---
reference_id: "PMID:34122333"
title: Hyperthyroidism Prevalence in China After Universal Salt Iodization.
authors:
- Wang C
- Li Y
- Teng D
- Shi X
- Ba J
- Chen B
- Du J
- He L
- Lai X
- Li Y
- Chi H
- Liao E
- Liu C
- Liu L
- Qin G
- Qin Y
- Quan H
- Shi B
- Sun H
- Tang X
- Tong N
- Wang G
- Zhang JA
- Wang Y
- Xue Y
- Yan L
- Yang J
- Yang L
- Yao Y
- Ye Z
- Zhang Q
- Zhang L
- Zhu J
- Zhu M
- Shan Z
- Teng W
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2021.651534
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperthyroidism Prevalence in China After Universal Salt Iodization.
**Authors:** Wang C, Li Y, Teng D, Shi X, Ba J, Chen B, Du J, He L, Lai X, Li Y, Chi H, Liao E, Liu C, Liu L, Qin G, Qin Y, Quan H, Shi B, Sun H, Tang X, Tong N, Wang G, Zhang JA, Wang Y, Xue Y, Yan L, Yang J, Yang L, Yao Y, Ye Z, Zhang Q, Zhang L, Zhu J, Zhu M, Shan Z, Teng W
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2021.651534](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2021.651534)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 May 28;12:651534. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.651534. eCollection 2021.

Hyperthyroidism Prevalence in China After Universal Salt Iodization.

Wang C(1), Li Y(1), Teng D(1), Shi X(1), Ba J(2), Chen B(3), Du J(4), He L(5), 
Lai X(6), Li Y(7), Chi H(8), Liao E(9), Liu C(10), Liu L(11), Qin G(12), Qin 
Y(13), Quan H(14), Shi B(15), Sun H(16), Tang X(17), Tong N(18), Wang G(19), 
Zhang JA(20), Wang Y(21), Xue Y(22), Yan L(23), Yang J(24), Yang L(25), Yao 
Y(26), Ye Z(27), Zhang Q(28), Zhang L(29), Zhu J(30), Zhu M(31), Shan Z(1), Teng 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) General 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, China.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Disease 
Hospital, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Jinfeng, China.
(6)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin, China.
(8)Department of Endocrinology, Hohhot First Hospital, Hohhot, China.
(9)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha, China.
(10)Research Center of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Affiliated Hospital of 
Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Nanjing University of 
Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(11)Fujian Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Fujian Medical University, 
Fuzhou, China.
(12)International Medical Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(13)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, China.
(14)Department of Endocrinology, Hainan General Hospital, Haikou, China.
(15)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an, China.
(16)Department of Endocrinology, Wuhan Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(17)Department of Endocrinology, First Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
China.
(18)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(19)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Jilin University, Changchun, China.
(20)Department of Endocrinology, Zhoupu Hospital, Shanghai University of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(21)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei, China.
(22)Department of Endocrinology, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, 
Kunming, China.
(23)Department of Otolaryngology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(24)Department of Endocrinology, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, China.
(25)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, People's Hospital of Tibet 
Autonomous Region, Lhasa, China.
(26)Department of Endocrinology, Qinghai Provincial People's Hospital, Xining, 
China.
(27)Zhejiang Center for Disease Control and Prevention (Zhejiang CDC), Hangzhou, 
China.
(28)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang 
Medical University, Guiyang, China.
(29)Department of Endocrinology, Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang, China.
(30)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang 
Medical University, Urumqi, China.
(31)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Tianjin Medical University 
General Hospital, Tianjin, China.

BACKGROUND: Universal salt iodization (USI) was implemented in mainland China in 
1996. The prevalence of hyperthyroidism and its risk factors now require 
examination.
METHODS: Data were acquired from a nationwide Thyroid, Iodine, and Diabetes 
Epidemiological survey (TIDE 2015-2017) of 78,470 subjects from 31 provinces. 
Iodine status, and thyroid hormones and antibodies were measured.
RESULTS: After two decades of USI, the prevalence of overt hyperthyroidism (OH), 
Graves' disease (GD), severe subclinical hyperthyroidism (severe SCH), and mild 
subclinical hyperthyroidism (mild SCH) in mainland China was 0.78%, 0.53%, 
0.22%, and 0.22%, respectively. OH and GD prevalence were higher in women than 
in men (OH: 1.16% vs. 0.64%, P<0.001; GD: 0.65% vs. 0.37%, P<0.001).Prevalence 
was significantly decreased after 60 years-of-age compared with 30-39 
years-of-age (OH:0.61% vs. 0.81%, P<0.001; GD: 0.38% vs. 0.57%, 
P<0.001).Excessive iodine(EI) and deficient iodine(DI) were both related to 
increased prevalence of OH (odds ratio [OR] 2.09, 95% confidence interval [CI] 
1.68-2.59; OR1.35, 95%CI 1.07-1.72, respectively); however, only deficient 
iodine was associated with increased prevalence of GD (OR1.67, 95%CI 1.30-2.15). 
Increased thyroid peroxidase antibody and thyroglobulin antibody levels were 
significantly associated with prevalence of OH and GD, but not severe SCH and 
mild SCH. Although hyperthyroidism was more prevalent in women, the association 
disappeared after adjusting for other factors such as antibody levels.
CONCLUSION: OH and GD prevalences in mainland China are stable after two decades 
of USI. Iodine deficiency, elevated thyroid antibody levels, and middle age are 
the main risk factors for OH and GD. The severe SCH population, rather than the 
mild SCH population, shows similar characteristics to the OH population.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Li, Teng, Shi, Ba, Chen, Du, He, Lai, Li, Chi, Liao, Liu, 
Liu, Qin, Qin, Quan, Shi, Sun, Tang, Tong, Wang, Zhang, Wang, Xue, Yan, Yang, 
Yang, Yao, Ye, Zhang, Zhang, Zhu, Zhu, Shan and Teng.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.651534
PMCID: PMC8194401
PMID: 34122333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.