---
reference_id: "PMID:36155967"
title: Genetic, social, and environmental risk factors in rheumatoid arthritis-associated interstitial lung disease.
authors:
- Wheeler AM
- Baker JF
- Poole JA
- Ascherman DP
- Yang Y
- Kerr GS
- Reimold A
- Kunkel G
- Cannon GW
- Wysham KD
- Singh N
- Lazaro D
- Monach P
- Bridges SL Jr
- Mikuls TR
- England BR
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2022.152098
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic, social, and environmental risk factors in rheumatoid arthritis-associated interstitial lung disease.
**Authors:** Wheeler AM, Baker JF, Poole JA, Ascherman DP, Yang Y, Kerr GS, Reimold A, Kunkel G, Cannon GW, Wysham KD, Singh N, Lazaro D, Monach P, Bridges SL Jr, Mikuls TR, England BR
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2022.152098](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2022.152098)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2022 Dec;57:152098. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2022.152098. Epub 2022 Sep 17.

Genetic, social, and environmental risk factors in rheumatoid 
arthritis-associated interstitial lung disease.

Wheeler AM(1), Baker JF(2), Poole JA(3), Ascherman DP(4), Yang Y(3), Kerr GS(5), 
Reimold A(6), Kunkel G(7), Cannon GW(7), Wysham KD(8), Singh N(8), Lazaro D(9), 
Monach P(10), Bridges SL Jr(11), Mikuls TR(1), England BR(12).

Author information:
(1)VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System, Omaha, NE, USA; University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(2)University of Pennsylvania and VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(4)Pittsburgh VA & University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Washington D.C. VA, Howard University, & Georgetown University, Washington 
D.C., USA.
(6)Dallas VA & University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX, USA.
(7)VA Salt Lake City & University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(8)VA Puget Sound Health Care System & University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 
USAca.
(9)Brooklyn VA, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(10)Boston VA, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY, USA.
(12)VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System, Omaha, NE, USA; University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. Electronic address: 
bryant.england@unmc.edu.

OBJECTIVE: MUC5B and TOLLIP single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and cigarette 
smoking were associated with rheumatoid arthritis-interstitial lung disease 
(RA-ILD) in a predominantly Northern European population. We evaluated whether 
RA-ILD is associated with these genetic variants and HLA-DRB1 shared epitope 
(SE) alleles in a large RA cohort stratified by race and smoking history.
METHODS: HLA-DRB1 SE alleles and MUC5B rs35705950 and TOLLIP rs5743890 SNPs were 
genotyped in U.S. veterans with RA. ILD was validated through medical record 
review. Genetic associations with ILD were assessed in logistic regression 
models overall and in subgroups defined by race and smoking status, with 
additive interactions assessed by the relative excess risk of interaction 
(RERI).
RESULTS: Of 2,556 participants (88% male, 77% White), 238 (9.3%) had ILD. The 
MUC5B variant was associated with ILD (OR 2.25 [95% CI 1.69, 3.02]), whereas 
TOLLIP and HLA-DRB1 SE were not. The MUC5B variant was less frequent among 
Black/African American participants (5.8% vs. 22.6%), though its association 
with RA-ILD was numerically stronger (OR 4.23 [1.65, 10.86]) compared to all 
other participants (OR 2.32 [1.70, 3.16]). Those with the MUC5B variant and a 
smoking history had numerically higher odds of ILD (OR 4.18 [2.53, 6.93]) than 
non-smokers (OR 2.41 [1.16, 5.04]). Additive interactions between MUC5B-race and 
MUC5B-smoking were not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: In this large RA cohort, the MUC5B promoter variant was associated 
with >2-fold higher odds of RA-ILD. While this variant is less common among 
Black/African American patients, its presence in this population carried >4-fold 
higher odds of RA-ILD.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2022.152098
PMCID: PMC10123759
PMID: 36155967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]