---
reference_id: "PMID:39596632"
title: Molecular and Functional Assessment of TSC1 and TSC2 in Individuals with Tuberous Sclerosis Complex.
authors:
- Dufner-Almeida LG
- Cardozo LFM
- Schwind MR
- Carvalho D
- Almeida JPG
- Cappellano AM
- Alegria TGP
- Nanhoe S
- Nellist M
- Passos-Bueno MR
- Chiavegatto S
- Silva NS
- Rosemberg S
- Pereira APA
- Antoniuk SA
- Haddad LA
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15111432
keywords:
- Humans
- "Tuberous Sclerosis/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 2 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 1 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Male
- Child
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adult
- Adolescent
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and Functional Assessment of TSC1 and TSC2 in Individuals with Tuberous Sclerosis Complex.
**Authors:** Dufner-Almeida LG, Cardozo LFM, Schwind MR, Carvalho D, Almeida JPG, Cappellano AM, Alegria TGP, Nanhoe S, Nellist M, Passos-Bueno MR, Chiavegatto S, Silva NS, Rosemberg S, Pereira APA, Antoniuk SA, Haddad LA
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15111432](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15111432)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Nov 3;15(11):1432. doi: 10.3390/genes15111432.

Molecular and Functional Assessment of TSC1 and TSC2 in Individuals with
Tuberous Sclerosis Complex.

Dufner-Almeida LG(1)(2), Cardozo LFM(3), Schwind MR(3), Carvalho D(3), Almeida
JPG(4), Cappellano AM(5), Alegria TGP(1), Nanhoe S(2), Nellist M(2),
Passos-Bueno MR(1), Chiavegatto S(6)(7), Silva NS(5), Rosemberg S(4), Pereira
APA(8), Antoniuk SA(3), Haddad LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Genome and Stem Cell Research Center, Department of Genetics and
Evolutionary Biology, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, São
Paulo 05508-090, Brazil.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015 Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(3)Pediatric Neurology Center, Department of Pediatrics, Hospital de Clínicas,
Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba 80060-900, Brazil.
(4)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Santa Casa de Misericórdia,
São Paulo 01221-010, Brazil.
(5)Grupo de Apoio ao Adolescente e à Criança com Câncer, Instituto de Oncologia
Pediátrica, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo 04039-001, Brazil.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de
São Paulo, São Paulo 05508-000, Brazil.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Instituto de Psiquiatria, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo 05403-903, Brazil.
(8)Department of Psychology, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba 80060-000,
Brazil.

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant neurodevelopmental
disorder and multisystem disease caused by pathogenic DNA alterations in the
TSC1 and TSC2 tumor suppressor genes. A molecular genetic diagnosis of TSC
confirms the clinical diagnosis, facilitating the implementation of appropriate
care and surveillance. TSC1 and TSC2 encode the core components of the TSC1/2
complex (TSC1/2), a negative regulator of the mechanistic target of rapamycin
(MTOR) complex 1 (TORC1). Functional analysis of the effects of TSC1 and TSC2
variants on TORC1 activity can help establish variant pathogenicity. We searched
for pathogenic alterations to TSC1 and TSC2 in DNA isolated from 116 individuals
with a definite clinical diagnosis of TSC. Missense variants and in-frame
deletions were functionally assessed. Pathogenic DNA alterations were identified
in 106 cases (91%); 18 (17%) in TSC1 and 88 (83%) in TSC2. Of these, 35 were
novel. Disruption of TSC1/2 activity was demonstrated for seven TSC2 variants.
Molecular diagnostics confirms the clinical diagnosis of TSC in a large
proportion of cases. Functional assessment can help establish variant
pathogenicity and is a useful adjunct to DNA analysis.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15111432
PMCID: PMC11593644
PMID: 39596632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses,
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision
to publish the results.
