---
reference_id: "PMID:34213873"
title: "Percutaneous Vertebroplasty Using a Rotary Cutter for Treating Kümmell's Disease with Intravertebral Vacuum Cleft."
authors:
- Zhong C
- Min G
- Liu XW
- Yang Z
- Li S
- Li M
journal: Pain Physician
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Percutaneous Vertebroplasty Using a Rotary Cutter for Treating Kümmell's Disease with Intravertebral Vacuum Cleft.
**Authors:** Zhong C, Min G, Liu XW, Yang Z, Li S, Li M
**Journal:** Pain Physician (2021)

## Content

1. Pain Physician. 2021 Jul;24(4):E477-E482.

Percutaneous Vertebroplasty Using a Rotary Cutter for Treating Kümmell's Disease 
with Intravertebral Vacuum Cleft.

Zhong C(1), Min G(2), Liu XW(3), Yang Z(3), Li S(3), Li M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, PLA 960th Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Taian Disabled Solders' Hospital of Shandong 
Province, Taian, Shandong, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, PLA 960th Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, P.R. 
China.

BACKGROUND: Reported data indicate that the curative effect of percutaneous 
vertebroplasty (PVP) on the patients with intravertebral vacuum cleft (IVC) is 
worse than on those without IVC.
OBJECTIVES: This study was to prospectively investigate the advantage of rotary 
cutter-PVP (RC-PVP) in patients with Kümmell's disease with IVC.
STUDY DESIGN: A prospective outcome study.
SETTING: A tertiary care hospital.
METHODS: Patients who underwent conventional PVP served as the control group. 
For the RC-PVP group, the rotary cutters were applied before the cement 
injection to destroy the IVC structure and the surrounding necrotic bone. The 
following data were compared between the two groups: the cement filling 
patterns, effective therapeutic rate, the pre- to post-procedural changes of 
spinal geometry, and the subsequent fractures.
RESULTS: This study included a total of 64 patients (30 and 34 patients in 
RC-PVP group and control group, respectively). In the RC-PVP group, the cement 
in 26 cases was filled as a mixed pattern, while the filling pattern in the 
control group was mainly the cystic type (n = 31). There were no significant 
differences in the height restoration rate between the RC-PVP and control groups 
(32.7 ± 13.6 and 32.4 ± 13.9, respectively, P = 0.93). The RC-PVP group had a 
higher effective rate during the first week and the first month (93.3% vs. 
70.6%, P = 0.02) and at 3 months (90.4% vs. 73.9%, P = 0.03). Long-term 
follow-up indicated that vertebral recollapse of the same treated vertebral body 
occurred in 5 patients after conventional PVP, which was not observed in the 
RC-PVP group.
LIMITATIONS: The small number of included patients and no long-term follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: RC-PVP, with the destruction of IVC, may lead to better clinical 
outcomes with fewer complications.

PMID: 34213873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]