---
reference_id: "PMID:39508990"
title: Multi-Omics Approach Reveals Genes and Pathways Affected in Miller-Dieker Syndrome.
authors:
- Mahendran G
- Breger K
- McCown PJ
- Hulewicz JP
- Bhandari T
- Addepalli B
- Brown JA
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-024-04532-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Cell Line
- Proteomics/methods
- Cell Movement/genetics
- Multiomics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multi-Omics Approach Reveals Genes and Pathways Affected in Miller-Dieker Syndrome.
**Authors:** Mahendran G, Breger K, McCown PJ, Hulewicz JP, Bhandari T, Addepalli B, Brown JA
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-024-04532-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-024-04532-7)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2025 Apr;62(4):5073-5094. doi: 10.1007/s12035-024-04532-7. Epub
 2024 Nov 7.

Multi-Omics Approach Reveals Genes and Pathways Affected in Miller-Dieker 
Syndrome.

Mahendran G(1), Breger K(1), McCown PJ(1)(2), Hulewicz JP(1), Bhandari T(3), 
Addepalli B(3), Brown JA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre 
Dame, IN, 46556, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Michigan Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 45221, 
USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre 
Dame, IN, 46556, USA. jbrown33@nd.edu.

Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS) is a rare neurogenetic disorder resulting from a 
heterozygous deletion of 26 genes in the MDS locus on human chromosome 17. MDS 
patients often die in utero and only 10% of those who are born reach 10 years of 
age. Current treatments mostly prevent complications and control seizures. A 
detailed understanding of the pathogenesis of MDS through gene expression 
studies would be useful in developing precise medical approaches toward MDS. To 
better understand MDS at the molecular level, we performed RNA sequencing on RNA 
and mass spectrometry on total protein isolated from BJ (non-MDS) cells and 
GM06097 (MDS) cells, which were derived from a healthy individual and an MDS 
patient, respectively. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) at the RNA and 
protein levels involved genes associated with phenotypic features reported in 
MDS patients (CACNG4, ADD2, SPTAN1, SHANK2), signaling pathways (GABBR2, CAMK2B, 
TRAM-1), and nervous system development (CAMK2B, BEX1, ARSA). Functional assays 
validated enhanced calcium signaling, downregulated protein translation, and 
cell migration defects in MDS. Interestingly, overexpression of 
methyltransferase-like protein 16 (METTL16), a protein encoded in the MDS locus, 
restored defects in protein translation, phosphor states of mTOR (mammalian 
target of rapamycin) pathway regulators, and cell migration in MDS cells. 
Although DNA- and RNA-modifying enzymes were among the DEGs and the 
intracellular SAM/SAH ratio was eightfold lower in MDS cells, global nucleoside 
modifications remained unchanged. Thus, this study identified specific genes and 
pathways responsible for the gene expression changes, which could lead to better 
therapeutics for MDS patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-024-04532-7
PMCID: PMC11880102
PMID: 39508990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics Approval: Not applicable. 
Consent to Participate: Not applicable. Consent for Publication: Not applicable. 
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no competing interests.