---
reference_id: "PMID:38300707"
title: ADAMTSL2 mutations determine the phenotypic severity in geleophysic dysplasia.
authors:
- Camarena V
- Williams MM
- Morales AA
- Zafeer MF
- Kilic OV
- Kamiar A
- Abad C
- Rasmussen MA
- Briski LM
- Peart L
- Bademci G
- Barbouth DS
- Smithson S
- Wang G
- Shehadeh LA
- Walz K
- Tekin M
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.174417
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- ADAMTS Proteins/genetics
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADAMTSL2 mutations determine the phenotypic severity in geleophysic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Camarena V, Williams MM, Morales AA, Zafeer MF, Kilic OV, Kamiar A, Abad C, Rasmussen MA, Briski LM, Peart L, Bademci G, Barbouth DS, Smithson S, Wang G, Shehadeh LA, Walz K, Tekin M
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.174417](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.174417)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Feb 1;9(5):e174417. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.174417.

ADAMTSL2 mutations determine the phenotypic severity in geleophysic dysplasia.

Camarena V(1), Williams MM(2)(3), Morales AA(1), Zafeer MF(4), Kilic OV(1),
Kamiar A(3), Abad C(1), Rasmussen MA(5), Briski LM(6), Peart L(1), Bademci G(1),
Barbouth DS(1), Smithson S(7), Wang G(1)(4)(8), Shehadeh LA(2)(3), Walz
K(1)(4)(9), Tekin M(1)(4)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology.
(3)Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute.
(4)John P. Hussmann Institute for Human Genomics.
(5)Department of Medical Education; and.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Miami Leonard
M. Miller School of Medicine Miami, Florida, USA.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS
Foundation Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(8)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA.
(9)IQUIBICEN - CONICET, Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, University of
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(10)Department of Otolaryngology and.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA.

Geleophysic dysplasia-1 (GD1) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by
ADAMTS-like 2 (ADAMTSL2) variants. It is characterized by distinctive facial
features, limited joint mobility, short stature, brachydactyly, and
life-threatening cardiorespiratory complications. The clinical spectrum spans
from perinatal lethality to milder adult phenotypes. We developed and
characterized cellular and mouse models, to replicate the genetic profile of a
patient who is compound heterozygous for 2 ADAMTSL2 variants, namely p.R61H and
p.A165T. The impairment of ADAMTSL2 secretion was observed in both variants, but
p.A165T exhibited a more severe impact. Mice carrying different allelic
combinations revealed a spectrum of phenotypic severity, from lethality in
knockout homozygotes to mild growth impairment observed in adult p.R61H
homozygotes. Homozygous and hemizygous p.A165T mice survived but displayed
severe respiratory and cardiac dysfunction. The respiratory dysfunction mainly
affected the expiration phase, and some of these animals had microscopic
post-obstructive pneumonia. Echocardiograms and MRI studies revealed a
significant systolic dysfunction, accompanied by a reduction of the aortic root
size. Histology verified the presence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with
myocyte hypertrophy, chondroid metaplasia, and mild interstitial fibrosis. This
study revealed a substantial correlation between the degree of impaired ADAMTSL2
secretion and the severity of the observed phenotype in GD1.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.174417
PMCID: PMC10972594
PMID: 38300707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared
that no conflict of interest exists.
