---
reference_id: "PMID:10749571"
title: Osteopenia and decreased bone formation in osteonectin-deficient mice.
authors:
- Delany AM
- Amling M
- Priemel M
- Howe C
- Baron R
- Canalis E
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1172/JCI7039
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bone Diseases, Metabolic/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Bone Remodeling
- Cell Count
- Collagenases/metabolism
- "Endothelial Growth Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Lymphokines/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 13
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 2/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Osteoblasts/cytology
- Osteocalcin/blood
- Osteoclasts/cytology
- "Osteonectin/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Radiography
- Spine/diagnostic imaging
- Tibia/pathology
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteopenia and decreased bone formation in osteonectin-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Delany AM, Amling M, Priemel M, Howe C, Baron R, Canalis E
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI7039](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI7039)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2000 Apr;105(7):915-23. doi: 10.1172/JCI7039.

Osteopenia and decreased bone formation in osteonectin-deficient mice.

Delany AM(1), Amling M, Priemel M, Howe C, Baron R, Canalis E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Research, Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center, Hartford, 
Connecticut 06105, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest 2000 May;105(9):1325.

Bone continuously remodels in response to mechanical and physiological stresses, 
allowing vertebrates to renew bone as adults. Bone remodeling consists of the 
cycled synthesis and resorption of collagenous and noncollagenous extracellular 
matrix proteins, and an imbalance in this process can lead to disease states 
such as osteoporosis, or more rarely, osteopetrosis. There is evidence that the 
extracellular matrix glycoprotein osteonectin or secreted protein acidic and 
rich in cysteine (BM-40) may be important in bone remodeling. Osteonectin is 
abundant in bone and is expressed in areas of active remodeling outside the 
skeleton. In vitro studies indicate that osteonectin can bind collagen and 
regulate angiogenesis, metalloproteinase expression, cell proliferation, and 
cell-matrix interactions. In some osteopenic states, such as osteogenesis 
imperfecta and selected animal models for bone fragility, osteonectin expression 
is decreased. To determine the function of osteonectin in bone, we used contact 
x-ray, histomorphometry, and Northern blot analysis to characterize the skeletal 
phenotype of osteonectin-null mice. We found that osteonectin-null mice have 
decreased bone formation and decreased osteoblast and osteoclast surface and 
number, leading to decreased bone remodeling with a negative bone balance and 
causing profound osteopenia. These data indicate that osteonectin supports bone 
remodeling and the maintenance of bone mass in vertebrates.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI7039
PMCID: PMC377474
PMID: 10749571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]