---
reference_id: "PMID:25324390"
title: Structure and selectivity in bestrophin ion channels.
authors:
- Yang T
- Liu Q
- Kloss B
- Bruni R
- Kalathur RC
- Guo Y
- Kloppmann E
- Rost B
- Colecraft HM
- Hendrickson WA
journal: Science
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1126/science.1259723
keywords:
- Bacterial Proteins/chemistry
- Bestrophins
- Chloride Channels/chemistry
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Electric Conductivity
- Eye Proteins/chemistry
- Humans
- Klebsiella pneumoniae
- Protein Conformation
- Static Electricity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structure and selectivity in bestrophin ion channels.
**Authors:** Yang T, Liu Q, Kloss B, Bruni R, Kalathur RC, Guo Y, Kloppmann E, Rost B, Colecraft HM, Hendrickson WA
**Journal:** Science (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1259723](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1259723)

## Content

1. Science. 2014 Oct 17;346(6207):355-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1259723. Epub 2014
Sep 25.

Structure and selectivity in bestrophin ion channels.

Yang T(1), Liu Q(2), Kloss B(3), Bruni R(3), Kalathur RC(3), Guo Y(1), Kloppmann
E(4), Rost B(4), Colecraft HM(5), Hendrickson WA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10032, USA.
(2)New York Structural Biology Center, Synchrotron Beamlines, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA.
(3)New York Consortium on Membrane Protein Structure, New York Structural
Biology Center, 89 Convent Avenue, New York, NY 10027, USA.
(4)New York Consortium on Membrane Protein Structure, New York Structural
Biology Center, 89 Convent Avenue, New York, NY 10027, USA. Department of
Informatics, Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, TUM (Technische
Universität München), Garching 85748, Germany.
(5)Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10032, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10032, USA. New York Structural Biology Center, Synchrotron Beamlines,
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA. New York Consortium on
Membrane Protein Structure, New York Structural Biology Center, 89 Convent
Avenue, New York, NY 10027, USA. Department of Physiology and Cellular
Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
wayne@xtl.cumc.columbia.edu.

Human bestrophin-1 (hBest1) is a calcium-activated chloride channel from the
retinal pigment epithelium, where mutations are associated with vitelliform
macular degeneration, or Best disease. We describe the structure of a bacterial
homolog (KpBest) of hBest1 and functional characterizations of both channels.
KpBest is a pentamer that forms a five-helix transmembrane pore, closed by three
rings of conserved hydrophobic residues, and has a cytoplasmic cavern with a
restricted exit. From electrophysiological analysis of structure-inspired
mutations in KpBest and hBest1, we find a sensitive control of ion selectivity
in the bestrophins, including reversal of anion/cation selectivity, and dramatic
activation by mutations at the cytoplasmic exit. A homology model of hBest1
shows the locations of disease-causing mutations and suggests possible roles in
regulation.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1259723
PMCID: PMC4341822
PMID: 25324390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
