---
reference_id: "PMID:26054819"
title: "The case of chronic hepatitis B treatment with tenofovir: an update for nephrologists."
authors:
- Coppolino G
- Simeoni M
- Summaria C
- Postorino MC
- Rivoli L
- Strazzulla A
- Torti C
- Fuiano G
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-015-0214-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The case of chronic hepatitis B treatment with tenofovir: an update for nephrologists.
**Authors:** Coppolino G, Simeoni M, Summaria C, Postorino MC, Rivoli L, Strazzulla A, Torti C, Fuiano G
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-015-0214-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-015-0214-0)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2015 Aug;28(4):393-402. doi: 10.1007/s40620-015-0214-0. Epub 2015
Jun  9.

The case of chronic hepatitis B treatment with tenofovir: an update for 
nephrologists.

Coppolino G(1), Simeoni M, Summaria C, Postorino MC, Rivoli L, Strazzulla A, 
Torti C, Fuiano G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Unit of Nephrology and Dialysis, 
University-Hospital "Magna Graecia", Via Michele Torcia, 4, 88100, Catanzaro, 
Italy, pepcop77@hotmail.com.

Tenofovir is a nucleotide acting both as an inhibitor of human immunodeficiency 
(HIV) reverse transcriptase and as a competitor for hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
RNA-directed DNA polymerase. Approved worldwide in 2001, tenofovir is used as a 
component of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in patients with HIV 
infection. Since 2008, it has also been indicated for treatment of chronic HBV 
infection or HIV/HBV co-infection. The aim of the treatment consists in 
suppressing viral replication, thus reducing hepatic complications and improving 
patient survival. Furthermore, tenofovir could represent an effective 
therapeutic option in lamivudine-resistant HBV patients. Tenofovir is eliminated 
unchanged through urine via glomerular filtration (80%) and proximal tubular 
secretion (20%). Thus, alterations in renal clearance may interfere with 
tenofovir pharmacokinetics and systemic drug concentrations, modifying the 
therapeutic response. Hence, a renal overload of tenofovir in patients with a 
pre-existing kidney impairment could result in a worsening of renal function. 
Following a brief introduction on HBV infection and its therapeutic options, we 
review the latest evidence, to our knowledge, on renal toxicity of tenofovir in 
HBV patients and on drug management.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-015-0214-0
PMID: 26054819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]