---
reference_id: "PMID:39048647"
title: Secure computation protocol of Chebyshev distance under the malicious model.
authors:
- Liu X
- Chen W
- Peng L
- Luo D
- Jia L
- Xu G
- Chen X
- Liu X
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-67907-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secure computation protocol of Chebyshev distance under the malicious model.
**Authors:** Liu X, Chen W, Peng L, Luo D, Jia L, Xu G, Chen X, Liu X
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-67907-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-67907-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 24;14(1):17115. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-67907-9.

Secure computation protocol of Chebyshev distance under the malicious model.

Liu X(1)(2), Chen W(1), Peng L(3), Luo D(4), Jia L(3), Xu G(5), Chen X(6), Liu 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Digtial and Intelligence Industry, Inner Mongolia University of 
Science and Technology, Baotou, 014010, China.
(2)School of Intelligent Computing Engineering, Tianjin Ren'ai College, Tianjin, 
301636, China.
(3)Beijing Institute of Computer Technology and Application, Beijing, 100039, 
China.
(4)School of Intelligent Computing Engineering, Tianjin Ren'ai College, Tianjin, 
301636, China. renailuodan@163.com.
(5)College of Information, North China University of Technology, Beijing, 
100144, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Network and Switching Technology, Beijing University 
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876, China.

Secure multi-party computation of Chebyshev distance represents a crucial method 
for confidential distance measurement, holding significant theoretical and 
practical implications. Especially within electronic archival management 
systems, secure computation of Chebyshev distance is employed for similarity 
measurement, classification, and clustering of sensitive archival information, 
thereby enhancing the security of sensitive archival queries and sharing. This 
paper proposes a secure protocol for computing Chebyshev distance under a 
semi-honest model, leveraging the additive homomorphic properties of the NTRU 
cryptosystem and a vector encoding method. This protocol transforms the 
confidential computation of Chebyshev distance into the inner product of 
confidential computation vectors, as demonstrated through the model paradigm 
validating its security under the semi-honest model. Addressing potential 
malicious participant scenarios, a secure protocol for computing Chebyshev 
distance under a malicious model is introduced, utilizing cryptographic tools 
such as digital commitments and mutual decryption methods. The security of this 
protocol under the malicious model is affirmed using the real/ideal model 
paradigm. Theoretical analysis and experimental simulations demonstrate the 
efficiency and practical applicability of the proposed schemes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-67907-9
PMCID: PMC11637183
PMID: 39048647

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.