---
reference_id: "PMID:11751685"
title: "Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency due to mutations in SCO2, encoding a mitochondrial copper-binding protein, is rescued by copper in human myoblasts."
authors:
- Jaksch M
- Paret C
- Stucka R
- Horn N
- Müller-Höcker J
- Horvath R
- Trepesch N
- Stecker G
- Freisinger P
- Thirion C
- Müller J
- Lunkwitz R
- Rödel G
- Shoubridge EA
- Lochmüller H
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.26.3025
keywords:
- Amino Acid Motifs/physiology
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Copper/metabolism
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency
- Electron Transport Complex IV/physiology
- Fibroblasts/physiology
- Gene Expression
- HeLa Cells
- "Histidine/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Mitochondria/genetics, metabolism"
- Mitochondrial Proteins
- Molecular Chaperones
- Mutation
- Organometallic Compounds/metabolism
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins
- Thioredoxins
- "Transduction, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency due to mutations in SCO2, encoding a mitochondrial copper-binding protein, is rescued by copper in human myoblasts.
**Authors:** Jaksch M, Paret C, Stucka R, Horn N, Müller-Höcker J, Horvath R, Trepesch N, Stecker G, Freisinger P, Thirion C, Müller J, Lunkwitz R, Rödel G, Shoubridge EA, Lochmüller H
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/10.26.3025](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/10.26.3025)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Dec 15;10(26):3025-35. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.26.3025.

Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency due to mutations in SCO2, encoding a 
mitochondrial copper-binding protein, is rescued by copper in human myoblasts.

Jaksch M(1), Paret C, Stucka R, Horn N, Müller-Höcker J, Horvath R, Trepesch N, 
Stecker G, Freisinger P, Thirion C, Müller J, Lunkwitz R, Rödel G, Shoubridge 
EA, Lochmüller H.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Disease Centre Munich-Schwabing, Koelner Platz 1, 80804 Munich, 
Germany. michaela.jaksch@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

Mutations in SCO2, a cytochrome c oxidase (COX) assembly gene, have been 
reported in nine infants with early onset fatal cardioencephalomyopathy and a 
severe COX deficiency in striated muscle. Studies on a yeast homolog have 
suggested that human Sco2 acts as a copper chaperone, transporting copper to the 
Cu(A) site on the Cox II subunit, but the mechanism of action remains unclear. 
To investigate the molecular basis of pathogenesis of Sco2 defects in humans we 
performed genetic and biochemical studies on tissues, myoblasts and fibroblasts 
from affected patients, as well as on a recombinant human C-terminal Sco2 
segment (22 kDa), bearing the putative CxxxC metal-binding motif. Recombinant 
Sco2 was shown to bind copper with a 1:1 stoichiometry and to form homomeric 
complexes in vitro, independent of the metal-binding motif. Immunohistochemistry 
using antibodies directed against different COX subunits showed a marked 
tissue-specific decrease in the Cox II/III subunits that form part of the 
catalytic core, consistent with the differential tissue involvement, but a more 
uniform distribution of Cox Vab, a nuclear-encoded subunit. Sco2 was severely 
reduced in patient fibroblasts and myoblasts by immunoblot analysis. Patient 
fibroblasts showed increased (64)Cu uptake but normal retention values and, 
consistent with this, the copper concentration was four times higher in 
Sco2-deficient myoblasts than in controls. COX activity in patient myoblasts was 
completely rescued by transduction with a retroviral vector expressing the human 
SCO2 coding sequence, and more interestingly by addition of copper-histidine 
(300 microM) to the culture medium. Whether the latter is accomplished by the 
very low residual levels of Sco2 in the patient cells, direct addition of copper 
to the Cu(A) site, or by another copper-binding protein remains unknown. 
Whatever the mechanism, this result suggests a possible therapy for the early 
treatment of this fatal infantile disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.26.3025
PMID: 11751685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]