---
reference_id: "PMID:20222921"
title: Mutations in EDARADD account for a small proportion of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia cases.
authors:
- Chassaing N
- Cluzeau C
- Bal E
- Guigue P
- Vincent MC
- Viot G
- Ginisty D
- Munnich A
- Smahi A
- Calvas P
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09670.x
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, metabolism"
- Edar-Associated Death Domain Protein/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Kinase Kinases/genetics
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Sequence Alignment
- Species Specificity
- TNF Receptor-Associated Factor 6/genetics
- Zebrafish
- MAP Kinase Kinase Kinase 7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in EDARADD account for a small proportion of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia cases.
**Authors:** Chassaing N, Cluzeau C, Bal E, Guigue P, Vincent MC, Viot G, Ginisty D, Munnich A, Smahi A, Calvas P
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09670.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09670.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2010 May;162(5):1044-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09670.x. 
Epub 2010 Mar 5.

Mutations in EDARADD account for a small proportion of hypohidrotic ectodermal 
dysplasia cases.

Chassaing N(1), Cluzeau C, Bal E, Guigue P, Vincent MC, Viot G, Ginisty D, 
Munnich A, Smahi A, Calvas P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U563, Centre de Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, Toulouse, 
F-31300 France.

BACKGROUND: Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is characterized by abnormal 
development of the eccrine sweat glands, hair and teeth. The X-linked form of 
the disease, caused by mutations in the EDA gene, represents the majority of HED 
cases. Autosomal dominant and recessive forms occasionally occur and result from 
mutations in at least two other genes: EDAR and EDARADD. EDARADD interacts with 
the TAB2/TRAF6/TAK1 complex, which is necessary for NF-kappaB activation by 
EDAR.
OBJECTIVES: To determine frequency of EDARADD, TRAF6, TAB2 and TAK1 mutations in 
HED.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We have screened 28 familial or sporadic HED cases with 
no mutations in the EDA and EDAR genes for EDARADD, TRAF6, TAB2 and TAK1 
mutations.
RESULTS: We identified one EDARADD 6-bp homozygous in-frame deletion 
(c.402-407del, p.Thr135-Val136del) in a patient born to consanguineous parents. 
Functional studies showed that the p.Thr135-Val136del impaired the EDAR-EDARADD 
interaction and then severely inhibited NF-kappaB activity. In the remaining 27 
patients, we failed to find causative mutations in EDARADD, or in TRAF6, TAB2 or 
TAK1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that EDARADD mutations are not a frequent 
cause of HED, while mutations in TRAF6, TAB2 and TAK1 may not be implicated in 
this disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09670.x
PMID: 20222921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]