---
reference_id: "PMID:37506226"
title: Plasmin-Mediated Fibrinolysis in Periodontitis Pathogenesis.
authors:
- Silva LM
- Divaris K
- Bugge TH
- Moutsopoulos NM
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/00220345231171837
keywords:
- Humans
- Fibrinolysis/physiology
- Fibrinolysin
- Plasminogen/genetics
- Fibrin/physiology
- Periodontitis/genetics
- Hemostatics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plasmin-Mediated Fibrinolysis in Periodontitis Pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Silva LM, Divaris K, Bugge TH, Moutsopoulos NM
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00220345231171837](https://doi.org/10.1177/00220345231171837)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2023 Aug;102(9):972-978. doi: 10.1177/00220345231171837. Epub 2023
 Jul 28.

Plasmin-Mediated Fibrinolysis in Periodontitis Pathogenesis.

Silva LM(1)(2), Divaris K(3)(4), Bugge TH(2), Moutsopoulos NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Oral Immunity and Infection Section, National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Proteases and Tissue Remodeling Section, National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric and Public Health, Adams School of Dentistry, 
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC,USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, 
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

The hemostatic and inflammatory systems work hand in hand to maintain 
homeostasis at mucosal barrier sites. Among the factors of the hemostatic 
system, fibrin is well recognized for its role in mucosal homeostasis, wound 
healing, and inflammation. Here, we present a basic overview of the fibrinolytic 
system, discuss fibrin as an innate immune regulator, and provide recent work 
uncovering the role of fibrin-neutrophil activation as a regulator of 
mucosal/periodontal homeostasis. We reason that the role of fibrin in 
periodontitis becomes most evident in individuals with the Mendelian genetic 
defect, congenital plasminogen (PLG) deficiency, who are predisposed to severe 
periodontitis in childhood due to a defect in fibrinolysis. Consistent with 
plasminogen deficiency being a risk factor for periodontitis, recent genomics 
studies uncover genetic polymorphisms in PLG, encoding plasminogen, being 
significantly associated with periodontal disease, and suggesting PLG variants 
as candidate risk indicators for common forms of periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1177/00220345231171837
PMCID: PMC10477773
PMID: 37506226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.