---
reference_id: "PMID:30938266"
title: "Familial Mediterranean fever: overview of pathogenesis, clinical features and management."
authors:
- Migita K
- Asano T
- Sato S
- Koga T
- Fujita Y
- Kawakami A
journal: Immunol Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/13497413.2018.1481579
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean fever: overview of pathogenesis, clinical features and management.
**Authors:** Migita K, Asano T, Sato S, Koga T, Fujita Y, Kawakami A
**Journal:** Immunol Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13497413.2018.1481579](https://doi.org/10.1080/13497413.2018.1481579)

## Content

1. Immunol Med. 2018 Jun;41(2):55-61. doi: 10.1080/13497413.2018.1481579. Epub
2018  Sep 7.

Familial Mediterranean fever: overview of pathogenesis, clinical features and 
management.

Migita K(1), Asano T(1), Sato S(1), Koga T(2), Fujita Y(1)(2), Kawakami A(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Rheumatology , Fukushima Medical University School of 
Medicine , Fukushima , Japan.
(2)b Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Unit of Translational Medicine, 
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences , Nagasaki University , Nagasaki , Japan.

Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common monogenic autoinflammatory 
disease, and is characterized by recurrent attacks of fever and polyserositis. 
It is associated with mutations in the MEFV gene encoding pyrin, which result in 
inflammasome activation and the uncontrolled production of IL-1β. FMF mainly 
affects individuals originating from the Mediterranean basin; however, a 
Japanese nationwide survey demonstrated that FMF is not uncommon in Japan. The 
survey also indicated that Japanese FMF patients are clinically or genetically 
distinct from Mediterranean FMF patients, suggesting a genotype-phenotype 
correlation. In Japanese patients with FMF, MEFV exon 10 mutations are 
associated with the more typical FMF phenotype. Conversely, Japanese FMF 
patients with mutations in MEFV exons 2 or 3 present with an atypical FMF 
phenotype. Colchicine is the mainstay of FMF treatment, and its regular use 
prevents febrile attacks and decreases the long-term risk of AA amyloidosis. 
However, a minority of FMF patients are colchicine-resistant, and anti-IL-1 
treatment has proven beneficial in suppressing inflammation in these patients. 
Although Japanese FMF patients may develop less severe disease compared with 
Mediterranean FMF patients, they should nevertheless be treated early to prevent 
recurrent attacks and the subsequent development of AA amyloidosis.

DOI: 10.1080/13497413.2018.1481579
PMID: 30938266