---
reference_id: "PMID:32676081"
title: Environmental Risk Factors for Sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Judson MA
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01340
keywords:
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Humans
- Risk Factors
- "Sarcoidosis/etiology, immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental Risk Factors for Sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Judson MA
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2020.01340](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.01340)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jun 26;11:1340. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01340. eCollection
 2020.

Environmental Risk Factors for Sarcoidosis.

Judson MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Albany Medical College, Albany, NY, United States.

Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous disease that may affect any body
organ. Sarcoidosis is associated with many environmental and occupational
exposures. Because the exact immunopathogenesis of sarcoidosis is unknown, it is
not known whether these exposures are truly causing sarcoidosis, rendering the
immune system more susceptible to the development of sarcoidosis, exacerbating
subclinical cases of sarcoidosis, or causing a granulomatous condition distinct
from sarcoidosis. This manuscript outlines what is known about the
immunopathogenesis of sarcoidosis and postulates mechanisms whereby these
exposures could cause or exacerbate the disease. We also describe the varied
environmental and occupational exposures that have been associated with
sarcoidosis. This includes potential infectious exposures such as mycobacteria
and Propionibacterium acnes, a skin commensal bacterium, as well as
non-infectious environmental exposures including inhaled bioaerosols, metal
dusts and products of combustion. Further insights concerning the relationship
of environmental exposures to the development of sarcoidosis may have a major
impact on the prevention and treatment of this enigmatic disease.

Copyright © 2020 Judson.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01340
PMCID: PMC7333358
PMID: 32676081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
