---
reference_id: "PMID:28871928"
title: The Impact of Pyschological Stress on Acne.
authors:
- Jović A
- Marinović B
- Kostović K
- Čeović R
- Basta-Juzbašić A
- Bukvić Mokos Z
journal: Acta Dermatovenerol Croat
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Impact of Pyschological Stress on Acne.
**Authors:** Jović A, Marinović B, Kostović K, Čeović R, Basta-Juzbašić A, Bukvić Mokos Z
**Journal:** Acta Dermatovenerol Croat (2017)

## Content

1. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat. 2017 Jul;25(2):1133-141.

The Impact of Pyschological Stress on Acne.

Jović A(1), Marinović B, Kostović K, Čeović R, Basta-Juzbašić A, Bukvić Mokos Z.

Author information:
(1)Anamaria Jović, MD, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Department of 
Dermatology and Venereology, University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Šalata 4, 
10000 Zagreb, Croatia; jovicanamaria@gmail.com.

Acne is one of the most common skin disorders. It is a multifactorial and 
complex disease, originating in the pilosebaceous follicle where a hereditary 
background, androgens, skin lipids, disorders of keratinization, inflammatory 
signaling, and regulatory neuropeptides seem to be mainly involved. Even though 
emotional stress has long been suspected to trigger or exacerbate acne, its 
influence on acne severity has been mostly underestimated until recently when 
studies have brought new data about the different mechanisms and possible 
factors involved in this interaction. A point to note is that there have been 
relatively few studies examining stress as a possible cause of acne or acne 
exacerbation; more studies have focused on stress and mental health problems 
occurring as a result of acne. In this review, we have tried to identify the 
underlying mechanisms that link stress to acne according to the latest 
scientific findings, and we summarize this perplexing connection. The basis for 
the association between emotional stress and the onset or exacerbation of acne 
is in several cutaneous neurogenic factors which interact with a pathogenic 
cascade in acne. This bidirectional intimate relationship of the skin and the 
mind emphasizes the importance of a holistic and interdisciplinary approach to 
caring for patients with acne that involves not only dermatologists but also 
psychologists and psychiatrists.

PMID: 28871928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]