---
reference_id: "PMID:39204246"
title: "Clostridioides difficile and Gut Microbiota: From Colonization to Infection and Treatment."
authors:
- Spigaglia P
journal: Pathogens
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/pathogens13080646
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clostridioides difficile and Gut Microbiota: From Colonization to Infection and Treatment.
**Authors:** Spigaglia P
**Journal:** Pathogens (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pathogens13080646](https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens13080646)

## Content

1. Pathogens. 2024 Jul 31;13(8):646. doi: 10.3390/pathogens13080646.

Clostridioides difficile and Gut Microbiota: From Colonization to Infection and 
Treatment.

Spigaglia P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Roma, 
Italy.

Clostridioides difficile is the main causative agent of antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea (AAD) in hospitals in the developed world. Both infected patients and 
asymptomatic colonized individuals represent important transmission sources of 
C. difficile. C. difficile infection (CDI) shows a large range of symptoms, from 
mild diarrhea to severe manifestations such as pseudomembranous colitis. 
Epidemiological changes in CDIs have been observed in the last two decades, with 
the emergence of highly virulent types and more numerous and severe CDI cases in 
the community. C. difficile interacts with the gut microbiota throughout its 
entire life cycle, and the C. difficile's role as colonizer or invader largely 
depends on alterations in the gut microbiota, which C. difficile itself can 
promote and maintain. The restoration of the gut microbiota to a healthy state 
is considered potentially effective for the prevention and treatment of CDI. 
Besides a fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), many other approaches to 
re-establishing intestinal eubiosis are currently under investigation. This 
review aims to explore current data on C. difficile and gut microbiota changes 
in colonized individuals and infected patients with a consideration of the 
recent emergence of highly virulent C. difficile types, with an overview of the 
microbial interventions used to restore the human gut microbiota.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens13080646
PMCID: PMC11357127
PMID: 39204246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.