---
reference_id: "PMID:21670465"
title: Mutations in GATA2 are associated with the autosomal dominant and sporadic monocytopenia and mycobacterial infection (MonoMAC) syndrome.
authors:
- Hsu AP
- Sampaio EP
- Khan J
- Calvo KR
- Lemieux JE
- Patel SY
- Frucht DM
- Vinh DC
- Auth RD
- Freeman AF
- Olivier KN
- Uzel G
- Zerbe CS
- Spalding C
- Pittaluga S
- Raffeld M
- Kuhns DB
- Ding L
- Paulson ML
- Marciano BE
- Gea-Banacloche JC
- Orange JS
- Cuellar-Rodriguez J
- Hickstein DD
- Holland SM
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-356352
keywords:
- GATA2 Transcription Factor/genetics
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Monocytes/pathology
- Mutation/genetics
- Mycobacterium/pathogenicity
- "Mycobacterium Infections/etiology, pathology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in GATA2 are associated with the autosomal dominant and sporadic monocytopenia and mycobacterial infection (MonoMAC) syndrome.
**Authors:** Hsu AP, Sampaio EP, Khan J, Calvo KR, Lemieux JE, Patel SY, Frucht DM, Vinh DC, Auth RD, Freeman AF, Olivier KN, Uzel G, Zerbe CS, Spalding C, Pittaluga S, Raffeld M, Kuhns DB, Ding L, Paulson ML, Marciano BE, Gea-Banacloche JC, Orange JS, Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Hickstein DD, Holland SM
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2011-05-356352](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-05-356352)

## Content

1. Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2653-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-356352. Epub 2011
 Jun 13.

Mutations in GATA2 are associated with the autosomal dominant and sporadic
monocytopenia and mycobacterial infection (MonoMAC) syndrome.

Hsu AP(1), Sampaio EP, Khan J, Calvo KR, Lemieux JE, Patel SY, Frucht DM, Vinh
DC, Auth RD, Freeman AF, Olivier KN, Uzel G, Zerbe CS, Spalding C, Pittaluga S,
Raffeld M, Kuhns DB, Ding L, Paulson ML, Marciano BE, Gea-Banacloche JC, Orange
JS, Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Hickstein DD, Holland SM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD
20892-1684, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2647-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-362772.

The syndrome of monocytopenia, B-cell and NK-cell lymphopenia, and
mycobacterial, fungal, and viral infections is associated with myelodysplasia,
cytogenetic abnormalities, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, and myeloid
leukemias. Both autosomal dominant and sporadic cases occur. We identified 12
distinct mutations in GATA2 affecting 20 patients and relatives with this
syndrome, including recurrent missense mutations affecting the zinc finger-2
domain (R398W and T354M), suggesting dominant interference of gene function.
Four discrete insertion/deletion mutations leading to frame shifts and premature
termination implicate haploinsufficiency as a possible mechanism of action as
well. These mutations were found in hematopoietic and somatic tissues, and
several were identified in families, indicating germline transmission. Thus,
GATA2 joins RUNX1 and CEBPA not only as a familial leukemia gene but also as a
cause of a complex congenital immunodeficiency that evolves over decades and
combines predisposition to infection and myeloid malignancy.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-356352
PMCID: PMC3172785
PMID: 21670465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
