---
reference_id: "PMID:35238469"
title: Phenotypic and molecular characterization of five patients with PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum (PROS).
authors:
- Gökpınar İli E
- Taşdelen E
- Durmaz CD
- Altıner Ş
- Tuncalı T
- Martinez-Glez V
- Karabulut HG
- Vural S
- Ceylaner S
- Acar MO
- Ilgın Ruhi H
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62709
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic and molecular characterization of five patients with PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum (PROS).
**Authors:** Gökpınar İli E, Taşdelen E, Durmaz CD, Altıner Ş, Tuncalı T, Martinez-Glez V, Karabulut HG, Vural S, Ceylaner S, Acar MO, Ilgın Ruhi H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62709](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62709)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 Jun;188(6):1792-1800. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62709. Epub 
2022 Mar 2.

Phenotypic and molecular characterization of five patients with PIK3CA-related 
overgrowth spectrum (PROS).

Gökpınar İli E(1)(2), Taşdelen E(1)(3), Durmaz CD(1)(4)(5), Altıner Ş(1), 
Tuncalı T(1), Martinez-Glez V(6), Karabulut HG(1), Vural S(7), Ceylaner S(8), 
Acar MO(1), Ilgın Ruhi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(2)Genetic Diseases Center, Başakşehir Çam and Sakura City Hospital, İstanbul, 
Turkey.
(3)Genetic Diseases Center, Şanlıurfa Eyyübiye Training and Research Hospital, 
Şanlıurfa, Turkey.
(4)Genetic Diseases Center, Gazi Yaşargil Training and Research Hospital, 
Diyarbakır, Turkey.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Hacettepe University School of Medicine, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Vascular Malformations Section, Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics 
(INGEMM-IdiPAZ), Hospital Universitario La Paz, and Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Koç University School of Medicine, İstanbul, 
Turkey.
(8)Intergen Genetic Diagnosis and Research Center, Ankara, Turkey.

Somatic and germline PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway pathogenic variants are involved in 
several segmental overgrowth phenotypes such as the PIK3CA-related overgrowth 
spectrum (PROS), Proteus syndrome, and PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome. In this 
study, we describe five patients with PROS. We identified by high-throughput 
sequencing four different somatic PIK3CA pathogenic variants in five 
individuals. The Glu726Lys variant, which was previously reported in 
megalencephaly-capillary malformation-polymicrogyria (MCAP) syndrome, was 
identified in two patients with unclassified PROS. The Cys420Arg substitution, 
which was previously reported in CLOVES, was found in a patient with 
fibroadipose hyperplasia. Additionally, relatively rare pathogenic variants, 
His1047Tyr and Tyr1021Cys, were detected in two patients with MCAP. Therefore, 
we suggest performing deep sequencing of PIK3CA in all patients with suspected 
PROS, instead of targeted polymerase chain reaction for hotspot pathogenic 
variants.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62709
PMID: 35238469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]