---
reference_id: "PMID:32809405"
title: Arsenical Keratosis(Archived).
authors:
- Shajil C
- Chen RJ
- Mahabal GD
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenical Keratosis(Archived).
**Authors:** Shajil C, Chen RJ, Mahabal GD

## Content

1. Arsenical Keratosis(Archived).

Shajil C(1), Chen RJ(2), Mahabal GD(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2024 Aug 11.

Author information:
(1)Christian Medical College and Hospital, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India
(2)Jefferson-Einstein Healthcare Network
(3)Christian Medical College

Arsenical keratosis is a precancerous dermatosis observed in patients with 
chronic arsenic toxicity. This condition is characterized by corn-like, 
yellowish, hyperkeratotic papules and plaques, primarily affecting the palms and 
soles. Often, it starts as small areas of hyperkeratosis, which increase in 
number and size to involve the entire palms and soles. In rare cases, it can 
spread to the dorsal surfaces of the hands and feet and other parts of the body 
and may progress to squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Arsenical keratosis with skin 
hyperpigmentation is the earliest and most common presenting complaint in 
chronic arsenic toxicity. Therefore, it plays a crucial role in guiding 
clinicians toward the early diagnosis and treatment of chronic arsenic toxicity. 
Apart from benign conditions such as skin hyperpigmentation and Mees' lines in 
the nails, arsenical keratosis can sometimes coexist with single or multiple 
lesions of Bowen's disease, basal cell carcinoma, and SCC. Identification and 
elimination of the source of arsenic exposure are of utmost importance, as these 
patients are at a high risk of developing multisystem disorders and visceral 
malignancies.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32809405

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Chandana Shajil declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Richard Chen 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Gauri Mahabal declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.