---
reference_id: "PMID:35356614"
title: "Association of Insulin Resistance and Elevated Androgen Levels with Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS): A Review of Literature."
authors:
- Xu Y
- Qiao J
journal: J Healthc Eng
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/9240569
keywords:
- Androgens
- Female
- Humans
- Insulin
- Insulin Resistance/physiology
- "Polycystic Ovary Syndrome/complications, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Insulin Resistance and Elevated Androgen Levels with Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS): A Review of Literature.
**Authors:** Xu Y, Qiao J
**Journal:** J Healthc Eng (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/9240569](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/9240569)

## Content

1. J Healthc Eng. 2022 Mar 21;2022:9240569. doi: 10.1155/2022/9240569.
eCollection  2022.

Association of Insulin Resistance and Elevated Androgen Levels with Polycystic
Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS): A Review of Literature.

Xu Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Qiao J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 100191, China.
(2)National Clinical Research Centre for Obstetrics and Gynecology, Beijing
100191, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Assisted Reproduction (Peking University), Ministry of
Education, Beijing 100191, China.
(4)Beijing Key Laboratory of Reproductive Endocrinology and Assisted
Reproductive Technology, Beijing 100191, China.
(5)Research Units of Comprehensive Diagnosis and Treatment of Oocyte Maturation
Arrest, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

The polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the disease featured by elevated levels
of androgens, ovulatory dysfunction, and morphological abnormalities. At
reproductive stage of women, the rate of PCOS occurrence is measured as 6-10%
and the prevalence rate may be double. There are different pathophysiological
factors involved in PCOS, and they play a major role in various abnormalities in
individual patient. It is clear that there is noteworthy elevation of androgen
in PCOS, causing substantial misery and infertility problems. The overexposure
of androgen is directly linked with insulin resistance and hyperinsulinaemia. It
has been reported previously that PCOS is related to cardiac metabolic miseries
and potently increases the risk of heart diseases. Endometrial cancer is also a
serious concern which is reported with exceedingly high incidence in women with
PCOS. However, the overexposure of androgen has direct and specific influence on
the development of insulin resistance. Although many factors are involved,
resistance to the insulin and enhanced level of androgen are considered the
major causes of PCOS. In the present review, we have focused on the
pathophysiology and major revolutions of insulin resistance and excessive levels
of androgen in females with PCOS.

Copyright © 2022 Yalan Xu and Jie Qiao.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/9240569
PMCID: PMC8959968
PMID: 35356614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest.
