---
reference_id: "PMID:20301680"
title: HRAS-Related Costello Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Gripp KW
- Weaver KN
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HRAS-Related Costello Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Gripp KW, Weaver KN

## Content

1. HRAS-Related Costello Syndrome.

Gripp KW(1)(2), Weaver KN(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2006 Aug 29 [updated 2023 Dec 21].

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Nemours Children's Hospital, Wilmington, 
Delaware
(2)Professor of Pediatrics, T Jefferson University and Medical College, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(3)Associate Professor, Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, Department of 
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: While the majority of individuals with HRAS-related 
Costello syndrome (Costello syndrome) share characteristic findings affecting 
multiple organ systems, the phenotypic spectrum is wide, ranging from a mild or 
attenuated phenotype to a severe phenotype with early-lethal complications. 
Costello syndrome is typically characterized by failure to thrive in infancy as 
a result of severe postnatal feeding difficulties; short stature; developmental 
delay or intellectual disability; coarse facial features (full lips, large 
mouth, full nasal tip); curly or sparse, fine hair; loose, soft skin with deep 
palmar and plantar creases; papillomata of the face and perianal region; diffuse 
hypotonia and joint laxity with ulnar deviation of the wrists and fingers; tight 
Achilles tendons; and cardiac involvement including cardiac hypertrophy (usually 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), congenital heart defects (usually valvular 
pulmonic stenosis), and arrhythmia (usually supraventricular tachycardia, 
especially abnormal atrial rhythm / multifocal atrial tachycardia or ectopic 
atrial tachycardia). Relative or absolute macrocephaly is typical, and postnatal 
cerebellar overgrowth can result in the development of a Chiari I malformation 
with associated anomalies including hydrocephalus or syringomyelia. Individuals 
with Costello syndrome have an approximately 15% lifetime risk for malignant 
tumors including rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma in young children and 
transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder in adolescents and young adults.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Costello syndrome is established in a 
proband with suggestive clinical findings and a heterozygous HRAS pathogenic 
variant identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Trametinib (MEK inhibitor) for treatment of 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with heart failure that is refractory to standard 
treatment. Supportive care: Failure to thrive is the most common and challenging 
clinical problem; most infants require nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding, and 
many require Nissen fundoplication. Cardiac manifestations and malignancies are 
managed through standard protocols. Ulnar deviation of the wrists and fingers 
often requires early bracing and occupational and/or physical therapy; tight 
Achilles tendons may require surgical tendon lengthening. Developmental delay 
requires early intervention programs and individualized education strategies. 
Recurrent facial papillomata may require removal. General anesthesia may pose a 
risk to those with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or those predisposed to types of 
atrial tachycardia. Surveillance: Monitoring for neonatal hypoglycemia; 
echocardiography with electrocardiogram at the time of diagnosis with subsequent 
follow up by a cardiologist; abdominal and pelvic ultrasound examinations to 
screen for rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma every three to six months until 
age eight to ten years may be considered; annual urinalysis for evidence of 
hematuria to screen for bladder cancer beginning at age ten years.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Costello syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder 
typically caused by a de novo pathogenic variant. Rarely, an individual with 
Costello syndrome has the disorder as the result of an HRAS pathogenic variant 
inherited from a heterozygous parent; vertical transmission has been reported in 
two families with the rare, attenuated phenotype of Costello syndrome. If the 
HRAS pathogenic variant identified in the proband cannot be detected in the 
leukocyte DNA of either parent, the recurrence risk to sibs is slightly greater 
than that of the general population because of the possibility of parental 
germline mosaicism. Recurrence of Costello syndrome in sibs has been reported 
and is suspected to be the result of germline mosaicism in a parent. Individuals 
with classic Costello syndrome typically do not reproduce. If an HRAS pathogenic 
variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301680