---
reference_id: "PMID:33516942"
title: Lynch syndrome and Muir-Torre phenotype associated with a recurrent variant in the 3'UTR of the MSH6 gene.
authors:
- Cini G
- Carnevali I
- Sahnane N
- Chiaravalli AM
- Dell'Elice A
- Maestro R
- Pin E
- Bestetti I
- Radovic S
- Armelao F
- Viel A
- Tibiletti MG
journal: Cancer Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2021.01.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lynch syndrome and Muir-Torre phenotype associated with a recurrent variant in the 3'UTR of the MSH6 gene.
**Authors:** Cini G, Carnevali I, Sahnane N, Chiaravalli AM, Dell'Elice A, Maestro R, Pin E, Bestetti I, Radovic S, Armelao F, Viel A, Tibiletti MG
**Journal:** Cancer Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cancergen.2021.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cancergen.2021.01.005)

## Content

1. Cancer Genet. 2021 Jun;254-255:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2021.01.005.
Epub  2021 Jan 19.

Lynch syndrome and Muir-Torre phenotype associated with a recurrent variant in 
the 3'UTR of the MSH6 gene.

Cini G(1), Carnevali I(2), Sahnane N(2), Chiaravalli AM(2), Dell'Elice A(1), 
Maestro R(1), Pin E(3), Bestetti I(4), Radovic S(5), Armelao F(6), Viel A(7), 
Tibiletti MG(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Functional Oncogenomics and Genetics, Centro di Riferimento 
Oncologico di Aviano (CRO) IRCCS, Via F. Gallini 2, 33081 Aviano, Italy.
(2)Department of Pathology, Circolo Hospital ASST Settelaghi, via O. Rossi 9, 
21100, Varese, Italy; Research Center for the Study of Hereditary and Familial 
Tumors, Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, via O. Rossi 
9, 21100, Varese, Italy.
(3)Division of Affinity Proteomics, Department of Protein Science, SciLifeLab, 
The Royal Institute of Technology KTH, Tomtebodavägen 23B, 171 65 Solna, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Research Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS 
Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Via Zucchi, 18 - 20095 Cusano Milanino (MI); 
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of 
Milan, Via Vanvitelli 32, 20133 Milan, Italy.
(5)IGA Technology Services Srl, Via J. Linussio, 51, 33100 Udine, Italy.
(6)U.O. Gastroenterologia ed Endoscopia Digestiva, Ospedale S. Chiara, APSS, Via 
A. de Gasperi 79 - 38123, Trento, Italy.
(7)Unit of Functional Oncogenomics and Genetics, Centro di Riferimento 
Oncologico di Aviano (CRO) IRCCS, Via F. Gallini 2, 33081 Aviano, Italy. 
Electronic address: aviel@cro.it.

A MSH6 3'UTR variant (c.*23_26dup) was found in 13 unrelated families consulted 
for Lynch/Muir-Torre Syndrome. This variant, which is very rare in the genomic 
databases, was absent in healthy controls and strongly segregated with the 
disease in the studied pedigrees. All tumors were defective for MSH2/MSH6/MSH3 
proteins expression, but only MSH2 somatic pathogenic mutations were found in 5 
of the 12 sequenced tumors. Moreover, we had no evidence of MSH6 transcript 
decrease in carriers, whereas MSH2 transcript was downregulated. Additional 
evaluations performed in representative carriers, including karyotype, arrayCGH 
and Linked-Reads whole genome sequencing, failed to evidence any MSH2 germline 
pathogenic variant. Posterior probability of pathogenicity for MSH6 c.*23_26dup 
was obtained from a multifactorial analysis incorporating segregation and 
phenotypic data and resulted >0.999, allowing to classify the variant as 
pathogenic (InSiGHT Class 5). Carriers shared a common haplotype involving 
MSH2/MSH6 loci, then a cryptic disease-associated variant, linked with MSH6 
c.*23_26dup, cannot be completely excluded. Even if it is not clear whether the 
MSH6 variant is pathogenic per se or simply a marker of a disease-associated 
MSH2/MSH6 haplotype, all data collected on patients and pedigrees prompted us to 
manage the variant as pathogenic and to offer predictive testing within these 
families.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2021.01.005
PMID: 33516942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.