---
reference_id: "PMID:36578839"
title: "Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome in a Newborn: A Case Report With Literature Review."
authors:
- Al-Blushi S
- Bantan NAA
- Al-Abdullatif S
- Taher MM
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.32899
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome in a Newborn: A Case Report With Literature Review.
**Authors:** Al-Blushi S, Bantan NAA, Al-Abdullatif S, Taher MM
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.32899](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.32899)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Dec 24;14(12):e32899. doi: 10.7759/cureus.32899. eCollection 2022
 Dec.

Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome in a Newborn: A Case Report With Literature Review.

Al-Blushi S(1), Bantan NAA(2), Al-Abdullatif S(3), Taher MM(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Radiology, Maternity and Children's Hospital, Dammam, SAU.
(2)Radiology, Al Noor Specialist Hospital, Makkah, SAU.
(3)Pediatrics, Maternity and Children's Hospital, Dammam, SAU.
(4)Medical Genetics, Umm Al-Qura University College of Medicine, Makkah, SAU.
(5)Science and Technology Unit, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, SAU.

Erratum in
    Cureus. 2023 Jan 3;15(1):c86. doi: 10.7759/cureus.c86.

Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS; OMIM #208050) is a sporadic, autosomal,
recessively inherited genetic disorder. ATS primarily causes the tortuosity and
elongation of large and medium-sized arteries; however, other skeletal
manifestations include dysmorphic features, such as hyperextensible skin,
hypermobile joints, and congenital contractures. The present article reports the
case of a female neonate, who, at birth, exhibited abnormal facial features,
hypermobility of joints, and abnormal physical appearance. The patient was
diagnosed with ATS during the first week of life, based on computed tomographic
scans. In addition, angiographic results demonstrated elongation and tortuosity
of the aorta, which were further supported using the results of genetic
analysis. Mutation analysis of the solute carrier family 2 member 10 (SLC2A10)
genes (Entrez Gene: 81031) detected a homozygous pathogenic c.243C>G (p.
Ser81Arg) variant (dbSNP: rs80358230) in this patient, which supports the
clinical diagnosis of ATS. Following the initial diagnosis, further
investigations into the family history were carried out, and the results
demonstrated that the patient's paternal grandmother and paternal aunt were also
positive for ATS. The patient was subsequently referred to a tertiary care
center for genetic counseling and further follow-up. Notably, carrier testing
for at-risk relatives is recommended to identify family members that may be
affected by this condition.

Copyright © 2022, Al-Blushi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.32899
PMCID: PMC9789724
PMID: 36578839

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
