---
reference_id: "PMID:15317890"
title: Interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) gene variants and the risk of isolated cleft lip or palate.
authors:
- Zucchero TM
- Cooper ME
- Maher BS
- Daack-Hirsch S
- Nepomuceno B
- Ribeiro L
- Caprau D
- Christensen K
- Suzuki Y
- Machida J
- Natsume N
- Yoshiura K
- Vieira AR
- Orioli IM
- Castilla EE
- Moreno L
- Arcos-Burgos M
- Lidral AC
- Field LL
- Liu YE
- Ray A
- Goldstein TH
- Schultz RE
- Shi M
- Johnson MK
- Kondo S
- Schutte BC
- Marazita ML
- Murray JC
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa032909
keywords:
- Cleft Lip/genetics
- Cleft Palate/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Genotype
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Interferon Regulatory Factors
- Linkage Disequilibrium
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Racial Groups
- Risk Factors
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Valine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) gene variants and the risk of isolated cleft lip or palate.
**Authors:** Zucchero TM, Cooper ME, Maher BS, Daack-Hirsch S, Nepomuceno B, Ribeiro L, Caprau D, Christensen K, Suzuki Y, Machida J, Natsume N, Yoshiura K, Vieira AR, Orioli IM, Castilla EE, Moreno L, Arcos-Burgos M, Lidral AC, Field LL, Liu YE, Ray A, Goldstein TH, Schultz RE, Shi M, Johnson MK, Kondo S, Schutte BC, Marazita ML, Murray JC
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa032909](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa032909)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2004 Aug 19;351(8):769-80. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa032909.

Interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) gene variants and the risk of isolated 
cleft lip or palate.

Zucchero TM(1), Cooper ME, Maher BS, Daack-Hirsch S, Nepomuceno B, Ribeiro L, 
Caprau D, Christensen K, Suzuki Y, Machida J, Natsume N, Yoshiura K, Vieira AR, 
Orioli IM, Castilla EE, Moreno L, Arcos-Burgos M, Lidral AC, Field LL, Liu YE, 
Ray A, Goldstein TH, Schultz RE, Shi M, Johnson MK, Kondo S, Schutte BC, 
Marazita ML, Murray JC.

Author information:
(1)University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Aug 19;351(8):745-7. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp048157.
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Aug 19;351(8):822-4. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe048164.

BACKGROUND: Cleft lip or palate (or the two in combination) is a common birth 
defect that results from a mixture of genetic and environmental factors. We 
searched for a specific genetic factor contributing to this complex trait by 
examining large numbers of affected patients and families and evaluating a 
specific candidate gene.
METHODS: We identified the gene that encodes interferon regulatory factor 6 
(IRF6) as a candidate gene on the basis of its involvement in an autosomal 
dominant form of cleft lip and palate, Van der Woude's syndrome. A 
single-nucleotide polymorphism in this gene results in either a valine or an 
isoleucine at amino acid position 274 (V274I). We carried out 
transmission-disequilibrium testing for V274I in 8003 individual subjects in 
1968 families derived from 10 populations with ancestry in Asia, Europe, and 
South America, haplotype and linkage analyses, and case-control analyses, and 
determined the risk of cleft lip or palate that is associated with genetic 
variation in IRF6.
RESULTS: Strong evidence of overtransmission of the valine (V) allele was found 
in the entire population data set (P<10(-9)); moreover, the results for some 
individual populations from South America and Asia were highly significant. 
Variation at IRF6 was responsible for 12 percent of the genetic contribution to 
cleft lip or palate and tripled the risk of recurrence in families that had 
already had one affected child.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA-sequence variants associated with IRF6 are major contributors 
to cleft lip, with or without cleft palate. The contribution of variants in 
single genes to cleft lip or palate is an important consideration in genetic 
counseling.

Copyright 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa032909
PMID: 15317890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]