---
reference_id: "PMID:28339786"
title: Modelling original antigenic sin in dengue viral infection.
authors:
- Nikin-Beers R
- Ciupe SM
journal: Math Med Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/imammb/dqx002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modelling original antigenic sin in dengue viral infection.
**Authors:** Nikin-Beers R, Ciupe SM
**Journal:** Math Med Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/imammb/dqx002](https://doi.org/10.1093/imammb/dqx002)

## Content

1. Math Med Biol. 2018 Jun 13;35(2):257-272. doi: 10.1093/imammb/dqx002.

Modelling original antigenic sin in dengue viral infection.

Nikin-Beers R(1), Ciupe SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.

Cross-reactive T cell responses induced by a primary dengue virus infection may 
contribute to increased disease severity following heterologous infections with 
a different virus serotype in a phenomenon known as the original antigenic sin. 
In this study, we developed and analyzed in-host models of T cell responses to 
primary and secondary dengue virus infections that considered the effect of T 
cell cross-reactivity in disease enhancement. We fitted the models to published 
patient data and showed that the overall infected cell killing is similar in 
dengue heterologous infections, resulting in dengue fever and dengue hemorrhagic 
fever. The contribution to overall killing, however, is dominated by 
non-specific T cell responses during the majority of secondary dengue 
hemorrhagic fever cases. By contrast, more than half of secondary dengue fever 
cases have predominant strain-specific T cell responses with high avidity. These 
results support the hypothesis that cross-reactive T cell responses occur mainly 
during severe disease cases of heterologous dengue virus infections.

DOI: 10.1093/imammb/dqx002
PMID: 28339786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]