---
reference_id: "PMID:35444542"
title: Efficacy of Eribulin in Soft Tissue Sarcomas.
authors:
- Phillips E
- Jones RL
- Huang P
- Digklia A
journal: Front Pharmacol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.869754
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of Eribulin in Soft Tissue Sarcomas.
**Authors:** Phillips E, Jones RL, Huang P, Digklia A
**Journal:** Front Pharmacol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphar.2022.869754](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2022.869754)

## Content

1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Mar 30;13:869754. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.869754. 
eCollection 2022.

Efficacy of Eribulin in Soft Tissue Sarcomas.

Phillips E(1), Jones RL(1)(2), Huang P(3), Digklia A(4).

Author information:
(1)Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Royal Marsden Hospital, Division of Clinical Sciences, Institute of Cancer 
Research, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Department of Oncology, Lausanne University Hospital and University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Soft tissue sarcomas are a highly heterogenous group of tumors with limited 
systemic therapy options. Eribulin, a synthetic analogue of halichondrin B, is a 
potent mitotic inhibitor. A phase 3 trial of previously treated advanced 
Liposarcoma and Leiomyosarcoma demonstrated superiority of eribulin to 
dacarbazine. Eribulin appears to be particularly effective for liposarcomas. It 
has also been shown to be a safe and effective treatment alternative to 
doxorubicin in patients where doxorubicin is contraindicated. From retrospective 
studies, eribulin has demonstrated efficacy in patients with angiosarcoma, 
pleomorphic sarcomas, synovial sarcomas, rhabdomyosarcomas, angiosarcomas, and 
myxofibrosarcomas. Future areas of development include liposomal eribulin, which 
may provide increased efficacy and lower toxicity, and delineation of biomarkers 
of response and resistance, allowing better selection of patients for treatment.

Copyright © 2022 Phillips, Jones, Huang and Digklia.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.869754
PMCID: PMC9014307
PMID: 35444542

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.