---
reference_id: "PMID:27424016"
title: Secondary Sjogren's Syndrome in 83 Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis.
authors:
- Hajiabbasi A
- Shenavar Masooleh I
- Alizadeh Y
- Banikarimi AS
- Ghavidel Parsa P
journal: Acta Med Iran
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secondary Sjogren's Syndrome in 83 Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis.
**Authors:** Hajiabbasi A, Shenavar Masooleh I, Alizadeh Y, Banikarimi AS, Ghavidel Parsa P
**Journal:** Acta Med Iran (2016)

## Content

1. Acta Med Iran. 2016 Jul;54(7):448-53.

Secondary Sjogren's Syndrome in 83 Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis.

Hajiabbasi A(1), Shenavar Masooleh I(1), Alizadeh Y(2), Banikarimi AS(3), 
Ghavidel Parsa P(1).

Author information:
(1)Guilan Rheumatology Research Center, Razi Hospital, Guilan University of 
Medical Sciences, Rasht, Iran.
(2)Guilan Eye Research Center, Amir Almomenin Hospital, Guilan University of 
Medical Sciences, Rasht, Iran.
(3)Razi Hospital, School of Medicine, Guilan University of Medical Sciences, 
Rasht, Iran.

Sjogren syndrome (SS) can occur alone, primary Sjogren syndrome, or in 
association with other rheumatic diseases, secondary Sjogren syndrome (sSS), 
such as Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The occurrence of Sjogren syndrome with RA 
makes it course worse and increases high morbidity and mortality of RA. In this 
exploratory study we aim to determine the prevalence of sSS (diagnosed based on 
the revised version of American-European consensus Group Classification 
Criteria: AUCG-criteria), sicca symptoms (dry eye, dry mouth), positive 
autoantibody tests (Anti RO or Anti-LA antibodies), UWSFR (Unstimulated Whole 
Salivary Flow Rate), Schirmer and Lissamine test. In this cross-sectional study, 
eighty three consecutive RA patients (according to American College of 
Rheumatology criteria 1987) who were visited at rheumatology clinic of Razi 
General Hospital located in the north of Iran entered into our study. Our 
exclusion criteria was a positive history of past head and neck radiation 
treatment, Hepatitis C infection, acquired immunodeficiency disease (AIDS), 
pre-existing lymphoma, sarcoidosis, graft versus host disease, use of 
anticholinergic drugs (including neuroleptics, antidepressants, antihypertensive 
and parasympatholytics). They examined with UWSFR by a rheumatologist and with 
Schirmer test and Lissamine test by an ophthalmologist. Participants were 90.4% 
female with the mean age 48.3±13 years. Duration of RA was in 36.1% less than 5 
years, in 22.9% 5-10 years, in 12.1% 11-15 years and in 28.9% more than 15 
years. Our results demonstrated that the prevalence of sSS was 5.9% 
(CI:0.6%-10.5%). Number of 27.7% of RA patients positively responded to at least 
one question about sicca symptoms. Among objective tests, only Positive UWSFR 
and Lissamine test were significantly more common in RA patients with sSS in 
comparison to ones without sSS (P<0.001, P=0.01 respectively). In RA patients, 
we found a linear trend between sicca symptoms and aging (P=0.02). In patients 
with sicca symptoms, among tests that used for assessing decrease in saliva or 
tear production, only USWFR significantly more common (P=0.01).
IN CONCLUSION: In RA population in North of Iran prevalence of sSS was less than 
10%. In them, a significant linear trend existed between aging and sicca 
symptoms. Among objective tests of AUCG-criteria (except for lip biopsy that was 
not performed in the current study) only UWSFR and Lissamine test were 
significantly more common in patients with sSS in comparison ones without it.

PMID: 27424016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]