---
reference_id: "PMID:28834165"
title: A gain-of-function mutation in TNFRSF13B is a candidate for predisposition to familial or sporadic immune thrombocytopenia.
authors:
- Peng HL
- Zhang Y
- Sun NN
- Yin YF
- Wang YW
- Cheng Z
- Yan WZ
- Liu SF
- Xu YX
- Xiao X
- Zhang GS
journal: J Thromb Haemost
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/jth.13806
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A gain-of-function mutation in TNFRSF13B is a candidate for predisposition to familial or sporadic immune thrombocytopenia.
**Authors:** Peng HL, Zhang Y, Sun NN, Yin YF, Wang YW, Cheng Z, Yan WZ, Liu SF, Xu YX, Xiao X, Zhang GS
**Journal:** J Thromb Haemost (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jth.13806](https://doi.org/10.1111/jth.13806)

## Content

1. J Thromb Haemost. 2017 Nov;15(11):2259-2269. doi: 10.1111/jth.13806. Epub 2017
 Sep 13.

A gain-of-function mutation in TNFRSF13B is a candidate for predisposition to 
familial or sporadic immune thrombocytopenia.

Peng HL(1), Zhang Y(2), Sun NN(1), Yin YF(1), Wang YW(1), Cheng Z(1), Yan WZ(1), 
Liu SF(1), Xu YX(1), Xiao X(1), Zhang GS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Institute of Molecular Hematology, The Second 
Xiang-Ya Hospital, Central South University, ChangSha, Hunan, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, The Second Xiang-Ya Hospital, Central South 
University, ChangSha, Hunan, China.

Essentials Positive family histories suggest the existence of hereditary immune 
thrombocytopenia (ITP). The predisposing gene for familial ITP was screened in 
two familial ITP patients. The G76S mutation on TNFRSF13B led to immune 
dysfunction and induced megakaryocyte apoptosis. The G76S mutation on TNFRSF13B 
is a gain-of-function mutation and a predisposing variant for ITP.
SUMMARY: Background Most immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is sporadic but a 
positive family history of ITP in some patients suggests that hereditary forms 
exist. Because of the rarity of familial ITP families available for study and 
the heterogeneity of sporadic ITP, family linkage analysis or genome-wide 
association studies are limited. Objectives Based on one ITP pedigree, we try to 
identify the predisposing gene in familial or sporadic ITP and reveal the way in 
which it causes thrombocytopenia. Methods Gene expression profiling analysis and 
whole-exome sequencing were performed on samples from family members with ITP, 
sporadic ITP cases and healthy individuals. We also evaluated the influence of 
potential pathogenic mutation on immune function and megakaryocyte apoptosis. 
Results Whole-exome sequencing identified a potential pathologic p.G76S 
heterozygous mutation on the TNFRSF13B gene in familial ITP patients. ITP 
patients harboring the G76S mutation displayed an upregulated 'cytokine-cytokine 
receptor interaction' signal, increased serum TNFα, IL-17α, IFNγ and BAFF 
levels, and enhanced binding capacity of APRIL ligand to B cells. Additionally, 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed B cells with the G76S mutation could induce 
human megakaryocyte line (Meg-01) apoptosis significantly. Conclusion p.G76S 
mutation on the TNFRSF13B gene is responsible for ITP, and is a genetic 
predisposing factor for familial or sporadic ITP.

© 2017 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.13806
PMID: 28834165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]