---
reference_id: "PMID:25794620"
title: TopBP1 interacts with BLM to maintain genome stability but is dispensable for preventing BLM degradation.
authors:
- Blackford AN
- Nieminuszczy J
- Schwab RA
- Galanty Y
- Jackson SP
- Niedzwiedz W
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.02.012
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "DNA Topoisomerases, Type I/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Genomic Instability
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Phosphorylation
- "RecQ Helicases/genetics, metabolism"
- Serine/metabolism
- "Trans-Activators/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TopBP1 interacts with BLM to maintain genome stability but is dispensable for preventing BLM degradation.
**Authors:** Blackford AN, Nieminuszczy J, Schwab RA, Galanty Y, Jackson SP, Niedzwiedz W
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2015.02.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2015.02.012)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2015 Mar 19;57(6):1133-1141. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.02.012.

TopBP1 interacts with BLM to maintain genome stability but is dispensable for 
preventing BLM degradation.

Blackford AN(1), Nieminuszczy J(2), Schwab RA(3), Galanty Y(4), Jackson SP(5), 
Niedzwiedz W(6).

Author information:
(1)The Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX3 9DS, UK; The Gurdon Institute and Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.
(2)The Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX3 9DS, UK; Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, PAS, 02-106 Warsaw, 
Poland.
(3)The Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX3 9DS, UK.
(4)The Gurdon Institute and Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.
(5)The Gurdon Institute and Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK; The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge 
CB10 1SA, UK. Electronic address: s.jackson@gurdon.cam.ac.uk.
(6)The Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX3 9DS, UK. Electronic address: wojciech.niedzwiedz@imm.ox.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2015 Mar 19;57(6):955-956. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.02.011.

The Bloom syndrome helicase BLM and topoisomerase-IIβ-binding protein 1 (TopBP1) 
are key regulators of genome stability. It was recently proposed that BLM 
phosphorylation on Ser338 mediates its interaction with TopBP1, to protect BLM 
from ubiquitylation and degradation (Wang et al., 2013). Here, we show that the 
BLM-TopBP1 interaction does not involve Ser338 but instead requires BLM 
phosphorylation on Ser304. Furthermore, we establish that disrupting this 
interaction does not markedly affect BLM stability. However, BLM-TopBP1 binding 
is important for maintaining genome integrity, because in its absence cells 
display increased sister chromatid exchanges, replication origin firing and 
chromosomal aberrations. Therefore, the BLM-TopBP1 interaction maintains genome 
stability not by controlling BLM protein levels, but via another as-yet 
undetermined mechanism. Finally, we identify critical residues that mediate 
interactions between TopBP1 and MDC1, and between BLM and TOP3A/RMI1/RMI2. Taken 
together, our findings provide molecular insights into a key tumor suppressor 
and genome stability network.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.02.012
PMCID: PMC4374139
PMID: 25794620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]