---
reference_id: "PMID:39611834"
title: Differential vasoproliferative traits of Bartonella henselae strains associated with autotransporter BafA variants.
authors:
- Kondo Y
- Suzuki M
- Sato S
- Maruyama S
- Sei A
- Ma X
- Nakano K
- Doi Y
- Tsukamoto K
journal: Microbiol Spectr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01925-24
keywords:
- "Bartonella henselae/genetics, pathogenicity"
- Humans
- Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells/microbiology
- Cell Proliferation
- "Bacterial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Adhesins, Bacterial/genetics, metabolism"
- Cat-Scratch Disease/microbiology
- "Angiomatosis, Bacillary/microbiology, genetics"
- "Type IV Secretion Systems/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential vasoproliferative traits of Bartonella henselae strains associated with autotransporter BafA variants.
**Authors:** Kondo Y, Suzuki M, Sato S, Maruyama S, Sei A, Ma X, Nakano K, Doi Y, Tsukamoto K
**Journal:** Microbiol Spectr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1128/spectrum.01925-24](https://doi.org/10.1128/spectrum.01925-24)

## Content

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2025 Jan 7;13(1):e0192524. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01925-24. 
Epub 2024 Nov 29.

Differential vasoproliferative traits of Bartonella henselae strains associated 
with autotransporter BafA variants.

Kondo Y(1)(2), Suzuki M(2), Sato S(3), Maruyama S(3), Sei A(2), Ma X(1), Nakano 
K(2), Doi Y(2)(4)(5), Tsukamoto K(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Bacterial Zoonoses, International Research Center for 
Infectious Diseases, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka 
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, 
Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon 
University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Fujita Health University School of 
Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Bartonella henselae, a Gram-negative facultative intracellular bacterium, is the 
etiological agent of cat-scratch disease and also causes bacillary angiomatosis 
in immunocompromised individuals. Although the ability to promote vascular 
endothelial cell proliferation differs among Bartonella species, variations 
among strains within B. henselae remain unclear. Bartonella angiogenic factor A 
(BafA) and Bartonella adhesin A (BadA) have been identified as autotransporters 
of B. henselae that are involved in endothelial cell proliferation. Although 
strain-specific differences in the expression of BadA and the VirB/D4 type IV 
secretion system have been reported, BafA expression among B. henselae strains 
has yet to be examined. Therefore, the present study investigated the 
proliferation-promoting ability of 13 B. henselae strains from several sources 
in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). We identified BafA variants 
1 and 2 based on the deduced amino acid sequences of its passenger domain. The 
recombinant proteins of both variants exhibited similar proliferation activity 
against HUVECs. However, BafA variant 2 strains showed cytotoxicity at a high 
bacterial inoculum in a direct coculture with HUVECs, which was attenuated in an 
indirect coculture. These strains, in contrast to BafA variant 1 strains, highly 
expressed BadA and exhibited bacterial aggregation. Based on a core genome SNP 
analysis of 50 B. henselae strains, the BafA variant types corresponded to 
clades 1-4. These results indicate that vasoproliferative traits differ among B. 
henselae clades based on the variant types. Therefore, this study provides a new 
conceptual framework in which the clades of B. henselae may predict their 
pathogenicity in humans.IMPORTANCEBartonella species including Bartonella 
henselae, Bartonella quintana, and Bartonella bacilliformis cause 
vasoproliferative lesions. Their proliferation-promoting ability in vascular 
endothelial cells differs among Bartonella species; however, it is unclear 
whether these differences exist among B. henselae strains. We herein showed that 
B. henselae strains exhibited variable proliferation-promoting ability and 
cytotoxicity in vascular endothelial cells, which corresponded to the bafA gene 
variants possessed by the strains. The expression levels of Bartonella 
angiogenic factor A (BafA) and Bartonella adhesin A, as well as the degree of 
proliferation-promoting ability and cytotoxicity in endothelial cells, varied 
among the strains. A core genome SNP analysis of strains using whole genome 
sequencing data divided B. henselae strains into four clades, with each clade 
corresponding to BafA variants 1-4. These results suggest the differential 
vasoproliferative potency of B. henselae, with potential implications in 
clinical management, including risk stratification and predictions of the 
clinical course.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01925-24
PMCID: PMC11705867
PMID: 39611834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.