---
reference_id: "PMID:15228757"
title: Central nervous system atrophy and clinical status in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Zivadinov R
- Bakshi R
journal: J Neuroimaging
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1177/1051228404266266
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central nervous system atrophy and clinical status in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Zivadinov R, Bakshi R
**Journal:** J Neuroimaging (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1051228404266266](https://doi.org/10.1177/1051228404266266)

## Content

1. J Neuroimaging. 2004 Jul;14(3 Suppl):27S-35S. doi: 10.1177/1051228404266266.

Central nervous system atrophy and clinical status in multiple sclerosis.

Zivadinov R(1), Bakshi R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University at Buffalo, SUNY School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, The Jacobs Neurological Institute, 100 High Street, 
Buffalo, NY 14203, USA. rzivadinov@thejni.org

In this review, the authors focus on clinical aspects of central nervous system 
(CNS) atrophy in multiple sclerosis (MS), including the relationship between 
atrophy and disability, disease course, disease duration, quality of life, and 
fatigue. Cross-sectional studies have demonstrated a moderate but significant 
correlation between brain or spinal cord atrophy and physical disability in 
patients with MS. Longitudinal studies (>/= 5 years) have shown that CNS atrophy 
is a significant predictor of subsequent long-term neurologic deterioration. The 
clinical relevance of CNS atrophy is reinforced by studies showing that atrophy 
accounts for more variance than conventional lesion measures in predicting 
disability. Impaired quality of life and both urodynamic and sexual dysfunction, 
but not fatigue, are associated with brain atrophy. It is likely that once the 
level of CNS atrophy reaches a critical threshold, patients begin to suffer 
clinical impairment and disease progression. Longitudinal studies suggest that 
CNS atrophy may occur in patients with clinically isolated demyelinating 
syndromes who are at high risk for developing clinically definite MS. 
Longitudinal natural history studies in relapsing-remitting, secondary 
progressive, and primary progressive MS have suggested that patients develop CNS 
atrophy at a faster rate in the first few years of disease than later in the 
disease course. Similarly, long-term follow-up studies have shown a poor 
relationship between disease duration and the rate of brain atrophy. The authors 
conclude that measurement of atrophy of the CNS is emerging as a clinically 
relevant biomarker of the MS disease process.

DOI: 10.1177/1051228404266266
PMID: 15228757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]