---
reference_id: "PMID:38761217"
title: Outcomes of surgical repair of Type III and IV laryngotracheoesophageal clefts with posterior cartilage grafting.
authors:
- Tan L
- Li Q
- Chen C
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-024-08701-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of surgical repair of Type III and IV laryngotracheoesophageal clefts with posterior cartilage grafting.
**Authors:** Tan L, Li Q, Chen C
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-024-08701-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-024-08701-1)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2024 Sep;281(9):4881-4887. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-024-08701-1. Epub 2024 May 18.

Outcomes of surgical repair of Type III and IV laryngotracheoesophageal clefts 
with posterior cartilage grafting.

Tan L(1), Li Q(1), Chen C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Children's Hospital of 
Fudan University, Shanghai, 201102, China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Children's Hospital of 
Fudan University, Shanghai, 201102, China. chenchao_ent@126.com.

PURPOSE: To describe the clinical outcomes of patients who underwent surgical 
repair through an anterior approach that involved interposition a posterior 
cartilage for Type III or Type IV laryngotracheoesophageal cleft (LTEC).
METHODS: A chart view was performed on patients with Type III or Type IV LTEC 
between May 2017 and May 2022. Demographic features and surgical outcomes were 
collected and analyzed.
RESULTS: Seven patients were finally included. Five patients were diagnosed with 
Type III LTEC and two patients were diagnosed with Type IV LTEC. All but one 
patients survived and thrived. Four patients were able to successfully extubate 
with acceptable voice, and two patients were tracheostomized. Five patients were 
deemed safe for all consistencies food and one was safe for thickened food. 
After a mean follow-up of 49 months (18-83 months), neither complications nor 
recurrences were observed.
CONCLUSION: An anterior laryngofissure approach to the cleft repair with a 
posterior cartilage grafting is an effective and safe treatment for Type III or 
IV LTEC, which enables closure of LTEC and reconstruction of cricoid plate in 
order to avoid tracheoesophageal fistula formation or subglottic stenosis 
postoperatively. Severe tracheomalacia and GERD are two main causes for surgical 
failure.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-024-08701-1
PMID: 38761217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]