---
reference_id: "PMID:25624320"
title: "Long-term outcome of Hurler syndrome patients after hematopoietic cell transplantation: an international multicenter study."
authors:
- Aldenhoven M
- Wynn RF
- Orchard PJ
- "O'Meara A"
- Veys P
- Fischer A
- Valayannopoulos V
- Neven B
- Rovelli A
- Prasad VK
- Tolar J
- Allewelt H
- Jones SA
- Parini R
- Renard M
- Bordon V
- Wulffraat NM
- de Koning TJ
- Shapiro EG
- Kurtzberg J
- Boelens JJ
journal: Blood
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-11-608075
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term outcome of Hurler syndrome patients after hematopoietic cell transplantation: an international multicenter study.
**Authors:** Aldenhoven M, Wynn RF, Orchard PJ, O'Meara A, Veys P, Fischer A, Valayannopoulos V, Neven B, Rovelli A, Prasad VK, Tolar J, Allewelt H, Jones SA, Parini R, Renard M, Bordon V, Wulffraat NM, de Koning TJ, Shapiro EG, Kurtzberg J, Boelens JJ
**Journal:** Blood (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2014-11-608075](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2014-11-608075)

## Content

1. Blood. 2015 Mar 26;125(13):2164-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-11-608075. Epub
2015  Jan 26.

Long-term outcome of Hurler syndrome patients after hematopoietic cell 
transplantation: an international multicenter study.

Aldenhoven M(1), Wynn RF(2), Orchard PJ(3), O'Meara A(4), Veys P(5), Fischer 
A(6), Valayannopoulos V(7), Neven B(6), Rovelli A(8), Prasad VK(9), Tolar J(3), 
Allewelt H(9), Jones SA(10), Parini R(11), Renard M(12), Bordon V(13), Wulffraat 
NM(14), de Koning TJ(15), Shapiro EG(16), Kurtzberg J(9), Boelens JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Blood and Marrow Transplantation Program, Department of Pediatrics, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands;
(2)Blood and Marrow Transplant Unit, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester, United Kingdom;
(3)Program in Blood and Marrow Transplantation, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN;
(4)Department of Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Our Lady's 
Children's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland;
(5)Blood and Marrow Transplantation Program, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children National Health Service Trust, London, United Kingdom;
(6)Département de Biothérapie and.
(7)Reference Center for Inherited Metabolic Diseases and Imagine Institute, 
Assistance Publique-Hopiteaux de Paris, Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants 
Malades, Paris, France;
(8)Pediatric Bone Marrow Transplant Unit, Department of Pediatrics, San Gerardo 
University Hospital, Monza, Italy;
(9)The Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, Duke University, Durham, 
NC;
(10)Willink Unit, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester 
University Hospitals, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom;
(11)Rare Metabolic Disorders Unit, Department of Pediatrics, San Gerardo 
University Hospital, Monza, Italy;
(12)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium;
(13)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium;
(14)Department of Pediatric Immunology and Rheumatology, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands;
(15)University Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands; and.
(16)Department of Pediatrics and Neurology, Division of Clinical Behavioral 
Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Mar 26;125(13):2016-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-02-626507.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type I-Hurler syndrome (MPS-IH) is a lysosomal storage 
disease characterized by multisystem morbidity and death in early childhood. 
Although hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) has been performed in these 
patients for more than 30 years, large studies on the long-term outcome of 
patients with MPS-IH after HCT are lacking. The goal of this international study 
was to identify predictors of the long-term outcome of patients with MPS-IH 
after successful HCT. Two hundred seventeen patients with MPS-IH successfully 
engrafted with a median follow-up age of 9.2 years were included in this 
retrospective analysis. Primary endpoints were neurodevelopmental outcomes and 
growth. Secondary endpoints included neurologic, orthopedic, cardiac, 
respiratory, ophthalmologic, audiologic, and endocrinologic outcomes. 
Considerable residual disease burden was observed in the majority of the 
transplanted patients with MPS-IH, with high variability between patients. 
Preservation of cognitive function at HCT and a younger age at transplantation 
were major predictors for superior cognitive development posttransplant. A 
normal α-l-iduronidase enzyme level obtained post-HCT was another highly 
significant predictor for superior long-term outcome in most organ systems. The 
long-term prognosis of patients with MPS-IH receiving HCT can be improved by 
reducing the age at HCT through earlier diagnosis, as well as using exclusively 
noncarrier donors and achieving complete donor chimerism.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2014-11-608075
PMID: 25624320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]