---
reference_id: "PMID:38974623"
title: "Hearing Function after CyberKnife for Vestibular Schwannoma: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Tavares MP
- Bahmad F Jr
journal: Int Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/s-0044-1787736
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hearing Function after CyberKnife for Vestibular Schwannoma: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Tavares MP, Bahmad F Jr
**Journal:** Int Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0044-1787736](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0044-1787736)

## Content

1. Int Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2024 Jul 5;28(3):e543-e551. doi: 
10.1055/s-0044-1787736. eCollection 2024 Jul.

Hearing Function after CyberKnife for Vestibular Schwannoma: A Systematic 
Review.

Tavares MP(1), Bahmad F Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Postgraduate Program in Health Sciences, School of Medicine, Universidade de 
Brasília, Brasília, DF, Brazil.

Introduction  CyberKnife (CK) radiosurgery is a treatment strategy for 
vestibular schwannoma (VS). Objectives  To evaluate hearing preservation (HP) 
after CK for VS. Data Synthesis  The study was conducted following the Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement, and 
it was registered at the International Prospective Register of Systematic 
Reviews (PROSPERO, under number CRD42021250300). The inclusion criteria were 
based on the population, intervention, comparison, outcome, timing and study 
design (PICOTS) strategy: population - patients with VS; intervention - CK; 
Comparison - none; Outcome - serviceable HP defined by Gardner and Robertson as 
grades I or II, or by the American Academy of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck 
Surgery as classes A or B; timing - mean follow-up longer than 1 year; and study 
design - retrospective or prospective studies. The exclusion criteria were: 
studies not published in English; studies published before January 2000 and 
after October 2021; and studies only including patients with neurofibromatosis 
type 2 or submitted to a previous treatment. The PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of 
Science, Cochrane Library, LILACS, and IBECS databases were used and last 
searched on October 27th, 2021. Statistical heterogeneity was assessed using I 2 
statistics. The appraisal checklist was used to assess the risk of bias in the 
included studies. A total of 222 studies were analyzed, and 13 were included in 
the synthesis, which represents 493 participants with serviceable hearing before 
intervention. The mean HP rate after CK using a random effects model was of 68% 
(95% confidence interval [95%CI]: 59-76%) at a mean follow-up of 42.96 months. 
Conclusion  The longer follow-up period was associated with a lower HP rate 
after CK radiosurgery for VS in the qualitative synthesis.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, permitting 
copying and reproduction so long as the original work is given appropriate 
credit ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0044-1787736
PMCID: PMC11226254
PMID: 38974623

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests The authors have no 
conflict of interests to declare.