---
reference_id: "PMID:35230699"
title: Interventions for minimal change disease in adults with nephrotic syndrome.
authors:
- Azukaitis K
- Palmer SC
- Strippoli GF
- Hodson EM
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001537.pub5
keywords:
- Acute Kidney Injury/chemically induced
- Adult
- Calcineurin Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/adverse effects
- Levamisole/therapeutic use
- Male
- Methylprednisolone/therapeutic use
- Mycophenolic Acid/therapeutic use
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/chemically induced, complications, drug therapy"
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/chemically induced, complications, drug therapy"
- Recurrence
- Steroids/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interventions for minimal change disease in adults with nephrotic syndrome.
**Authors:** Azukaitis K, Palmer SC, Strippoli GF, Hodson EM
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD001537.pub5](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001537.pub5)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022 Mar 1;3(3):CD001537. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001537.pub5.

Interventions for minimal change disease in adults with nephrotic syndrome.

Azukaitis K(1), Palmer SC(2), Strippoli GF(3)(4), Hodson EM(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Otago Christchurch, Christchurch, New 
Zealand.
(3)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, Bari, 
Italy.
(4)Cochrane Kidney and Transplant, Centre for Kidney Research, The Children's 
Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Jan 23;(1):CD001537. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001537.pub4.

BACKGROUND: Steroids have been used widely since the early 1970s for the 
treatment of adult-onset minimal change disease (MCD). Recently, newer agents 
have been used in adult MCD aiming to reduce the risk of adverse effects. The 
response rates to immunosuppressive agents in adult MCD are more variable than 
in children. The optimal agent, dose, and duration of treatment for the first 
episode of nephrotic syndrome, or for disease relapse(s) have not been 
determined. This is an update of a review first published in 2008.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to 1) evaluate the benefits and harms of different agents, 
including both immunosuppressive and non-immunosuppressive agents, in adults 
with MCD causing the nephrotic syndrome; and 2) evaluate the efficacy of 
interventions on 'time-to-remission' of nephrotic syndrome, in adults with MCD 
causing the nephrotic syndrome.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Kidney and Transplant Register of 
Studies up to 21 July 2021 through contact with the Information Specialist using 
search terms relevant to this review. Studies in the Register are identified 
through searches of CENTRAL, MEDLINE, and EMBASE, conference proceedings, the 
International Clinical Trials Register (ICTRP) Search Portal and 
ClinicalTrials.gov.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-RCTs of any 
intervention for MCD with nephrotic syndrome in adults over 18 years were 
included. Studies comparing different types, routes, frequencies, and duration 
of immunosuppressive agents and non-immunosuppressive agents were assessed.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed study quality 
and extracted data. Statistical analyses were performed using the random-effects 
model and results were expressed as a risk ratio (RR) for dichotomous outcomes, 
or mean difference (MD) for continuous data with 95% confidence intervals (CI). 
Confidence in the evidence was assessed using the Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach.
MAIN RESULTS: Fifteen RCTs (769 randomised participants) were identified; four 
studies evaluated different prednisolone regimens, eight studies evaluated the 
calcineurin inhibitors (CNIs) (tacrolimus or cyclosporin), two studies evaluated 
enteric-coated mycophenolate sodium (EC-MPS) and one study evaluated levamisole. 
In all but two studies of non-corticosteroid agents, reduced-dose prednisolone 
was given with the treatment agent and the comparator was high-dose 
prednisolone. In the risk of bias assessment, 11 and seven studies were at low 
risk of bias for sequence generation and allocation concealment, respectively. 
No studies were at low risk of performance bias and eight studies were at low 
risk of detection bias. Thirteen, 10 and six studies were at low risk of 
attrition bias, reporting bias and other bias, respectively. Compared with no 
specific treatment, it is uncertain whether prednisolone increases the number 
with complete remission (1 study, 28 participants: RR 1.44, 95% CI 0.95 to 
2.19), complete or partial remission (1 study, 28 participants: RR 1.38, 95% CI 
0.98 to 1.95), subsequent relapse (1 study, 28 participants: RR 0.75, 95% CI 
0.48 to 1.17), or reduces the adverse effects because the certainty of the 
evidence is very low. Compared with oral prednisolone alone, it is uncertain 
whether intravenous methylprednisolone and prednisolone increase the number with 
complete remission (2 studies, 35 participants: RR 1.76, 95% CI 0.17 to 18.32; 
I² = 90%), relapse (two studies, 19 participants. RR 1.18, 95% CI 0.65 to 2.15; 
I² = 0%) or adverse events because the certainty of the evidence is very low. 
Compared with prednisolone alone, CNIs with reduced-dose prednisolone or without 
prednisolone probably make little or no difference to the number achieving 
complete remission (8 studies; 492 participants: RR 0.99, 95% CI 0.93 to 1.05; 
I² = 0%), complete or partial remission (4 studies, 269 participants: RR 1.01, 
95% CI 0.96 to 1.05; I² = 0%), or relapse (7 studies; 422 participants: RR 0.73, 
95% CI 0.51 to 1.03; I² = 0%) (moderate certainty evidence), may reduce the risk 
of obesity or Cushing's Syndrome (5 studies; 388 participants: RR 0.11, 95% CI 
0.02 to 0.59; I² = 45%) and the risk of acne (4 studies; 270 participants: RR 
0.15, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.67; I² = 0%) (low certainty evidence); and had uncertain 
effects on diabetes or hyperglycaemia, hypertension, and acute kidney injury 
(AKI) (low certainty evidence). Compared with prednisolone alone, EC-MPS with 
reduced-dose prednisolone probably make little or no difference to the number 
undergoing complete remission at 4 weeks (1 study, 114 participants: RR 1.12, 
95% CI 0.84 to 1.50), and at 24 weeks probably make little or no difference to 
the number undergoing complete remission (2 studies, 134 participants: RR 1.12, 
95% CI 0.84 to 1.38; I² = 0%) (moderate certainty evidence), complete or partial 
remission (2 studies 134 participants: RR 0.92, 95% CI 0.75 to 1.12; I² = 0%), 
relapse (2 studies, 83 participants: RR 0.50, 95% CI 0.07 to 3.74; I² = 56%) 
(low certainty evidence); or to the adverse events of new-onset glucose 
intolerance, death, or AKI (low certainty evidence). One study (24 participants) 
compared levamisole and prednisolone with prednisolone in patients with 
relapsing disease. The authors identified no differences in mean relapse rate or 
adverse effects but no standard deviations were provided.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: This updated review has identified evidence for the 
efficacy and adverse effects of CNIs and EC-MPS with or without reduced-dose 
prednisolone compared with prednisolone alone for the induction of remission in 
adults with MCD and nephrotic syndrome with some reductions in 
steroid-associated adverse events. RCT data on the efficacy and adverse effects 
of rituximab in adults with MCD are awaited. Further, adequately powered RCTs 
are required to determine the relative efficacies of CNIs and EC-MPS and to 
evaluate these medications in patients with relapsing or steroid-resistant 
disease.

Copyright © 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001537.pub5
PMCID: PMC8887628
PMID: 35230699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Karolis Azukaitis has declared they have no 
conflict of interest. Suetonia C Palmer has declared they have no conflict of 
interest. Giovanni FM Strippoli has declared they have no conflict of interest. 
Elisabeth M Hodson has declared they have no conflict of interest. Prof Jonathan 
Craig was the sign‐off editor for this review update