---
reference_id: "PMID:11885915"
title: Selected mechanisms of genotoxic effects of inorganic arsenic compounds.
authors:
- Gradecka D
- Palus J
- Wasowicz W
journal: Int J Occup Med Environ Health
year: '2001'
keywords:
- Animals
- Arsenic/toxicity
- Carcinogens/toxicity
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Environmental Monitoring
- Humans
- Mutagenicity Tests
- Mutagens/toxicity
- Organometallic Compounds/toxicity
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Water Pollution/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selected mechanisms of genotoxic effects of inorganic arsenic compounds.
**Authors:** Gradecka D, Palus J, Wasowicz W
**Journal:** Int J Occup Med Environ Health (2001)

## Content

1. Int J Occup Med Environ Health. 2001;14(4):317-28.

Selected mechanisms of genotoxic effects of inorganic arsenic compounds.

Gradecka D(1), Palus J, Wasowicz W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Nofer Institute of Occupational
Medicine, Lódź, Poland. jadwigap@imp.lodz.pl

Chronic exposure to inorganic arsenic compounds is responsible for the
prevalance of various tumors, as well as of other diseases. A major problem is
the exposure to inorganic arsenic (i-As) in drinking water that affects millions
of people, primarily in Asia and South America. In these regions, the
concentration of arsenic in drinking water amounts to several thousand microg/l
and considerably exceeds the standard of 50 microg/l, recommended by the US
Environmental Protection Agency. It is interesting that not all populations are
equally sensitive to i-As. Therefore, the existing standard should be verified
and the environmentally safe i-As concentration should be established. Bearing
this in mind, it would be helpful to know the mechanisms of toxicity of
inorganic arsenic compounds. In vitro and in vivo studies and examination of
people exposed to high concentrations of i-As in drinking water show its
genotoxicity. Inorganic As increases the frequency of micronuclei, chromosome
aberrations and sister chromatid exchanges both in humans and in animals, but it
does not induce point mutations. If arsenic does not affect DNA directly, then
what is the mechanism of its toxicity? The results of various studies suggest
that it may intensify toxic effects of other physical and chemical agents,
especially by DNA repair inhibition. Besides, it is believed that inorganic
arsenic compounds may cause changes in the cell redox potential and alter DNA
methylation and phosphorylation of cell-cycle control proteins. Some data also
suggest that i-As increases celluar proliferation and apoptosis. The purpose of
this work is to present some views on cytotoxic mechanisms of inorganic arsenic
compounds.

PMID: 11885915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
