---
reference_id: "PMID:22700886"
title: Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency.
authors:
- Bollée G
- Harambat J
- Bensman A
- Knebelmann B
- Daudon M
- Ceballos-Picot I
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.02320312
keywords:
- "Adenine/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- "Adenine Phosphoribosyltransferase/deficiency, genetics, urine"
- Allopurinol/therapeutic use
- Animals
- Biomarkers/urine
- Disease Progression
- Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Kidney Diseases/enzymology, etiology"
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, urine"
- Phenotype
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Recurrence
- "Urolithiasis/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, enzymology, etiology, genetics, urine"
- "Xanthine Dehydrogenase/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency.
**Authors:** Bollée G, Harambat J, Bensman A, Knebelmann B, Daudon M, Ceballos-Picot I
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.02320312](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.02320312)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Sep;7(9):1521-7. doi: 10.2215/CJN.02320312. Epub
2012 Jun 14.

Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency.

Bollée G(1), Harambat J, Bensman A, Knebelmann B, Daudon M, Ceballos-Picot I.

Author information:
(1)Association pour l'Utilisation du Rein Artificiel and Inserm U970, Paris,
France. gbollee@gmail.com

Complete adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) deficiency is a rare inherited
metabolic disorder that leads to the formation and hyperexcretion of
2,8-dihydroxyadenine (DHA) into urine. The low solubility of DHA results in
precipitation of this compound and the formation of urinary crystals and stones.
The disease can present as recurrent urolithiasis or nephropathy secondary to
crystal precipitation into renal parenchyma (DHA nephropathy). The diagnostic
tools available-including stone analysis, crystalluria, and APRT activity
measurement-make the diagnosis easy to confirm when APRT deficiency is
suspected. However, the disease can present at any age, and the variability of
symptoms can present a diagnostic challenge to many physicians. The early
recognition and treatment of APRT deficiency are of crucial importance for
preventing irreversible loss of renal function, which still occurs in a
non-negligible proportion of cases. This review summarizes the genetic and
metabolic mechanisms underlying stone formation and renal disease, along with
the diagnosis and management of APRT deficiency.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.02320312
PMID: 22700886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
