---
reference_id: "PMID:22239179"
title: Testing the effectiveness of community-based dengue vector control interventions using semiparametric mixed models.
authors:
- Sanchez L
- Maringwa J
- Shkedy Z
- Castro M
- Carbonell N
- Van der Stuyft P
journal: Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1089/vbz.2011.0690
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Testing the effectiveness of community-based dengue vector control interventions using semiparametric mixed models.
**Authors:** Sanchez L, Maringwa J, Shkedy Z, Castro M, Carbonell N, Van der Stuyft P
**Journal:** Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1089/vbz.2011.0690](https://doi.org/10.1089/vbz.2011.0690)

## Content

1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2012 Jul;12(7):609-15. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2011.0690. 
Epub 2012 Jan 12.

Testing the effectiveness of community-based dengue vector control interventions 
using semiparametric mixed models.

Sanchez L(1), Maringwa J, Shkedy Z, Castro M, Carbonell N, Van der Stuyft P.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Division, Institute of Tropical Medicine "Pedro Kouri," Havana 
City, Cuba. lsanchez@ipk.sld.cu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the results obtained though intersectoral coordination 
and community empowerment in one study carried out during 6 years in Playa 
Municipality, Cuba.
METHODS: A longitudinal assessment comparing one intervention and one control 
area was conducted. The intervention encompasses two main stages separated by 
two dengue outbreaks. The first stage, focused on strengthening intersectoral 
coordination, was initiated in January 2000. In August 2003, a complementary 
strategy, focused on community empowerment and was initiated in half of the 
intervention area. In the control area, routine dengue control activities 
continued without additional input. We used entomologic surveillance data from 
January 1999 to December 2005 to assess the effectiveness. We computed the 
Breteau index (BI) per health area and the 95% confidence interval for the 
difference between the BIs at each time point. A semiparametric mixed model to 
capture the evolution in time of Aedes aegypti larval densities was fitted.
RESULTS: The BI in the control area showed the lowest value before starting the 
intervention. This was reversed 1 year after launching intersectoral activities 
for dengue control in the intervention area. In spite of spraying actions in all 
areas, the differences in BI between intervention and control areas remain 
significant until December 2002. Although for the next 2 years no differences 
were observed, they become significant again in December 2004, which corresponds 
with the implementation of the complementary community-based vector control 
strategy in the intervention area.
CONCLUSIONS: The model fitted identified monotonous trends over time and 
reversal trends at particular moments. The confidence bands indicate sections 
with significant differences between areas. Our data increase the evidence that 
the intersectoral coordination and community empowerment strategy for A. aegypti 
control is effective.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2011.0690
PMID: 22239179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]