---
reference_id: "PMID:32320744"
title: "Increase in cases of dengue in China, 2004-2016: A retrospective observational study."
authors:
- Zhang H
- Mehmood K
- Chang YF
- Zhao Y
- Lin W
- Chang Z
journal: Travel Med Infect Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2020.101674
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increase in cases of dengue in China, 2004-2016: A retrospective observational study.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Mehmood K, Chang YF, Zhao Y, Lin W, Chang Z
**Journal:** Travel Med Infect Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tmaid.2020.101674](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmaid.2020.101674)

## Content

1. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2020 Sep-Oct;37:101674. doi:
10.1016/j.tmaid.2020.101674.  Epub 2020 Apr 20.

Increase in cases of dengue in China, 2004-2016: A retrospective observational 
study.

Zhang H(1), Mehmood K(2), Chang YF(3), Zhao Y(4), Lin W(5), Chang Z(6).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou, 510642, China; Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic 
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. 
Electronic address: ahstuzh@sina.com.
(2)University College of Veterinary & Animal Sciences, Islamia University of 
Bahawalpur, 63100, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
yc42@cornell.edu.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(5)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou, 510642, China; Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic 
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(6)Tibet Agriculture and Animal Husbandry College, Linzhi, 860000, Tibet, China.

BACKGROUND: Dengue fever (DF) is a vector-bore infectious disease that can 
infect humans, and has been recognized as a global public health threat, with 
significant morbidity and mortality rates.
METHOD: To describe the epidemiological profile of DF in China during 2004-2016, 
the morbidity data of DF by age-group, season (different months) and geographic 
location (different provinces) were obtained from the public health science data 
center of China for subsequent epidemiological analysis.
RESULTS: The results showed that the incidence of DF shows striking annual 
variations, and two large outbreaks occurred in 2006-2007 and during 2012-2015. 
The results of the average morbidity rates (cases/100,000 population) for human 
DF indicated that among all dengue fever cases, Guangdong in southern area of 
China had the highest rates (3.8160 cases/100,000 population), followed by 
Yunnan (0.6614 cases/100,000 population), Fujian (0.3463 cases/100,000 
population) and Guangxi (0.1474 cases/100,000 population). Epidemic peaks 
occurred in late June and early November, and the incidence rate among 
middle-aged people (30-45 years old) was relatively high, followed by rates 
among 15-29 and 45-59 age groups.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we demonstrated the epidemiological profile of DF 
circulating in China and revealed the geographic distribution, dynamic 
transmission, seasonal asymmetries and age distribution, which will provide 
guidelines on the prevention and control of DF in China. The present 
investigation is useful in the risk assessment of DF transmission, to predict DF 
outbreaks and the prevention and control strategies should be used along with 
surveillance to reduce the spread of DF in China.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2020.101674
PMID: 32320744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]