---
reference_id: "PMID:24336335"
title: Genetic risk scores and number of autoantibodies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Maehlen MT
- Olsen IC
- Andreassen BK
- Viken MK
- Jiang X
- Alfredsson L
- Källberg H
- Brynedal B
- Kurreeman F
- Daha N
- Toes R
- Zhernakova A
- Gutierrez-Achury J
- de Bakker PI
- Martin J
- Teruel M
- Gonzalez-Gay MA
- Rodríguez-Rodríguez L
- Balsa A
- Uhlig T
- Kvien TK
- Lie BA
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204173
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic risk scores and number of autoantibodies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Maehlen MT, Olsen IC, Andreassen BK, Viken MK, Jiang X, Alfredsson L, Källberg H, Brynedal B, Kurreeman F, Daha N, Toes R, Zhernakova A, Gutierrez-Achury J, de Bakker PI, Martin J, Teruel M, Gonzalez-Gay MA, Rodríguez-Rodríguez L, Balsa A, Uhlig T, Kvien TK, Lie BA
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204173](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204173)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Apr;74(4):762-8. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204173.
Epub  2013 Dec 13.

Genetic risk scores and number of autoantibodies in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Maehlen MT(1), Olsen IC(2), Andreassen BK(3), Viken MK(4), Jiang X(5), 
Alfredsson L(5), Källberg H(5), Brynedal B(5), Kurreeman F(6), Daha N(6), Toes 
R(6), Zhernakova A(7), Gutierrez-Achury J(8), de Bakker PI(9), Martin J(10), 
Teruel M(10), Gonzalez-Gay MA(11), Rodríguez-Rodríguez L(12), Balsa A(13), Uhlig 
T(2), Kvien TK(2), Lie BA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway Department 
of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, 
Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of EpiGen, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway Department of Biostatistics, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo and Oslo University 
Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The 
Netherlands Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen and 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen and University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(9)Departments of Medical Genetics and of Epidemiology, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(10)Instituto de Parasitologia y Biomedicina Lopez-Neyra, CSIC, Granada, Spain.
(11)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Marques de Valdecilla, Santander, 
Spain.
(12)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(13)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Certain HLA-DRB1 alleles and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
are associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Our objective was to examine the 
combined effect of these associated variants, calculated as a cumulative genetic 
risk score (GRS) on RA predisposition, as well as the number of autoantibodies 
(none, one or two present).
METHOD: We calculated four GRSs in 4956 patients and 4983 controls from four 
European countries. All four scores contained data on 22 non-HLA-risk SNPs, and 
three scores also contained HLA-DRB1 genotypes but had different HLA typing 
resolution. Most patients had data on both rheumatoid factor (RF) and 
anti-citrullinated proteins antibodies (ACPA). The GRSs were standardised 
(std.GRS) to account for population heterogeneity. Discrimination between 
patients and controls was examined by receiveroperating characteristics curves, 
and the four std.GRSs were compared across subgroups according to autoantibody 
status.
RESULTS: The std.GRS improved its discriminatory ability between patients and 
controls when HLA-DRB1 data of higher resolution were added to the combined 
score. Patients had higher mean std.GRS than controls (p=7.9×10(-156)), and this 
score was significantly higher in patients with autoantibodies (shown for both 
RF and ACPA). Mean std.GRS was also higher in those with two versus one 
autoantibody (p=3.7×10(-23)) but was similar in patients without autoantibodies 
and controls (p=0.12).
CONCLUSIONS: The GRS was associated with the number of autoantibodies and to 
both RF and ACPA positivity. ACPA play a more important role than RF with 
regards to the genetic risk profile, but stratification of patients according to 
both RF and ACPA may optimise future genetic studies.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204173
PMID: 24336335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]