---
reference_id: "PMID:30255938"
title: Identification of a highly lethal V3(+) TP53(+) subset in ALK(+) lung adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Christopoulos P
- Kirchner M
- Bozorgmehr F
- Endris V
- Elsayed M
- Budczies J
- Ristau J
- Penzel R
- Herth FJ
- Heussel CP
- Eichhorn M
- Muley T
- Meister M
- Fischer JR
- Rieken S
- Lasitschka F
- Bischoff H
- Sotillo R
- Schirmacher P
- Thomas M
- Stenzinger A
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ijc.31893
keywords:
- Aged
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a highly lethal V3(+) TP53(+) subset in ALK(+) lung adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Christopoulos P, Kirchner M, Bozorgmehr F, Endris V, Elsayed M, Budczies J, Ristau J, Penzel R, Herth FJ, Heussel CP, Eichhorn M, Muley T, Meister M, Fischer JR, Rieken S, Lasitschka F, Bischoff H, Sotillo R, Schirmacher P, Thomas M, Stenzinger A
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.31893](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.31893)

## Content

1. Int J Cancer. 2019 Jan 1;144(1):190-199. doi: 10.1002/ijc.31893. Epub 2018 Oct
 30.

Identification of a highly lethal V3(+) TP53(+) subset in ALK(+) lung
adenocarcinoma.

Christopoulos P(1)(2), Kirchner M(3), Bozorgmehr F(1)(4), Endris V(3), Elsayed
M(1), Budczies J(3), Ristau J(4), Penzel R(3), Herth FJ(2)(5), Heussel CP(2)(6),
Eichhorn M(2)(7), Muley T(2)(8), Meister M(2)(8), Fischer JR(9), Rieken S(4),
Lasitschka F(2)(3), Bischoff H(1), Sotillo R(2)(10), Schirmacher P(3), Thomas
M(1)(2), Stenzinger A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Thoraxklinik at Heidelberg University
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Translational Lung Research Center Heidelberg (TLRC-H), Heidelberg, Germany,
member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL).
(3)Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(5)Department of Pneumology, Thoraxklinik at Heidelberg University Hospital,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology with Nuclear Medicine,
Thoraxklinik at Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Surgery, Thoraxklinik at Heidelberg University Hospital,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Translational Research Unit, Thoraxklinik at Heidelberg University Hospital,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(9)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Lungenklinik Löwenstein, Löwenstein,
Germany.
(10)Division of Molecular Thoracic Oncology, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) have improved prognosis in metastatic
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-driven lung adenocarcinoma, but patient
outcomes vary widely. We retrospectively analyzed the clinical course of all
cases with assessable baseline TP53 status and/or ALK fusion variant treated at
our institutions (n = 102). TP53 mutations were present in 17/87 (20%) and the
echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4)-ALK variant 3 (V3) in
41/92 (45%) patients. The number of metastatic sites at diagnosis was affected
more by the presence of V3 than by TP53 mutations, and highest with both factors
(mean 5.3, p < 0.001). Under treatment with ALK TKI, progression-free survival
(PFS) was shorter with either TP53 mutations or V3, while double positive cases
appeared to have an even higher risk (hazard ratio [HR] = 2.9, p = 0.015). The
negative effect of V3 on PFS of TKI-treated patients was strong already in the
first line (HR = 2.5, p = 0.037) and decreased subsequently, whereas a trend for
PFS impairment under first-line TKI by TP53 mutations became stronger and
statistically significant only when considering all treatment lines together.
Overall survival was impaired more by TP53 mutations (HR = 4.9, p = 0.003) than
by V3 (HR = 2.4, p = 0.018), while patients with TP53 mutated V3-driven tumors
carried the highest risk of death (HR = 9.1, p = 0.02). Thus, TP53 mutations and
V3 are independently associated with enhanced metastatic spread, shorter TKI
responses and inferior overall survival in ALK+ lung adenocarcinoma. Both
markers could assist selection of cases for more aggressive management and guide
development of novel therapeutic strategies. In combination, they define a
patient subset with very poor outcome.

© 2018 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.31893
PMID: 30255938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
