---
reference_id: "PMID:1176138"
title: Chromosome mosaicism in a population sample.
authors:
- Nielsen J
journal: Humangenetik
year: '1975'
doi: 10.1007/BF00430354
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chromosome mosaicism in a population sample.
**Authors:** Nielsen J
**Journal:** Humangenetik (1975)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00430354](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00430354)

## Content

1. Humangenetik. 1975 Sep 10;29(2):155-9. doi: 10.1007/BF00430354.

Chromosome mosaicism in a population sample.

Nielsen J.

An analysis has been made of mosaicism found in the different types of 
chromosome abnormalities among the 19000 persons examined at the Cytogenetic 
Laboratory, Risskov. The percentage with mosaicism was 36 in both triple-X and 
Turner's syndrome, it was 7 and 11% in XYY and Klinefelter's syndrome, 
respectively, and 2 in autosomal abnormalities. We found a mosaicism frequency 
of 11% in population studies with 5 cells analyzed primarily compared with 7% in 
other studies, in which 10-50 cells were analyzed primarily. (The difference is 
not significant.) The total frequency of mosaicism was 8%. The first cell with 
the chromosome aberration establishing the mosaicism was found among the first 5 
cells in 40 of the 44 cases with mosaicism, and all but one of the 44 cases 
would have been established as mosaics, if the guidlines indicated by Bochkov et 
al. (1974) had been followed; that is 11 cells analyzed primarily, and if one of 
these cells has a chromosome aberration, the number of cells analyzed is 
increased to 17; if 2 cells have the same chromosome aberration, the number of 
cells analyzed is extended to 23, and if 3 cells with the same chromosome 
aberration is found among these 23 cells, the mosaicism is established. 
Aneuploid or structural chromosome abnormalities present in all cells may be 
detected by analysis of 2-3 cells of good quality. Mosaicism with 2 or more cell 
clones with different chromosome patterns are extremely difficult to detect, if 
the percentage of cell clones with chromosome aberration is low. The incidence 
of chromosome abnormalities found in all cells in newborn children in the 
different studies is very similar as shown in a recent survey of 6 different 
studies by Jacobs et al. (1974). The incidence of mosaicism varies according to 
the frequency of artefactual aneuploidy, the variety of tissue studied, number 
of cells analyzed from each tissue as well as the acuity of the observer and the 
checking procedures.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00430354
PMID: 1176138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]