---
reference_id: "PMID:31328377"
title: Utilization of echocardiography in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Rauser-Foltz KK
- Starr LJ
- Yetman AT
journal: Congenit Heart Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/chd.12824
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Utilization of echocardiography in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Rauser-Foltz KK, Starr LJ, Yetman AT
**Journal:** Congenit Heart Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/chd.12824](https://doi.org/10.1111/chd.12824)

## Content

1. Congenit Heart Dis. 2019 Sep;14(5):864-867. doi: 10.1111/chd.12824. Epub 2019 
Jul 22.

Utilization of echocardiography in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Rauser-Foltz KK(1), Starr LJ(2), Yetman AT(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(2)Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, 
Nebraska.

OBJECTIVES: This study assessed the frequency and utility of echocardiographic 
examination in patients with all forms of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and sought to 
identify clinical variables associated with an abnormal echocardiogram.
DESIGN/SETTING: This was a retrospective study of all patients carrying a 
diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome of any type who were evaluated by a 
pediatrician or pediatric subspecialist at a single tertiary medical center with 
an affiliated children's hospital during the period January 2013 to December 
2018.
PATIENTS: Chart review was performed on all patients carrying a diagnosis of 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in the electronic medical record.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Data from genetics examination, cardiovascular examination 
where applicable, genetic test results when available, and echocardiography were 
recorded.
RESULTS: Of 262 patients identified, echocardiography and cardiac evaluation 
were common occurring in 90% and 50% of patients with any form of Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome. Cardiovascular complications occurred in 50% of patients with vascular 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome but echocardiography was normal in all. Aortic dilation 
was common in classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome but absent in hypermobile 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Mitral valve prolapse and bicuspid aortic valve occurred 
at the same incidence as the general population. Cardiac symptoms were present 
in 12% but did not correlate with abnormal cardiac structure. Presentation with 
symptoms of musculoskeletal pain was inversely related to the presence of 
cardiac pathology.
CONCLUSIONS: In light of the absence of cardiac pathology in patients with 
hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, routine cardiac evaluation and 
echocardiography are not required for patients with hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/chd.12824
PMID: 31328377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]