---
reference_id: "PMID:37754774"
title: New Acylcarnitine Ratio as a Reliable Indicator of Long-Chain 3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Baydakova GV
- Tsygankova PG
- Pechatnikova NL
- Bazhanova OA
- Nazarenko YD
- Zakharova EY
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijns9030048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Acylcarnitine Ratio as a Reliable Indicator of Long-Chain 3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Baydakova GV, Tsygankova PG, Pechatnikova NL, Bazhanova OA, Nazarenko YD, Zakharova EY
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns9030048](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns9030048)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2023 Aug 25;9(3):48. doi: 10.3390/ijns9030048.

New Acylcarnitine Ratio as a Reliable Indicator of Long-Chain 3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA 
Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Baydakova GV(1), Tsygankova PG(1), Pechatnikova NL(2), Bazhanova OA(1), 
Nazarenko YD(1), Zakharova EY(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moskvorechye Str., 1, 115522 Moscow, 
Russia.
(2)Morozov Children's City Clinical Hospital, 4th Dobryninsky Lane, 1/9, 119049 
Moscow, Russia.

Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) and mitochondrial 
trifunctional protein (MTP) deficiencies are rare fatal disorders of fatty acid 
β-oxidation with no apparent genotype-phenotype correlation. The measurement of 
acylcarnitines by MS/MS is a current diagnostic workup in these disorders. 
Nevertheless, false-positive and false-negative results have been reported, 
highlighting a necessity for more sensitive and specific biomarkers. This study 
included 54 patients with LCHAD/MTP deficiency that has been confirmed by 
biochemical and molecular methods. The analysis of acylcarnitines in dried blood 
spots was performed using ESI-MS/MS. The established "HADHA ratio" = (C16OH + 
C18OH + C18:1OH)/C0 was significantly elevated in all 54 affected individuals in 
comparison to the control group. Apart from 54 LCHAD deficiency patients, the 
"HADHA ratio" was calculated in 19 patients with very-long-chain acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency. As VLCAD-deficient patients did not show 
increased "HADHA ratio", the results emphasized the high specificity of this new 
ratio. Therefore, the "HADHA ratio" was shown to be instrumental in improving 
the overall performance of MS/MS-based analysis of acylcarnitine levels in the 
diagnostics of LCHAD/MTP deficiencies. The ratio was demonstrated to increase 
the sensitivity and specificity of this method and reduce the chances of 
false-negative results.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns9030048
PMCID: PMC10531771
PMID: 37754774

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.