---
reference_id: "PMID:37303175"
title: "Oxidative Stress and Dopaminergic Metabolism: A Major PD Pathogenic Mechanism and Basis of Potential Antioxidant Therapies."
authors:
- Rasool A
- Manzoor R
- Ullah K
- Afzal R
- Ul-Haq A
- Imran H
- Kaleem I
- Akhtar T
- Farrukh A
- Hameed S
- Bashir S
journal: CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2174/1871527322666230609141519
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxidative Stress and Dopaminergic Metabolism: A Major PD Pathogenic Mechanism and Basis of Potential Antioxidant Therapies.
**Authors:** Rasool A, Manzoor R, Ullah K, Afzal R, Ul-Haq A, Imran H, Kaleem I, Akhtar T, Farrukh A, Hameed S, Bashir S
**Journal:** CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1871527322666230609141519](https://doi.org/10.2174/1871527322666230609141519)

## Content

1. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2024;23(7):852-864. doi: 
10.2174/1871527322666230609141519.

Oxidative Stress and Dopaminergic Metabolism: A Major PD Pathogenic Mechanism 
and Basis of Potential Antioxidant Therapies.

Rasool A(1)(2), Manzoor R(3)(4), Ullah K(5), Afzal R(6), Ul-Haq A(7), Imran 
H(8), Kaleem I(8), Akhtar T(9), Farrukh A(10), Hameed S(11), Bashir S(12).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Synthetic Biosystem, School of Chemistry and Chemical 
Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, PR China.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Balochistan, Quetta 87300, Pakistan.
(3)Beijing Key Laboratory for Separation and Analysis in Biomedicine and 
Pharmaceuticals, School of Life Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, 
Beijing 100081, PR China.
(4)Faculty of Marine Sciences, Lasbella University of Agriculture Water and 
Marine Sciences, Uthal 90050, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Microbiology, University of Balochistan, Quetta 87300, 
Pakistan.
(6)Department of Brain Science, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon 16499, 
Republic of Korea.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Soonchunhyang 
University Seoul Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS University Islamabad, Pakistan.
(9)National Institute of Health Islamabad, Pakistan.
(10)Department of General Medicine, Fauji Foundation Hospital (FFH), Rawalpindi, 
Pakistan.
(11)National Institute for Genomics and Advanced Biotechnology (N.I.G.A.B.) 
National Agriculture Research Centre Islamabad, Pakistan.
(12)Neurosciences Center, King Fahad Specialist Hospital Dammam, P.O. Box 15215, 
Dammam 31444, Saudi Arabia.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced oxidative stress triggers the vicious 
cycle leading to the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the nigra pars 
compacta. ROS produced during the metabolism of dopamine is immediately 
neutralized by the endogenous antioxidant defense system (EADS) under 
physiological conditions. Aging decreases the vigilance of EADS and makes the 
dopaminergic neurons more vulnerable to oxidative stress. As a result, ROS left 
over by EADS oxidize the dopamine-derived catechols and produces a number of 
reactive dopamine quinones, which are precursors to endogenous neurotoxins. In 
addition, ROS causes lipid peroxidation, uncoupling of the electron transport 
chain, and DNA damage, which lead to mitochondrial dysfunction, lysosomal 
dysfunction, and synaptic dysfunction. The mutations in genes such as DNAJC6, 
SYNJ1, SH3GL2, LRRK2, PRKN, and VPS35 caused by ROS have been associated with 
synaptic dysfunction and the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD). The 
available drugs that are used against PD can only delay the progression of the 
disease, but they produce various side effects. Through their antioxidant 
activity, flavonoids can substantiate the EADS of dopaminergic neurons and 
disrupt the vicious cycle incepted by oxidative stress. In this review, we show 
how the oxidative metabolism of dopamine generates ROS and dopamine-quinones, 
which then exert unrestrained OS, causing mutations in several genes involved in 
the proper functioning of mitochondrion, synapse, and lysosome. Besides, we also 
present some examples of approved drugs used for the treatment of PD, therapies 
in the clinical trial phase, and an update on the flavonoids that have been 
tested to boost the EADS of dopaminergic neurons.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1871527322666230609141519
PMID: 37303175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]