---
reference_id: "PMID:26206937"
title: AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE. Patients with LRBA deficiency show CTLA4 loss and immune dysregulation responsive to abatacept therapy.
authors:
- Lo B
- Zhang K
- Lu W
- Zheng L
- Zhang Q
- Kanellopoulou C
- Zhang Y
- Liu Z
- Fritz JM
- Marsh R
- Husami A
- Kissell D
- Nortman S
- Chaturvedi V
- Haines H
- Young LR
- Mo J
- Filipovich AH
- Bleesing JJ
- Mustillo P
- Stephens M
- Rueda CM
- Chougnet CA
- Hoebe K
- McElwee J
- Hughes JD
- Karakoc-Aydiner E
- Matthews HF
- Price S
- Su HC
- Rao VK
- Lenardo MJ
- Jordan MB
journal: Science
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1126/science.aaa1663
keywords:
- Abatacept
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, metabolism"
- Adolescent
- "Autoimmune Diseases/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "CTLA-4 Antigen/deficiency, genetics"
- Child
- Chloroquine/pharmacology
- "Common Variable Immunodeficiency/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Endosomes/metabolism
- Female
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/analysis
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Immunoconjugates/therapeutic use
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Lymphocyte Activation
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Male
- Proteolysis
- "T-Lymphocytes/drug effects, immunology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE. Patients with LRBA deficiency show CTLA4 loss and immune dysregulation responsive to abatacept therapy.
**Authors:** Lo B, Zhang K, Lu W, Zheng L, Zhang Q, Kanellopoulou C, Zhang Y, Liu Z, Fritz JM, Marsh R, Husami A, Kissell D, Nortman S, Chaturvedi V, Haines H, Young LR, Mo J, Filipovich AH, Bleesing JJ, Mustillo P, Stephens M, Rueda CM, Chougnet CA, Hoebe K, McElwee J, Hughes JD, Karakoc-Aydiner E, Matthews HF, Price S, Su HC, Rao VK, Lenardo MJ, Jordan MB
**Journal:** Science (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aaa1663](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa1663)

## Content

1. Science. 2015 Jul 24;349(6246):436-40. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa1663.

AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE. Patients with LRBA deficiency show CTLA4 loss and immune
dysregulation responsive to abatacept therapy.

Lo B(1), Zhang K(2), Lu W(3), Zheng L(3), Zhang Q(4), Kanellopoulou C(3), Zhang
Y(4), Liu Z(5), Fritz JM(3), Marsh R(6), Husami A(7), Kissell D(7), Nortman
S(7), Chaturvedi V(6), Haines H(8), Young LR(9), Mo J(10), Filipovich AH(6),
Bleesing JJ(6), Mustillo P(11), Stephens M(12), Rueda CM(13), Chougnet CA(13),
Hoebe K(13), McElwee J(14), Hughes JD(14), Karakoc-Aydiner E(15), Matthews
HF(3), Price S(3), Su HC(4), Rao VK(3), Lenardo MJ(1), Jordan MB(16).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Development of the Immune System Section and Clinical and Molecular
Genomics Unit, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. NIAID
Clinical Genomics Program, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
michael.jordan@cchmc.org.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
michael.jordan@cchmc.org.
(3)Molecular Development of the Immune System Section and Clinical and Molecular
Genomics Unit, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. NIAID
Clinical Genomics Program, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)NIAID Clinical Genomics Program, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. Human Immunological
Diseases Unit, Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Lymphocyte Biology Section, Laboratory of Systems Biology, National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA.
(6)Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune Deficiency, Department of
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(7)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(8)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, USA.
(9)Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Pulmonary Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, and Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care, Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.
(10)Departments of Pathology and Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego
and Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA.
(11)Section of Allergy and Immunology, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus,
OH, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN, USA.
(13)Division of Immunobiology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center/ University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(14)Merck Research Laboratories, Merck & Co, Boston, MA, USA.
(15)Molecular Development of the Immune System Section and Clinical and
Molecular Genomics Unit, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. NIAID
Clinical Genomics Program, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. Division of Human
Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. Human Immunological
Diseases Unit, Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Lymphocyte Biology Section, Laboratory of Systems Biology, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA. Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune Deficiency, Department
of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, USA. Division
of Allergy, Immunology, and Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, and
Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care, Department of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA. Departments of
Pathology and Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego and Rady
Children's Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA. Section of Allergy and Immunology,
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Division of Immunobiology,
Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center/
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. Merck Research Laboratories,
Merck & Co, Boston, MA, USA. Marmara University, Division of Pediatric Allergy
and Immunology, Istanbul, Turkey.
(16)Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune Deficiency, Department of
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. Division of Immunobiology, Department of
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center/ University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. michael.jordan@cchmc.org.

Comment in
    Science. 2015 Jul 24;349(6246):377-8. doi: 10.1126/science.aac7888.
    Oral Dis. 2016 May;22(4):249-50. doi: 10.1111/odi.12455.

Mutations in the LRBA gene (encoding the lipopolysaccharide-responsive and
beige-like anchor protein) cause a syndrome of autoimmunity,
lymphoproliferation, and humoral immune deficiency. The biological role of LRBA
in immunologic disease is unknown. We found that patients with LRBA deficiency
manifested a dramatic and sustained improvement in response to abatacept, a
CTLA4 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4)-immunoglobulin fusion drug. Clinical
responses and homology of LRBA to proteins controlling intracellular trafficking
led us to hypothesize that it regulates CTLA4, a potent inhibitory immune
receptor. We found that LRBA colocalized with CTLA4 in endosomal vesicles and
that LRBA deficiency or knockdown increased CTLA4 turnover, which resulted in
reduced levels of CTLA4 protein in FoxP3(+) regulatory and activated
conventional T cells. In LRBA-deficient cells, inhibition of lysosome
degradation with chloroquine prevented CTLA4 loss. These findings elucidate a
mechanism for CTLA4 trafficking and control of immune responses and suggest
therapies for diseases involving the CTLA4 pathway.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aaa1663
PMID: 26206937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
