---
reference_id: "PMID:38062451"
title: "∆(4)-3-oxo-5β-reductase deficiency: favorable outcome in 16 patients treated with cholic acid."
authors:
- Gardin A
- Ruiz M
- Beime J
- Cananzi M
- Rathert M
- Rohmer B
- Grabhorn E
- Almes M
- Logarajah V
- Peña-Quintana L
- Casswall T
- Darmellah-Remil A
- Reyes-Domínguez A
- Barkaoui E
- Hierro L
- Baquero-Montoya C
- Baumann U
- Fischler B
- Gonzales E
- Davit-Spraul A
- Laplanche S
- Jacquemin E
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02984-z
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Cholic Acid/therapeutic use
- Bile Acids and Salts
- Retrospective Studies
- Quality of Life
- Metabolic Diseases/drug therapy
- Oxidoreductases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ∆(4)-3-oxo-5β-reductase deficiency: favorable outcome in 16 patients treated with cholic acid.
**Authors:** Gardin A, Ruiz M, Beime J, Cananzi M, Rathert M, Rohmer B, Grabhorn E, Almes M, Logarajah V, Peña-Quintana L, Casswall T, Darmellah-Remil A, Reyes-Domínguez A, Barkaoui E, Hierro L, Baquero-Montoya C, Baumann U, Fischler B, Gonzales E, Davit-Spraul A, Laplanche S, Jacquemin E
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02984-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02984-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Dec 7;18(1):383. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02984-z.

∆(4)-3-oxo-5β-reductase deficiency: favorable outcome in 16 patients treated 
with cholic acid.

Gardin A(1), Ruiz M(2), Beime J(3), Cananzi M(4), Rathert M(5), Rohmer B(2), 
Grabhorn E(3), Almes M(1), Logarajah V(6), Peña-Quintana L(7), Casswall T(8), 
Darmellah-Remil A(1), Reyes-Domínguez A(7), Barkaoui E(9), Hierro L(10), 
Baquero-Montoya C(11), Baumann U(5), Fischler B(8), Gonzales E(1), Davit-Spraul 
A(12), Laplanche S(13), Jacquemin E(14).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Hepatology and Pediatric Liver Transplantation Unit, National 
Reference Centre for Biliary Atresia and Genetic Cholestasis, FSMR Filfoie, ERN 
RARE LIVER, Hôpital Bicêtre, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Faculty of 
Medicine Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre; INSERM UMR-S1193, Hepatinov, 
University Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France.
(2)Pediatric Hepatology, Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Reference Centre 
for Biliary Atresia and Genetic Cholestasis, Hospices Civils de Lyon - Hôpital 
Femme Mère Enfant, Bron, France.
(3)Pediatric Hepatology and Gastroenterology Unit, University Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Unit of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Digestive Endoscopy, Hepatology and Care 
of the Child with Liver Transplantation, Dpt. For Women's and Children's Health, 
University Hospital of Padova, Padua, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Hepatology, Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, MHH 
Hannover/University Magdeburg, Hannover, Germany.
(6)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, KK 
Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Unit. Complejo 
Hospitalario Universitario Insular Materno-Infantil, University of Las Palmas de 
Gran Canaria, Las Palmas, Spain.
(8)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Unit, Astrid Lindgren's 
Children's Hospital, CLINTEC, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Tunis Children Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
(10)Pediatric Hepatology Unit, University Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(11)Pediatric Genetics, Pablo Tobon Uribe Hospital, Medellin, Colombia.
(12)Biochemistry Department, Hôpital Bicêtre, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(13)Biology Unit, Groupe Hospitalier Paris - Saint Joseph, Paris, France.
(14)Pediatric Hepatology and Pediatric Liver Transplantation Unit, National 
Reference Centre for Biliary Atresia and Genetic Cholestasis, FSMR Filfoie, ERN 
RARE LIVER, Hôpital Bicêtre, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Faculty of 
Medicine Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre; INSERM UMR-S1193, Hepatinov, 
University Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France. emmanuel.jacquemin@aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: Oral cholic acid therapy is an effective therapy in children with 
primary bile acid synthesis deficiencies. Most reported patients with this 
treatment have 3β-hydroxy-Δ5-C27-steroid oxidoreductase deficiency. The aim of 
the study was the evaluation of cholic acid therapy in a cohort of patients with 
the rarer Δ4-3-oxosteroid 5β-reductase (Δ4-3-oxo-R) deficiency.
METHODS: Sixteen patients with Δ4-3-oxo-R deficiency confirmed by AKR1D1 gene 
sequencing who received oral cholic acid were retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: First symptoms were reported early in life (median 2 months of age), 
with 14 and 3 patients having cholestatic jaundice and severe bleeding 
respectively. Fifteen patients received ursodeoxycholic acid before diagnosis, 
with partial improvement in 8 patients. Four patients had liver failure at the 
time of cholic acid initiation. All 16 patients received cholic acid from a 
median age of 8.1 months (range 3.1-159) and serum liver tests normalized in all 
within 6-12 months of treatment. After a median cholic acid therapy of 4.5 years 
(range 1.1-24), all patients were alive with their native liver. Median daily 
cholic acid dose at last follow-up was 8.3 mg/kg of body weight. All patients, 
but one, had normal physical examination and all had normal serum liver tests. 
Fibrosis, evaluated using liver biopsy (n = 4) or liver elastography (n = 9), 
had stabilized or improved. Cholic acid therapy enabled a 12-fold decrease of 
3-oxo-∆4 derivatives in urine. Patients had normal growth and quality of life. 
The treatment was well tolerated without serious adverse events and signs of 
hepatotoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: Oral cholic acid therapy is a safe and effective treatment for 
patients with Δ4-3-oxo-R deficiency.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02984-z
PMCID: PMC10704681
PMID: 38062451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EJ is consultant for Vivet Therapeutics and 
Laboratoire CTRS. EG is consultant for Vivet Therapeutics, Laboratoire CTRS, 
Albireo, Mirum.