---
reference_id: "PMID:2403059"
title: Efficacy of cornstarch therapy in type III glycogen-storage disease.
authors:
- Gremse DA
- Bucuvalas JC
- Balistreri WF
journal: Am J Clin Nutr
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1093/ajcn/52.4.671
keywords:
- Blood Glucose/analysis
- Child
- Child Development
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Glycogen Storage Disease/drug therapy
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type III/blood, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Liver/pathology
- Male
- Starch/therapeutic use
- Transaminases/blood
- Weight Gain
- Zea mays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of cornstarch therapy in type III glycogen-storage disease.
**Authors:** Gremse DA, Bucuvalas JC, Balistreri WF
**Journal:** Am J Clin Nutr (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ajcn/52.4.671](https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/52.4.671)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Nutr. 1990 Oct;52(4):671-4. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/52.4.671.

Efficacy of cornstarch therapy in type III glycogen-storage disease.

Gremse DA(1), Bucuvalas JC, Balistreri WF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Children's Hospital
Research Foundation, Cincinnati.

Type III glycogen-storage disease (GSD-III), due to decreased activity of the
glycogen debranching enzyme amylo-1,6 glucosidase, may cause hepatic
dysfunction, growth failure, and myopathy. The prevention of hypoglycemia by
nocturnal intragastric formula infusion has been shown to enhance growth and
improve the metabolic abnormalities associated with GSD-III. Cornstarch therapy
was effective in preventing hypoglycemia in a few patients with GSD-III who were
previously treated with nocturnal enteral formula infusion, but oral cornstarch
had not been evaluated as an initial treatment. We studied three patients with
GSD-III who exhibited growth failure, elevated serum aminotransferase
concentrations, and asymptomatic hypoglycemia. Cornstarch therapy was associated
with maintenance of normoglycemia, increased growth velocity, and decreased
serum aminotransferase concentrations in all patients. Our experience suggests
that cornstarch therapy can be effective as an initial treatment for patients
with GSD-III.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/52.4.671
PMID: 2403059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
