---
reference_id: "PMID:38716222"
title: "Revamping hepatitis C global eradication efforts: towards simplified and enhanced screening, prevention, and treatment."
authors:
- Pan CQ
- Park JS
journal: Transl Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.21037/tgh-23-104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revamping hepatitis C global eradication efforts: towards simplified and enhanced screening, prevention, and treatment.
**Authors:** Pan CQ, Park JS
**Journal:** Transl Gastroenterol Hepatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tgh-23-104](https://doi.org/10.21037/tgh-23-104)

## Content

1. Transl Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2024 Mar 15;9:30. doi: 10.21037/tgh-23-104. 
eCollection 2024.

Revamping hepatitis C global eradication efforts: towards simplified and 
enhanced screening, prevention, and treatment.

Pan CQ(1)(2), Park JS(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Department of 
Hepatology, Guangzhou Eighth People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, NYU 
Langone Health, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Division of Hepatology, Department of Medicine, North Shore University 
Hospital, Manhasset, NY, USA.
(4)Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell Health, 
Hempstead, NY, USA.
(5)Northwell Center for Liver Disease and Transplantation, Northwell Transplant 
Institute, North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, NY, USA.

Comment on
    Clin Infect Dis. 2023 May 25:ciad319. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciad319.

DOI: 10.21037/tgh-23-104
PMCID: PMC11074485
PMID: 38716222

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: Both authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://tgh.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tgh-23-104/coif). C.Q.P. 
received the institutional research grant from Gilead Sciences, Inc., and he is 
the Chair of the Hepatitis B Special Interest Group and the AASLD Hepatitis B 
Practice Guideline Writing Group for 2024. The other author has no conflicts of 
interest to declare.