---
reference_id: "PMID:29039017"
title: "Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis complicated by seizures: a retrospective analysis of 69 cases."
authors:
- Sha DJ
- Qian J
- Gu SS
- Wang LN
- Wang F
- Xu Y
journal: J Thromb Thrombolysis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s11239-017-1570-5
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Cerebrovascular Disorders/complications
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Seizures/etiology
- "Sinus Thrombosis, Intracranial/complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis complicated by seizures: a retrospective analysis of 69 cases.
**Authors:** Sha DJ, Qian J, Gu SS, Wang LN, Wang F, Xu Y
**Journal:** J Thromb Thrombolysis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11239-017-1570-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11239-017-1570-5)

## Content

1. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2018 Jan;45(1):186-191. doi: 10.1007/s11239-017-1570-5.

Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis complicated by seizures: a retrospective 
analysis of 69 cases.

Sha DJ(1)(2), Qian J(3), Gu SS(3), Wang LN(3)(4), Wang F(3), Xu Y(5)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing 
University Medical School, 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing, 210008, Jiangsu, China. 
tbwen0912@126.com.
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, 
Nanjing, 210008, China. tbwen0912@126.com.
(3)Department of Emergency, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing 
University Medical School, 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing, 210008, Jiangsu, China.
(4)The State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, 
Nanjing, 210008, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing 
University Medical School, 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing, 210008, Jiangsu, China.

Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) is a rare ischemic cerebrovascular 
disease. The aim of this retrospective observational study was to investigate 
the risk factors for complication of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis by 
seizures and to explore the impact of such seizures on clinical outcomes. 
Patients with cerebral venous sinus thrombosis with or without epileptic 
seizures were retrospectively analyzed and compared in terms of clinical 
variables, causative factors, clinical presentation, and imaging data. In all, 
69 patients with cerebral venous sinus thrombosis were enrolled in this study, 
32 (46.38%) of whom had experienced secondary seizures. Compared with those with 
no seizures, significantly more patients with secondary seizures had hemiplegia 
(37.50 vs. 15.63%; P = 0.020), bleeding (29.40 vs. 10.81%; P = 0.047), lesions 
involving the frontal (31.25 vs. 10.81%; P = 0.023) and temporal lobe (43.75 vs. 
8.11%; P = 0.005), and thrombosis in the superior sagittal sinus (65.63 vs. 
40.54%; P = 0.036). Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed focal 
neurological deficits (P = 0.004, odds ratio = 5.16, 95% CI 1.99-15.76) and 
thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus (P = 0.039, odds ratio = 0.13, 95% CI 
0.04-0.37) were independent risk factors for secondary seizures in patients with 
cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. In addition, mortality rate (9.38 vs. 5.41%; 
P = 0.469) and 90-day excellent prognosis rate (81.25 vs. 86.47%; P = 0.793) did 
not differ significantly between patients with and without epileptic seizures. 
The presence of focal neurological deficits and thrombosis of the superior 
sagittal sinus are independent risk factors for secondary seizures in patients 
with cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, whereas mortality and 90-day prognosis 
have no correlation with secondary seizures.

DOI: 10.1007/s11239-017-1570-5
PMCID: PMC5756278
PMID: 29039017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest in this work. ETHICAL APPROVAL: The present study was 
approved by the Human Ethics Committee of the Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital of 
Nanjing University Medical School (Reference Number: 2017-104-01) and adhered to 
the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.