---
reference_id: "PMID:28380362"
title: An Organoid-Based Model of Cortical Development Identifies Non-Cell-Autonomous Defects in Wnt Signaling Contributing to Miller-Dieker Syndrome.
authors:
- Iefremova V
- Manikakis G
- Krefft O
- Jabali A
- Weynans K
- Wilkens R
- Marsoner F
- Brändl B
- Müller FJ
- Koch P
- Ladewig J
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.047
keywords:
- "1-Alkyl-2-acetylglycerophosphocholine Esterase/genetics, metabolism"
- "14-3-3 Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cadherins/metabolism
- Cell Communication
- Cell Division
- "Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities, pathology"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Classical Lissencephalies and Subcortical Band Heterotopias/metabolism
- Ependymoglial Cells/metabolism
- Gene Expression
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Models, Biological"
- Organoids/metabolism
- Stem Cell Niche
- Tissue Engineering
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- beta Catenin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Organoid-Based Model of Cortical Development Identifies Non-Cell-Autonomous Defects in Wnt Signaling Contributing to Miller-Dieker Syndrome.
**Authors:** Iefremova V, Manikakis G, Krefft O, Jabali A, Weynans K, Wilkens R, Marsoner F, Brändl B, Müller FJ, Koch P, Ladewig J
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.047)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2017 Apr 4;19(1):50-59. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.047.

An Organoid-Based Model of Cortical Development Identifies Non-Cell-Autonomous
Defects in Wnt Signaling Contributing to Miller-Dieker Syndrome.

Iefremova V(1), Manikakis G(1), Krefft O(1), Jabali A(1), Weynans K(1), Wilkens
R(1), Marsoner F(1), Brändl B(2), Müller FJ(2), Koch P(3), Ladewig J(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn, Bonn 53127,
Germany.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital Schleswig
Holstein, Kiel 24105, Germany.
(3)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn, Bonn 53127,
Germany. Electronic address: philipp.koch@uni-bonn.de.
(4)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn, Bonn 53127,
Germany. Electronic address: jladewig@uni-bonn.de.

Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS) is caused by a heterozygous deletion of chromosome
17p13.3 involving the genes LIS1 and YWHAE (coding for 14.3.3ε) and leads to
malformations during cortical development. Here, we used patient-specific
forebrain-type organoids to investigate pathological changes associated with
MDS. Patient-derived organoids are significantly reduced in size, a change
accompanied by a switch from symmetric to asymmetric cell division of
ventricular zone radial glia cells (vRGCs). Alterations in microtubule network
organization in vRGCs and a disruption of cortical niche architecture, including
altered expression of cell adhesion molecules, are also observed. These
phenotypic changes lead to a non-cell-autonomous disturbance of the
N-cadherin/β-catenin signaling axis. Reinstalling active β-catenin signaling
rescues division modes and ameliorates growth defects. Our data define the role
of LIS1 and 14.3.3ε in maintaining the cortical niche and highlight the utility
of organoid-based systems for modeling complex cell-cell interactions in vitro.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.047
PMID: 28380362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
