---
reference_id: "PMID:9694423"
title: Fluid and electrolyte disturbances in heat illness.
authors:
- Noakes TD
journal: Int J Sports Med
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1055/s-2007-971982
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fluid and electrolyte disturbances in heat illness.
**Authors:** Noakes TD
**Journal:** Int J Sports Med (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2007-971982](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2007-971982)

## Content

1. Int J Sports Med. 1998 Jun;19 Suppl 2:S146-9. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-971982.

Fluid and electrolyte disturbances in heat illness.

Noakes TD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Cape Town Medical School and Sports 
Science Institute of South Africa, Newlands, Cape.

Three exercise-related heat illnesses are described in the literature -- heat 
cramps, heat exhaustion or heat syncope, and heat stroke. Of these, only 
exercise-induced heat stroke, which occurs infrequently, is definitely a heat 
illness caused by an increased rate of heat production unmatched by adequate 
heat loss causing progressive heat retention with the body temperature rising to 
dangerously high levels (> 41 degrees C). The terms heat cramps and heat 
exhaustion are misleading as neither is caused by an elevated body temperature; 
nor is there evidence that either is caused by specific fluid or electrolyte 
abnormalities. Cramps occur during or after exercise regardless of whether the 
exercise is performed in the heat or the cold, or in water. Current evidence 
suggests that a spinal neural mechanism may induce cramping that is unrelated to 
biochemical changes in either blood or in the affected skeletal muscles. 
Historically, heat exhaustion has been described as a condition of postural 
hypotension that develops immediately on termination of exercise especially when 
performed in the heat by unacclimatised persons. No modern evidence conflicts 
with this historical interpretation. Nor have more modern studies shown that 
exercise-related heat exhaustion is necessarily caused by specific fluid or 
electrolyte abnormalities. Similarly, there is no published evidence that fluid 
and electrolyte abnormalities are critical determinants of exercise-related heat 
stroke. This does not negate firm evidence that dehydration has important 
physiological effects that impair heat loss and exercise performance especially 
in the heat. Rather, it shows that exercise-induced heat stroke requires 
powerful initiating factors, in addition to dehydration which occurs commonly 
during prolonged exercise, whereas heat stroke is an extremely rare event. The 
purpose of this review is to provide an alternate, more critical review of the 
conditions that are considered to be exercise-related heat disorders and to 
evaluate the aetiological role of fluid and electrolyte disturbances. There is a 
need to better understand these conditions so that their clinical management can 
be based on modern information rather than on dated ideas, many of which have 
survived unchallenged for more than 50 years.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-971982
PMID: 9694423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]