---
reference_id: "PMID:37485339"
title: Functional identification of two novel variants and a hypomorphic variant in ASS1 from patients with Citrullinemia type I.
authors:
- Liu J
- Wang Z
- Yan H
- Teng Y
- Shi Q
- Chen J
- Tang W
- Yu W
- Peng Y
- Xi H
- Ma N
- Liang D
- Li Z
- Wu L
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1172947
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional identification of two novel variants and a hypomorphic variant in ASS1 from patients with Citrullinemia type I.
**Authors:** Liu J, Wang Z, Yan H, Teng Y, Shi Q, Chen J, Tang W, Yu W, Peng Y, Xi H, Ma N, Liang D, Li Z, Wu L
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1172947](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1172947)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Jul 7;14:1172947. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1172947.
eCollection  2023.

Functional identification of two novel variants and a hypomorphic variant in 
ASS1 from patients with Citrullinemia type I.

Liu J(1)(2), Wang Z(3), Yan H(1), Teng Y(3), Shi Q(3), Chen J(1), Tang W(1), Yu 
W(1), Peng Y(1)(2), Xi H(1)(2), Ma N(1), Liang D(3)(4), Li Z(3), Wu L(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Hunan 
Province, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)National Health Commission Key Laboratory of Birth Defects Research, 
Prevention and Treatment, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(3)Center for Medical Genetics, Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Hunan 
Key Laboratory of Animal Models for Human Diseases, School of Life Sciences, 
Central South University, Changsha, China.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Hunan Jiahui Genetics Hospital, Changsha, 
Hunan, China.

Background: Citrullinemia type I (CTLN1) is a rare autosomal recessive inborn 
error of the urea cycle caused by mutations in the gene encoding the 
arginosuccinate synthetase (ASS1) enzyme. Classic CTLN1 often manifests with 
acute hyperammonemia and neurological symptoms. Molecular genetic testing is 
critical for patient diagnosis. Methods: Three unrelated families with 
clinically suspected CTLN1 were included in this study. Potential pathogenic 
variants were identified using whole exome sequencing (WES) and validated using 
Sanger sequencing. Western blotting, quantitative PCR, immunofluorescent 
staining, and ELISA were used to assess functional changes in candidate ASS1 
variants. Results: Five variants were identified, two of which were novel, and 
one has been reported, but its pathogenicity was not validated. The novel 
variant c.649-651del (p.P217del) and the 5'UTR variant (c.-4C>T) resulted in a 
decrease in ASS1 expression at both the protein and transcription levels. The 
other novel variant, c.1048C>T (p.Q350*), showed a marked decrease in expression 
at the protein level, with the formation of truncated proteins but an increased 
transcription. Both c.649_651del (p.P217del) and c.1048C>T (p.Q350*) showed a 
highly significant reduction in enzyme activity, while c.-4C>T had no effect. 
Conclusion: We identified two novel variants and a hypomorphic non-coding 
variant in ASS1 and validated the pathogenicity using functional studies. Our 
findings contribute to expanding the spectrum of ASS1 variants and understanding 
the genotype-phenotype relationships of CTLN1.

Copyright © 2023 Liu, Wang, Yan, Teng, Shi, Chen, Tang, Yu, Peng, Xi, Ma, Liang, 
Li and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1172947
PMCID: PMC10360398
PMID: 37485339

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.