---
reference_id: "PMID:37497748"
title: "Poly-ADP ribose polymerase inhibitor and androgen receptor signaling inhibitor for all comers for first-line treatment of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: is gene sequencing out?"
authors:
- Higano CS
- Cheng HH
journal: Curr Opin Urol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000001114
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Receptors, Androgen/genetics"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Adenosine Diphosphate Ribose/therapeutic use
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Poly-ADP ribose polymerase inhibitor and androgen receptor signaling inhibitor for all comers for first-line treatment of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: is gene sequencing out?
**Authors:** Higano CS, Cheng HH
**Journal:** Curr Opin Urol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOU.0000000000001114](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOU.0000000000001114)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Urol. 2023 Sep 1;33(5):396-403. doi: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000001114.
Epub 2023 Jul 25.

Poly-ADP ribose polymerase inhibitor and androgen receptor signaling inhibitor
for all comers for first-line treatment of metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer: is gene sequencing out?

Higano CS(1), Cheng HH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Prostate
Cancer Supportive Care Program, Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada and Madrona Oncology, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The landscape for first-line therapy (1L) of metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) is rapidly shifting. In the past 2
years, three phase 3 trials have examined the addition of a poly-ADP ribose
polymerase inhibitor (PARPi) to an androgen receptor-signaling inhibitor (ARSI)
in 1L. The FDA and the EMA recently considered whether one of these combinations
should be approved for "all comers." Here, we review the trial designs, assays
for homologous recombination repair mutations (HRRm) and BRCA mutations ( BRCA
m), and predictive capacity of mutational status on treatment efficacy to
understand the basis for the FDA decision.
RECENT FINDINGS: The phase 3 trials, PROpel, MAGNITUDE, and TALAPRO-2, each
compared PARPi and ARSI to placebo (PBO) plus ARSI. PROpel and TALAPRO-2 (cohort
1) included all comers (i.e., no prospective biomarker selection), while
MAGNITUDE prospectively assigned patients to HRRm and HRR nonmutated cohorts and
TALAPRO-2 (cohort 2) included only those with HRRm. Radiographic
progression-free survival (rPFS) was the primary endpoint, and overall survival
(OS) was a key secondary endpoint in all trials. Although rPFS with a PARPi and
ARSI was improved versus PBO with ARSI, major conclusions differed.
SUMMARY: The nuances and interpretation of these trials provide an understanding
of the rationale for the FDA's decision to restrict the approval of olaparib and
abiraterone and prednisone (AAP) as 1L therapy to those with biomarker evidence
of BRCA m.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000001114
PMID: 37497748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
