---
reference_id: "PMID:35463999"
title: The Role of Oxidative Stress and Inflammation in X-Link Adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Yu J
- Chen T
- Guo X
- Zafar MI
- Li H
- Wang Z
- Zheng J
journal: Front Nutr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fnut.2022.864358
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Oxidative Stress and Inflammation in X-Link Adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Yu J, Chen T, Guo X, Zafar MI, Li H, Wang Z, Zheng J
**Journal:** Front Nutr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnut.2022.864358](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2022.864358)

## Content

1. Front Nutr. 2022 Apr 8;9:864358. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2022.864358. eCollection 
2022.

The Role of Oxidative Stress and Inflammation in X-Link Adrenoleukodystrophy.

Yu J(1)(2), Chen T(1)(2), Guo X(3), Zafar MI(4), Li H(1)(2), Wang Z(1)(2), Zheng 
J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Hubei Provincial Clinical Research Center for Diabetes and Metabolic 
Disorders, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Cheeloo 
College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(4)Institute of Reproductive Health/Center of Reproductive Medicine, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is an inherited disease caused by a 
mutation in the ABCD1 gene encoding a peroxisomal transmembrane protein. It is 
characterized by the accumulation of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) in 
body fluids and tissues, leading to progressive demyelination and adrenal 
insufficiency. ALD has various phenotypes, among which the most common and 
severe is childhood cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy (CCALD). The 
pathophysiological mechanisms of ALD remain unclear, but some in vitro/in vivo 
research showed that VLCFA could induce oxidative stress and inflammation, 
leading to damage. In addition, the evidence that oxidative stress and 
inflammation are increased in patients with X-ALD also proves that it is a 
potential mechanism of brain and adrenal damage. Therefore, normalizing the 
redox balance becomes a critical therapeutic target. This study focuses on the 
possible predictors of the severity and progression of X-ALD, the potential 
mechanisms of pathogenesis, and the promising targeted drugs involved in 
oxidative stress and inflammation.

Copyright © 2022 Yu, Chen, Guo, Zafar, Li, Wang and Zheng.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2022.864358
PMCID: PMC9024313
PMID: 35463999

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.