---
reference_id: "PMID:24411945"
title: "Single room occupancy (SRO) hotels as mental health risk environments among impoverished women: the intersection of policy, drug use, trauma, and urban space."
authors:
- Knight KR
- Lopez AM
- Comfort M
- Shumway M
- Cohen J
- Riley ED
journal: Int J Drug Policy
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.drugpo.2013.10.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single room occupancy (SRO) hotels as mental health risk environments among impoverished women: the intersection of policy, drug use, trauma, and urban space.
**Authors:** Knight KR, Lopez AM, Comfort M, Shumway M, Cohen J, Riley ED
**Journal:** Int J Drug Policy (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.drugpo.2013.10.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2013.10.011)

## Content

1. Int J Drug Policy. 2014 May;25(3):556-61. doi: 10.1016/j.drugpo.2013.10.011. 
Epub 2013 Nov 8.

Single room occupancy (SRO) hotels as mental health risk environments among 
impoverished women: the intersection of policy, drug use, trauma, and urban 
space.

Knight KR(1), Lopez AM(2), Comfort M(3), Shumway M(4), Cohen J(5), Riley ED(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, History and Social Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, United States. Electronic address: 
kelly.knight@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, United 
States; Urban Health Program, Research Triangle Institute International, United 
States.
(3)Urban Health Program, Research Triangle Institute International, United 
States.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Trauma Recovery Center, University of California, 
San Francisco, United States.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of California, San Francisco, 
United States.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, United 
States.

BACKGROUND: Due to the significantly high levels of comorbid substance use and 
mental health diagnosis among urban poor populations, examining the intersection 
of drug policy and place requires a consideration of the role of housing in drug 
user mental health. In San Francisco, geographic boundedness and progressive 
health and housing polices have coalesced to make single room occupancy hotels 
(SROs) a key urban built environment used to house poor populations with 
co-occurring drug use and mental health issues. Unstably housed women who use 
illicit drugs have high rates of lifetime and current trauma, which manifests in 
disproportionately high rates of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, 
and depression when compared to stably housed women.
METHODS: We report data from a qualitative interview study (n=30) and four years 
of ethnography conducted with housing policy makers and unstably housed women 
who use drugs and live in SROs.
RESULTS: Women in the study lived in a range of SRO built environments, from 
publicly funded, newly built SROs to privately owned, dilapidated buildings, 
which presented a rich opportunity for ethnographic comparison. Applying Rhodes 
et al.'s framework of socio-structural vulnerability, we explore how SROs can 
operate as "mental health risk environments" in which macro-structural factors 
(housing policies shaping the built environment) interact with meso-level 
factors (social relations within SROs) and micro-level, behavioral coping 
strategies to impact women's mental health. The degree to which SRO built 
environments were "trauma-sensitive" at the macro level significantly influenced 
women's mental health at meso- and micro-levels. Women who were living in SROs 
which exacerbated fear and anxiety attempted, with limited success, to deploy 
strategies on the meso- and micro-level to manage their mental health symptoms.
CONCLUSION: Study findings underscore the importance of housing polices which 
consider substance use in the context of current and cumulative trauma 
experiences in order to improve quality of life and mental health for unstably 
housed women.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drugpo.2013.10.011
PMCID: PMC4014526
PMID: 24411945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]