---
reference_id: "PMID:30552424"
title: "Holt-Oram syndrome: clinical and molecular description of 78 patients with TBX5 variants."
authors:
- Vanlerberghe C
- Jourdain AS
- Ghoumid J
- Frenois F
- Mezel A
- Vaksmann G
- Lenne B
- Delobel B
- Porchet N
- Cormier-Daire V
- Smol T
- Escande F
- Manouvrier-Hanu S
- Petit F
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-018-0303-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Holt-Oram syndrome: clinical and molecular description of 78 patients with TBX5 variants.
**Authors:** Vanlerberghe C, Jourdain AS, Ghoumid J, Frenois F, Mezel A, Vaksmann G, Lenne B, Delobel B, Porchet N, Cormier-Daire V, Smol T, Escande F, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Petit F
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-018-0303-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-018-0303-3)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2019 Mar;27(3):360-368. doi: 10.1038/s41431-018-0303-3. Epub 
2018 Dec 14.

Holt-Oram syndrome: clinical and molecular description of 78 patients with TBX5 
variants.

Vanlerberghe C(1)(2), Jourdain AS(3)(4), Ghoumid J(5)(3), Frenois F(3), Mezel 
A(6), Vaksmann G(7), Lenne B(8), Delobel B(8), Porchet N(4), Cormier-Daire V(9), 
Smol T(3)(10), Escande F(3)(4), Manouvrier-Hanu S(5)(3), Petit F(5).

Author information:
(1)CHU Lille, Clinique de Génétique, 59000, Lille, France. 
clemence.vanlerberghe@chru-lille.fr.
(2)Univ. Lille, RADEME, EA 7364, 59000, Lille, France. 
clemence.vanlerberghe@chru-lille.fr.
(3)Univ. Lille, RADEME, EA 7364, 59000, Lille, France.
(4)CHU Lille, Institut de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, 59000, Lille, 
France.
(5)CHU Lille, Clinique de Génétique, 59000, Lille, France.
(6)CHU Lille, Unité de chirurgie orthopédique infantile, 59000, Lille, France.
(7)Hôpital privé de La Louvière, unité de cardiologie pédiatrique, Lille, 
France.
(8)Centre de Génétique Chromosomique, Hôpital Saint Vincent de Paul, Lille, 
France.
(9)Service de Génétique, U781, Fondation Imagine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades 
AP-HP, Paris, France.
(10)CHU Lille, Institut de Génétique Médicale, 59000, Lille, France.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant condition characterised by the 
association of congenital heart defect (CHD), with or without rhythm 
disturbances and radial defects, due to TBX5 variants. The diagnosis is 
challenged by the variability of expression and the large phenotypic overlap 
with other conditions, like Okihiro syndrome, TAR syndrome or Fanconi disease. 
We retrospectively reviewed 212 patients referred for suspicion of HOS between 
2002 and 2014, who underwent TBX5 screening. A TBX5 variant has been identified 
in 78 patients, representing the largest molecular series ever described. In the 
cohort, 61 met the previously described diagnostic criteria and 17 have been 
considered with an uncertain HOS diagnosis. A CHD was present in 91% of the 
patients with a TBX5 variant, atrial septal defects being the most common 
(61.5%). The genotype-phenotype study highlights the importance of some critical 
features in HOS: the septal characteristic of the CHD, the bilateral and 
asymmetric characteristics of the radial defect and the presence of shoulder or 
elbow mobility defect. Besides, 21 patients presented with an overlapping 
condition. Among them, 13 had a typical HOS presentation. We discuss the 
strategies that could be adopted to improve the molecular delineation of the 
remaining typical patients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-018-0303-3
PMCID: PMC6460573
PMID: 30552424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.