---
reference_id: "PMID:20973822"
title: Cyanoacrylate for septal ablation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Oto A
- Aytemir K
- Okutucu S
- Kaya EB
- Deniz A
- Cil B
- Peynircioglu B
- Kabakci G
journal: J Interv Cardiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1540-8183.2010.00605.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cyanoacrylate for septal ablation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Oto A, Aytemir K, Okutucu S, Kaya EB, Deniz A, Cil B, Peynircioglu B, Kabakci G
**Journal:** J Interv Cardiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1540-8183.2010.00605.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-8183.2010.00605.x)

## Content

1. J Interv Cardiol. 2011 Feb;24(1):77-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-8183.2010.00605.x.
 Epub 2010 Oct 25.

Cyanoacrylate for septal ablation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Oto A(1), Aytemir K, Okutucu S, Kaya EB, Deniz A, Cil B, Peynircioglu B, Kabakci 
G.

Author information:
(1)Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Ankara, 
Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Alcohol septal ablation (ASA) has been shown to be an effective 
treatment in patients with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) who 
are refractory to medical treatment. We describe an alternative approach for 
septal ablation with glue (cyanoacrylate), which is particularly useful in 
patients with the collateral formation to the right coronary artery in whom ASA 
is contraindicated.
METHODS: In our method left coronary ostium was cannulated with 6-8F guiding 
catheter. Septal branch was cannulated with a 4F catheter and a microcatheter 
then cyanoacrylate mixture was instilled into the septal artery. Immediate 
polymerization prevents the leak into the left anterior descending coronary 
artery, and also into the right coronary artery (RCA) via septal collaterals.
RESULTS: Glue septal ablation (GSA) was performed in 18 patients (6 patients had 
collateral branches to RCA). Immediately after the procedure peak left 
ventricular outflow (LVOT) gradient reduced significantly both in cardiac 
catheterization (65.0 ± 13.8 vs. 14.2 ± 5.7 mmHg, P < 0.001) and Doppler 
echocardiographic measurements (75.8 ± 19.9 vs. 18.0 ± 9.1 mmHg, P < 0.001). 
LVOT tract gradient reduction persisted after 6 months follow-up. Septal wall 
thickness (20.2 ± 3.7 mm vs. 16.5 ± 3.2 mm, P = 0.003) reduced and NYHA 
functional class (3.1 ± 0.4 vs. 2.2 ± 0.3, P < 0.001) improved. There was no 
significant complication during the procedure and within 6 months follow-up 
period.
CONCLUSIONS: GSA seems to be an efficient and safe approach to HOCM, especially 
in patients with the collateral formation. Further experience is needed in order 
to assess the long-term efficacy and safety of this technique.

©2010, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-8183.2010.00605.x
PMID: 20973822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]