---
reference_id: "PMID:14991055"
title: "Mutations in the gene encoding filamin B disrupt vertebral segmentation, joint formation and skeletogenesis."
authors:
- Krakow D
- Robertson SP
- King LM
- Morgan T
- Sebald ET
- Bertolotto C
- Wachsmann-Hogiu S
- Acuna D
- Shapiro SS
- Takafuta T
- Aftimos S
- Kim CA
- Firth H
- Steiner CE
- Cormier-Daire V
- Superti-Furga A
- Bonafe L
- Graham JM Jr
- Grix A
- Bacino CA
- Allanson J
- Bialer MG
- Lachman RS
- Rimoin DL
- Cohn DH
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/ng1319
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding filamin B disrupt vertebral segmentation, joint formation and skeletogenesis.
**Authors:** Krakow D, Robertson SP, King LM, Morgan T, Sebald ET, Bertolotto C, Wachsmann-Hogiu S, Acuna D, Shapiro SS, Takafuta T, Aftimos S, Kim CA, Firth H, Steiner CE, Cormier-Daire V, Superti-Furga A, Bonafe L, Graham JM Jr, Grix A, Bacino CA, Allanson J, Bialer MG, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1319](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1319)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Apr;36(4):405-10. doi: 10.1038/ng1319. Epub 2004 Feb 29.

Mutations in the gene encoding filamin B disrupt vertebral segmentation, joint 
formation and skeletogenesis.

Krakow D(1), Robertson SP, King LM, Morgan T, Sebald ET, Bertolotto C, 
Wachsmann-Hogiu S, Acuna D, Shapiro SS, Takafuta T, Aftimos S, Kim CA, Firth H, 
Steiner CE, Cormier-Daire V, Superti-Furga A, Bonafe L, Graham JM Jr, Grix A, 
Bacino CA, Allanson J, Bialer MG, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Cedars-Sinai Research Institute, and 
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA. 
deborah.krakow@cshs.org

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2004 Apr;36(4):323-4. doi: 10.1038/ng0404-323.

The filamins are cytoplasmic proteins that regulate the structure and activity 
of the cytoskeleton by cross-linking actin into three-dimensional networks, 
linking the cell membrane to the cytoskeleton and serving as scaffolds on which 
intracellular signaling and protein trafficking pathways are organized (reviewed 
in refs. 1,2). We identified mutations in the gene encoding filamin B in four 
human skeletal disorders. We found homozygosity or compound heterozygosity with 
respect to stop-codon mutations in autosomal recessive spondylocarpotarsal 
syndrome (SCT, OMIM 272460) and missense mutations in individuals with autosomal 
dominant Larsen syndrome (OMIM 150250) and the perinatal lethal atelosteogenesis 
I and III phenotypes (AOI, OMIM 108720; AOIII, OMIM 108721). We found that 
filamin B is expressed in human growth plate chondrocytes and in the developing 
vertebral bodies in the mouse. These data indicate an unexpected role in 
vertebral segmentation, joint formation and endochondral ossification for this 
ubiquitously expressed cytoskeletal protein.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1319
PMID: 14991055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]