---
reference_id: "PMID:31388698"
title: Frequency of silent brain lesions and aspirin protection evaluation over 3 years follow-up in beta thalassemia patients.
authors:
- Karimi M
- Haghpanah S
- Pishdad P
- Zahedi Z
- Parand S
- Safaei S
journal: Ann Hematol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00277-019-03765-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of silent brain lesions and aspirin protection evaluation over 3 years follow-up in beta thalassemia patients.
**Authors:** Karimi M, Haghpanah S, Pishdad P, Zahedi Z, Parand S, Safaei S
**Journal:** Ann Hematol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00277-019-03765-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00277-019-03765-0)

## Content

1. Ann Hematol. 2019 Oct;98(10):2267-2271. doi: 10.1007/s00277-019-03765-0. Epub 
2019 Aug 6.

Frequency of silent brain lesions and aspirin protection evaluation over 3 years 
follow-up in beta thalassemia patients.

Karimi M(1), Haghpanah S(2), Pishdad P(3), Zahedi Z(2), Parand S(2), Safaei 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)Hematology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran. mkarimi820@gmail.com.
(2)Hematology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran.
(3)Medical Imaging Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.

Silent brain lesions might be associated with overt cerebrovascular accident 
over time in beta thalassemia major (BTM) and intermediate (BTI). Aspirin may be 
protective in these patients. We evaluated brain magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) in thalassemia patients to see whether aspirin is protective or not. A 
historical cohort study was conducted on 35 thalassemia patients, 22 BTI, and 13 
BTM patients at Shiraz Hematology Research Center in 2018. Median age of the 
patients was 32 years and ranged from 8 to 42 years. Twenty-four patients 
(68.6%) were females. Overall frequency of white matter lesions (WMLs) in the 
first MRI was 10 patients (28.6%). After 3 years, 3 patients developed new 
lesions and the frequency of WMLs was 13 patients (37.1%) in the second MRI. 
Moreover, in 3 patients, number of WMLs increased. Patients with new lesions or 
more lesions compared to the baseline were significantly older than the other 
group (median age 36.5 years vs. 31 years, P = 0.046). Regarding aspirin 
consumption, only 1 patient (16.7%) of patients with new lesions was using 
aspirin compared to 10 (34.5%) of the other group (P = 0.640). The high-risk 
patients with thrombocytosis, splenectomy, severe iron overload, and older age 
(> 30 years) should be under close follow-up and evaluated on a regular periodic 
basis as well as brain MRI at least once every 3 years. Aspirin could be 
protective against new or progressive brain lesions so that low-dose aspirin is 
recommended in high-risk thalassemia patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-019-03765-0
PMID: 31388698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]