---
reference_id: "PMID:31329045"
title: Disrupted Iron Storage in Dental Fluorosis.
authors:
- Houari S
- Picard E
- Wurtz T
- Vennat E
- Roubier N
- Wu TD
- Guerquin-Kern JL
- Duttine M
- Thuy TT
- Berdal A
- Babajko S
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/0022034519855650
keywords:
- Ameloblasts/metabolism
- Amelogenesis
- Animals
- Epithelial Cells/metabolism
- Fluorides
- "Fluorosis, Dental/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Iron/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disrupted Iron Storage in Dental Fluorosis.
**Authors:** Houari S, Picard E, Wurtz T, Vennat E, Roubier N, Wu TD, Guerquin-Kern JL, Duttine M, Thuy TT, Berdal A, Babajko S
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0022034519855650](https://doi.org/10.1177/0022034519855650)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2019 Aug;98(9):994-1001. doi: 10.1177/0022034519855650.

Disrupted Iron Storage in Dental Fluorosis.

Houari S(1)(2), Picard E(3), Wurtz T(1), Vennat E(4), Roubier N(4), Wu TD(5)(6), 
Guerquin-Kern JL(5)(6), Duttine M(7), Thuy TT(8), Berdal A(1)(2)(9), Babajko 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM UMRS 1138, Université de Paris, 
Sorbonne Université, Laboratory of Molecular Oral Pathophysiology, Paris, 
France.
(2)2 Garancière Dental Faculty, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(3)3 Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers INSERM UMRS 1138 Université de Paris, 
Sorbonne Université, Physiopathology of Ocular Diseases to Clinical Development, 
Paris, France.
(4)4 Laboratory of Mechanics of Soils, Structures and Materials, CNRS, 
Centrale-Supélec, Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(5)5 Institut Curie, INSERM U1196, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France.
(6)6 Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS UMR 9187, Orsay, 
France.
(7)7 CNRS UPR 9048, Université de Bordeaux, Institute of Chemistry and Condensed 
Matter of Bordeaux, Pessac, France.
(8)8 Faculty of Odonto-stomatology, HochiMinh University of Medicine and 
Pharmacology, HôchiMinh Ville, Vietnam.
(9)9 Reference Center for Oral and Dental Rare Diseases, Rothschild Hospital, 
Paris, France.

Enamel formation and quality are dependent on environmental conditions, 
including exposure to fluoride, which is a widespread natural element. Fluoride 
is routinely used to prevent caries. However, when absorbed in excess, fluoride 
may also lead to altered enamel structural properties associated with enamel 
gene expression modulations. As iron plays a determinant role in enamel quality, 
the aim of our study was to evaluate the iron metabolism in dental epithelial 
cells and forming enamel of mice exposed to fluoride, as well as its putative 
relation with enamel mechanical properties. Iron storage was investigated in 
dental epithelial cells with Perl's blue staining and secondary ion mass 
spectrometry imaging. Iron was mainly stored by maturation-stage ameloblasts 
involved in terminal enamel mineralization. Iron storage was drastically reduced 
by fluoride. Among the proteins involved in iron metabolism, ferritin heavy 
chain (Fth), in charge of iron storage, appeared as the preferential target of 
fluoride according to quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, Western 
blotting, and immunohistochemistry analyses. Fluorotic enamel presented a 
decreased quantity of iron oxides attested by electron spin resonance technique, 
altered mechanical properties measured by nanoindentation, and ultrastructural 
defects analyzed by scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive x-ray 
spectroscopy. The in vivo functional role of Fth was illustrated with Fth+/- 
mice, which incorporated less iron into their dental epithelium and exhibited 
poor enamel quality. These data demonstrate that exposure to excessive fluoride 
decreases ameloblast iron storage, which contributes to the defective structural 
and mechanical properties in rodent fluorotic enamel. They raise the question of 
fluoride's effects on iron storage in other cells and organs that may contribute 
to its effects on population health.

DOI: 10.1177/0022034519855650
PMID: 31329045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]