---
reference_id: "PMID:35820705"
title: ScRNA-seq expression of IFI27 and APOC2 identifies four alveolar macrophage superclusters in healthy BALF.
authors:
- Li X
- Kolling FW
- Aridgides D
- Mellinger D
- Ashare A
- Jakubzick CV
journal: Life Sci Alliance
year: '2022'
doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201458
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ScRNA-seq expression of IFI27 and APOC2 identifies four alveolar macrophage superclusters in healthy BALF.
**Authors:** Li X, Kolling FW, Aridgides D, Mellinger D, Ashare A, Jakubzick CV
**Journal:** Life Sci Alliance (2022)
**DOI:** [10.26508/lsa.202201458](https://doi.org/10.26508/lsa.202201458)

## Content

1. Life Sci Alliance. 2022 Jul 12;5(11):e202201458. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201458. 
Print 2022 Nov.

ScRNA-seq expression of IFI27 and APOC2 identifies four alveolar macrophage 
superclusters in healthy BALF.

Li X(1), Kolling FW(2), Aridgides D(3), Mellinger D(3), Ashare A(4)(3), 
Jakubzick CV(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Geisel School of 
Medicine, Hanover, NH, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Dartmouth Geisel School of Medicine, 
Hanover, NH, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Geisel School of 
Medicine, Hanover, NH, USA claudia.jakubzick@dartmouth.edu 
alix.ashare@hitchcock.org.

Alveolar macrophages (AMs) reside on the luminal surface of the airways and 
alveoli, ensuring proper gas exchange by ingesting cellular debris and 
pathogens, and regulating inflammatory responses. Therefore, understanding the 
heterogeneity and diverse roles played by AMs, interstitial macrophages, and 
recruited monocytes is critical for treating airway diseases. We performed 
single-cell RNA sequencing on 113,213 bronchoalveolar lavage cells from four 
healthy and three uninflamed cystic fibrosis subjects and identified two 
MARCKS+LGMN+IMs, FOLR2+SELENOP+ and SPP1+PLA2G7+ IMs, monocyte subtypes, DC1, 
DC2, migDCs, plasmacytoid DCs, lymphocytes, epithelial cells, and four AM 
superclusters (families) based on the gene expression of IFI27 and APOC2 These 
four AM families have at least eight distinct functional members (subclusters) 
named after their differentially expressed gene(s): IGF1, CCL18, CXCL5, 
cholesterol, chemokine, metallothionein, interferon, and small-cluster AMs. 
Interestingly, the chemokine cluster further divides with each subcluster 
selectively expressing a unique combination of chemokines. One of the most 
striking observations, besides the heterogeneity, is the conservation of AM 
family members in relatively equal ratio across all AM superclusters and 
individuals. Transcriptional data and TotalSeq technology were used to 
investigate cell surface markers that distinguish resident AMs from recruited 
monocytes. Last, other AM datasets were projected onto our dataset. Similar AM 
superclusters and functional subclusters were observed, along with a significant 
increase in chemokine and IFN AM subclusters in individuals infected with 
COVID-19. Overall, functional specializations of the AM subclusters suggest that 
there are highly regulated AM niches with defined programming states, 
highlighting a clear division of labor.

© 2022 Li et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202201458
PMCID: PMC9275597
PMID: 35820705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.