---
reference_id: "PMID:34131144"
title: Integrated analysis of Xist upregulation and X-chromosome inactivation with single-cell and single-allele resolution.
authors:
- Pacini G
- Dunkel I
- Mages N
- Mutzel V
- Timmermann B
- Marsico A
- Schulz EG
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-23643-6
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- "Dosage Compensation, Genetic"
- Female
- Gene Silencing
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Up-Regulation
- X Chromosome
- "X Chromosome Inactivation/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrated analysis of Xist upregulation and X-chromosome inactivation with single-cell and single-allele resolution.
**Authors:** Pacini G, Dunkel I, Mages N, Mutzel V, Timmermann B, Marsico A, Schulz EG
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-021-23643-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-23643-6)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2021 Jun 15;12(1):3638. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-23643-6.

Integrated analysis of Xist upregulation and X-chromosome inactivation with
single-cell and single-allele resolution.

Pacini G(1), Dunkel I(1), Mages N(2), Mutzel V(1), Timmermann B(2), Marsico
A(#)(3), Schulz EG(#)(4).

Author information:
(1)Otto Warburg Laboratories, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Sequencing core facility, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute for Computational Biology, Helmholtz Center, München, Germany.
annalisa.marsico@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(4)Otto Warburg Laboratories, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Berlin, Germany. edda.schulz@molgen.mpg.de.
(#)Contributed equally

To ensure dosage compensation between the sexes, one randomly chosen X
chromosome is silenced in each female cell in the process of X-chromosome
inactivation (XCI). XCI is initiated during early development through
upregulation of the long non-coding RNA Xist, which mediates chromosome-wide
gene silencing. Cell differentiation, Xist upregulation and gene silencing are
thought to be coupled at multiple levels to ensure inactivation of exactly one
out of two X chromosomes. Here we perform an integrated analysis of all three
processes through allele-specific single-cell RNA-sequencing. Specifically, we
assess the onset of random XCI in differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells,
and develop dedicated analysis approaches. By exploiting the inter-cellular
heterogeneity of XCI onset, we identify putative Xist regulators. Moreover, we
show that transient Xist upregulation from both X chromosomes results in
biallelic gene silencing right before transitioning to the monoallelic state,
confirming a prediction of the stochastic model of XCI. Finally, we show that
genetic variation modulates the XCI process at multiple levels, providing a
potential explanation for the long-known X-controlling element (Xce) effect,
which leads to preferential inactivation of a specific X chromosome in
inter-strain crosses. We thus draw a detailed picture of the different levels of
regulation that govern the initiation of XCI. The experimental and computational
strategies we have developed here will allow us to profile random XCI in more
physiological contexts, including primary human cells in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-23643-6
PMCID: PMC8206119
PMID: 34131144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
