---
reference_id: "PMID:27785449"
title: "Hepatocellular carcinoma: a review."
authors:
- Balogh J
- Victor D 3rd
- Asham EH
- Burroughs SG
- Boktour M
- Saharia A
- Li X
- Ghobrial RM
- Monsour HP Jr
journal: J Hepatocell Carcinoma
year: '2016'
doi: 10.2147/JHC.S61146
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatocellular carcinoma: a review.
**Authors:** Balogh J, Victor D 3rd, Asham EH, Burroughs SG, Boktour M, Saharia A, Li X, Ghobrial RM, Monsour HP Jr
**Journal:** J Hepatocell Carcinoma (2016)
**DOI:** [10.2147/JHC.S61146](https://doi.org/10.2147/JHC.S61146)

## Content

1. J Hepatocell Carcinoma. 2016 Oct 5;3:41-53. doi: 10.2147/JHC.S61146.
eCollection  2016.

Hepatocellular carcinoma: a review.

Balogh J(1), Victor D 3rd(2), Asham EH(1), Burroughs SG(1), Boktour M(1), 
Saharia A(1), Li X(1), Ghobrial RM(1), Monsour HP Jr(2).

Author information:
(1)Sherrie and Alan Conover Center for Liver Disease and Transplantation; 
Division of Transplantation, Department of Surgery.
(2)Sherrie and Alan Conover Center for Liver Disease and Transplantation; 
Department of Gastroenterology and Transplant Hepatology; Department of 
Medicine, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary liver malignancy and 
is a leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. In the United States, HCC 
is the ninth leading cause of cancer deaths. Despite advances in prevention 
techniques, screening, and new technologies in both diagnosis and treatment, 
incidence and mortality continue to rise. Cirrhosis remains the most important 
risk factor for the development of HCC regardless of etiology. Hepatitis B and C 
are independent risk factors for the development of cirrhosis. Alcohol 
consumption remains an important additional risk factor in the United States as 
alcohol abuse is five times higher than hepatitis C. Diagnosis is confirmed 
without pathologic confirmation. Screening includes both radiologic tests, such 
as ultrasound, computerized tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging, and 
serological markers such as α-fetoprotein at 6-month intervals. Multiple 
treatment modalities exist; however, only orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) 
or surgical resection is curative. OLT is available for patients who meet or are 
downstaged into the Milan or University of San Francisco criteria. Additional 
treatment modalities include transarterial chemoembolization, radiofrequency 
ablation, microwave ablation, percutaneous ethanol injection, cryoablation, 
radiation therapy, systemic chemotherapy, and molecularly targeted therapies. 
Selection of a treatment modality is based on tumor size, location, extrahepatic 
spread, and underlying liver function. HCC is an aggressive cancer that occurs 
in the setting of cirrhosis and commonly presents in advanced stages. HCC can be 
prevented if there are appropriate measures taken, including hepatitis B virus 
vaccination, universal screening of blood products, use of safe injection 
practices, treatment and education of alcoholics and intravenous drug users, and 
initiation of antiviral therapy. Continued improvement in both surgical and 
nonsurgical approaches has demonstrated significant benefits in overall 
survival. While OLT remains the only curative surgical procedure, the shortage 
of available organs precludes this therapy for many patients with HCC.

DOI: 10.2147/JHC.S61146
PMCID: PMC5063561
PMID: 27785449

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.