---
reference_id: "PMID:38503502"
title: "Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia, Retinoic Acid, and Arsenic: A Tale of Dualities."
authors:
- Rérolle D
- Wu HC
- de Thé H
journal: Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a041582
keywords:
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- "Tretinoin/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Arsenic Trioxide/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Oxides/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Arsenicals/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Receptors, Retinoic Acid/metabolism, genetics"
- "Retinoic Acid Receptor alpha/metabolism, genetics"
- "Promyelocytic Leukemia Protein/metabolism, genetics"
- "Transcription Factors/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia, Retinoic Acid, and Arsenic: A Tale of Dualities.
**Authors:** Rérolle D, Wu HC, de Thé H
**Journal:** Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1101/cshperspect.a041582](https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a041582)

## Content

1. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2024 Sep 3;14(9):a041582. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a041582.

Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia, Retinoic Acid, and Arsenic: A Tale of Dualities.

Rérolle D(1)(2)(3), Wu HC(1)(2)(3), de Thé H(4)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB), Collège de France,
CNRS, INSERM, Université PSL, 75005 Paris, France.
(2)INSERM U944, CNRS UMR7212, GenCellDis, Institut de Recherche Saint-Louis,
Université Paris Cité, 75010 Paris, France.
(3)Chaire d'Oncologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Collège de France, Université
PSL, 75005 Paris, France.
(4)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB), Collège de France,
CNRS, INSERM, Université PSL, 75005 Paris, France hugues.dethe@inserm.fr.
(5)Service d'Hématologie Biologique, AP-HP, Hôpital St. Louis, 75010 Paris,
France.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is driven by the promyelocytic leukemia
(PML)/retinoic acid receptor α (RARA) fusion oncoprotein. Over the years, it has
emerged as a model system to understand how this simple (and sometimes sole)
genetic alteration can transform hematopoietic progenitors through the
acquisition of dominant-negative properties toward both transcriptional control
by nuclear receptors and PML-mediated senescence. The fortuitous identification
of two drugs, arsenic trioxide (ATO) and all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA), that
respectively bind PML and RARA to initiate PML/RARA degradation, has allowed an
unprecedented dissection of the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
patients' cure by the ATO/ATRA combination. This analysis has unraveled the dual
and complementary roles of RARA and PML in both APL initiation and cure by the
ATRA/ATO combination. We discuss how some of the features unraveled by APL
studies may be more broadly applicable to some other forms of leukemia. In
particular, the functional synergy between drugs that promote differentiation
and those that initiate apoptosis/senescence to impede self-renewal could pave
the way to novel curative combinations.

Copyright © 2024 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a041582
PMCID: PMC11368190
PMID: 38503502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
