---
reference_id: "PMID:39399475"
title: Human inborn errors of long-chain fatty acid oxidation show impaired inflammatory responses to TLR4-ligand LPS.
authors:
- Mosegaard S
- Twayana KS
- Denis SW
- Kroon J
- Schomakers BV
- van Weeghel M
- Houtkooper RH
- Olsen RKJ
- Holm CK
journal: FASEB Bioadv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1096/fba.2024-00060
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human inborn errors of long-chain fatty acid oxidation show impaired inflammatory responses to TLR4-ligand LPS.
**Authors:** Mosegaard S, Twayana KS, Denis SW, Kroon J, Schomakers BV, van Weeghel M, Houtkooper RH, Olsen RKJ, Holm CK
**Journal:** FASEB Bioadv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fba.2024-00060](https://doi.org/10.1096/fba.2024-00060)

## Content

1. FASEB Bioadv. 2024 Aug 19;6(9):337-350. doi: 10.1096/fba.2024-00060.
eCollection  2024 Sep.

Human inborn errors of long-chain fatty acid oxidation show impaired 
inflammatory responses to TLR4-ligand LPS.

Mosegaard S(1)(2)(3)(4), Twayana KS(5), Denis SW(2), Kroon J(6)(7), Schomakers 
BV(2)(8), van Weeghel M(2)(3)(4)(8), Houtkooper RH(2)(3)(4)(9), Olsen RKJ(1), 
Holm CK(5).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine Aarhus 
University and Aarhus University Hospital Aarhus Denmark.
(2)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam UMC University of Amsterdam 
Amsterdam The Netherlands.
(3)Amsterdam Gastroenterology, Endocrinology, and Metabolism Amsterdam The 
Netherlands.
(4)Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences Amsterdam The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus Research Center for Innate Immunology 
Aarhus University Aarhus Denmark.
(6)Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism VIB-KU Leuven Center for 
Cancer Biology, VIB Leuven Belgium.
(7)Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Department of Oncology KU 
Leuven and Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI) Leuven Belgium.
(8)Core Facility Metabolomics Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University 
of Amsterdam Amsterdam The Netherlands.
(9)Emma Center for Personalized Medicine Amsterdam UMC Amsterdam The 
Netherlands.

Stimulation of mammalian cells with inflammatory inducers such as 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) leads to alterations in activity of central cellular 
metabolic pathways. Interestingly, these metabolic changes seem to be important 
for subsequent release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. This has become 
particularly clear for enzymes of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle such as 
succinate dehydrogenase (SDH). LPS leads to inhibition of SDH activity and 
accumulation of succinate to enhance the LPS-induced formation of IL-1β. If 
enzymes involved in beta-oxidation of fatty acids are important for sufficient 
responses to LPS is currently not clear. Using cells from various patients with 
inborn long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders (lcFAOD), we report that 
disease-causing deleterious variants of Electron Transfer Flavoprotein 
Dehydrogenase (ETFDH) and of Very Long Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase (ACADVL), 
both cause insufficient inflammatory responses to stimulation with LPS. The 
insufficiencies included reduced TLR4 expression levels, impaired TLR4 
signaling, and reduced or absent induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as 
IL-6. The insufficient responses to LPS were reproduced in cells from healthy 
controls by targeted loss-of-function of either ETFDH or ACADVL, supporting that 
the deleterious ETFDH and ACADVL variants cause the attenuated responses to LPS. 
ETFDH and ACADVL encode two distinct enzymes both involved in fatty acid 
beta-oxidation, and patients with these deficiencies cannot sufficiently 
metabolize long-chain fatty acids. We report that genes important for 
beta-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids are also important for inflammatory 
responses to an acute immunogen trigger like LPS, which may have important 
implications for understanding infection and other metabolic stress induced 
disease pathology in lcFAODs.

©2024 The Authors FASEB BioAdvances published by The Federation of American 
Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fba.2024-00060
PMCID: PMC11467727
PMID: 39399475