---
reference_id: "PMID:41508834"
title: "Incidence and Mortality of Mycosis Fungoides and Sezary Syndrome: A Nationwide Registry Study in Finland."
authors:
- Partanen A
- Häyrinen M
- Kuusisto MEL
- Anttalainen A
- Ukkola-Vuoti L
- Toppila I
- Kuitunen H
- Miettinen T
- Rönkä A
- Kuittinen O
journal: Acta Derm Venereol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.2340/actadv.v106.44273
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mycosis Fungoides/mortality, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Finland/epidemiology
- "Sezary Syndrome/mortality, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Incidence
- Male
- Female
- Registries
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- "Skin Neoplasms/mortality, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Risk Factors
- Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cause of Death
- Case-Control Studies
- Young Adult
- Time Factors
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and Mortality of Mycosis Fungoides and Sezary Syndrome: A Nationwide Registry Study in Finland.
**Authors:** Partanen A, Häyrinen M, Kuusisto MEL, Anttalainen A, Ukkola-Vuoti L, Toppila I, Kuitunen H, Miettinen T, Rönkä A, Kuittinen O
**Journal:** Acta Derm Venereol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.2340/actadv.v106.44273](https://doi.org/10.2340/actadv.v106.44273)

## Content

1. Acta Derm Venereol. 2026 Jan 8;106:adv44273. doi: 10.2340/actadv.v106.44273.

Incidence and Mortality of Mycosis Fungoides and Sezary Syndrome: A Nationwide
Registry Study in Finland.

Partanen A(#)(1), Häyrinen M(#)(2), Kuusisto MEL(3), Anttalainen A(4),
Ukkola-Vuoti L(4), Toppila I(4), Kuitunen H(5), Miettinen T(6), Rönkä A(7),
Kuittinen O(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
anu.partanen@pshyvinvointialue.fi.
(2)Oncology, Faculty of Health Medicine, School of Medicine, Institute of
Clinical Medicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(3)Medical Research Center, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland; Biomedicine
and Internal Medicine Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland;
Department of Internal Medicine, Länsi-Pohja Central Hospital, The Wellbeing
County of Lapland, Kemi, Finland.
(4)Medaffcon Oy, Espoo, Finland.
(5)Cancer Center, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(6)Takeda Oy, Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Oncology, Faculty of Health Medicine, School of Medicine, Institute of
Clinical Medicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland; Cancer
Centre, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
(#)Contributed equally

This study investigated the incidence, mortality, and causes of death in Finnish
patients with mycosis fungoides (MF) or Sezary syndrome (SS). The study
population consisted of 450 patients with MF and 23 with SS and their 1:1
matched controls. Data were collected from nationwide Finnish healthcare
registries. The average incidence of MF was 0.38 and of SS 0.02 per 100,000
persons in 2007-2019 and was highest among older adults. Patients with SS had a
low 5-year overall survival of 33.5% vs 64.5% in their controls (p = 0.0046),
whereas 62.3% of patients with MF were alive 10 years after diagnosis vs 71.4%
of their controls (p = 0.0011). SS diagnosis (hazard ratio [HR] 11.85 [5.08,
27.65]; p < 0.001) and higher age (HR 1.07 [1.01, 1.12]; p = 0.01) were risk
factors of poorer disease-specific survival. Moreover, patients with MF had a
2.38-fold [1.07, 5.27] risk of thyroid diseases (p = 0.033) and over 1.5-fold
[1.17, 2.07] risk of cardiovascular diseases (p = 0.002) compared with controls.
In conclusion, in the Finnish population, patients with MF or SS had a higher
incidence and mortality and more late comorbidities than controls. More
awareness, earlier diagnostic tools, and more effective treat-ment for MF/SS are
needed.

DOI: 10.2340/actadv.v106.44273
PMCID: PMC12797152
PMID: 41508834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AP reports consultancy fees from Behring and
AbbVie and has participated in Scientific Advisory Board meetings organized by
AbbVie, AstraZeneca, Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Pfizer, and Takeda. AR reports
personal fees for speaking at symposia or financial support for attending
conferences from Amgen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Daiichi
Sankyo, and Roche. None of the financial support was related to the present
study. TM has been contracted by Takeda Oy during the study course. LU-V, IT,
and AA are employed by Medaffcon Oy. The rest of the authors declare no
competing interests.
