---
reference_id: "PMID:30223072"
title: "A review on arsenic carcinogenesis: Epidemiology, metabolism, genotoxicity and epigenetic changes."
authors:
- Zhou Q
- Xi S
journal: Regul Toxicol Pharmacol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2018.09.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review on arsenic carcinogenesis: Epidemiology, metabolism, genotoxicity and epigenetic changes.
**Authors:** Zhou Q, Xi S
**Journal:** Regul Toxicol Pharmacol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yrtph.2018.09.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yrtph.2018.09.010)

## Content

1. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2018 Nov;99:78-88. doi: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2018.09.010. 
Epub 2018 Sep 15.

A review on arsenic carcinogenesis: Epidemiology, metabolism, genotoxicity and 
epigenetic changes.

Zhou Q(1), Xi S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Liaoning Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Arsenic Biological Effect and Poisoning, School of Public Health, 
China Medical University, No.77 Puhe Road, Shenyang North New Area, Shenyang 
110122, Liaoning Province, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Liaoning Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Arsenic Biological Effect and Poisoning, School of Public Health, 
China Medical University, No.77 Puhe Road, Shenyang North New Area, Shenyang 
110122, Liaoning Province, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: 
Shxi@cmu.edu.cn.

Long-term exposure to arsenic (inorganic arsenic) is a world-wide environmental 
health concern. Arsenic is classified as the Group 1 human carcinogen by the 
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). Epidemiological studies have 
established a strong association between inorganic arsenic (iAs) exposure in 
drinking water and an increased incidence of cancer including bladder, liver, 
lung, prostate, and skin cancer. iAs also increases the risk of other diseases 
such as cardiovascular disease, hypertension and diabetes. The molecular 
mechanisms of carcinogenesis of iAs remain poorly defined, several mechanisms 
have been proposed, including genotoxicity, altered cell proliferation, 
oxidative stress, changes to the epigenome, disturbances of signal transduction 
pathways, cytotoxicity and regenerative proliferation. In this article, we will 
summarize current knowledge on the mechanisms of arsenic carcinogenesis and 
focus on integrating all these issues to garner a broader perspective.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2018.09.010
PMID: 30223072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]