---
reference_id: "PMID:38146440"
title: Case report of a family with hereditary inclusion body myopathy with VCP gene variant and literature review.
authors:
- Asadauskaitė G
- Vilimienė R
- Augustinavičius V
- Burnytė B
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1290960
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report of a family with hereditary inclusion body myopathy with VCP gene variant and literature review.
**Authors:** Asadauskaitė G, Vilimienė R, Augustinavičius V, Burnytė B
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1290960](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1290960)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Dec 11;14:1290960. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1290960.
eCollection 2023.

Case report of a family with hereditary inclusion body myopathy with VCP gene
variant and literature review.

Asadauskaitė G(1), Vilimienė R(2), Augustinavičius V(3), Burnytė B(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Vilnius University,
Vilnius, Lithuania.
(3)Center of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Vilnius University Hospital
Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Vilnius University,
Vilnius, Lithuania.

BACKGROUND: Missense VCP gene variants lead to a disruption in protein
homeostasis causing a spectrum of progressive degenerative diseases. Myopathy is
the most frequent manifestation characterized by slowly progressing weakness of
proximal and distal limb muscles. We present a family with myopathy due to
c.277C > T variant in VCP gene.
CASE PRESENTATION: The patient's phenotype includes symmetrical muscle wasting
and weakness in the proximal parts of the limbs and axial muscles, a wide based
gait, lordotic posture, positive Gowers' sign, mild calf enlargement, impaired
mobility, elevated CK, and myopathy in proximal limb muscles. Whole body MRI
revealed fatty replacement, predominantly affecting right vastus intermedius and
medialis, gastrocnemius and soleus in calf, abdomen wall and lumbar muscles.
Next-generation sequencing analysis revealed a pathogenic heterozygous variant
c.277C > T (p.(Arg93Cys)) in exon 3 of the VCP gene. Segregation analysis showed
that the detected variant is inherited from the affected father who developed
symptoms at 60.
CONCLUSION: The patients described experienced muscle wasting and weakness in
the proximal and distal parts of the limbs which is a common finding in VCP
related disease. Nevertheless, the patient has distinguishing features, such as
high CK levels, early onset of the disease, and rapid mobility decline.

Copyright © 2023 Asadauskaitė, Vilimienė, Augustinavičius and Burnytė.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1290960
PMCID: PMC10749511
PMID: 38146440

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
