---
reference_id: "PMID:34804114"
title: Edgetic Perturbations Contribute to Phenotypic Variability in PEX26 Deficiency.
authors:
- Lotz-Havla AS
- Woidy M
- Guder P
- Schmiesing J
- Erdmann R
- Waterham HR
- Muntau AC
- Gersting SW
journal: Front Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.726174
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Edgetic Perturbations Contribute to Phenotypic Variability in PEX26 Deficiency.
**Authors:** Lotz-Havla AS, Woidy M, Guder P, Schmiesing J, Erdmann R, Waterham HR, Muntau AC, Gersting SW
**Journal:** Front Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2021.726174](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2021.726174)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2021 Nov 4;12:726174. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.726174. eCollection
 2021.

Edgetic Perturbations Contribute to Phenotypic Variability in PEX26 Deficiency.

Lotz-Havla AS(1), Woidy M(2), Guder P(2), Schmiesing J(2), Erdmann R(3), 
Waterham HR(4), Muntau AC(5), Gersting SW(2).

Author information:
(1)Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, 
Germany.
(2)University Children's Research, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Medizinische Fakultät der 
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(4)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, 
Germany.

Peroxisomes share metabolic pathways with other organelles and peroxisomes are 
embedded into key cellular processes. However, the specific function of many 
peroxisomal proteins remains unclear and restricted knowledge of the peroxisomal 
protein interaction network limits a precise mapping of this network into the 
cellular metabolism. Inborn peroxisomal disorders are autosomal or X-linked 
recessive diseases that affect peroxisomal biogenesis (PBD) and/or peroxisomal 
metabolism. Pathogenic variants in the PEX26 gene lead to peroxisomal disorders 
of the full Zellweger spectrum continuum. To investigate the phenotypic 
complexity of PEX26 deficiency, we performed a combined organelle protein 
interaction screen and network medicine approach and 1) analyzed whether PEX26 
establishes interactions with other peroxisomal proteins, 2) deciphered the 
PEX26 interaction network, 3) determined how PEX26 is involved in further 
processes of peroxisomal biogenesis and metabolism, and 4) showed how 
variant-specific disruption of protein-protein interactions (edgetic 
perturbations) may contribute to phenotypic variability in PEX26 deficient 
patients. The discovery of 14 novel protein-protein interactions for PEX26 
revealed a hub position of PEX26 inside the peroxisomal interactome. Analysis of 
edgetic perturbations of PEX26 variants revealed a strong correlation between 
the number of affected protein-protein interactions and the molecular phenotype 
of matrix protein import. The role of PEX26 in peroxisomal biogenesis was 
expanded encompassing matrix protein import, division and proliferation, and 
membrane assembly. Moreover, the PEX26 interaction network intersects with 
cellular lipid metabolism at different steps. The results of this study expand 
the knowledge about the function of PEX26 and refine genotype-phenotype 
correlations, which may contribute to our understanding of the underlying 
disease mechanism of PEX26 deficiency.

Copyright © 2021 Lotz-Havla, Woidy, Guder, Schmiesing, Erdmann, Waterham, Muntau 
and Gersting.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.726174
PMCID: PMC8600046
PMID: 34804114

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.