---
reference_id: "PMID:27584717"
title: "Epidemiology of Varicella During the 2-Dose Varicella Vaccination Program - United States, 2005-2014."
authors:
- Lopez AS
- Zhang J
- Marin M
journal: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6534a4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of Varicella During the 2-Dose Varicella Vaccination Program - United States, 2005-2014.
**Authors:** Lopez AS, Zhang J, Marin M
**Journal:** MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.mm6534a4](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6534a4)

## Content

1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016 Sep 2;65(34):902-5. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm6534a4.

Epidemiology of Varicella During the 2-Dose Varicella Vaccination Program - 
United States, 2005-2014.

Lopez AS(1), Zhang J, Marin M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory 
Diseases, CDC.

Before availability of varicella vaccine in the United States, an estimated 4 
million varicella cases, 11,000-13,500 varicella-related hospitalizations, and 
100-150 varicella-related deaths occurred annually. The varicella vaccination 
program was implemented in the United States in 1996 as a 1-dose routine 
childhood program. Based on data from two varicella active surveillance sites, 
the varicella vaccination program led to 90% decline in incidence over the next 
decade (1). However, because of continued varicella outbreaks, a routine 2-dose 
schedule (at ages 12-15 months and 4-6 years) was recommended and has been in 
place since 2006 (2). The declines in incidence (1,3-6) made it feasible for 
states to implement varicella case-based surveillance and to report varicella 
data to CDC through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System 
(NNDSS). State data have become the primary source for monitoring trends in 
varicella incidence nationally (7). Using NNDSS data, CDC previously reported 
nationwide declines in varicella incidence of 72% from the end of the 1-dose to 
the early years of the 2-dose varicella vaccination program (2006-2010) (7). 
This report updates varicella incidence trends to include the most recent years 
in the 2-dose varicella vaccination program. Between the period 2005-2006 
(before the 2-dose recommendation) and 2013-2014, overall varicella incidence 
declined 84.6%, with the largest declines reported in children aged 5-9 years 
(89.3%) and 10-14 years (84.8%). The availability of varicella-specific data 
varied over time. During the last 2 years examined (2013 and 2014), completeness 
of reporting of two critical variables monitored by CDC, vaccination status 
(receipt of at least 1 dose of varicella vaccine) of cases and severity of 
disease based on number of lesions, were 54.2% and 39.1%, respectively. State 
and local health departments, in collaboration with CDC, should continue working 
to improve reporting of cases and completeness of critical varicella-specific 
variables to better monitor impact of the varicella vaccination program.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6534a4
PMID: 27584717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]