---
reference_id: "PMID:25119967"
title: "FGFR3-related condition: a skeletal dysplasia with similarities to thanatophoric dysplasia and SADDAN due to Lys650Met."
authors:
- Farmakis SG
- Shinawi M
- Miller-Thomas M
- Radmanesh A
- Herman TE
journal: Skeletal Radiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00256-014-1983-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FGFR3-related condition: a skeletal dysplasia with similarities to thanatophoric dysplasia and SADDAN due to Lys650Met.
**Authors:** Farmakis SG, Shinawi M, Miller-Thomas M, Radmanesh A, Herman TE
**Journal:** Skeletal Radiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00256-014-1983-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00256-014-1983-6)

## Content

1. Skeletal Radiol. 2015 Mar;44(3):441-5. doi: 10.1007/s00256-014-1983-6. Epub
2014  Aug 15.

FGFR3-related condition: a skeletal dysplasia with similarities to thanatophoric 
dysplasia and SADDAN due to Lys650Met.

Farmakis SG(1), Shinawi M, Miller-Thomas M, Radmanesh A, Herman TE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, St. Louis University School of Medicine, 3635 Vista 
Ave. at Grand Blvd., St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA, farmakis@slu.edu.

Mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene account for 
six related skeletal dysplasia conditions: achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia, 
thanatophoric dysplasia types 1 and 2, SADDAN (severe achondroplasia with 
developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans), and platyspondylic lethal 
skeletal dysplasia, San Diego type. This group of disorders has very 
characteristic clinical and radiologic features, which distinguish them from 
other skeletal dysplasias. They display a spectrum of severity in the skeletal 
findings, ranging from relatively mild hypochondroplasia to lethal thanatophoric 
dysplasia. We report a patient who has the missense FGFR3 mutation, Lys650Met, 
previously reported in association only with SADDAN, who exhibits some findings 
similar to both thanatophoric dysplasia (types 1 and 2) in addition to those 
findings characteristic of SADDAN.

DOI: 10.1007/s00256-014-1983-6
PMID: 25119967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]