---
reference_id: "PMID:24772361"
title: Swellings over the Limbs as the Earliest Feature in a Patient with Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type V.
authors:
- Al Kaissi A
- Ganger R
- Klaushofer K
- Grill F
journal: Case Rep Orthop
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1155/2014/780959
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Swellings over the Limbs as the Earliest Feature in a Patient with Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type V.
**Authors:** Al Kaissi A, Ganger R, Klaushofer K, Grill F
**Journal:** Case Rep Orthop (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2014/780959](https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/780959)

## Content

1. Case Rep Orthop. 2014;2014:780959. doi: 10.1155/2014/780959. Epub 2014 Mar 18.

Swellings over the Limbs as the Earliest Feature in a Patient with Osteogenesis 
Imperfecta Type V.

Al Kaissi A(1), Ganger R(2), Klaushofer K(3), Grill F(2).

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology, The Hanusch Hospital of WGKK and 
AUVA Trauma Centre Meidling, First Medical Department, Hanusch Hospital, 
Heinrich Collin Street 30, 1140 Vienna, Austria ; Orthopaedic Hospital of 
Speising, Paediatric Department, Speisinger Street 109, 1130 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Orthopaedic Hospital of Speising, Paediatric Department, Speisinger Street 
109, 1130 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology, The Hanusch Hospital of WGKK and 
AUVA Trauma Centre Meidling, First Medical Department, Hanusch Hospital, 
Heinrich Collin Street 30, 1140 Vienna, Austria.

Swellings over the upper and lower limbs were encountered in a one-year-old 
child. Skeletal survey showed a constellation of distinctive radiographic 
abnormalities of osteoporosis, hyperplastic callus and ossification of the 
interosseous membrane of the forearm, femora, and to lesser extent the tibiae. 
Neither wormian bones of the skull nor dentinogenesis imperfecta was present. 
Genetic tests revealed absence of mutation in COL1A1 or COL1A2 genes, 
respectively. The overall phenotypic features were consistent with the diagnosis 
of osteogenesis imperfecta type V (OI-V). The aim of this paper is to 
distinguish between swellings because of intrinsic bone disorders and these due 
to child physical abuse.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/780959
PMCID: PMC3976949
PMID: 24772361