---
reference_id: "PMID:26170524"
title: "Epidemiology of Vasculitides in Khorasan Province, Iran."
authors:
- Jokar M
- Mirfeizi Z
journal: Iran J Med Sci
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of Vasculitides in Khorasan Province, Iran.
**Authors:** Jokar M, Mirfeizi Z
**Journal:** Iran J Med Sci (2015)

## Content

1. Iran J Med Sci. 2015 Jul;40(4):362-6.

Epidemiology of Vasculitides in Khorasan Province, Iran.

Jokar M(1), Mirfeizi Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Imam Reza Hospital, Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

Vasculitides are a heterogeneous group of more than 20 diseases defined by
inflammation and destruction of blood vessels. We aimed to study the demographic
characteristics of the primary vasculitides in the North East of Iran. We
retrospectively studied the medical records of patients diagnosed with any kind
of vasculitis at the Clinic and Department of Rheumatology of the Imam Reza
Hospital, Mashhad, Iran between January 1, 2002, and December 31, 2012. Patients
were classified according to the American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria
for the classification of vasculitis and the 2012 Revised International Chapel
Hill Consensus Conference Nomenclature of Vasculitides. A total of 721 patients
(51.5% male, 48.5% female) with a diagnosis of primary vasculitis was
identified. The frequency distributions of vasculitic disorders were as follows:
Behcet's disease, 63.6%; cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis, 8.2%;
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's), 6.8%; Takayasu's arteritis. 6%;
giant cell arteritis, 4%; polyarteritis nodosa, 2.1%; microscopic polyangiitis,
0.6%; eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss), 1.8%;
cryoglobulinemic vasculitis, 0.3%; and IgA vasculitis (Henoch-Schonlein
purpura), 3.5%. In our population, the most common forms of vasculitis are
Behcet's disease, cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis, and granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (Wegener's).

PMCID: PMC4487463
PMID: 26170524
