---
reference_id: "PMID:9799191"
title: "Exposure of the U.S. population to lead, 1991-1994."
authors:
- Pirkle JL
- Kaufmann RB
- Brody DJ
- Hickman T
- Gunter EW
- Paschal DC
journal: Environ Health Perspect
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1289/ehp.98106745
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Environmental Exposure
- Environmental Monitoring
- Female
- Health Surveys
- Humans
- Infant
- Lead/blood
- Male
- Middle Aged
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exposure of the U.S. population to lead, 1991-1994.
**Authors:** Pirkle JL, Kaufmann RB, Brody DJ, Hickman T, Gunter EW, Paschal DC
**Journal:** Environ Health Perspect (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1289/ehp.98106745](https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.98106745)

## Content

1. Environ Health Perspect. 1998 Nov;106(11):745-50. doi: 10.1289/ehp.98106745.

Exposure of the U.S. population to lead, 1991-1994.

Pirkle JL(1), Kaufmann RB, Brody DJ, Hickman T, Gunter EW, Paschal DC.

Author information:
(1)National Center for Environmental Health, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30341 USA.

Blood lead measurements were obtained on 13,642 persons aged 1 year and older 
who participated in Phase 2 of the Third National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey (NHANES III) from 1991 through 1994. NHANES III is a national 
representative survey of the civilian, noninstitutionalized U.S. population. The 
overall mean blood lead level for the U.S. population aged 1 year and older was 
2.3 microgram/dl, with 2.2% of the population having levels >=10 microgram/dl, 
the level of health concern for children. Among U.S. children aged 1-5 years, 
the mean blood lead level was 2.7 microgram/dl, and 890,000 of these children 
(4.4%) had elevated blood lead levels. Sociodemographic factors associated with 
higher blood lead levels in children were non-Hispanic black race/ethnicity, low 
income, and residence in older housing. The prevalence of elevated blood lead 
levels was 21.9% among non-Hispanic black children living in homes built before 
1946 and 16.4% among children in low-income families who lived in homes built 
before 1946. Blood lead levels continue to decline in the U.S. population, but 
890,000 children still have elevated levels. Public health efforts have been 
successful in removing lead from population-wide sources such as gasoline and 
lead-soldered food and drink cans, but new efforts must address the difficult 
problem of leaded paint, especially in older houses, as well as lead in dust and 
soil. Lead poisoning prevention programs should target high-risk persons, such 
as children who live in old homes, children of minority groups, and children 
living in families with low income.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.98106745
PMCID: PMC1533471
PMID: 9799191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]