---
reference_id: "PMID:36291953"
title: "\"Intestinal-Type\" Vulvar Adenocarcinoma: A Review of the MITO Rare Tumors Group."
authors:
- Dellino M
- Cicogna S
- Falcone F
- Mitidieri M
- Mazzeo R
- Pignata S
- Mangili G
- Cormio G
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cancers14205171
content_type: abstract_only
---

# "Intestinal-Type" Vulvar Adenocarcinoma: A Review of the MITO Rare Tumors Group.
**Authors:** Dellino M, Cicogna S, Falcone F, Mitidieri M, Mazzeo R, Pignata S, Mangili G, Cormio G
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers14205171](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers14205171)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Oct 21;14(20):5171. doi: 10.3390/cancers14205171.

"Intestinal-Type" Vulvar Adenocarcinoma: A Review of the MITO Rare Tumors Group.

Dellino M(1)(2), Cicogna S(3), Falcone F(4), Mitidieri M(5), Mazzeo R(6), 
Pignata S(7), Mangili G(8), Cormio G(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, University of Bari, 
70100 Bari, Italy.
(2)Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology, "San Paolo" Hospital, 70123 Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Institute for Maternal and Child 
Health-IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", 34137 Trieste, Italy.
(4)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, IRCSS, 
"Fondazione G. Pascale", 80131 Naples, Italy.
(5)Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Città della Scienza e della Salute di 
Torino, Ginecologia e Ostetricia SC4, 10126 Turin, Italy.
(6)Department of Medicine (DAME), University of Udine, 33100 Udine, Italy.
(7)Department of Urology and Gynecology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, IRCSS, 
"Fondazione G. Pascale", 80131 Naples, Italy.
(8)Obstetrics and Gynecology Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 
20132 Milan, Italy.
(9)Gynecologic Oncology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Tumori Giovanni Paolo II, 
Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine (DIM), University of Bari "Aldo Moro", 
70121 Bari, Italy.

Intestinal-type adenocarcinoma (VAIt) represents a sporadic variant of vulvar 
carcinoma. It appears frequently localized to epithelial glands in the vulvar 
region, and it probably derives from cloacal remnants persisting in the adult. 
We performed a systematic review of the limited cases reported in the 
literature, with the intent to assess the specific peculiarities of this rare 
neoplasia and to state consistent management recommendations. The principal 
histological VAIt characteristic is that it resembles mucinous colonic 
carcinomas. Therefore, immunohistochemical workup, with different tumor markers 
including CK20, CDX2, and CK7 staining, is needed. To confirm vulvar origin, a 
thorough diagnostic, and radiological examination is required to rule out other 
primary malignancies. The gold standard of treatment for VAIt is surgery, with 
local excision with tumor-free margins. Lymph node staging is an option advised 
if the tumor size is >2 cm or if lymph node metastases are suspected on imaging. 
On the other hand, the role of neoadjuvant therapy is still in doubt, but a good 
response to adjuvant chemotherapy treatments has been described in both advanced 
and recurrent diseases. Sometimes, VAIt behavior can be unpredictable, with 
relapses even after many years, so more experiences and longer follow-up periods 
are needed to elucidate the best therapeutic management and its long-term 
prognosis.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14205171
PMCID: PMC9600239
PMID: 36291953

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.