---
reference_id: "PMID:38809896"
title: "Predictors of cochlear implant outcomes in pediatric auditory neuropathy: A matched case-control study."
authors:
- Jafari Z
- Fitzpatrick EM
- Schramm DR
- Rouillon I
- Koravand A
journal: PLoS One
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0304316
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Cochlear Implants
- Case-Control Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Retrospective Studies
- "Hearing Loss, Central/physiopathology, surgery"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/surgery, physiopathology"
- Speech Perception/physiology
- Treatment Outcome
- Cochlear Implantation
- Infant
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of cochlear implant outcomes in pediatric auditory neuropathy: A matched case-control study.
**Authors:** Jafari Z, Fitzpatrick EM, Schramm DR, Rouillon I, Koravand A
**Journal:** PLoS One (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0304316](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0304316)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2024 May 29;19(5):e0304316. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0304316. 
eCollection 2024.

Predictors of cochlear implant outcomes in pediatric auditory neuropathy: A 
matched case-control study.

Jafari Z(1)(2), Fitzpatrick EM(1)(3), Schramm DR(4)(5), Rouillon I(6), Koravand 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology Program, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)School of Communication Sciences and Disorders (SCSD), Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, NS, Canada.
(3)Child Hearing Lab, CHEO Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Ottawa Hospital, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Speech and Language Pathology, and Otolaryngology Department, Necker 
Hospital, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVES: Current evidence supports the benefits of cochlear implants (CIs) in 
children with hearing loss, including those with auditory neuropathy spectrum 
disorder (ANSD). However, there is limited evidence regarding factors that hold 
predictive value for intervention outcomes.
DESIGN: This retrospective case-control study consisted of 66 children with CIs, 
including 22 with ANSD and 44 with sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) matched on 
sex, age, age at CI activation, and the length of follow-up with CIs (1:2 
ratio). The case and control groups were compared in the results of five 
open-set speech perception tests, and a Forward Linear Regression Model was used 
to identify factors that can predict the post-CI outcomes.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in average scores between the two 
groups across five outcome measures, ranging from 88.40% to 95.65%. The 
correlation matrix revealed that younger ages at hearing aid fitting and CI 
activation positively influenced improvements in speech perception test scores. 
Furthermore, among the variables incorporated in the regression model, the 
duration of follow-up with CIs, age at CI activation, and the utilization of two 
CIs demonstrated prognostic significance for improved post-CI speech perception 
outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Children with ANSD can achieve similar open-set speech perception 
outcomes as children with SNHL. A longer CI follow-up, a lower age at CI 
activation, and the use of two CIs are predictive for optimal CI outcome.

Copyright: © 2024 Jafari et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0304316
PMCID: PMC11135674
PMID: 38809896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.