---
reference_id: "PMID:21599942"
title: Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency.
authors:
- Froissart R
- Piraud M
- Boudjemline AM
- Vianey-Saban C
- Petit F
- Hubert-Buron A
- Eberschweiler PT
- Gajdos V
- Labrune P
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-27
keywords:
- Genetic Testing
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type I/diet therapy, epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency.
**Authors:** Froissart R, Piraud M, Boudjemline AM, Vianey-Saban C, Petit F, Hubert-Buron A, Eberschweiler PT, Gajdos V, Labrune P
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-6-27](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-6-27)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2011 May 20;6:27. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-27.

Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency.

Froissart R(1), Piraud M, Boudjemline AM, Vianey-Saban C, Petit F, Hubert-Buron 
A, Eberschweiler PT, Gajdos V, Labrune P.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Référence Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme Hépatique, Service 
de Pédiatrie, APHP, Clamart cedex, France.

Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency (G6P deficiency), or glycogen storage disease 
type I (GSDI), is a group of inherited metabolic diseases, including types Ia 
and Ib, characterized by poor tolerance to fasting, growth retardation and 
hepatomegaly resulting from accumulation of glycogen and fat in the liver. 
Prevalence is unknown and annual incidence is around 1/100,000 births. GSDIa is 
the more frequent type, representing about 80% of GSDI patients. The disease 
commonly manifests, between the ages of 3 to 4 months by symptoms of 
hypoglycemia (tremors, seizures, cyanosis, apnea). Patients have poor tolerance 
to fasting, marked hepatomegaly, growth retardation (small stature and delayed 
puberty), generally improved by an appropriate diet, osteopenia and sometimes 
osteoporosis, full-cheeked round face, enlarged kydneys and platelet 
dysfunctions leading to frequent epistaxis. In addition, in GSDIb, neutropenia 
and neutrophil dysfunction are responsible for tendency towards infections, 
relapsing aphtous gingivostomatitis, and inflammatory bowel disease. Late 
complications are hepatic (adenomas with rare but possible transformation into 
hepatocarcinoma) and renal (glomerular hyperfiltration leading to proteinuria 
and sometimes to renal insufficiency). GSDI is caused by a dysfunction in the 
G6P system, a key step in the regulation of glycemia. The deficit concerns the 
catalytic subunit G6P-alpha (type Ia) which is restricted to expression in the 
liver, kidney and intestine, or the ubiquitously expressed G6P transporter (type 
Ib). Mutations in the genes G6PC (17q21) and SLC37A4 (11q23) respectively cause 
GSDIa and Ib. Many mutations have been identified in both genes,. Transmission 
is autosomal recessive. Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation, on abnormal 
basal values and absence of hyperglycemic response to glucagon. It can be 
confirmed by demonstrating a deficient activity of a G6P system component in a 
liver biopsy. To date, the diagnosis is most commonly confirmed by G6PC (GSDIa) 
or SLC37A4 (GSDIb) gene analysis, and the indications of liver biopsy to measure 
G6P activity are getting rarer and rarer. Differential diagnoses include the 
other GSDs, in particular type III (see this term). However, in GSDIII, glycemia 
and lactacidemia are high after a meal and low after a fast period (often with a 
later occurrence than that of type I). Primary liver tumors and Pepper syndrome 
(hepatic metastases of neuroblastoma) may be evoked but are easily ruled out 
through clinical and ultrasound data. Antenatal diagnosis is possible through 
molecular analysis of amniocytes or chorionic villous cells. Pre-implantatory 
genetic diagnosis may also be discussed. Genetic counseling should be offered to 
patients and their families. The dietary treatment aims at avoiding hypoglycemia 
(frequent meals, nocturnal enteral feeding through a nasogastric tube, and later 
oral addition of uncooked starch) and acidosis (restricted fructose and 
galactose intake). Liver transplantation, performed on the basis of poor 
metabolic control and/or hepatocarcinoma, corrects hypoglycemia, but renal 
involvement may continue to progress and neutropenia is not always corrected in 
type Ib. Kidney transplantation can be performed in case of severe renal 
insufficiency. Combined liver-kidney grafts have been performed in a few cases. 
Prognosis is usually good: late hepatic and renal complications may occur, 
however, with adapted management, patients have almost normal life span. DISEASE 
NAME AND SYNONYMS: Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency or G6P deficiency or 
glycogen storage disease type I or GSDI or type I glycogenosis or Von Gierke 
disease or Hepatorenal glycogenosis.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-27
PMCID: PMC3118311
PMID: 21599942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]