---
reference_id: PMID:35611307
title: Longitudinal EEG model detects antisense oligonucleotide treatment effect and increased UBE3A in Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Spencer ER
- Shi W
- Komorowski RW
- Gilbert JP
- Ostrowski LM
- Bird LM
- Thibert R
- Bao C
- Molloy F
- Calhoun M
- Koirala S
- Jafar-Nejad P
- Rigo F
- Kramer MA
- Chu CJ
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcac106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinal EEG model detects antisense oligonucleotide treatment effect and increased UBE3A in Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Spencer ER, Shi W, Komorowski RW, Gilbert JP, Ostrowski LM, Bird LM, Thibert R, Bao C, Molloy F, Calhoun M, Koirala S, Jafar-Nejad P, Rigo F, Kramer MA, Chu CJ
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcac106](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcac106)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2022 Apr 26;4(3):fcac106. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcac106. 
eCollection 2022.

Longitudinal EEG model detects antisense oligonucleotide treatment effect and 
increased UBE3A in Angelman syndrome.

Spencer ER(1)(2), Shi W(2)(3), Komorowski RW(4), Gilbert JP(4), Ostrowski 
LM(2)(5), Bird LM(6), Thibert R(2)(3), Bao C(4), Molloy F(4), Calhoun M(4), 
Koirala S(4), Jafar-Nejad P(7), Rigo F(7), Kramer MA(1), Chu CJ(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Boston University, 02215 Boston, 
MA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 02114 Boston, MA, 
USA.
(3)Harvard Medical School, 02115 Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Biogen Inc, 02142 Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)School of Medicine, University of California, 92092 San Diego, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, 92093 San Diego, CA, USA.
(7)Ionis Pharmaceuticals, 92010 Carlsbad, CA, USA.

Angelman syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by deficiency of the 
maternally inherited UBE3A gene in neurons. Antisense oligonucleotide therapies 
are under development to reinstate UBE3A protein production. Non-invasive 
biomarkers to detect target engagement and treatment response are needed to 
support clinical trials. Delta power measured in the scalp EEG is a reliable 
biomarker for Angelman syndrome but varies widely across individuals and 
throughout development, making detection of a treatment effect using single 
measurements challenging. We utilized a longitudinal dataset of 204 EEG 
recordings from 56 subjects with Angelman syndrome to develop a natural history 
model of delta (2-4 Hz) power, with predictors of age, elapsed time, and 
relative delta power at an initial recording. Using this model, we computed the 
sample and effect sizes needed to detect a treatment effect in a human clinical 
trial with 80% power. We applied the same model structure to a mouse model of 
Angelman syndrome (n = 41) to detect antisense oligonucleotide-mediated 
treatment effects on absolute delta activity and Ube3a expression. In humans, 
delta power at a second time point can be reliably predicted using the natural 
history model. In mice, a treatment effect can be detected after antisense 
oligonucleotide treatment targeting the Ube3a-antisense transcript through at 
least 8 weeks post-treatment (P < 1e-15). Deviations in delta power from the 
expected natural history correlated with Ube3a expression in the mouse model (P 
< 0.001). Deviations in delta power from a human natural history model in 
Angelman syndrome can detect antisense oligonucleotide-mediated improvement in 
Ube3a expression in Angelman syndrome mice and may be relevant for human 
clinical trials.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcac106
PMCID: PMC9123847
PMID: 35611307