---
reference_id: "PMID:39669610"
title: "ACMG/AMP variant classification framework in arginase 1 deficiency: Implications for birth prevalence estimates and diagnostics."
authors:
- Cameron JM
- Osundiji MA
- Olson RJ
- Olarewaju BA
- Schulze A
journal: Genet Med Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.gimo.2024.101815
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ACMG/AMP variant classification framework in arginase 1 deficiency: Implications for birth prevalence estimates and diagnostics.
**Authors:** Cameron JM, Osundiji MA, Olson RJ, Olarewaju BA, Schulze A
**Journal:** Genet Med Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gimo.2024.101815](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gimo.2024.101815)

## Content

1. Genet Med Open. 2024 Jan 23;2:101815. doi: 10.1016/j.gimo.2024.101815. 
eCollection 2024.

ACMG/AMP variant classification framework in arginase 1 deficiency: Implications 
for birth prevalence estimates and diagnostics.

Cameron JM(1)(2), Osundiji MA(3)(4), Olson RJ(3), Olarewaju BA(5), Schulze 
A(4)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(4)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(5)School of Science and Engineering, University of Dundee, Dundee, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

PURPOSE: Arginase 1 (ARG1) deficiency manifests with hyperargininemia and 
progressive neurological impairment. Recent estimates of birth prevalence using 
allele frequencies of ARG1 variants do not sufficiently distinguish benign from 
pathogenic variants. Additionally, ongoing discussions of reproductive carrier 
screening for diseases such as ARG1 creates a need for improved understanding of 
ARG1 variant classification. Here, we incorporate American College of Medical 
Genetics and Genomics/Association for Molecular Pathology-developed guidelines 
for interpreting gene variants and in silico predictions to select allele 
frequencies for estimation of global birth prevalence of ARG1 deficiency.
METHODS: We interrogated Genome Aggregation Database and PubMed for published 
(defined as identified in patients with clinically defined arginase deficiency 
in scientific literature, n = 73) and unpublished ARG1 variants (defined as 
variants present in Genome Aggregation Database, unique to ARG1, but not yet 
associated with clinical arginase deficiency, n = 302). American College of 
Medical Genetics and Genomics/Association for Molecular Pathology guidelines 
were applied to classify variants using Franklin Genoox artificial 
intelligence-powered platform and manual review.
RESULTS: Of 73 published ARG1 variants, 16 classified as pathogenic, 30 as 
likely pathogenic, and 27 as variant of uncertain significance. Of 302 
unpublished ARG1 variants, 3 classified as pathogenic, 28 likely pathogenic, and 
229 variant of uncertain significance. Mutant allele frequency estimates ranged 
from 17 to 266 per 100,000 and birth prevalence from 1 in 141,331 to 34,602,076.
CONCLUSION: We show that a large proportion of ARG1 variants lack adequate 
evidence of pathogenicity. These findings underscore the significance of 
functional studies and accumulating clinical data for determination of variant 
pathogenicity and for improved understanding of global birth prevalence of ARG1 
deficiency.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gimo.2024.101815
PMCID: PMC11613747
PMID: 39669610

Conflict of interest statement: Andreas Schulze is a paid consultant and member 
of the advisory boards for Aeglea Biotherapeutics, HZNP Canada Ltd, ModernaTX 
Inc, and Recordati Rare Diseases Canada Inc. Andreas Schulze is site principal 
investigator on clinical trials sponsored by ModernaTX Inc and 
10.13039/100013220Ultragenyx Canada Inc. All other authors declare no conflicts 
of interest.