---
reference_id: PMID:33374996
title: Sterol 14α-Demethylase Ligand-Binding Pocket-Mediated Acquired and Intrinsic Azole Resistance in Fungal Pathogens.
authors:
- Rosam K
- Monk BC
- Lackner M
journal: J Fungi (Basel)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/jof7010001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sterol 14α-Demethylase Ligand-Binding Pocket-Mediated Acquired and Intrinsic Azole Resistance in Fungal Pathogens.
**Authors:** Rosam K, Monk BC, Lackner M
**Journal:** J Fungi (Basel) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jof7010001](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof7010001)

## Content

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2020 Dec 22;7(1):1. doi: 10.3390/jof7010001.

Sterol 14α-Demethylase Ligand-Binding Pocket-Mediated Acquired and Intrinsic 
Azole Resistance in Fungal Pathogens.

Rosam K(1), Monk BC(2), Lackner M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, Schöpfstrasse 41, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Sir John Walsh Research Institute and Department of Oral Biology, Faculty of 
Dentistry, University of Otago, PO Box 56, 9054 Dunedin, New Zealand.

The fungal cytochrome P450 enzyme sterol 14α-demethylase (SDM) is a key enzyme 
in the ergosterol biosynthesis pathway. The binding of azoles to the active site 
of SDM results in a depletion of ergosterol, the accumulation of toxic 
intermediates and growth inhibition. The prevalence of azole-resistant strains 
and fungi is increasing in both agriculture and medicine. This can lead to major 
yield loss during food production and therapeutic failure in medical settings. 
Diverse mechanisms are responsible for azole resistance. They include amino acid 
(AA) substitutions in SDM and overexpression of SDM and/or efflux pumps. This 
review considers AA affecting the ligand-binding pocket of SDMs with a primary 
focus on substitutions that affect interactions between the active site and the 
substrate and inhibitory ligands. Some of these interactions are particularly 
important for the binding of short-tailed azoles (e.g., voriconazole). We 
highlight the occurrence throughout the fungal kingdom of some key AA 
substitutions. Elucidation of the role of these AAs and their substitutions may 
assist drug design in overcoming some common forms of innate and acquired azole 
resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/jof7010001
PMCID: PMC7822023
PMID: 33374996

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.