---
reference_id: "PMID:12418611"
title: Epilepsy in fragile X syndrome.
authors:
- Berry-Kravis E
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1017/s0012162201002833
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electroencephalography/drug effects
- "Epilepsies, Partial/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Epilepsy, Generalized/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Epilepsy, Rolandic/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1
- "Fragile X Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- RNA-Binding Proteins
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epilepsy in fragile X syndrome.
**Authors:** Berry-Kravis E
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1017/s0012162201002833](https://doi.org/10.1017/s0012162201002833)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2002 Nov;44(11):724-8. doi: 10.1017/s0012162201002833.

Epilepsy in fragile X syndrome.

Berry-Kravis E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, RUSH-Presbyterian-St Luke's Medical Center,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Elizabeth_M_Berry-Kravis@rush.edu

Epilepsy is reported to occur in 10 to 20% of individuals with fragile X
syndrome (FXS). A frequent seizure/EEG pattern in FXS appears to resemble that
of benign focal epilepsy of childhood (BFEC, benign rolandic epilepsy). To
evaluate seizure frequency and type in a Chicago FXS cohort, data regarding
potential seizure history were reviewed for 136 individuals with FXS (age range
2 to 51 years: 113 males and 23 females). Seizures occurred in 15 males (13.3%)
and one female (4.8%): of these, 12 had partial seizures. EEG findings were
available for 35 individuals (13 of 16 with seizures and 22 of 120 without
seizures) and showed an epileptiform abnormality in 10 (77%) individuals with
seizures and five (23%) individuals without seizures--the most common
epileptiform pattern being centrotemporal spikes. Seizures were easily
controlled in 14 of the 16 individuals with seizures. Many individuals,
including all with centrotemporal spikes, had remission of seizures in
childhood. The most common seizure syndrome resembled BFEC and this pattern had
the best prognosis for epilepsy remission. Deficiency of FMRP (fragile X mental
retardation protein) appears to lead to increased neuronal excitability and
susceptibility to epilepsy, but particularly seems to facilitate mechanisms
leading to the BFEC pattern.

DOI: 10.1017/s0012162201002833
PMID: 12418611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
