---
reference_id: "PMID:33661072"
title: "Prevalence of pain in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Hurwitz N
- Radakovic R
- Boyce E
- Peryer G
journal: Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/21678421.2021.1892765
keywords:
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/complications, epidemiology"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Humans
- Muscle Cramp
- "Pain/epidemiology, etiology"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of pain in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Hurwitz N, Radakovic R, Boyce E, Peryer G
**Journal:** Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21678421.2021.1892765](https://doi.org/10.1080/21678421.2021.1892765)

## Content

1. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2021 Nov;22(7-8):449-458. doi:
 10.1080/21678421.2021.1892765. Epub 2021 Mar 4.

Prevalence of pain in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Hurwitz N(1)(2), Radakovic R(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Boyce E(1)(2), Peryer G(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, 
UK.
(2)Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, UK.
(3)Alzheimer Scotland Dementia Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Euan MacDonald Centre for MND Research, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
UK.
(5)Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK and.
(6)St. Nicholas Hospice Care, Bury St. Edmunds, UK.

Objectives: Physical pain is a known symptom in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS), but no systematically derived prevalence estimate is available. The aim 
of this study was to determine the pooled prevalence of pain in ALS, relative to 
its method of measurement and pain characteristics. Methods: A systematic search 
across multiple databases was conducted on January 16, 2020. Random-effects 
meta-analyses of single proportions were performed on prevalence data. 
Heterogeneity was determined using the I2 statistic. Where available, pain 
location, intensity, and type or source were compared. Results: 2552 articles 
were identified. Twenty-one eligible studies were included. All studies used 
observational designs (14 cross-sectional, 6 cohort, 1 case-control). Pooled 
prevalence of pain in ALS across all studies was 60% (95% CI = 50-69%), with a 
high degree of heterogeneity (I2 = 94%, p < .001). Studies that used only 
validated measures had lower heterogeneity (I2 = 82%, p = 0.002), compared to 
those that used tailored measures, or tailored supplemented with validated 
measures (I2 = 90%, p < 0.001 and I2 = 83%, p < 0.001, respectively). In a 
subset of studies (N = 9), the most commonly reported pain location was the 
upper limbs including shoulders/extremities (41.5%). A further study subset 
(N = 7) showed moderate-severe intensity pain was most frequently reported. Type 
of pain was commonly related to cramp or spasm. Conclusions: Experiencing 
physical pain in ALS occurs with high prevalence. Deriving consensus on which 
specific tools should be used to assess, monitor and compare symptoms of pain in 
this population will reduce current heterogeneity in approaches and increase the 
likelihood of ameliorating distressing experiences more effectively.

DOI: 10.1080/21678421.2021.1892765
PMID: 33661072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]