---
reference_id: "PMID:21075760"
title: Adult-onset hereditary pulmonary alveolar proteinosis caused by a single-base deletion in CSF2RB.
authors:
- Tanaka T
- Motoi N
- Tsuchihashi Y
- Tazawa R
- Kaneko C
- Nei T
- Yamamoto T
- Hayashi T
- Tagawa T
- Nagayasu T
- Kuribayashi F
- Ariyoshi K
- Nakata K
- Morimoto K
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.082586
keywords:
- Adult
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 22"
- Exons
- Female
- Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/metabolism
- Humans
- Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis/genetics
- "Receptors, Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/genetics"
- "Respiratory Insufficiency/etiology, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-onset hereditary pulmonary alveolar proteinosis caused by a single-base deletion in CSF2RB.
**Authors:** Tanaka T, Motoi N, Tsuchihashi Y, Tazawa R, Kaneko C, Nei T, Yamamoto T, Hayashi T, Tagawa T, Nagayasu T, Kuribayashi F, Ariyoshi K, Nakata K, Morimoto K
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2010.082586](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2010.082586)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2011 Mar;48(3):205-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.082586. Epub 2010 Nov
 12.

Adult-onset hereditary pulmonary alveolar proteinosis caused by a single-base
deletion in CSF2RB.

Tanaka T(1), Motoi N, Tsuchihashi Y, Tazawa R, Kaneko C, Nei T, Yamamoto T,
Hayashi T, Tagawa T, Nagayasu T, Kuribayashi F, Ariyoshi K, Nakata K, Morimoto
K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Disruption of granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF) signalling causes pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP). Rarely, genetic
defects in neonatal or infant-onset PAP have been identified in CSF2RA. However,
no report has clearly identified any function-associated genetic defect in
CSF2RB.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The patient was diagnosed with PAP at the age of 36 and
developed respiratory failure. She was negative for GM-CSF autoantibody and had
no underlying disease. Signalling and genetic defects in GM-CSF receptor were
screened. GM-CSF-stimulated STAT5 phosphorylation was not observed and
GM-CSF-Rβc expression was defective in the patient's blood cells. Genetic
screening revealed a homozygous, single-base deletion at nt 631 in exon 6 of
CSF2RB on chromosome 22, which caused reductions in GM-CSF dependent signalling
and function. Both parents, who were second cousins, showed no pulmonary
symptoms, and had normal GM-CSF-signalling, but had a CSF2RB allele with the
identical deletion, indicating that the mutant allele may give rise to PAP in an
autosomal recessive manner.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report identifying a genetic defect in CSF2RB
that causes deficiency of GM-CSF-Rβc expression and impaired signalling
downstream. These results suggested that GM-CSF signalling was compensated by
other signalling pathways, leading to adult-onset PAP.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2010.082586
PMID: 21075760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
