---
reference_id: "PMID:17655751"
title: "Sweet's syndrome--a comprehensive review of an acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis."
authors:
- Cohen PR
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-34
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Sweet Syndrome/chemically induced, diagnosis, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sweet's syndrome--a comprehensive review of an acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis.
**Authors:** Cohen PR
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-2-34](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-2-34)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 Jul 26;2:34. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-34.

Sweet's syndrome--a comprehensive review of an acute febrile neutrophilic 
dermatosis.

Cohen PR(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Houston Health Center, Houston, Texas, USA. mitehead@aol.com

Sweet's syndrome (the eponym for acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis) is 
characterized by a constellation of clinical symptoms, physical features, and 
pathologic findings which include fever, neutrophilia, tender erythematous skin 
lesions (papules, nodules, and plaques), and a diffuse infiltrate consisting 
predominantly of mature neutrophils that are typically located in the upper 
dermis. Several hundreds cases of Sweet's syndrome have been published. Sweet's 
syndrome presents in three clinical settings: classical (or idiopathic), 
malignancy-associated, and drug-induced. Classical Sweet's syndrome (CSS) 
usually presents in women between the age of 30 to 50 years, it is often 
preceded by an upper respiratory tract infection and may be associated with 
inflammatory bowel disease and pregnancy. Approximately one-third of patients 
with CSS experience recurrence of the dermatosis. The malignancy-associated 
Sweet's syndrome (MASS) can occur as a paraneoplastic syndrome in patients with 
an established cancer or individuals whose Sweet's syndrome-related hematologic 
dyscrasia or solid tumor was previously undiscovered; MASS is most commonly 
related to acute myelogenous leukemia. The dermatosis can precede, follow, or 
appear concurrent with the diagnosis of the patient's cancer. Hence, MASS can be 
the cutaneous harbinger of either an undiagnosed visceral malignancy in a 
previously cancer-free individual or an unsuspected cancer recurrence in an 
oncology patient. Drug-induced Sweet's syndrome (DISS) most commonly occurs in 
patients who have been treated with granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, 
however, other medications may also be associated with DISS. The pathogenesis of 
Sweet's syndrome may be multifactorial and still remains to be definitively 
established. Clinical and laboratory evidence suggests that cytokines have an 
etiologic role. Systemic corticosteroids are the therapeutic gold standard for 
Sweet's syndrome. After initiation of treatment with systemic corticosteroids, 
there is a prompt response consisting of dramatic improvement of both the 
dermatosis-related symptoms and skin lesions. Topical application of high 
potency corticosteroids or intralesional corticosteroids may be efficacious for 
treating localized lesions. Other first-line oral systemic agents are potassium 
iodide and colchicine. Second-line oral systemic agents include indomethacin, 
clofazimine, cyclosporine, and dapsone. The symptoms and lesions of Sweet's 
syndrome may resolved spontaneously, without any therapeutic intervention; 
however, recurrence may follow either spontaneous remission or therapy-induced 
clinical resolution.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-34
PMCID: PMC1963326
PMID: 17655751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]