---
reference_id: PMID:38587388
title: The impact of myelosuppression on quality of life of patients treated with chemotherapy.
authors:
- Crawford J
- Herndon D
- Gmitter K
- Weiss J
journal: Future Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2217/fon-2023-0513
keywords:
- Humans
- Quality of Life
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, complications"
- Neutropenia/chemically induced
- Thrombocytopenia/chemically induced
- "Anemia/chemically induced, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The impact of myelosuppression on quality of life of patients treated with chemotherapy.
**Authors:** Crawford J, Herndon D, Gmitter K, Weiss J
**Journal:** Future Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fon-2023-0513](https://doi.org/10.2217/fon-2023-0513)

## Content

1. Future Oncol. 2024;20(21):1515-1530. doi: 10.2217/fon-2023-0513. Epub 2024 Apr
 8.

The impact of myelosuppression on quality of life of patients treated with 
chemotherapy.

Crawford J(1), Herndon D(2), Gmitter K(3), Weiss J(4).

Author information:
(1)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(2)Cone Health Cancer Center, Greensboro, NC 27403, USA.
(3)Patient Author, Chapel Hill, NC 27516, USA.
(4)UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Side effects from chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression can negatively affect 
patients' quality of life (QoL). Neutropenia increases infection risk, and 
anemia frequently results in debilitating fatigue. Additionally, the bleeding 
risk associated with thrombocytopenia can lead to fear and anxiety. However, 
traditional interventions for myelosuppression fall short of the ideal. 
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factors reduce the risk of severe neutropenia but 
commonly lead to bone pain. Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents are not always 
effective and may cause thromboembolic events, while transfusions to correct 
anemia/thrombocytopenia are associated with transfusion reactions and volume 
overload. Trilaciclib, which is approved for reducing myelosuppression in 
patients with extensive-stage small cell lung cancer, together with several 
investigational agents in development for managing myelosuppression have the 
potential to improve QoL for patients on chemotherapy.

Plain Language Summary: Chemotherapy can cause side effects by killing 
blood-forming cells in the bone marrow. This is known as myelosuppression and 
leads to neutropenia (decreased neutrophils [white blood cells]), anemia 
(decreased red blood cells) and thrombocytopenia (decreased platelets). 
Neutropenia can increase the risk of getting an infection, and severe cases 
might result in patients being hospitalized. Both neutropenia and anemia can 
cause fatigue, which is often reported by patients as being the most draining 
symptom of chemotherapy. Thrombocytopenia increases the risk of bleeding and can 
cause patients with cancer to become even more scared and anxious. 
Myelosuppression due to chemotherapy is usually managed with delays or 
reductions in the amount of chemotherapy that patients receive, but this may 
worsen the disease. Other treatments, known as supportive care interventions, 
include growth factors, which stimulate the production of blood cells and red 
blood cell or platelet transfusions. However, having these treatments in 
addition to chemotherapy can be a burden to patients, and they can cause side 
effects such as bone pain and blood clots. A treatment called trilaciclib is 
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for patients receiving certain 
types of chemotherapy for advanced small-cell lung cancer. Trilaciclib has been 
shown to reduce neutropenia, anemia and thrombocytopenia in these patients and 
improve their quality of life. Other drugs are also being assessed in clinical 
trials for preventing or treating myelosuppression in patients with different 
cancer types. In the future, these drugs may improve quality of life for 
patients on chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.2217/fon-2023-0513
PMCID: PMC11441072
PMID: 38587388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J Crawford has participated as a scientific 
advisor for Actimed Therapeutics, Enzychem Lifesciences, Faraday 
Pharmaceuticals, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Partner Therapeutics, and Pfizer; 
participated on publications committees for Amgen, Frensenius Kabi, G1 
Therapeutics Inc., LUNGevity Foundation, Pfizer and Spectrum Pharmaceuticals; 
and participated on data safety monitoring boards for BioAtla, G1 Therapeutics, 
Inc and NiA Pharmaceuticals. The authors have no other competing interests or 
relevant affiliations with any organization or entity with the subject matter or 
materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.