---
reference_id: "PMID:21987747"
title: "Reston ebolavirus in humans and animals in the Philippines: a review."
authors:
- Miranda ME
- Miranda NL
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir296
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reston ebolavirus in humans and animals in the Philippines: a review.
**Authors:** Miranda ME, Miranda NL
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jir296](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jir296)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2011 Nov;204 Suppl 3:S757-60. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir296.

Reston ebolavirus in humans and animals in the Philippines: a review.

Miranda ME(1), Miranda NL.

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Public Health Consultants, Research Institute for Tropical 
Medicine, Muntinlupa City, Philippines. betsygmiranda@gmail.com

The 2008 Reston ebolavirus infection event in domestic pigs has triggered 
continuing epidemiologic investigations among Philippine health and veterinary 
agencies in collaboration with international filovirus experts. Prior to this, 
there were only 3 known and documented Reston ebolavirus outbreaks in nonhuman 
primates in the world, all traced back to a single geographic source in the 
Philippines in a monkey breeding/export facility. The first one in 1989 was the 
first-ever Ebola virus that emerged outside of Africa and was also the first 
known natural infection of Ebola virus in nonhuman primates. When it was first 
discovered among laboratory monkeys in the United States, the source was 
immediately traced back to the farm located in the Philippines. The second 
outbreak was in 1992-93. The third episode in 1996 was the last known outbreak 
before Reston ebolavirus reemerged in pigs in 2008. The isolated outbreaks 
involving 2 animal species bring forth issues requiring further investigations, 
and highlight the significance of intersectoral collaboration to effectively 
address zoonoses prevention and control/response in the interest of minimizing 
public health risk.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jir296
PMID: 21987747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]