---
reference_id: "PMID:28698599"
title: Genes and molecular pathways underpinning ciliopathies.
authors:
- Reiter JF
- Leroux MR
journal: Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nrm.2017.60
keywords:
- Animals
- Basal Bodies/metabolism
- Cilia/metabolism
- "Ciliopathies/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genes and molecular pathways underpinning ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Reiter JF, Leroux MR
**Journal:** Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrm.2017.60](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm.2017.60)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2017 Sep;18(9):533-547. doi: 10.1038/nrm.2017.60. Epub 
2017 Jul 12.

Genes and molecular pathways underpinning ciliopathies.

Reiter JF(1), Leroux MR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Cardiovascular Research 
Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco CA 94158, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry and Centre for Cell Biology, 
Development and Disease, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia V5A 
1S6, Canada.

Motile and non-motile (primary) cilia are nearly ubiquitous cellular organelles. 
The dysfunction of cilia causes diseases known as ciliopathies. The number of 
reported ciliopathies (currently 35) is increasing, as is the number of 
established (187) and candidate (241) ciliopathy-associated genes. The 
characterization of ciliopathy-associated proteins and phenotypes has improved 
our knowledge of ciliary functions. In particular, investigating ciliopathies 
has helped us to understand the molecular mechanisms by which the 
cilium-associated basal body functions in early ciliogenesis, as well as how the 
transition zone functions in ciliary gating, and how intraflagellar transport 
enables cargo trafficking and signalling. Both basic biological and clinical 
studies are uncovering novel ciliopathies and the ciliary proteins involved. The 
assignment of these proteins to different ciliary structures, processes and 
ciliopathy subclasses (first order and second order) provides insights into how 
this versatile organelle is built, compartmentalized and functions in diverse 
ways that are essential for human health.

DOI: 10.1038/nrm.2017.60
PMCID: PMC5851292
PMID: 28698599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]