---
reference_id: "PMID:26854863"
title: C8orf37 is mutated in Bardet-Biedl syndrome and constitutes a locus allelic to non-syndromic retinal dystrophies.
authors:
- Khan AO
- Decker E
- Bachmann N
- Bolz HJ
- Bergmann C
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3109/13816810.2015.1066830
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Proteins/genetics
- "Retinal Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C8orf37 is mutated in Bardet-Biedl syndrome and constitutes a locus allelic to non-syndromic retinal dystrophies.
**Authors:** Khan AO, Decker E, Bachmann N, Bolz HJ, Bergmann C
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3109/13816810.2015.1066830](https://doi.org/10.3109/13816810.2015.1066830)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2016 Sep;37(3):290-3. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2015.1066830.
Epub  2016 Feb 8.

C8orf37 is mutated in Bardet-Biedl syndrome and constitutes a locus allelic to 
non-syndromic retinal dystrophies.

Khan AO(1)(2), Decker E(3), Bachmann N(3), Bolz HJ(3)(4), Bergmann C(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)a Eye Institute , Cleveland Clinic Abu Dhabi , Abu Dhabi , UAE.
(2)b Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology , King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital , 
Riyadh , Saudi Arabia.
(3)c Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia , Ingelheim , Germany.
(4)d Institute of Human Genetics , University of Cologne , Cologne , Germany.
(5)e Department of Medicine , University of Freiburg Medical Center , Freiburg , 
Germany.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a pleiotropic and clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous ciliopathy. Primary features are early-onset retinal dystrophy 
that is typically rod-cone, obesity, polydactyly, renal abnormalities, 
hypogonadism, and learning difficulties, but most patients do not present with 
the full clinical picture. In a BBS patient from a consanguineous marriage we 
performed next-generation sequencing targeting all known BBS genes and other 
genes known or hypothesized to cause ciliopathies. While no mutation was present 
in any of the recognized genes for BBS, we were able to identify the homozygous 
non-conservative mutation c.529C>T (p.Arg177Trp) in C8orf37 that segregated with 
the phenotype, affects an evolutionarily highly conserved residue, and is 
bioinformatically predicted to be pathogenic. The same mutation has been 
described in unrelated patients with non-syndromic cone-rod dystrophy and other 
C8orf37 changes were found in individuals with retinitis pigmentosa. We conclude 
that C8orf37 should be added to BBS screening panels as a probable rare cause of 
the disease and that individuals with C8orf37-related retinal dystrophy should 
be screened for BBS features.

DOI: 10.3109/13816810.2015.1066830
PMID: 26854863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]