---
reference_id: "PMID:49561"
title: Sucrose in oral therapy for cholera and related diarrhoeas.
authors:
- Nalin DR
journal: Lancet
year: '1975'
doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(75)92607-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sucrose in oral therapy for cholera and related diarrhoeas.
**Authors:** Nalin DR
**Journal:** Lancet (1975)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0140-6736(75)92607-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(75)92607-0)

## Content

1. Lancet. 1975 Jun 28;1(7922):1400-2. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(75)92607-0.

Sucrose in oral therapy for cholera and related diarrhoeas.

Nalin DR.

Sucrose was tested as a possible alternative to glucose in oral diarrhoea 
therapy. Eighteen patients were given oral sucrose plus electrolytes as a 
maintenance solution. Fifteen of these patients could be maintained using this 
solution, but three developed massive increases in net fluid losses with 
increases in plasma specific gravity, necessitating termination of oral therapy. 
Twelve patients tested all had significant concentrations of stool reducing 
sugar. The data contrast with the rarity of treatment failures of oral 
glucose-electrolyte solutions. Glucose, therefore, is preferable to sucrose for 
oral therapy of diarrhoeal diseases.

PIP: The use of sucrose in oral rehydration therapy solutions in place of 
glucose was tested in 18 patients, 17 males and 1 female, admitted for treatment 
of severe dehydration due to diarrhea and vomiting. 13 of these patients were 
positive for cholera (1 with untyped vibrio), whereas 4 others cultured no 
recognizable pathogen. Patients received an average 1100 ml of intravenous 
fluids to keep the intravenous drip open during the oral therapy period, and the 
intravenous therapy was stopped or slowed during oral (or nasogastric) therapy. 
Average patient age was 32 years. Oral solutions contained either 48 or 38 gm of 
sucrose per liter plus (in all solutions) sodium chloride (4.2 gm/liter), sodium 
bicarbonate (2 gm/liter), and potassium citrate (2.7 gm/liter). Of the 18 
patients, 15 could be maintained using this solution, but 3 developed massive 
increases in net fluid losses with increases in plasma specific gravity, which 
necessitated terminating the therapy. In these failure cases, plasma specific 
gravity increased over 1.031. Stool samples of 12 patients tested were found to 
contain reducing sugar: prehydrolysis 436 mg/100 ml, posthydrolysis 957 mg/100 
ml. The breakdown of sucrose by intestinal enzymes or by bacteria accounts for 
the presence of reducing sugar in the stool. These data contrast with the rarity 
of treatment failures of oral glucose therapy; therefore, glucose is the 
preferable component in oral rehydration electrolyte solution therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(75)92607-0
PMID: 49561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]