---
reference_id: "PMID:19818152"
title: "Fabry disease: recent advances in pathology, diagnosis, treatment and monitoring."
authors:
- Hoffmann B
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fabry disease: recent advances in pathology, diagnosis, treatment and monitoring.
**Authors:** Hoffmann B
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-4-21](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-4-21)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Oct 11;4:21. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-21.

Fabry disease: recent advances in pathology, diagnosis, treatment and 
monitoring.

Hoffmann B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department for General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, 
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Germany. hoffmann@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

BACKGROUND: In Fabry disease (alpha-galactosidase A deficiency) accumulation of 
Globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) leads to progressive organ failure and premature 
death. The introduction of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) was the beginning of 
a new era in this disorder, and has prompted a broad range of research 
activities. This review aims to summarize recent developments and progress with 
high impact for Fabry disease.
METHODS: A Pubmed analysis was performed using the search terms "Fabry disease", 
"Anderson-Fabry disease", "alpha-galactosidase A" and "Gb3". Of the given 
publications by 31st January 2009 only original articles recently published in 
peer reviewed journals were included for this review. Case reports were included 
only when they comprised a new aspect. In addition we included relevant 
conference abstracts when the results had not already been published as original 
articles.
RESULTS: Apart from Gb3-accumulation cellular and organ specific damages may be 
related also to inflammatory and immunological consequences. It will be 
interesting whether this may lead to new therapeutic strategies in the treatment 
of Fabry disease. Since newborn screening is still difficult in Fabry disease, 
detection of patients in populations at risk is of great importance. Undiagnosed 
patients with Fabry disease may still be found in cohorts of subjects with renal 
diseases, cardiomyopathy and TIA or stroke. Efforts should be undertaken to 
identify these individuals and initialise ERT in order to hault disease 
progression. It has also been demonstrated that Gb3-accumulation leads to 
pre-clinical damages and it is believed that early treatment may be the only 
possibility so far to prevent irreversible organ damage.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-21
PMCID: PMC2768700
PMID: 19818152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]