---
reference_id: "PMID:10377081"
title: Congenital long-QT syndrome caused by a novel mutation in a conserved acidic domain of the cardiac Na+ channel.
authors:
- Wei J
- Wang DW
- Alings M
- Fish F
- Wathen M
- Roden DM
- George AL Jr
journal: Circulation
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1161/01.cir.99.24.3165
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Conserved Sequence
- DNA Primers
- "Death, Sudden"
- Electrocardiography
- Electrophysiology
- Female
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/congenital, diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- "Membrane Potentials/drug effects, physiology"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Myocardium/chemistry
- NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- Oocytes/physiology
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Sodium Channels/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Tetrodotoxin/pharmacology
- Xenopus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital long-QT syndrome caused by a novel mutation in a conserved acidic domain of the cardiac Na+ channel.
**Authors:** Wei J, Wang DW, Alings M, Fish F, Wathen M, Roden DM, George AL Jr
**Journal:** Circulation (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.cir.99.24.3165](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.99.24.3165)

## Content

1. Circulation. 1999 Jun 22;99(24):3165-71. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.99.24.3165.

Congenital long-QT syndrome caused by a novel mutation in a conserved acidic
domain of the cardiac Na+ channel.

Wei J(1), Wang DW, Alings M, Fish F, Wathen M, Roden DM, George AL Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Congenital long-QT syndrome (LQTS) is an inherited condition of
abnormal cardiac excitability characterized clinically by an increased risk of
ventricular tachyarrhythmias. One form, LQT3, is caused by mutations in the
cardiac voltage-dependent sodium channel gene, SCN5A. Only 5 SCN5A mutations
have been associated with LQTS, and more work is needed to improve correlations
between SCN5A genotypes and associated clinical syndromes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We researched a 3-generation white family with autosomal
dominant LQTS who exhibited a wide clinical spectrum from mild bradycardia to
sudden death. Molecular genetic studies revealed a single nucleotide
substitution in SCN5A exon 28 that caused the substitution of Glu1784 by Lys
(E1784K). The mutation occurs in a highly conserved domain within the C-terminus
of the cardiac sodium channel containing multiple, negatively charged amino
acids. Two-electrode voltage-clamp recordings of a recombinant E1784K mutant
channel expressed in Xenopus oocytes revealed a defect in fast inactivation
characterized by a small, persistent current during long membrane
depolarizations. Coexpression of the mutant with the human sodium channel
beta1-subunit did not affect the persistent current, even though we did observe
shifts in the voltage dependence of steady-state inactivation. Neutralizing
multiple, negatively charged residues in the same region of the sodium channel
C-terminus did not cause a more severe functional defect.
CONCLUSIONS: We characterized the genetics and molecular pathophysiology of a
novel SCN5A sodium channel mutation, E1784K. The functional defect exhibited by
the mutant channel causes delayed myocardial repolarization, and our data on the
effects of multiple charge neutralizations in this region of the C-terminus
suggest that the molecular mechanism of channel dysfunction involves an
allosteric rather than a direct effect on channel gating.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.99.24.3165
PMID: 10377081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
