---
reference_id: "PMID:25809843"
title: Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis is a network disorder with altered cortical hubs.
authors:
- Jin SH
- Jeong W
- Chung CK
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/epi.12966
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain Mapping
- "Cerebral Cortex/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Epilepsy, Temporal Lobe/pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Functional Laterality
- Hippocampus/pathology
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Magnetoencephalography
- Male
- Memory Disorders/etiology
- Middle Aged
- Neural Pathways/pathology
- Rest
- Sclerosis/etiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis is a network disorder with altered cortical hubs.
**Authors:** Jin SH, Jeong W, Chung CK
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.12966](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.12966)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2015 May;56(5):772-9. doi: 10.1111/epi.12966. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis is a network disorder
with altered cortical hubs.

Jin SH(1)(2), Jeong W(1)(3), Chung CK(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Neuroscience Research Institute, Seoul National University Medical Research
Center, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Seoul National University College
of Natural Science, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Seoul National University College
of Natural Sciences, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Electrophysiologic hubs within the large-scale functional networks in
mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (mTLE) with hippocampal sclerosis (HS) have not
been investigated. We hypothesized that mTLE with HS has different resting-state
network hubs in their large-scale functional networks compared to the hubs in
healthy controls (HC). We also hypothesized that the hippocampus would be a
functional hub in mTLE patients with HS.
METHODS: Resting-state functional networks, identified by using
magnetoencephalography (MEG) signals in the theta, alpha, beta, and gamma
frequency bands, were evaluated. Networks in 44 mTLE patients with HS (left mTLE
= 22; right mTLE = 22) were compared with those in 46 age-matched HC. We
investigated betweenness centrality at the source-level MEG network.
RESULTS: The main network hubs were at the pole of the left superior temporal
gyrus in the beta band, the pole of the left middle temporal gyrus in the beta
and gamma bands, left hippocampus in the theta and alpha bands, and right
posterior cingulate gyrus in all four frequency bands in mTLE patients; all of
which were different from the main network hubs in HC. Only patients with left
mTLE showed profound differences from HC at the left hippocampus in the alpha
band.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our analysis of resting-state MEG signals shows that altered
electrophysiologic functional hubs in mTLE patients reflect pathophysiologic
brain network reorganization. Because we detected network hubs in both
hippocampal and extrahippocampal areas, it is probable that mTLE is a
large-scale network disorder rather than a focal disorder. The hippocampus was a
network hub in left mTLE but not in right mTLE patients, which may be due to
intrinsic functional and structural asymmetries between left and right mTLE
patients. The evaluation of cortical hubs, even in the spike-free resting-state,
could be a clinical diagnostic marker of mTLE with HS.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2015 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.12966
PMID: 25809843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
