---
reference_id: "PMID:39327125"
title: KMT2D deficiency leads to cellular developmental disorders and enhancer dysregulation in neural-crest-containing brain organoids.
authors:
- Shan Z
- Zhao Y
- Chen X
- Zhan G
- Huang J
- Yang X
- Xu C
- Guo N
- Xiong Z
- Wu F
- Liu Y
- Liu H
- Chen B
- Chen B
- Sun J
- He J
- Guo Y
- Cao S
- Wu K
- Mao R
- Wu G
- Lin L
- Zou X
- Wang J
- Chen J
journal: Sci Bull (Beijing)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.scib.2024.09.004
keywords:
- Animals
- "Organoids/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Neural Crest/metabolism, cytology, pathology"
- Humans
- "Vestibular Diseases/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "Brain/pathology, metabolism"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- "Face/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic/genetics"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Hematologic Diseases/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, deficiency, metabolism"
- "Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/genetics, deficiency, metabolism"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism, deficiency"
- Cell Differentiation
- "Neurogenesis/genetics, physiology"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Myeloid-Lymphoid Leukemia Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KMT2D deficiency leads to cellular developmental disorders and enhancer dysregulation in neural-crest-containing brain organoids.
**Authors:** Shan Z, Zhao Y, Chen X, Zhan G, Huang J, Yang X, Xu C, Guo N, Xiong Z, Wu F, Liu Y, Liu H, Chen B, Chen B, Sun J, He J, Guo Y, Cao S, Wu K, Mao R, Wu G, Lin L, Zou X, Wang J, Chen J
**Journal:** Sci Bull (Beijing) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scib.2024.09.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scib.2024.09.004)

## Content

1. Sci Bull (Beijing). 2024 Nov 30;69(22):3533-3546. doi: 
10.1016/j.scib.2024.09.004. Epub 2024 Sep 7.

KMT2D deficiency leads to cellular developmental disorders and enhancer 
dysregulation in neural-crest-containing brain organoids.

Shan Z(1), Zhao Y(2), Chen X(1), Zhan G(3), Huang J(4), Yang X(5), Xu C(5), Guo 
N(4), Xiong Z(6), Wu F(1), Liu Y(5), Liu H(7), Chen B(3), Chen B(1), Sun J(8), 
He J(9), Guo Y(5), Cao S(8), Wu K(10), Mao R(11), Wu G(8), Lin L(5), Zou X(12), 
Wang J(13), Chen J(14).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cell Lineage and Development, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for 
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and 
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China; University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(2)Center for Cell Lineage and Development, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for 
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and 
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China; University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China; Centre for Regenerative 
Medicine and Health, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Hong Kong 999077, China.
(3)Child Development and Behavior Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510630, China.
(4)Center for Cell Lineage and Development, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for 
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and 
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China; Joint School of 
Life Sciences, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China; Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 
511436, China.
(5)Center for Cell Lineage and Development, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for 
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and 
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China.
(6)Center for Cell Lineage and Development, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for 
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and 
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China; Guangzhou 
Laboratory, Guangzhou 510005, China.
(7)Center for Cell Lineage and Atlas (CCLA), Bioland Laboratory, Guangzhou 
510005, China; The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou 510700, China.
(8)Guangzhou Laboratory, Guangzhou 510005, China.
(9)Center for Cell Lineage and Atlas (CCLA), Bioland Laboratory, Guangzhou 
510005, China; Guangzhou Laboratory, Guangzhou 510005, China.
(10)Center for Cell Lineage and Atlas (CCLA), Bioland Laboratory, Guangzhou 
510005, China.
(11)Animal Research Center, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China.
(12)Child Development and Behavior Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510630, China. Electronic address: 
zouxb@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(13)Center for Cell Lineage and Development, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for 
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and 
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China. Electronic 
address: wang_jie@gibh.ac.cn.
(14)Center for Cell Lineage and Development, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for 
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and 
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China; University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China; Centre for Regenerative 
Medicine and Health, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Hong Kong 999077, China; Center for Cell Lineage and Atlas 
(CCLA), Bioland Laboratory, Guangzhou 510005, China; Joint School of Life 
Sciences, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China; Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 
511436, China. Electronic address: chen_jiekai@gibh.ac.cn.

KMT2D, a H3K4me1 methyltransferase primarily regulating enhancers, is a leading 
cause of KABUKI syndrome. This multisystem disorder leads to craniofacial and 
cognitive abnormalities, possibly through neural crest and neuronal lineages. 
However, the impacted cell-of-origin and molecular mechanism of KMT2D during the 
development of KABUKI disease remains unknown. Here we have optimized a brain 
organoid model to investigate neural crest and neuronal differentiation. To 
pinpoint KMT2D's enhancer target, we developed a genome-wide cis-regulatory 
element explorer (GREE) based on single-cell multiomic integration. Single cell 
RNA-seq revealed that KMT2D-knockout (KO) and patient-derived organoids 
exhibited neural crest deformities and GABAergic overproduction. 
Mechanistically, GREE identified that KMT2D targets a roof-plate-like niche cell 
and activates the niche cell-specific WNT3A enhancer, providing the 
microenvironment for neural crest and neuronal development. Interestingly, 
KMT2D-mutated mice displayed decreased WNT3A expression in the diencephalon roof 
plate, indicating impaired niche cell function. Deleting the WNT3A enhancer in 
the organoids presented phenotypic similarities to KMT2D-depletion, emphasizing 
the WNT3A enhancer as the predominant target of KMT2D. Conversely, reactivating 
WNT signaling in KMT2D-KO rescued the lineage defects by restoring the 
microenvironment. Overall, our discovery of KMT2D's primary target provides 
insights for reconciling complex phenotypes of KABUKI syndrome and establishes a 
new paradigm for dissecting the mechanisms of genetic disorders from genotype to 
phenotype.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scib.2024.09.004
PMID: 39327125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]