---
reference_id: "PMID:34669204"
title: "Cancer of the vulva: 2021 update."
authors:
- Olawaiye AB
- Cuello MA
- Rogers LJ
journal: Int J Gynaecol Obstet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ijgo.13881
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Chemoradiotherapy
- Female
- Humans
- Neoplasm Staging
- Vulva/pathology
- "Vulvar Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer of the vulva: 2021 update.
**Authors:** Olawaiye AB, Cuello MA, Rogers LJ
**Journal:** Int J Gynaecol Obstet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijgo.13881](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijgo.13881)

## Content

1. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2021 Oct;155 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):7-18. doi: 
10.1002/ijgo.13881.

Cancer of the vulva: 2021 update.

Olawaiye AB(1), Cuello MA(2), Rogers LJ(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and 
Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Gynecology, Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of 
Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Division of Gynecological Oncology, Groote Schuur Hospital, University of 
Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)South African Medical Research Council University of Cape Town Gynecological 
Cancer Research Centre (SA MRC UCT GCRC, Cape Town, South Africa.

Vulvar cancer is an uncommon gynecological malignancy primarily affecting 
postmenopausal women. There is no specific screening and the most effective 
strategy to reduce vulvar cancer incidence is the opportune treatment of 
predisposing and preneoplastic lesions associated with its development. While 
vulvar cancer may be asymptomatic, most women present with vulvar pruritus or 
pain, or have noticed a lump or ulcer. Therefore, any suspicious vulvar lesion 
should be biopsied to exclude invasion. Once established, the most common 
subtype is squamous cell carcinoma. Treatment of vulvar cancer depends primarily 
on histology and surgical staging. Treatment is predominantly surgical, 
particularly for squamous cell carcinoma, although concurrent chemoradiation is 
an effective alternative, particularly for advanced tumors. Management should be 
individualized and carried out by a multidisciplinary team in a cancer center 
experienced in the treatment of these tumors.

International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics© 2021 The Authors. 
International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics.

DOI: 10.1002/ijgo.13881
PMCID: PMC9298362
PMID: 34669204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.