---
reference_id: "PMID:25712922"
title: "X-linked acrogigantism syndrome: clinical profile and therapeutic responses."
authors:
- Beckers A
- Lodish MB
- Trivellin G
- Rostomyan L
- Lee M
- Faucz FR
- Yuan B
- Choong CS
- Caberg JH
- Verrua E
- Naves LA
- Cheetham TD
- Young J
- Lysy PA
- Petrossians P
- Cotterill A
- Shah NS
- Metzger D
- Castermans E
- Ambrosio MR
- Villa C
- Strebkova N
- Mazerkina N
- Gaillard S
- Barra GB
- Casulari LA
- Neggers SJ
- Salvatori R
- Jaffrain-Rea ML
- Zacharin M
- Santamaria BL
- Zacharieva S
- Lim EM
- Mantovani G
- Zatelli MC
- Collins MT
- Bonneville JF
- Quezado M
- Chittiboina P
- Oldfield EH
- Bours V
- Liu P
- W de Herder W
- Pellegata N
- Lupski JR
- Daly AF
- Stratakis CA
journal: Endocr Relat Cancer
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1530/ERC-15-0038
keywords:
- "Acromegaly/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Adenoma/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- Female
- "Gigantism/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked acrogigantism syndrome: clinical profile and therapeutic responses.
**Authors:** Beckers A, Lodish MB, Trivellin G, Rostomyan L, Lee M, Faucz FR, Yuan B, Choong CS, Caberg JH, Verrua E, Naves LA, Cheetham TD, Young J, Lysy PA, Petrossians P, Cotterill A, Shah NS, Metzger D, Castermans E, Ambrosio MR, Villa C, Strebkova N, Mazerkina N, Gaillard S, Barra GB, Casulari LA, Neggers SJ, Salvatori R, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Zacharin M, Santamaria BL, Zacharieva S, Lim EM, Mantovani G, Zatelli MC, Collins MT, Bonneville JF, Quezado M, Chittiboina P, Oldfield EH, Bours V, Liu P, W de Herder W, Pellegata N, Lupski JR, Daly AF, Stratakis CA
**Journal:** Endocr Relat Cancer (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ERC-15-0038](https://doi.org/10.1530/ERC-15-0038)

## Content

1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Jun;22(3):353-67. doi: 10.1530/ERC-15-0038. Epub
2015  Feb 24.

X-linked acrogigantism syndrome: clinical profile and therapeutic responses.

Beckers A(1), Lodish MB(1), Trivellin G(1), Rostomyan L(1), Lee M(1), Faucz
FR(1), Yuan B(1), Choong CS(1), Caberg JH(1), Verrua E(1), Naves LA(1), Cheetham
TD(1), Young J(1), Lysy PA(1), Petrossians P(1), Cotterill A(1), Shah NS(1),
Metzger D(1), Castermans E(1), Ambrosio MR(1), Villa C(1), Strebkova N(1),
Mazerkina N(1), Gaillard S(1), Barra GB(1), Casulari LA(1), Neggers SJ(1),
Salvatori R(1), Jaffrain-Rea ML(1), Zacharin M(1), Santamaria BL(1), Zacharieva
S(1), Lim EM(1), Mantovani G(1), Zatelli MC(1), Collins MT(1), Bonneville JF(1),
Quezado M(1), Chittiboina P(1), Oldfield EH(1), Bours V(1), Liu P(1), W de
Herder W(1), Pellegata N(1), Lupski JR(1), Daly AF(1), Stratakis CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of EndocrinologyCentre Hospitalier Universitaire de Liège,
University of Liège, Domaine Universitaire du Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège,
BelgiumProgram on Developmental Endocrinology and GeneticsSection on
Endocrinology and Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development (NICHD), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
NIH-Clinical Research Center, 10 Center Drive, Building 10, Room 1-3330,
MSC1103, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1862, USAHelmholtz Zentrum MünchenInstitute of
Pathology, Neuherberg, GermanyDepartment of Molecular and Human GeneticsBaylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USADepartment of Pediatric Endocrinology
and DiabetesPrincess Margaret Hospital for Children, Subiaco, Western Australia,
AustraliaDepartment of Clinical GeneticsCentre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Liège, University of Liège, Liège, BelgiumEndocrinology and Diabetology
UnitFondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Department of
Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, Milan,
ItalyDepartment of EndocrinologyUniversity of Brasilia, Brasilia,
BrazilDepartment of Paediatric EndocrinologyRoyal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UKINSERM U 693GHU Paris-Sud - Hôpital de
Bicêtre, 78 rue du Général Leclerc, 94270 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, FrancePediatric
Endocrinology UnitUniversité Catholique de Louvain, Bruxelles, BelgiumMater
Medical Research InstituteUniversity of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland,
AustraliaDepartment of EndocrinologyKEM Hospital, Mumbai, IndiaEndocrinology and
Diabetes UnitBC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, CanadaSection
of EndocrinologyDepartment of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara,
ItalyService d'Anatomie et Cytologie PathologiquesHopital Foch, Suresnes,
FranceINSERM Unité 1016Institut Cochin, Hopital Cochin, Université Paris
Descartes, Paris, FranceInstitute of Pediatric EndocrinologyEndocrinological
Research Centre, Moscow

X-linked acrogigantism (X-LAG) is a new syndrome of pituitary gigantism, caused
by microduplications on chromosome Xq26.3, encompassing the gene GPR101, which
is highly upregulated in pituitary tumors. We conducted this study to explore
the clinical, radiological, and hormonal phenotype and responses to therapy in
patients with X-LAG syndrome. The study included 18 patients (13 sporadic) with
X-LAG and microduplication of chromosome Xq26.3. All sporadic cases had unique
duplications and the inheritance pattern in two families was dominant, with all
Xq26.3 duplication carriers being affected. Patients began to grow rapidly as
early as 2-3 months of age (median 12 months). At diagnosis (median delay 27
months), patients had a median height and weight standard deviation scores (SDS)
of >+3.9 SDS. Apart from the increased overall body size, the children had
acromegalic symptoms including acral enlargement and facial coarsening. More
than a third of cases had increased appetite. Patients had marked hypersecretion
of GH/IGF1 and usually prolactin, due to a pituitary macroadenoma or
hyperplasia. Primary neurosurgical control was achieved with extensive anterior
pituitary resection, but postoperative hypopituitarism was frequent. Control
with somatostatin analogs was not readily achieved despite moderate to high
levels of expression of somatostatin receptor subtype-2 in tumor tissue.
Postoperative use of adjuvant pegvisomant resulted in control of IGF1 in all
five cases where it was employed. X-LAG is a new infant-onset gigantism syndrome
that has a severe clinical phenotype leading to challenging disease management.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-15-0038
PMCID: PMC4433400
PMID: 25712922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
