---
reference_id: "PMID:23502138"
title: "IGF-I in human growth: lessons from defects in the GH-IGF-I axis."
authors:
- Hwa V
- Fang P
- Derr MA
- Fiegerlova E
- Rosenfeld RG
journal: Nestle Nutr Inst Workshop Ser
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1159/000342548
keywords:
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- Fetal Growth Retardation/genetics
- "Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- "Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Mutation
- "Receptor, IGF Type 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "STAT5 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IGF-I in human growth: lessons from defects in the GH-IGF-I axis.
**Authors:** Hwa V, Fang P, Derr MA, Fiegerlova E, Rosenfeld RG
**Journal:** Nestle Nutr Inst Workshop Ser (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000342548](https://doi.org/10.1159/000342548)

## Content

1. Nestle Nutr Inst Workshop Ser. 2013;71:43-55. doi: 10.1159/000342548. Epub
2013  Jan 22.

IGF-I in human growth: lessons from defects in the GH-IGF-I axis.

Hwa V(1), Fang P, Derr MA, Fiegerlova E, Rosenfeld RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, 
USA.

The IGF system plays a critical role in all phases of human growth, including 
intrauterine, childhood and pubertal. The importance of IGF-I for both in utero 
as well as postnatal human growth is highlighted by rare human homozygous IGF1 
mutations, which are characterized by intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR), 
microcephaly, mental retardation and severe postnatal growth failure. Clinical 
conditions of IGF-I resistance due to mutations in the IGF-I receptor (IGFIR) 
similarly lead to IUGR and postnatal growth retardation. Postnatal regulation of 
IGF-I production is predominantly GH dependent. Defects in the GH-IGF-I axis, 
including mutations in the GHR, STAT5B and IGFALS genes, lead to postnatal IGF 
deficiency and GH insensitivity. Patients are of normal birth size but present 
with severe postnatal growth failure, despite normal or elevated levels of GH. 
Other phenotypic features - immune deficiency for STAT5B defects and insulin 
insensitivity for IGFALS defects - are of note. Mutations identified have been 
predominantly recessive. The identification and assessment of genetic defects in 
the GH-IGF axis has greatly enhanced our understanding of the critical 
importance of IGF-I in human linear growth. Continued evaluations will 
facilitate better diagnosis and management of children presenting with abnormal 
growth and development.

Copyright © 2013 Nestec Ltd., Vevey/S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000342548
PMID: 23502138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]