---
reference_id: "PMID:28349350"
title: "Visual Snow: a Potential Cortical Hyperexcitability Syndrome."
authors:
- Bou Ghannam A
- Pelak VS
journal: Curr Treat Options Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s11940-017-0448-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual Snow: a Potential Cortical Hyperexcitability Syndrome.
**Authors:** Bou Ghannam A, Pelak VS
**Journal:** Curr Treat Options Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11940-017-0448-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11940-017-0448-3)

## Content

1. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2017 Mar;19(3):9. doi: 10.1007/s11940-017-0448-3.

Visual Snow: a Potential Cortical Hyperexcitability Syndrome.

Bou Ghannam A(1), Pelak VS(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Neurology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Academic Office 1, 12631 E. 17th Ave., Aurora, CO, 80045, USA. 
ALAA.BOUGHANNAM@UCDENVER.EDU.
(2)Departments of Ophthalmology and Neurology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Academic Office 1, 12631 E. 17th Ave., Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.

The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of visual snow (VS) and 
provide information regarding current treatment options for VS. Visual snow (VS) 
is a rare disorder manifesting with a persistent visual phenomenon of seeing 
numerous tiny snow-like dots throughout the visual field, and it can cause 
debilitating visual and psychological consequences. It is emerging as a disorder 
separate from, but associated with, migraine visual aura, and neuronal cortical 
hyperexcitability is being considered as a theoretical mechanism for the 
persistent-positive visual symptoms. There are few studies that have 
investigated the treatment of VS, but as our understanding of this entity begins 
to change, we expect that new treatment approaches and treatment trials will 
emerge in the next decade. Currently, our approach is to consider pharmacologic 
treatment for all patients with VS who report decreased quality of life as a 
result of VS. Resolution of the disorder is difficult to accomplish with 
treatment, but in our experience, even when symptom intensity is simply reduced, 
many patients find that there is an improvement in their quality of life that is 
beneficial. Our preferred treatment options include: (1) oral lamotrigine with a 
slow increase from 25 mg daily to a maintenance dose of 200-300 mg daily in 
divided doses as tolerated, and this is typically achieved by advancing the dose 
in increments of 25-50 mg weekly following the first 2 weeks of therapy; (2) 
oral acetazolamide with an initial dose of 250 mg daily followed by a slow 
increase over 1-2 weeks to a total of 1000 mg daily in divided doses, and higher 
doses can be tolerated by some without increasing the risk-benefit ratio; or (3) 
oral verapamil long-acting at 120-240 mg daily, and if side effects limit the 
dose the can be initiated, then lower doses with short-acting verapamil two or 
three times daily can be substituted until higher doses with the long-acting 
formula can be tolerated. By initiating drug treatments with low doses and 
slowly increasing over 1 to 4 weeks, tolerability and compliance improves and 
allows patients to realize the full benefits of treatment. The proposed 
mechanisms of microstructural cortical abnormalities and hyperexcitability as a 
cause of VS may lead to new treatment approaches in the future. Until such a 
time, medications reported to relieve persistent visual phenomena of migraine 
and visual aura of migraine are treatment options worth considering and these 
are reviewed for that purpose. Although clinical trials for the treatment of 
visual snow are lacking due to the rarity of the disorder, medications reviewed 
here should be considered for use in patients with VS who experience an impact 
on their quality of life. Theoretical mechanisms that lead to cortical 
hyperexcitability are being investigated and could lead to new treatment 
options. In the meantime, medications may provide benefits in this disabling 
condition.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-017-0448-3
PMID: 28349350