---
reference_id: "PMID:37976519"
title: "Pediatric Pars Planitis: A Review."
authors:
- Khochtali S
- Ozdal P
- AlBloushi AF
- Nabi W
- Khairallah M
journal: Ocul Immunol Inflamm
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/09273948.2023.2279683
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Pars Planitis: A Review.
**Authors:** Khochtali S, Ozdal P, AlBloushi AF, Nabi W, Khairallah M
**Journal:** Ocul Immunol Inflamm (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09273948.2023.2279683](https://doi.org/10.1080/09273948.2023.2279683)

## Content

1. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2023 Dec;31(10):1915-1929. doi: 
10.1080/09273948.2023.2279683. Epub 2023 Dec 14.

Pediatric Pars Planitis: A Review.

Khochtali S(1), Ozdal P(2), AlBloushi AF(3), Nabi W(1), Khairallah M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, Fattouma Bourguiba 
University Hospital, University of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.
(2)Service of Uveitis and Retinal Diseases, Ankara Ulucanlar Eye Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkiye.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, King Saud University, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

PURPOSE: To provide an overview of pediatric pars planitis.
METHODS: Narrative literature review.
RESULTS: Pars planitis refers to the idiopathic subset of intermediate uveitis 
in which there is vitritis along with snowball or snowbank formation occurring 
in the absence of an associated infection or systemic disease. It is thought to 
be a T-cell mediated disease with a genetic predisposition. Pars planitis 
accounts for 5-26.7% of pediatric uveitis cases. Presentation is commonly 
bilateral but asymmetric, often with insidious onset of floaters and blurred 
vision. Although pars planitis is known to be a benign form of uveitis in most 
cases, severe complications secondary to chronic inflammation may arise, with 
cystoid macular edema being the most common cause of visual morbidity. Mild 
vitritis in the absence of symptoms, vision loss, or macular edema may be 
observed. Patients with severe vitritis and/or associated vision-threatening 
complications require prompt aggressive treatment. A stepladder approach 
including corticosteroids, immunosuppressive agents, anti‑tumor necrosis 
factor‑alpha and pars plana vitrectomy and/or laser photocoagulation is the most 
commonly used method for treatment of pars planitis.
CONCLUSION: Timely diagnosis and adequate treatment of pediatric pars planitis 
and associated complications are crucial in order to improve visual outcomes.

DOI: 10.1080/09273948.2023.2279683
PMID: 37976519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]