---
reference_id: "PMID:30221719"
title: Network analysis of membranous glomerulonephritis based on metabolomics data.
authors:
- Taherkhani A
- Kalantari S
- Arefi Oskouie A
- Nafar M
- Taghizadeh M
- Tabar K
journal: Mol Med Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3892/mmr.2018.9477
keywords:
- Biomarkers
- Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
- Gene Ontology
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- Genomics/methods
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Metabolome
- Metabolomics/methods
- Protein Interaction Mapping
- Protein Interaction Maps
- ROC Curve
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Network analysis of membranous glomerulonephritis based on metabolomics data.
**Authors:** Taherkhani A, Kalantari S, Arefi Oskouie A, Nafar M, Taghizadeh M, Tabar K
**Journal:** Mol Med Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3892/mmr.2018.9477](https://doi.org/10.3892/mmr.2018.9477)

## Content

1. Mol Med Rep. 2018 Nov;18(5):4197-4212. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2018.9477. Epub 2018
Sep  12.

Network analysis of membranous glomerulonephritis based on metabolomics data.

Taherkhani A(1), Kalantari S(2), Arefi Oskouie A(3), Nafar M(4), Taghizadeh
M(5), Tabar K(6).

Author information:
(1)Proteomics Research Center, Faculty of Paramedical Sciences, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 1971653313, Iran.
(2)Chronic Kidney Disease Research Center, Shahid Labbafinejad Hospital, Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 1666663111, Iran.
(3)Department of Basic Science, Faculty of Paramedical Sciences, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 1971653313, Iran.
(4)Urology Nephrology Research Center, Shahid Labbafinejad Hospital, Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 1666663111, Iran.
(5)Bioinformatics Department, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Tehran
University, Tehran 1417614411, Iran.
(6)Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Research Center of Iran, Tehran
1496813151, Iran.

Membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN) is one of the most frequent causes of
nephrotic syndrome in adults. It is characterized by the thickening of the
glomerular basement membrane in the renal tissue. The current diagnosis of MGN
is based on renal biopsy and the detection of antibodies to the few podocyte
antigens. Due to the limitations of the current diagnostic methods, including
invasiveness and the lack of sensitivity of the current biomarkers, there is a
requirement to identify more applicable biomarkers. The present study aimed to
identify diagnostic metabolites that are involved in the development of the
disease using topological features in the component‑reaction‑enzyme‑gene (CREG)
network for MGN. Significant differential metabolites in MGN compared with
healthy controls were identified using proton nuclear magnetic resonance and gas
chromatography‑mass spectrometry techniques, and multivariate analysis. The CREG
network for MGN was constructed, and metabolites with a high centrality and a
striking fold‑change in patients, compared with healthy controls, were
introduced as putative diagnostic biomarkers. In addition, a protein‑protein
interaction (PPI) network, which was based on proteins associated with MGN, was
built and analyzed using PPI analysis methods, including molecular complex
detection and ClueGene Ontology. A total of 26 metabolites were identified as
hub nodes in the CREG network, 13 of which had salient centrality and
fold‑changes: Dopamine, carnosine, fumarate, nicotinamide D‑ribonucleotide,
adenosine monophosphate, pyridoxal, deoxyguanosine triphosphate, L‑citrulline,
nicotinamide, phenylalanine, deoxyuridine, tryptamine and succinate. A total of
13 subnetworks were identified using PPI analysis. In total, two of the clusters
contained seed proteins (phenylalanine‑4‑hydroxlylase and cystathionine γ‑lyase)
that were associated with MGN based on the CREG network. The following
biological processes associated with MGN were identified using gene ontology
analysis: 'Pyrimidine‑containing compound biosynthetic process', 'purine
ribonucleoside metabolic process', 'nucleoside catabolic process',
'ribonucleoside metabolic process' and 'aromatic amino acid family metabolic
process'. The results of the present study may be helpful in the diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures of MGN. However, validation is required in the future.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2018.9477
PMCID: PMC6172390
PMID: 30221719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
