---
reference_id: "PMID:31378850"
title: "Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in thyroid cancer: a comprehensive review."
authors:
- Shakib H
- Rajabi S
- Dehghan MH
- Mashayekhi FJ
- Safari-Alighiarloo N
- Hedayati M
journal: Endocrine
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-019-02030-8
keywords:
- "Carcinoma/metabolism, pathology"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
- Humans
- Neoplastic Stem Cells/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Thyroid Gland/pathology
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in thyroid cancer: a comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Shakib H, Rajabi S, Dehghan MH, Mashayekhi FJ, Safari-Alighiarloo N, Hedayati M
**Journal:** Endocrine (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-019-02030-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-019-02030-8)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2019 Dec;66(3):435-455. doi: 10.1007/s12020-019-02030-8. Epub 2019 
Aug 4.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in thyroid cancer: a comprehensive review.

Shakib H(1), Rajabi S(2), Dehghan MH(3), Mashayekhi FJ(4), Safari-Alighiarloo 
N(5), Hedayati M(6).

Author information:
(1)Cellular and Molecular Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for 
Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(2)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Biochemistry Department, School of Medicine, Alborz University of Medical 
Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Arak University of Medical Sciences, 
Arak, Iran.
(5)Endocrine Research Center, Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Iran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Cellular and Molecular Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for 
Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran. hedayati47@yahoo.com.

The Metastatic progression of solid tumors, such as thyroid cancer is a complex 
process which involves various factors. Current understanding on the role of 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in thyroid carcinomas suggests that EMT 
is implicated in the progression from follicular thyroid cancer (FTC) and 
papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) to poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma (PDTC) 
and anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC). According to the literature, the initiation 
of the EMT program in thyroid epithelial cells elevates the number of stem 
cells, which contribute to recurrent and metastatic diseases. The EMT process is 
orchestrated by a complex network of transcription factors, growth factors, 
signaling cascades, epigenetic modulations, and the tumor milieu. These factors 
have been shown to be dysregulated in thyroid carcinomas. Therefore, molecular 
interferences restoring the expression of tumor suppressors, or thwarting 
overexpressed oncogenes is a hopeful therapeutic method to improve the treatment 
of progressive diseases. In this review, we summarize the recent findings on EMT 
in thyroid cancer focusing on the main role-players and regulators of this 
process in thyroid tumors.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-019-02030-8
PMID: 31378850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]