---
reference_id: "PMID:31520266"
title: Impact of Genetic Testing in Transthyretin (ATTR) Cardiac Amyloidosis.
authors:
- Gopal DM
- Ruberg FL
- Siddiqi OK
journal: Curr Heart Fail Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s11897-019-00436-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Genetic Testing in Transthyretin (ATTR) Cardiac Amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Gopal DM, Ruberg FL, Siddiqi OK
**Journal:** Curr Heart Fail Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11897-019-00436-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11897-019-00436-z)

## Content

1. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2019 Oct;16(5):180-188. doi: 10.1007/s11897-019-00436-z.

Impact of Genetic Testing in Transthyretin (ATTR) Cardiac Amyloidosis.

Gopal DM(1)(2), Ruberg FL(3)(4)(5), Siddiqi OK(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Amyloidosis Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston Medical 
Center, 72 E. Concord Street, K-503, Boston, MA, 02118, USA. dmgopal@bu.edu.
(2)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston Medical Center, 72 E. Concord Street - Collamore, Boston, MA, 02118, USA. 
dmgopal@bu.edu.
(3)Amyloidosis Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston Medical 
Center, 72 E. Concord Street, K-503, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(4)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston Medical Center, 72 E. Concord Street - Collamore, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston Medical 
Center, 72 E. Concord Street, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The review's main focus centers on the genetics of hereditary 
cardiac amyloidosis, highlighting the opportunities and challenges posed by the 
widespread availability of genetic screening and diagnostic cardiac imaging.
RECENT FINDINGS: Advancements in cardiac imaging, heightened awareness of the 
ATTR amyloidosis diagnosis, and greater access to genetic testing have all led 
to an increased appreciation of the prevalence of ATTR cardiac amyloidosis. 
Elucidation of the TTR molecular structure and effect of mutations on TTR 
function have allowed for novel TTR therapy development leading to clinical 
implementation of transthyretin stabilizers and transthyretin gene silencers. 
The transthyretin amyloidoses are a diverse group of protein misfolding 
disorders with cardiac and peripheral/autonomic nervous system manifestations 
due to protein deposition. Genetic screening allows for the early identification 
of asymptomatic TTR mutation carriers. With the advent of TTR-specific 
therapeutics, clinical guidance is necessary for the management of individuals 
with mutations in the TTR gene without evidence of disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s11897-019-00436-z
PMID: 31520266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]