---
reference_id: "PMID:37175911"
title: "Non-Permissive Parvovirus B19 Infection: A Reservoir and Questionable Safety Concern in Mesenchymal Stem Cells."
authors:
- Bua G
- Marrazzo P
- Manaresi E
- Gamberini C
- Bonsi L
- Alviano F
- Gallinella G
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24098204
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-Permissive Parvovirus B19 Infection: A Reservoir and Questionable Safety Concern in Mesenchymal Stem Cells.
**Authors:** Bua G, Marrazzo P, Manaresi E, Gamberini C, Bonsi L, Alviano F, Gallinella G
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24098204](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24098204)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 May 3;24(9):8204. doi: 10.3390/ijms24098204.

Non-Permissive Parvovirus B19 Infection: A Reservoir and Questionable Safety 
Concern in Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Bua G(1), Marrazzo P(2), Manaresi E(1), Gamberini C(2), Bonsi L(2), Alviano 
F(3), Gallinella G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, 40138 
Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, 40138 
Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, 
40126 Bologna, Italy.

Mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent cells with 
differentiation, immunoregulatory and regenerative properties. Because of these 
features, they represent an attractive tool for regenerative medicine and 
cell-based therapy. However, MSCs may act as a reservoir of persistent viruses 
increasing the risk of failure of MSCs-based therapies and of viral 
transmission, especially in immunocompromised patients. Parvovirus B19V (B19V) 
is a common human pathogen that infects bone marrow erythroid progenitor cells, 
leading to transient or persistent anemia. Characteristics of B19V include the 
ability to cross the placenta, infecting the fetus, and to persist in several 
tissues. We thus isolated MSCs from bone marrow (BM-MSCs) and fetal membrane 
(FM-MSCs) to investigate their permissiveness to B19V infection. The results 
suggest that both BM- and FM- MSCs can be infected by B19V and, while not able 
to support viral replication, allow persistence over time in the infected 
cultures. Future studies are needed to understand the potential role of MSCs in 
B19V transmission and the conditions that can favor a potential reactivation of 
the virus.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24098204
PMCID: PMC10179342
PMID: 37175911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.