---
reference_id: "PMID:35143379"
title: "Cognitive or daily stress association with headache and pain induction in migraine and tension-type headache patients: a systematic review."
authors:
- Viero FT
- Rodrigues P
- Trevisan G
journal: Expert Rev Neurother
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/14737175.2022.2041414
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive or daily stress association with headache and pain induction in migraine and tension-type headache patients: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Viero FT, Rodrigues P, Trevisan G
**Journal:** Expert Rev Neurother (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737175.2022.2041414](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737175.2022.2041414)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2022 Mar;22(3):257-268. doi: 
10.1080/14737175.2022.2041414. Epub 2022 Feb 28.

Cognitive or daily stress association with headache and pain induction in 
migraine and tension-type headache patients: a systematic review.

Viero FT(1), Rodrigues P(1), Trevisan G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Graduated Program in Pharmacology, 
Federal University of Santa Maria (Ufsm), Santa Maria (RS), Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Primary headache disorders, such as migraine and tension-type 
headache (TTH), represent a significant public health concern. Besides, 
cognitive/mental stress was suggested to contribute to TTH and migraine 
physiopathology. Thus, this study aimed to evaluate the existence of a causal 
relationship between stress (mental/cognitive or daily stress) and headache or 
pain improvement in migraine and TTH patients.
AREAS COVERED: We developed a systematic review of the literature, including 
studies that utilized mental/cognitive stress tasks or daily stress by lifestyle 
questionnaire in migraine and TTH patients. Necessarily, these studies should 
have healthy patients and a pain measure (quantitative sensory tests or 
headache/migraine detection). PubMed, EMBASE, and SCOPUS were searched, using 
terms about stress and primary headaches.
EXPERT OPINION: Both mental/cognitive stress and daily stress (perceived) were 
related to an increase in pain perception and related to the development of 
headache or enhanced transient pain intensity in migraine and TTH patients. 
Different factors could enrich the comprehension of the influence of stress on 
pain/headache induction in migraine and TTH patients, including methodological 
standardization, consistency of assessing, and isolating the many headache 
triggers in randomized controlled trial studies.

DOI: 10.1080/14737175.2022.2041414
PMID: 35143379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]