---
reference_id: "PMID:30029679"
title: "Acid ceramidase deficiency: Farber disease and SMA-PME."
authors:
- Yu FPS
- Amintas S
- Levade T
- Medin JA
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-018-0845-z
keywords:
- Animals
- "Farber Lipogranulomatosis/metabolism, pathology, surgery, therapy"
- Humans
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/metabolism, pathology, surgery, therapy"
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive/metabolism, pathology, surgery, therapy"
- Sphingolipids/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acid ceramidase deficiency: Farber disease and SMA-PME.
**Authors:** Yu FPS, Amintas S, Levade T, Medin JA
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-018-0845-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-018-0845-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2018 Jul 20;13(1):121. doi: 10.1186/s13023-018-0845-z.

Acid ceramidase deficiency: Farber disease and SMA-PME.

Yu FPS(1), Amintas S(2), Levade T(3)(4), Medin JA(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Laboratoire de Biochimie Métabolique, Institut Fédératif de Biologie, CHU
Purpan, Toulouse, France.
(3)Laboratoire de Biochimie Métabolique, Institut Fédératif de Biologie, CHU
Purpan, Toulouse, France. Thierry.Levade@inserm.fr.
(4)INSERM UMR1037 CRCT, Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
Thierry.Levade@inserm.fr.
(5)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
jmedin@mcw.edu.
(6)Departments of Pediatrics and Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, WI, USA. jmedin@mcw.edu.

Acid ceramidase (ACDase) deficiency is a spectrum of disorders that includes a
rare lysosomal storage disorder called Farber disease (FD) and a rare epileptic
disorder called spinal muscular atrophy with progressive myoclonic epilepsy
(SMA-PME). Both disorders are caused by mutations in the ASAH1 gene that encodes
the lysosomal hydrolase that breaks down the bioactive lipid ceramide. To date,
there have been fewer than 200 reported cases of FD and SMA-PME in the
literature. Typical textbook manifestations of classical FD include the
formation of subcutaneous nodules, accumulation of joint contractures, and
development of a hoarse voice. In reality, however, the clinical presentation is
much broader. Patients may develop severe pathologies leading to death in
infancy or may develop attenuated forms of the disorder wherein they are often
misdiagnosed or not diagnosed until adulthood. A clinical variability also
exists for SMA-PME, in which patients develop progressive muscle weakness and
seizures. Currently, there is no known cure for FD or for SMA-PME. The main
treatment is symptom management. In rare cases, treatment may include surgery or
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Research using disease models has
provided insights into the pathology as well as the role of ACDase in the
development of these conditions. Recent studies have highlighted possible
biomarkers for an effective diagnosis of ACDase deficiency. Ongoing work is
being conducted to evaluate the use of recombinant human ACDase (rhACDase) for
the treatment of FD. Finally, gene therapy strategies for the treatment of
ACDase deficiency are actively being pursued. This review highlights the broad
clinical definition and outlines key studies that have improved our
understanding of inherited ACDase deficiency-related conditions.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-018-0845-z
PMCID: PMC6053731
PMID: 30029679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not
applicable, literature review only. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable.
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
