---
reference_id: "PMID:38782953"
title: Structure and inhibition of the human lysosomal transporter Sialin.
authors:
- Schmiege P
- Donnelly L
- Elghobashi-Meinhardt N
- Lee CH
- Li X
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-48535-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- Molecular Dynamics Simulation
- "N-Acetylneuraminic Acid/metabolism, chemistry"
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Protein Conformation
- "Organic Anion Transporters/metabolism, chemistry, antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Dipeptides/chemistry, metabolism, pharmacology"
- Symporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structure and inhibition of the human lysosomal transporter Sialin.
**Authors:** Schmiege P, Donnelly L, Elghobashi-Meinhardt N, Lee CH, Li X
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-48535-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48535-3)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 May 23;15(1):4386. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-48535-3.

Structure and inhibition of the human lysosomal transporter Sialin.

Schmiege P(1), Donnelly L(1), Elghobashi-Meinhardt N(2), Lee CH(3), Li X(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)School of Chemistry, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA. xiaochun.li@utsouthwestern.edu.
(5)Department of Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA. xiaochun.li@utsouthwestern.edu.

Sialin, a member of the solute carrier 17 (SLC17) transporter family, is unique 
in its ability to transport not only sialic acid using a pH-driven mechanism, 
but also transport mono and diacidic neurotransmitters, such as glutamate and 
N-acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG), into synaptic vesicles via a membrane 
potential-driven mechanism. While most transporters utilize one of these 
mechanisms, the structural basis of how Sialin transports substrates using both 
remains unclear. Here, we present the cryogenic electron-microscopy structures 
of human Sialin: apo cytosol-open, apo lumen-open, NAAG-bound, and 
inhibitor-bound. Our structures show that a positively charged cytosol-open 
vestibule accommodates either NAAG or the Sialin inhibitor Fmoc-Leu-OH, while 
its luminal cavity potentially binds sialic acid. Moreover, functional analyses 
along with molecular dynamics simulations identify key residues in binding 
sialic acid and NAAG. Thus, our findings uncover the essential conformational 
states in NAAG and sialic acid transport, demonstrating a working model of SLC17 
transporters.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-48535-3
PMCID: PMC11116495
PMID: 38782953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.