---
reference_id: "PMID:32189549"
title: Treatment beyond progression with immune checkpoint inhibitors in non-small-cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Reinhorn D
- Jacobi O
- Icht O
- Dudnik E
- Rotem O
- Zer A
- Goldstein DA
journal: Immunotherapy
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2217/imt-2019-0131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment beyond progression with immune checkpoint inhibitors in non-small-cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Reinhorn D, Jacobi O, Icht O, Dudnik E, Rotem O, Zer A, Goldstein DA
**Journal:** Immunotherapy (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2217/imt-2019-0131](https://doi.org/10.2217/imt-2019-0131)

## Content

1. Immunotherapy. 2020 Mar;12(4):235-243. doi: 10.2217/imt-2019-0131. Epub 2020
Mar  19.

Treatment beyond progression with immune checkpoint inhibitors in non-small-cell 
lung cancer.

Reinhorn D(1), Jacobi O(1), Icht O(1), Dudnik E(1)(2), Rotem O(1), Zer A(1)(2), 
Goldstein DA(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Oncology, Davidoff Cancer Center, Rabin Medical Center, Petach 
Tikva, Israel.
(2)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Health Policy & Management, Gillings School of Global Public 
Health, University of North Carolina, NC 27599-7400, USA.

Aim: The treatment paradigm of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer has recently 
changed with the introduction of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). It is 
common practice to continue treatment beyond progression (TBP) in selected 
cases. The aim of this study was to evaluate real life practice and outcomes 
related to TBP. Materials & methods: We retrospectively evaluated advanced 
non-small-cell lung cancer patients treated with ICI therapy and identified 
patients who were treated beyond progression. Results: Of 207 patients included 
in this analysis, 22% patients received TBP. A total of 36% achieved a clinical 
benefit. A total of 27% patients had a progression-free interval over 6 months 
after receiving TBP. Conclusion: A subset of patients who were treated beyond 
progression with ICI achieved a clinically meaningful response with durable 
disease control.

DOI: 10.2217/imt-2019-0131
PMID: 32189549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]