---
reference_id: "PMID:38736083"
title: Challenges in Diagnosis of Esophageal Tuberculosis.
authors:
- Gandhi H
- Chandnani S
- Rathi P
- Jain S
- Malokar R
- Chudasama J
- Nawghare P
journal: J Assoc Physicians India
year: '2024'
doi: 10.59556/japi.71.0402
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Challenges in Diagnosis of Esophageal Tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Gandhi H, Chandnani S, Rathi P, Jain S, Malokar R, Chudasama J, Nawghare P
**Journal:** J Assoc Physicians India (2024)
**DOI:** [10.59556/japi.71.0402](https://doi.org/10.59556/japi.71.0402)

## Content

1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2024 Jan;72(1):104-105. doi: 10.59556/japi.71.0402.

Challenges in Diagnosis of Esophageal Tuberculosis.

Gandhi H(1), Chandnani S(2), Rathi P(3), Jain S(2), Malokar R(4), Chudasama 
J(4), Nawghare P(5).

Author information:
(1)Senior Resident, Department of Gastroenterology, TN Medical College and BYL 
Nair Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India, Corresponding Author.
(2)Assistant Professor, Department of Gastroenterology, TN Medical College and 
BYL Nair Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(3)Head of the Department, Department of Gastroenterology, TN Medical College 
and BYL Nair Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(4)Senior Resident, Department of Gastroenterology, TN Medical College and BYL 
Nair Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(5)Bonded Assistant Professor, Department of Gastroenterology, TN Medical 
College and BYL Nair Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Esophageal tuberculosis (TB) is a rare manifestation of extrapulmonary TB, 
accounting for <0.2% of all TB cases. Esophageal TB most commonly presents with 
dysphagia, odynophagia, retrosternal pain, and systemic symptoms like decreased 
appetite, loss of weight, and low-grade fever as associated or other 
presentations. We report a similar case recently encountered as an elderly male 
patient presented with chronic dysphagia to solids, loss of appetite, and 
significant loss of weight. Radiological and endoscopy pictures looked like 
esophageal cancer with histopathological examination (twice) negative for the 
same. Diagnosis of esophageal TB was confirmed by GeneXpert Ultra of biopsy 
sample and histopathological examination was suggestive of granulomatous 
esophagitis. The patient improved on 6 months antitubercular therapy. The unique 
aspect of this case was how the lesion mimicked an esophageal carcinoma on 
imaging which posed a diagnostic challenge.

© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2024.

DOI: 10.59556/japi.71.0402
PMID: 38736083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]