---
reference_id: "PMID:35522861"
title: CTLA-4 POLYMORPHISM ALONG WITH PROINFLAMMATORY CYTOKINES IN AUTOIMMUNE THYROIDITIS DISEASE.
authors:
- Hasan GA
- Altamemi IA
journal: Wiad Lek
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CTLA-4 POLYMORPHISM ALONG WITH PROINFLAMMATORY CYTOKINES IN AUTOIMMUNE THYROIDITIS DISEASE.
**Authors:** Hasan GA, Altamemi IA
**Journal:** Wiad Lek (2022)

## Content

1. Wiad Lek. 2022;75(3):577-583.

CTLA-4 POLYMORPHISM ALONG WITH PROINFLAMMATORY CYTOKINES IN AUTOIMMUNE 
THYROIDITIS DISEASE.

Hasan GA(1), Altamemi IA(1).

Author information:
(1)UNIVERSITY OF AL-QADISIYAH, AL DIWANIYAH, IRAQ.

OBJECTIVE: The aim: Evaluating serum concentration of IL-17 and IL-23 in 
autoimmune thyroiditis patient and control group along with the role of CTLA-4 
rs3087243 gene polymorphism.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Materials and methods: A case control study was conducted 
in 30 HT (Hashimoto's thyroiditis), 30 GD (Graves' disease) who attended the 
consultant clinic for thyroiditis in AL-Diwaniyah teaching hospital and in 30 
people as control group. Blood samples were processed for measurement of serum 
IL-17 and IL-23 using ELISA test. The second part used for DNA extraction then 
CTLA-4 polymorphism was detected by Allele - specific PCR assay.
RESULTS: Results: The level of IL-17, and IL23 was highest in patients with 
Hashimoto's thyroiditis and Graves' disease, followed by control group and the 
difference was highly significant (p< 0.001; p< 0.001) respectively; however, 
the difference between patients Hashimoto's thyroiditis and patients with 
Graves' disease was not significant (p > 0.05; p > 0.05) respectively. There was 
no significant association between rs3087243 gene polymorphism and Hashimoto's 
thyroiditis (p> 0.05), no significant association between rs3087243 gene 
polymorphism and Graves' disease (p> 0.05). Moreover, there was no significant 
difference in rs3087243 genotypes frequencies between Hashimoto's thyroiditis 
and Graves' disease (p> 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Conclusions: Serum IL-17 and IL-23 level have been linked with 
autoimmune thyroiditis disease, while CTLA-4 rs3087243 polymorphism seem to have 
no role in disease susceptibility in Iraqi population.

PMID: 35522861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]