---
reference_id: "PMID:30075114"
title: Argininosuccinate Lyase Deficiency Causes an Endothelial-Dependent Form of Hypertension.
authors:
- Kho J
- Tian X
- Wong WT
- Bertin T
- Jiang MM
- Chen S
- Jin Z
- Shchelochkov OA
- Burrage LC
- Reddy AK
- Jiang H
- Abo-Zahrah R
- Ma S
- Zhang P
- Bissig KD
- Kim JJ
- Devaraj S
- Rodney GG
- Erez A
- Bryan NS
- Nagamani SCS
- Lee BH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.07.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Argininosuccinate Lyase Deficiency Causes an Endothelial-Dependent Form of Hypertension.
**Authors:** Kho J, Tian X, Wong WT, Bertin T, Jiang MM, Chen S, Jin Z, Shchelochkov OA, Burrage LC, Reddy AK, Jiang H, Abo-Zahrah R, Ma S, Zhang P, Bissig KD, Kim JJ, Devaraj S, Rodney GG, Erez A, Bryan NS, Nagamani SCS, Lee BH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.07.008)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2018 Aug 2;103(2):276-287. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.07.008.

Argininosuccinate Lyase Deficiency Causes an Endothelial-Dependent Form of 
Hypertension.

Kho J(1), Tian X(2), Wong WT(3), Bertin T(4), Jiang MM(4), Chen S(4), Jin Z(4), 
Shchelochkov OA(4), Burrage LC(4), Reddy AK(5), Jiang H(6), Abo-Zahrah R(7), Ma 
S(8), Zhang P(9), Bissig KD(10), Kim JJ(9), Devaraj S(11), Rodney GG(7), Erez 
A(12), Bryan NS(4), Nagamani SCS(4), Lee BH(13).

Author information:
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, 
NT, Hong Kong.
(3)School of Life Sciences, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine - Cardiovascular Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(6)Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health 
Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(8)Division of Nanomedicine and Molecular Intervention, Department of Medicine, 
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48823, USA.
(9)Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.
(10)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA; Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA.
(12)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute 
of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel.
(13)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: blee@bcm.edu.

Primary hypertension is a major risk factor for ischemic heart disease, stroke, 
and chronic kidney disease. Insights obtained from the study of rare Mendelian 
forms of hypertension have been invaluable in elucidating the mechanisms causing 
primary hypertension and development of antihypertensive therapies. Endothelial 
cells play a key role in the regulation of blood pressure; however, a Mendelian 
form of hypertension that is primarily due to endothelial dysfunction has not 
yet been described. Here, we show that the urea cycle disorder, 
argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD), can manifest as a Mendelian form of 
endothelial-dependent hypertension. Using data from a human clinical study, a 
mouse model with endothelial-specific deletion of argininosuccinate lyase (Asl), 
and in vitro studies in human aortic endothelial cells and induced pluripotent 
stem cell-derived endothelial cells from individuals with ASLD, we show that 
loss of ASL in endothelial cells leads to endothelial-dependent vascular 
dysfunction with reduced nitric oxide (NO) production, increased oxidative 
stress, and impaired angiogenesis. Our findings show that ASLD is a unique model 
for studying NO-dependent endothelial dysfunction in human hypertension.

Copyright © 2018 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.07.008
PMCID: PMC6080833
PMID: 30075114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]