---
reference_id: "PMID:32418451"
title: "First report of c.425-1G>A mutation in ornithine aminotransferase gene causing gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina with hyperornithinemia."
authors:
- Jalali H
- Najafi M
- Khoshaeen A
- Mahdavi MR
- Mahdavi M
journal: Eur J Ophthalmol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/1120672120921734
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Atrophy/pathology
- Child
- Choroid/pathology
- "Gyrate Atrophy/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Ornithine-Oxo-Acid Transaminase/genetics
- Retina/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First report of c.425-1G>A mutation in ornithine aminotransferase gene causing gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina with hyperornithinemia.
**Authors:** Jalali H, Najafi M, Khoshaeen A, Mahdavi MR, Mahdavi M
**Journal:** Eur J Ophthalmol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1120672120921734](https://doi.org/10.1177/1120672120921734)

## Content

1. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2021 Sep;31(5):NP23-NP26. doi: 10.1177/1120672120921734.
Epub  2020 May 17.

First report of c.425-1G>A mutation in ornithine aminotransferase gene causing
gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina with hyperornithinemia.

Jalali H(1), Najafi M(2), Khoshaeen A(3), Mahdavi MR(1), Mahdavi M(4).

Author information:
(1)Thalassemia Research Center, Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Sari,
Iran.
(2)Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Sari, Iran.
(3)Welfare Counseling Center, Mazandaran, Iran.
(4)Sinaye Mehr Research Center, Mazandaran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Gyrate atrophy is a rare autosomal recessive inherited genetic
disease. Progressive deterioration of peripheral night vision and blindness are
the foremost clinical manifestations of the disease caused by mutations of
ornithine aminotransferase gene.
CASE: The presented case was an 18-year-old male referred for a progressive
reduction of visual acuity, which started when the subject was 7 years old,
blurred vision, and hypotonic muscles.
OBSERVATIONS: The findings by liquid chromatography with tandem mass
spectrometry and high-performance liquid chromatography methods exhibited a high
level of ornithine: 248 μmol/L (reference range: 44-206 μmol/L) and 818 μmol/L
(reference: 25-123 μmol/L), respectively. After genetic counseling and
conducting further investigation, a novel mutation (c.425-1G>A) in ornithine
aminotransferase gene was recognized through whole exome sequencing and the
mutation was verified using Sanger sequencing method, which is associated with
gyrate atrophy phenotype.
CONCLUSION: The exact mechanism of chorioretinal atrophy in hyperornithinemia is
not known but the increased ornithine level is the clinical manifestation of
gyrate atrophy of choroid and retina, muscle weakness, moderate mental
retardation, and low cerebral creatine. Pathogenic variant in the ornithine
aminotransferase gene associated with gyrate atrophy, may be beneficial as a
biomarker to initial diagnosis and treatment of gyrate atrophy disease.

DOI: 10.1177/1120672120921734
PMID: 32418451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
