---
reference_id: "PMID:22119091"
title: Suicidality in Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Hubers AA
- Reedeker N
- Giltay EJ
- Roos RA
- van Duijn E
- van der Mast RC
journal: J Affect Disord
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2011.10.031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Suicidality in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Hubers AA, Reedeker N, Giltay EJ, Roos RA, van Duijn E, van der Mast RC
**Journal:** J Affect Disord (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jad.2011.10.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.10.031)

## Content

1. J Affect Disord. 2012 Feb;136(3):550-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2011.10.031. Epub 
2011 Nov 25.

Suicidality in Huntington's disease.

Hubers AA(1), Reedeker N, Giltay EJ, Roos RA, van Duijn E, van der Mast RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands. a.a.m.hubers@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: In Huntington's disease (HD) the risk of suicide is increased. Since 
suicidality may precede suicide, this study investigates prevalence, clinical 
associations and predictors of suicidality in HD.
METHODS: Suicidality was investigated in 152 mutation carriers and 56 
non-carriers, and was considered present if the score on the item 'suicidal 
ideation' of the Problem Behaviours Assessment (PBA) was >1 point. After 2 
years, 100 mutation carriers who were free of suicidality at baseline were 
re-assessed. Associations and predictors of suicidality were analyzed using 
multivariate logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: Eleven (20%) pre-motor and 20 (20%) motor symptomatic mutation carriers 
were considered suicidal compared to none of the non-carriers. 
Cross-sectionally, suicidal mutation carriers were more likely to use 
antidepressants (odds ratio=5.3), were more often apathetic (OR=2.8), more often 
had a depressed mood according to the PBA (OR=5.9), and were more often 
diagnosed with a DSM-IV depression diagnosis (OR=4.7). Independent associations 
were more frequent use of antidepressants (OR=4.0) and presence of a depressed 
mood (OR=4.2). Longitudinally, depressed mood (OR=10.6) at baseline was the only 
independent predictor of suicidality at follow-up.
LIMITATIONS: Selection bias might have occurred which could have affected the 
suicidality rate.
CONCLUSION: It is important to screen both pre-motor and motor symptomatic HD 
mutation carriers for suicidality. The presence of a depressed mood is both 
associated with and predictive of suicidality in HD and assessment of depressed 
mood can help to identify individuals with increased risk for suicide.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2011.10.031
PMID: 22119091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]