---
reference_id: "PMID:30888637"
title: "Congenital Granular Cell Epulis: Classic Presentation and Its Differential Diagnosis."
authors:
- Cheung JM
- Putra J
journal: Head Neck Pathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s12105-019-01025-1
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Gingival Neoplasms/congenital, diagnosis, pathology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Maxilla/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Granular Cell Epulis: Classic Presentation and Its Differential Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Cheung JM, Putra J
**Journal:** Head Neck Pathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12105-019-01025-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12105-019-01025-1)

## Content

1. Head Neck Pathol. 2020 Mar;14(1):208-211. doi: 10.1007/s12105-019-01025-1.
Epub  2019 Mar 19.

Congenital Granular Cell Epulis: Classic Presentation and Its Differential 
Diagnosis.

Cheung JM(1), Putra J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Renaissance School of Medicine at Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, 
USA.
(2)Division of Pathology, Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, Hospital 
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. Juan.Putra@sickkids.ca.
(3)Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 
University Ave Rm. 3119, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada. Juan.Putra@sickkids.ca.

Congenital granular cell epulis (CGCE) is an uncommon lesion of unclear 
pathogenesis. It occurs predominantly in female newborns with a predilection 
site of the maxillary alveolar ridge. The mass enlarges prenatally but the 
growth arrests after birth. Histologically, CGCE is characterized by a 
proliferation of polygonal cells with eosinophilic, granular cytoplasm and 
eccentric, bland-appearing nuclei. It closely resembles adult granular cell 
tumor (GCT) microscopically and S-100 immunostain is often helpful in 
distinguishing the two (S-100-positive in GCT and S-100-negative in CGCE). 
Clinically, the lesion should also be distinguished from entities such as 
infantile myofibroma, rhabdomyoma, melanotic neuroectodermal tumor of infancy, 
peripheral odontogenic fibroma, and neurofibroma. CGCE demonstrates an excellent 
prognosis and has not been associated with any syndromes/genetic defects or 
malignant transformation. Clinicians and pathologists should be familiar with 
this rare entity and its differential diagnosis for accurate diagnosis and 
management.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-019-01025-1
PMCID: PMC7021869
PMID: 30888637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of interest to disclose.