---
reference_id: "PMID:26676359"
title: Autoimmunity and dysmetabolism of human acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
authors:
- Huang YM
- Hong XZ
- Xu JH
- Luo JX
- Mo HY
- Zhao HL
journal: Immunol Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8767-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmunity and dysmetabolism of human acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
**Authors:** Huang YM, Hong XZ, Xu JH, Luo JX, Mo HY, Zhao HL
**Journal:** Immunol Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12026-015-8767-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12026-015-8767-5)

## Content

1. Immunol Res. 2016 Jun;64(3):641-52. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8767-5.

Autoimmunity and dysmetabolism of human acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.

Huang YM(1), Hong XZ(2)(3), Xu JH(4), Luo JX(1), Mo HY(5), Zhao HL(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Systems Medicine, Guangxi Key Laboratory 
of Excellence, Guilin Medical University, Guilin, 541004, China.
(2)Department of Immunology, Center for Systems Medicine, Guangxi Key Laboratory 
of Excellence, Guilin Medical University, Guilin, 541004, China. 
hongxuezhi8@126.com.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, The Affiliated Hospital of the 
Guilin Medical University, Guilin, 541004, China. hongxuezhi8@126.com.
(4)Fangchenggang Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fangchenggang, 
538021, Guangxi, China.
(5)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, The Affiliated Hospital of the 
Guilin Medical University, Guilin, 541004, China.
(6)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Basic Medicine, Guilin Medical 
University, Guilin, 541004, China.

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) remains ill-defined by lists of 
symptoms, infections, tumors, and disorders in metabolism and immunity. Low CD4 
cell count, severe loss of body weight, pneumocystis pneumonia, and Kaposi's 
sarcoma are the major disease indicators. Lines of evidence indicate that 
patients living with AIDS have both immunodeficiency and autoimmunity. 
Immunodeficiency is attributed to deficits in the skin- and mucosa-defined 
innate immunity, CD4 T cells and regulatory T cells, presumably relating human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. The autoimmunity in AIDS is evident by: 
(1) overproduction of autoantibodies, (2) impaired response of CD4 cells and CD8 
cells, (3) failure of clinical trials of HIV vaccines, and (4) therapeutic 
benefits of immunosuppression following solid organ transplantation and bone 
marrow transplantation in patients at risk of AIDS. Autoantibodies are generated 
in response to antigens such as debris and molecules de novo released from dead 
cells, infectious agents, and catabolic events. Disturbances in metabolic 
homeostasis occur at the interface of immunodeficiency and autoimmunity in the 
development of AIDS. Optimal treatments favor therapeutics targeting on the 
regulation of metabolism to restore immune homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-015-8767-5
PMID: 26676359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]