---
reference_id: "PMID:32472720"
title: "Family members' prioritisation of care in residential aged care facilities: A case for individualised care."
authors:
- Ludlow K
- Churruca K
- Ellis LA
- Mumford V
- Braithwaite J
journal: J Clin Nurs
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/jocn.15352
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Family members' prioritisation of care in residential aged care facilities: A case for individualised care.
**Authors:** Ludlow K, Churruca K, Ellis LA, Mumford V, Braithwaite J
**Journal:** J Clin Nurs (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jocn.15352](https://doi.org/10.1111/jocn.15352)

## Content

1. J Clin Nurs. 2020 Sep;29(17-18):3272-3285. doi: 10.1111/jocn.15352. Epub 2020 
Jun 18.

Family members' prioritisation of care in residential aged care facilities: A 
case for individualised care.

Ludlow K(1), Churruca K(1), Ellis LA(1), Mumford V(1), Braithwaite J(1).

Author information:
(1)Australian Institute of Health Innovation, Macquarie University, North Ryde, 
NSW, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate family members' prioritisation of care in residential 
aged care facilities (RACFs).
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND: Family members are often involved in the care of 
their older relatives even after these relatives transit to a RACF. 
Understanding family members' priorities regarding care (i.e., what is most 
important to them) can provide valuable insights into how to better meet 
residents' needs.
DESIGN: A multisite mixed-methods study comprising qualitative methods and Q 
methodology. The qualitative component of the study was guided by the COREQ 
checklist.
METHODS: Participants comprised 27 family members of residents living in one of 
five participating Australian RACFs. Participants rank-ordered 34 cards, each 
representing an aspect of care, on a predefined grid from "Least important" (-4) 
to "Most important" (+4). Participants also engaged in a think-aloud task, 
demographic questionnaire, post-sorting interview and semi-structured interview. 
Q data were analysed using inverted factor techniques to identify factors that 
each represent a portion of shared meaning. Factors were interpreted as 
viewpoints using data from the think-aloud task and interviews. These data were 
further analysed using inductive content analysis to reveal influences on 
prioritisation decision-making.
RESULTS: Three distinct viewpoints were identified through Q methodology: 
prioritisation of residents' physical needs, maintaining residents' 
independence, and human connection. Inductive content analysis revealed four 
influences on prioritisation decision-making: residents' capabilities and 
support requirements, unmet needs, family bridging the gaps, and family 
knowledge of residents.
CONCLUSIONS: The study indicated that to meet residents' needs and family 
members' priorities, individualised approaches to care are warranted. It also 
demonstrated the vital role family members play in residents' care when needs 
are not fully met.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Strategies to improve individualised care in 
clinical practice include flexibility of routines, supporting family members' 
involvement in care, workforce training focused on family-staff communication, 
and safer staffing ratios.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.15352
PMID: 32472720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]