---
reference_id: "PMID:28757364"
title: Ehlers Danlos syndrome, kyphoscoliotic type due to Lysyl Hydroxylase 1 deficiency in two children without congenital or early onset kyphoscoliosis.
authors:
- van Dijk FS
- Mancini GMS
- Maugeri A
- Cobben JM
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.07.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers Danlos syndrome, kyphoscoliotic type due to Lysyl Hydroxylase 1 deficiency in two children without congenital or early onset kyphoscoliosis.
**Authors:** van Dijk FS, Mancini GMS, Maugeri A, Cobben JM
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.07.011)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2017 Oct;60(10):536-540. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.07.011.
Epub  2017 Jul 27.

Ehlers Danlos syndrome, kyphoscoliotic type due to Lysyl Hydroxylase 1 
deficiency in two children without congenital or early onset kyphoscoliosis.

van Dijk FS(1), Mancini GMS(2), Maugeri A(3), Cobben JM(4).

Author information:
(1)North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome National 
Diagnostic Service London, North West Health Care NHS Trust, Harrow, Middlesex, 
UK; Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: fleur.dijk@nhs.net.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Medical Genetics, St George's 
University of London, London, UK.

We report two children with Ehlers Danlos, kyphoscoliotic type confirmed by 
Lysyl Hydroxylase 1 deficiency due to bi-allelic PLOD1 mutations (kEDS-PLOD1) 
who were initially thought to have either a diagnosis of classical EDS (cEDS) or 
a neuromuscular disorder due to absence of (congenital) scoliosis. As the two 
patients reported here illustrate, patients with kEDS-PLOD1 do not always have a 
kyphoscoliosis present at birth or in the first year of life, neither do they 
necessarily develop kyphoscoliosis later in infancy. Using the past criteria for 
kEDS there was considerable overlap with the clinical diagnostic criteria for 
EDS classical type. In the patients reported here without (kypho) scoliosis this 
has delayed the diagnosis, which is unfortunate as the diagnosis of kEDS-PLOD1 
results in a different recurrence risk and has management consequences. 
Interestingly, the new criteria for kEDS would not have prevented this 
diagnostic delay as congenital or early onset kyphoscoliosis (progressive or 
non-progressive) is deemed obligatory for the diagnosis of kEDS. Being aware of 
the limitations of clinical diagnostic criteria, we recommend that (i) in 
patients without a positive family history nor identified COL5A1/2 mutations, 
lysyl hydroxylase deficiency or biallelic PLOD1 mutations should be excluded 
before the diagnosis classical EDS can be made and (ii) PLOD1 and COL5A1/2 
should be included in the same Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) gene panel.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2017.07.011
PMID: 28757364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]