---
reference_id: "PMID:29053833"
title: "Clinical, pathological and functional characterization of riboflavin-responsive neuropathy."
authors:
- Manole A
- Jaunmuktane Z
- Hargreaves I
- Ludtmann MHR
- Salpietro V
- Bello OD
- Pope S
- Pandraud A
- Horga A
- Scalco RS
- Li A
- Ashokkumar B
- Lourenço CM
- Heales S
- Horvath R
- Chinnery PF
- Toro C
- Singleton AB
- Jacques TS
- Abramov AY
- Muntoni F
- Hanna MG
- Reilly MM
- Revesz T
- Kullmann DM
- Jepson JEC
- Houlden H
journal: Brain
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awx231
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- Atrophy
- "Brain/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Bulbar Palsy, Progressive/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Citrate (si)-Synthase/metabolism
- Drosophila melanogaster
- Electron Transport Complex I/metabolism
- Electron Transport Complex II/metabolism
- Electron Transport Complex III/metabolism
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- Infant
- Locomotion/genetics
- Longevity/genetics
- Male
- Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Neural Pathways
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics"
- Riboflavin
- Spinal Cord/pathology
- Spinocerebellar Tracts/pathology
- Spinothalamic Tracts/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, pathological and functional characterization of riboflavin-responsive neuropathy.
**Authors:** Manole A, Jaunmuktane Z, Hargreaves I, Ludtmann MHR, Salpietro V, Bello OD, Pope S, Pandraud A, Horga A, Scalco RS, Li A, Ashokkumar B, Lourenço CM, Heales S, Horvath R, Chinnery PF, Toro C, Singleton AB, Jacques TS, Abramov AY, Muntoni F, Hanna MG, Reilly MM, Revesz T, Kullmann DM, Jepson JEC, Houlden H
**Journal:** Brain (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awx231](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awx231)

## Content

1. Brain. 2017 Nov 1;140(11):2820-2837. doi: 10.1093/brain/awx231.

Clinical, pathological and functional characterization of riboflavin-responsive 
neuropathy.

Manole A(1)(2), Jaunmuktane Z(3), Hargreaves I(4), Ludtmann MHR(1), Salpietro 
V(1)(2), Bello OD(5), Pope S(4), Pandraud A(1)(2), Horga A(2), Scalco RS(2), Li 
A(6), Ashokkumar B(1)(7), Lourenço CM(8), Heales S(9), Horvath R(10), Chinnery 
PF(11)(12), Toro C(13), Singleton AB(14), Jacques TS(15), Abramov AY(1), Muntoni 
F(16), Hanna MG(1)(2), Reilly MM(1)(2), Revesz T(1)(6), Kullmann DM(5), Jepson 
JEC(5), Houlden H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience and Neurogenetics Laboratory, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(2)MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen 
Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(3)Division of Neuropathology and Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(4)Neurometabolic Unit, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, UCL Institute of Neurology, 
Queen Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(6)Reta Lila Weston Institute of Neurological Studies and Queen Square Brain 
Bank for Neurological Disorders, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(7)School of Biotechnology, Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai 625021, India.
(8)Departamento de Neurociências e Ciências do Comportamento, Faculdade de 
Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo (USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP, 
Brazil.
(9)Chemical Pathology, Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital, London, UK.
(10)John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Institute of Genetic 
Medicine, Newcastle University, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(11)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, School of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(12)MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge CB2 
0QQ, UK.
(13)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Office of the Director, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(14)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, NIA/NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(15)Developmental Biology and Cancer Programme, UCL Great Ormond Street 
Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(16)The Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of 
Child Health, 30 Guildford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.

Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome represents a phenotypic spectrum of motor, 
sensory, and cranial nerve neuropathy, often with ataxia, optic atrophy and 
respiratory problems leading to ventilator-dependence. Loss-of-function 
mutations in two riboflavin transporter genes, SLC52A2 and SLC52A3, have 
recently been linked to Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome. However, the genetic 
frequency, neuropathology and downstream consequences of riboflavin transporter 
mutations are unclear. By screening a large cohort of 132 patients with 
early-onset severe sensory, motor and cranial nerve neuropathy we confirmed the 
strong genetic link between riboflavin transporter mutations and 
Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome, identifying 22 pathogenic mutations in 
SLC52A2 and SLC52A3, 14 of which were novel. Brain and spinal cord 
neuropathological examination of two cases with SLC52A3 mutations showed 
classical symmetrical brainstem lesions resembling pathology seen in 
mitochondrial disease, including severe neuronal loss in the lower cranial nerve 
nuclei, anterior horns and corresponding nerves, atrophy of the spinothalamic 
and spinocerebellar tracts and posterior column-medial lemniscus pathways. 
Mitochondrial dysfunction has previously been implicated in an array of 
neurodegenerative disorders. Since riboflavin metabolites are critical 
components of the mitochondrial electron transport chain, we hypothesized that 
reduced riboflavin transport would result in impaired mitochondrial activity, 
and confirmed this using in vitro and in vivo models. Electron transport chain 
complex I and complex II activity were decreased in SLC52A2 patient fibroblasts, 
while global knockdown of the single Drosophila melanogaster riboflavin 
transporter homologue revealed reduced levels of riboflavin, downstream 
metabolites, and electron transport chain complex I activity. This in turn led 
to abnormal mitochondrial membrane potential, respiratory chain activity and 
morphology. Riboflavin transporter knockdown in Drosophila also resulted in 
severely impaired locomotor activity and reduced lifespan, mirroring patient 
pathology, and these phenotypes could be partially rescued using a novel 
esterified derivative of riboflavin. Our findings expand the genetic, clinical 
and neuropathological features of Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome, implicate 
mitochondrial dysfunction as a downstream consequence of riboflavin transporter 
gene defects, and validate riboflavin esters as a potential therapeutic 
strategy.

© The Author (2017). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awx231
PMCID: PMC5808726
PMID: 29053833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]