---
reference_id: "PMID:26170028"
title: "Epigenetic harnessing of HCV via modulating the lipid droplet-protein, TIP47, in HCV cell models."
authors:
- El-Ekiaby NM
- Mekky RY
- El Sobky SA
- Elemam NM
- El-Sayed M
- Esmat G
- Abdelaziz AI
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic harnessing of HCV via modulating the lipid droplet-protein, TIP47, in HCV cell models.
**Authors:** El-Ekiaby NM, Mekky RY, El Sobky SA, Elemam NM, El-Sayed M, Esmat G, Abdelaziz AI
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.040)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2015 Aug 4;589(17):2266-73. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.040.
Epub  2015 Jul 10.

Epigenetic harnessing of HCV via modulating the lipid droplet-protein, TIP47, in 
HCV cell models.

El-Ekiaby NM(1), Mekky RY(1), El Sobky SA(2), Elemam NM(1), El-Sayed M(3), Esmat 
G(3), Abdelaziz AI(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pathology Research Group, Department of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, German University in Cairo, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Molecular Pathology Research Group, Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, 
German University in Cairo, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Endemic Medicine and Hepatology, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(4)Molecular Pathology Research Group, Department of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, German University in Cairo, Cairo, Egypt. Electronic address: 
ahmed.abdel-aziz@guc.edu.eg.

This study aimed at identifying potential microRNAs that modulate hepatic lipid 
droplets (LD) through targeting the Tail interacting protein of 47 kDa (TIP47) 
in HCV infection. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that miR-148a and miR-30a 
potentially target TIP47. Expression profiling showed that both microRNAs were 
downregulated, while TIP47 was upregulated in liver biopsies of HCV-infected 
patients. Forcing the expression of both microRNAs in JFH-I infected, oleic 
acid-treated Huh7 cells, significantly suppressed TIP47 expression and reduced 
cellular LDs with marked decrease in viral RNA. This study shows that miR-148a 
and miR-30a, regulate TIP47 expression and LDs in HCV infected cells.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.040
PMID: 26170028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]