---
reference_id: "PMID:38143369"
title: "Contribution of Complement, Microangiopathy and Inflammation in Idiopathic Inflammatory Myopathies."
authors:
- Honda M
- Shimizu F
- Sato R
- Nakamori M
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3233/JND-230168
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of Complement, Microangiopathy and Inflammation in Idiopathic Inflammatory Myopathies.
**Authors:** Honda M, Shimizu F, Sato R, Nakamori M
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-230168](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-230168)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2024;11(1):5-16. doi: 10.3233/JND-230168.

Contribution of Complement, Microangiopathy and Inflammation in Idiopathic 
Inflammatory Myopathies.

Honda M(1), Shimizu F(1), Sato R(1), Nakamori M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Clinical Neuroscience, Yamaguchi University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs) are a heterogeneous 
group characterized by muscle weakness and skin symptoms and are categorized 
into six subtypes: dermatomyositis (DM), polymyositis (PM), anti-synthetase 
syndrome (ASS), immune-mediated myopathy (IMNM), inclusion body myopathy (IBM), 
and overlap myositis. Myositis-specific autoantibodies were detected for the 
diagnosis and classification of IIM. This review highlights the pathogenic 
contributions of the complement system, microangiopathy, and inflammation in 
IIM.
RECENT FINDINGS: Deposition of complement around capillaries and/or the 
sarcolemma was observed in muscle biopsy specimens from patients with DM, ASS, 
and IMNM, suggesting the pathomechanism of complement-dependent muscle and 
endothelial cell injury. A recent study using human muscle microvascular 
endothelial cells showed that Jo-1 antibodies from ASS induce 
complement-dependent cellular cytotoxicity in vitro. Based on both clinical and 
pathological observations, antibody- and complement-mediated microangiopathy may 
contribute to the development of DM and anti-Jo-1 ASS. Juvenile DM is 
characterized by the loss of capillaries, perivascular inflammation, and 
small-vessel angiopathies, which may be related to microinfarction and 
perifascicular atrophy. Several serum biomarkers that reflect the IFN1 signature 
and microangiopathy are elevated in patients with DM. The pathological 
observation of myxovirus resistance protein A (MxA), which suggests a type 1 
interferon (IFN1) signature in DM, supports the diagnosis and further 
understanding of the pathomechanism of IIM. A recent report showed that an 
increase in triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells (TREM-1) around 
perimysial blood vessels and muscles in patients with IIM plays a role in 
triggering inflammation and promoting the migration of inflammatory cells by 
secreting proinflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor α.
SUMMARY: The deposition of complement in muscles and capillaries is a 
characteristic feature of DM, ASS, and IMNM. Microangiopathy plays a pathogenic 
role in DM, possibly resulting in perifascicular atrophy. Further understanding 
of the detailed pathomechanism regarding complement, microangiopathy, and 
inflammation may lead to novel therapeutic approaches for IIM.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-230168
PMCID: PMC10789353
PMID: 38143369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.