---
reference_id: "PMID:21738390"
title: Clinical evaluation of two consanguineous families with homozygous mutations in BEST1.
authors:
- Piñeiro-Gallego T
- Álvarez M
- Pereiro I
- Campos S
- Sharon D
- Schatz P
- Valverde D
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2011'
keywords:
- Bestrophins
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chloride Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- Consanguinity
- Denmark
- Electrooculography
- Exons
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Spain
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical evaluation of two consanguineous families with homozygous mutations in BEST1.
**Authors:** Piñeiro-Gallego T, Álvarez M, Pereiro I, Campos S, Sharon D, Schatz P, Valverde D
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2011)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2011;17:1607-17. Epub 2011 Jun 16.

Clinical evaluation of two consanguineous families with homozygous mutations in
BEST1.

Piñeiro-Gallego T(1), Álvarez M, Pereiro I, Campos S, Sharon D, Schatz P,
Valverde D.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Genética e Inmunología, Facultad de Biología,
Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain.

PURPOSE: To describe the clinical and genetic findings in two consanguineous
families with Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) and homozygous mutations
in the bestrophin-1 (BEST1) gene.
METHODS: Ophthalmologic examination was performed in eight members of two
families originating from Spain and Denmark. Mutation screening was performed
using the Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy mutation array from Asper Biotech, and
by the directed genomic sequencing of BEST1.
RESULTS: Two homozygous mutations were detected in these families. Mutation
c.936C>A (p.Asp312Glu) has been reported previously in a Danish family; here, we
describe four additional individuals in this family demonstrating findings
compatible with a severe dominant BVMD, albeit with reduced penetrance in
heterozygotes. In the Spanish family, a novel homozygous missense mutation in
exon 4, c.388 C>A (p.Arg130Ser), was identified in the siblings. Homozygous
siblings demonstrated evidence of multifocal vitelliform retinopathy, whereas
heterozygous family members presented findings ranging from isolated reduction
of the electrooculogram Arden ratio to normal values on all clinical parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: As demonstrated in these consanguineous families, a great clinical
variability is associated with homozygous mutations in BEST1, ranging from
severe dominant BVMD with reduced penetrance in heterozygotes to autosomal
recessive bestrophinopathy.

PMCID: PMC3123162
PMID: 21738390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
