---
reference_id: "PMID:30348195"
title: Complement-dependent bystander injury to neurons in AQP4-IgG seropositive neuromyelitis optica.
authors:
- Duan T
- Smith AJ
- Verkman AS
journal: J Neuroinflammation
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12974-018-1333-z
keywords:
- Animals
- "Aquaporin 4/deficiency, immunology"
- Astrocytes/drug effects
- CD59 Antigens/metabolism
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cerebral Cortex/cytology
- Coculture Techniques
- "Complement C1q/metabolism, toxicity"
- "Complement Membrane Attack Complex/metabolism, toxicity"
- "Culture Media, Conditioned/pharmacology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Embryo, Mammalian"
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- "Immunoglobulin G/blood, pharmacology"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/blood, chemically induced"
- Neurons/drug effects
- Rats
- "Rats, Transgenic"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complement-dependent bystander injury to neurons in AQP4-IgG seropositive neuromyelitis optica.
**Authors:** Duan T, Smith AJ, Verkman AS
**Journal:** J Neuroinflammation (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12974-018-1333-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-018-1333-z)

## Content

1. J Neuroinflammation. 2018 Oct 22;15(1):294. doi: 10.1186/s12974-018-1333-z.

Complement-dependent bystander injury to neurons in AQP4-IgG seropositive
neuromyelitis optica.

Duan T(1)(2), Smith AJ(1), Verkman AS(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Physiology, University of California, 1246 Health
Sciences East Tower, 513 Parnassus Ave, San Francisco, CA, 94143-0521, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University,
Changsha, 410011, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Departments of Medicine and Physiology, University of California, 1246 Health
Sciences East Tower, 513 Parnassus Ave, San Francisco, CA, 94143-0521, USA.
alan.verkman@ucsf.edu.

BACKGROUND: Aquaporin-4-immunoglobulin G (AQP4-IgG) seropositive neuromyelitis
optica spectrum disorder (herein called NMO) is an autoimmune disease of the
central nervous system in which AQP4-IgG binding to AQP4 on astrocytes results
in complement-dependent astrocyte injury and secondary inflammation,
demyelination, and neuron loss. We previously reported evidence for a complement
bystander mechanism for early oligodendrocyte injury in NMO. Herein, we tested
the hypothesis that complement bystander injury, which involves diffusion to
nearby cells of activated soluble complement components from complement-injured
astrocytes, is a general phenomenon that may contribute to neuronal injury in
NMO.
METHODS: Primary cocultures of rat astrocytes and cortical neurons were
established to study complement-dependent cell death after exposure to AQP4-IgG
and complement. In animal experiments, AQP4-IgG was delivered to adult rats by
intracerebral injection. Cell cultures and rat brain were studied by
immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: In primary astrocyte-neuron cocultures, addition of AQP4-IgG and
complement resulted in death of neurons nearby astrocytes. Deposition of
complement membrane attack complex C5b-9 was seen on neurons nearby astrocytes,
whereas C1q, the initiating protein in the complement pathway, was seen only on
astrocytes. Neuron death was not seen with a complement inhibitor, with C1q- or
C6-depleted complement, in pure neuron cultures exposed to AQP4-IgG and
complement or in cocultures exposed to an astrocyte toxin. Intracerebral
injection in rats of AQP4-IgG and a fixable dead cell fluorescent marker
produced death of neurons near astrocytes, with C5b-9 deposition. Neuron death
was not seen in rats receiving a complement inhibitor or in AQP4-IgG-injected
AQP4 knockout rats.
CONCLUSION: These results support a novel mechanism for early neuron injury in
NMO and provide evidence that complement bystander injury may be a general
phenomenon for brain cell injury following AQP4-IgG-targeted astrocyte death.

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-018-1333-z
PMCID: PMC6198534
PMID: 30348195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE:
Procedures were approved by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care Use Committee
(IACUC). Consent to participate is not applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
