---
reference_id: "PMID:14510623"
title: "Angelman syndrome: etiology, clinical features, diagnosis, and management of symptoms."
authors:
- Guerrini R
- Carrozzo R
- Rinaldi R
- Bonanni P
journal: Paediatr Drugs
year: '2003'
doi: 10.2165/00148581-200305100-00001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angelman syndrome: etiology, clinical features, diagnosis, and management of symptoms.
**Authors:** Guerrini R, Carrozzo R, Rinaldi R, Bonanni P
**Journal:** Paediatr Drugs (2003)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00148581-200305100-00001](https://doi.org/10.2165/00148581-200305100-00001)

## Content

1. Paediatr Drugs. 2003;5(10):647-61. doi: 10.2165/00148581-200305100-00001.

Angelman syndrome: etiology, clinical features, diagnosis, and management of 
symptoms.

Guerrini R(1), Carrozzo R, Rinaldi R, Bonanni P.

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy, Neurophysiology, and Neurogenetics Unit, Institute of Child 
Neurology and Psychiatry, University of Pisa and IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, 
Pisa, Italy. renzo.guerrini@inpe.unipi.it

It is estimated that Angelman syndrome (AS) accounts for up to 6% of all 
children presenting with severe mental retardation and epilepsy. The main 
clinical features of AS may not be apparent early in life. Clinical findings 
present in all patients include developmental delay, which becomes apparent by 
6-12 months of age, severely impaired expressive language, ataxic gait, 
tremulousness of limbs, and a typical behavioral profile, including a happy 
demeanor, hypermotoric behavior, and low attention span. Seizures, abnormal 
electroencephalography, microcephaly, and scoliosis are observed in >80% of 
patients. Approximately 70% of patients show a deletion involving the maternally 
inherited chromosome 15q11-q13, encompassing a cluster of gamma-aminobutyric 
acid receptor subunit genes, 3% show chromosome 15 paternal uniparental disomy 
(UPD), 1% harbor a mutation in the imprinting center (a transcriptional 
regulatory element), and 6% harbor intragenic mutations of the ubiquitin-protein 
ligase E3A (UBE3A) gene. Twenty percent of patients have no detectable genetic 
abnormality. Rare cases of familial recurrence of AS show either imprinting 
center (IC) or UBE3A mutations. Approximately 75% of cases are detected through 
the methylation test, which allows the detection of AS due to deletions, UPD and 
IC mutations. Mutation analysis of the UBE3A gene should be performed when the 
methylation test is negative. Individuals with chromosome 15q11-q13 deletions 
have a more severe clinical picture and are more prone to develop severe 
epilepsy. Epilepsy has typical features, including absence and myoclonic 
seizures, and insidious episodes of nonconvulsive or subtle myoclonic status 
which are easily overlooked as children appear apathetic or in a state of 
neurologic regression. Tremulousness, present in all patients even when seizures 
are well controlled or absent, is related to distal cortical myoclonus. Valproic 
acid (sodium valproate), benzodiazepines, and ethosuximide, in various 
combinations, are quite effective in treating the typical seizure types. 
Piracetam may help in reducing distal myoclonus. Carbamazepine and vigabatrin 
may seriously aggravate absence and myoclonic seizures and should be avoided. 
Cognitive, language, and orthopedic problems must be addressed with vigorous 
rehabilitation programs, including early physical therapy, which may help to 
develop communicative skills and prevent severe scoliosis and subsequent 
immobility. Where these treatment strategies are applied, individuals with AS 
may reach an appreciable level of integration, self care, and have a normal life 
span.

DOI: 10.2165/00148581-200305100-00001
PMID: 14510623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]