---
reference_id: "PMID:39572784"
title: Genome-wide association study reveals mechanisms underlying dilated cardiomyopathy and myocardial resilience.
authors:
- Jurgens SJ
- Rämö JT
- Kramarenko DR
- Wijdeveld LFJM
- Haas J
- Chaffin MD
- Garnier S
- Gaziano L
- Weng LC
- Lipov A
- Zheng SL
- Henry A
- Huffman JE
- Challa S
- Rühle F
- Verdugo CD
- Krijger Juárez C
- Kany S
- van Orsouw CA
- Biddinger K
- Poel E
- Elliott AL
- Wang X
- Francis C
- Ruan R
- Koyama S
- Beekman L
- Zimmerman DS
- Deleuze JF
- Villard E
- Trégouët DA
- Isnard R
- FinnGen
- VA Million Veteran Program
- HERMES Consortium
- Boomsma DI
- de Geus EJC
- Tadros R
- Pinto YM
- Wilde AAM
- Hottenga JJ
- Sinisalo J
- Niiranen T
- Walsh R
- Schmidt AF
- Choi SH
- Chang KM
- Tsao PS
- Matthews PM
- Ware JS
- Lumbers RT
- van der Crabben S
- Laukkanen J
- Palotie A
- Amin AS
- Charron P
- Meder B
- Ellinor PT
- Daly M
- Aragam KG
- Bezzina CR
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41588-024-01975-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association study reveals mechanisms underlying dilated cardiomyopathy and myocardial resilience.
**Authors:** Jurgens SJ, Rämö JT, Kramarenko DR, Wijdeveld LFJM, Haas J, Chaffin MD, Garnier S, Gaziano L, Weng LC, Lipov A, Zheng SL, Henry A, Huffman JE, Challa S, Rühle F, Verdugo CD, Krijger Juárez C, Kany S, van Orsouw CA, Biddinger K, Poel E, Elliott AL, Wang X, Francis C, Ruan R, Koyama S, Beekman L, Zimmerman DS, Deleuze JF, Villard E, Trégouët DA, Isnard R, FinnGen, VA Million Veteran Program, HERMES Consortium, Boomsma DI, de Geus EJC, Tadros R, Pinto YM, Wilde AAM, Hottenga JJ, Sinisalo J, Niiranen T, Walsh R, Schmidt AF, Choi SH, Chang KM, Tsao PS, Matthews PM, Ware JS, Lumbers RT, van der Crabben S, Laukkanen J, Palotie A, Amin AS, Charron P, Meder B, Ellinor PT, Daly M, Aragam KG, Bezzina CR
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41588-024-01975-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-024-01975-5)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2024 Dec;56(12):2636-2645. doi: 10.1038/s41588-024-01975-5. Epub
2024  Nov 21.

Genome-wide association study reveals mechanisms underlying dilated 
cardiomyopathy and myocardial resilience.

Jurgens SJ(#)(1)(2)(3), Rämö JT(#)(2)(3)(4), Kramarenko DR(#)(1)(5), Wijdeveld 
LFJM(#)(2)(6), Haas J(#)(7)(8), Chaffin MD(#)(2), Garnier S(#)(9)(10), Gaziano 
L(#)(2)(3), Weng LC(2)(3), Lipov A(1), Zheng SL(11)(12)(13), Henry A(14)(15), 
Huffman JE(16)(17)(18), Challa S(2), Rühle F(19)(20), Verdugo CD(2), Krijger 
Juárez C(1), Kany S(2)(3)(21), van Orsouw CA(22), Biddinger K(2), Poel E(1), 
Elliott AL(4)(18)(23)(24)(25), Wang X(2), Francis C(11)(13), Ruan R(2), Koyama 
S(2)(3), Beekman L(1), Zimmerman DS(1), Deleuze JF(26)(27)(28), Villard 
E(9)(10), Trégouët DA(27)(29), Isnard R(9)(10)(30); FinnGen; VA Million Veteran 
Program; HERMES Consortium; Boomsma DI(31), de Geus EJC(31)(32), Tadros 
R(1)(33)(34), Pinto YM(1)(5)(35), Wilde AAM(1)(5)(35), Hottenga JJ(31)(36), 
Sinisalo J(37)(38), Niiranen T(39)(40)(41), Walsh R(1), Schmidt 
AF(35)(42)(43)(44), Choi SH(2)(45), Chang KM(46)(47), Tsao PS(48)(49), Matthews 
PM(11)(12), Ware JS(11)(12)(13)(24), Lumbers RT(15)(50), van der Crabben S(22), 
Laukkanen J(51)(52), Palotie A(4)(53)(54), Amin AS(1)(5)(35), Charron 
P(9)(10)(30), Meder B(7)(8), Ellinor PT(55)(56), Daly M(57)(58)(59), Aragam 
KG(60)(61), Bezzina CR(62)(63).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Cardiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, 
Heart Failure & Arrhythmias, Amsterdam UMC location, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Cardiovascular Disease Initiative, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(4)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki Institute of Life 
Science (HiLIFE), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)European Reference Network for rare low prevalence and complex diseases of 
the heart: ERN GUARD-Heart, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Physiology, Amsterdam UMC location, Vrije Universiteit, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Medicine III, Institute for Cardiomyopathies Heidelberg (ICH), 
University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Site Heidelberg/Mannheim, DZHK, Heidelberg, Germany.
(9)Research Unit on Cardiovascular Disorders, Metabolism and Nutrition, Team 
Genomics and Pathophysiology of Cardiovascular Disease, Sorbone Université, 
INSERM, Paris, France.
(10)ICAN Institute for Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, Paris, France.
(11)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(12)MRC Laboratory of Medical Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(13)Royal Brompton and Harefield Hospitals, Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, UK.
(14)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College London, London, UK.
(15)Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, London, UK.
(16)Massachusetts Veterans Epidemiology Research and Information Center 
(MAVERIC), VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA.
(17)Palo Alto Veterans Institute for Research (PAVIR), Palo Alto Health Care 
System, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(18)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(19)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Institute of Molecular Biology gGmbH (IMB), 
Mainz, Germany.
(20)Department of Genetic Epidemiology, Institute of Human Genetics, University 
of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(21)Department of Cardiology, University Heart and Vascular Center, University 
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(22)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC location, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(23)Department of Psychiatry and Center for Genomic Medicine, Psychiatric and 
Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(24)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and 
MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(25)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(26)CEA, Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Evry, France.
(27)Laboratory of Excellence in Medical Genomics, GENMED, Evry, France.
(28)Fondation Jean Dausset, Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain, Paris, 
France.
(29)Bordeaux Population Health Research Center, UMR 1219, University of 
Bordeaux, INSERM, Bordeaux, France.
(30)APHP, Cardiology and Genetics Departments, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, 
Paris, France.
(31)Department of Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(32)Amsterdam Public Health Research Institute, Amsterdam UMC location, Vrije 
Universiteit, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(33)Cardiovascular Genetics Centre, Montreal Heart Institute, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(34)Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(35)Department of Clinical Cardiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Heart 
Failure and Arrhythmias, Amsterdam UMC location, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(36)The Netherlands Twin Register, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(37)Department of Cardiology, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(38)Heart and Lung Center, Helsinki University Hospital and Helsinki University, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(39)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Turku, Helsinki, Finland.
(40)Division of Medicine, Turku University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(41)Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki, Finland.
(42)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, Faculty of Population Health, 
University College London, London, UK.
(43)University College London British Heart Foundation Research Accelerator, 
London, UK.
(44)Department of Cardiology, Division Heart and Lungs, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(45)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
(46)Corporal Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(47)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(48)Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(49)Department of Medicine and Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(50)The National Institute for Health Research, University College London 
Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre, University College London, London, UK.
(51)Department of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of 
Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(52)Central Finland Biobank, Central Finland Health Care District, Jyväskylä, 
Finland.
(53)Program in Medical and Population Genetics and Stanley Center for 
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(54)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(55)Cardiovascular Disease Initiative, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA. ellinor@mgh.harvard.edu.
(56)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA. ellinor@mgh.harvard.edu.
(57)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki Institute of Life 
Science (HiLIFE), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. 
mark.daly@helsinki.fi.
(58)Program in Medical and Population Genetics and Stanley Center for 
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
mark.daly@helsinki.fi.
(59)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA. mark.daly@helsinki.fi.
(60)Cardiovascular Disease Initiative, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA. karagam@broadinstitute.org.
(61)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA. karagam@broadinstitute.org.
(62)Department of Experimental Cardiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, 
Heart Failure & Arrhythmias, Amsterdam UMC location, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. c.r.bezzina@amsterdamumc.nl.
(63)European Reference Network for rare low prevalence and complex diseases of 
the heart: ERN GUARD-Heart, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 
c.r.bezzina@amsterdamumc.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2024 Dec;56(12):2843. doi: 10.1038/s41588-024-02047-4.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a heart muscle disease that represents an 
important cause of morbidity and mortality, yet causal mechanisms remain largely 
elusive. Here, we perform a large-scale genome-wide association study and 
multitrait analysis for DCM using 9,365 cases and 946,368 controls. We identify 
70 genome-wide significant loci, which show broad replication in independent 
samples and map to 63 prioritized genes. Tissue, cell type and pathway 
enrichment analyses highlight the central role of the cardiomyocyte and 
contractile apparatus in DCM pathogenesis. Polygenic risk scores constructed 
from our genome-wide association study predict DCM across different ancestry 
groups, show differing contributions to DCM depending on rare pathogenic variant 
status and associate with systolic heart failure across various clinical 
settings. Mendelian randomization analyses reveal actionable potential causes of 
DCM, including higher bodyweight and higher systolic blood pressure. Our 
findings provide insights into the genetic architecture and mechanisms 
underlying DCM and myocardial function more broadly.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-024-01975-5
PMCID: PMC11631763
PMID: 39572784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: P.T.E. has received 
sponsored research support from Bayer AG, IBM Health, Bristol Myers Squibb and 
Pfizer; he has consulted for Bayer AG, Novartis and MyoKardia. K.G.A. has 
received sponsored research support from Sarepta Therapeutics and Bayer AG, and 
reports a research collaboration with Novartis. Y.M.P. is involved in the 
development of therapies for DCM as an advisor to Forbion and Medical Director 
at ARMGO pharma and CMO at Phlox Therapeutics. P.C. reports personal fees for 
consultancies, outside the present work, for Amicus, OWKIN, Pfizer and SANOFI. 
J.S.W. has received research support from Bristol Myers Squibb, and has acted as 
a consultant for MyoKardia, Pfizer, Foresite Labs, Health Lumen and Tenaya 
Therapeutics. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.