---
reference_id: "PMID:36857968"
title: "Senolytics dasatinib and quercetin in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: results of a phase I, single-blind, single-center, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot trial on feasibility and tolerability."
authors:
- Nambiar A
- Kellogg D 3rd
- Justice J
- Goros M
- Gelfond J
- Pascual R
- Hashmi S
- Masternak M
- Prata L
- LeBrasseur N
- Limper A
- Kritchevsky S
- Musi N
- Tchkonia T
- Kirkland J
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104481
keywords:
- Humans
- Aged
- Quercetin/adverse effects
- Dasatinib/adverse effects
- Pilot Projects
- Feasibility Studies
- Prospective Studies
- Single-Blind Method
- "Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Double-Blind Method
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Senolytics dasatinib and quercetin in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: results of a phase I, single-blind, single-center, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot trial on feasibility and tolerability.
**Authors:** Nambiar A, Kellogg D 3rd, Justice J, Goros M, Gelfond J, Pascual R, Hashmi S, Masternak M, Prata L, LeBrasseur N, Limper A, Kritchevsky S, Musi N, Tchkonia T, Kirkland J
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104481](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104481)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2023 Apr;90:104481. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104481. Epub 2023 
Feb 28.

Senolytics dasatinib and quercetin in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: results of 
a phase I, single-blind, single-center, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot 
trial on feasibility and tolerability.

Nambiar A(1), Kellogg D 3rd(2), Justice J(3), Goros M(4), Gelfond J(4), Pascual 
R(3), Hashmi S(5), Masternak M(6), Prata L(5), LeBrasseur N(5), Limper A(5), 
Kritchevsky S(3), Musi N(2), Tchkonia T(5), Kirkland J(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA; 
South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: nambiar@uthscsa.edu.
(2)University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA; 
South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(3)Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.
(4)University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(5)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)University of Central Florida, Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, 
Orlando, FL, USA; Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Poznan University of 
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

Comment in
    EBioMedicine. 2023 Oct;96:104837. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104837.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is an age-related, chronic, 
irreversible fibrotic lung disease. IPF is associated with increased senescent 
cells burden, which may be alleviated with administration of senescent cell 
targeting drugs termed 'senolytics'. We previously conducted an open-label 
single-arm pilot study of the senolytic combination of dasatinib and quercetin 
(D + Q) in patients with IPF but lack of control group limited interpretation 
and next-stage trial planning. The primary objective of this confirmatory 
randomized placebo-controlled pilot trial (RCT; NCT02874989) was to report 
adverse events with D + Q and inform study feasibility for future efficacy 
trials.
METHODS: Twelve participants with IPF aged >50 years were blinded and randomized 
at a 1:1 ratio to either receive three weeks of D + Q (D: 100 mg/d and Q: 
1250 mg/d, three consecutive days per week) or matching placebo.
FINDINGS: All participants completed the scheduled drug dosing regimen (108/108 
doses) and planned assessments (60/60). While the placebo arm reported fewer 
overall non-serious AEs (65 vs 22), there were no serious adverse events related 
to D + Q. Most AEs in the D + Q arm are common in IPF patients or anticipated 
side effects of D. Sleep disturbances and anxiety were disproportionately 
represented in the D + Q arm (4/6 vs 0/6). Frailty, pulmonary, or physical 
function were explored before and after intermittent D + Q; though under-powered 
to evaluate change, these measures do not appear to differ meaningfully between 
groups.
INTERPRETATION: Intermittently-dosed D + Q in patients with IPF is feasible and 
generally well-tolerated. Further prospective studies, such as a larger RCT, are 
needed to confirm the safety and efficacy of D + Q in patients with IPF.
FUNDING: This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants 
R33AG61456 (JLK, TT), Robert and Arlene Kogod (JLK, TT), the Connor Fund (JLK, 
TT), Robert J. and Theresa W. Ryan (JLK, TT), and the Noaber Foundation (JLK, 
TT) San Antonio Claude D. Pepper Older Americans Independence Center's 
(OAIC)Pilot/Exploratory Studies Core (PESC) Grant (AMN, NM); NIHK01 AG059837 
(JNJ), P30 AG021332 (SBK, JNJ); NIHR37 AG013925 (JLK), the Connor Group (JLK), 
Glenn/AFAR BIG Award (JLK), Robert J. and Theresa W. Ryan (JLK), and the Noaber 
and Ted Nash Long Life Foundations (JLK).

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104481
PMCID: PMC10006434
PMID: 36857968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests TT and JK have a 
financial interest related to this research including patents and pending 
patents on senolytic drugs, and their uses are held by Mayo Clinic. This 
research has been reviewed by the Mayo Clinic Conflict of Interest Review Board 
and was conducted in compliance with Mayo Clinic Conflict of Interest policies.