---
reference_id: "PMID:1493145"
title: "AIDS dementia-related psychosis: is there a window of vulnerability?"
authors:
- el-Mallakh RS
journal: AIDS Care
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1080/09540129208253109
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AIDS dementia-related psychosis: is there a window of vulnerability?
**Authors:** el-Mallakh RS
**Journal:** AIDS Care (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09540129208253109](https://doi.org/10.1080/09540129208253109)

## Content

1. AIDS Care. 1992;4(4):381-7. doi: 10.1080/09540129208253109.

AIDS dementia-related psychosis: is there a window of vulnerability?

el-Mallakh RS(1).

Author information:
(1)Office on AIDS, Prince George's County Health Department, Cheverly, Maryland.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) frequently enters the central nervous system 
(CNS) soon after infection, and frequently produces a wide variety of 
neurologic, cognitive, and psychiatric complications. Although, the entire 
spectrum of psychiatric illnesses may be seen in individuals with HIV infection, 
most are probably not directly caused by the virus. Psychiatric manifestations 
that are the direct result of HIV infection are usually seen in the setting of 
HIV-associated dementia. In this paper, it is proposed that these psychiatric 
manifestations of HIV infection can be phenomenologically separated into 
positive and negative symptoms. Negative symptoms are deficit states presenting 
as cognitive, social, or motivational deterioration; positive symptoms are 
psychotic or manic states that may occur in the course of the dementing illness. 
It is further purposed that there is a window of vulnerability to psychosis or 
mania that occurs relatively early in the dementing process. Consequently, 
advancing dementia would be expected to be associated with remission of 
psychosis.

DOI: 10.1080/09540129208253109
PMID: 1493145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]