---
reference_id: "PMID:39277846"
title: Pathomechanisms of Monoallelic variants in TTN causing skeletal muscle disease.
authors:
- Gohlke J
- Lindqvist J
- Hourani Z
- Heintzman S
- Tonino P
- Elsheikh B
- Morales A
- Vatta M
- Burghes A
- Granzier H
- Roggenbuck J
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae136
keywords:
- Humans
- "Connectin/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Adult
- "Muscular Diseases/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- Alleles
- Pedigree
- Mutation
- "Growth Differentiation Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- RNA Splicing/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathomechanisms of Monoallelic variants in TTN causing skeletal muscle disease.
**Authors:** Gohlke J, Lindqvist J, Hourani Z, Heintzman S, Tonino P, Elsheikh B, Morales A, Vatta M, Burghes A, Granzier H, Roggenbuck J
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddae136](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddae136)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2024 Nov 20;33(23):2003-2023. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae136.

Pathomechanisms of Monoallelic variants in TTN causing skeletal muscle disease.

Gohlke J(1), Lindqvist J(1), Hourani Z(1), Heintzman S(2), Tonino P(3), Elsheikh 
B(2), Morales A(4), Vatta M(4), Burghes A(5), Granzier H(1), Roggenbuck J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, 1656 E. 
Mabel St., Tucson, AZ 85724, United States.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 395 
W. 12th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, United States.
(3)Research, Innovation and Impact Core Facilities Department, University of 
Arizona, 1333 N. Martin Ave, Tucson, AZ 85719, United States.
(4)Invitae Corporation, 1400 16th St., San Francisco, CA 94103, United States.
(5)Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, The Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center, 370 W 9th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, United 
States.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2025 Jan 29;34(2):205. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddae181.

Pathogenic variants in the titin gene (TTN) are known to cause a wide range of 
cardiac and musculoskeletal disorders, with skeletal myopathy mostly attributed 
to biallelic variants. We identified monoallelic truncating variants (TTNtv), 
splice site or internal deletions in TTN in probands with mild, progressive 
axial and proximal weakness, with dilated cardiomyopathy frequently developing 
with age. These variants segregated in an autosomal dominant pattern in 7 out of 
8 studied families. We investigated the impact of these variants on mRNA, 
protein levels, and skeletal muscle structure and function. Results reveal that 
nonsense-mediated decay likely prevents accumulation of harmful truncated 
protein in skeletal muscle in patients with TTNtvs. Splice variants and an 
out-of-frame deletion induce aberrant exon skipping, while an in-frame deletion 
produces shortened titin with intact N- and C-termini, resulting in disrupted 
sarcomeric structure. All variant types were associated with genome-wide changes 
in splicing patterns, which represent a hallmark of disease progression. Lastly, 
RNA-seq studies revealed that GDF11, a member of the TGF-β superfamily, is 
upregulated in diseased tissue, indicating that it might be a useful therapeutic 
target in skeletal muscle titinopathies.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddae136
PMCID: PMC11578113
PMID: 39277846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]