---
reference_id: "PMID:20301609"
title: Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Ben Yaou R
- Leturcq F
- Bonne G
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Ben Yaou R, Leturcq F, Bonne G

## Content

1. Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy.

Ben Yaou R(1)(2)(3), Leturcq F(4), Bonne G(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2004 Sep 29 [updated 2025 Sep 18].

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut de Myologie,, Centre de Recherche en 
Myologie, Paris France
(2)Cellule Bases de Données, Institut de Myologie, Paris, France
(3)AP-HP Sorbonne Université, Groupe Hospitalier-Universitaire La 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Centre de Référence des Maladies Neuromusculaires 
Nord/Est/Ile-de-France, Paris, France
(4)Service de Médecine Génomique des Maladies de Système et d'Organe, Fédération 
de Génétique et de Médecine Génomique, AP-HP Centre-Université Paris Cité, 
Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is 
characterized by the clinical triad of joint contractures that begin in early 
childhood; slowly progressive muscle weakness and wasting initially in a 
humeroperoneal distribution that later extends to the scapular and pelvic girdle 
muscles; and cardiac involvement that may manifest as palpitations, presyncope 
and syncope, poor exercise tolerance, and congestive heart failure along with 
variable cardiac rhythm disturbances. Age of onset, severity, and progression of 
muscle and cardiac involvement demonstrate both inter- and intrafamilial 
variability. Clinical variability ranges from early onset with severe 
presentation in childhood to late onset with slow progression in adulthood. In 
general, joint contractures appear during the first two decades, followed by 
muscle weakness and wasting. Cardiac involvement usually occurs after the second 
decade, and respiratory function may be impaired in some individuals.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of EDMD can be established in a 
proband with characteristic early and prominent joint contractures, 
humeroperoneal (or more rarely limb-girdle) muscle weakness and wasting, and 
later-onset cardiac disease. The molecular diagnosis is established in a proband 
with characteristic clinical findings and a hemizygous pathogenic variant in EMD 
or FHL1, a heterozygous pathogenic variant in LMNA, SUN2, SYNE1, SYNE2, or 
TMEM43, or (more rarely) biallelic pathogenic variants in LMNA or SUN1 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgery to release contractures and 
manage scoliosis as needed; aids (canes, walkers, orthoses, wheelchairs) as 
needed to help ambulation; physical therapy and stretching to prevent 
contractures. Treatment for cardiac disease can include antiarrhythmic drugs, 
oral anticoagulation, ablation procedures, cardiac pacemaker, implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator, pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic therapy for heart 
failure; heart transplantation for the end stages of heart failure as 
appropriate; respiratory aids (respiratory muscle training, assisted coughing 
techniques, mechanical ventilation) as needed; in those with associated 
metabolic features, treatment may include dietary modification, medications to 
improve hypertriglyceridemia and hypercholesterolemia, and diabetes / insulin 
resistance medications. Surveillance: Assess joints for contractures and 
mobility, and spine for rigidity, posture, flexibility, swallowing function, and 
muscle strength at each visit; EKG, Holter monitor, and echocardiography at 
least annually; additional cardiac surveillance as needed; pulmonary function 
tests every two to three years and annually in those with respiratory 
compromise; cholesterol panel with triglycerides, hemoglobin A1c, and blood 
glucose every two to three years or more frequently in those with abnormalities. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Triggering agents for malignant hyperthermia, 
such as depolarizing muscle relaxants (succinylcholine) and volatile anesthetic 
drugs (halothane, isoflurane); obesity. Evaluation of relatives at risk: 
Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known; 
clinical evaluation, including musculoskeletal evaluation and cardiac 
assessment, if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known.
GENETIC COUNSELING: EDMD is inherited in an X-linked (XL), autosomal dominant 
(AD), or (rarely) autosomal recessive (AR) manner. XL-EDMD: If the mother of a 
proband has a pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting it in each 
pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; 
females who inherit the pathogenic variant will be heterozygous. Heterozygous 
females are usually asymptomatic but are at risk of developing cardiac disease, 
progressive muscular dystrophy (rare), and/or an EDMD phenotype (exceedingly 
rare). AD-EDMD: Sixty-five percent of individuals with LMNA-related AD-EDMD have 
a de novo pathogenic variant. Each child of an individual with AD-EDMD has a 50% 
chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. AR-EDMD: If both parents are known 
to be heterozygous for a pathogenic variant associated with AR-EDMD, each sib of 
an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% 
chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the 
familial pathogenic variants. Once the EDMD-related pathogenic variant(s) have 
been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing for EDMD are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301609