---
reference_id: "PMID:7616010"
title: "[An outbreak of Pontiac fever due to Legionella pneumophila serogroup 7. I. Clinical aspects]."
authors:
- Mori M
- Hoshino K
- Sonoda H
- Yoshida H
- Yabuuchi E
- Yamashiro Y
- Koide M
- Saito A
- Kishimoto T
- Furuhata K
journal: Kansenshogaku Zasshi
year: '1995'
doi: 10.11150/kansenshogakuzasshi1970.69.646
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Disease Outbreaks
- Female
- Humans
- Legionella pneumophila/classification
- "Legionnaires' Disease/microbiology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Serotyping
- Tokyo/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [An outbreak of Pontiac fever due to Legionella pneumophila serogroup 7. I. Clinical aspects].
**Authors:** Mori M, Hoshino K, Sonoda H, Yoshida H, Yabuuchi E, Yamashiro Y, Koide M, Saito A, Kishimoto T, Furuhata K
**Journal:** Kansenshogaku Zasshi (1995)
**DOI:** [10.11150/kansenshogakuzasshi1970.69.646](https://doi.org/10.11150/kansenshogakuzasshi1970.69.646)

## Content

1. Kansenshogaku Zasshi. 1995 Jun;69(6):646-53. doi: 
10.11150/kansenshogakuzasshi1970.69.646.

[An outbreak of Pontiac fever due to Legionella pneumophila serogroup 7. I. 
Clinical aspects].

[Article in Japanese]

Mori M(1), Hoshino K, Sonoda H, Yoshida H, Yabuuchi E, Yamashiro Y, Koide M, 
Saito A, Kishimoto T, Furuhata K, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yoyogi Hospital.

In August 1994, an epidemic of acute febrile illness occurred at the Education 
Center Building of a company in Shibuya-ku, Tokyo. All 43 trainees attended in 
two groups and 2 staff members of the Center fell ill. The 45 patients came to 
one of our hospitals in two groups, and 35 patients were treated. The patients 
were 4 males and 31 females, and the average age was 29.0 years. The duration 
until falling ill was 36 to 90 hours after entering the Center. Symptoms were 
fever, lumbago arthralgia, headache, dyspnea, general fatigue, etc. Physical 
examination revealed slightly injected mucosa of the pharynx in a patient who 
complained of a sore throat. On laboratory examination, leukocytosis with a left 
shift of the nucleus and elevation of serum CRP levels were found. Erythromycin 
(600 mg, daily) and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were given by 
mouth to almost every patient. Two patients were hospitalized. The illness was 
self-limited, generally lasting from two to five days. Strains of legionellae 
isolated from the water of the cooling tower located at the top of the Center, 
were identified as L. pneumophila serogroup 7. Since seroconversion in a patient 
against the cooling tower strain from 1:16 to 1:256 was determined and the 
clinical courses agreed with the definition of Pontiac fever by Glick et al, we 
concluded that the epidemic was an outbreak of Pontiac fever due to L. 
pneumophila serogroup 7. Pontiac fever is considered to be one of the 
community-acquired diseases. Thus, we have to note that Pontiac fever may be 
misdiagnosed as we examine patients who complain of the symptoms noted above.

DOI: 10.11150/kansenshogakuzasshi1970.69.646
PMID: 7616010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]