---
reference_id: "PMID:17666397"
title: Crucial role of the disulfide bridge between botulinum neurotoxin light and heavy chains in protease translocation across membranes.
authors:
- Fischer A
- Montal M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M703619200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crucial role of the disulfide bridge between botulinum neurotoxin light and heavy chains in protease translocation across membranes.
**Authors:** Fischer A, Montal M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M703619200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M703619200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 5;282(40):29604-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M703619200. Epub
2007  Jul 31.

Crucial role of the disulfide bridge between botulinum neurotoxin light and 
heavy chains in protease translocation across membranes.

Fischer A(1), Montal M.

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurobiology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0366, USA.

Clostridial botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs) exert their neuroparalytic action by 
arresting synaptic exocytosis. Intoxication requires the disulfide-linked, 
di-chain protein to undergo conformational changes in response to pH and redox 
gradients across the endosomal membrane with consequent formation of a 
protein-conducting channel by the heavy chain (HC) that translocates the light 
chain (LC) protease into the cytosol. Here, we investigate the role of the 
disulfide bridge in the dynamics of protein translocation. We utilize a single 
channel/single molecule assay to characterize in real time the BoNT channel and 
chaperone activities in Neuro 2A cells under conditions that emulate those 
prevalent across endosomes. We show that the disulfide bridge must remain intact 
throughout LC translocation; premature reduction of the disulfide bridge after 
channel formation arrests translocation. The disulfide bridge must be on the 
trans compartment to achieve productive translocation of LC; disulfide 
disruption on the cis compartment or within the bilayer during translocation 
aborts it. We demonstrate that a peptide linkage between LC and HC in place of a 
disulfide bridge is insufficient for productive LC translocation. The disulfide 
linkage, therefore, dictates the outcome of translocation: productive passage of 
cargo or abortive channel occlusion by cargo. Based on these and previous 
findings we suggest a sequence of events for BoNT LC translocation to be HC 
insertion, coupled LC unfolding, and protein conduction through the HC channel 
in an N to C terminus orientation and ultimate release of the LC from the HC by 
reduction of the disulfide bridge concomitant with LC refolding in the cytosol.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M703619200
PMID: 17666397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]