---
reference_id: "PMID:15150772"
title: Risk of sudden death in the Williams-Beuren syndrome.
authors:
- Wessel A
- Gravenhorst V
- Buchhorn R
- Gosch A
- Partsch CJ
- Pankau R
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30012
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- "Death, Sudden"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Risk Factors
- Williams Syndrome/mortality
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk of sudden death in the Williams-Beuren syndrome.
**Authors:** Wessel A, Gravenhorst V, Buchhorn R, Gosch A, Partsch CJ, Pankau R
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30012](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30012)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jun 15;127A(3):234-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30012.

Risk of sudden death in the Williams-Beuren syndrome.

Wessel A(1), Gravenhorst V, Buchhorn R, Gosch A, Partsch CJ, Pankau R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, 
Germany. wessel.armin@mh-hannover.de

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a genetic disorder characterized by a 
distinctive facial gestalt, mental retardation, mild growth deficiency, and 
cardiovascular disease. The occurrence of sudden death in the WBS is known from 
several case reports, but information about the risk of sudden death as derived 
from the data of a large cohort of patients is lacking. We analyzed the data of 
293 WBS patients who had been treated for 43 years at the same two institutions. 
We thus collected 5,190 patient years without loss to follow-up. During this 
period ten patients died. Five of them died from: reticulosarcoma (1), after 
accident (1), heart failure (1), following heart surgery (2). Of the remaining 
five patients, four died suddenly and one died of unknown cause suggestive of 
sudden cardiac death. Thus, the incidence of sudden death in our WBS cohort 
amounts to 1/1,000 patient years. This risk of sudden death is comparable to 
that following surgery for congenital heart disease, and is 25-100-fold higher 
compared to the age-matched normal population.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30012
PMID: 15150772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]