---
reference_id: "PMID:28941498"
title: "Not Just Skin Deep: Systemic Disease Involvement in Patients With Cutaneous Lupus."
authors:
- O'Brien JC
- Chong BF
journal: J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jisp.2016.09.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Not Just Skin Deep: Systemic Disease Involvement in Patients With Cutaneous Lupus.
**Authors:** O'Brien JC, Chong BF
**Journal:** J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jisp.2016.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jisp.2016.09.001)

## Content

1. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc. 2017 Oct;18(2):S69-S74. doi: 
10.1016/j.jisp.2016.09.001.

Not Just Skin Deep: Systemic Disease Involvement in Patients With 
Cutaneous Lupus.

O'Brien JC(1), Chong BF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, USA. Electronic address: Ben.Chong@utsouthwestern.edu.

Cutaneous lupus erythematosus, specifically discoid lupus erythematosus, 
disproportionately affects those with skin of color and may result in greater 
dyspigmentation and scarring in darker skin types. In this article, we review 
investigations relevant to cutaneous lupus patients with skin of color at 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, associations and risk of 
progression to systemic lupus, and recommendations for monitoring for systemic 
disease spread. Between 5% and 25% of patients with cutaneous lupus can develop 
systemic lupus. If they progress to systemic disease, patients often develop 
mild systemic disease with primarily mucocutaneous and musculoskeletal 
manifestations. Patients with cutaneous lupus should be followed up closely to 
monitor for systemic disease involvement. The University of Texas Southwestern 
Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Registry, of which almost two thirds of 
participants are those with skin of color, is a part of an ongoing effort to 
better understand the pathophysiologic mechanisms of CLE and to identify 
prognostic indicators of risk of progression to systemic lupus.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jisp.2016.09.001
PMID: 28941498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]