---
reference_id: "PMID:20484084"
title: "Sezary syndrome and mycosis fungoides arise from distinct T-cell subsets: a biologic rationale for their distinct clinical behaviors."
authors:
- Campbell JJ
- Clark RA
- Watanabe R
- Kupper TS
journal: Blood
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-11-251926
keywords:
- "Antigens, CD/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/chemistry, pathology"
- Chemokine CCL21/pharmacology
- Chemokine CCL22/pharmacology
- Chemotaxis/drug effects
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Gene Rearrangement, beta-Chain T-Cell Antigen Receptor"
- Humans
- Immunologic Memory
- "L-Selectin/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Lymph Nodes/immunology
- Mycosis Fungoides/pathology
- "Neoplastic Stem Cells/chemistry, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, CCR7/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Sezary Syndrome/pathology
- "Skin/cytology, immunology"
- Skin Neoplasms/pathology
- "T-Lymphocyte Subsets/chemistry, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sezary syndrome and mycosis fungoides arise from distinct T-cell subsets: a biologic rationale for their distinct clinical behaviors.
**Authors:** Campbell JJ, Clark RA, Watanabe R, Kupper TS
**Journal:** Blood (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2009-11-251926](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2009-11-251926)

## Content

1. Blood. 2010 Aug 5;116(5):767-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-11-251926. Epub 2010
May 18.

Sezary syndrome and mycosis fungoides arise from distinct T-cell subsets: a
biologic rationale for their distinct clinical behaviors.

Campbell JJ(1), Clark RA, Watanabe R, Kupper TS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital/Harvard, Boston, MA,
USA.

Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) encompasses leukemic variants (L-CTCL) such as
Sézary syndrome (SS) and primarily cutaneous variants such as mycosis fungoides
(MF). To clarify the relationship between these clinically disparate
presentations, we studied the phenotype of T cells from L-CTCL and MF. Clonal
malignant T cells from the blood of L-CTCL patients universally coexpressed the
lymph node homing molecules CCR7 and L-selectin as well as the differentiation
marker CD27, a phenotype consistent with central memory T cells. CCR4 was also
universally expressed at high levels, and there was variable expression of other
skin addressins (CCR6, CCR10, and CLA). In contrast, T cells isolated from MF
skin lesions lacked CCR7/L-selectin and CD27 but strongly expressed CCR4 and
CLA, a phenotype suggestive of skin resident effector memory T cells. Our
results suggest that SS is a malignancy of central memory T cells and MF is a
malignancy of skin resident effector memory T cells.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-11-251926
PMCID: PMC2918332
PMID: 20484084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
