---
reference_id: "PMID:40593720"
title: A rationally designed 2C inhibitor prevents enterovirus D68-infected mice from developing paralysis.
authors:
- Li K
- Rudy MJ
- Hu Y
- Tan H
- Lambrinidis G
- Wu X
- Georgiou K
- Tan B
- Frost J
- Wilson C
- Clarke P
- Kolocouris A
- Zhang QY
- Tyler KL
- Wang J
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-61083-8
keywords:
- Animals
- "Enterovirus Infections/drug therapy, virology, complications"
- "Antiviral Agents/pharmacology, chemistry, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- "Enterovirus D, Human/drug effects"
- Mice
- Humans
- "Paralysis/virology, prevention & control, drug therapy"
- Virus Replication/drug effects
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Drug Design
- "Viral Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rationally designed 2C inhibitor prevents enterovirus D68-infected mice from developing paralysis.
**Authors:** Li K, Rudy MJ, Hu Y, Tan H, Lambrinidis G, Wu X, Georgiou K, Tan B, Frost J, Wilson C, Clarke P, Kolocouris A, Zhang QY, Tyler KL, Wang J
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-61083-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61083-8)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 Jul 1;16(1):5987. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-61083-8.

A rationally designed 2C inhibitor prevents enterovirus D68-infected mice from
developing paralysis.

Li K(#)(1), Rudy MJ(#)(2), Hu Y(#)(1), Tan H(#)(1), Lambrinidis G(3), Wu X(4),
Georgiou K(3), Tan B(1), Frost J(2), Wilson C(2), Clarke P(2), Kolocouris A(3),
Zhang QY(4), Tyler KL(5)(6)(7)(8), Wang J(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers,
the State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
CO, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry, Section of Pharmaceutical Chemistry,
Department of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,
Panepistimiopolis-Zografou, Athens, 15771, Greece.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, R. Ken Coit College of Pharmacy,
The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
CO, USA. ken.tyler@cuanschutz.edu.
(6)Department of Immunology & Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA. ken.tyler@cuanschutz.edu.
(7)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA. ken.tyler@cuanschutz.edu.
(8)Neurology Service, Rocky Mountain VA Medical Center, Aurora, CO, USA.
ken.tyler@cuanschutz.edu.
(9)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers,
the State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
junwang@pharmacy.rutgers.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) is a respiratory virus that often causes mild to
moderate respiratory illnesses and, in severe cases, can lead to paralysis and
rarely death, mainly in children. There is currently no vaccine or antiviral for
EV-D68. Here, we report the rational design of viral 2 C inhibitors for treating
EV-D68 infection-induced paralysis in a neonatal mouse model. Viral 2 C protein
is a multi-functional protein vital for viral replication. Structure-based drug
design identifies Jun6504 showing potent and broad-spectrum antiviral activity
against multiple strains of EV-D68, EV-A71, and CVB3, as well as favorable in
vitro and in vivo pharmacokinetic properties. In a neonatal mouse model of
EV-D68 infection, Jun6504 significantly improves paralysis score and weight gain
when administered immediately or 24 hours post-infection. Jun6504 also reduces
viral titers in the spinal cord and the infected quadriceps muscle.
Collectively, Jun6504 represents a promising candidate for further development
as an EV-D68 antiviral.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-61083-8
PMCID: PMC12216181
PMID: 40593720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: J.W. is the inventor of
patent application US11834451B2, which was granted based on this work. The
patent covers the composition of matter for the 2C inhibitors and their use as
antiviral agents against enteroviruses. There are no restrictions on publishing
the associated data. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
