---
reference_id: "PMID:25216398"
title: A Gly-zipper motif mediates homodimerization of the transmembrane domain of the mitochondrial kinase ADCK3.
authors:
- Khadria AS
- Mueller BK
- Stefely JA
- Tan CH
- Pagliarini DJ
- Senes A
journal: J Am Chem Soc
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1021/ja505017f
keywords:
- Amino Acid Motifs
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cell Line
- Cell Membrane/enzymology
- Conserved Sequence
- Escherichia coli/cytology
- Glycine
- Humans
- Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Interactions
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutagenesis
- Protein Multimerization
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# A Gly-zipper motif mediates homodimerization of the transmembrane domain of the mitochondrial kinase ADCK3.
**Authors:** Khadria AS, Mueller BK, Stefely JA, Tan CH, Pagliarini DJ, Senes A
**Journal:** J Am Chem Soc (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1021/ja505017f](https://doi.org/10.1021/ja505017f)

## Content

1. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Oct 8;136(40):14068-77. doi: 10.1021/ja505017f. Epub 2014
Sep 24.

A Gly-zipper motif mediates homodimerization of the transmembrane domain of the
mitochondrial kinase ADCK3.

Khadria AS(1), Mueller BK, Stefely JA, Tan CH, Pagliarini DJ, Senes A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison , 433 Babcock
Drive, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States.

Interactions between α-helices within the hydrophobic environment of lipid
bilayers are integral to the folding and function of transmembrane proteins;
however, the major forces that mediate these interactions remain debated, and
our ability to predict these interactions is still largely untested. We recently
demonstrated that the frequent transmembrane association motif GASright, the
GxxxG-containing fold of the glycophorin A dimer, is optimal for the formation
of extended networks of Cα-H hydrogen bonds, supporting the hypothesis that
these bonds are major contributors to association. We also found that
optimization of Cα-H hydrogen bonding and interhelical packing is sufficient to
computationally predict the structure of known GASright dimers at near atomic
level. Here, we demonstrate that this computational method can be used to
characterize the structure of a protein not previously known to dimerize, by
predicting and validating the transmembrane dimer of ADCK3, a mitochondrial
kinase. ADCK3 is involved in the biosynthesis of the redox active lipid,
ubiquinone, and human ADCK3 mutations cause a cerebellar ataxia associated with
ubiquinone deficiency, but the biochemical functions of ADCK3 remain largely
undefined. Our experimental analyses show that the transmembrane helix of ADCK3
oligomerizes, with an interface based on an extended Gly-zipper motif, as
predicted by our models. The data provide strong evidence for the hypothesis
that optimization of Cα-H hydrogen bonding is an important factor in the
association of transmembrane helices. This work also provides a structural
foundation for investigating the role of transmembrane association in regulating
the biological activity of ADCK3.

DOI: 10.1021/ja505017f
PMCID: PMC4195374
PMID: 25216398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

A fundamental event
in the folding and oligomerization of membrane
proteins is the association of the transmembrane (TM) helices.1,2 After the TM helices have been inserted in the membrane, helix–helix
association is required to achieve the final fold and oligomeric state
of the protein. A favorite system for investigating the rules that
govern TM helix association are the single-span membrane proteins,3−7 primarily because a variety of methods are available for measuring
their oligomerization (including FRET,8−11 sedimentation equilibrium analytical
ultracentrifugation,12,13 in vivo assays in biological
membranes,14−16 SDS-PAGE,17,18 and steric trapping19,20). Conversely, assessing the folding energetics of multispan membrane
proteins still represents a tremendous challenge.21,22

In addition to being a tractable system, the single-span membrane
proteins attract interest because of their biological importance.
These proteins comprise the most numerous class of membrane proteins,
constituting about half of the total.23−25 Rather than acting as
mere membrane anchors for soluble domains, as it was once assumed,
the oligomerization of single TM domains actively plays roles in assembly,
signal transduction, ion conduction and regulation in a wide variety
of biological processes.7

To investigate
the basis of oligomerization in TM helices, our
group and others have pursued a strategy based on the analysis of
frequently occurring association motifs.26−32 One of the most important motifs is GASright27 (Figure 1), which is
best known as the fold of a widely studied model system for TM association,
the glycophorin A TM dimer.33 GASright gets its name from its right-handed crossing angle (Figure 1b), and from the characteristic small amino acids
at its interface (GAS: Gly, Ala, Ser),27 which are arranged to form GxxxG and GxxxG-like patterns (GxxxA,
AxxxG, etc.).28,29 In many ways GASright parallels the important coiled coil, a frequently occurring interaction
motif and model for folding and association for soluble proteins.34−36 Like the coiled coil, GASright is characterized by a
specific geometry (a short interhelical distance and a crossing angle
near −40°), it has a distinctive sequence signature (the
GxxxG patterns), and is one of the most common oligomerization motifs,
if not the most common.27

Structural features of
the GASright TM association motif.
(a) The GASright motif (which is best known as the fold
of the TM region of glycophorin A) is a right-handed helical dimer
with a short interhelical distance d and a right-handed
crossing angle θ of approximatively −40°. The GxxxG
sequence pattern near the crossing point (marked in red in the green
helix) allows the backbones to come into close contact. (b) The contact
enables the formation of networks of interhelical hydrogen bonds between
Cα–H donors and carbonyl oxygen acceptors (shown in detail
in (c)).

In a recent computational analysis
of transmembrane dimer geometry,
we proposed that the primary role of GxxxG in GASright is
to promote the formation of networks of stabilizing hydrogen bonds
between Cα–H donors and carbonyl oxygen acceptors on
opposed helices37 (Figure 1b,c). More specifically, we proposed that the small amino
acids perform two distinct functions: the first is to create permissive
steric conditions, allowing the two helices to come in backbone contact,
thus bringing the Cα–H donors and carbonyl acceptors
in proximity. The second function, which is performed exclusively
by Gly, is to increase the number of hydrogen bonds by donating with
the second Hα, which corresponds to the side chain R-group in
all other amino acids. To perform these functions, the small amino
acids are required to be present at specific positions. The formation
of this network of hydrogen bonds is also dependent on the specific
crossing angle of GASright (−40°), which precisely
aligns Cα–H donors spaced at i, i+1 on one helix against carbonyl acceptors spaced at i, i+3 on the opposing helix (see Figure
4 in Mueller et al.37). Overall, GASright appears geometrically optimized for interhelical Cα–H
formation.37

Cα–H hydrogen
bonds are commonly observed in proteins.38 Carbons are generally weak donors, but the Cα
in proteins is activated by the electron-withdrawing amide groups
on both sides, and quantum calculations indicate that the energy of
Cα–H hydrogen bonds may be as much as one-third to half
of that of canonical donors in vacuum.39,40 Therefore,
they are likely to be stabilizing factors in proteins embedded in
the hydrophobic milieu of the membrane, particularly when they occur
in multiple instances at the same interface, as in the GASright motif (Figure 1).41 An IR-based investigation of the CD2 stretching mode
of a Cα–H donor in the transmembrane domain of glycophorin
A produced an estimated contribution of −0.88 kcal/mol for
the hydrogen bond.42 Conversely, a folding
study of the multispan membrane protein bacteriorhodopsin in which
a Cα–H···O side chain hydroxyl acceptor
(Thr-24) was mutated indicated that this particular bond was not stabilizing.43 Subsequent computational work suggested that
the orientation of the groups can determine whether an interaction
may be strongly favorable or unfavorable.44,45

The exact contribution of hydrogen bonds to membrane protein
folding
and association − whether the donor is a Cα–H
or a more “canonical” N–H or O–H group
− is still unresolved.46 A governing
assumption maintains that donors and acceptors buried in the membrane
would not pay a significant desolvation penalty upon helix association,
and therefore the formation of hydrogen bonds should contribute appreciably
to the stability of membrane proteins. Indeed, polar residues can
promote interaction of transmembrane helices.13,47,48 Yet, the limited number of experimental
observations made to date seem to indicate that the contribution of
hydrogen bonding in the membrane may be, surprisingly, of the same
magnitude observed for water-soluble proteins.46

Despite the scarce experimental evidence regarding
the contribution
of Cα–H hydrogen bonds to TM interactions, the hypothesis
that they drive folding and oligomerization remains compelling. In
particular, the fact that the prevalent GASright motif
corresponds to the only interhelical geometry that maximizes formation
of Cα—H···O=C networks, strongly
suggests that these bonds are indeed a major contributor to association.37 Under these premises, we hypothesized that a
computational structural search based on the simultaneous optimization
of side chain packing and Cα–H hydrogen bonding may be
able to predict the structure of GASright dimers. The resulting
program, named CATM, was tested against the small database of known
GASright homodimeric structures.37 We found that CATM predicts these known structures at near atomic
precision. The finding provides further indirect support that Cα–H
hydrogen bonding is likely to be a structural determinant of GASright dimers.37 The positive result
also indicates that CATM may be a powerful tool for assisting the
experimental investigation of GASright homodimers of unknown
structure.

To test the ability of our methods to predict ab
initio the structure
of unknown GASright dimers, here we investigate ADCK3,
a human mitochondrial protein that is a member of the highly conserved
UbiB protein kinase-like family.49 UbiB
family members account for approximately one-quarter of microbial
PKL sequences,50 are ubiquitous among eukaryotes,50 and are strongly associated with lipid metabolism.51−53 Most organisms have a UbiB family member
that is required for the biosynthesis of coenzyme Q (CoQ, ubiquinone). Deletion of the Escherichia
coli gene ubiB(54) or the yeast gene coq8(55) completely halts CoQ biosynthesis. Similarly,
mutations to human ADCK3 are known to cause CoQ deficiency and cerebellar
ataxia,56−59 and mutations to human ADCK4 were recently shown to cause CoQ deficiency
and a steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome.60 Our knowledge of the molecular mechanism by which UbiB family proteins
enable CoQ biosynthesis is limited, primarily because the endogenous
substrates of UbiB proteins have not yet been discovered. However,
we do know that coq8p in yeast somehow stabilizes a complex of CoQ
biosynthesis enzymes.61 CoQ biosynthesis
occurs within the context of cellular membranes, either the plasma
membrane of prokaryotes or the inner mitochondrial membrane of eukaryotes,
and the responsible enzymes are either integral membrane proteins
or peripherally associated membrane proteins.61 ADCK3, which contains a predicted TM domain, is also likely to associate
with membranes, but this hypothesis has not yet been tested. Biochemical
characterization of the ADCK3 TM domain would provide an important
foundation for understanding how it enables CoQ biosynthesis.

The potential functional importance of the ADCK3 TM region is underlined
by the existence of a mutation at the putative edge of the TM domain
(R213W) that disrupts CoQ biosynthesis and causes cerebellar ataxia
in human patients.57 Furthermore, dimerization
of single-span TM domains is known to be central to the regulation
of some kinase families, such as the receptor tyrosine kinases.62,63 However, it was unknown whether the predicted TM helix of ADCK3
could actually insert into biological membranes and whether the TM
helix can self-associate to potentially drive dimerization of ADCK3.

Here, we demonstrate experimentally that the TM domain of ADCK3
inserts into membranes and self-associates. Using extensive mutagenesis,
we also show that the interaction interface is consistent with the
structural models predicted by CATM, which involves an extended Gly-zipper
motif30 (i.e., a series of Gly amino acids
separated at i, i+4). The experimental
and computational data also indicates that the Gly-zipper interface
is potentially compatible with alternative conformations of the TM
domain, opening the possibility that conformational changes of the
TM dimer may be important for ADCK3 function.

All oligonucleotides were purchased
in desalted form from Integrated DNA Technologies and used without
purification. The expression vectors pccKAN, pccGpA-wt, and pccGpA-G83I,
and malE deficient E. coli strain
MM39 were kindly provided by Dr. Donald M. Engelman.14 The genes encoding the TM domain of ADCK3 (214-LANFGGLAVGLGFGALA-230)
and ADCK4 (92-LANFGGLAVGLGLGVLA-108) were cloned into
the NheI-BamHI restriction sites of the pccKAN vector.
Site directed mutations to produce single amino acid variants in the
TM domain of ADCK3 were introduced with the QuikChange kit (Stratagene).

The TOXCAT
constructs were transformed into MM39 cells. A freshly streaked colony
was inoculated into 3 mL of LB broth containing 100 μg/mL ampicillin
and grown overnight at 37 °C. 30 μL of overnight cultures
were inoculated into 3 mL of LB broth and grown to an OD420 of approximately 0.8–1.1 (OD600 of 0.4 to 0.6)
at 37 °C. After recording the optical density, 1 mL of cells
was spun down for 10 min at 17000g and resuspended
in 500 mL of sonication buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM EDTA, pH 8.0).
Cells were lysed by probe sonication at medium power for 8 s over
ice. An aliquot was removed from each sample and stored in SDS-PAGE
loading buffer for immunoblotting. The lysates were then cleared by
centrifugation at 17000g, and the supernatant was
kept on ice for chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) activity assay.

To confirm proper membrane
insertion and orientation of the TOXCAT constructs, overnight cultures
were plated on M9 minimal medium plates containing 0.4% maltose as
the only carbon source and grown at 37 °C for 48 h.14

CAT activity was measured as described.64,65 Briefly, 1 mL of buffer containing 0.1 mM acetyl CoA, 0.4 mg/mL
5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) or Ellman’s reagent,
and 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.8, were mixed with 40 μL of cleared
cell lysates and the absorbance at 412 nm was measured for 2 min to
establish basal enzyme activity rate. After addition of 40 μL
of 2.5 mM chloramphenicol in 10% ethanol, the absorbance was measured
for an additional 2 min to determine CAT activity. The basal CAT activity
was subtracted and the value was normalized by the cell density measured
as OD420. All measurements were determined at least in
duplicate and the experiments were repeated at least twice.

Protein
expression was confirmed by immunoblotting. The cell lysates (10 μL)
were loaded onto a NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen)
and then transferred to PVDF membranes (VWR) for 1 h at 100 millivolts.
Blots were blocked using 5% bovine serum albumin (US Biologicals)
in TBS-Tween buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20) for
2 h at 4 °C, incubated with biotinylated anti-Maltose Binding
Protein antibodies (Vector laboratories) overnight at 4 °C, followed
by peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin (Jackson ImmunoResearch) for
2 h at 4 °C. Blots were developed with the Pierce ECL Western
Blotting Substrate Kit and chemiluminescence was measured using an
ImageQuant LAS 4000 (GE Healthsciences).

The structure of ADCK3-TM was
predicted with CATM,37 which is distributed
with the open source MSL C++ library v. 1.266 at http://msl-libraries.org. The computational mutagenesis
was performed on all ADCK3 models by applying the same point mutations
measured experimentally in the context of a fixed backbone, followed
by side chain optimization. Side chain mobility was modeled using
the energy-based conformer library applied at the 95% level.67 Energies were determined using the CHARMM 22
van der Waals function68 and the hydrogen
bonding function of SCWRL 4,69 as implemented
in MSL,66 with the following parameters
for Cα donors, as reported previously: B =
60.278; D0 = 2.3 Å; σd = 1.202 Å; αmax = 74.0°; βmax = 98.0°.37 The relative
energy of each mutant was calculated aswhere EWT,dimer and Emut,dimer are the energies of the
wild type and mutant sequence, respectively, in the dimeric state,
and EWT,monomer and Emut,monomer are the energies of the wild type and mutant
sequence, respectively, in a side chain optimized monomeric state
with the same sequence. As reported previously,65 the effect of each mutation was classified in four categories
(analogous to the experimental mutagenesis) using the following criterion:
category 0, “WT-like”, ΔEmut < 2 kcal/mol; category 1, “Mild”, 2 ≤
ΔEmut < 4; category 2, “Severe”,
4 ≤ ΔEmut < 8; category
3, “Disruptive”, ΔEmut ≥ 8. The numerical category values were averaged to calculate
the average position-dependent disruption value.

The protein kinase-like
domain of ADCK3 is preceded on the N-terminal side by a region of
undefined function. A predicted TM helix within this region is annotated
in UniProt for the close homologue ADCK4,70 providing a potential anchor for the protein at the inner mitochondrial
membrane (Figure 2a). UniProt does not report
a predicted TM domain for the corresponding region of ADCK3, but the
sequence of the putative TM segment is highly conserved between the
two proteins. The same general domain organization and function is
also predicted for the yeast homologue Coq8p. Given that ADCK3 and
ADCK4 are localized to the mitochondrial matrix,71 the TM domain would position their catalytic kinase domains
on the matrix face of the inner membrane, the same localization of
the enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of coenzyme Q.61,71 Therefore, it is important to verify the TM domain experimentally
and to investigate its potential functional role.

The transmembrane domain
of ADCK3 has a conserved Gly-zipper motif.
(a) Domain organization of ADCK3 homologues, which are proteins associated
with the mitochondrial inner membrane. They are predicted to contain
a TM domain (yellow) and a protein kinase-like domain (white). (b)
The sequence alignment of the TM domains of ADCK3, ADCK4 (yellow box).
The TM domains of ADCK3 and ADKC4, which differ only at two positions,
contain a number of GxxxG-like motifs, including an extended Gly-zipper
motif (red) and a second AxxxG motif which is off-register by two
positions (magenta). (c) Sequence logo of the alignment of 400 sequences
homologous to ADCK3 from a broad range of eukaryotic species highlights
conservation in the TM domain and in the N-terminal side of the juxta-membrane
region. All Gly positions in the Gly-zipper (red) appear strongly
conserved. The most conserved positions in the TM region are L220
and G227. Identifiers of the sequences used for the alignment are
provided in Supplementary Text S1 (SI).

The sequences of the putative
TM domains of ADCK3 and ADCK4 are
aligned in Figure 2b. As summarized in Table 1, these sequences have low hydrophobicity and a
relative short length (17 amino acids), and thus are not well recognized
by prediction servers. The TM domain of ADCK3, which contains one
polar amino acid (Asn 216), is recognized as a borderline TM sequence
by most servers. Specifically, the segment is not recognized by TMHMM72 and E(z),73 but the
segment is predicted as transmembrane by MemBrain74,75 and HMMTOP,76,77 and Phobius78,79 and ΔG prediction80 recognize it with low confidence. ADCK4 shares over 50% sequence
identify with ADCK3 but their TM domains are almost identical, differing
only at two positions (Figure 2b). Because
of these two substitutions (and primarily because of the A228 V substitution),
the hydrophobicity of the TM domain of ADCK4 is higher (as calculated
with either the Wimley-White octanol scale81 or the “biological” scale80,82) and is sufficient to be predicted by most servers, except E(z),
with good confidence (Table 1).

Wimley–White
octanol scale
(kcal/mol).81

Biological hydrophobicity scale
(kcal/mol).80,82

TMPRED76,77 at http://www.ch.embnet.org/software/TMPRED_form.html.

Phobius78,79 at http://phobius.sbc.su.se.

TMHMM72 at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM-2.0.

ΔG predictior80 at http://dgpred.cbr.su.se (in paretheses
the ΔGApp for the predicted TM segment,
kcal/mol).

MemBrain74,75 at http://www.csbio.sjtu.edu.cn/bioinf/MemBrain.

E(z) potential73 at http://ez.degradolab.org/ez/original.

In interpreting these prediction
data, it is important to consider
that TM prediction servers are trained against a majority of proteins
that are inserted in the membrane via a translocon mediated mechanism.
The sequence requirements for translocon mediated insertion in an
eukaryotic system are well understood.80,82 A recent analysis
in a bacterial system shows good overall correspondence to the mammalian
system, but the hydrophobicity threshold appears to be distinctly
lower.83 Much less is known about the requirements
for membrane insertion of mitochondrial integral membrane proteins
that are encoded in the nucleus, such as ADCK3. There is, however,
good indication that the hydrophobicity threshold for these proteins
should be even lower, to avoid mistargeting of these proteins to the
endoplasmic reticulum and to facilitate their translocation to the
mitochondrion.84−89 Based on the above considerations, it is highly probable that the
predicted TM segments of ADCK3 and ADCK4 are indeed bona fide TM domains.

As
shown in Figure 2b, the predicted TM regions
of ADCK3 and ADCK4 are very rich in small amino acids such as Gly,
Ala and Ser (9 in each). The sequences contain a number of GxxxG and
GxxxG-like (AxxxG) helix association patterns, which appear to be
evolutionarily conserved (Figure 2c). In particular,
they contain an extended Gly-zipper motif,30 i.e., a series of small amino acids (215-AxxxGxxxGxxxG-227) spaced
at i, i+4, highlighted in red in
Figure 2b. They also contain an additional
AxxxG motif (magenta), which is off-frame by two positions with respect
to the Gly-zipper. This spacing projects the two motifs on opposite
helical faces.

GxxxG-like patterns
can drive helix–helix
association.28 They occur with high frequency
in TM helices,29 both in multispan proteins
and in oligomerizing single-span membrane proteins,41 and are often important for biological function.4 The presence of GxxxG-like motifs in the putative
TM sequence of ADCK3 raised the question of whether this domain oligomerizes.
To investigate this question, we analyzed the sequence with CATM,37 a program for the structural prediction of GASright motifs, an important and common class of GxxxG-mediated
dimers.27

As shown in Figure 3, CATM predicts five alternative models for the
TM sequence of ADCK3. The figure schematically depicts the geometrical
features of the dimers. The position of the crossing point between
the two helices is marked (dot), and the interfacial positions that
surround this crossing point are highlighted by a green parallelogram.
All the positions that are involved in intermonomer contacts at the
interface are highlighted in either yellow, or in red if they belong
to the Gly-zipper motif. The scores of the top models of ADCK3 in
CATM (−59.8, −50.8, and −47.7 for Models 1, 2,
and 3 respectively) are comparable to the scores obtained for the
five known structures of GASright motifs (which range between
−56 and −38), which CATM is able to predict at near
atomic precision.37

CATM predicts multiple
modes of interaction along the Gly-zipper
motif of ADCK3. Schematic representation of the five models of GASright homodimers generated by CATM for ADCK3-TM. The crossing
point is marked by a black dot. The four positions that surround the
crossing point are marked by a green parallelogram and are underlined
in the sequence. The positions involved in interhelical packing at
the dimer interface are highlighted: in red are the interfacial positions
that belong to the extended Gly-zipper motif of ADCK3; all other interfacial
positions are highlighted in yellow. The table summarizes the geometry
of the five models: interhelical distance d; crossing
angle θ; vertical (Z′) and axial (ω′)
coordinates of the crossing point within the parallelogram of closest
approach; and energy score E. For the geometric definitions,
see Figure S2 (SI) and Mueller et al.37

Notably, the extended Gly-zipper is involved at the helix–helix
interface in all models (Figure 3). Model 1
and 2 are related geometries whose crossing points fall in the quadrilateral
defined by Gly 219, Leu 220, Gly 223 and Leu 224 (AxxxGLxxGLxxG).
These two models differ by the position of the crossing point and,
most importantly, by their crossing angle, which is near the canonical
−40° of GASright motifs for Model 2, and narrower
for Model 1 (−27.1°). The smaller crossing angle causes
Model 1 to have a more extended interface, which is reflected also
by the more extensive van der Waals interaction of Model 1. Both models
have 12 interhelical Cα–H hydrogen bonds, although Model
2 has a better overall hydrogen bonding score (Tables S1 and S2 (SI)).

The other three predicted models
cross at different sections of
the Gly-zipper. Model 3 and Model 5 are variations that cross within
the N-terminal side of the zipper (ANxxGLxxGxxxG). Conversely,
Model 4 crosses on the C-terminal side of the zipper (AxxxGxxxGLxxGA). CATM does not produce any model mediated by the off-frame
AxxxG motif of ADCK3 (magenta in Figure 2b).
The coordinates of all ADCK3 models are available as Supporting Information and for download at http://seneslab.org/ADCK3_models.

To investigate the structural predictions of
CATM, we assessed the dimerization of ADCK3-TM and ADCK4-TM experimentally
using TOXCAT, a widely used assay for TM association in biological
membranes.14 This assay involves the biological
expression in the membrane of E. coli of a chimeric
construct that fuses the TM domain of interest with the ToxR transcriptional
activator of Vibrio cholera (Figure 4a). TM helix association
leads to the dimerization of the ToxR domain, resulting in expression
of the reporter gene chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT). The
expression level of CAT (measured by its enzymatic activity) is compared
to that of a stable dimer, Glycophorin A (GpA), and to a monomeric
GpA variant (GpA-G83I) as standards.

ADCK3-TM and ADCK4-TM associate strongly
in TOXCAT. (a) TOXCAT
is an in vivo assay based on a construct in which the transmembrane
domain under investigation is fused to the ToxR transcriptional activator
of V. cholerae. Transmembrane association results
in the expression of a reporter gene in E. coli cells,
which can be quantified. (b) malE complementation
assay. The TOXCAT construct containing the TM domain of ADCK3 and
ADCK4 can use maltose as a carbon source, demonstrating correct insertion.
GpA: Glycophorin A positive control; no TM: pcckan plasmid without
TM insert, negative control. (c) TOXCAT assay of ADCK3 and ADCK4.
ADCK3 shows approximately 150% of the CAT activity of the strong transmembrane
dimer of Glycophorin A (GpA). The monomeric G83I mutant (GpA*) is
used as a negative control. Data reported as average and standard
deviation over four replicate experiments. Expression levels were
controlled by immunoblotting.

We first tested whether the constructs inserted correctly
in the
plasma membrane of E. coli, using a complementation
test in the malE deficient strain MM39. The ADCK3-TM
and ADCK4-TM TOXCAT constructs supported growth in minimal media with
maltose as the sole carbon source (Figure 4b), indicating that the fusion proteins are recognized as TM domains
and are expressed in the bacterial inner membrane in the correct orientation,
with the MBP moiety positioned on the periplasmic side.

To examine
whether ADCK3 oligomerizes in TOXCAT, we quantified
the enzymatic activity of the reporter gene CAT, as an indirect measure
of its expression. As shown in Figure 4c, the
CAT activities of the ADCK3-TM and ADCK4-TM constructs are higher
than the activity of the GpA standard, which is a stable homodimer.
These results indicate that the TM domain of ADCK3 and ADCK4 form
strong homo-oligomers in TOXCAT.

To assess experimentally the
interaction interface of the ADCK3-TM oligomer and validate the computational
predictions, we performed large scale mutagenesis along the entire
span of the TM segment, and measured their self-association in TOXCAT.
Each position was individually changed to a variety of large and small
hydrophobic amino acids. The expectation is that the changes at interfacial
positions are more likely to perturb oligomerization than changes
at lipid exposed positions, as commonly observed (for example17,90−93). A total of 53 mutants were generated and analyzed in TOXCAT.

The TOXCAT data is shown in Figure S1 (SI) and is schematically represented in Figure 5a. To compute an overall position-dependent sensitivity to mutation,
we applied a classification scheme for the variants’ phenotypes
using four categories (dashed lines in Figure
S1 (SI)), labeled as “WT-like” (>80% of wild
type CAT activity), “Mild” (50–80%), “Severe”
(20–50%) and “Disruptive” (0–20%). These
scores were then averaged to obtain a position specific “average
disruption”. Position-based averaging reduces some of the natural
variability of the biological assay and the method has been reliable
in identifying the most sensitive positions at the helix–helix
binding interface.65,90,93,94 The position-dependent “average disruption”
is also plotted in numerical form in Figure 5b.

Position specific “average disruption” suggests that
the Gly-zipper is at the helical interface. (a) “MacKenzie
plot” summarizing the effect of all mutations of ADCK3-TM measured
in TOXCAT. The color coding of the GxxxG motifs in the sequence corresponds
to Figure 1. The data has been subdivided in
three categories as in the legend. The raw TOXCAT data is shown in Figure S1 (SI). A calculated average disruption
score for each position is displayed at the bottom of the scheme.
(b) The same average disruption plotted numerically (0 = as TW; 3
= disruptive). The mutagenesis reveals two positions that are essential
for self-association, G223 and G227, which are the last two position
of ADCK3′s Gly-zipper (red).

A majority of the variants had CAT activity levels similar
or higher
compared to the wild type sequences (Figure 5b). However, a number of variants showed dramatically reduced activity
in a position specific fashion. In particular, all variants of the
two C-terminal Gly residues of the Gly-zipper (G223 and G227) have
the strongest disruptive phenotypes. Interestingly, the next most
sensitive positions are L220 and L224, which are also predicted to
be interfacial in almost all CATM models (Figure 3). Conversely, the N-terminal positions of the zipper are
either mildly affected by mutation (G219) or appear completely tolerant
(A215).

The off-frame 221-AxxxG-225 (magenta) is also relatively
insensitive
to mutation. Substitution for a large Leu at these two positions has
only a mild effect, and the Ile variants are completely tolerated.
This is consistent with the CATM predictions, which do not identify
any model in which this motif is at the interface.

A position
of interest for self-association was Asn 216. Polar
residues can drive TM helix oligomerization through the formation
of hydrogen bonds, and have been found to be important for the association
of model peptides13,47 and of biological systems,95−98 including in the context of GASright motifs.94,99 In addition, some polarity of position 216 appears to be relatively
conserved, as the main substitutions of N216 in a sequence alignment
(Figure 2c) are Gly, Ser, Gln and Glu. However,
neither the computational nor the experimental analysis suggest that
N216 is important for self-association. Asn 216 can be mutated to
Ala, Leu or Phe in TOXCAT without reduction of self-association. CATM
is in agreement with the experimental data, as it does not identify
any potential strong polar interaction (i.e., N–H···O
hydrogen bonds) involving the side chain of N216, although the side
chain carbonyl oxygen (Oδ1) acts as a Cα–H bond
acceptor in most models.

Overall the data indicates that the
interface of the ADCK3-TM oligomer
is mediated by Gly-zipper motif and, in particular, by the C-terminal
side of this interaction motif.

In order to identify the structure most consistent
with the TOXCAT data, we performed a mutational analysis of the five
models generated by CATM. Using a protocol developed previously to
analyze similar mutational data,65 we created
in silico the same set of variants that were tested experimentally,
and computed an analogous position-dependent “average disruption”
index based on the interaction energies.

The experimental and
theoretical disruption patterns are compared in Figure 6. Given that all CATM structures interact through portions
of the extended Gly-zipper, the computed patterns have similar periodicity
across all models, with disruption peaking at position G219, G223
and/or G227. Models 1, 3, and 5 (Figure 6a,c,e)
show high sensitivity to mutation on the N-terminal side of the TM
domain, in disagreement with the experimental observations. In these
three models, mutations to G219 are completely disruptive, whereas
the position is only mildly sensitive in TOXCAT. Models 1 and 5 are
also very sensitive at positions A215 and N216, which are completely
tolerant experimentally.

Computational mutagenesis identifies compatible
models. Comparison
of the mutagenesis obtained in TOXCAT (same as Figure 5b) with the computational mutagenesis performed on the five
CATM models (a–e). The comparison suggests that Model 2 is
the best fit to the experimental data, followed by Model 4. (f) A
linear combination of Model 2 (60%) and Model 4 (40%) produces an
excellent fit to the data, suggesting that the TM of ADCK3 may be
in equilibrium between at least two conformations in the TOXCAT system.

The structures of Models 2 and
4 are compared in Figure 7. Model 2 (Figure 6b) and
Model 4 (Figure 6d) are in better agreement
with the experimental data and represent two possible structural solutions
for the ADCK3 TM dimer. The disruption for both models peak at G223
and G227, which are also the two most disruptive positions in TOXCAT.
However, Model 4 appears insensitive at position G219 (which is mildly
sensitive experimentally) and it is extremely disruptive at position
A228 (which is insensitive experimentally). In addition to being a
better match, Model 2 also has lower energy, better packing and a
larger number of hydrogen bonds (Tables S2 and
S4 (SI)). Therefore, Model 2 appears to be the best structural
candidate for the ADCK3 TM dimer.

Structural Models 2 and 4. Comparison
of the structures of CATM
Models 2 and 4 for ADCK3. From left to right, entire TM helix, detail
of the interface, and same conformation in full atom spheres. Model
2 has lower energy, a larger number of hydrogen bonds (12 in Model
2 versus 4 in Model 4) and more extended and complementary packing.

In a recent analysis of known
GASright structures, we
demonstrated that CATM is capable of capturing alternative conformations
of biological importance.37 Therefore,
an additional possibility is that the TM domain of ADCK3 may be in
equilibrium between two or more structures. We observed that a linear
combination of the mutagenesis profiles of the two models that best
fit the data, 60% of Model 2 and 40% of Model 4, improves the fit
with the TOXCAT data, producing an excellent correspondence between
the two experiments (Figure 6f). This interpolation
is not necessarily quantitative, but it suggests that a conformational
equilibrium would be compatible with the data. If such an equilibrium
occurs in the biological context, it would postulate that the TM domain
of ADCK3 may be a switchable element, a trait that could be important
for regulation or signaling, as observed in a number of other single-span
TM proteins.7 In this framework, the Gly-zipper
would provide a dynamic interface for structural changes that could
potentially affect either the distance of the helical termini or the
relative rotation of the helices.

We
have presented a computational and experimental analysis of
the structural organization of the TM domain of the mitochondrial
kinase ADCK3. While more experiments are necessary to fully test CATM,
the work provides a first practical demonstration of the applicability
of the program to the characterization of a TM dimer of unknown structure.
It also confirms the ability of the algorithm (which is based on optimization
of van der Waals and Cα–H hydrogen bonding) to correctly
predict GASright motifs.

We have experimentally demonstrated
that the TM domain of ADCK3
self-associates in E. coli membranes. While the specific
oligomeric state could not be determined by TOXCAT, the evidence suggests
that ADCK3-TM is likely dimeric. Although Gly-zipper motifs can be
involved in the formation of higher-oligomeric complexes,30 the good agreement between the experimental
and computational mutagenesis supports the homodimeric hypothesis.
Moreover, such oligomeric state is also consistent with a large body
of structural evidence, which shows that kinases frequently form dimeric
complexes (for example100−102), while higher oligomers are
rarely observed.

The analysis reveals a number of leads that
may be biologically
important. The helix–helix interaction interface was determined
and the mutagenesis identified a number of disruptive interfacial
mutations that will be useful for follow-up functional studies. The
computational prediction of alternative models in which the helices
adopt a different crossing point along the Gly-zipper interface raises
also the hypothesis that the TM domain of ADCK3 may possibly undergo
conformational changes.

Indirectly, the work also provides important
insight about ADCK4.
All the amino acids that participate at the dimerization interface
of ADCK3 are identical in ADCK4. The two positions that differ between
the two sequences (F228L and A230 V, Figure 2) are insensitive to variation when they are mutated individually
(Figure 5). The computational predictions obtained
for ADCK3 and ADCK4 are nearly identical, and it is thus expected
that both TM domains dimerize with the same structure. Because the
two interfaces are compatible with each other, it also possible that
the TM domains could associate to drive formation of a heterodimeric
complex between ADCK3 and ADCK4. These hypotheses need to be investigated
in a biological context; the present analysis provides the theoretical
foundation necessary for testing in vivo the role of these TM domains.
