---
reference_id: "PMID:26831710"
title: Annotating and Interpreting Linear and Cyclic Peptide Tandem Mass Spectra.
authors:
- Niedermeyer TH
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3375-4_13
keywords:
- Depsipeptides/chemistry
- Peptides/chemistry
- "Peptides, Cyclic/chemistry"
- Software
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Annotating and Interpreting Linear and Cyclic Peptide Tandem Mass Spectra.
**Authors:** Niedermeyer TH
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4939-3375-4_13](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-3375-4_13)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1401:199-207. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3375-4_13.

Annotating and Interpreting Linear and Cyclic Peptide Tandem Mass Spectra.

Niedermeyer TH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Interfaculty Institute for Microbiology and Infection Medicine, Eberhard 
Karls University, Auf der Morgenstelle 28, Tübingen, 72076, Germany. 
timo.niedermeyer@uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Tübingen, Germany. 
timo.niedermeyer@uni-tuebingen.de.

Nonribosomal peptides often possess pronounced bioactivity, and thus, they are 
often interesting hit compounds in natural product-based drug discovery 
programs. Their mass spectrometric characterization is difficult due to the 
predominant occurrence of non-proteinogenic monomers and, especially in the case 
of cyclic peptides, the complex fragmentation patterns observed. This makes 
nonribosomal peptide tandem mass spectra annotation challenging and 
time-consuming. To meet this challenge, software tools for this task have been 
developed. In this chapter, the workflow for using the software mMass for the 
annotation of experimentally obtained peptide tandem mass spectra is described. 
mMass is freely available (http://www.mmass.org), open-source, and the most 
advanced and user-friendly software tool for this purpose. The software enables 
the analyst to concisely annotate and interpret tandem mass spectra of linear 
and cyclic peptides. Thus, it is highly useful for accelerating the structure 
confirmation and elucidation of cyclic as well as linear peptides and 
depsipeptides.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3375-4_13
PMID: 26831710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]