---
reference_id: "PMID:40440437"
title: "Homocystinuria due to Deficiency of N(5,10)-Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase Activity."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Umair M
- Alfadhel M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homocystinuria due to Deficiency of N(5,10)-Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase Activity.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Umair M, Alfadhel M

## Content

1. Homocystinuria due to Deficiency of N(5,10)-Methylenetetrahydrofolate
Reductase  Activity.

Umair M(1), Alfadhel M(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2025 May 29 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)Medical Genomics Research Department, King Abdullah International Medical
Research Center (KAIMRC), King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences
(KSAU-HS), Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs (MNGHA), Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia
(2)Genetics and Precision Medicine Department, King Abdullah Specialized
Children Hospital (KASCH), King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of National
Guard Health Affairs (MNGHA), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Homocystinuria due to deficiency of
N(5,10)-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) activity can present in the
neonatal period, adolescence, or adulthood. Neonatal onset is typically
characterized by postnatal microcephaly, developmental delays, feeding
difficulties, growth deficiency, seizures, intellectual disability, neonatal
apneas, motor and gait abnormalities, psychiatric manifestations, a history of
stroke, and progressive neurologic deterioration. Individuals with adolescent or
adult onset may present with milder clinical manifestations, which may include
thromboembolic events, lens dislocation, and less commonly cognitive decline,
psychiatric manifestations, seizures, and/or motor and gait abnormalities.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of homocystinuria due to deficiency of
N(5,10)-MTHFR activity is established in a proband with characteristic clinical
and laboratory findings (low plasma methionine, increased plasma and urine
homocysteine, low plasma and CSF 5-methyltetrahydrofolate [MTHF]) and biallelic
pathogenic variants in MTHFR identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Betaine, methionine, vitamin B12, and L-5-MTHF
can reduce risk of neurologic manifestations and increase life span. Supportive
care: Respiratory support as needed; sleep study for those with suspected apnea
and respiratory compromise; feeding therapy as needed; standard treatment for
seizures by neurologist; developmental and educational support; treatment of
motor and gait abnormalities per orthopedist, physical medicine and
rehabilitation specialist, and physical and occupational therapists; treatment
for neurovascular manifestations to prevent stroke; social work and family
support. Surveillance: Plasma homocysteine and plasma amino acids to assess
methionine concentration every three to four months; assess for respiratory
issues annually or as needed; assess growth, nutrition, oral intake, seizures,
changes in tone, movement disorders, and family needs at each visit; behavioral
assessment annually or as needed; assessment of motor and gait abnormalities at
each visit; neurovascular assessment annually or as needed. Agents/circumstances
to avoid: High-protein diet; medications impacting folate metabolism (e.g.,
methotrexate); certain anti-seizure medications (e.g., valproic acid) that may
increase homocysteine levels; inadequate monitoring of vitamin levels.
Evaluation of relatives at risk: Testing of all at-risk sibs is warranted to
allow early detection and timely intervention. If prenatal testing has not been
performed, a newborn with an older sib with homocystinuria due to deficiency of
N(5,10)-MTHFR activity should receive immediate nutritional and metabolic
management pending results of biochemical testing (e.g., plasma homocysteine and
methionine concentration) and/or molecular genetic testing for the familial
MTHFR pathogenic variants.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Homocystinuria due to deficiency of N(5,10)-MTHFR activity
is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both parents are known to be
heterozygous for an MTHFR pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual
has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an
asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier.
Once the MTHFR pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family
member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 40440437
