---
reference_id: "PMID:36809318"
title: "Glioblastoma and Other Primary Brain Malignancies in Adults: A Review."
authors:
- Schaff LR
- Mellinghoff IK
journal: JAMA
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.0023
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Brain/pathology
- "Brain Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Glioblastoma/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Glioma/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Lymphoma/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Temozolomide/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glioblastoma and Other Primary Brain Malignancies in Adults: A Review.
**Authors:** Schaff LR, Mellinghoff IK
**Journal:** JAMA (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2023.0023](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2023.0023)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2023 Feb 21;329(7):574-587. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.0023.

Glioblastoma and Other Primary Brain Malignancies in Adults: A Review.

Schaff LR(1)(2), Mellinghoff IK(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York.
(2)Department of Neurology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York.
(3)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2023 Jul 11;330(2):188-189. doi: 10.1001/jama.2023.8587.

IMPORTANCE: Malignant primary brain tumors cause more than 15 000 deaths per 
year in the United States. The annual incidence of primary malignant brain 
tumors is approximately 7 per 100 000 individuals and increases with age. 
Five-year survival is approximately 36%.
OBSERVATIONS: Approximately 49% of malignant brain tumors are glioblastomas, and 
30% are diffusely infiltrating lower-grade gliomas. Other malignant brain tumors 
include primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma (7%) and malignant forms 
of ependymomas (3%) and meningiomas (2%). Symptoms of malignant brain tumors 
include headache (50%), seizures (20%-50%), neurocognitive impairment (30%-40%), 
and focal neurologic deficits (10%-40%). Magnetic resonance imaging before and 
after a gadolinium-based contrast agent is the preferred imaging modality for 
evaluating brain tumors. Diagnosis requires tumor biopsy with consideration of 
histopathological and molecular characteristics. Treatment varies by tumor type 
and often includes a combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation. For 
patients with glioblastoma, the combination of temozolomide with radiotherapy 
improved survival when compared with radiotherapy alone (2-year survival, 27.2% 
vs 10.9%; 5-year survival, 9.8% vs 1.9%; hazard ratio [HR], 0.6 [95% CI, 
0.5-0.7]; P < .001). In patients with anaplastic oligodendroglial tumors with 
1p/19q codeletion, probable 20-year overall survival following radiotherapy 
without vs with the combination of procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine was 
13.6% vs 37.1% (80 patients; HR, 0.60 [95% CI, 0.35-1.03]; P = .06) in the EORTC 
26951 trial and 14.9% vs 37% in the RTOG 9402 trial (125 patients; HR, 0.61 [95% 
CI, 0.40-0.94]; P = .02). Treatment of primary CNS lymphoma includes high-dose 
methotrexate-containing regimens, followed by consolidation therapy with 
myeloablative chemotherapy and autologous stem cell rescue, nonmyeloablative 
chemotherapy regimens, or whole brain radiation.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The incidence of primary malignant brain tumors is 
approximately 7 per 100 000 individuals, and approximately 49% of primary 
malignant brain tumors are glioblastomas. Most patients die from progressive 
disease. First-line therapy for glioblastoma is surgery followed by radiation 
and the alkylating chemotherapeutic agent temozolomide.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2023.0023
PMCID: PMC11445779
PMID: 36809318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest and have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form 
for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts.