---
reference_id: "PMID:39080655"
title: "Extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma with tonsil involvement: a case report."
authors:
- Xiao Y
- Zhang X
- Gao Y
- Lin K
- Chi W
- Zhou K
- Ma J
- Zhang T
journal: BMC Oral Health
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12903-024-04452-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma with tonsil involvement: a case report.
**Authors:** Xiao Y, Zhang X, Gao Y, Lin K, Chi W, Zhou K, Ma J, Zhang T
**Journal:** BMC Oral Health (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12903-024-04452-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12903-024-04452-x)

## Content

1. BMC Oral Health. 2024 Jul 30;24(1):867. doi: 10.1186/s12903-024-04452-x.

Extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma with tonsil involvement: a case 
report.

Xiao Y(#)(1), Zhang X(#)(2), Gao Y(1), Lin K(1), Chi W(1), Zhou K(3), Ma J(4), 
Zhang T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Children's Hospital 
Affiliated to Kunming Medical University (Kunming Children's Hospital), Kunming, 
China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Kunming Medical 
University (Kunming Children's Hospital), Kunming, China.
(3)Kunming Medical University Haiyuan College, Kunming, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Children's Hospital 
Affiliated to Kunming Medical University (Kunming Children's Hospital), Kunming, 
China. majing@etyy.cn.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Children's Hospital 
Affiliated to Kunming Medical University (Kunming Children's Hospital), Kunming, 
China. km62502023@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (ENKTL) with tonsil 
involvement is not common, especially in children.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 13-year-old girl presented with an unexplained sore throat 
for more than 2 months, together with intermittent fever and suppurative 
tonsilitis. Nasopharyngoscopy revealed a pharyngeal mass. Enhanced computed 
tomography (CT) scan showed tonsillar hypertrophy and punctate calcification. 
Chronic pyogenic granulomatous inflammation with pseudoepithelial squamous 
epithelial hyperplasia was observed in left tonsil, and pyogenic granulomatous 
inflammation and a small number of T-lymphoid cells were detected in the right 
tonsil. The immunohistochemical results showed CD2+, CD3+, CD4+, CD5+, CD8+, 
granzyme B+, and TIA-1+. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 20%. The case showed 
T cell receptor gene rearrangement. Finally, the case was diagnosed as ENKTL of 
stage II with tonsil involvement. The patient received 6 cycles of chemotherapy 
with SMILE regimen, and showed complete response with no recurrence in the 
follow-up.
CONCLUSION: We presented a rare case of ENKTL with tonsil involvement in a 
child. The patient showed complete response to the SMILE chemotherapy with no 
recurrence.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-024-04452-x
PMCID: PMC11290306
PMID: 39080655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.