---
reference_id: "PMID:36876653"
title: An innovative hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy approach benefits CLN1 disease in the mouse model.
authors:
- Peviani M
- Das S
- Patel J
- Jno-Charles O
- Kumar R
- Zguro A
- Mathews TD
- Cabras P
- Milazzo R
- Cavalca E
- Poletti V
- Biffi A
journal: EMBO Mol Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15252/emmm.202215968
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Brain
- Central Nervous System
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genetic Therapy
- Hematopoietic Stem Cells
- Thiolester Hydrolases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An innovative hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy approach benefits CLN1 disease in the mouse model.
**Authors:** Peviani M, Das S, Patel J, Jno-Charles O, Kumar R, Zguro A, Mathews TD, Cabras P, Milazzo R, Cavalca E, Poletti V, Biffi A
**Journal:** EMBO Mol Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15252/emmm.202215968](https://doi.org/10.15252/emmm.202215968)

## Content

1. EMBO Mol Med. 2023 Apr 11;15(4):e15968. doi: 10.15252/emmm.202215968. Epub
2023  Mar 6.

An innovative hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy approach benefits CLN1
disease in the mouse model.

Peviani M(1)(2)(3)(4), Das S(1), Patel J(1), Jno-Charles O(1), Kumar R(1), Zguro
A(1), Mathews TD(1), Cabras P(4), Milazzo R(3), Cavalca E(3), Poletti V(1)(2),
Biffi A(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Gene Therapy Program, Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood
Disorders Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-TIGET), San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "L. Spallanzani", University of
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplant Division, Woman's and
Child Health Department, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) can establish a long-lasting
microglia-like progeny in the central nervous system of properly myeloablated
hosts. We exploited this approach to treat the severe CLN1 neurodegenerative
disorder, which is the most aggressive form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
due to palmitoyl-protein thioesterase-1 (PPT1) deficiency. We here provide the
first evidence that (i) transplantation of wild-type HSPCs exerts partial but
long-lasting mitigation of CLN1 symptoms; (ii) transplantation of HSPCs
over-expressing hPPT1 by lentiviral gene transfer enhances the therapeutic
benefit of HSPCs transplant, with first demonstration of such a dose-effect
benefit for a purely neurodegenerative condition like CLN1 disease; (iii)
transplantation of hPPT1 over-expressing HSPCs by a novel
intracerebroventricular (ICV) approach is sufficient to transiently ameliorate
CLN1-symptoms in the absence of hematopoietic tissue engraftment of the
transduced cells; and (iv) combinatorial transplantation of transduced HSPCs
intravenously and ICV results in a robust therapeutic benefit, particularly on
symptomatic animals. Overall, these findings provide first evidence of efficacy
and feasibility of this novel approach to treat CLN1 disease and possibly other
neurodegenerative conditions, paving the way for its future clinical
application.

© 2023 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/emmm.202215968
PMCID: PMC10086581
PMID: 36876653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AB and MP are co‐authors in the patent
PCT/US2017/056774. The authors have no other competing interests to declare.
Synopsis Image was created with Biorender.com.
