---
reference_id: "PMID:39664273"
title: "Dieulafoy lesion with rare vascular complications: diagnostic and therapeutic approach."
authors:
- Abdoh Q
- Samara E
- Zayed A
- Khader M
- Maqboul I
- Rashed MAM
journal: J Surg Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/jscr/rjae750
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dieulafoy lesion with rare vascular complications: diagnostic and therapeutic approach.
**Authors:** Abdoh Q, Samara E, Zayed A, Khader M, Maqboul I, Rashed MAM
**Journal:** J Surg Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jscr/rjae750](https://doi.org/10.1093/jscr/rjae750)

## Content

1. J Surg Case Rep. 2024 Dec 5;2024(12):rjae750. doi: 10.1093/jscr/rjae750. 
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Dieulafoy lesion with rare vascular complications: diagnostic and therapeutic 
approach.

Abdoh Q(1), Samara E(2), Zayed A(2), Khader M(3), Maqboul I(4), Rashed MAM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, GI and Endoscopy Unit, An-Najah National 
University Hospital, Asira Street, Nablus, Palestine.
(2)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, An-Najah 
National University, Al-Junaid Street, Nablus, Palestine.
(3)Department of Interventional Radiology, An-Najah National University 
Hospital, Asira Street, Nablus, Palestine.
(4)Department of General Surgery and Radiology, An-Najah National Hospital, 
Asira Street, Nablus, Palestine.
(5)Department of Radiology, Rafedia Hospital, Rafidia Main Street, Nablus, 
Palestine.

Dieulafoy lesions are a rare cause of gastrointestinal bleeding, characterized 
by an enlarged submucosal blood vessel that bleeds without visible 
abnormalities. The diagnosis is typically made via endoscopy, and treatment 
usually involves endoscopic therapy. This case involves a 46-year-old female who 
presented with upper gastrointestinal bleeding due to a Dieulafoy's lesion, 
treated with band ligation and later embolization after the lesion was found to 
originate from the left phrenic artery. The patient developed rare 
complications, including splenic infarction and pleural effusion, which required 
additional management. Upon initial investigations, the patients had an 
accidental finding on computed tomography of asymptomatic celiac artery 
compression that was advised to take into consideration for the possibility of 
developing median arcuate ligament syndrome and was treated conservatively. The 
case highlights the diagnostic and therapeutic challenges of Dieulafoy's lesion 
and underscores the need for individualized treatment and further research.

Published by Oxford University Press and JSCR Publishing Ltd. © The Author(s) 
2024.

DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjae750
PMCID: PMC11630252
PMID: 39664273

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of interest.