---
reference_id: "PMID:1509881"
title: Dengue encephalopathy.
authors:
- Hendarto SK
- Hadinegoro SR
journal: Acta Paediatr Jpn
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200x.1992.tb00971.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Hendarto SK, Hadinegoro SR
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr Jpn (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1442-200x.1992.tb00971.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1442-200x.1992.tb00971.x)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr Jpn. 1992 Jun;34(3):350-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1442-200x.1992.tb00971.x.

Dengue encephalopathy.

Hendarto SK(1), Hadinegoro SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Health, Medical Faculty, University of Indonesia, 
Jakarta.

Dengue encephalopathy or dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) with CNS involvement 
used to be considered a relatively rare condition; but the number of cases 
reported in human studies has been increasing every year. Diagnosis of dengue 
encephalopathy is based on clinically diagnosed DHF according to the W.H.O. 
criteria (1980), with CNS manifestations consisting of abrupt onset of 
hyperpyrexia, non-transient alteration of consciousness, headache, 
vomiting--with or without seizures--and normal CSF. Many factors may be 
considered to be directly or indirectly associated with CNS signs and symptoms 
in DHF, the main pathology being leakage of plasma into serous spaces and 
abnormal hemostasis, leading to hypovolemic shock and hemorrhage in many organs 
of the body. Acute liver failure is considered to be one of the main factors 
causing brain pathology. One hundred fifty-two cases of dengue encephalopathy 
admitted during 3 periods at the Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital in Jakarta were 
studied retrospectively. The overall incidence was 152 out of 2,441 DHF cases, 
or 6.2%. The most pronounced symptoms were hyperpyrexia, alteration of 
consciousness and convulsions. Laboratory examination showed an unusually high 
increase of serum transaminases, hyponatremia, and hypoxia. Neurologic 
abnormalities detected were hemiparesis and tetraparesis of the extremities, and 
second nerve atrophy; such abnormalities were found in 10 out of the 152 cases, 
or 6.5%.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1442-200x.1992.tb00971.x
PMID: 1509881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]