---
reference_id: "PMID:32905845"
title: FOXC1 variant in a family with anterior segment dysgenesis and normal-tension glaucoma.
authors:
- Or L
- Barkana Y
- Hecht I
- Weiner C
- Einan-Lifshitz A
- Pras E
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2020.108220
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FOXC1 variant in a family with anterior segment dysgenesis and normal-tension glaucoma.
**Authors:** Or L, Barkana Y, Hecht I, Weiner C, Einan-Lifshitz A, Pras E
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2020.108220](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2020.108220)

## Content

1. Exp Eye Res. 2020 Nov;200:108220. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2020.108220. Epub 2020
Sep  6.

FOXC1 variant in a family with anterior segment dysgenesis and normal-tension 
glaucoma.

Or L(1), Barkana Y(2), Hecht I(3), Weiner C(4), Einan-Lifshitz A(3), Pras E(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shamir Medical Center, Israel; Sackler Faculty 
of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic address: 
orlior555@gmail.com.
(2)Private Practice, Ramla, Israel.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Shamir Medical Center, Israel; Sackler Faculty 
of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Matlow's 
Ophthalmo-genetic Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, Shamir Medical 
Center, Israel.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Shamir Medical Center, Israel; Sackler Faculty 
of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Matlow's Ophthalmo-genetic 
Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, Shamir Medical Center, Israel.

Our study describes the glaucoma phenotype in a family with Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome (ARS) and a FOXC1 variant. Included were 20 subjects from a large three 
generation family of Jewish Indian ancestry. Subjects underwent a comprehensive 
ophthalmic examination including automated perimetry and optical coherence 
tomography. Eight subjects were available for molecular analysis which included 
whole genome sequencing on selected patients and Sanger sequencing for variant 
screening. Eleven patients demonstrated a wide spectrum of Axenfeld-Rieger 
anomaly signs and symptoms. These ranged from subtle angle abnormalities to 
remarkable anterior segment abnormalities such as corectopia, iris adhesions and 
strands. Among them, six had glaucoma and two were glaucoma suspects. Of the six 
subjects with glaucoma three had high-tension glaucoma and two had 
normal-tension glaucoma. Molecular analysis revealed a previously described 
pathogenic variant in the FOXC1 gene (c.378C > G p.I126M; rs104893958), in six 
affected patients which was not identified in two healthy siblings. Molecular 
analysis also revealed a PITX2 missense variant (c.28T > A p.L10M; rs755864040) 
which did not segregate with clinical findings and was considered likely benign. 
In conclusion, patients with ARS due to FOXC1 variants may present with 
glaucomatous optic nerve damage without apparent elevation in IOP. 
Normal-tension glaucoma is less commonly reported in individuals with ARS and a 
comprehensive glaucoma assessment may be warranted in these individuals even 
with normal IOP. These findings raise the possibility that glaucomatous damage 
associated with FOXC1 is not only due to high IOP.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2020.108220
PMID: 32905845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]