---
reference_id: "PMID:37634669"
title: Development and Validation of a Nomogram to Predict the Risk of Recurrent Lower Extremity Radiating Pain Within 1 Week Following Full-Endoscopic Lumbar Discectomy.
authors:
- Zhong D
- Wang Y
- Lin L
- Cheng S
- Zhao GS
- Wang LY
- Liu Y
- Ke ZY
journal: World Neurosurg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.08.090
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development and Validation of a Nomogram to Predict the Risk of Recurrent Lower Extremity Radiating Pain Within 1 Week Following Full-Endoscopic Lumbar Discectomy.
**Authors:** Zhong D, Wang Y, Lin L, Cheng S, Zhao GS, Wang LY, Liu Y, Ke ZY
**Journal:** World Neurosurg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.wneu.2023.08.090](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2023.08.090)

## Content

1. World Neurosurg. 2023 Nov;179:e348-e358. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.08.090. Epub
 2023 Aug 25.

Development and Validation of a Nomogram to Predict the Risk of Recurrent Lower 
Extremity Radiating Pain Within 1 Week Following Full-Endoscopic Lumbar 
Discectomy.

Zhong D(1), Wang Y(2), Lin L(1), Cheng S(1), Zhao GS(1), Wang LY(1), Liu Y(1), 
Ke ZY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Spine Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China. Electronic address: 
303496@hospital.cqmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Accurately predicting the risk of lower extremity (LE) radiating 
pain after surgery is an important endeavor for spinal surgeons. Our study aimed 
to identify risk factors for LE radiating pain after decompression with 
full-endoscopic lumbar discectomy (FELD) and develop a nomogram.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical data of patients with lumbar 
disc herniation who underwent FELD. Two hundred thirty-five patients diagnosed 
at our hospital from January 2015 to December 2020 were used for model 
development. The independent risk factors for LE radiating pain after surgery 
were determined by least absolute shrinkage and selection operator logistic 
regression and multivariate logistic regression analysis. A nomogram was 
developed to predict the risk of LE radiating pain based on independent risk 
factors. Receiver operating characteristic curve, calibration curve, and 
decision curve analyses were used to evaluate the predictive performance. The 
nomogram was further verified by an independent cohort.
RESULTS: Three hundred seventy-five patients were enrolled in this study, with 
102 patients in the training cohort reporting LE radiating pain after FELD, 
while 133 patients did not. In the validation cohort, 57 patients reported LE 
radiating pain after FELD, while 83 patients did not. The model was established 
by multivariate logistic regression analysis. The risk factors included a higher 
Michigan State University classification of herniated discs, increased disease 
course, increased time of surgery, reduced lateral recess width, and an 
interlaminar surgical approach, compared to transforaminal approach. The 
C-indices and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of the 
predictive model demonstrated good discrimination. Good predictive performance 
and accuracy were also observed in the validation cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel nomogram for predicting recurrent LE radiating pain within 
1 week after FELD was established and validated. More aggressive pain management 
strategies should be considered for patients at high risk of LE radiating pain 
after surgery, as predicted by this model.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.08.090
PMID: 37634669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]