---
reference_id: "PMID:22945646"
title: Progeny of Lgr5-expressing hair follicle stem cell contributes to papillomavirus-induced tumor development in epidermis.
authors:
- da Silva-Diz V
- Solé-Sánchez S
- Valdés-Gutiérrez A
- Urpí M
- Riba-Artés D
- Penin RM
- Pascual G
- González-Suárez E
- Casanovas O
- Viñals F
- Paramio JM
- Batlle E
- Muñoz P
journal: Oncogene
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.375
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antigens, CD34/analysis"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/etiology"
- Cell Movement
- Epidermis/pathology
- Hair Follicle/pathology
- Keratin-15/physiology
- Mice
- "Oncogene Proteins, Viral/physiology"
- Papillomaviridae/pathogenicity
- Papillomavirus E7 Proteins/physiology
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/physiology"
- Repressor Proteins/physiology
- Skin Neoplasms/etiology
- Stem Cells/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progeny of Lgr5-expressing hair follicle stem cell contributes to papillomavirus-induced tumor development in epidermis.
**Authors:** da Silva-Diz V, Solé-Sánchez S, Valdés-Gutiérrez A, Urpí M, Riba-Artés D, Penin RM, Pascual G, González-Suárez E, Casanovas O, Viñals F, Paramio JM, Batlle E, Muñoz P
**Journal:** Oncogene (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2012.375](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2012.375)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 8;32(32):3732-43. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.375. Epub 2012 Sep
3.

Progeny of Lgr5-expressing hair follicle stem cell contributes to
papillomavirus-induced tumor development in epidermis.

da Silva-Diz V(1), Solé-Sánchez S, Valdés-Gutiérrez A, Urpí M, Riba-Artés D,
Penin RM, Pascual G, González-Suárez E, Casanovas O, Viñals F, Paramio JM,
Batlle E, Muñoz P.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain.

Epidermal keratinocytes and hair follicle (HF) stem cells (SCs) expressing
oncogenes are competent at developing squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) in
epidermis and HFs, respectively. To determine whether bulge and hair germ (HG)
SCs from HF contribute to SCC generation at distant epidermis, the most frequent
epidermal region where these lesions arise in human skin, we used a skin cancer
mouse model expressing E6 and E7 oncoproteins from Human papillomavirus (HPV) 16
in SCs and basal keratinocytes. This previously described mouse model
recapitulates the human skin papillomavirus-induced SCC pathology. We show that
E6 and E7 expression promote the expansion of keratin 15 (K15)-expressing cells.
These K15(+) aberrant cells exhibit some HGSC markers and diminished expression
of Tcf3 and Sox9 hair SC specification genes, which are accumulated in HFs and
mislocalized to interfollicular epidermis. Leucine-rich G-protein-coupled
receptor 5 (Lgr5)-expressing SCs, localized in the bulge and HG, are the origin
of the expanded K15(+) cell population. A large subset of the Lgr5(+) SC
progeny, expressing K15 and P-cadherin, is aberrantly mobilized to the upper
region of HFs and the epidermis, and accumulates at E6/E7-induced pre-neoplastic
lesions and epidermal tumors. These findings indicate that aberrant accumulation
of altered SCs in HFs and their subsequent migration to the epidermis contribute
to HPV-induced tumor development.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.375
PMID: 22945646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
