---
reference_id: "PMID:38540277"
title: "Unraveling the Role of Endothelial Dysfunction in Osteonecrosis of the Femoral Head: A Pathway to New Therapies."
authors:
- Shao W
- Wang P
- Lv X
- Wang B
- Gong S
- Feng Y
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12030664
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unraveling the Role of Endothelial Dysfunction in Osteonecrosis of the Femoral Head: A Pathway to New Therapies.
**Authors:** Shao W, Wang P, Lv X, Wang B, Gong S, Feng Y
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12030664](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12030664)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 Mar 15;12(3):664. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12030664.

Unraveling the Role of Endothelial Dysfunction in Osteonecrosis of the Femoral 
Head: A Pathway to New Therapies.

Shao W(1), Wang P(1), Lv X(1), Wang B(2), Gong S(1), Feng Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430000, China.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, Wuhan No. 1 Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430000, China.

Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) is a disabling disease characterized by 
the disruption of the blood supply to the femoral head, leading to the apoptosis 
and necrosis of bone cells and subsequent joint collapse. Total hip arthroplasty 
is not optimal since most patients are young. Multiple risk factors contribute 
to osteonecrosis, including glucocorticoid (GC) usage, excessive alcohol intake, 
hypercholesterolemia, and smoking. Continuous stimulation by many variables 
causes a chronic inflammatory milieu, with clinical repercussions including 
endothelial dysfunction, leading to thrombosis, coagulopathy, and poor 
angiogenesis. Immune cells are the primary regulators of inflammation. Innate 
and adaptive immune cells interact with endothelial cells to hinder the 
regeneration and repair of bone lesions. An in-depth examination of the 
pathological drivers of ONFH reveals that endothelial dysfunction may be a major 
cause of osteonecrosis. Understanding the involvement of endothelial dysfunction 
in the chronic inflammation of osteonecrosis could aid in the development of 
possible therapies. This review summarizes the role of endothelial cells in 
osteonecrosis and further explains the pathophysiological mechanism of 
endothelial dysfunction in this disease from the perspective of inflammation to 
provide new ideas for the treatment of osteonecrosis.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12030664
PMCID: PMC10967783
PMID: 38540277

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.