---
reference_id: "PMID:19563860"
title: "Prevalence of kidney dysfunction in humans - relationship to cadmium dose, metallothionein, immunological and metabolic factors."
authors:
- Nordberg GF
- Jin T
- Wu X
- Lu J
- Chen L
- Lei L
- Hong F
- Nordberg M
journal: Biochimie
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2009.06.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of kidney dysfunction in humans - relationship to cadmium dose, metallothionein, immunological and metabolic factors.
**Authors:** Nordberg GF, Jin T, Wu X, Lu J, Chen L, Lei L, Hong F, Nordberg M
**Journal:** Biochimie (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biochi.2009.06.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2009.06.014)

## Content

1. Biochimie. 2009 Oct;91(10):1282-5. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2009.06.014. Epub
2009  Jun 27.

Prevalence of kidney dysfunction in humans - relationship to cadmium dose, 
metallothionein, immunological and metabolic factors.

Nordberg GF(1), Jin T, Wu X, Lu J, Chen L, Lei L, Hong F, Nordberg M.

Author information:
(1)Environmental Medicine, Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, 
Umea University, SE-90187 Umea, Sweden. gunnar.nordberg@envmed.umu.se

Long term cadmium (Cd) exposure in occupational and general environments may 
give rise to kidney dysfunction. This effect is usually considered to be the 
critical effect, i. e. the effect that occurs at relatively low level of 
exposure. The present review focused on studies of the prevalence of 
cadmium-related kidney dysfunction among population groups residing in cadmium 
contaminated areas in China. Dose-response relationships were shown between UCd 
and the prevalence of increased levels of biomarkers in urine of renal tubular 
dysfunction such as urinary beta-2-microglobulin or 
N-acetyl-beta-d-glucosaminidase - NAG or urinary albumin, a biomarker of 
glomerular kidney dysfunction. Factors that influence these dose-response 
relationships include: 1) Metallothionein mRNA levels in peripheral blood 
lymphocytes, used as a biomarker of the ability of each person, to synthesize 
metallothionein (a protein known to provide intracellular protection against 
cadmium toxicity). 2) The occurrence of increased levels in blood plasma of 
autoantibodies against metallothionein. 3) Concomitant changes in glucose 
metabolism i e Type II diabetes. 4) Concomitant exposure to other nephrotoxic 
agents such as inorganic arsenic. Increased susceptibility in diabetics has been 
shown also in population groups in Europe. In persons with type II diabetes and 
increased levels of autoantibodies against metallothionein in blood plasma or in 
persons with concomitant exposure to environmental inorganic arsenic, 
indications of Cd-related kidney dysfunction was observed at UCd levels around 1 
microg/g creatinine, levels found among "unexposed" population groups in many 
countries.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2009.06.014
PMID: 19563860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]