---
reference_id: "PMID:35430993"
title: "Clinical and Molecular Findings in a Turkish Family Who Had a (c.869- 1G>A) Splicing Variant in PSEN1 Gene with A Rare Condition: The Variant Alzheimer's Disease with Spastic Paraparesis."
authors:
- Doğan M
- Eröz R
- Tecellioğlu M
- Gezdirici A
- Çevik B
- Barış İ
journal: Curr Alzheimer Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2174/1567205019666220414101251
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Molecular Findings in a Turkish Family Who Had a (c.869- 1G>A) Splicing Variant in PSEN1 Gene with A Rare Condition: The Variant Alzheimer's Disease with Spastic Paraparesis.
**Authors:** Doğan M, Eröz R, Tecellioğlu M, Gezdirici A, Çevik B, Barış İ
**Journal:** Curr Alzheimer Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1567205019666220414101251](https://doi.org/10.2174/1567205019666220414101251)

## Content

1. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2022;19(3):223-235. doi:
10.2174/1567205019666220414101251.

Clinical and Molecular Findings in a Turkish Family Who Had a (c.869- 1G>A) 
Splicing Variant in PSEN1 Gene with A Rare Condition: The Variant Alzheimer's 
Disease with Spastic Paraparesis.

Doğan M(1), Eröz R(2), Tecellioğlu M(3), Gezdirici A(4), Çevik B(5), Barış İ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Malatya Turgut Ozal University Medical 
Faculty, Malatya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Aksaray University Medical Faculty, Aksaray, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Neurology, Inonu University Medical Faculty, Malatya, Turkey.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Basaksehir Cam and Sakura City Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Neurology, Tokat Gaziosmanpasa University Medical Faculty, 
Tokat, Turkey.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Koc University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Early-onset Alzheimer's disease (EOAD) is commonly diagnosed with an 
onset age of earlier than 65 years and accounts for 5-10% of all Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) cases. To date, although only 10-15% of familial EOAD cases have 
been explained, the genetic cause of the vast proportion of cases has not been 
explained. The variant Alzheimer's disease with spastic paraparesis (var- AD) is 
defined as a rare clinical entity characterized by early-onset dementia, 
spasticity of the lower extremities, and gait disturbance. Although the disease 
was first associated with variants in exon 9 of the PSEN1 gene, it was later 
shown that variations in other exons were also responsible for the disease.
OBJECTIVE: The current study aims to raise awareness of varAD, which occurs as a 
rare phenotype due to pathogenic variants in PSEN1. In addition, we aimed to 
evaluate the spectrum of mutations in varAD patients identified to date.
METHODS: Detailed family histories and clinical data were recorded. Whole exome 
sequencing was performed and co-segregation analysis of the family was done by 
Sanger sequencing. Also, a review of the molecularly confirmed patients with 
(varAD) from the literature was evaluated.
RESULTS: We identified a heterozygous splicing variant (c.869-1G>A) in the PSEN1 
gene, in a family with two affected individuals who present with varAD. We 
reported the clinical and genetic findings from the affected individuals.
CONCLUSION: We present the detailed clinical and genetic profiles of a Turkish 
patient with the diagnosis of varAD together with subjects from the literature. 
Together, we think that the clinical characteristics and the effect of the 
(c.869-1G>A) variant will facilitate our understanding of the PSEN1 gene in AD 
pathogenesis.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1567205019666220414101251
PMID: 35430993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]