---
reference_id: "PMID:29451879"
title: Dengue knowledge, attitudes and practices and their impact on community-based vector control in rural Cambodia.
authors:
- Kumaran E
- Doum D
- Keo V
- Sokha L
- Sam B
- Chan V
- Alexander N
- Bradley J
- Liverani M
- Prasetyo DB
- Rachmat A
- Lopes S
- Hii J
- Rithea L
- Shafique M
- Hustedt J
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006268
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue knowledge, attitudes and practices and their impact on community-based vector control in rural Cambodia.
**Authors:** Kumaran E, Doum D, Keo V, Sokha L, Sam B, Chan V, Alexander N, Bradley J, Liverani M, Prasetyo DB, Rachmat A, Lopes S, Hii J, Rithea L, Shafique M, Hustedt J
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0006268](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0006268)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Feb 16;12(2):e0006268. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006268. eCollection 2018 Feb.

Dengue knowledge, attitudes and practices and their impact on community-based 
vector control in rural Cambodia.

Kumaran E(1)(2), Doum D(1), Keo V(1), Sokha L(3), Sam B(3), Chan V(4), Alexander 
N(2), Bradley J(2), Liverani M(5), Prasetyo DB(6), Rachmat A(7), Lopes S(1), Hii 
J(1), Rithea L(3), Shafique M(1), Hustedt J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Technical Department, Malaria Consortium, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London, United Kingdom.
(3)National Dengue Control Program, National Center of Parasitology, Entomology 
and Malaria Control, Ministry of Health, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(4)Malaria and other Vector-borne and Parasitic diseases Office of the WHO 
Representative in Cambodia, World Health Organization, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(5)Department of Global Health and Development, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Entomology Unit, US Naval Medical Research Unit-2, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(7)Data Analyst Unit, US Naval Medical Research Unit-2, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

BACKGROUND: Globally there are an estimated 390 million dengue infections per 
year, of which 96 million are clinically apparent. In Cambodia, estimates 
suggest as many as 185,850 cases annually. The World Health Organization global 
strategy for dengue prevention aims to reduce mortality rates by 50% and 
morbidity by 25% by 2020. The adoption of integrated vector management approach 
using community-based methods tailored to the local context is one of the 
recommended strategies to achieve these objectives. Understanding local 
knowledge, attitudes and practices is therefore essential to designing suitable 
strategies to fit each local context.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: A Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices survey in 600 
randomly chosen households was administered in 30 villages in Kampong Cham which 
is one of the most populated provinces of Cambodia. KAP surveys were 
administered to a sub-sample of households where an entomology survey was 
conducted (1200 households), during which Aedes larval/pupae and adult female 
Aedes mosquito densities were recorded. Participants had high levels of 
knowledge regarding the transmission of dengue, Aedes breeding, and biting 
prevention methods; the majority of participants believed they were at risk and 
that dengue transmission is preventable. However, self-reported vector control 
practices did not match observed practices recorded in our surveys. No 
correlation was found between knowledge and observed practices either.
CONCLUSION: An education campaign regarding dengue prevention in this setting 
with high knowledge levels is unlikely to have any significant effect on 
practices unless it is incorporated in a more comprehensive strategy for 
behavioural change, such a COMBI method, which includes behavioural models as 
well as communication and marketing theory and practice.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ISRCTN85307778.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006268
PMCID: PMC5833285
PMID: 29451879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.