---
reference_id: "PMID:12455813"
title: Hematological manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Bowman SJ
journal: Scand J Rheumatol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1080/030097402760375124
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematological manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Bowman SJ
**Journal:** Scand J Rheumatol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1080/030097402760375124](https://doi.org/10.1080/030097402760375124)

## Content

1. Scand J Rheumatol. 2002;31(5):251-9. doi: 10.1080/030097402760375124.

Hematological manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis.

Bowman SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Department, Division of Immunity and Infection, The Medical 
School, University of Birmingham, UK. s.j.bowman@bham.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To inform clinical rheumatologists about the common and rarer 
hematological manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis with an emphasis on 
diagnosis and therapy and a particular reference to Felty's syndrome.
METHODS: Literature review.
RESULTS: The hematological manifestations can be conveniently categorized into 
the broad areas of; anemia, particularly NSAID induced iron deficiency anemia 
and the anemia of chronic disease, neutropenia, particularly Felty's syndrome 
and the large granular lymphocyte syndrome and drug induced neutropenia; 
thrombocytopenia, particularly autoimmune and drug induced thrombocytopenia; and 
hematological malignancy. Rarer conditions, their diagnosis and therapy are also 
described in this review.
CONCLUSION: Hematological manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis are very 
common. A logical approach using easily available tests should allow 
straightforward decisions about diagnosis and therapy to be made, even in 
patients with some of the rarer manifestations.

DOI: 10.1080/030097402760375124
PMID: 12455813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]