---
reference_id: "PMID:31769518"
title: Platelet activation during chronic hepatitis B infection exacerbates liver inflammation and promotes fibrosis.
authors:
- Jiang Q
- Mao R
- Wu J
- Chang L
- Zhu H
- Zhang G
- Ding Z
- Zhang J
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.25641
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Platelet activation during chronic hepatitis B infection exacerbates liver inflammation and promotes fibrosis.
**Authors:** Jiang Q, Mao R, Wu J, Chang L, Zhu H, Zhang G, Ding Z, Zhang J
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.25641](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25641)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2020 Dec;92(12):3319-3326. doi: 10.1002/jmv.25641. Epub 2020 Feb 
29.

Platelet activation during chronic hepatitis B infection exacerbates liver 
inflammation and promotes fibrosis.

Jiang Q(1), Mao R(1), Wu J(1), Chang L(2), Zhu H(1), Zhang G(2), Ding Z(2), 
Zhang J(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, 
and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Jing'An District Centre Hospital of 
Shanghai, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Recurrent hepatitis activity during chronic hepatitis B virus infection results 
in fibrosis and even hepatocellular carcinoma. It is still unclear what causes 
acute exacerbation. As platelets have recently been identified as a significant 
role in inflammation, we here investigated the role of platelets in mediating 
liver damage in patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Platelet 
aggregation testing and flow cytometry were carried out to evaluate platelet 
activation status in 121 patients chronically infected with hepatitis B across 
different phases of the condition. The correlation between platelet aggregation 
rate and liver inflammation or liver fibrosis index was evaluated. To 
investigate the genesis of platelet activation, several serum cytokines were 
also assessed by MILLIPLEX microsphere-based multiplex cytokine assay. Active 
hepatitis patients showed a higher aggregation rate than others. Levels of 
CD62p, a marker of platelet activation, were also increased in this group of 
patients. Positive correlations between platelet aggregation rate and liver 
inflammation or liver fibrosis were also noted, indicating a significant role of 
platelet in the progression of liver disease. The level of tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha, which is known to trigger platelet activation, was markedly higher 
in the active hepatitis group (P < .005). Based on the findings in our study, 
platelet activation plays a vital role in the progression of chronic hepatitis B 
virus infection. Antiplatelet therapy may provide a new means of hepatitis B 
infection treatment.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25641
PMID: 31769518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]