---
reference_id: "PMID:19559398"
title: WNT10A mutations are a frequent cause of a broad spectrum of ectodermal dysplasias with sex-biased manifestation pattern in heterozygotes.
authors:
- Bohring A
- Stamm T
- Spaich C
- Haase C
- Spree K
- Hehr U
- Hoffmann M
- Ledig S
- Sel S
- Wieacker P
- Röpke A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.001
keywords:
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Sex Characteristics
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WNT10A mutations are a frequent cause of a broad spectrum of ectodermal dysplasias with sex-biased manifestation pattern in heterozygotes.
**Authors:** Bohring A, Stamm T, Spaich C, Haase C, Spree K, Hehr U, Hoffmann M, Ledig S, Sel S, Wieacker P, Röpke A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.001)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Jul;85(1):97-105. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.001. Epub 
2009 Jun 25.

WNT10A mutations are a frequent cause of a broad spectrum of ectodermal 
dysplasias with sex-biased manifestation pattern in heterozygotes.

Bohring A(1), Stamm T, Spaich C, Haase C, Spree K, Hehr U, Hoffmann M, Ledig S, 
Sel S, Wieacker P, Röpke A.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, 48149 Münster, 
Germany. abohring@aol.com

Odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia (OODD), a rare autosomal-recessive inherited form 
of ectodermal dysplasia including severe oligodontia, nail dystrophy, 
palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, and hyperhidrosis, was recently shown to be caused 
by a homozygous nonsense WNT10A mutation in three consanguineous Lebanese 
families. Here, we report on 12 patients, from 11 unrelated families, with 
ectodermal dysplasia caused by five previously undescribed WNT10A mutations. In 
this study, we show that (1) WNT10A mutations cause not only OODD but also other 
forms of ectodermal dysplasia, reaching from apparently monosymptomatic severe 
oligodontia to Schöpf-Schulz-Passarge syndrome, which is so far considered a 
unique entity by the findings of numerous cysts along eyelid margins and the 
increased risk of benign and malignant skin tumors; (2) WNT10A mutations are a 
frequent cause of ectodermal dysplasia and were found in about 9% of an 
unselected patient cohort; (3) about half of the heterozygotes (53.8%) show a 
phenotype manifestation, including mainly tooth and nail anomalies, which was 
not reported before in OODD; and (4) heterozygotes show a sex-biased 
manifestation pattern, with a significantly higher proportion of tooth anomalies 
in males than in females, which may implicate gender-specific differences of 
WNT10A expression.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.001
PMCID: PMC2706962
PMID: 19559398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]