---
reference_id: "PMID:18070816"
title: Bloodspot assay using HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry for detection of Barth syndrome.
authors:
- Kulik W
- van Lenthe H
- Stet FS
- Houtkooper RH
- Kemp H
- Stone JE
- Steward CG
- Wanders RJ
- Vaz FM
journal: Clin Chem
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2007.095711
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Blood Specimen Collection
- Cardiolipins/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/diagnosis"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lysophospholipids/blood
- Male
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Syndrome
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bloodspot assay using HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry for detection of Barth syndrome.
**Authors:** Kulik W, van Lenthe H, Stet FS, Houtkooper RH, Kemp H, Stone JE, Steward CG, Wanders RJ, Vaz FM
**Journal:** Clin Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1373/clinchem.2007.095711](https://doi.org/10.1373/clinchem.2007.095711)

## Content

1. Clin Chem. 2008 Feb;54(2):371-8. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2007.095711. Epub 2007
Dec 10.

Bloodspot assay using HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry for detection of Barth
syndrome.

Kulik W(1), van Lenthe H, Stet FS, Houtkooper RH, Kemp H, Stone JE, Steward CG,
Wanders RJ, Vaz FM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Amsterdam, Laboratory Genetic
Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. w.kulik@amc.nl

BACKGROUND: Barth syndrome (BTHS) is a serious X-linked, metabolic, multisystem
disorder characterized by cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, myopathy, and growth
delay. Because early diagnosis and appropriate treatment are of key importance
for the survival of affected boys, we developed a biochemical BTHS screening
method based on analysis of the monolysocardiolipin:cardiolipin ratio in
bloodspots.
METHODS: We performed chloroform/methanol extraction on quarter-inch punches of
dried bloodspots on Guthrie cards from BTHS patients and controls. Extracts were
dried (60 degrees C, N(2)) and reconstituted in CHCl(3)/methanol/H(2)O [50:45:5
vol/vol/vol, 0.1% NH(3) (25%)]. HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry analysis was
performed with a normal-phase HPLC column and multiple reaction monitoring
transitions for monolysocardiolipin (MLCL) and cardiolipin (CL) with a total run
time of 10 min. The ratio of MLCL and CL was used as screening parameter.
RESULTS: All BTHS patients (n = 31) had monolysocardiolipin:cardiolipin ratios
>0.40 and all controls (n = 215) had monolysocardiolipin:cardiolipin ratios
<0.23. Using a cutoff point of 0.30, a blind test of 206 samples (199 controls,
7 BTHS) had sensitivity and specificity of 100%. Bloodspots could be stored at 4
degrees C or room temperature for >1 year without affecting the test outcome.
Three neonatal Guthrie cards of BTHS patients taken 3.6 to 5.8 years previously
were correctly identified as positive for BTHS.
CONCLUSIONS: HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry analysis of dried bloodspots is an
unambiguous screening test for BTHS with potential for rapid screening of
neonates suspected of having BTHS, making remote and retrospective diagnosis
accessible for a disease that is almost certainly underdiagnosed.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2007.095711
PMID: 18070816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
