---
reference_id: "PMID:34946881"
title: "Imaging the \"Hot Phase\" of a Familiar Left-Dominant Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy."
authors:
- Rubino M
- Scatteia A
- Frisso G
- Pacileo G
- Caiazza M
- Pascale CE
- Guarini P
- Limongelli G
- Dellegrottaglie S
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12121933
keywords:
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Ventricular Dysfunction, Left/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging the "Hot Phase" of a Familiar Left-Dominant Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Rubino M, Scatteia A, Frisso G, Pacileo G, Caiazza M, Pascale CE, Guarini P, Limongelli G, Dellegrottaglie S
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12121933](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12121933)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Nov 30;12(12):1933. doi: 10.3390/genes12121933.

Imaging the "Hot Phase" of a Familiar Left-Dominant Arrhythmogenic
Cardiomyopathy.

Rubino M(1)(2), Scatteia A(1), Frisso G(3)(4), Pacileo G(2), Caiazza M(2),
Pascale CE(1), Guarini P(1), Limongelli G(2), Dellegrottaglie S(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular MRI Laboratory, Division of Cardiology, Ospedale
Medico-Chirurgico Accreditato Villa dei Fiori, 80011 Acerra, Naples, Italy.
(2)Inherited and Rare Disease Unit, Department of Translational Medical
Sciences, Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 81100
Caserta, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University
Federico II, 80138 Napoli, Italy.
(4)CEINGE, Advanced Biotechnologies, 80145 Napoli, Italy.
(5)Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute/Marie-Josee and Henry R.
Kravis Center for Cardi-ovascular Health, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.

We describe the case of a young man with an initial diagnosis of acute
myocarditis that was finally recognized as a familial left-dominant
arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. The diagnostic process was also based on
demonstration, serial cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, and typical patterns
of myocardial damage, including features of the disease's inflammatory "hot
phase".

DOI: 10.3390/genes12121933
PMCID: PMC8702094
PMID: 34946881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflict of
interest.
