---
reference_id: "PMID:34243871"
title: "Extrathyroidal Manifestations of Thyroid Disease: Graves Eye Disease."
authors:
- Debnam JM
- Koka K
- Esmaeli B
journal: Neuroimaging Clin N Am
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.nic.2021.04.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extrathyroidal Manifestations of Thyroid Disease: Graves Eye Disease.
**Authors:** Debnam JM, Koka K, Esmaeli B
**Journal:** Neuroimaging Clin N Am (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nic.2021.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nic.2021.04.006)

## Content

1. Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 2021 Aug;31(3):367-378. doi:
10.1016/j.nic.2021.04.006.

Extrathyroidal Manifestations of Thyroid Disease: Graves Eye Disease.

Debnam JM(1), Koka K(2), Esmaeli B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroradiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit 1482, Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA. 
Electronic address: matthew.debnam@mdanderson.org.
(2)Ophthalmic Plastic Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit 1488, Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA; Orbit, 
Oculoplasty, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Services, Sankara Nethralaya, No 18, 
College Road, Chennai 600006, India.
(3)Ophthalmic Plastic Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit 1488, Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA.

Graves disease is an autoimmune disorder caused by the breakdown of immune 
tolerance to thyroid antigens against the TSH receptor. In approximately 25% of 
patients, an inflammatory condition, Graves eye disease (GED), affects the 
orbital soft tissues. About 60% of patients develop mild symptoms including fat 
expansion and inflammation of the levator muscle complex with resultant 
proptosis, eyelid retraction, and exposure of the globe. The remaining patients 
experience enlargement of one or more of the extraocular muscles, leading to 
conjunctival and eyelid edema and congestion, restricted ocular movement with 
resultant diplopia, and optic nerve compression leading to compressive optic 
neuropathy.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nic.2021.04.006
PMID: 34243871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]