---
reference_id: "PMID:39087232"
title: "Clinical and genetic evaluations of Zimmermann-Laband syndrome with gingival fibromatosis: a rare case report."
authors:
- Gu Y
- Yang X
- Guo X
- Wu M
- Huang X
- Guo H
- Li S
- Fu F
- Liu M
- Xuan K
- Liu A
journal: J Clin Pediatr Dent
year: '2024'
doi: 10.22514/jocpd.2024.095
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Male
- Gingivectomy/methods
- Female
- "Nails, Malformed/genetics"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic evaluations of Zimmermann-Laband syndrome with gingival fibromatosis: a rare case report.
**Authors:** Gu Y, Yang X, Guo X, Wu M, Huang X, Guo H, Li S, Fu F, Liu M, Xuan K, Liu A
**Journal:** J Clin Pediatr Dent (2024)
**DOI:** [10.22514/jocpd.2024.095](https://doi.org/10.22514/jocpd.2024.095)

## Content

1. J Clin Pediatr Dent. 2024 Jul;48(4):206-213. doi: 10.22514/jocpd.2024.095.
Epub  2024 Jul 3.

Clinical and genetic evaluations of Zimmermann-Laband syndrome with gingival
fibromatosis: a rare case report.

Gu Y(#)(1), Yang X(#)(1), Guo X(1), Wu M(1), Huang X(1), Guo H(1), Li S(1), Fu
F(1), Liu M(2), Xuan K(1), Liu A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, School of Stomatology, Air Force Medical
University, State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology & National Clinical
Research Center for Oral Diseases & Shaanxi Clinical Research Center for Oral
Diseases, 710032 Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Qinghai University Affiliated
Hospital, 810000 Xining, Qinghai, China.
(3)Department of Stomatology, The 985 Hospital of PLA, 030001 Taiyuan, Shanxi,
China.
(#)Contributed equally

Zimmermann-Laband Syndrome (ZLS; MIM 135500) is a rare genetic disorder with the
main clinical manifestations of gingival fibromatosis and finger/toe nail
hypoplasia. KCNH1 (potassium channel, voltage-gated, subfamily H, member-1),
KCNN3 (potassium channel, voltage-gated, subfamily H, member-3) and ATP6V1B2
(ATPase H+ transporting V1 subunit B2) genes are considered causative genes for
ZLS. However, there are limited reports about the diverse clinical presentation
and genetic heterogeneity. Reporting more information on phenotype-genotype
correlation and the treatment of ZLS is necessary. This case reported a
2-year-old patient with gingival enlargement that failure of eruption of the
deciduous teeth and severe hypoplasia of nails. Based on a systemic examination
and a review of the relevant literature, we made an initial clinical diagnosis
of ZLS. A novel pathogenic variant in the KCNH1 gene was identified using
whole-exome sequencing to substantiate our preliminary diagnosis. The
histopathological results were consistent with gingival fibromatosis.
Gingivectomy and gingivoplasty were performed under general anesthesia. After
surgery, the gingival appearance improved significantly, and the masticatory
function of the teeth was restored. After 2-year follow-up, the gingival showed
slightly hyperplasia. Systemic examination and gene sequencing firstly
contribute to provide information for an early diagnosis for ZLS, then timely
removal of the hyperplastic gingival facilitates the establishment of a normal
occlusal relationship and improves oral aesthetics.

©2024 The Author(s). Published by MRE Press.

DOI: 10.22514/jocpd.2024.095
PMID: 39087232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
