---
reference_id: "PMID:27163751"
title: Molecular and cellular aspects of age-related cognitive decline and Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Hullinger R
- Puglielli L
journal: Behav Brain Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.05.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and cellular aspects of age-related cognitive decline and Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Hullinger R, Puglielli L
**Journal:** Behav Brain Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbr.2016.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2016.05.008)

## Content

1. Behav Brain Res. 2017 Mar 30;322(Pt B):191-205. doi:
10.1016/j.bbr.2016.05.008.  Epub 2016 May 7.

Molecular and cellular aspects of age-related cognitive decline and Alzheimer's 
disease.

Hullinger R(1), Puglielli L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, 
USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, 
USA; Department of Neuroscience, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 
53705, USA; Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA; Geriatric Research Education Clinical 
Center, VA Medical Center, Madison, WI 53705, USA. Electronic address: 
lp1@medicine.wisc.edu.

As the population of people aged 60 or older continues to rise, it has become 
increasingly important to understand the molecular basis underlying age-related 
cognitive decline. In fact, a better understanding of aging biology will help us 
identify ways to maintain high levels of cognitive functioning throughout the 
aging process. Many cellular and molecular aspects of brain aging are shared 
with other organ systems; however, certain age-related changes are unique to the 
nervous system due to its structural, cellular and molecular complexity. 
Importantly, the brain appears to show differential changes throughout the aging 
process, with certain regions (e.g. frontal and temporal regions) being more 
vulnerable than others (e.g. brain stem). Within the medial temporal lobe, the 
hippocampus is especially susceptible to age-related changes. The important role 
of the hippocampus in age-related cognitive decline and in vulnerability to 
disease processes such as Alzheimer's disease has prompted this review, which 
will focus on the complexity of changes that characterize aging, and on the 
molecular connections that exist between normal aging and Alzheimer's disease. 
Finally, it will discuss behavioral interventions and emerging insights for 
promoting healthy cognitive aging.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.05.008
PMCID: PMC5099115
PMID: 27163751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]