---
reference_id: PMID:32457520
title: Guidelines for the Li-Fraumeni and heritable TP53-related cancer syndromes.
authors:
- Frebourg T
- Bajalica Lagercrantz S
- Oliveira C
- Magenheim R
- Evans DG
- European Reference Network GENTURIS
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-020-0638-4
keywords:
- "Early Detection of Cancer/methods, standards"
- "Genetic Testing/methods, standards"
- Humans
- "Li-Fraumeni Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Guidelines for the Li-Fraumeni and heritable TP53-related cancer syndromes.
**Authors:** Frebourg T, Bajalica Lagercrantz S, Oliveira C, Magenheim R, Evans DG, European Reference Network GENTURIS
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-020-0638-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-020-0638-4)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2020 Oct;28(10):1379-1386. doi: 10.1038/s41431-020-0638-4.
Epub  2020 May 26.

Guidelines for the Li-Fraumeni and heritable TP53-related cancer syndromes.

Frebourg T(1), Bajalica Lagercrantz S(2), Oliveira C(3), Magenheim R(4), Evans 
DG(5); European Reference Network GENTURIS.

Collaborators: Hoogerbrugge N, Ligtenberg M, Kets M, Oostenbrink R, Sijmons R, 
Evans G, Woodward E, Tischkowitz M, Maher E, Ferner RE, Aretz S, Spier I, 
Steinke-Lange V, Holinski-Feder E, Schröck E, Frebourg T, Houdayer C, Colas C, 
Wolkenstein P, Bours V, Legius E, Poppe B, Claes K, de Putter R, Guillermo IB, 
Capella G, Vidal JB, Lázaro C, Balmaña J, Hernandez HS, Oliveira C, Teixeira M, 
Bajalica-Lagercrantz S, Tham E, Lubinski J, Ertmanska K, Melegh B, Krajc M, 
Blatnik A, Peltonen S, Hietala M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital and Inserm U1245, Normandie 
University, UNIROUEN, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, 
Rouen, France. frebourg@chu-rouen.fr.
(2)Hereditary Cancer Unit, Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska 
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)i3S-Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde & Institute of Molecular 
Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, and Porto Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Porto, Portugal.
(4)Community Representative, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Division of Evolution and Genomic 
Sciences, University of Manchester, MAHSC, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2020 Nov;28(11):1483-1485. doi: 10.1038/s41431-020-00710-y.
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2020 Nov;28(11):1481-1482. doi: 10.1038/s41431-020-00709-5.

Fifty years after the recognition of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), our 
perception of cancers related to germline alterations of TP53 has drastically 
changed: (i) germline TP53 alterations are often identified among children with 
cancers, in particular soft-tissue sarcomas, adrenocortical carcinomas, central 
nervous system tumours, or among adult females with early breast cancers, 
without familial history. This justifies the expansion of the LFS concept to a 
wider cancer predisposition syndrome designated heritable TP53-related cancer 
(hTP53rc) syndrome; (ii) the interpretation of germline TP53 variants remains 
challenging and should integrate epidemiological, phenotypical, bioinformatics 
prediction, and functional data; (iii) the penetrance of germline 
disease-causing TP53 variants is variable, depending both on the type of variant 
(dominant-negative variants being associated with a higher cancer risk) and on 
modifying factors; (iv) whole-body MRI (WBMRI) allows early detection of tumours 
in variant carriers and (v) in cancer patients with germline disease-causing 
TP53 variants, radiotherapy, and conventional genotoxic chemotherapy contribute 
to the development of subsequent primary tumours. It is critical to perform TP53 
testing before the initiation of treatment in order to avoid in carriers, if 
possible, radiotherapy and genotoxic chemotherapies. In children, the 
recommendations are to perform clinical examination and abdominal ultrasound 
every 6 months, annual WBMRI and brain MRI from the first year of life, if the 
TP53 variant is known to be associated with childhood cancers. In adults, the 
surveillance should include every year clinical examination, WBMRI, breast MRI 
in females from 20 until 65 years and brain MRI until 50 years.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-020-0638-4
PMCID: PMC7609280
PMID: 32457520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.