---
reference_id: "PMID:33091144"
title: "Palatine Tonsils Primary Presentation of Blastoid Variant of Mantle Cell Lymphoma: Case Report."
authors:
- Marques JAS
- Ferreira F
- Melo DP
- Santos M
- Vaz RP
journal: Head Neck Pathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12105-020-01238-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Palatine Tonsils Primary Presentation of Blastoid Variant of Mantle Cell Lymphoma: Case Report.
**Authors:** Marques JAS, Ferreira F, Melo DP, Santos M, Vaz RP
**Journal:** Head Neck Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12105-020-01238-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12105-020-01238-9)

## Content

1. Head Neck Pathol. 2021 Jun;15(2):588-592. doi: 10.1007/s12105-020-01238-9.
Epub  2020 Oct 22.

Palatine Tonsils Primary Presentation of Blastoid Variant of Mantle Cell 
Lymphoma: Case Report.

Marques JAS(1)(2), Ferreira F(3), Melo DP(4)(5), Santos M(6), Vaz RP(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário S. João, 
EPE, Porto, Portugal. joana.antunesmarques@gmail.com.
(2)Unit of Otorhinolaryngology - Department of Surgery and Physiology, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. 
joana.antunesmarques@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Clinical Haematology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário S. João, 
EPE, Alameda Professor Hernâni Monteiro, 4200-319, Porto, Portugal.
(4)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário S. João, 
EPE, Porto, Portugal.
(5)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário S. João, 
EPE, Porto, Portugal.
(7)Unit of Anatomy - Department of Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(8)Center for Health Technology and Services Research (CINTESIS), Porto, 
Portugal.

Head and neck lymphomas can present with a wide range of symptoms. Timely and 
accurate diagnosis is often challenging. The blastoid variant of mantle cell 
lymphoma (MCL) accounts for less than one-third of all MCL cases. Isolated 
primary presentation on the palatine tonsils is rare, and prognosis and outcome 
are seemingly unfavorable. An 81-year-old man presented with persistent 
odynophagia, dysphagia, and obstructive hypertrophic palatine tonsils with 
purulent exudate. The signs and symptoms were non-responsive to antibiotic 
therapy, and the tonsils were biopsied. The cellular morphology, 
immunophenotype, and genotype supported a diagnosis of the blastoid variant of 
MCL. After staging, the patient underwent chemotherapy with 
Rituximab-Bendamustine (R-Benda). The patient is in clinical remission more than 
two years after therapy. We report an exceedingly rare case of blastoid MCL that 
is prone to be misdiagnosed as tonsillitis. We review the literature and discuss 
treatment options of this uncommon malignancy.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-020-01238-9
PMCID: PMC8134596
PMID: 33091144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]