---
reference_id: "PMID:37861255"
title: A Breathtaking Case of Pulmonary Hypertension with Frightening Complications and Intertwining Different Etiologies.
authors:
- Arabacı HO
- Taşdelen AG
- Buğday İ
- Ülkücü A
- Sinan ÜY
- Yıldızeli B
- Küçükoğlu MS
journal: Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5543/tkda.2023.22477
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Breathtaking Case of Pulmonary Hypertension with Frightening Complications and Intertwining Different Etiologies.
**Authors:** Arabacı HO, Taşdelen AG, Buğday İ, Ülkücü A, Sinan ÜY, Yıldızeli B, Küçükoğlu MS
**Journal:** Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5543/tkda.2023.22477](https://doi.org/10.5543/tkda.2023.22477)

## Content

1. Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars. 2023 Oct;51(7):488-492. doi: 10.5543/tkda.2023.22477.

A Breathtaking Case of Pulmonary Hypertension with Frightening Complications and 
Intertwining Different Etiologies.

[Article in English]

Arabacı HO(1), Taşdelen AG(1), Buğday İ(1), Ülkücü A(2), Sinan ÜY(1), Yıldızeli 
B(3), Küçükoğlu MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, İstanbul University-Cerrahpaşa Institute of 
Cardiology, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Emergency, Yedikule Chest Diseases and Thoracic Surgery 
Training and Research Hospital, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, 
İstanbul, Türkiye.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a major health problem with increasing awareness. 
Although most common cause of PH is left heart disease (Group 2 PH), 
life-threatening complications occur mostly in Group 1 (pulmonary arterial 
hypertension) and Group 4 (chronic thromboembolic PH) patients. Although 
external compression of the left main coronary artery (LMCA) due to pulmonary 
artery dilatation is rare, it is a life-threatening complication since it causes 
myocardial ischemia and sudden cardiac death. In addition, PH is more than a 
single clinical entity due to its complex mechanism in which more than one 
subgroup may develop over time in the same patient. This complex mechanism 
challenges us when diagnosing the patient and faces us with life-threatening 
complications. In this case; we report a pulmonary arterial hypertension patient 
applied to our clinic with progressive dyspnea and recent angina, after 
detection of LMCA ostial stenosis, the patient was treated with intravascular 
ultrasound-guided stent implantation. In the further follow-ups, the patient 
underwent the pulmonary endarterectomy operation due to the diagnosis of chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension secondary to newly diagnosed primary 
antiphospholipid syndrome.

DOI: 10.5543/tkda.2023.22477
PMID: 37861255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]