---
reference_id: "PMID:37624446"
title: Electrocardiographic measurements in children with pre-dialysis chronic kidney disease and undergoing kidney replacement therapy.
authors:
- Leventoğlu E
- Büyükkaragöz B
- Kavas FÇ
- Holoğlu MC
- Kavgacı A
- Fidan K
- Dalgıç A
- Bakkaloğlu SA
- Tunaoğlu FS
- Söylemezoğlu O
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-023-05154-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Dialysis/adverse effects
- Electrocardiography
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications, therapy"
- "Hypertrophy, Left Ventricular/diagnosis, etiology"
- Renal Dialysis
- Hypertension/complications
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/etiology"
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Electrocardiographic measurements in children with pre-dialysis chronic kidney disease and undergoing kidney replacement therapy.
**Authors:** Leventoğlu E, Büyükkaragöz B, Kavas FÇ, Holoğlu MC, Kavgacı A, Fidan K, Dalgıç A, Bakkaloğlu SA, Tunaoğlu FS, Söylemezoğlu O
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-023-05154-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-023-05154-2)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2023 Nov;182(11):4993-5005. doi: 10.1007/s00431-023-05154-2.
Epub  2023 Aug 25.

Electrocardiographic measurements in children with pre-dialysis chronic kidney 
disease and undergoing kidney replacement therapy.

Leventoğlu E(1), Büyükkaragöz B(2), Kavas FÇ(3), Holoğlu MC(3), Kavgacı A(4), 
Fidan K(2), Dalgıç A(5), Bakkaloğlu SA(2), Tunaoğlu FS(4), Söylemezoğlu O(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Gazi University, 
Ankara, Turkey. dremrelevent@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Gazi University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Gazi University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Gazi University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Transplantation Surgery, Gazi University, 
Ankara, Turkey.

Cardiovascular diseases are the main causes of morbidity in children with 
chronic kidney disease (CKD). Electrocardiography (ECG) can provide important 
information about cardiac functions and parameters associated with sudden 
cardiac death. This study aims to evaluate the potentially dangerous changes in 
CKD and kidney replacement therapies by ECG and to determine the value of ECG in 
predicting cardiovascular outcome compared with echocardiography. 101 patients 
with CKD were divided into subgroups according to treatment modalities as 
pre-dialysis CKD, hemodialysis (HD), peritoneal dialysis (PD) and kidney 
transplantation (KTx). Differences in anthropometric measurements, laboratory 
results, blood pressures, ECG monitoring were compared within groups as well as 
with 40 healthy controls. Available echocardiographic findings were noted. In 
the patients, HD group had highest frequency of hypertension. ECG revealed 
prolonged QTc as more frequent (16.8% vs 0%, p = 0.006) and higher QTcD 
(56.7 ± 6.5 vs 39.9 ± 5.1 ms, p = 0.001) in the patients compared to controls, 
especially in dialysis patients, whereas lowest values were in KTx subgroup. 
Left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy (LVH) was more frequent (47.1%) in HD compared 
to other CKD subgroups in ECG (p = 0.052). Echocardiography also showed LV mass 
index as highest in HD and lowest in KTx (121.4 ± 55.7 vs 63.7 ± 18.3 g/m2, 
p = 0.000), with numerically highest LVH in HD (58.3%, p = 0.063).  Conclusion: 
ECG can be used to detect cardiovascular problems in patients with CKD, 
especially in HD. As ECG results were in line with echocardiography, patients 
with ECG abnormalities suggestive of LVH should be referred for 
echocardiographic assessment. What is Known: • Cardiovascular diseases such as 
coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, arrhythmias and sudden 
cardiac death are major causes of morbidity and mortality in chronic kidney 
disease. • Electrocardiography has significant advantages in demonstrating 
cardiac functions in children because it is readily available, non-invasive and 
often non-experts can interpret the results. What is New: • The heart rate is 
higher, QTc is longer and QTcD is higher in dialysis patients and the prolonged 
QTc is more frequent in patients with underlying glomerular diseases. • Left 
ventricular hypertrophy is more common in HD patients and those with 
hypertension, hypercalcemia, anemia or glomerular etiology. The cardiovascular 
risky conditions are less frequent in the patients with kidney transplantation.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-023-05154-2
PMID: 37624446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]