---
reference_id: "PMID:28317533"
title: Genetics of Vitiligo.
authors:
- Spritz RA
- Andersen GH
journal: Dermatol Clin
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.det.2016.11.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of Vitiligo.
**Authors:** Spritz RA, Andersen GH
**Journal:** Dermatol Clin (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.det.2016.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.det.2016.11.013)

## Content

1. Dermatol Clin. 2017 Apr;35(2):245-255. doi: 10.1016/j.det.2016.11.013.

Genetics of Vitiligo.

Spritz RA(1), Andersen GH(2).

Author information:
(1)Human Medical Genetics and Genomics Program, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, 12800 East 19th Avenue, Room 3100, MS8300, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. 
Electronic address: richard.spritz@ucdenver.edu.
(2)Human Medical Genetics and Genomics Program, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, 12800 East 19th Avenue, Room 3100, MS8300, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Vitiligo reflects simultaneous contributions of multiple genetic risk factors 
and environmental triggers. Genomewide association studies have discovered 
approximately 50 genetic loci contributing to vitiligo risk. At many vitiligo 
susceptibility loci, the relevant genes and DNA sequence variants are 
identified. Many encode proteins involved in immune regulation, several play 
roles in cellular apoptosis, and others regulate functions of melanocytes. 
Although many of the specific biologic mechanisms need elucidation, it is clear 
that vitiligo is an autoimmune disease involving a complex relationship between 
immune system programming and function, aspects of the melanocyte autoimmune 
target, and dysregulation of the immune response.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.det.2016.11.013
PMCID: PMC5362127
PMID: 28317533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no commercial or financial 
conflict of interest related to this manuscript.