---
reference_id: "PMID:10369869"
title: "A missense mutation in connexin26, D66H, causes mutilating keratoderma with sensorineural deafness (Vohwinkel's syndrome) in three unrelated families."
authors:
- Maestrini E
- Korge BP
- Ocaña-Sierra J
- Calzolari E
- Cambiaghi S
- Scudder PM
- Hovnanian A
- Monaco AP
- Munro CS
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.7.1237
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A missense mutation in connexin26, D66H, causes mutilating keratoderma with sensorineural deafness (Vohwinkel's syndrome) in three unrelated families.
**Authors:** Maestrini E, Korge BP, Ocaña-Sierra J, Calzolari E, Cambiaghi S, Scudder PM, Hovnanian A, Monaco AP, Munro CS
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/8.7.1237](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/8.7.1237)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Jul;8(7):1237-43. doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.7.1237.

A missense mutation in connexin26, D66H, causes mutilating keratoderma with 
sensorineural deafness (Vohwinkel's syndrome) in three unrelated families.

Maestrini E(1), Korge BP, Ocaña-Sierra J, Calzolari E, Cambiaghi S, Scudder PM, 
Hovnanian A, Monaco AP, Munro CS.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, UK. 
maestrini@well.ox.ac.uk

The multiplicity of functions served by intercellular gap junctions is reflected 
by the variety of phenotypes caused by mutations in the connexins of which they 
are composed. Mutations in the connexin26 (Cx26) gene ( GJB2 ) at 13q11-q13 are 
a major cause of autosomal recessive hearing loss (DFNB1), but have also been 
reported in autosomal dominant deafness (DFNA3). We now report a Cx26 mutation 
in three families with mutilating keratoderma and deafness [Vohwinkel's syndrome 
(VS; MIM 124500), as originally described]. VS is characterized by papular and 
honeycomb keratoderma associated with constrictions of digits leading to 
autoamputation, distinctive starfish-like acral keratoses and moderate degrees 
of deafness. In a large British pedigree, we have mapped the defect to the Cx26 
locus. All 10 affected members were heterozygous for a non-conservative 
mutation, D66H, in Cx26. The same mutation was found subsequently in affected 
individuals from two unrelated Spanish and Italian pedigrees segregating VS, 
suggesting that D66H in Cx26 is a common mutation in classical VS. This mutation 
occurs at a highly conserved residue in the first extracellular domain of the 
Cx26 molecule, and may exert its effects by interfering with assembly into 
connexons, docking with adjacent cells or gating properties of the gap junction. 
Our results provide evidence that a specific mutation in Cx26 can impair 
epidermal differentiation, as well as inner ear function.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/8.7.1237
PMID: 10369869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]