---
reference_id: "PMID:20028993"
title: Risks of Lynch syndrome cancers for MSH6 mutation carriers.
authors:
- Baglietto L
- Lindor NM
- Dowty JG
- White DM
- Wagner A
- Gomez Garcia EB
- Vriends AH
- Dutch Lynch Syndrome Study Group
- Cartwright NR
- Barnetson RA
- Farrington SM
- Tenesa A
- Hampel H
- Buchanan D
- Arnold S
- Young J
- Walsh MD
- Jass J
- Macrae F
- Antill Y
- Winship IM
- Giles GG
- Goldblatt J
- Parry S
- Suthers G
- Leggett B
- Butz M
- Aronson M
- Poynter JN
- Baron JA
- Le Marchand L
- Haile R
- Gallinger S
- Hopper JL
- Potter J
- de la Chapelle A
- Vasen HF
- Dunlop MG
- Thibodeau SN
- Jenkins MA
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/djp473
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risks of Lynch syndrome cancers for MSH6 mutation carriers.
**Authors:** Baglietto L, Lindor NM, Dowty JG, White DM, Wagner A, Gomez Garcia EB, Vriends AH, Dutch Lynch Syndrome Study Group, Cartwright NR, Barnetson RA, Farrington SM, Tenesa A, Hampel H, Buchanan D, Arnold S, Young J, Walsh MD, Jass J, Macrae F, Antill Y, Winship IM, Giles GG, Goldblatt J, Parry S, Suthers G, Leggett B, Butz M, Aronson M, Poynter JN, Baron JA, Le Marchand L, Haile R, Gallinger S, Hopper JL, Potter J, de la Chapelle A, Vasen HF, Dunlop MG, Thibodeau SN, Jenkins MA
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/djp473](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djp473)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Feb 3;102(3):193-201. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djp473. Epub 
2009 Dec 22.

Risks of Lynch syndrome cancers for MSH6 mutation carriers.

Baglietto L(1), Lindor NM, Dowty JG, White DM, Wagner A, Gomez Garcia EB, 
Vriends AH; Dutch Lynch Syndrome Study Group; Cartwright NR, Barnetson RA, 
Farrington SM, Tenesa A, Hampel H, Buchanan D, Arnold S, Young J, Walsh MD, Jass 
J, Macrae F, Antill Y, Winship IM, Giles GG, Goldblatt J, Parry S, Suthers G, 
Leggett B, Butz M, Aronson M, Poynter JN, Baron JA, Le Marchand L, Haile R, 
Gallinger S, Hopper JL, Potter J, de la Chapelle A, Vasen HF, Dunlop MG, 
Thibodeau SN, Jenkins MA.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Epidemiology Centre, Victorian Cancer Registry, Carlton, Victoria, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Germline mutations in MSH6 account for 10%-20% of Lynch syndrome 
colorectal cancers caused by hereditary DNA mismatch repair gene mutations. 
Because there have been only a few studies of mutation carriers, their cancer 
risks are uncertain.
METHODS: We identified 113 families of MSH6 mutation carriers from five 
countries that we ascertained through family cancer clinics and population-based 
cancer registries. Mutation status, sex, age, and histories of cancer, 
polypectomy, and hysterectomy were sought from 3104 of their relatives. 
Age-specific cumulative risks for carriers and hazard ratios (HRs) for cancer 
risks of carriers, compared with those of the general population of the same 
country, were estimated by use of a modified segregation analysis with 
appropriate conditioning depending on ascertainment.
RESULTS: For MSH6 mutation carriers, the estimated cumulative risks to ages 70 
and 80 years, respectively, were as follows: for colorectal cancer, 22% (95% 
confidence interval [CI] = 14% to 32%) and 44% (95% CI = 28% to 62%) for men and 
10% (95% CI = 5% to 17%) and 20% (95% CI = 11% to 35%) for women; for 
endometrial cancer, 26% (95% CI = 18% to 36%) and 44% (95% CI = 30% to 58%); and 
for any cancer associated with Lynch syndrome, 24% (95% CI = 16% to 37%) and 47% 
(95% CI = 32% to 66%) for men and 40% (95% CI = 32% to 52%) and 65% (95% CI = 
53% to 78%) for women. Compared with incidence for the general population, MSH6 
mutation carriers had an eightfold increased incidence of colorectal cancer (HR 
= 7.6, 95% CI = 5.4 to 10.8), which was independent of sex and age. Women who 
were MSH6 mutation carriers had a 26-fold increased incidence of endometrial 
cancer (HR = 25.5, 95% CI = 16.8 to 38.7) and a sixfold increased incidence of 
other cancers associated with Lynch syndrome (HR = 6.0, 95% CI = 3.4 to 10.7).
CONCLUSION: We have obtained precise and accurate estimates of both absolute and 
relative cancer risks for MSH6 mutation carriers.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djp473
PMCID: PMC2815724
PMID: 20028993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]