---
reference_id: "PMID:37062442"
title: "Prevalence of immune-mediated inner ear disease in non-segmental vitiligo: A cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Marchioro HZ
- de Castro CCS
- Chiesorin AST
- Bindi EW
- Jiacomini IG
- Miot HA
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2023.103336
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of immune-mediated inner ear disease in non-segmental vitiligo: A cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Marchioro HZ, de Castro CCS, Chiesorin AST, Bindi EW, Jiacomini IG, Miot HA
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2023.103336](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2023.103336)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2023 Jul;22(7):103336. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2023.103336. Epub 
2023 Apr 14.

Prevalence of immune-mediated inner ear disease in non-segmental vitiligo: A 
cross-sectional study.

Marchioro HZ(1), de Castro CCS(2), Chiesorin AST(3), Bindi EW(3), Jiacomini 
IG(4), Miot HA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Santa Casa Hospital, Praça Rui Barbosa, 694, 
Centro, 80.010-030 Curitiba, PR, Brazil. Electronic address: 
helenamarchioro@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná, Rua 
Imaculada Conceição, 1155, Prado Velho, Curitiba, PR 80.215-901, Brazil. 
Electronic address: caio.castro@pucpr.br.
(3)Department of Phonoaudiology, Santa Casa Hospital, Praça Rui Barbosa, 694, 
Centro, Curitiba, PR 80.010-030, Brazil.
(4)Department of Basic Patology, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Av. Cel. 
Francisco H. dos Santos, 100, Jardim das Américas, Curitiba, PR 81530-000, 
Brazil.
(5)Department of Dermatology, FMB - UNESP, Distrito de Rubião Júnior, s/n, 
Botucatu, SP 18.618-687, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) is associated with non-segmental 
vitiligo (NSV); however, the aetiology of SNHL has not been explored. The 
concomitance of autoimmune disease in vitiligo patients demands the 
investigation of immune-mediated inner ear disease (IMIED) as a cause of SNHL in 
NSV. The anti-Hsp70 antibody is a serological marker of IMIED, which may help in 
the early diagnosis of this disease.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prevalence of IMIED in NSV patients.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study involving NSV adult patients and a control group, 
evaluated through audiometry and serological dosage of the anti-Hsp70 antibody.
RESULTS: In total, 112 cases and 23 controls were evaluated. Bilateral SNHL was 
found in 28 (25.0%; 95%CI 17.9%-32.1%) patients and in 1 (4.3%) control 
(p = 0.019). Six cases (5.4%; 95%CI 2.7%-8.0%) presented bilateral SNHL of 
unexplained aetiology, and anti-Hsp70 antibody positivity, fulfilling the 
diagnostic criteria for IMIED. No controls met the diagnostic criteria for 
IMIED. Serum anti-Hsp70 antibodies were higher in cases with IMIED: median 220.9 
vs. 85.1 ng/ml (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of IMIED is remarkable in NSV adult patients.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2023.103336
PMID: 37062442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Helena Zenedin Marchioro reports 
financial support was provided by FUNADERM (Brazilian Society of Dermatology 
Official Fund).