---
reference_id: "PMID:39746537"
title: Ocular and neurological manifestations of the FDXR-related disorder.
authors:
- Kaler A
- Couser N
journal: J AAPOS
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2024.104102
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Cataract/genetics
- Eye Diseases/genetics
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Mutation
- "Nystagmus, Pathologic/genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular and neurological manifestations of the FDXR-related disorder.
**Authors:** Kaler A, Couser N
**Journal:** J AAPOS (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaapos.2024.104102](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaapos.2024.104102)

## Content

1. J AAPOS. 2025 Feb;29(1):104102. doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2024.104102. Epub 2024
Dec  31.

Ocular and neurological manifestations of the FDXR-related disorder.

Kaler A(1), Couser N(2).

Author information:
(1)Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Virginia, Richmond.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Medicine, Richmond, Virginia; Department of Human and Molecular Genetics,
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia;
Department of Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine,
Children's Hospital of Richmond at Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond,
Virginia. Electronic address: cousernl@gmail.com.

The FDXR-related disorder is caused by pathogenic variants in the FDXR gene.
Including our case, a total of 47 patients have been reported. The most common
genotypes are the homozygous c.1174C>T (p.R392W) variant and homozygous c.916C>T
(p.R306C) variant. Optic atrophy is the most common feature (89%), but many
other ocular manifestations have not previously been characterized. Our review
of the existing literature reveals other common ocular findings of myopia,
nystagmus, strabismus, retinal dystrophy, attenuation of retinal vessels, and
cataracts. Common neurological symptoms include movement disorder, sensorineural
hearing loss, developmental delay/regression, and hypotonia.

Copyright © 2025 American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and
Strabismus. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2024.104102
PMID: 39746537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
