---
reference_id: "PMID:20301319"
title: Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 6.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Casey HL
- Gomez CM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 6.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Casey HL, Gomez CM

## Content

1. Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 6.

Casey HL(1), Gomez CM(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
1998 Oct 23 [updated 2019 Nov 21].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is characterized
by adult-onset, slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria, and nystagmus.
The age of onset ranges from 19 to 73 years; mean age of onset is between 43 and
52 years. Initial symptoms are gait unsteadiness, stumbling, and imbalance (in
~90%) and dysarthria (in ~10%). Eventually all persons have gait ataxia,
upper-limb incoordination, intention tremor, and dysarthria. Dysphagia and
choking are common. Visual disturbances may result from diplopia, difficulty
fixating on moving objects, horizontal gaze-evoked nystagmus, and vertical
nystagmus. Hyperreflexia and extensor plantar responses occur in up to 40%-50%.
Basal ganglia signs, including dystonia and blepharospasm, occur in up to 25%.
Mentation is generally preserved.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SCA6 rests on the use of molecular genetic
testing to detect an abnormal CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in CACNA1A.
Affected individuals have 20 to 33 CAG repeats.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Acetazolamide may eliminate episodes of
ataxia; canes, walking sticks, and walkers to prevent falling; home
modifications for safety and convenience; weighted eating utensils and dressing
hooks; physical therapy and exercises enhancing balance and core strength;
vitamin supplements particularly if caloric intake is reduced; feeding
recommendations as per feeding therapist / occupational therapist; weight
control, as obesity exacerbates ambulation and mobility problems; vestibular
symptoms may be managed with medications including diphenhydramine, baclofen,
and gabapentin. 4-aminopyridine may be helpful with vestibular symptoms and to
suppress nystagmus; refractive or surgical management per ophthalmologist for
diplopia; speech therapy and communication devices for dysarthria; clonazepam
for REM sleep disorders; continuous positive airway pressure for sleep apnea.
Surveillance: Annual or semiannual evaluation by a neurologist; driving ability
should be assessed by professionals periodically. Annual consultations with a
physiatrist and physical and/or occupational therapist; review need for walking
aid(s) and home adaptations. Nutrition evaluation, video esophagram, and feeding
assessments as needed. Ophthalmology and/or optometry evaluation as needed for
prisms or surgery. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Sedative hypnotics (ethanol or
certain medications) that increase incoordination.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SCA6 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Offspring
of an affected individual have a 50% chance of inheriting an abnormal CAG
trinucleotide repeat expansion in CACNA1A. Once a CACNA1A CAG repeat expansion
has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal testing and
preimplantation genetic testing for SCA6 are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301319
