---
reference_id: "PMID:37304269"
title: "Genetic bases of C7 deficiency: systematic review and report of a novel deletion determining functional hemizygosity."
authors:
- Balduit A
- Bianco AM
- Mangogna A
- Zicari AM
- Leonardi L
- Cinicola BL
- Capponi M
- Tommasini A
- Agostinis C
- "d'Adamo AP"
- Bulla R
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1192690
keywords:
- Alleles
- Male
- Child
- "3' Untranslated Regions"
- Humans
- Complement C7/deficiency
- Hereditary Complement Deficiency Diseases
- Biological Assay
- Autoimmunity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic bases of C7 deficiency: systematic review and report of a novel deletion determining functional hemizygosity.
**Authors:** Balduit A, Bianco AM, Mangogna A, Zicari AM, Leonardi L, Cinicola BL, Capponi M, Tommasini A, Agostinis C, d'Adamo AP, Bulla R
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1192690](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1192690)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 May 25;14:1192690. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1192690. 
eCollection 2023.

Genetic bases of C7 deficiency: systematic review and report of a novel deletion 
determining functional hemizygosity.

Balduit A(1), Bianco AM(1), Mangogna A(1), Zicari AM(2), Leonardi L(2), Cinicola 
BL(2)(3), Capponi M(2), Tommasini A(1)(4), Agostinis C(1), d'Adamo AP(1)(4), 
Bulla R(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Maternal and Child Health and Urological Sciences, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Science, University of Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

Primary complement system (C) deficiencies are rare but notably associated with 
an increased risk of infections, autoimmunity, or immune disorders. Patients 
with terminal pathway C-deficiency have a 1,000- to 10,000-fold-higher risk of 
Neisseria meningitidis infections and should be therefore promptly identified to 
minimize the likelihood of further infections and to favor vaccination. In this 
paper, we performed a systematic review about clinical and genetic patterns of 
C7 deficiency starting from the case of a ten-year old boy infected by Neisseria 
meningitidis B and with clinical presentation suggestive of reduced C activity. 
Functional assay via Wieslab ELISA Kit confirmed a reduction in total C activity 
of the classical (0.6% activity), lectin (0.2% activity) and alternative (0.1% 
activity) pathways. Western blot analysis revealed the absence of C7 in patient 
serum. Sanger sequencing of genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood of the 
patient allowed the identification of two pathogenetic variants in the C7 gene: 
the already well-characterized missense mutation G379R and a novel heterozygous 
deletion of three nucleotides located at the 3'UTR (c.*99_*101delTCT). This 
mutation resulted in an instability of the mRNA; thus, only the allele 
containing the missense mutation was expressed, making the proband a functional 
hemizygote for the expression of the mutated C7 allele.

Copyright © 2023 Balduit, Bianco, Mangogna, Zicari, Leonardi, Cinicola, Capponi, 
Tommasini, Agostinis, d’Adamo and Bulla.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1192690
PMCID: PMC10248053
PMID: 37304269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.