---
reference_id: "PMID:27911343"
title: "PINK1, Parkin, and Mitochondrial Quality Control: What can we Learn about Parkinson's Disease Pathobiology?"
authors:
- Truban D
- Hou X
- Caulfield TR
- Fiesel FC
- Springer W
journal: J Parkinsons Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3233/JPD-160989
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PINK1, Parkin, and Mitochondrial Quality Control: What can we Learn about Parkinson's Disease Pathobiology?
**Authors:** Truban D, Hou X, Caulfield TR, Fiesel FC, Springer W
**Journal:** J Parkinsons Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JPD-160989](https://doi.org/10.3233/JPD-160989)

## Content

1. J Parkinsons Dis. 2017;7(1):13-29. doi: 10.3233/JPD-160989.

PINK1, Parkin, and Mitochondrial Quality Control: What can we Learn about 
Parkinson's Disease Pathobiology?

Truban D(1), Hou X(1), Caulfield TR(1)(2), Fiesel FC(1)(2), Springer W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(2)Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

The first clinical description of Parkinson's disease (PD) will embrace its two 
century anniversary in 2017. For the past 30 years, mitochondrial dysfunction 
has been hypothesized to play a central role in the pathobiology of this 
devastating neurodegenerative disease. The identifications of mutations in genes 
encoding PINK1 (PTEN-induced kinase 1) and Parkin (E3 ubiquitin ligase) in 
familial PD and their functional association with mitochondrial quality control 
provided further support to this hypothesis. Recent research focused mainly on 
their key involvement in the clearance of damaged mitochondria, a process known 
as mitophagy. It has become evident that there are many other aspects of this 
complex regulated, multifaceted pathway that provides neuroprotection. As such, 
numerous additional factors that impact PINK1/Parkin have already been 
identified including genes involved in other forms of PD. A great pathogenic 
overlap amongst different forms of familial, environmental and even sporadic 
disease is emerging that potentially converges at the level of mitochondrial 
quality control. Tremendous efforts now seek to further detail the roles and 
exploit PINK1 and Parkin, their upstream regulators and downstream signaling 
pathways for future translation. This review summarizes the latest findings on 
PINK1/Parkin-directed mitochondrial quality control, its integration and 
cross-talk with other disease factors and pathways as well as the implications 
for idiopathic PD. In addition, we highlight novel avenues for the development 
of biomarkers and disease-modifying therapies that are based on a detailed 
understanding of the PINK1/Parkin pathway.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-160989
PMCID: PMC5302033
PMID: 27911343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]