---
reference_id: "PMID:36055263"
title: One Hundred Years of Congenital Fibrinogen Disorders.
authors:
- Casini A
- Moerloose P
- Neerman-Arbez M
journal: Semin Thromb Hemost
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1756187
keywords:
- Humans
- "Afibrinogenemia/genetics, therapy"
- Fibrinogen/genetics
- Hemorrhage/genetics
- Phenotype
- Genotype
- Hemostatics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# One Hundred Years of Congenital Fibrinogen Disorders.
**Authors:** Casini A, Moerloose P, Neerman-Arbez M
**Journal:** Semin Thromb Hemost (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0042-1756187](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0042-1756187)

## Content

1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2022 Nov;48(8):880-888. doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1756187. Epub
 2022 Sep 2.

One Hundred Years of Congenital Fibrinogen Disorders.

Casini A(1)(2), Moerloose P(2), Neerman-Arbez M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Angiology and Hemostasis, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Congenital fibrinogen disorders encompass a broad range of fibrinogen defects 
characterized by a wide molecular and clinical spectrum. From the first clinical 
description of afibrinogenemia in 1920, many major achievements have contributed 
to a better understanding of these complex disorders. The finding of causative 
mutations in all three fibrinogen genes has contributed to reveal the molecular 
mechanisms involved in biosynthesis of the fibrinogen molecule and to clarify 
the basic processes of fibrin polymerization and fibrinolysis. The compilation 
of abundant cases with detailed genetic, biological, and clinical features has 
enabled the classification of congenital fibrinogen disorders into several types 
and subtypes. Thus, the recent classification of congenital fibrinogen disorder 
is based not only on the clottable and antigenic fibrinogen levels but also on 
the patient's clinical phenotype and genotype. Fibrinogen supplementation is the 
cornerstone of bleeding management in fibrinogen disorders. Since the discovery 
of blood fractionation, the method of production of fibrinogen concentrate has 
been progressively modified to significantly improve purity and safety. 
Nevertheless, the availability of such products is still limited to a few 
countries and the optimal threshold of fibrinogen to target is still not 
established. In this review, we describe the major advances that have 
characterized 100 years of congenital fibrinogen disorders, focusing on 
afibrinogenemia and dysfibrinogenemia.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-1756187
PMID: 36055263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.C. reports personal fees from LFB, grants from 
CSL Behring, grants from NovoNordisk, personal fees from SOBI, personal fees 
from TAKEDA, personal fees from Pentapharma, during the conduct of the study.