---
reference_id: "PMID:8610486"
title: Tests of autonomic dysfunction in patients with multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Drory VE
- Nisipeanu PF
- Kroczyn AD
journal: Acta Neurol Scand
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1995.tb00146.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tests of autonomic dysfunction in patients with multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Drory VE, Nisipeanu PF, Kroczyn AD
**Journal:** Acta Neurol Scand (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0404.1995.tb00146.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0404.1995.tb00146.x)

## Content

1. Acta Neurol Scand. 1995 Nov;92(5):356-60. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.1995.tb00146.x.

Tests of autonomic dysfunction in patients with multiple sclerosis.

Drory VE(1), Nisipeanu PF, Kroczyn AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tel-Aviv Medical Center, Israel.

Autonomic dysfunction is frequent in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS). The 
sympathetic skin response (SSR) and the R-R interval variation (RRIV) are simple 
electrophysiologic tests for the assessment of central and peripheral autonomic 
disturbances. Both tests were performed in 60 patients with clinically definite 
MS and 30 controls. The SSR was recorded simultaneously from both upper and both 
lower limbs. In all volunteers normal responses were recorded from the four 
limbs, but 39 patients (65%) showed abnormal responses in at least one limb. The 
reduction in amplitude of the response was correlated with patients' EDSS. In 
individual limbs, the SSR amplitude correlated with weakness, spasticity and 
cerebellar dysfunction, but was not sufficiently related to the deep sensory 
loss. The RRIV was abnormal in 48 MS patients (80%), as compared to the 
controls, but showed no significant relationship either to the EDSS or to the 
SSR. The sensitivity of SSR and RRIV is high and compatible with that of visual 
and somatosensory evoked potentials.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1995.tb00146.x
PMID: 8610486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]