---
reference_id: "PMID:40132641"
title: MFSD6 is an entry receptor for enterovirus D68.
authors:
- Varanese L
- Xu L
- Peters CE
- Pintilie G
- Roberts DS
- Raj S
- Liu M
- Ooi YS
- Diep J
- Qiao W
- Richards CM
- Callaway J
- Bertozzi CR
- Jabs S
- de Vries E
- van Kuppeveld FJM
- Nagamine CM
- Chiu W
- Carette JE
journal: Nature
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-08908-0
keywords:
- "Enterovirus D, Human/ultrastructure, physiology, chemistry, pathogenicity, metabolism"
- Humans
- Animals
- Virus Internalization
- Mice
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- "Receptors, Virus/metabolism, chemistry, genetics"
- "Enterovirus Infections/virology, metabolism"
- Female
- "Models, Molecular"
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Cell Line
- Male
- Myelitis
- Neuromuscular Diseases
- Central Nervous System Viral Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MFSD6 is an entry receptor for enterovirus D68.
**Authors:** Varanese L, Xu L, Peters CE, Pintilie G, Roberts DS, Raj S, Liu M, Ooi YS, Diep J, Qiao W, Richards CM, Callaway J, Bertozzi CR, Jabs S, de Vries E, van Kuppeveld FJM, Nagamine CM, Chiu W, Carette JE
**Journal:** Nature (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-025-08908-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-08908-0)

## Content

1. Nature. 2025 May;641(8065):1268-1275. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-08908-0. Epub
2025  Mar 25.

MFSD6 is an entry receptor for enterovirus D68.

Varanese L(#)(1), Xu L(#)(1), Peters CE(1), Pintilie G(2), Roberts DS(3)(4), Raj
S(5), Liu M(6), Ooi YS(7), Diep J(1), Qiao W(1), Richards CM(1), Callaway J(5),
Bertozzi CR(3)(4)(8), Jabs S(9), de Vries E(6), van Kuppeveld FJM(6), Nagamine
CM(10), Chiu W(11)(12)(13), Carette JE(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Sarafan ChEM-H, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(5)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(6)Virology Group, Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of
Biomolecular Health Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Programme in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Medical School,
Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(9)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University and
University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(10)Department of Comparative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. wahc@stanford.edu.
(12)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
wahc@stanford.edu.
(13)Division of CryoEM and Bioimaging, SSRL, SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory, Stanford University, Menlo Park, CA, USA. wahc@stanford.edu.
(14)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. carette@stanford.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

With the near eradication of poliovirus due to global vaccination campaigns,
attention has shifted to other enteroviruses that can cause polio-like paralysis
syndrome (now termed acute flaccid myelitis)1-3. In particular, enterovirus D68
(EV-D68) is believed to be the main driver of epidemic outbreaks of acute
flaccid myelitis in recent years4, yet not much is known about EV-D68 host
interactions. EV-D68 is a respiratory virus5 but, in rare cases, can spread to
the central nervous system to cause severe neuropathogenesis. Here we use
genome-scale CRISPR screens to identify the poorly characterized multipass
membrane transporter MFSD6 as a host entry factor for EV-D68. Knockout of MFSD6
expression abrogated EV-D68 infection in cell lines and primary cells
corresponding to respiratory and neural cells. MFSD6 localized to the plasma
membrane and was required for viral entry into host cells. MFSD6 bound directly
to EV-D68 particles through its extracellular, third loop (L3). We determined
the cryo-electron microscopy structure of EV-D68 in a complex with MFSD6 L3,
revealing the interaction interface. A decoy receptor, engineered by fusing
MFSD6 L3 to Fc, blocked EV-D68 infection of human primary lung epithelial cells
and provided near-complete protection in a lethal mouse model of EV-D68
infection. Collectively, our results reveal MFSD6 as an entry receptor for
EV-D68, and support the targeting of MFSD6 as a potential mechanism to combat
infections by this emerging pathogen with pandemic potential.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-025-08908-0
PMCID: PMC12333957
PMID: 40132641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: J.E.C. consulted for
Janssen BioPharma on topics unrelated to this study. The other authors declare
no competing interests.
