---
reference_id: "PMID:39292928"
title: Pomalidomide for Epistaxis in Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.
authors:
- Al-Samkari H
- Kasthuri RS
- Iyer VN
- Pishko AM
- Decker JE
- Weiss CR
- Whitehead KJ
- Conrad MB
- Zumberg MS
- Zhou JY
- Parambil J
- Marsh D
- Clancy M
- Bradley L
- Wisniewski L
- Carper BA
- Thomas SM
- McCrae KR
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2312749
keywords:
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Angiogenesis Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Double-Blind Method
- "Epistaxis/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology, psychology"
- Quality of Life
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Telangiectasia, Hereditary Hemorrhagic/complications, drug therapy"
- "Thalidomide/administration & dosage, adverse effects, analogs & derivatives"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Neutropenia/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- "Constipation/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- "Drug Eruptions/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pomalidomide for Epistaxis in Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Al-Samkari H, Kasthuri RS, Iyer VN, Pishko AM, Decker JE, Weiss CR, Whitehead KJ, Conrad MB, Zumberg MS, Zhou JY, Parambil J, Marsh D, Clancy M, Bradley L, Wisniewski L, Carper BA, Thomas SM, McCrae KR
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2312749](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2312749)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2024 Sep 19;391(11):1015-1027. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2312749.

Pomalidomide for Epistaxis in Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.

Al-Samkari H(1), Kasthuri RS(1), Iyer VN(1), Pishko AM(1), Decker JE(1), Weiss
CR(1), Whitehead KJ(1), Conrad MB(1), Zumberg MS(1), Zhou JY(1), Parambil J(1),
Marsh D(1), Clancy M(1), Bradley L(1), Wisniewski L(1), Carper BA(1), Thomas
SM(1), McCrae KR(1).

Author information:
(1)From Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston (H.A.-S.); University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill (R.S.K.), and RTI International, Research Triangle Park
(D.M., L.B., B.A.C., S.M.T.) - both in North Carolina; Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN (V.N.I.); University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (A.M.P.); Medical College
of Wisconsin, Milwaukee (J.E.D.); Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore (C.R.W.),
and CureHHT, Monkton (M.C.) - both in Maryland; University of Utah, Salt Lake
City (K.J.W.); University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco (M.B.C.);
University of Florida, Gainesville (M.S.Z.); University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla (J.Y.Z.); and Taussig Cancer Center and Lerner Research
Institute (K.R.M.), Cleveland Clinic (J.P., L.W., K.R.M.), Cleveland.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Dec 12;391(23):2277. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2413110.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Dec 12;391(23):2277-2278. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2413110.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Dec 12;391(23):2278-2279. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2413110.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is characterized by
extensive telangiectasias and arteriovenous malformations. The primary clinical
manifestation is epistaxis that results in iron-deficiency anemia and reduced
health-related quality of life.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, placebo-controlled trial to evaluate the
safety and efficacy of pomalidomide for the treatment of HHT. We randomly
assigned patients, in a 2:1 ratio, to receive pomalidomide at a dose of 4 mg
daily or matching placebo for 24 weeks. The primary outcome was the change from
baseline through week 24 in the Epistaxis Severity Score (a validated bleeding
score in HHT; range, 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating worse bleeding). A
reduction of 0.71 points or more is considered clinically significant. A key
secondary outcome was the HHT-specific quality-of-life score (range, 0 to 16,
with higher scores indicating more limitations).
RESULTS: The trial was closed to enrollment in June 2023 after a planned interim
analysis met a prespecified threshold for efficacy. A total of 144 patients
underwent randomization; 95 patients were assigned to receive pomalidomide and
49 to receive placebo. The baseline mean (±SD) Epistaxis Severity Score was
5.0±1.5, a finding consistent with moderate-to-severe epistaxis. At 24 weeks,
the mean difference between the pomalidomide group and the placebo group in the
change from baseline in the Epistaxis Severity Score was -0.94 points (95%
confidence interval [CI], -1.57 to -0.31; P = 0.004). The mean difference in the
changes in the HHT-specific quality-of-life score between the groups was -1.4
points (95% CI, -2.6 to -0.3). Adverse events that were more common in the
pomalidomide group than in the placebo group included neutropenia, constipation,
and rash.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with HHT, pomalidomide treatment resulted in a
significant, clinically relevant reduction in epistaxis severity. No unexpected
safety signals were identified. (Funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute; PATH-HHT Clinicaltrials.gov number, NCT03910244).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2312749
PMCID: PMC11412318
PMID: 39292928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
