---
reference_id: "PMID:32803853"
title: "Birth prevalence of achondroplasia: A systematic literature review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Foreman PK
- van Kessel F
- van Hoorn R
- van den Bosch J
- Shediac R
- Landis S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61787
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle East/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Birth prevalence of achondroplasia: A systematic literature review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Foreman PK, van Kessel F, van Hoorn R, van den Bosch J, Shediac R, Landis S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61787](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61787)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2020 Oct;182(10):2297-2316. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61787. Epub 
2020 Aug 17.

Birth prevalence of achondroplasia: A systematic literature review and 
meta-analysis.

Foreman PK(1), van Kessel F(2), van Hoorn R(2), van den Bosch J(2), Shediac 
R(1), Landis S(3).

Author information:
(1)BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Inc, Novato, California, USA.
(2)Pallas Health Research and Consultancy, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., London, UK.

Achondroplasia is a genetic disorder that results in disproportionate short 
stature. The true prevalence of achondroplasia is unknown as estimates vary 
widely. This systematic literature review and meta-analysis was conducted to 
better estimate worldwide achondroplasia birth prevalence. PubMed, Embase, 
Scielo, and Google Scholar were searched, complemented by manual searching, for 
peer-reviewed articles published between 1950 and 2019. Eligible articles were 
identified by two independent researchers using predefined selection criteria. 
Birth prevalence estimates were extracted for analysis, and the quality of 
evidence was assessed. A meta-analysis using a quality effects approach based on 
the inverse variance fixed effect model was conducted. The search identified 955 
unique articles, of which 52 were eligible and included. Based on the 
meta-analysis, the worldwide birth prevalence of achondroplasia was estimated to 
be 4.6 per 100,000. Substantial regional variation was observed with a 
considerably higher birth prevalence reported in North Africa and the Middle 
East compared to other regions, particularly Europe and the Americas. Higher 
birth prevalence was also reported in specialized care settings. Significant 
heterogeneity (Higgins I2 of 84.3) was present and some indication of 
publication bias was detected, based on visual asymmetry of the Doi plot with a 
Furuya-Kanamori index of 2.73. Analysis of pooled data from the current 
literature yields a worldwide achondroplasia birth prevalence of approximately 
4.6 per 100,000, with considerable regional variation. Careful interpretation of 
these findings is advised as included studies are of broadly varying 
methodological quality.

© 2020 BioMarin. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61787
PMCID: PMC7540685
PMID: 32803853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The review team members P. K. F., S. L., and R. 
S. are employed by BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Inc.