---
reference_id: "PMID:22535601"
title: "Acute promyelocytic leukemia: four distinct patterns by flow cytometry immunophenotyping."
authors:
- Gorczyca W
journal: Pol J Pathol
year: '2012'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antigens, CD/analysis"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Cell Separation
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/classification, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute promyelocytic leukemia: four distinct patterns by flow cytometry immunophenotyping.
**Authors:** Gorczyca W
**Journal:** Pol J Pathol (2012)

## Content

1. Pol J Pathol. 2012 Mar;63(1):8-17.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia: four distinct patterns by flow cytometry
immunophenotyping.

Gorczyca W(1).

Author information:
(1)CSI Laboratories, Alpharetta, GA 30004, USA. wgorczyca@csilaboratories.com

A total of 97 acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients with adequate flow
cytometry (FC) data, bone marrow aspirates and presence of t(15;17)/PML-RARA by
cytogenetics and/or FISH studies were analyzed for immunophenotypic pattern.
Leukemic cells had the following phenotype: CD11b-, CD11c-, CD13+, CD33+, CD45+,
CD64+/-, CD117+, and HLA-DR-. A subset of cases showed also an expression of
CD2, CD4, CD34, and CD56. Based on the immunophenotype and side scatter
properties (SSC), four FC patterns were recognized. The majority of cases
represented classical (hypergranular) APL and were characterized by high SSC,
positive CD117, lack of CD34, heterogeneous CD13, and bright CD33 (pattern 1).
Second most common type, corresponding to the hypogranular (microgranular)
variant of APL differed from classical APL by low SSC and frequent co-expression
of CD2 and CD34 (pattern 2). Rare cases of APL (pattern 3) showed a mixture of
neoplastic cells (low SSC/CD2+/CD13+/CD33+/CD34+/CD117+) and prominent
population of benign granulocytes/maturing myeloid precursors (high
SSC/CD10+/-/CD16+/-/ CD117-). One case showed two APL populations, one with
hypogranular and one with hypergranular characteristics (pattern 4). Apart from
a well-known FC pattern of hypergranular APL, we presented less common
immunophenotypic variants of APL, which helps to identify an additional group of
patients who would benefit from fast confirmatory FISH and/or PCR testing for
t(15;17)/PML-RARA.

PMID: 22535601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
