---
reference_id: "PMID:42301793"
title: Restoring the interplay between the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria by gene therapy improves Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2A disease.
authors:
- Tessier M
- Hamze Z
- Bonello-Palot N
- Roeckel-Trévisiol N
- Da Silva N
- Verlet I
- Broucqsault N
- Bertaux K
- Delmont E
- Attarian S
- Bartoli M
- Delague V
- Schneider BL
- Bernard-Marissal N
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2530774123
keywords:
- Animals
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/therapy, genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism, genetics"
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, genetics"
- "GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Mice
- "Motor Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Therapy Agents
- "Neuromuscular Junction/metabolism, pathology"
- Dependovirus/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Restoring the interplay between the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria by gene therapy improves Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2A disease.
**Authors:** Tessier M, Hamze Z, Bonello-Palot N, Roeckel-Trévisiol N, Da Silva N, Verlet I, Broucqsault N, Bertaux K, Delmont E, Attarian S, Bartoli M, Delague V, Schneider BL, Bernard-Marissal N
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2530774123](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2530774123)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2026 Jun 23;123(25):e2530774123. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2530774123. Epub 2026 Jun 16.

Restoring the interplay between the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria by 
gene therapy improves Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2A disease.

Tessier M(1), Hamze Z(1), Bonello-Palot N(1)(2), Roeckel-Trévisiol N(1), Da 
Silva N(1), Verlet I(1), Broucqsault N(1), Bertaux K(3), Delmont E(4), Attarian 
S(4), Bartoli M(1)(5), Delague V(#)(1), Schneider BL(#)(6), Bernard-Marissal 
N(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM, Marseille Medical Genetics, U1251, Marseille 
13005, France.
(2)Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Timone, Assistance Publique- 
Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille 13005, France.
(3)Centre de Ressources Biologiques, Assistance Publique- Hôpitaux de Marseille, 
Hôpital Timone Adulte, Biogénopôle, Marseille 13005, France.
(4)Centre de Référence des Maladies Neuromusculaires et de la Sclérose Latérale 
Amyotrophique, Assistance Publique- Hôpitaux de Marseille, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Timone, Marseille, France.
(5)CNRS, Marseille 13009, France.
(6)Bertarelli Platform for Gene Therapy, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne, Geneva 1202, Switzerland.
(#)Contributed equally

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A (CMT2A) is the most common axonal CMT and is 
associated with an early onset and severe motor neuropathy. CMT2A is mainly 
caused by dominant mutations in the MFN2 gene, encoding mitofusin-2, a GTPase 
located in the outer membrane of the mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER). Mutations in MFN2 affect mitochondrial dynamics. We previously 
demonstrated that mutated MFN2 further disrupts contacts between the ER and the 
mitochondria, leading to axonal degeneration. There are no treatments for CMT2A, 
and those currently under development primarily focus on restoring mitochondrial 
function. Here, we provide proof of concept that neuronal overexpression of 
wild-type MFN2 (MFN2WT) provides therapeutic benefit in transgenic CMT2A mice as 
well as in CMT2A-motor neurons derived from induced pluripotent stem cells. 
Intrathecal delivery of an AAV9 vector expressing MFN2WT effectively targets 
motor and sensory neurons, restoring ER-mitochondria contacts and mitochondrial 
morphology, thereby preserving both neuromuscular junction integrity and motor 
function. Strikingly, therapeutic efficacy is also achieved by administering the 
vector after the onset of symptoms. Importantly, AAV administration was well 
tolerated, with no evidence of hepatotoxicity or dorsal root ganglion 
inflammation. We further show that CMT2A pathology can be corrected in vitro and 
in vivo using an ER-targeting MFN1 isoform that selectively enhances 
ER-mitochondria contacts. These results establish that restoring contacts 
between the ER and mitochondria using gene therapy is a promising therapeutic 
avenue for CMT2A.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2530774123
PMID: 42301793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:M.T. and N.B.-M. 
are the inventors of a patent application describing the use of recombinant 
adeno-associated virus, vector and composition for use in gene therapy of 
neurodegenerative diseases of motor and/or sensory neurons (EP 25306607.0).