---
reference_id: "PMID:36674605"
title: Age-Related microRNA Overexpression in Lafora Disease Male Mice Provides Links between Neuroinflammation and Oxidative Stress.
authors:
- Romá-Mateo C
- Lorente-Pozo S
- Márquez-Thibaut L
- Moreno-Estellés M
- Garcés C
- González D
- Lahuerta M
- Aguado C
- García-Giménez JL
- Sanz P
- Pallardó FV
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24021089
keywords:
- Mice
- Male
- Animals
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lafora Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- Neuroinflammatory Diseases
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
- Oxidative Stress/genetics
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Age-Related microRNA Overexpression in Lafora Disease Male Mice Provides Links between Neuroinflammation and Oxidative Stress.
**Authors:** Romá-Mateo C, Lorente-Pozo S, Márquez-Thibaut L, Moreno-Estellés M, Garcés C, González D, Lahuerta M, Aguado C, García-Giménez JL, Sanz P, Pallardó FV
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24021089](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24021089)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 6;24(2):1089. doi: 10.3390/ijms24021089.

Age-Related microRNA Overexpression in Lafora Disease Male Mice Provides Links 
between Neuroinflammation and Oxidative Stress.

Romá-Mateo C(1)(2)(3), Lorente-Pozo S(4), Márquez-Thibaut L(5), Moreno-Estellés 
M(3)(6), Garcés C(1), González D(7)(8), Lahuerta M(6), Aguado C(3), 
García-Giménez JL(1)(2)(3), Sanz P(3)(6), Pallardó FV(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Facultat de Medicina i Odontologia, Universitat de 
València, 46010 Valencia, Spain.
(2)Fundación Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria INCLIVA, 46010 Valencia, 
Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras 
(CIBERER)-ISCIII, 46010 Valencia, Spain.
(4)Neonatal Research Group, Health Research Institute La Fe, 46026 Valencia, 
Spain.
(5)Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Girona Dr. Josep Trueta (IDIBGI), Parc 
Hospitalari Martí i Julià de Salt, 17190 Girona, Spain.
(6)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas, 46010 Valencia, Spain.
(7)EpiDisease S.L. (Spin-off From the CIBER-ISCIII), Parc Científic de la 
Universitat de València, 46980 Paterna, Spain.
(8)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research (NIBR), Novartis Campus, CH-4056 
Basel, Switzerland.

Lafora disease is a rare, fatal form of progressive myoclonus epilepsy 
characterized by continuous neurodegeneration with epileptic seizures, 
characterized by the intracellular accumulation of aberrant polyglucosan 
granules called Lafora bodies. Several works have provided numerous evidence of 
molecular and cellular alterations in neural tissue from experimental mouse 
models deficient in either laforin or malin, two proteins related to the 
disease. Oxidative stress, alterations in proteostasis, and deregulation of 
inflammatory signals are some of the molecular alterations underlying this 
condition in both KO animal models. Lafora bodies appear early in the animal's 
life, but many of the aforementioned molecular aberrant processes and the 
consequent neurological symptoms ensue only as animals age. Here, using small 
RNA-seq and quantitative PCR on brain extracts from laforin and malin KO male 
mice of different ages, we show that two different microRNA species, miR-155 and 
miR-146a, are overexpressed in an age-dependent manner. We also observed altered 
expression of putative target genes for each of the microRNAs studied in brain 
extracts. These results open the path for a detailed dissection of the molecular 
consequences of laforin and malin deficiency in brain tissue, as well as the 
potential role of miR-155 and miR-146a as specific biomarkers of disease 
progression in LD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24021089
PMCID: PMC9865572
PMID: 36674605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.