---
reference_id: "PMID:37822332"
title: A patient with concurrent Axenfeld-Rieger and Stickler syndromes verified by molecular genetics.
authors:
- Fan J
- da Cruz NFS
- Fan KC
- Negron CI
- Amescua G
- Grajewski AL
- Chang TC
- Berrocal AM
journal: Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2023.101931
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A patient with concurrent Axenfeld-Rieger and Stickler syndromes verified by molecular genetics.
**Authors:** Fan J, da Cruz NFS, Fan KC, Negron CI, Amescua G, Grajewski AL, Chang TC, Berrocal AM
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajoc.2023.101931](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajoc.2023.101931)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep. 2023 Sep 26;32:101931. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajoc.2023.101931. eCollection 2023 Dec.

A patient with concurrent Axenfeld-Rieger and Stickler syndromes verified by 
molecular genetics.

Fan J(1), da Cruz NFS(1), Fan KC(1), Negron CI(1), Amescua G(1), Grajewski 
AL(1), Chang TC(1), Berrocal AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Miami, FL, USA.

PURPOSE: To report a case of Axenfeld-Rieger and Stickler Syndrome in a 
pediatric patient.
OBSERVATIONS: A 3-month-old male was referred to the glaucoma clinic after he 
was noted to have elevated intraocular pressures in both eyes. His family 
history was notable for infantile glaucoma on his maternal side and retinal 
detachment on his paternal side. He was found to have anterior segment 
dysgenesis with iris strands, iridocorneal adhesions, and corectopia, as well as 
veil-like vitreous in both eyes. He required trabeculotomy, goniotomy, and 
multiple Baerveldt glaucoma implants in both eyes to achieve intraocular 
pressure control. Furthermore, the patient later developed macula-involving 
retinal detachments in both eyes, requiring pars plana vitrectomy with silicone 
oil tamponade. Genetic analysis confirmed heterozygous pathogenic variants in 
both the FOXC1 and COL2A1 genes, leading to the concurrent diagnoses of 
Axenfeld-Rieger and Stickler syndromes.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPORTANCE: This is a rare case of a patient with concurrent 
Axenfeld-Rieger and Stickler syndromes. The severity of pathology in both the 
anterior and posterior segments required a collaborative multidisciplinary 
approach. In the diagnostic evaluation of congenital eye diseases, if there is 
strong family history of atypical findings for a given diagnosis, concurrent 
syndromes should be considered and ruled out. A comprehensive eye genetics panel 
may be a useful tool in these cases.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2023.101931
PMCID: PMC10562680
PMID: 37822332

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.