---
reference_id: "PMID:30354828"
title: "Resistant Hypertension: Detection, Evaluation, and Management: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association."
authors:
- Carey RM
- Calhoun DA
- Bakris GL
- Brook RD
- Daugherty SL
- Dennison-Himmelfarb CR
- Egan BM
- Flack JM
- Gidding SS
- Judd E
- Lackland DT
- Laffer CL
- Newton-Cheh C
- Smith SM
- Taler SJ
- Textor SC
- Turan TN
- White WB
- American Heart Association Professional/Public Education and Publications Committee of the Council on Hypertension; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Genomic and Precision Medicine; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; and Stroke Council
journal: Hypertension
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1161/HYP.0000000000000084
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resistant Hypertension: Detection, Evaluation, and Management: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association.
**Authors:** Carey RM, Calhoun DA, Bakris GL, Brook RD, Daugherty SL, Dennison-Himmelfarb CR, Egan BM, Flack JM, Gidding SS, Judd E, Lackland DT, Laffer CL, Newton-Cheh C, Smith SM, Taler SJ, Textor SC, Turan TN, White WB, American Heart Association Professional/Public Education and Publications Committee of the Council on Hypertension; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Genomic and Precision Medicine; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; and Stroke Council
**Journal:** Hypertension (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1161/HYP.0000000000000084](https://doi.org/10.1161/HYP.0000000000000084)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 2018 Nov;72(5):e53-e90. doi: 10.1161/HYP.0000000000000084.

Resistant Hypertension: Detection, Evaluation, and Management: A Scientific 
Statement From the American Heart Association.

Carey RM, Calhoun DA, Bakris GL, Brook RD, Daugherty SL, Dennison-Himmelfarb CR, 
Egan BM, Flack JM, Gidding SS, Judd E, Lackland DT, Laffer CL, Newton-Cheh C, 
Smith SM, Taler SJ, Textor SC, Turan TN, White WB; American Heart Association 
Professional/Public Education and Publications Committee of the Council on 
Hypertension; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; Council on Genomic and Precision Medicine; Council on Peripheral 
Vascular Disease; Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; and Stroke 
Council.

Resistant hypertension (RH) is defined as above-goal elevated blood pressure 
(BP) in a patient despite the concurrent use of 3 antihypertensive drug classes, 
commonly including a long-acting calcium channel blocker, a blocker of the 
renin-angiotensin system (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin 
receptor blocker), and a diuretic. The antihypertensive drugs should be 
administered at maximum or maximally tolerated daily doses. RH also includes 
patients whose BP achieves target values on ≥4 antihypertensive medications. The 
diagnosis of RH requires assurance of antihypertensive medication adherence and 
exclusion of the "white-coat effect" (office BP above goal but out-of-office BP 
at or below target). The importance of RH is underscored by the associated risk 
of adverse outcomes compared with non-RH. This article is an updated American 
Heart Association scientific statement on the detection, evaluation, and 
management of RH. Once antihypertensive medication adherence is confirmed and 
out-of-office BP recordings exclude a white-coat effect, evaluation includes 
identification of contributing lifestyle issues, detection of drugs interfering 
with antihypertensive medication effectiveness, screening for secondary 
hypertension, and assessment of target organ damage. Management of RH includes 
maximization of lifestyle interventions, use of long-acting thiazide-like 
diuretics (chlorthalidone or indapamide), addition of a mineralocorticoid 
receptor antagonist (spironolactone or eplerenone), and, if BP remains elevated, 
stepwise addition of antihypertensive drugs with complementary mechanisms of 
action to lower BP. If BP remains uncontrolled, referral to a hypertension 
specialist is advised.

DOI: 10.1161/HYP.0000000000000084
PMCID: PMC6530990
PMID: 30354828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The American Heart Association makes every 
effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as 
a result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or business 
interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the 
writing group are required to complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire 
showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential 
conflicts of interest.