---
reference_id: "PMID:21276132"
title: Genome-wide association studies for discovery of genes involved in asthma.
authors:
- Akhabir L
- Sandford AJ
journal: Respirology
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2011.01939.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association studies for discovery of genes involved in asthma.
**Authors:** Akhabir L, Sandford AJ
**Journal:** Respirology (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1440-1843.2011.01939.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1843.2011.01939.x)

## Content

1. Respirology. 2011 Apr;16(3):396-406. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2011.01939.x.

Genome-wide association studies for discovery of genes involved in asthma.

Akhabir L(1), Sandford AJ.

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia James Hogg Research Centre, Providence Heart + 
Lung Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Asthma is the result of a complex interaction between environmental factors and 
genetic variants that confer susceptibility. Studies of the genetics of asthma 
have previously been conducted using linkage designs and candidate gene 
association studies. Recently, the association study design has been extended 
from specific candidate genes to an unbiased genome-wide approach: the 
genome-wide association study (GWAS). To date, there have been 12 GWAS to look 
for susceptibility loci for asthma and related traits. The first GWAS for asthma 
discovered a novel associated locus on chromosome 17q21 encompassing the genes 
ORMDL3, GSDMB and ZPBP2. None of these genes would have been selected in a 
candidate association study based on current knowledge of the functions of these 
genes. Nevertheless, this finding has been consistently replicated in 
independent populations of European ancestry and also in other ethnic groups. 
Thus, chromosome 17q21 seems to be a true asthma susceptibility locus. Other 
genes that were identified in more than one GWAS are IL33, RAD50, IL1RL1 and 
HLA-DQB1. Additional novel susceptibility genes identified in a single study 
include DENND1BI and IL2RB. Discovering the causal mechanism behind these 
associations is likely to yield great insights into the development of asthma. 
It is likely that further meta-analyses of asthma GWAS data from existing 
international consortia will uncover more novel susceptibility genes and further 
increase our understanding of this disease.

© 2011 The Authors. Respirology © 2011 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2011.01939.x
PMID: 21276132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]