---
reference_id: "PMID:34637570"
title: Autopsy case with concurrent transthyretin and immunoglobulin amyloidosis.
authors:
- Shintani-Domoto Y
- Ishino K
- Naiki H
- Sakatani T
- Ohashi R
journal: Pathol Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/pin.13179
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autopsy case with concurrent transthyretin and immunoglobulin amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Shintani-Domoto Y, Ishino K, Naiki H, Sakatani T, Ohashi R
**Journal:** Pathol Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pin.13179](https://doi.org/10.1111/pin.13179)

## Content

1. Pathol Int. 2022 Jan;72(1):65-71. doi: 10.1111/pin.13179. Epub 2021 Oct 12.

Autopsy case with concurrent transthyretin and immunoglobulin amyloidosis.

Shintani-Domoto Y(1), Ishino K(2), Naiki H(3), Sakatani T(1), Ohashi R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Nippon Medical School Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Integrated Diagnostic Pathology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Pathology, University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan.

An 85-year-old man with a history of aortic dissection suddenly fainted, 
underwent cardiac heart arrest, and died. An autopsy was performed, but the 
cause of death was not grossly identified. Congo red staining detected amyloid 
deposits in systemic organs, including the heart, lungs, liver, and kidneys. 
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis revealed immunoglobulin (Ig) λ light chain 
(-λ) in systemic blood vessels and transthyretin (TTR) in the heart and lungs. 
Ig-λ was predominantly positive in the blood vessels of the lungs, while TTR was 
detected in the alveolar septum. In the heart, Ig-λ was positive in the 
endocardium and blood vessels, and TTR was positive in nodular deposits between 
cardiomyocytes. The concurrent deposition of Ig-λ and TTR in the heart was 
further substantiated by laser microdissection (LMD)-liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) at each deposition site. 
Despite systemic deposition of Ig-λ, bone marrow biopsy findings were not 
diagnostic for multiple myeloma. In summary, we present an autopsy case of 
concurrent Ig-λ and TTR deposition as revealed by IHC and LC-MS/MS. When Congo 
red staining and IHC results are indeterminate due to the deposition of multiple 
amyloid proteins, LMD-LC-MS/MS is useful for determining the precursor protein.

© 2021 Japanese Society of Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pin.13179
PMID: 34637570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]