---
reference_id: "PMID:20874010"
title: "Varicella-zoster virus human ganglionic latency: a current summary."
authors:
- Kennedy PG
- Cohrs RJ
journal: J Neurovirol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/BF03210846
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella-zoster virus human ganglionic latency: a current summary.
**Authors:** Kennedy PG, Cohrs RJ
**Journal:** J Neurovirol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF03210846](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03210846)

## Content

1. J Neurovirol. 2010 Nov;16(6):411-8. doi: 10.1007/BF03210846. Epub 2010 Sep 27.

Varicella-zoster virus human ganglionic latency: a current summary.

Kennedy PG(1), Cohrs RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Glasgow University, Southern General Hospital, 
Glasgow, Scotland, UK. P.G.Kennedy@clinmed.gla.ac.uk

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is a ubiquitous human herpes virus typically 
acquired in childhood when it causes varicella (chickenpox), following which the 
virus establishes a latent infection in trigeminal and dorsal root ganglia that 
lasts for the life of the individual. VZV subsequently reactivates, 
spontaneously or after specific triggering factors, to cause herpes zoster 
(shingles), which may be complicated by postherpetic neuralgia and several other 
neurological complications including vasculopathy. Our understanding of VZV 
latency lags behind our knowledge of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) latency 
primarily due to the difficulty in propagating the virus to high titers in a 
cell-free state, and the lack of a suitable small-animal model for studying 
virus latency and reactivation. It is now established beyond doubt that latent 
VZV is predominantly located in human ganglionic neurons. Virus gene 
transcription during latency is epigenetically regulated, and appears to be 
restricted to expression of at least six genes, with expression of gene 63 being 
the hallmark of latency. However, viral gene transcription may be more extensive 
than previously thought. There is also evidence for several VZV genes being 
expressed at the protein level, including VZV gene 63-encoded protein, but 
recent evidence suggests that this may not be a common event. The nature and 
extent of the chronic inflammatory response in latently infected ganglia is also 
of current interest. There remain several questions concerning the VZV latency 
process that still need to be resolved unambiguously and it is likely that this 
will require the use of newly developed molecular technologies, such as GeXPS 
multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for virus transcriptional analysis and 
ChIP-seq to study the epigenetic of latent virus genome ( Liu et al, 2010 , BMC 
Biol 8: 56).

DOI: 10.1007/BF03210846
PMID: 20874010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]