---
reference_id: "PMID:36460281"
title: "HTAD patient pathway: Strategy for diagnostic work-up of patients and families with (suspected) heritable thoracic aortic diseases (HTAD). A statement from the HTAD working group of VASCERN."
authors:
- Caruana M
- Baars MJ
- Bashiardes E
- Benke K
- Björck E
- Codreanu A
- de Moya Rubio E
- Dumfarth J
- Evangelista A
- Groenink M
- Kallenbach K
- Kempers M
- Keravnou A
- Loeys B
- Muiño-Mosquera L
- Nagy E
- Milleron O
- Nistri S
- Pepe G
- Roos-Hesselink J
- Szabolcs Z
- Teixidó-Tura G
- Timmermans J
- Van de Laar I
- van Kimmenade R
- Verstraeten A
- Von Kodolitsch Y
- De Backer J
- Jondeau G
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104673
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Humans
- Aortic Dissection
- Genetic Testing
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Thoracic/genetics"
- Patient Care
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HTAD patient pathway: Strategy for diagnostic work-up of patients and families with (suspected) heritable thoracic aortic diseases (HTAD). A statement from the HTAD working group of VASCERN.
**Authors:** Caruana M, Baars MJ, Bashiardes E, Benke K, Björck E, Codreanu A, de Moya Rubio E, Dumfarth J, Evangelista A, Groenink M, Kallenbach K, Kempers M, Keravnou A, Loeys B, Muiño-Mosquera L, Nagy E, Milleron O, Nistri S, Pepe G, Roos-Hesselink J, Szabolcs Z, Teixidó-Tura G, Timmermans J, Van de Laar I, van Kimmenade R, Verstraeten A, Von Kodolitsch Y, De Backer J, Jondeau G
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104673](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104673)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2023 Jan;66(1):104673. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104673. Epub 
2022 Nov 29.

HTAD patient pathway: Strategy for diagnostic work-up of patients and families 
with (suspected) heritable thoracic aortic diseases (HTAD). A statement from the 
HTAD working group of VASCERN.

Caruana M(1), Baars MJ(2), Bashiardes E(3), Benke K(4), Björck E(5), Codreanu 
A(6), de Moya Rubio E(7), Dumfarth J(8), Evangelista A(9), Groenink M(2), 
Kallenbach K(6), Kempers M(10), Keravnou A(3), Loeys B(11), Muiño-Mosquera 
L(12), Nagy E(13), Milleron O(14), Nistri S(15), Pepe G(15), Roos-Hesselink 
J(16), Szabolcs Z(4), Teixidó-Tura G(9), Timmermans J(10), Van de Laar I(16), 
van Kimmenade R(10), Verstraeten A(11), Von Kodolitsch Y(17), De Backer J(12), 
Jondeau G(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Mater Dei Hospital, VASCERN HTAD Affiliated Partner 
Centre, Malta.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, VASCERN HTAD 
European Reference Centre, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Genetics and Laboratory of Forensic Genetics, 
The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, VASCERN HTAD Affiliated 
Partner Centre, Cyprus.
(4)Semmelweis University Heart and Vascular Centre, Budapest, VASCERN HTAD 
European Reference Centre, Hungary.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
VASCERN HTAD European Reference Centre, Sweden.
(6)Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg, VASCERN HTAD Affiliated Partner Centre, 
Luxembourg.
(7)Marfan Hilfe, VASCERN HTAD European Patient Advocacy Group, Spain.
(8)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria, VASCERN HTAD Affiliated Partner Centre.
(9)Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, VASCERN HTAD European 
Reference Centre, Spain.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, VASCERN HTAD European Reference Centre, the Netherlands.
(11)Center of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, VASCERN 
HTAD European Reference Centre, Belgium.
(12)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, VASCERN HTAD 
European Reference Centre, Belgium.
(13)Karolinska University Hospital, Theme Heart and Vessels, Division of 
Valvular and Adult Congenital Heart Disease, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
(14)Centre de référence pour le syndrome de Marfan et apparentés, Department of 
Cardiology, AP-HP, Université Paris Cité, Hôpital Bichat-Claude Bernard, Paris, 
VASCERN HTAD European Reference Centre, France.
(15)Regional Tuscany Reference Center for Marfan Syndrome and Related Disorders, 
Careggi Hospital, University of Florence, Florence, VASCERN HTAD European 
Reference Centre, Italy.
(16)Department of Clinical Genetics and Cardiology, Erasmus Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, VASCERN HTAD European Reference Centre, Spain.
(17)University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf University Heart Centre, Hamburg, 
VASCERN HTAD European Reference Centre, Germany.
(18)Centre de référence pour le syndrome de Marfan et apparentés, Department of 
Cardiology, AP-HP, Université Paris Cité, Hôpital Bichat-Claude Bernard, Paris, 
VASCERN HTAD European Reference Centre, France. Electronic address: 
guillaume.jondeau@aphp.fr.

Heritable thoracic aortic diseases (HTAD) are rare pathologies associated with 
thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissection, which can be syndromic or 
non-syndromic. They may result from genetic defects. Associated genes identified 
to date are classified into those encoding components of the (a) extracellular 
matrix (b) TGFβ pathway and (c) smooth muscle contractile mechanism. Timely 
diagnosis allows for prompt aortic surveillance and prophylactic surgery, hence 
improving life expectancy and reducing maternal complications as well as 
providing reassurance to family members when a diagnosis is ruled out. This 
document is an expert opinion reflecting strategies put forward by medical 
experts and patient representatives involved in the HTAD Rare Disease Working 
Group of VASCERN. It aims to provide a patient pathway that improves patient 
care by diminishing time to diagnosis, facilitating the establishment of a 
correct diagnosis using molecular genetics when possible, excluding the 
diagnosis in unaffected persons through appropriate family screening and 
avoiding overuse of resources. It is being recommended that patients are 
referred to an expert centre for further evaluation if they meet at least one of 
the following criteria: (1) thoracic aortic dissection (<70 years if 
hypertensive; all ages if non-hypertensive), (2) thoracic aortic aneurysm (all 
adults with Z score >3.5 or 2.5-3.5 if non-hypertensive or hypertensive and <60 
years; all children with Z score >3), (3) family history of HTAD with/without a 
pathogenic variant in a gene linked to HTAD, (4) ectopia lentis without other 
obvious explanation and (5) a systemic score of >5 in adults and >3 in children. 
Aortic imaging primarily relies on transthoracic echocardiography with magnetic 
resonance imaging or computed tomography as needed. Genetic testing should be 
considered in those with a high suspicion of underlying genetic aortopathy. 
Though panels vary among centers, for patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm or 
dissection or systemic features these should include genes with a definitive or 
strong association to HTAD. Genetic cascade screening and serial aortic imaging 
should be considered for family screening and follow-up. In conclusion, the 
implementation of these strategies should help standardise the diagnostic 
work-up and follow-up of patients with suspected HTAD and the screening of their 
relatives.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104673
PMID: 36460281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]