---
reference_id: "PMID:12709727"
title: "Pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of bosentan in pediatric patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension."
authors:
- Barst RJ
- Ivy D
- Dingemanse J
- Widlitz A
- Schmitt K
- Doran A
- Bingaman D
- Nguyen N
- Gaitonde M
- van Giersbergen PL
journal: Clin Pharmacol Ther
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0009-9236(03)00005-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Analysis of Variance
- "Antihypertensive Agents/blood, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Body Weight
- Bosentan
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Female
- Half-Life
- Hemodynamics/drug effects
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/drug therapy"
- Male
- "Sulfonamides/blood, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of bosentan in pediatric patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension.
**Authors:** Barst RJ, Ivy D, Dingemanse J, Widlitz A, Schmitt K, Doran A, Bingaman D, Nguyen N, Gaitonde M, van Giersbergen PL
**Journal:** Clin Pharmacol Ther (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0009-9236(03)00005-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0009-9236(03)00005-5)

## Content

1. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2003 Apr;73(4):372-82. doi:
10.1016/s0009-9236(03)00005-5.

Pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of bosentan in pediatric patients with
pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Barst RJ(1), Ivy D, Dingemanse J, Widlitz A, Schmitt K, Doran A, Bingaman D,
Nguyen N, Gaitonde M, van Giersbergen PL.

Author information:
(1)Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Department of Clinical Pharmacology,
Gewerbestrasse, Allscwil, Switzerland. paul.cangiersbergen@actelion.com

BACKGROUND: Bosentan, a dual endothelin-receptor antagonist, is registered for
the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension. Little is known about the
effects of bosentan in children. This study was conducted to investigate the
pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy of bosentan in pediatric patients with
pulmonary arterial hypertension.
METHODS: In this 2-center, open-label study, 19 pediatric patients with
pulmonary arterial hypertension were enrolled and stratified for body weight and
epoprostenol use. Patients weighing between 10 and 20 kg, between 20 and 40 kg,
or greater than 40 kg received a single dose of 31.25, 62.5, or 125 mg,
respectively, on day 1, followed by 4 weeks of treatment with the initial dose.
The dose was then up-titrated to the target dose (31.25, 62.5, or 125 mg twice
daily). Pharmacokinetic and hemodynamic parameters were obtained at baseline and
after 12 weeks of treatment. Six-minute walk distance and cardiopulmonary
exercise testing results were measured at baseline and at week 12 in children
aged 8 years or older.
RESULTS: The variability in exposure among the 3 groups was less than 2-fold
after single- and multiple-dose administration. The exposure to bosentan
decreased over time in all groups. The covariates body weight, gender, age, and
the use of epoprostenol had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of
bosentan. Bosentan produced hemodynamic improvement and was well tolerated. The
mean change from baseline in mean pulmonary artery pressure was -8.0 mm Hg (95%
confidence interval, -12.2 to -3.7 mm Hg), and that in pulmonary vascular
resistance index was -300 dyne x s x m(2)/cm(5) (95% confidence interval, -576
to -24 dyne x s x m(2)/cm(5)).
CONCLUSIONS: The pharmacokinetics of bosentan in pediatric patients with
pulmonary arterial hypertension and healthy adults are similar, and treatment
with bosentan resulted in hemodynamic improvement. These results suggest that
the applied dosing regimens may be appropriate to treat pediatric patients.

DOI: 10.1016/s0009-9236(03)00005-5
PMID: 12709727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
