---
reference_id: "PMID:32439934"
title: Omental adipocytes promote peritoneal metastasis of gastric cancer through the CXCL2-VEGFA axis.
authors:
- Natsume M
- Shimura T
- Iwasaki H
- Okuda Y
- Hayashi K
- Takahashi S
- Kataoka H
journal: Br J Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41416-020-0898-3
keywords:
- "Adipocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Chemokine CXCL2/genetics, urine"
- Coculture Techniques/methods
- "Culture Media, Conditioned/chemistry"
- Female
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Omentum/cytology, metabolism"
- "Peritoneal Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, secondary"
- Phosphorylation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- "Stomach Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Up-Regulation
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Omental adipocytes promote peritoneal metastasis of gastric cancer through the CXCL2-VEGFA axis.
**Authors:** Natsume M, Shimura T, Iwasaki H, Okuda Y, Hayashi K, Takahashi S, Kataoka H
**Journal:** Br J Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41416-020-0898-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-020-0898-3)

## Content

1. Br J Cancer. 2020 Aug;123(3):459-470. doi: 10.1038/s41416-020-0898-3. Epub
2020  May 22.

Omental adipocytes promote peritoneal metastasis of gastric cancer through the
CXCL2-VEGFA axis.

Natsume M(1), Shimura T(2), Iwasaki H(1), Okuda Y(1), Hayashi K(1), Takahashi
S(3), Kataoka H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Nagoya City University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya,
467-8601, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Nagoya City University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya,
467-8601, Japan. tshimura@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Experimental Pathology and Tumor Biology, Nagoya City
University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 1-Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho,
Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, 467-8601, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer (GC) patients frequently develop peritoneal
metastasis; however, the underlying mechanism remains unknown. We hypothesised
that omental adipocytes (OmAd) trigger GC cells towards malignant activity to
induce peritoneal metastasis.
METHODS: We analysed interactions among human GC cells, endothelial cells and
OmAd using a 3D co-culture system. We also employed a multipronged animal study,
including subcutaneous and orthotopic tumours, and humanised omental adipose
tissue models. Urinary levels of CXCL2 were analysed in human GC patients with
and without peritoneal metastasis.
RESULTS: Conditioned media derived from OmAd (OmAd-CM) promoted the
proliferation, migration and capacity to induce angiogenesis of GC cells through
AKT phosphorylation and VEGFA overexpression, whereas silencing CXCL2 in OmAd
cancelled OmAd-induced effects. In an orthotopic tumour model using SCID mice,
omentectomy suppressed GC growth and peritoneal dissemination, and reduced serum
levels of CXCL2. OmAd promoted GC growth in a humanised omental adipose tissue
model using NSG mice, but silencing CXCL2 in OmAd cancelled OmAd-induced tumour
growth. Finally, urinary levels of CXCL2 were significantly higher in GC
patients with peritoneal metastasis than in those without.
CONCLUSION: Omental adipocytes trigger GC cells to an aggressive phenotype
through CXCL2 secretion, which induces angiogenesis followed by cell growth and
peritoneal metastasis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-020-0898-3
PMCID: PMC7403422
PMID: 32439934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
