---
reference_id: "PMID:16831202"
title: "Dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever: implications of host genetics."
authors:
- Chaturvedi U
- Nagar R
- Shrivastava R
journal: FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2006.00058.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever: implications of host genetics.
**Authors:** Chaturvedi U, Nagar R, Shrivastava R
**Journal:** FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1574-695X.2006.00058.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-695X.2006.00058.x)

## Content

1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2006 Jul;47(2):155-66. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2006.00058.x.

Dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever: implications of host genetics.

Chaturvedi U(1), Nagar R, Shrivastava R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, K.G. Medical University, Lucknow, India. 
ucc05@rediffmail.com

Little is known of the role of human leucocyte antigen (HLA) alleles or non-HLA 
alleles in determining resistance, susceptibility or the severity of acute viral 
infections. Dengue fever (DF) and dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) are suitable 
models for immunogenetic studies, yet only superficial efforts have been made to 
study dengue disease to date. DF and DHF can be caused by both primary and 
secondary infection by any of the four serotypes of the dengue virus. 
Differences in host susceptibility to infectious disease and disease severity 
cannot be attributed solely to the virus virulence. Variations in immune 
response, often associated with polymorphism in the human genome, can now be 
detected. Data on the influence of human genes in DF and DHF are discussed here 
in relation to (1) associations between HLA polymorphism and dengue disease 
susceptibility or resistance, (2) protective alleles influencing progression to 
severe disease, (3) alleles restricting CD4(+) and CD8(+) T lymphocytes, and (4) 
non-HLA genetic factors that may contribute to DHF evolution. Recent discoveries 
regarding genetic associations in other viral infections may provide clues to 
understanding the development of end-stage complications in dengue disease. The 
scanty positive data presented here indicate a need for detailed genetic studies 
in different ethnic groups in different countries during the acute phase of DF 
and DHF on a larger number of patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2006.00058.x
PMID: 16831202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]