---
reference_id: "PMID:25773224"
title: Ophthalmology issues in schizophrenia.
authors:
- Gracitelli CP
- Abe RY
- Diniz-Filho A
- Vaz-de-Lima FB
- Paranhos A Jr
- Medeiros FA
journal: Curr Psychiatry Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s11920-015-0569-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ophthalmology issues in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Gracitelli CP, Abe RY, Diniz-Filho A, Vaz-de-Lima FB, Paranhos A Jr, Medeiros FA
**Journal:** Curr Psychiatry Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11920-015-0569-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-015-0569-x)

## Content

1. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2015 May;17(5):28. doi: 10.1007/s11920-015-0569-x.

Ophthalmology issues in schizophrenia.

Gracitelli CP(1), Abe RY, Diniz-Filho A, Vaz-de-Lima FB, Paranhos A Jr, Medeiros 
FA.

Author information:
(1)Hamilton Glaucoma Center and Department of Ophthalmology, University of 
California, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0946, USA, 
carolepm@gmail.com.

Schizophrenia is a complex mental disorder associated with not only cognitive 
dysfunctions, such as memory and attention deficits, but also changes in basic 
sensory processing. Although most studies on schizophrenia have focused on 
disturbances in higher-order brain functions associated with the prefrontal 
cortex or frontal cortex, recent investigations have also reported abnormalities 
in low-level sensory processes, such as the visual system. At very early stages 
of the disease, schizophrenia patients frequently describe in detail symptoms of 
a disturbance in various aspects of visual perception that may lead to worse 
clinical symptoms and decrease in quality of life. Therefore, the aim of this 
review is to describe the various studies that have explored the visual issues 
in schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1007/s11920-015-0569-x
PMCID: PMC4523638
PMID: 25773224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]