---
reference_id: "PMID:10636975"
title: "Maternal phenylketonuria syndrome: congenital heart defects, microcephaly, and developmental outcomes."
authors:
- Rouse B
- Matalon R
- Koch R
- Azen C
- Levy H
- Hanley W
- Trefz F
- de la Cruz F
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(00)90050-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Child Development/physiology
- Cohort Studies
- Developmental Disabilities/etiology
- Diet
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genotype
- Gestational Age
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/etiology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intelligence/physiology
- Medical Records
- Microcephaly/etiology
- Mutation/genetics
- "Phenylalanine/adverse effects, blood, therapeutic use"
- "Phenylketonurias/complications, genetics, prevention & control"
- Preconception Care
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications/prevention & control"
- Psychomotor Performance/physiology
- Risk Factors
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maternal phenylketonuria syndrome: congenital heart defects, microcephaly, and developmental outcomes.
**Authors:** Rouse B, Matalon R, Koch R, Azen C, Levy H, Hanley W, Trefz F, de la Cruz F
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(00)90050-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(00)90050-7)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2000 Jan;136(1):57-61. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(00)90050-7.

Maternal phenylketonuria syndrome: congenital heart defects, microcephaly, and
developmental outcomes.

Rouse B(1), Matalon R, Koch R, Azen C, Levy H, Hanley W, Trefz F, de la Cruz F.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX
77555-0319, USA.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2000 Jan;136(1):12-3. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(00)90042-8.

OBJECTIVE: A cohort of women with phenylketonuria (PKU) were selected to explore
the impact of phenylalanine (Phe) levels and other factors on congenital heart
defects (CHDs), microcephaly, and development of their offspring.
STUDY DESIGN: Three hundred fifty-four women with PKU were followed up weekly
with diet records, blood Phe levels, and sonograms obtained at 18 to 20 and 32
weeks' gestation. At birth, 413 offspring were examined and followed up at 6
months and annually by means of Bayley Mental Developmental Index and
Psychomotor Developmental Index tests at 1 and 2 years. The women had Wechsler
Adult Intelligence Scales and DNA testing.
RESULTS: Thirty-one offspring had CHDs; of these, 17 also had microcephaly. Mean
Phe levels at 4 to 8 weeks' gestation predicted CHDs (P <.0001). An infant with
a CHD had a 3-fold risk of having microcephaly when the mother had higher Phe
levels (P =.02). The Bayley Mental Developmental Index and Psychomotor
Developmental Index scores correlated with both CHDs (P =.037 and.0015,
respectively) and microcephaly (P =.0001 for both). No direct relationship to
the PKU mutation was found.
CONCLUSION: None of the women whose offspring had CHDs had blood Phe levels in
control during the first 8 weeks of gestation. Women with PKU need to be well
controlled on a low-phenylalanine diet before conception and throughout
pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(00)90050-7
PMID: 10636975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
