---
reference_id: "PMID:15227686"
title: Perianal Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Singh B
- McC Mortensen NJ
- Jewell DP
- George B
journal: Br J Surg
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/bjs.4613
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perianal Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Singh B, McC Mortensen NJ, Jewell DP, George B
**Journal:** Br J Surg (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bjs.4613](https://doi.org/10.1002/bjs.4613)

## Content

1. Br J Surg. 2004 Jul;91(7):801-14. doi: 10.1002/bjs.4613.

Perianal Crohn's disease.

Singh B(1), McC Mortensen NJ, Jewell DP, George B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    Br J Surg. 2004 Oct;91(10):1381. doi: 10.1002/bjs.4825.

BACKGROUND: The management of perianal Crohn's disease is difficult. A wide 
variety of treatment options exist although few are evidence based.
METHODS: A search was conducted using the National Library of Medicine for 
articles on perianal Crohn's disease and its incidence, classification, 
assessment and management.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Perianal Crohn's disease can manifest as skin tags, 
ulcers, fissures, abscesses, fistulas or stenoses. Improved radiological imaging 
with endoanal anal ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging has improved 
its assessment and may be used to predict outcome after surgery. Many treatment 
options exist. During acute complications they are generally aimed at resolving 
the immediate problem and limiting damage to anal and perianal tissues; this may 
be a 'bridge' to definitive treatment. The likelihood of success of definitive 
treatment must be weighed against the risk of complications, especially faecal 
incontinence.

Copyright 2004 British Journal of Surgery Society Ltd. Published by John Wiley & 
Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/bjs.4613
PMID: 15227686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]