---
reference_id: "PMID:36374860"
title: "Genotype-Phenotype Correlations for ATX-TBP (SCA17): MDSGene Systematic Review."
authors:
- Rossi M
- Hamed M
- Rodríguez-Antigüedad J
- Cornejo-Olivas M
- Breza M
- Lohmann K
- Klein C
- Rajalingam R
- Marras C
- van de Warrenburg BP
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mds.29278
keywords:
- Humans
- Genetic Association Studies
- Parkinson Disease/genetics
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
- TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- Lysophospholipase D
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-Phenotype Correlations for ATX-TBP (SCA17): MDSGene Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Rossi M, Hamed M, Rodríguez-Antigüedad J, Cornejo-Olivas M, Breza M, Lohmann K, Klein C, Rajalingam R, Marras C, van de Warrenburg BP
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.29278](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.29278)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2023 Mar;38(3):368-377. doi: 10.1002/mds.29278. Epub 2022 Nov 14.

Genotype-Phenotype Correlations for ATX-TBP (SCA17): MDSGene Systematic Review.

Rossi M(1)(2), Hamed M(3), Rodríguez-Antigüedad J(4)(5), Cornejo-Olivas M(6)(7), 
Breza M(8)(9), Lohmann K(10), Klein C(10), Rajalingam R(11), Marras C(11), van 
de Warrenburg BP(12).

Author information:
(1)Sección de Movimientos Anormales, Departamento de Neurología, Fleni, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(3)New York-Presbyterian Brooklyn Methodist Hospital, Brooklyn, New York, USA.
(4)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Department, Sant Pau Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques-Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Neurogenetics Research Center, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Neurológicas, 
Lima, Peru.
(7)Carrera de Medicina, Universidad Científica del Sur, Lima, Peru.
(8)1st Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Eginition Hospital, National 
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(9)Department of Neuromuscular Disease, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 
The National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(10)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(11)Edmond J. Safra Program in Parkinson's Disease, Morton and Gloria Shulman 
Movement Disorders Clinic, Toronto Western Hospital, UHN, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(12)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition & Behaviour, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 or ATX-TBP is a CAG/CAA repeat expansion disorder 
characterized by marked clinical heterogeneity. Reports of affected carriers 
with subthreshold repeat expansions and of patients with Parkinson's disease 
(PD) with expanded repeats have cast doubt on the established cutoff values of 
the expansions and the phenotypic spectrum of this disorder. The objective of 
this systematic review was to explore the genotype-phenotype relationships for 
repeat expansions in TBP to delineate the ATX-TBP phenotype and reevaluate the 
pathological range of repeat expansions. The International Parkinson and 
Movement Disorder Society Genetic Mutation Database (MDSGene) standardized data 
extraction protocol was followed. Clinically affected carriers of reported 
ATX-TBP expansions were included. Publications that contained repeat sizes in 
screened cohorts of patients with PD and/or healthy individuals were included 
for a separate evaluation of cutoff values. Phenotypic and genotypic data for 
346 ATX-TBP patients were curated. Overall, 97.7% of the patients had ≥41 
repeats, while 99.6% of patients with PD and 99.9% of healthy individuals had 
≤42 repeats, with a gray zone of reduced penetrance between 41 and 45 repeats. 
Pure parkinsonism was more common in ATX-TBP patients with 41 to 45 repeats than 
in the group with ≥46 repeats, which conversely more often presented with a 
complex phenotype with mixed movement disorders. An updated genotype-phenotype 
assessment for ATX-TBP is provided, and new repeat expansion cutoff values of 
reduced penetrance (41-45 expanded repeats) and full penetrance (46-66 expanded 
repeats) are proposed. These adjusted cutoff values will have diagnostic and 
counseling implications and may guide future clinical trial protocol. © 2022 The 
Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2022 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.29278
PMID: 36374860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]