---
reference_id: "PMID:16452608"
title: "Flat affect in schizophrenia: relation to emotion processing and neurocognitive measures."
authors:
- Gur RE
- Kohler CG
- Ragland JD
- Siegel SJ
- Lesko K
- Bilker WB
- Gur RC
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbj041
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Flat affect in schizophrenia: relation to emotion processing and neurocognitive measures.
**Authors:** Gur RE, Kohler CG, Ragland JD, Siegel SJ, Lesko K, Bilker WB, Gur RC
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/sbj041](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbj041)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 2006 Apr;32(2):279-87. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbj041. Epub 2006
Feb  1.

Flat affect in schizophrenia: relation to emotion processing and neurocognitive 
measures.

Gur RE(1), Kohler CG, Ragland JD, Siegel SJ, Lesko K, Bilker WB, Gur RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Neuropsychiatry Division, Schizophrenia Center, 
University of Pennsylvania, USA. raquel@bbl.med.upenn.edu

Impaired emotional functioning in schizophrenia is a prominent clinical feature 
that manifests primarily as flat affect. Studies have examined the perception, 
experience, and expression of emotions in schizophrenia and reported normal 
ratings of experience but impaired affect identification. However, the relation 
between flat affect and performance on facial affect identification and 
cognitive tasks has not been systematically examined in relation to premorbid 
adjustment and clinical outcome. We report a prospective study of 63 patients 
with at least moderate severity of flat affect and 99 patients without flat 
affect, who were compared on functional domains, emotion processing tasks, and 
neurocognitive measures. Flat affect was more common in men and was associated 
with poorer premorbid adjustment, worse current quality of life, and worse 
outcome at 1-year follow-up. Patients overall performed more poorly on emotion 
processing tasks, one that required identification of happy and sad emotions and 
one that required differentiating among intensities within these emotions. They 
responded inaccurately yet faster than controls for the intensity 
differentiation task, suggesting a decomposition of the normal relation between 
accuracy and speed. Flat affect ratings, compared with other negative symptoms, 
uniquely predicted performance on emotion processing tasks. Patients with flat 
affect showed greater impairment in both emotion processing tasks, with the most 
pronounced impairment for the intensity differentiation task. However, the 2 
patient groups did not differ in the neurocognitive profile except for verbal 
memory. We conclude that flat affect is an important clinical feature of 
schizophrenia that exacerbates the course of illness.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbj041
PMCID: PMC2632232
PMID: 16452608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]