---
reference_id: "PMID:10884944"
title: "Host-pathogen interactions in emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases: a genomic perspective of tuberculosis, malaria, human immunodeficiency virus infection, hepatitis B, and cholera."
authors:
- McNicholl JM
- Downer MV
- Udhayakumar V
- Alper CA
- Swerdlow DL
journal: Annu Rev Public Health
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.21.1.15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Host-pathogen interactions in emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases: a genomic perspective of tuberculosis, malaria, human immunodeficiency virus infection, hepatitis B, and cholera.
**Authors:** McNicholl JM, Downer MV, Udhayakumar V, Alper CA, Swerdlow DL
**Journal:** Annu Rev Public Health (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.publhealth.21.1.15](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.21.1.15)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Public Health. 2000;21:15-46. doi:
10.1146/annurev.publhealth.21.1.15.

Host-pathogen interactions in emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases: a 
genomic perspective of tuberculosis, malaria, human immunodeficiency virus 
infection, hepatitis B, and cholera.

McNicholl JM(1), Downer MV, Udhayakumar V, Alper CA, Swerdlow DL.

Author information:
(1)Division of AIDS, National Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for 
Disease Control, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA. jkm7@cdc.gov

On exposure to a pathogen, a host may resist infection, become subclinically 
infected, or progress through several stages from mild to severe infection. 
Chronic sequelae may or may not occur. Host factors, particularly host genes, 
influence many of these stages. We have used a model of the continuum of 
pathogenesis of infectious diseases to consider the effect of host genes on five 
pathogens of significant public health burden: Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 
Plasmodium species, human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and Vibrio 
cholerae. The relationships between these infections and polymorphisms in human 
leukocyte antigen, cytokines, other immune response, or pathogen receptor genes 
are reviewed. We discuss gene-gene interactions and their effects in complex 
settings, such as coinfections with several pathogens. Priorities for prevention 
and control of these pathogens include vaccines and antimicrobial drugs. 
Research on how host genes can influence vaccine responses and the efficacy of 
drugs or other interventions, as well as further research into the relationship 
of host genes to infectious disease outcomes, may lead to new strategies for 
prevention and control.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.21.1.15
PMID: 10884944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]