---
reference_id: "PMID:34919656"
title: Induction of mismatch repair deficiency, compromised DNA damage signaling and compound hypermutagenesis by a dietary mutagen in a cell-based model for Lynch syndrome.
authors:
- Ijsselsteijn R
- van Hees S
- Drost M
- Jansen JG
- de Wind N
journal: Carcinogenesis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgab108
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Induction of mismatch repair deficiency, compromised DNA damage signaling and compound hypermutagenesis by a dietary mutagen in a cell-based model for Lynch syndrome.
**Authors:** Ijsselsteijn R, van Hees S, Drost M, Jansen JG, de Wind N
**Journal:** Carcinogenesis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/carcin/bgab108](https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/bgab108)

## Content

1. Carcinogenesis. 2022 Mar 24;43(2):160-169. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgab108.

Induction of mismatch repair deficiency, compromised DNA damage signaling and 
compound hypermutagenesis by a dietary mutagen in a cell-based model for Lynch 
syndrome.

Ijsselsteijn R(1), van Hees S(1), Drost M(1), Jansen JG(1), de Wind N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.

The prevalent cancer predisposition Lynch syndrome (LS, OMIM #120435) is caused 
by an inherited heterozygous defect in any of the four core DNA mismatch repair 
(MMR) genes MSH2, MSH6, MLH1 or PMS2. MMR repairs errors by the replicative DNA 
polymerases in all proliferating tissues. Its deficiency, following somatic loss 
of the wild-type copy, results in a spontaneous mutator phenotype that underlies 
the rapid development of, predominantly, colorectal cancer (CRC) in LS. Here, we 
have addressed the hypothesis that aberrant responses of intestinal stem cells 
to diet-derived mutagens may be causally involved in the restricted cancer 
tropism of LS. To test this we have generated a panel of isogenic mouse 
embryonic stem (mES) cells with heterozygous or homozygous disruption of 
multiple MMR genes and investigated their responses to the common dietary 
mutagen and carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP). 
Our data reveal that PhIP can inactivate the wild-type allele of heterozygous 
mES cells via the induction of either loss of heterozygosity (LOH) or intragenic 
mutations. Moreover, while protective DNA damage signaling (DDS) is compromised, 
PhIP induces more mutations in Msh2, Mlh1, Msh6 or Pms2-deficient mES cells than 
in wild-type cells. Combined with their spontaneous mutator phenotypes, this 
results in a compound hypermutator phenotype. Together, these results indicate 
that dietary mutagens may promote CRC development in LS at multiple levels, 
providing a rationale for dietary modifications in the management of LS.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgab108
PMCID: PMC8947211
PMID: 34919656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]