---
reference_id: "PMID:32453336"
title: "Cockayne Syndrome: The many challenges and approaches to understand a multifaceted disease."
authors:
- Vessoni AT
- Guerra CCC
- Kajitani GS
- Nascimento LLS
- Garcia CCM
journal: Genet Mol Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2019-0085
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cockayne Syndrome: The many challenges and approaches to understand a multifaceted disease.
**Authors:** Vessoni AT, Guerra CCC, Kajitani GS, Nascimento LLS, Garcia CCM
**Journal:** Genet Mol Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2019-0085](https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2019-0085)

## Content

1. Genet Mol Biol. 2020 May 20;43(1 suppl. 1):e20190085. doi: 
10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2019-0085. eCollection 2020.

Cockayne Syndrome: The many challenges and approaches to understand a 
multifaceted disease.

Vessoni AT(1), Guerra CCC(2), Kajitani GS(2)(3), Nascimento LLS(3), Garcia 
CCM(2).

Author information:
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto, Instituto de Ciências Exatas e 
Biológicas, Núcleo de Pesquisa em Ciências Biológicas & Departamento de Ciências 
Biológicas, Ouro Preto, MG, Brazil.
(3)Universidade de São Paulo, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Departamento de 
Microbiologia, São Paulo,SP, Brazil.

The striking and complex phenotype of Cockayne syndrome (CS) patients combines 
progeria-like features with developmental deficits. Since the establishment of 
the in vitro culture of skin fibroblasts derived from patients with CS in the 
1970s, significant progress has been made in the understanding of the genetic 
alterations associated with the disease and their impact on molecular, cellular, 
and organismal functions. In this review, we provide a historic perspective on 
the research into CS by revisiting seminal papers in this field. We highlighted 
the great contributions of several researchers in the last decades, ranging from 
the cloning and characterization of CS genes to the molecular dissection of 
their roles in DNA repair, transcription, redox processes and metabolism 
control. We also provide a detailed description of all pathological mutations in 
genes ERCC6 and ERCC8 reported to date and their impact on CS-related proteins. 
Finally, we review the contributions (and limitations) of many genetic animal 
models to the study of CS and how cutting-edge technologies, such as cell 
reprogramming and state-of-the-art genome editing, are helping us to address 
unanswered questions.

DOI: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2019-0085
PMCID: PMC7250278
PMID: 32453336

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interest.