---
reference_id: "PMID:12773498"
title: Experimental autoimmune autonomic neuropathy.
authors:
- Vernino S
- Low PA
- Lennon VA
journal: J Neurophysiol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1152/jn.00408.2003
keywords:
- Animals
- Blood Pressure/physiology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Heart Rate/physiology
- "Neuritis, Autoimmune, Experimental/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Rabbits
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/metabolism"
- Tears/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Experimental autoimmune autonomic neuropathy.
**Authors:** Vernino S, Low PA, Lennon VA
**Journal:** J Neurophysiol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1152/jn.00408.2003](https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00408.2003)

## Content

1. J Neurophysiol. 2003 Sep;90(3):2053-9. doi: 10.1152/jn.00408.2003. Epub 2003
May  28.

Experimental autoimmune autonomic neuropathy.

Vernino S(1), Low PA, Lennon VA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Graduate and Medical Schools, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurophysiol. 2003 Sep;90(3):1377-8. doi: 10.1152/jn.00601.2003.

Antibodies specific for the neuronal ganglionic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
(nAChR) are found in high titer in serum of patients with subacute autonomic 
failure. This clinical disorder is known as autoimmune autonomic neuropathy 
(AAN). Rabbits immunized with a neuronal nAChR alpha3 subunit fusion protein 
produce ganglionic nAChR antibodies and develop autonomic failure (experimental 
AAN, or EAAN). We used quantitative measures of autonomic function to 
demonstrate that this animal model of neuronal nAChR autoimmunity recapitulates 
the cardinal autonomic features of AAN in humans. The severity of dysautonomia 
in the rabbit ranges from isolated cardiovagal impairment to severe panautonomic 
failure with fixed mydriasis, gastroparesis, dry eyes, impaired heart rate 
variability, hypotension, and low plasma catecholamines. The severity of 
autonomic failure correlates with serum antibody levels. Immunohistochemical 
staining of superior cervical ganglia and myenteric plexus neurons demonstrates 
intact presynaptic nerve terminals and intact postsynaptic neurons containing 
cytoplasmic nAChR, but lacking surface nAChR. These findings define the 
autonomic physiology and histopathology of this novel animal model and support 
the concept that AAN in humans is a disorder of ganglionic cholinergic synaptic 
transmission caused by ganglionic nAChR antibodies.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00408.2003
PMID: 12773498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]