---
reference_id: "PMID:20664696"
title: "Homozygous FOXE3 mutations cause non-syndromic, bilateral, total sclerocornea, aphakia, microphthalmia and optic disc coloboma."
authors:
- Ali M
- Buentello-Volante B
- McKibbin M
- Rocha-Medina JA
- Fernandez-Fuentes N
- Koga-Nakamura W
- Ashiq A
- Khan K
- Booth AP
- Williams G
- Raashid Y
- Jafri H
- Rice A
- Inglehearn CF
- Zenteno JC
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2010'
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Aphakia/complications, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- "Coloboma/complications, genetics"
- Cornea/abnormalities
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Family
- Female
- "Forkhead Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mexico
- "Microphthalmos/complications, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Optic Disk/abnormalities
- Pakistan
- Pedigree
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous FOXE3 mutations cause non-syndromic, bilateral, total sclerocornea, aphakia, microphthalmia and optic disc coloboma.
**Authors:** Ali M, Buentello-Volante B, McKibbin M, Rocha-Medina JA, Fernandez-Fuentes N, Koga-Nakamura W, Ashiq A, Khan K, Booth AP, Williams G, Raashid Y, Jafri H, Rice A, Inglehearn CF, Zenteno JC
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2010)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2010 Jun 23;16:1162-8.

Homozygous FOXE3 mutations cause non-syndromic, bilateral, total sclerocornea, 
aphakia, microphthalmia and optic disc coloboma.

Ali M(1), Buentello-Volante B, McKibbin M, Rocha-Medina JA, Fernandez-Fuentes N, 
Koga-Nakamura W, Ashiq A, Khan K, Booth AP, Williams G, Raashid Y, Jafri H, Rice 
A, Inglehearn CF, Zenteno JC.

Author information:
(1)Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, St. James's University Hospital, 
Leeds, UK. medma@leeds.ac.uk

PURPOSE: To investigate the genetic basis of recessively-inherited congenital, 
non syndromic, bilateral, total sclerocornea in two consanguineous pedigrees, 
one from the Punjab province of Pakistan and the other from the Tlaxcala 
province of Mexico.
METHODS: Ophthalmic examinations were conducted on each family member to confirm 
their diagnosis and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or ultrasonography of the 
eyes was performed on some family members. Genomic DNA was analyzed by 
homozygosity mapping using the Affymetrix 6.0 SNP array and linkage was 
confirmed with polymorphic microsatellite markers. Candidate genes were 
sequenced.
RESULTS: A diagnosis of autosomal recessive sclerocornea was established for 7 
members of the Pakistani and 8 members of the Mexican pedigrees. In the 
Pakistani family we established linkage to a region on chromosome 1p that 
contained Forkhead Box E3 (FOXE3), a strong candidate gene since FOXE3 mutations 
had previously been associated with various anterior segment abnormalities. 
Sequencing FOXE3 identified the previously reported nonsense mutation, c.720C>A, 
p.C240X, in the Pakistani pedigree and a novel missense mutation which disrupts 
an evolutionarily conserved residue in the forkhead domain, c.292T>C, p.Y98H, in 
the Mexican pedigree. Individuals with heterozygous mutations had no ocular 
abnormalities. MRI or ultrasonography confirmed that the patients with 
sclerocornea were also aphakic, had microphthalmia and some had optic disc 
coloboma.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the fourth report detailing homozygous FOXE3 mutations 
causing anterior segment abnormalities in human patients. Previous papers have 
emphasized aphakia and microphthalmia as the primary phenotype, but we find that 
the initial diagnosis - and perhaps the only one possible in a rural setting - 
is one of non-syndromic, bilateral, total sclerocornea. Dominantly inherited 
anterior segment defects have also been noted in association with heterozygous 
FOXE3 mutations. However the absence of any abnormalities in the FOXE3 
heterozygotes described suggests that genetic background and environmental 
factors plays a role in the penetrance of the mutant allele.

PMCID: PMC2901196
PMID: 20664696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]