---
reference_id: "PMID:37288720"
title: Higher rate of progression in HIV- than in HIV+ patients after rituximab for HHV8+ multicentric Castleman disease.
authors:
- Rasmussen C
- Gérard L
- Fadlallah J
- Corvilain E
- Galicier L
- Meignin V
- Oksenhendler E
- Boutboul D
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2023010316
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Higher rate of progression in HIV- than in HIV+ patients after rituximab for HHV8+ multicentric Castleman disease.
**Authors:** Rasmussen C, Gérard L, Fadlallah J, Corvilain E, Galicier L, Meignin V, Oksenhendler E, Boutboul D
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2023010316](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2023010316)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2023 Sep 26;7(18):5663-5669. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2023010316.

Higher rate of progression in HIV- than in HIV+ patients after rituximab for 
HHV8+ multicentric Castleman disease.

Rasmussen C(1), Gérard L(1), Fadlallah J(1), Corvilain E(1), Galicier L(1)(2), 
Meignin V(3), Oksenhendler E(1)(2)(4), Boutboul D(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(2)National Reference Center for Castleman Disease, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Pathology, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Paris, France.
(4)Université de Paris, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Blood Adv. 2023 Sep 26;7(18):5661-5662. doi: 
10.1182/bloodadvances.2023011043.

Rituximab has revolutionized the treatment of Kaposi sarcoma-associated 
herpesvirus/human herpesvirus 8-associated multicentric Castleman disease 
(HHV8+ MCD), converting a rapidly fatal illness into a relapsing disease. 
HHV8+ MCD mainly affects patients with HIV infection but can also be observed in 
patients without HIV infection. We retrospectively analyzed a cohort of 99 
patients (73 who tested HIV+ and 26 who tested HIV-), with HHV8+ MCD treated 
with rituximab-based therapy. Baseline characteristics were similar in patients 
who had HIV- and HIV+ results, although those who tested HIV- were older (65 vs 
42 years) and presented less frequently with Kaposi sarcoma (15% vs 40%). 
Ninety-five patients (70 HIV+ and 25 HIV-) achieved complete remission (CR) 
after rituximab-based therapy. After a median follow-up of 51 months, 36 
patients (12 HIV- and 24 HIV+) experienced disease progression. The 5-year 
progression-free survival (PFS) was 54%. The 5-year PFS was lower in 
HIV- patients than in HIV+ patients : 26% and 62%, respectively (P = .02). A 
multivariate prognostic factors analysis including time-dependent covariates 
revealed that HIV- status, reoccurrence of HHV8 DNA >3 log copies per mL, and 
serum C-reactive protein (CRP) >20 mg/mL were independently associated with an 
increased risk of progression after rituximab-induced CR (P = .001; P = .01; 
and P = .01, respectively). The lower rate of progression observed in the 
population with HIV+ results despite a longer follow-up period might have 
resulted from the possible immune restoration upon antiretroviral therapy. HHV8 
viral load and serum CRP monitoring after rituximab therapy provide information 
on the progression risk and may help in the decision to resume specific therapy.

© 2023 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2023010316
PMCID: PMC10546345
PMID: 37288720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: E.O. serves as 
a consultant for EusaPharma and CSL Behring. The remaining authors declare no 
competing financial interests.