---
reference_id: "PMID:2458387"
title: Urushiol (poison ivy)-triggered suppressor T cell clone generated from peripheral blood.
authors:
- Kalish RS
- Morimoto C
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1172/JCI113685
keywords:
- Antibody Specificity
- Antigen-Presenting Cells/immunology
- Catechols/immunology
- Clone Cells/immunology
- "Dermatitis, Toxicodendron/blood, immunology"
- Epitopes/immunology
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/biosynthesis
- Lymphocyte Activation/drug effects
- Lymphokines/biosynthesis
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/immunology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/immunology"
- Tetanus Toxoid/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urushiol (poison ivy)-triggered suppressor T cell clone generated from peripheral blood.
**Authors:** Kalish RS, Morimoto C
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI113685](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI113685)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1988 Sep;82(3):825-32. doi: 10.1172/JCI113685.

Urushiol (poison ivy)-triggered suppressor T cell clone generated from 
peripheral blood.

Kalish RS(1), Morimoto C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Tumor Immunology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115.

Allergic contact dermatitis to Toxicodendron radicans (poison ivy) is mediated 
by the hapten urushiol. An urushiol-specific, interleukin 2 (IL-2)-dependent T 
cell clone (RLB9-7) was generated from the peripheral blood of a patient with a 
history of allergic contact dermatitis to T. radicans. This clone proliferated 
specifically to both leaf extract and pure urushiol. Although the clone had the 
phenotype CD3+CD4+CD8+, proliferation to antigen was blocked by anti-CD8 and 
anti-HLA-A, B, C, but not by anti-CD4, suggesting that CD4 was not functionally 
associated with the T cell receptor. Furthermore, studies with 
antigen-presenting cells from MHC-typed donors indicated that the clone was MHC 
class 1 restricted. RLB9-7 was WT31 positive, indicating it bears the alpha beta 
T cell receptor. The clone lacked significant natural killer cell activity and 
produced only low levels of IL-2 or gamma-interferon upon antigen stimulation. 
Addition of RLB9-7 to autologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells in the 
presence of urushiol inhibited the pokeweed mitogen-driven IgG synthesis. This 
suppression was resistant to irradiation (2,000 rad) and was not seen when 
RLB9-7 was added to allogeneic cells, even in the presence of irradiated 
autologous antigen-presenting cells, suggesting that suppression was MHC 
restricted and not mediated by nonspecific soluble factors. However, RLB9-7 
cells in the presence of urushiol inhibited the synthesis of tetanus 
toxoid-specific IgG by autologous lymphocytes, indicating that the suppression, 
although triggered specifically by urushiol, was nonspecific.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI113685
PMCID: PMC303589
PMID: 2458387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]