---
reference_id: "PMID:23573605"
title: Schizophrenia, the prefrontal cortex, and a mechanism of genetic susceptibility.
authors:
- Weinberger DR
journal: Eur Psychiatry
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0924-9338(03)00080-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schizophrenia, the prefrontal cortex, and a mechanism of genetic susceptibility.
**Authors:** Weinberger DR
**Journal:** Eur Psychiatry (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0924-9338(03)00080-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0924-9338(03)00080-4)

## Content

1. Eur Psychiatry. 2002 Aug;17 Suppl 4:355s-362s. doi: 
10.1016/s0924-9338(03)00080-4.

Schizophrenia, the prefrontal cortex, and a mechanism of genetic susceptibility.

Weinberger DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Brain Disorders Branch, Intramural Research Program, National 
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. WeinberD@INTRA.NIMH.nih.gov

Information-processing in the prefrontal cortex is abnormal in patients with 
schizophrenia. From functional neuroimaging and other studies, it appears that 
neurons of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex are effectors of core clinical and 
biological phenomena associated with the illness. Cognitive deficits 
qualitatively similar to those in patients with schizophrenia are also found in 
their healthy siblings and other relatives. The evidence for abnormal prefrontal 
function in healthy siblings suggests that the deficit in information-processing 
is part of the biology of genetic susceptibility. Therefore, genetic variations 
in human DNA that affect this kind of information-processing may contribute part 
of the genetic risk for the illness. COMT is an enzyme that is distributed 
widely throughout the brain, but seems to be uniquely relevant to how dopamine 
affects information-processing in the prefrontal cortex. There is a common 
variation in the genetic sequence of the COMT gene, which causes a dramatic 
change in its enzyme activity. In people with schizophrenia, in their healthy 
siblings, and also in normal controls, the COMT genotype predicts 4% of the 
variation in human executive cognition and working memory. We have thus 
identified a genetic mechanism in the human species that affects the efficiency 
and efficacy of information-processing in the prefrontal cortex. It is, also, a 
weak genetic risk factor for schizophrenia: in family studies, it increases the 
risk of schizophrenia by 50-80%. Prefrontal neuronal tuning may be a target for 
new drug development in the future.

DOI: 10.1016/s0924-9338(03)00080-4
PMID: 23573605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]