---
reference_id: "PMID:36769891"
title: "Post-Inflammatory Hypopigmentation: Review of the Etiology, Clinical Manifestations, and Treatment Options."
authors:
- Rao M
- Young K
- Jackson-Cowan L
- Kourosh A
- Theodosakis N
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12031243
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-Inflammatory Hypopigmentation: Review of the Etiology, Clinical Manifestations, and Treatment Options.
**Authors:** Rao M, Young K, Jackson-Cowan L, Kourosh A, Theodosakis N
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12031243](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12031243)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Feb 3;12(3):1243. doi: 10.3390/jcm12031243.

Post-Inflammatory Hypopigmentation: Review of the Etiology, Clinical
Manifestations, and Treatment Options.

Rao M(1)(2), Young K(3), Jackson-Cowan L(4), Kourosh A(1), Theodosakis N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.
(2)Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.
(3)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02214, USA.
(4)The Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University, AU/UGA Medical
Partnership, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Post-inflammatory hypopigmentation is a common acquired pigmentary disorder that
is more prominent in skin of color, leading to great cosmetic and psychosocial
implications. Often, a diagnosis with a pigmentary disorder can negatively
impact an individual's health-related quality of life and may result in stigma.
Although most cases of post-inflammatory hypopigmentation resolve spontaneously
over time, a systematic diagnostic approach can help with identifying the
underlying etiology and informing treatment strategies. It can be due to
cutaneous inflammation, sequelae of inflammatory or infectious dermatoses, or
dermatologic procedures. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the
epidemiology, patient history, physical exam findings, and clinical features of
post-inflammatory hypopigmentation phenomenon can explain the primary cause to
providers and allow for patient education. It is also important to understand
the various therapeutic approaches available and the efficacy of these options,
which will inform providers to choose the appropriate therapy for patients.
Although algorithms exist for classifying acquired disorders of
hypopigmentation, there are no established algorithms for the diagnosis and
treatment of post-inflammatory hypopigmentation, which warrants further
exploration and discourse.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12031243
PMCID: PMC9917556
PMID: 36769891

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant conflict of
interest to declare.
