---
reference_id: "PMID:31990680"
title: Chronic liver disease and impaired hepatic glycogen metabolism in argininosuccinate lyase deficiency.
authors:
- Burrage LC
- Madan S
- Li X
- Ali S
- Mohammad M
- Stroup BM
- Jiang MM
- Cela R
- Bertin T
- Jin Z
- Dai J
- Guffey D
- Finegold M
- Members of the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC)
- Nagamani S
- Minard CG
- Marini J
- Masand P
- Schady D
- Shneider BL
- Leung DH
- Bali D
- Lee B
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.132342
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic liver disease and impaired hepatic glycogen metabolism in argininosuccinate lyase deficiency.
**Authors:** Burrage LC, Madan S, Li X, Ali S, Mohammad M, Stroup BM, Jiang MM, Cela R, Bertin T, Jin Z, Dai J, Guffey D, Finegold M, Members of the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC), Nagamani S, Minard CG, Marini J, Masand P, Schady D, Shneider BL, Leung DH, Bali D, Lee B
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.132342](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.132342)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2020 Feb 27;5(4):e132342. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.132342.

Chronic liver disease and impaired hepatic glycogen metabolism in 
argininosuccinate lyase deficiency.

Burrage LC(1)(2), Madan S(1)(3), Li X(1), Ali S(1), Mohammad M(4)(5), Stroup 
BM(1), Jiang MM(1), Cela R(1), Bertin T(1), Jin Z(1), Dai J(6), Guffey D(7), 
Finegold M(8); Members of the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium (UCDC); Nagamani 
S(1)(2), Minard CG(7), Marini J(4)(9), Masand P(10), Schady D(8), Shneider 
BL(2)(11), Leung DH(2)(11), Bali D(6), Lee B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Interdepartmental Program in Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine 
and.
(4)USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, National Research Centre, Dokki, 
Giza, Egypt.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Duke Health, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(7)Dan L. Duncan Institute for Clinical and Translational Research and.
(8)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(9)Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(10)Edward B. Singleton Department of Pediatric Radiology, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(11)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUNDLiver disease in urea cycle disorders (UCDs) ranges from hepatomegaly 
and chronic hepatocellular injury to cirrhosis and end-stage liver disease. 
However, the prevalence and underlying mechanisms are unclear.METHODSWe 
estimated the prevalence of chronic hepatocellular injury in UCDs using data 
from a multicenter, longitudinal, natural history study. We also used ultrasound 
with shear wave elastography and FibroTest to evaluate liver stiffness and 
markers of fibrosis in individuals with argininosuccinate lyase deficiency 
(ASLD), a disorder with high prevalence of elevated serum alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT). To understand the human observations, we evaluated the 
hepatic phenotype of the AslNeo/Neo mouse model of ASLD.RESULTSWe demonstrate a 
high prevalence of elevated ALT in ASLD (37%). Hyperammonemia and use of 
nitrogen-scavenging agents, 2 markers of disease severity, were significantly (P 
< 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively) associated with elevated ALT in ASLD. In 
addition, ultrasound with shear wave elastography and FibroTest revealed 
increased echogenicity and liver stiffness, even in individuals with ASLD and 
normal aminotransferases. The AslNeo/Neo mice mimic the human disorder with 
hepatomegaly, elevated aminotransferases, and excessive hepatic glycogen noted 
before death (3-5 weeks of age). This excessive hepatic glycogen is associated 
with impaired hepatic glycogenolysis and decreased glycogen phosphorylase and is 
rescued with helper-dependent adenovirus expressing Asl using a liver-specific 
(ApoE) promoter.CONCLUSIONOur results link urea cycle dysfunction and impaired 
hepatic glucose metabolism and identify a mouse model of liver disease in the 
setting of urea cycle dysfunction.TRIAL REGISTRATIONThis study has been 
registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03721367, NCT00237315).FUNDINGFunding was 
provided by NIH, Burroughs Wellcome Fund, NUCDF, Genzyme/ACMG Foundation, and 
CPRIT.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.132342
PMCID: PMC7101134
PMID: 31990680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.