---
reference_id: "PMID:33542053"
title: Personal exposure to air pollution and respiratory health of COPD patients in London.
authors:
- Evangelopoulos D
- Chatzidiakou L
- Walton H
- Katsouyanni K
- Kelly FJ
- Quint JK
- Jones RL
- Barratt B
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1183/13993003.03432-2020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Personal exposure to air pollution and respiratory health of COPD patients in London.
**Authors:** Evangelopoulos D, Chatzidiakou L, Walton H, Katsouyanni K, Kelly FJ, Quint JK, Jones RL, Barratt B
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1183/13993003.03432-2020](https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.03432-2020)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2021 Jul 20;58(1):2003432. doi: 10.1183/13993003.03432-2020.
Print  2021 Jul.

Personal exposure to air pollution and respiratory health of COPD patients in 
London.

Evangelopoulos D(1)(2), Chatzidiakou L(3), Walton H(1)(2), Katsouyanni K(1)(4), 
Kelly FJ(1)(2), Quint JK(5), Jones RL(3), Barratt B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Research Group, MRC Centre for Environment and Health, Imperial 
College London, London, UK.
(2)National Institute for Health Research Health Protection Research Unit in 
Environmental Exposures and Health, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(3)Centre for Atmospheric Science, Dept of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK.
(4)Dept of Hygiene, Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, Medical School, 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(5)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Previous studies have investigated the effects of air pollution on chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients using either fixed-site 
measurements or a limited number of personal measurements, usually for one 
pollutant and a short time period. These limitations may introduce bias and 
distort the epidemiological associations as they do not account for all the 
potential sources or the temporal variability of pollution.We used detailed 
information on individuals' exposure to various pollutants measured at fine 
spatiotemporal scale to obtain more reliable effect estimates. A panel of 115 
patients was followed up for an average continuous period of 128 days carrying a 
personal monitor specifically designed for this project that measured 
temperature, nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3), nitric oxide (NO), carbon 
monoxide (CO), and particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter <2.5 and <10 μm 
at 1-min time resolution. Each patient recorded daily information on respiratory 
symptoms and measured peak expiratory flow (PEF). A pulmonologist combined 
related data to define a binary variable denoting an "exacerbation". The 
exposure-response associations were assessed with mixed effects models.We found 
that gaseous pollutants were associated with a deterioration in patients' 
health. We observed an increase of 16.4% (95% CI 8.6-24.6%), 9.4% (95% CI 
5.4-13.6%) and 7.6% (95% CI 3.0-12.4%) in the odds of exacerbation for an 
interquartile range increase in NO2, NO and CO, respectively. Similar results 
were obtained for cough and sputum. O3 was found to have adverse associations 
with PEF and breathlessness. No association was observed between particulate 
matter and any outcome.Our findings suggest that, when considering total 
personal exposure to air pollutants, mainly the gaseous pollutants affect COPD 
patients' health.

Copyright ©ERS 2021.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.03432-2020
PMCID: PMC8290182
PMID: 33542053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: D. Evangelopoulos has 
nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: L. Chatzidiakou has nothing to 
disclose. Conflict of interest: H. Walton has nothing to disclose. Conflict of 
interest: K. Katsouyanni has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: F.J. 
Kelly has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: J.K. Quint reports grants 
from the Medical Research Council (MRC), during the conduct of the study; grants 
from Asthma UK, Chiesi, MRC and The Health Foundation, grants and personal fees 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim and Bayer, outside the submitted work. 
Conflict of interest: R.L. Jones has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: 
B. Barratt has nothing to disclose.