---
reference_id: "PMID:35441598"
title: "The congenital dyserythropoieitic anemias: genetics and pathophysiology."
authors:
- King R
- Gallagher PJ
- Khoriaty R
journal: Curr Opin Hematol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000697
keywords:
- "ATPases Associated with Diverse Cellular Activities/genetics, metabolism"
- "Anemia, Dyserythropoietic, Congenital/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Endosomal Sorting Complexes Required for Transport/genetics, metabolism"
- Erythropoiesis/genetics
- "Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- "Vacuolar Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The congenital dyserythropoieitic anemias: genetics and pathophysiology.
**Authors:** King R, Gallagher PJ, Khoriaty R
**Journal:** Curr Opin Hematol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOH.0000000000000697](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOH.0000000000000697)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2022 May 1;29(3):126-136. doi:
10.1097/MOH.0000000000000697.  Epub 2021 Dec 24.

The congenital dyserythropoieitic anemias: genetics and pathophysiology.

King R(1)(2), Gallagher PJ(3), Khoriaty R(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan.
(2)University of Michigan Rogel Cancer Center.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology.
(4)Cellular and Molecular Biology Program.
(5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDA) are hereditary 
disorders characterized by ineffective erythropoiesis. This review evaluates 
newly developed CDA disease models, the latest advances in understanding the 
pathogenesis of the CDAs, and recently identified CDA genes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Mice exhibiting features of CDAI were recently generated, 
demonstrating that Codanin-1 (encoded by Cdan1) is essential for primitive 
erythropoiesis. Additionally, Codanin-1 was found to physically interact with 
CDIN1, suggesting that mutations in CDAN1 and CDIN1 result in CDAI via a common 
mechanism. Recent advances in CDAII (which results from SEC23B mutations) have 
also been made. SEC23B was found to functionally overlap with its paralogous 
protein, SEC23A, likely explaining the absence of CDAII in SEC23B-deficient 
mice. In contrast, mice with erythroid-specific deletion of 3 or 4 of the Sec23 
alleles exhibited features of CDAII. Increased SEC23A expression rescued the 
CDAII erythroid defect, suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy for the disease. 
Additional recent advances included the identification of new CDA genes, RACGAP1 
and VPS4A, in CDAIII and a syndromic CDA type, respectively.
SUMMARY: Establishing cellular and animal models of CDA is expected to result in 
improved understanding of the pathogenesis of these disorders, which may 
ultimately lead to the development of new therapies.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000697
PMCID: PMC9021540
PMID: 35441598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interests: None