---
reference_id: "PMID:35248712"
title: "BRAF-mutated colorectal adenocarcinomas: Pathological heterogeneity and clinical implications."
authors:
- Angerilli V
- Sabella G
- Centonze G
- Lonardi S
- Bergamo F
- Mangogna A
- Pietrantonio F
- Fassan M
- Milione M
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2022.103647
keywords:
- Adenocarcinoma/drug therapy
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Cetuximab/therapeutic use
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF-mutated colorectal adenocarcinomas: Pathological heterogeneity and clinical implications.
**Authors:** Angerilli V, Sabella G, Centonze G, Lonardi S, Bergamo F, Mangogna A, Pietrantonio F, Fassan M, Milione M
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.critrevonc.2022.103647](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2022.103647)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2022 Apr;172:103647. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2022.103647. Epub 2022 Mar 4.

BRAF-mutated colorectal adenocarcinomas: Pathological heterogeneity and clinical
implications.

Angerilli V(1), Sabella G(2), Centonze G(2), Lonardi S(3), Bergamo F(3),
Mangogna A(4), Pietrantonio F(5), Fassan M(6), Milione M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgical Pathology Unit, University of Padua, Italy.
(2)Pathology Unit 1, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano,
Italy.
(3)Oncology Unit 1, Department of Oncology, Veneto Institute of Oncology,
IOV-IRCCS, Padua, Italy.
(4)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS Burlo Garofalo, 34137 Trieste,
Italy.
(5)Oncologia Medica, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano,
Italy.
(6)Department of Medicine, Surgical Pathology Unit, University of Padua, Italy;
Veneto Institute of Oncology, IOV-IRCCS, Padua, Italy.
(7)Pathology Unit 1, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano,
Italy. Electronic address: massimo.milione@istitutotumori.mi.it.

Advances in molecular biology have markedly increased our understanding of the
heterogeneous molecular landscape of colorectal cancer (CRC). Up to 15% of CRCs
harbor the BRAF p.V600E somatic mutation (BRAFmt), a well-established negative
prognostic marker in patients with metastatic CRC (mCRC). The BEACON CRC trial
set a new standard of care in patients with progressive BRAFmt cancers,
consisting of the combination of encorafenib and cetuximab. On these bases, BRAF
mutational testing is now recommended in patients with mCRC. However, efforts
are needed to further stratify patients carrying this mutation. Here, we discuss
the heterogeneous pathologic and molecular landscape of BRAFmt CRCs, focusing on
the promises and pitfalls of molecular diagnostics, on novel biomarkers to
improve patients' stratification and on the current diagnostic scenario for CRC.
We believe that a better stratification based on histopathological features and
novel molecular biomarkers should be performed to optimize patient management
and therapeutic decision-making.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2022.103647
PMID: 35248712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
