---
reference_id: PMID:34394873
title: Ankylosing Spondylitis.
authors:
- Ebrahimiadib N
- Berijani S
- Ghahari M
- Pahlaviani FG
journal: J Ophthalmic Vis Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.18502/jovr.v16i3.9440
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ankylosing Spondylitis.
**Authors:** Ebrahimiadib N, Berijani S, Ghahari M, Pahlaviani FG
**Journal:** J Ophthalmic Vis Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.18502/jovr.v16i3.9440](https://doi.org/10.18502/jovr.v16i3.9440)

## Content

1. J Ophthalmic Vis Res. 2021 Jul 29;16(3):462-469. doi:
10.18502/jovr.v16i3.9440.  eCollection 2021 Jul-Sep.

Ankylosing Spondylitis.

Ebrahimiadib N(1)(2), Berijani S(2), Ghahari M(2), Pahlaviani FG(2).

Author information:
(1)Retina Service, Ocular Immunology and Uveitis Foundation, Farabi Eye 
Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Retina Service, Farabi Eye Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

The seronegative spondyloarthropathies are a group of autoimmune inflammatory 
diseases lacking rheumatoid factor or antinuclear antibody in their serum. They 
include ankylosing spondylitis (AS), reactive arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, 
spondylitis associated with Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, and 
undifferentiated spondyloarthropathies. Inflammation mostly affects the axial 
joints, entheses, and extra-articular structures such as uveal tract, 
gastrointestinal tract, mucocutaneous tissue, and heart. Uveitis is the most 
common extra-articular manifestation. Spondyloarthropathies, especially AS, have 
a strong association with the presence of Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA)-B27 
gene. AS happens earlier in HLA-B27 patients and men are more prone to the 
disease. Uveitis, typically unilateral non-granulomatous acute anterior uveitis, 
occurs in up to 50% of the patients with AS. HLA-B27 positivity correlates with 
more frequent flare-ups. Conjunctivitis and scleritis are rare ocular 
manifestations of AS. To establish the diagnosis of AS, at least one clinical 
and one radiologic parameter are required for definitive diagnosis. Magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) or bone scan can help early detection of the axial 
skeleton inflammation. The course of eye and joint involvement are not 
correlated. Short-term treatment with topical corticosteroids and cycloplegic 
agents control the uveitis attack. In resistant cases, local or systemic therapy 
with corticosteroids are recommended. NSAIDs, disease-modifying anti-rheumatic 
drugs (DMARDs), methotrexate, azathioprine, anti-IL-17A monoclonal antibodies, 
and TNF-α antagonists are effective treatments for ocular and systemic 
manifestations of AS. If not treated adequately, uveitis may become recalcitrant 
and extend posteriorly. Functional impairment due to joint destruction can also 
occur as a result of under-treatment.

Copyright © 2021 Ebrahimiadib et al.

DOI: 10.18502/jovr.v16i3.9440
PMCID: PMC8358754
PMID: 34394873

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.