---
reference_id: "PMID:31853708"
title: Muscle phenotype of AGAT- and GAMT-deficient mice after simvastatin exposure.
authors:
- Sasani A
- Hornig S
- Grzybowski R
- Cordts K
- Hanff E
- Tsikas D
- Böger R
- Gerloff C
- Isbrandt D
- Neu A
- Schwedhelm E
- Choe CU
journal: Amino Acids
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00726-019-02812-4
keywords:
- Animals
- Arginine/metabolism
- Creatine/metabolism
- "DNA Modification Methylases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "DNA Repair Enzymes/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- "Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- Homoarginine/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- "Muscle, Skeletal/drug effects, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Simvastatin/pharmacology
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Muscle phenotype of AGAT- and GAMT-deficient mice after simvastatin exposure.
**Authors:** Sasani A, Hornig S, Grzybowski R, Cordts K, Hanff E, Tsikas D, Böger R, Gerloff C, Isbrandt D, Neu A, Schwedhelm E, Choe CU
**Journal:** Amino Acids (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00726-019-02812-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00726-019-02812-4)

## Content

1. Amino Acids. 2020 Jan;52(1):73-85. doi: 10.1007/s00726-019-02812-4. Epub 2019
Dec 18.

Muscle phenotype of AGAT- and GAMT-deficient mice after simvastatin exposure.

Sasani A(1)(2)(3), Hornig S(2), Grzybowski R(1), Cordts K(3)(4), Hanff E(5),
Tsikas D(5), Böger R(3)(4), Gerloff C(1), Isbrandt D(6)(7), Neu A(2), Schwedhelm
E(3)(4), Choe CU(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistraße 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Experimental Neuropediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner Site
Hamburg/Kiel/Lübeck, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Toxicology, Core Unit Proteomics, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany.
(6)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany.
(7)University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(8)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistraße 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany. cchoe@uke.de.

Statin-induced myopathy affects more than 10 million people worldwide. But
discontinuation of statin treatment increases mortality and cardiovascular
events. Recently, L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) gene was
associated with statin-induced myopathy in two populations, but the causal link
is still unclear. AGAT is responsible for the synthesis of L-homoarginine (hArg)
and guanidinoacetate (GAA). GAA is further methylated to creatine (Cr) by
guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT). In cerebrovascular patients treated
with statin, lower hArg and GAA plasma concentrations were found than in
non-statin patients, indicating suppressed AGAT expression and/or activity
(n = 272, P = 0.033 and P = 0.039, respectively). This observation suggests that
statin-induced myopathy may be associated with AGAT expression and/or activity
in muscle cells. To address this, we studied simvastatin-induced myopathy in
AGAT- and GAMT-deficient mice. We found that simvastatin induced muscle damage
and reduced AGAT expression in wildtype mice (myocyte diameter: 34.1 ± 1.3 µm vs
21.5 ± 1.3 µm, P = 0.026; AGAT expression: 1.0 ± 0.3 vs 0.48 ± 0.05, P = 0.017).
Increasing AGAT expression levels of transgenic mouse models resulted in rising
plasma levels of hArg and GAA (P < 0.01 and P < 0.001, respectively).
Simvastatin-induced motor impairment was exacerbated in AGAT-deficient mice
compared with AGAT-overexpressing GAMT-/- mice and therefore revealed an effect
independent of Cr. But Cr supplementation itself improved muscle strength
independent of AGAT expression (normalized grip strength: 55.8 ± 2.9% vs
72.5% ± 3.0%, P < 0.01). Homoarginine supplementation did not affect
statin-induced myopathy in AGAT-deficient mice. Our results from clinical and
animal studies suggest that AGAT expression/activity and its product Cr
influence statin-induced myopathy independent of each other. The interplay
between simvastatin treatment, AGAT expression and activity, and Cr seems to be
complex. Further clinical pharmacological studies are needed to elucidate the
underlying mechanism(s) and to evaluate whether supplementation with Cr, or
possibly GAA, in patients under statin medication may reduce the risk of
muscular side effects.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-019-02812-4
PMID: 31853708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
