---
reference_id: "PMID:39244563"
title: "Smoking and alcohol by HPV status in head and neck cancer: a Mendelian randomization study."
authors:
- Thakral A
- Lee JJ
- Hou T
- Hueniken K
- Dudding T
- Gormley M
- Virani S
- Olshan A
- Diergaarde B
- Ness AR
- Waterboer T
- Smith-Byrne K
- Brennan P
- Hayes DN
- Sanderson E
- Brown MC
- Huang S
- Bratman SV
- Spreafico A
- De Almeida J
- Davies JC
- Bierut L
- Macfarlane GJ
- Lagiou P
- Lagiou A
- Polesel J
- Agudo A
- Alemany L
- Ahrens W
- Healy CM
- Conway DI
- Nygard M
- Canova C
- Holcatova I
- Richiardi L
- Znaor A
- Goldstein DP
- Hung RJ
- Xu W
- Liu G
- Espin-Garcia O
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-51679-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smoking and alcohol by HPV status in head and neck cancer: a Mendelian randomization study.
**Authors:** Thakral A, Lee JJ, Hou T, Hueniken K, Dudding T, Gormley M, Virani S, Olshan A, Diergaarde B, Ness AR, Waterboer T, Smith-Byrne K, Brennan P, Hayes DN, Sanderson E, Brown MC, Huang S, Bratman SV, Spreafico A, De Almeida J, Davies JC, Bierut L, Macfarlane GJ, Lagiou P, Lagiou A, Polesel J, Agudo A, Alemany L, Ahrens W, Healy CM, Conway DI, Nygard M, Canova C, Holcatova I, Richiardi L, Znaor A, Goldstein DP, Hung RJ, Xu W, Liu G, Espin-Garcia O
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-51679-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51679-x)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Sep 7;15(1):7835. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-51679-x.

Smoking and alcohol by HPV status in head and neck cancer: a Mendelian 
randomization study.

Thakral A(#)(1), Lee JJ(#)(2)(3), Hou T(1), Hueniken K(1), Dudding T(4)(5), 
Gormley M(4)(5), Virani S(6), Olshan A(7), Diergaarde B(8), Ness AR(9), 
Waterboer T(10), Smith-Byrne K(6), Brennan P(6), Hayes DN(11), Sanderson E(4), 
Brown MC(12), Huang S(12)(13), Bratman SV(12)(13), Spreafico A(12)(14), De 
Almeida J(15)(12), Davies JC(15)(16), Bierut L(17), Macfarlane GJ(18), Lagiou 
P(19), Lagiou A(20), Polesel J(21), Agudo A(22), Alemany L(22), Ahrens W(23), 
Healy CM(24), Conway DI(25), Nygard M(26), Canova C(27), Holcatova I(28), 
Richiardi L(29), Znaor A(30), Goldstein DP(15)(12), Hung RJ(31)(32), Xu 
W(1)(32), Liu G(33)(34)(35), Espin-Garcia O(1)(32)(36).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre-University 
Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Jongwook.lee@utoronto.ca.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Sinai Health System, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Jongwook.lee@utoronto.ca.
(4)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, Population Health Sciences, Bristol 
Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 1TL, UK.
(5)University of Bristol Dental School, 1 Trinity Walk, Avon Street, Bristol, 
BS2 0PT, UK.
(6)Genomic Epidemiology Branch, International Agency for Research on Cancer, 
World Health Organization, Lyon, France.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, USA.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, and UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA.
(9)University Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS Foundation Trust National 
Institute for Health Research Bristol Biomedical Research Centre, University of 
Bristol, Bristol, BS1 3NU, UK.
(10)Infections and Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(11)Division of Medical Oncology and Center for Cancer Research, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.
(12)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(13)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(14)Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Department of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(15)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(16)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Sinai Health System, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(17)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA.
(18)Epidemiology Group, School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, 
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(19)Department of Hygiene, Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, Medical School, 
National and Kapodistrian, University of Athens, Goudi, Greece.
(20)Department of Public and Community Health, School of Public Health, 
University of West Attica, Athens, Greece.
(21)Unit of Cancer Epidemiology, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico di Aviano 
(CRO) IRCCS, Aviano, Italy.
(22)Cancer Epidemiology Research Programme, Catalan Institute of Oncology, 
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica 
en Red de Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Madrid, Spain.
(23)Department of Epidemiological Methods and Etiological Research, Leibniz 
Institute for Prevention Research and Epidemiology-BIPS, Bremen, Germany; 
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Bremen, Bremen, 
Germany.
(24)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Oral Medicine and Oral 
Pathology, Dublin Dental University Hospital, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(25)School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Nursing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, 
UK.
(26)Department of Research, Cancer Registry of Norway, Norwegian Institute of 
Public Health, Oslo, Norway.
(27)University of Padua, Padova, Italy.
(28)Institute of Hygiene & Epidemiology, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(29)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin and CPO-Piemonte, Turin, 
Italy.
(30)Cancer Surveillance Branch, International Agency for Research on Cancer, 
World Health Organization, Lyon, France.
(31)Prosserman Centre for Population Health Research, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum 
Research Institute, Sinai Health, Toronto, Canada.
(32)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(33)Infections and Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, Germany. Geoffrey.Liu@uhn.ca.
(34)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. Geoffrey.Liu@uhn.ca.
(35)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada. Geoffrey.Liu@uhn.ca.
(36)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

HPV-positive and HPV-negative head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) are 
recognized as distinct entities. There remains uncertainty surrounding the 
causal effects of smoking and alcohol on the development of these two cancer 
types. Here we perform multivariable Mendelian randomization (MR) to evaluate 
the causal effects of smoking and alcohol on the risk of HPV-positive and 
HPV-negative HNSCC in 3431 cases and 3469 controls. Lifetime smoking exposure, 
as measured by the Comprehensive Smoking Index (CSI), is associated with 
increased risk of both HPV-negative HNSCC (OR = 3.03, 95%CI:1.75-5.24, 
P = 7.00E-05) and HPV-positive HNSCC (OR = 2.73, 95%CI:1.39-5.36, P = 0.003). 
Drinks Per Week is also linked with increased risk of both HPV-negative HNSCC 
(OR = 7.72, 95%CI:3.63-16.4, P = 1.00E-07) and HPV-positive HNSCC (OR = 2.66, 
95%CI:1.06-6.68, P = 0.038). Smoking and alcohol independently increase the risk 
of both HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC. These findings have important 
implications for understanding the modifying risk factors between HNSCC 
subtypes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-51679-x
PMCID: PMC11380676
PMID: 39244563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study, the collection, analysis, and 
interpretation of data, the writing of the manuscript, or the decision to submit 
the manuscript for publication. The research was conducted independently by the 
authors, who are responsible for all the findings expressed in this article. The 
authors affirm that they have no financial or personal relationships that could 
have influenced the work reported in this paper. Where authors are identified as 
personnel of the International Agency for Research on Cancer/World Health 
Organization, the authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this 
article, and they do not necessarily represent the decisions, policies, or views 
of the International Agency for Research on Cancer/World Health Organization.