---
reference_id: "PMID:38359414"
title: IC3D Classification of Corneal Dystrophies-Edition 3.
authors:
- Weiss JS
- Rapuano CJ
- Seitz B
- Busin M
- Kivelä TT
- Bouheraoua N
- Bredrup C
- Nischal KK
- Chawla H
- Borderie V
- Kenyon KR
- Kim EK
- Møller HU
- Munier FL
- Berger T
- Lisch W
journal: Cornea
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003420
keywords:
- Humans
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics
- "Epithelium, Corneal/pathology"
- Phenotype
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- DNA Mutational Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IC3D Classification of Corneal Dystrophies-Edition 3.
**Authors:** Weiss JS, Rapuano CJ, Seitz B, Busin M, Kivelä TT, Bouheraoua N, Bredrup C, Nischal KK, Chawla H, Borderie V, Kenyon KR, Kim EK, Møller HU, Munier FL, Berger T, Lisch W
**Journal:** Cornea (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICO.0000000000003420](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICO.0000000000003420)

## Content

1. Cornea. 2024 Apr 1;43(4):466-527. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003420. Epub 2024
 Feb 12.

IC3D Classification of Corneal Dystrophies-Edition 3.

Weiss JS(1), Rapuano CJ(2), Seitz B(3), Busin M(4)(5), Kivelä TT(6), Bouheraoua 
N(7), Bredrup C(8), Nischal KK(9), Chawla H(10), Borderie V(7), Kenyon KR(11), 
Kim EK(12)(13), Møller HU(14), Munier FL(15), Berger T(3), Lisch W(16).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology, Pathology and Pharmacology, Louisiana State 
University Eye Center of Excellence, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, LA.
(2)Cornea Service, Wills Eye Hospital, Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Saarland University Medical Center, 
Homburg/Saar, Germany.
(4)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(5)Istituto Internazionale per la Ricerca e Formazione in Oftalmologia, Forlì, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Quinze-Vingts National Ophthalmology Hospital 
and Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(8)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(9)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Strabismus and Adult Motility, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, LA.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, Tufts University School of Medicine and Harvard 
Medical School, Schepens Eye Research Institute and New England Eye Center, 
Boston, MA.
(12)Corneal Dystrophy Research Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(13)Saevit Eye Hospital, Goyang, Korea.
(14)Department of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(15)Retinoblastoma and Oculogenetic Units, Jules-Gonin Eye Hospital and 
Fondation Asile des Aveugle, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; and.
(16)Department of Ophthalmology, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, 
Germany.

Comment in
    Cornea. 2024 Oct 1;43(10):e28-e29. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003602.
    Cornea. 2024 Oct 1;43(10):e29. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003628.

PURPOSE: The International Committee for the Classification of Corneal 
Dystrophies (IC3D) was created in 2005 to develop a new classification system 
integrating current information on phenotype, histopathology, and genetic 
analysis. This update is the third edition of the IC3D nomenclature.
METHODS: Peer-reviewed publications from 2014 to 2023 were evaluated. The new 
information was used to update the anatomic classification and each of the 22 
standardized templates including the level of evidence for being a corneal 
dystrophy [from category 1 (most evidence) to category 4 (least evidence)].
RESULTS: Epithelial recurrent erosion dystrophies now include epithelial 
recurrent erosion dystrophy, category 1 ( COL17A1 mutations, chromosome 10). 
Signs and symptoms are similar to Franceschetti corneal dystrophy, dystrophia 
Smolandiensis, and dystrophia Helsinglandica, category 4. Lisch epithelial 
corneal dystrophy, previously reported as X-linked, has been discovered to be 
autosomal dominant ( MCOLN1 mutations, chromosome 19). Classic lattice corneal 
dystrophy (LCD) results from TGFBI R124C mutation. The LCD variant group has 
over 80 dystrophies with non-R124C TGFBI mutations, amyloid deposition, and 
often similar phenotypes to classic LCD. We propose a new nomenclature for 
specific LCD pathogenic variants by appending the mutation using 1-letter amino 
acid abbreviations to LCD. Pre-Descemet corneal dystrophies include category 1, 
autosomal dominant, punctiform and polychromatic pre-Descemet corneal dystrophy 
(PPPCD) ( PRDX3 mutations, chromosome 10). Typically asymptomatic, it can be 
distinguished phenotypically from pre-Descemet corneal dystrophy, category 4. We 
include a corneal dystrophy management table.
CONCLUSIONS: The IC3D third edition provides a current summary of corneal 
dystrophy information. The article is available online at 
https://corneasociety.org/publications/ic3d .

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000003420
PMCID: PMC10906208
PMID: 38359414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The other authors have no funding or conflicts 
of interest to disclose.