---
reference_id: "PMID:27273086"
title: "Thymic Germinal Centers and Corticosteroids in Myasthenia Gravis: an Immunopathological Study in 1035 Cases and a Critical Review."
authors:
- Truffault F
- de Montpreville V
- Eymard B
- Sharshar T
- Le Panse R
- Berrih-Aknin S
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-016-8558-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thymic Germinal Centers and Corticosteroids in Myasthenia Gravis: an Immunopathological Study in 1035 Cases and a Critical Review.
**Authors:** Truffault F, de Montpreville V, Eymard B, Sharshar T, Le Panse R, Berrih-Aknin S
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-016-8558-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-016-8558-3)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2017 Feb;52(1):108-124. doi: 
10.1007/s12016-016-8558-3.

Thymic Germinal Centers and Corticosteroids in Myasthenia Gravis: an 
Immunopathological Study in 1035 Cases and a Critical Review.

Truffault F(1)(2)(3)(4), de Montpreville V(5), Eymard B(6), Sharshar T(7), Le 
Panse R(1)(2)(3)(4), Berrih-Aknin S(8)(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U974, Paris, France.
(2)CNRS FRE3617, Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Paris, France.
(4)AIM, Institut de myologie, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Pathology, Marie Lannelongue Hospital, Le Plessis Robinson, 
92350, France.
(6)Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, CHU Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(7)General Intensive Care Medicine, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, 
Raymond Poincaré Hospital, University of Versailles Saint-Quentin en Yvelines, 
92380, Garches, France.
(8)INSERM U974, Paris, France. sonia.berrih-aknin@upmc.fr.
(9)CNRS FRE3617, Paris, France. sonia.berrih-aknin@upmc.fr.
(10)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Paris, France. 
sonia.berrih-aknin@upmc.fr.
(11)AIM, Institut de myologie, Paris, France. sonia.berrih-aknin@upmc.fr.
(12)UMRS 974 UPMC, INSERM, FRE 3617 CNRS, AIM, Center of Research in Myology, 
105 Boulevard de l'Hôpital, Paris, 75013, France. sonia.berrih-aknin@upmc.fr.

The most common form of Myasthenia gravis (MG) is due to anti-acetylcholine 
receptor (AChR) antibodies and is frequently associated with thymic pathology. 
In this review, we discuss the immunopathological characteristics and molecular 
mechanisms of thymic follicular hyperplasia, the effects of corticosteroids on 
this thymic pathology, and the role of thymic epithelial cells (TEC), a key 
player in the inflammatory thymic mechanisms. This review is based not only on 
the literature data but also on thymic transcriptome results and analyses of 
pathological and immunological correlations in a vast cohort of 1035 MG patients 
without thymoma. We show that among patients presenting a thymic hyperplasia 
with germinal centers (GC), 80 % are females, indicating that thymic follicular 
hyperplasia is mainly a disease of women. The presence of anti-AChR antibodies 
is correlated with the degree of follicular hyperplasia, suggesting that the 
thymus is a source of anti-AChR antibodies. The degree of hyperplasia is not 
dependent upon the time from the onset, implying that either the antigen is 
chronically expressed and/or that the mechanisms of the resolution of the GC are 
not efficiently controlled. Glucocorticoids, a conventional therapy in MG, 
induce a significant reduction in the GC number, together with changes in the 
expression of chemokines and angiogenesis. These changes are likely related to 
the acetylation molecular process, overrepresented in corticosteroid-treated 
patients, and essential for gene regulation. Altogether, based on the 
pathological and molecular thymic abnormalities found in MG patients, this 
review provides some explanations for the benefit of thymectomy in early-onset 
MG patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-016-8558-3
PMID: 27273086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]