---
reference_id: "PMID:19505475"
title: "Disease-associated substitutions in the filamin B actin binding domain confer enhanced actin binding affinity in the absence of major structural disturbance: Insights from the crystal structures of filamin B actin binding domains."
authors:
- Sawyer GM
- Clark AR
- Robertson SP
- Sutherland-Smith AJ
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-associated substitutions in the filamin B actin binding domain confer enhanced actin binding affinity in the absence of major structural disturbance: Insights from the crystal structures of filamin B actin binding domains.
**Authors:** Sawyer GM, Clark AR, Robertson SP, Sutherland-Smith AJ
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.009)

## Content

1. J Mol Biol. 2009 Jul 31;390(5):1030-47. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.009. Epub 
2009 Jun 6.

Disease-associated substitutions in the filamin B actin binding domain confer 
enhanced actin binding affinity in the absence of major structural disturbance: 
Insights from the crystal structures of filamin B actin binding domains.

Sawyer GM(1), Clark AR, Robertson SP, Sutherland-Smith AJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular BioSciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New 
Zealand.

Missense mutations in filamin B (FLNB) are associated with the autosomal 
dominant atelosteogenesis (AO) and the Larsen group of skeletal malformation 
disorders. These mutations cluster in particular FLNB protein domains and act in 
a presumptive gain-of-function mechanism. In contrast the loss-of-function 
disorder, spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome, is characterised by the 
complete absence of FLNB. One cluster of AO missense mutations is found within 
the second of two calponin homology (CH) domains that create a functional 
actin-binding domain (ABD). This N-terminal ABD is required for filamin F-actin 
crosslinking activity, a crucial aspect of filamin's role of integrating 
cell-signalling events with cellular scaffolding and mechanoprotection. This 
study characterises the wild type FLNB ABD and investigates the effects of two 
disease-associated mutations on the structure and function of the FLNB ABD that 
could explain a gain-of-function mechanism for the AO diseases. We have 
determined high-resolution X-ray crystal structures of the human filamin B wild 
type ABD, plus W148R and M202V mutants. All three structures display the classic 
compact monomeric conformation for the ABD with the CH1 and CH2 domains in close 
contact. The conservation of tertiary structure in the presence of these 
mutations shows that the compact ABD conformation is stable to the sequence 
substitutions. In solution the mutant ABDs display reduced melting temperatures 
(by 6-7 degrees C) as determined by differential scanning fluorimetry. 
Characterisation of the wild type and mutant ABD F-actin binding activities via 
co-sedimentation assays shows that the mutant FLNB ABDs have increased F-actin 
binding affinities, with dissociation constants of 2.0 microM (W148R) and 0.56 
microM (M202V), compared to the wild type ABD K(d) of 7.0 microM. The increased 
F-actin binding affinity of the mutants presents a biochemical mechanism that 
differentiates the autosomal dominant gain-of-function FLNB disorders from those 
that arise through the complete loss of FLNB protein.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.009
PMID: 19505475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]