---
reference_id: "PMID:36759144"
title: Neuroimaging Features of Biotinidase Deficiency.
authors:
- Biswas A
- McNamara C
- Gowda VK
- Gala F
- Sudhakar S
- Sidpra J
- Vari MS
- Striano P
- Blaser S
- Severino M
- Batzios S
- Mankad K
journal: AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A7781
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroimaging Features of Biotinidase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Biswas A, McNamara C, Gowda VK, Gala F, Sudhakar S, Sidpra J, Vari MS, Striano P, Blaser S, Severino M, Batzios S, Mankad K
**Journal:** AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3174/ajnr.A7781](https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A7781)

## Content

1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2023 Mar;44(3):328-333. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A7781. Epub 
2023 Feb 9.

Neuroimaging Features of Biotinidase Deficiency.

Biswas A(1)(2), McNamara C(2), Gowda VK(3), Gala F(4), Sudhakar S(2), Sidpra 
J(2)(5), Vari MS(6), Striano P(6), Blaser S(7), Severino M(8), Batzios S(9), 
Mankad K(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Diagnostic Imaging (A.B., S. Blaser), The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada asthikbiswas@gmail.com.
(2)Departments of Neuroradiology (A.B., C.M., S.S., J.S., K.M.).
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology (V.K.G.), Indira Gandhi Institute of Child 
Health, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Radiodiagnosis (F.G.), Bai Jerbai Wadia Hospital, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.
(5)Developmental Biology and Cancer Section (J.S.), University College London 
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(6)Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit (M.S.V., P.S.).
(7)From the Department of Diagnostic Imaging (A.B., S. Blaser), The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Neuroradiology Unit (M.S.), Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere 
Scientifico Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(9)Paediatric Metabolic Medicine (S. Batzios), Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children, National Health Service Foundation Trust, London, UK.

Biotinidase deficiency is an autosomal recessive condition caused by pathogenic 
variants in the BTD gene. Resultant deficiency of free biotin leads to impaired 
activity of the enzyme carboxylase and related neurologic, dermatologic, and 
ocular symptoms. Many of these are reversible on treatment, but early 
recognition and commencement of biotin supplementation are critical. This 
practice is especially important in countries where routine neonatal screening 
for biotinidase deficiency is not performed. In this report comprising 14 
patients from multiple centers, we demonstrate the MR imaging patterns of this 
disorder at various age groups. Knowledge of these patterns in the appropriate 
clinical context will help guide early diagnosis of this treatable metabolic 
disorder.

© 2023 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A7781
PMCID: PMC10187823
PMID: 36759144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]