---
reference_id: "PMID:15658543"
title: "[Antiphospholipid syndrome and exogenic risk factors in thromboses]."
authors:
- Tikhonova TL
- Mach ES
- Shirokova IE
- Reshetniak TM
journal: Ter Arkh
year: '2004'
keywords:
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/complications, drug therapy"
- "Antirheumatic Agents/adverse effects, pharmacology"
- Cyclophosphamide/adverse effects
- Female
- Glucocorticoids/adverse effects
- Humans
- Life Style
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, drug therapy"
- Male
- Obesity/complications
- Prednisolone/adverse effects
- Recurrence
- Risk Factors
- Smoking/adverse effects
- "Thrombosis/chemically induced, etiology"
- Venous Thrombosis/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Antiphospholipid syndrome and exogenic risk factors in thromboses].
**Authors:** Tikhonova TL, Mach ES, Shirokova IE, Reshetniak TM
**Journal:** Ter Arkh (2004)

## Content

1. Ter Arkh. 2004;76(11):71-4.

[Antiphospholipid syndrome and exogenic risk factors in thromboses].

[Article in Russian]

Tikhonova TL, Mach ES, Shirokova IE, Reshetniak TM.

AIM: To examine relationships between incidence rate of thromboses in 
antiphospholipid syndrome and exogenic risk factors (RF) of thrombosis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The trial enrolled 131 patients (105 females and 26 
males). They were divided into three groups: 23 patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE, group 1), 63 patients with SLE and antiphospholipid syndrome 
(APS, group 2), 45 patients with primary APS (PAPS, group 3). Thrombosis RF 
questionnaire survey was made. Effects of corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide 
on occurrence of thrombosis were assessed.
RESULTS: Such exogenic RF as intake of coffee, fat food, alcohol were not 
related to thromboses. Hypodynamia was more typical for APS patients (21.3%) 
than for SLE patients free of APS (8.7%). Overweight for was characteristic for 
APS patients (49 and 34.7%, respectively). The proportion of smokers was higher 
in APS patients, though smoking did not provoke thrombotic complications. A 
direct correlation was found between occlusion and corticosteroids 
administration, while occlusion and cyclophosphamide treatment correlated 
inversely.
CONCLUSION: Venous thrombosis RF in patients with APS and PAPS are obesity and 
treatment with glucocorticosteroids.

PMID: 15658543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]