---
reference_id: "PMID:31255487"
title: "Transneuronal Propagation of Pathologic α-Synuclein from the Gut to the Brain Models Parkinson's Disease."
authors:
- Kim S
- Kwon SH
- Kam TI
- Panicker N
- Karuppagounder SS
- Lee S
- Lee JH
- Kim WR
- Kook M
- Foss CA
- Shen C
- Lee H
- Kulkarni S
- Pasricha PJ
- Lee G
- Pomper MG
- Dawson VL
- Dawson TM
- Ko HS
journal: Neuron
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.05.035
keywords:
- Animals
- Axonal Transport
- Brain Chemistry
- "Dopaminergic Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Duodenum/innervation, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Injections, Intramuscular"
- Lewy Bodies/metabolism
- Maze Learning
- Memory Disorders/etiology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Models, Neurological"
- "Muscle, Smooth/innervation, metabolism"
- Nesting Behavior/physiology
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/etiology, metabolism, prevention & control, psychology"
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Aggregates
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- "Pylorus/innervation, metabolism"
- Rotarod Performance Test
- Vagotomy
- Vagus Nerve/metabolism
- "alpha-Synuclein/administration & dosage, deficiency, pharmacokinetics, toxicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transneuronal Propagation of Pathologic α-Synuclein from the Gut to the Brain Models Parkinson's Disease.
**Authors:** Kim S, Kwon SH, Kam TI, Panicker N, Karuppagounder SS, Lee S, Lee JH, Kim WR, Kook M, Foss CA, Shen C, Lee H, Kulkarni S, Pasricha PJ, Lee G, Pomper MG, Dawson VL, Dawson TM, Ko HS
**Journal:** Neuron (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2019.05.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.05.035)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2019 Aug 21;103(4):627-641.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.05.035. Epub
 2019 Jun 26.

Transneuronal Propagation of Pathologic α-Synuclein from the Gut to the Brain
Models Parkinson's Disease.

Kim S(1), Kwon SH(1), Kam TI(1), Panicker N(1), Karuppagounder SS(1), Lee S(1),
Lee JH(1), Kim WR(1), Kook M(1), Foss CA(2), Shen C(2), Lee H(1), Kulkarni S(3),
Pasricha PJ(3), Lee G(4), Pomper MG(2), Dawson VL(5), Dawson TM(6), Ko HS(7).

Author information:
(1)Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA;
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA.
(2)The Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(3)Center for Neurogastroenterology, Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(4)Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA;
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA; Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(5)Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA;
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA; Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department of
Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205,
USA.
(6)Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA;
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA; Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department of
Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Electronic address: tdawson@jhmi.edu.
(7)Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA;
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA; Adrienne Helis Malvin Medical Research Foundation, New Orleans,
LA 70130, USA. Electronic address: hko3@jhmi.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2019 Sep;15(9):491. doi: 10.1038/s41582-019-0241-x.
    Neuron. 2019 Aug 21;103(4):547-549. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.07.031.
    Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2019 Oct;30(10):687-689. doi:
10.1016/j.tem.2019.08.001.

Analysis of human pathology led Braak to postulate that α-synuclein (α-syn)
pathology could spread from the gut to brain via the vagus nerve. Here, we test
this postulate by assessing α-synucleinopathy in the brain in a novel
gut-to-brain α-syn transmission mouse model, where pathological α-syn preformed
fibrils were injected into the duodenal and pyloric muscularis layer. Spread of
pathologic α-syn in brain, as assessed by phosphorylation of serine 129 of
α-syn, was observed first in the dorsal motor nucleus, then in caudal portions
of the hindbrain, including the locus coeruleus, and much later in basolateral
amygdala, dorsal raphe nucleus, and the substantia nigra pars compacta.
Moreover, loss of dopaminergic neurons and motor and non-motor symptoms were
observed in a similar temporal manner. Truncal vagotomy and α-syn deficiency
prevented the gut-to-brain spread of α-synucleinopathy and associated
neurodegeneration and behavioral deficits. This study supports the Braak
hypothesis in the etiology of idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD).

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.05.035
PMCID: PMC6706297
PMID: 31255487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no
competing interests.
