---
reference_id: "PMID:37499275"
title: The microbial genotoxin colibactin exacerbates mismatch repair mutations in colorectal tumors.
authors:
- Dougherty MW
- Valdés-Mas R
- Wernke KM
- Gharaibeh RZ
- Yang Y
- Brant JO
- Riva A
- Muehlbauer M
- Elinav E
- Puschhof J
- Herzon SB
- Jobin C
journal: Neoplasia
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2023.100918
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The microbial genotoxin colibactin exacerbates mismatch repair mutations in colorectal tumors.
**Authors:** Dougherty MW, Valdés-Mas R, Wernke KM, Gharaibeh RZ, Yang Y, Brant JO, Riva A, Muehlbauer M, Elinav E, Puschhof J, Herzon SB, Jobin C
**Journal:** Neoplasia (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neo.2023.100918](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neo.2023.100918)

## Content

1. Neoplasia. 2023 Sep;43:100918. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2023.100918. Epub 2023 Jul
25.

The microbial genotoxin colibactin exacerbates mismatch repair mutations in 
colorectal tumors.

Dougherty MW(1), Valdés-Mas R(2), Wernke KM(3), Gharaibeh RZ(1), Yang Y(1), 
Brant JO(4), Riva A(5), Muehlbauer M(1), Elinav E(6), Puschhof J(7), Herzon 
SB(8), Jobin C(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Systems Immunology Department, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, IL, 
Israel.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Bioinformatics Core, Interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(6)Systems Immunology Department, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, IL, 
Israel; Microbiome and Cancer Division, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, DE, Germany.
(7)Microbiome and Cancer Division, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, DE, Germany.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA; Departments of Pharmacology and Therapeutic Radiology, 
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA; Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, 
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA; Department of 
Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA. Electronic address: Christian.jobin@medicine.ufl.edu.

Certain Enterobacteriaceae strains contain a 54-kb biosynthetic gene cluster 
referred to as "pks" encoding the biosynthesis of a secondary metabolite, 
colibactin. Colibactin-producing E. coli promote colorectal cancer (CRC) in 
preclinical models, and in vitro induce a specific mutational signature that is 
also detected in human CRC genomes. Yet, how colibactin exposure affects the 
mutational landscape of CRC in vivo remains unclear. Here we show that 
colibactin-producing E. coli-driven colonic tumors in mice have a significantly 
higher SBS burden and a larger percentage of these mutations can be attributed 
to a signature associated with mismatch repair deficiency (MMRd; SBS15), 
compared to tumors developed in the presence of colibactin-deficient E. coli. We 
found that the synthetic colibactin 742 but not an inactive analog 746 causes 
DNA damage and induces transcriptional activation of p53 and senescence 
signaling pathways in non-transformed human colonic epithelial cells. In MMRd 
colon cancer cells (HCT 116), chronic exposure to 742 resulted in the 
upregulation of BRCA1, Fanconi anemia, and MMR signaling pathways as revealed by 
global transcriptomic analysis. This was accompanied by increased T>N 
single-base substitutions (SBS) attributed to the proposed pks+E. coli signature 
(SBS88), reactive oxygen species (SBS17), and mismatch-repair deficiency 
(SBS44). A significant co-occurrence between MMRd SBS44 and pks-associated SBS88 
signature was observed in a large cohort of human CRC patients (n=2,945), and 
significantly more SBS44 mutations were found when SBS88 was also detected. 
Collectively, these findings reveal the host response mechanisms underlying 
colibactin genotoxic activity and suggest that colibactin may exacerbate 
MMRd-associated mutations.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neo.2023.100918
PMCID: PMC10413156
PMID: 37499275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.