---
reference_id: "PMID:24679006"
title: TP53 mutations are frequent events in double-hit B-cell lymphomas with MYC and BCL2 but not MYC and BCL6 translocations.
authors:
- Gebauer N
- Bernard V
- Gebauer W
- Thorns C
- Feller AC
- Merz H
journal: Leuk Lymphoma
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.907896
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TP53 mutations are frequent events in double-hit B-cell lymphomas with MYC and BCL2 but not MYC and BCL6 translocations.
**Authors:** Gebauer N, Bernard V, Gebauer W, Thorns C, Feller AC, Merz H
**Journal:** Leuk Lymphoma (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3109/10428194.2014.907896](https://doi.org/10.3109/10428194.2014.907896)

## Content

1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Jan;56(1):179-85. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.907896. Epub 
2014 May 7.

TP53 mutations are frequent events in double-hit B-cell lymphomas with MYC and 
BCL2 but not MYC and BCL6 translocations.

Gebauer N(1), Bernard V, Gebauer W, Thorns C, Feller AC, Merz H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Reference Center for Lymph Node Pathology and 
Hematopathology, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein , Luebeck , Germany.

Double-hit lymphomas (DHL) with MYC and either BCL2 or BCL6 rearrangements are 
rare neoplasms with an aggressive clinical presentation and grim prognosis. 
Moreover, molecular characterization of DHL remains insufficient, and especially 
the role of TP53 pathway disruption is unknown. We employed a next-generation 
sequencing approach to investigate the mutational status of TP53 in DHL and 
correlated genomic data with immunohistochemical reactivity for p53. We 
identified TP53 mutations in MYC+/BCL2+ lymphomas at a frequency intermediate 
between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphoma. Remarkably, 
TP53 mutations were particularly scarce in MYC+/BCL6+ lymphomas. Our findings 
indicate a significant difference between these two types of DHL at a molecular 
level with pathogenetic implications, as arguably, TP53 mutations inhibiting p53 
mediated promotion of apoptosis pose a synergistic advantage in clonal evolution 
of cells with malignantly enforced overexpression of BCL2. Immunohistochemical 
staining appears to be a sensitive surrogate of TP53 mutation status with 
moderate specificity.

DOI: 10.3109/10428194.2014.907896
PMID: 24679006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]