---
reference_id: "PMID:35476551"
title: Homologous Recombination Repair Gene Variants and Outcomes Among Patients With Prostate Cancer Treated With Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors.
authors:
- Price MJ
- Vashistha V
- Winski D
- Kelley MJ
- Bitting RL
- Montgomery B
journal: JCO Precis Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1200/PO.21.00461
keywords:
- Adenosine Diphosphate
- Humans
- Male
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Precision Medicine
- Prostatic Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Recombinational DNA Repair/genetics
- Ribose
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homologous Recombination Repair Gene Variants and Outcomes Among Patients With Prostate Cancer Treated With Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors.
**Authors:** Price MJ, Vashistha V, Winski D, Kelley MJ, Bitting RL, Montgomery B
**Journal:** JCO Precis Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1200/PO.21.00461](https://doi.org/10.1200/PO.21.00461)

## Content

1. JCO Precis Oncol. 2022 Apr;6(1):e2100461. doi: 10.1200/PO.21.00461.

Homologous Recombination Repair Gene Variants and Outcomes Among Patients With
Prostate Cancer Treated With Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors.

Price MJ(1)(2), Vashistha V(3), Winski D(4)(5), Kelley MJ(1)(2)(4)(6), Bitting
RL(1)(2), Montgomery B(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Health System, Durham, NC.
(2)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Durham Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Durham, NC.
(3)Raymond G. Murphy New Mexico Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Section of
Hematology/Oncology, Albuquerque, NM.
(4)National Oncology Program Office, Department of Veterans Affairs, Durham, NC.
(5)Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System, Jamaica Plain Campus, Boston, MA.
(6)Duke University Health System, Divisions of Medical Oncology, Hematology and
Cell Therapeutics, Durham, NC.
(7)Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Seattle, WA.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

PURPOSE: Poly ADP-ribose polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) are used for patients
with advanced prostate cancer bearing alterations in homologous recombination
repair (HRR) genes. We sought to characterize HRR gene variants and describe
real-world outcomes for patients on PARPi.
METHODS: The US Department of Veterans Affairs' National Precision Oncology
Program's database was reviewed to identify patients who underwent somatic DNA
sequencing and were prescribed a PARPi before May 15, 2020. Somatic and germline
variants within HRR genes were reported, and pathogenicity was reviewed via
OncoKB. In patients treated with PARPi for > 4 weeks, the rate of those
achieving a 30% decrease in prostate-specific antigen (PSA30) and composite
progression-free survival (PFS) were compared between patients bearing
pathogenic variants of BRCA2 and patients without these variants using
Mann-Whitney and log-rank tests, respectively.
RESULTS: Forty-eight patients bearing 67 total HRR gene variants were prescribed
PARPi for prostate cancer. Twenty-one patients (43.8%) were found to have at
least one pathogenic HRR gene variant. Eight (16.6%) were referred to genetic
counseling, and five (10.4%) were ultimately confirmed with germline variants.
The median PFS was 4.0 months, and PSA30 was 25.6% (11 of 43) for all 43
evaluable patients. Patients with pathogenic BRCA2 variants (n = 13) had higher
PSA30 (69.2% v 4.0%; P < .001) and longer PFS (7.2 v 2.8 months; P = .0291) than
those without.
CONCLUSION: In a real-world setting, heavily pretreated patients with prostate
cancer and pathogenic BRCA2 variants have a significant PSA response rate and a
PFS > 7 months with PARPi. This work emphasizes the importance of determining
pathogenicity and origin of HRR alterations to better inform clinical treatment
decisions and highlights the need for provider education and other decision
support tools.

DOI: 10.1200/PO.21.00461
PMCID: PMC9848572
PMID: 35476551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Vishal VashisthaEmployment: UnitedHealthcare
(I)Research Funding: IBM Watson Health (Inst)Other Relationship: IBM Michael J.
KelleyResearch Funding: Novartis (Inst), AstraZeneca (Inst), Bristol Myers
Squibb (Inst), Regeneron (Inst), Genentech (Inst)Other Relationship: IBM (Inst)
Bruce MontgomeryResearch Funding: AstraZeneca (Inst), Janssen Oncology (Inst),
Clovis Oncology (Inst), Astellas Pharma (Inst), BeiGene (Inst)No other potential
conflicts of interest were reported.
