---
reference_id: "PMID:36661039"
title: Animal host range of mpox virus.
authors:
- Li K
- Yuan Y
- Jiang L
- Liu Y
- Liu Y
- Zhang L
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.28513
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Animal host range of mpox virus.
**Authors:** Li K, Yuan Y, Jiang L, Liu Y, Liu Y, Zhang L
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.28513](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.28513)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2023 Feb;95(2):e28513. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28513.

Animal host range of mpox virus.

Li K(1)(2)(3), Yuan Y(2), Jiang L(2), Liu Y(2), Liu Y(2), Zhang L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University, 
Jinan, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Pathogen Biology, School of Clinical and Basic Medical 
Sciences, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(3)Medical Science and Technology Innovation Center, Shandong First Medical 
University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, Shandong, China.

Mpox is caused by the mpox virus, which belongs to the Orthopoxvirus genus and 
Poxviridae family. Animal hosts, such as African rodents, mice, prairie dogs, 
and non-human primates, play important roles in the development and transmission 
of outbreaks. Laboratory animal infection experiments have demonstrated that 
some animals are susceptible to mpox virus. This review summarizes the current 
progress on the animal hosts for mpox virus. The surveillance of mpox virus in 
animal hosts will provide important insights into virus tracing, analysis of 
mutation evolutionary patterns, transmission mechanisms, and development of 
control measures.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.28513
PMID: 36661039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]