---
reference_id: "PMID:26537923"
title: The effects of intracisternal enzyme replacement versus sham treatment on central neuropathology in preclinical canine fucosidosis.
authors:
- Kondagari GS
- Fletcher JL
- Cruz R
- Williamson P
- Hopwood JJ
- Taylor RM
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0357-z
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/drug effects, pathology"
- Cisterna Magna
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dogs
- "Fucosidosis/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Infusions, Spinal"
- Treatment Outcome
- "alpha-L-Fucosidase/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effects of intracisternal enzyme replacement versus sham treatment on central neuropathology in preclinical canine fucosidosis.
**Authors:** Kondagari GS, Fletcher JL, Cruz R, Williamson P, Hopwood JJ, Taylor RM
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-015-0357-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-015-0357-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Nov 4;10:143. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0357-z.

The effects of intracisternal enzyme replacement versus sham treatment on
central neuropathology in preclinical canine fucosidosis.

Kondagari GS(1), Fletcher JL(1), Cruz R(1), Williamson P(1), Hopwood JJ(2),
Taylor RM(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, 2006,
Australia.
(2)Lysosomal Diseases Research Unit, South Australian Health and Medical
Research Institute, Adelaide, SA, 5000, Australia.
(3)Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, 2006,
Australia. rosanne.taylor@sydney.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Fucosidosis results from lack of α-L-fucosidase activity, with
accumulation of fucose-linked substrates in the nervous system and viscera
leading to progressive motor and mental deterioration, and death. The naturally
occurring dog model of fucosidosis was used to evaluate the neuropathological
responses to partial enzyme replacement, and substrate reduction in early
disease following treatment with recombinant canine α-L-fucosidase delivered
through cerebrospinal fluid.
METHODS: Neuropathology in both treated (n = 3) and untreated
fucosidosis-affected (n = 3) animals was evaluated with immunohistochemistry,
image analysis, manual quantification and gene expression analysis and compared
with unaffected age-matched controls (n = 3) in an extension of our previous
biochemical report on the same cohort. Data were analyzed by ANOVA.
RESULTS: Quantification demonstrated a consistent trend to reduction in
vacuolation, pyramidal neuron loss, astrocytosis, microgliosis, perivascular
storage, apoptosis, oligodendrocyte loss, and hypomyelination throughout the
central nervous system of enzyme treated animals compared to placebo-treated,
age-matched affected controls. Key lesions including lysosomal expansion in
neurons of deep cortex, astrocytosis in cerebral cortex and medulla, and
increased lysosomal membrane associated protein-1 (LAMP-1) gene expression were
ameliorated in treated animals. There was no change in spheroid formation and
loss of Purkinje cells, but Purkinje cell vulnerability to apoptosis was reduced
with treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite reduced severity of fucosidosis neuropathology with partial
enzyme replacement, more complete and sustained biochemical correction is
required to halt neuropathological processes in this large animal model of
lysosomal storage disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-015-0357-z
PMCID: PMC4632352
PMID: 26537923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
