---
reference_id: "PMID:33956417"
title: Primrose Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Arora V
- Ferreira CR
- Dua Puri R
- Verma IC
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primrose Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Arora V, Ferreira CR, Dua Puri R, Verma IC

## Content

1. Primrose Syndrome.

Arora V(1), Ferreira CR(2), Dua Puri R(3), Verma IC(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2021 May 6 [updated 2021 Jun 17].

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New 
Delhi, India
(2)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland
(3)Head, Institute of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New 
Delhi, India

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Primrose syndrome is characterized by macrocephaly, 
hypotonia, developmental delay, intellectual disability with expressive speech 
delay, behavioral issues, a recognizable facial phenotype, radiographic 
features, and altered glucose metabolism. Additional features seen in adults: 
sparse body hair, distal muscle wasting, and contractures. Characteristic 
craniofacial features include brachycephaly, high anterior hairline, deeply set 
eyes, ptosis, downslanted palpebral fissures, high palate with torus palatinus, 
broad jaw, and large ears with small or absent lobes. Radiographic features 
include calcification of the external ear cartilage, multiple wormian bones, 
platybasia, bathrocephaly, slender bones with exaggerated metaphyseal flaring, 
mild epiphyseal dysplasia, and spondylar dysplasia. Additional features include 
hearing impairment, ocular anomalies, cryptorchidism, and nonspecific findings 
on brain MRI.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Primrose syndrome is established in a 
proband with characteristic features and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in 
ZBTB20 identified on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment: Individualized educational program, speech therapy, 
physical therapy, and occupational therapy as indicated; treatment of behavioral 
concerns; applied behavioral analysis for autism; standard treatment for 
seizures, musculoskeletal issues, hearing loss, and thyroid dysfunction; oral 
hypoglycemics or insulin as needed for diabetes. Surveillance: Monitor growth 
and development every six months; speech and developmental assessment every six 
months; assess for behavioral issues, seizures, and musculoskeletal 
complications at each visit; brain stem evoked response audiometry annually; 
annual fasting and postprandial blood glucose, hemoglobin A1c, and assessment 
for signs and symptoms of thyroid dysfunction.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Primrose syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder. All 
probands reported to date with Primrose syndrome whose parents have undergone 
molecular genetic testing have the disorder as a result of a de novo ZBTB20 
pathogenic variant. If a parent of the proband is known to have the ZBTB20 
pathogenic variant identified in the proband, the risk to the sibs of inheriting 
the variant is 50%. Once the ZBTB20 pathogenic variant has been identified in an 
affected family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 33956417