---
reference_id: "PMID:17919309"
title: Non-neuronopathic Gaucher disease due to saposin C deficiency.
authors:
- Tylki-Szymańska A
- Czartoryska B
- Vanier MT
- Poorthuis BJ
- Groener JA
- Ługowska A
- Millat G
- Vaccaro AM
- Jurkiewicz E
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00899.x
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- "Gaucher Disease/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- "Saposins/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-neuronopathic Gaucher disease due to saposin C deficiency.
**Authors:** Tylki-Szymańska A, Czartoryska B, Vanier MT, Poorthuis BJ, Groener JA, Ługowska A, Millat G, Vaccaro AM, Jurkiewicz E
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00899.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00899.x)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2007 Dec;72(6):538-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00899.x. Epub
 2007 Oct 7.

Non-neuronopathic Gaucher disease due to saposin C deficiency.

Tylki-Szymańska A(1), Czartoryska B, Vanier MT, Poorthuis BJ, Groener JA, 
Ługowska A, Millat G, Vaccaro AM, Jurkiewicz E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Endocrinology, and Diabetology, The 
Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. a.tylki@czd.pl

Gaucher disease is generally caused by a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme 
glucocerebrosidase. The degradation of glycosphingolipids requires also the 
participation of sphingolipid activator proteins. The prosaposin PSAP gene codes 
for a single protein which undergoes post-translational cleavage to yield four 
proteins named saposins A, B, C and D. Saposin (SAP-) C is required for 
glucosylceramide degradation, and its deficiency results in a variant form of 
Gaucher disease. In this report, we present clinical, biochemical, and molecular 
findings in a 36-year-old man and his 30-year-old sister with non-neuronopathic 
Gaucher disease due to SAP-C deficiency. Very high levels of chitotriosidase 
activity, chemokine CCL18, and increased concentration of glucosylceramide in 
plasma and normal beta-glucosidase activity in skin fibroblasts were observed in 
the patients. A molecular genetics study of the PSAP gene enabled the 
identification of one missense mutation, p.L349P, located in the SAP-C domain 
and another mutation, p.M1L, located in the initiation codon of the prosaposin 
precursor protein. The presented findings describe the first cases where the 
non-neuronopathic Gaucher disease has been definitely demonstrated to be a 
consequence of SAP-C deficiency. Three previously described cases in the 
literature displayed a Gaucher type 3 phenotype.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00899.x
PMID: 17919309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]