---
reference_id: "PMID:35699227"
title: "Carriers of COL3A1 pathogenic variants in Denmark: Interfamilial variability in severity and outcome of elective surgical procedures."
authors:
- Sølyst S
- Oksjoki R
- Farholt S
- Nielsen DG
- Christensen AH
- Fagerberg CR
- Risom L
- Gregersen PA
- Christensen MB
- Rasmussen TB
- Diness BR
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carriers of COL3A1 pathogenic variants in Denmark: Interfamilial variability in severity and outcome of elective surgical procedures.
**Authors:** Sølyst S, Oksjoki R, Farholt S, Nielsen DG, Christensen AH, Fagerberg CR, Risom L, Gregersen PA, Christensen MB, Rasmussen TB, Diness BR
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14176](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14176)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2022 Sep;102(3):191-200. doi: 10.1111/cge.14176. Epub 2022 Jul 4.

Carriers of COL3A1 pathogenic variants in Denmark: Interfamilial variability in 
severity and outcome of elective surgical procedures.

Sølyst S(1)(2), Oksjoki R(3), Farholt S(4)(5), Nielsen DG(3), Christensen 
AH(2)(6), Fagerberg CR(7), Risom L(1), Gregersen PA(8), Christensen MB(1), 
Rasmussen TB(3), Diness BR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev-Gentofte and 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Center for Rare Diseases, Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Copenhagen 
University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Center for Rare Diseases, Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Aarhus 
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.

The study describes all patients in Denmark with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
(vEDS). Carriers of pathogenic or likely pathogenic COL3A1 variants were 
retrospectively identified through registries and specialized clinics. Medical 
records were reviewed for vascular- or organ ruptures and invasive procedures 
performed. Identified families were divided by variant type (null, splice, and 
missense) and familial phenotypes (severe or attenuated). Families in which at 
least one carrier has suffered a major event before the age of 30 were 
classified as severe, whereas families in which at least three carriers had 
reached the age of 40 without a major event were classified as attenuated. 
Eighty-seven persons (59 still alive) from 25 families were included with a mean 
observation time of 44 years. Sixty-seven percent of patients could be 
subclassified in a familial phenotype. Thirty-one major events were observed. 
Eleven complications in 172 invasive procedures were recorded. No fatal 
complications to elective surgery were observed. The type of COL3A1 variant did 
not reliably predict phenotype, but a pattern of intrafamilial consistency 
emerged with some families showing an attenuated form of vEDS. Elective medical 
procedures appear to be safer than previously thought, although data only allow 
for conclusions regarding individuals from families with the attenuated form of 
vEDS.

© 2022 The Authors. Clinical Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14176
PMCID: PMC9544160
PMID: 35699227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.