---
reference_id: "PMID:38958846"
title: Feasibility of Indirect Treatment Comparisons Between Niraparib Plus Abiraterone Acetate and Other First-Line Poly ADP-Ribose Polymerase Inhibitor Treatment Regimens for Patients with BRCA1/2 Mutation-Positive Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer.
authors:
- De Santis M
- Breijo SM
- Robinson P
- Capone C
- Pascoe K
- Van Sanden S
- Hashim M
- Trevisan M
- Daly C
- Reitsma F
- van Beekhuizen S
- Ruan H
- Heeg B
- Verzoni E
journal: Adv Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12325-024-02918-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Abiraterone Acetate/therapeutic use
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Feasibility Studies
- Indazoles/therapeutic use
- Mutation
- Network Meta-Analysis as Topic
- "Phthalazines/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Piperidines/therapeutic use
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant/drug therapy, genetics"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Feasibility of Indirect Treatment Comparisons Between Niraparib Plus Abiraterone Acetate and Other First-Line Poly ADP-Ribose Polymerase Inhibitor Treatment Regimens for Patients with BRCA1/2 Mutation-Positive Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer.
**Authors:** De Santis M, Breijo SM, Robinson P, Capone C, Pascoe K, Van Sanden S, Hashim M, Trevisan M, Daly C, Reitsma F, van Beekhuizen S, Ruan H, Heeg B, Verzoni E
**Journal:** Adv Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12325-024-02918-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-024-02918-6)

## Content

1. Adv Ther. 2024 Aug;41(8):3039-3058. doi: 10.1007/s12325-024-02918-6. Epub 2024
 Jul 3.

Feasibility of Indirect Treatment Comparisons Between Niraparib Plus Abiraterone
Acetate and Other First-Line Poly ADP-Ribose Polymerase Inhibitor Treatment
Regimens for Patients with BRCA1/2 Mutation-Positive Metastatic
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer.

De Santis M(1)(2), Breijo SM(3)(4), Robinson P(5), Capone C(6), Pascoe K(5), Van
Sanden S(7), Hashim M(8), Trevisan M(9), Daly C(10), Reitsma F(11), van
Beekhuizen S(11), Ruan H(10), Heeg B(11), Verzoni E(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Urology, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)A Coruña University Hospital, C/As Xubias de Arriba nº 86, 15006, A Coruña,
Spain.
(4)Department of Urology, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña
(INIBIC), Universidad de A Coruña (UDC), 15006, A Coruña, Spain.
(5)Janssen-Cilag Limited, 50-100 Holmers Farm Way, High Wycombe, HP12 4EG, UK.
(6)Janssen-Cilag, 1 Rue Camille Desmoulins, 92130, Issy Les Moulineaux, France.
ccapone3@ITS.JNJ.com.
(7)Janssen Pharmaceutica NV, Turnhoutseweg 30, Beerse, Belgium.
(8)Janssen Vaccines & Prevention BV, Archimedesweg 4-6, 2333 CN, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(9)Janssen-Cilag AG, Gubelstrasse 34, 6300, Zug, Switzerland.
(10)Cytel Inc., 1 University Avenue, 3rd Floor, Toronto, ON, M5J 2P1, Canada.
(11)Cytel Inc., Weena 316-318, 3012 NJ, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(12)SSD Genitourinary Medical Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori, Milan, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) are a novel option
to treat patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC).
Niraparib plus abiraterone acetate and prednisone (AAP) is indicated for BRCA1/2
mutation-positive mCRPC. Niraparib plus AAP demonstrated safety and efficacy in
the phase 3 MAGNITUDE trial (NCT03748641). In the absence of head-to-head
studies comparing PARPi regimens, the feasibility of conducting indirect
treatment comparisons (ITC) to inform decisions for patients with first-line
BRCA1/2 mutation-positive mCRPC has been explored.
METHODS: A systematic literature review was conducted to identify evidence from
randomized controlled trials on relevant comparators to inform the feasibility
of conducting ITCs via network meta-analysis (NMA) or population-adjusted
indirect comparisons (PAIC). Feasibility was assessed based on network
connectivity, data availability in the BRCA1/2 mutation-positive population, and
degree of within- and between-study heterogeneity or bias.
RESULTS: NMAs between niraparib plus AAP and other PARPi regimens (olaparib
monotherapy, olaparib plus AAP, and talazoparib plus enzalutamide) were
inappropriate due to the disconnected network, differences in trial populations
related to effect modifiers, or imbalances within BRCA1/2 mutation-positive
subgroups. The latter issue, coupled with the lack of a common comparator
(except for olaparib plus AAP), also rendered anchored PAICs infeasible.
Unanchored PAICs were either inappropriate due to lack of population overlap
(vs. olaparib monotherapy) or were restricted by unmeasured confounders and
small sample size (vs. olaparib plus AAP). PAIC versus talazoparib plus
enzalutamide was not possible due to lack of published arm-level baseline
characteristics and sufficient efficacy outcome data in the relevant population.
CONCLUSION: The current randomized controlled trial evidence network does not
permit robust comparisons between niraparib plus AAP and other PARPi regimens
for patients with 1L BRCA-positive mCRPC. Decision-makers should scrutinize any
ITC results in light of their limitations. Real-world evidence combined with
clinical experience should inform treatment recommendations in this indication.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-024-02918-6
PMCID: PMC11263413
PMID: 38958846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Maria De Santis: received honoraria for
consultancy and advisory boards by AAA, Amgen, Astellas, AstraZeneca, Basilea,
Bayer, Bioclin, BMS, EISAI, Ferring, Immunomedics/Gilead, Ipsen, Janssen, MSD,
Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Orion, Roche, Sandoz, Sanofi, SeaGen Sara Martínez
Breijo: provided scientific advice to Janssen, Bayer, Astellas; participated in
medical meetings organized by Astellas, Astra-Zeneca, Bayer, Ipsen, Janssen,
Opko, Palex and Sanofi; received payments for presentations from Astellas,
Amgen, Astra-Zeneca, Bayer, Ipsen, Janssen, and Sanofi. Paul Robinson, Camille
Capone, Katie Pascoe, Suzy Van Sanden, Mahmoud Hashim, and Marco Trevisan are
employees of Janssen; Caitlin Daly, Friso Reitsma, Sophie van Beekhuizen, Haoyao
Ruan, and Bart Heeg are employees of Cytel which was commissioned by Janssen for
the study. Current affiliations: Haoyao Ruan: PhD student in the Department of
Mathematics at the University of Texas at Arlington. Friso Reitsma: Senior
Policy Advisor, Medicines & Medical Technology department, Dutch Ministry of
Health. Elena Verzoni: served as consultant/advisory board member for Astellas,
AstraZeneca, Bayer, BMS, EISAI, Ipsen, Janssen, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer.
