---
reference_id: "PMID:23250843"
title: Limbic encephalitis and related cortical syndromes.
authors:
- Rubio-Agusti I
- Salavert M
- Bataller L
journal: Curr Treat Options Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s11940-012-0212-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Limbic encephalitis and related cortical syndromes.
**Authors:** Rubio-Agusti I, Salavert M, Bataller L
**Journal:** Curr Treat Options Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11940-012-0212-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11940-012-0212-7)

## Content

1. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2013 Apr;15(2):169-84. doi: 
10.1007/s11940-012-0212-7.

Limbic encephalitis and related cortical syndromes.

Rubio-Agusti I(1), Salavert M, Bataller L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitari I Politècnic La Fe, Boulevar 
Sur s/n, 46026, Valencia, Spain, vikja@hotmail.com.

Patients with limbic encephalitis and related cortical syndromes develop 
neurologic and psychiatric symptoms due to autoimmune damage of limbic and 
extralimbic brain areas. Some patients develop limbic encephalitis as a 
paraneoplastic manifestation of systemic cancer, where immune tolerance is 
thought to be lost. Serum and cerebrospinal antibodies against neuronal antigens 
can be detected in most patients. According to the type of antibodies found, 
patients may be classified into two broad groups, with implications for 
neurological and cancer diagnosis, treatment and prognosis. Patients with 
antibodies to intracellular neuronal antigens (onconeuronal antibodies: Hu, Ma2, 
amphiphysin, CV2/CRMP5) almost invariably have an underlying neoplasm (lung, 
testis, breast, etc.), often require aggressive combined antineoplastic and 
immunomodulatory treatment and their prognosis is usually poor. Patients with 
antibodies to cell-membrane antigens may present with classical limbic 
encephalitis (anti-LGI1 antibodies, other) or with a more diffuse stereotyped 
encephalitis, combining psychiatric symptoms, seizures, dyskinesias, catatonia 
and central hypoventilation (NMDAR-encephalitis). These patients may or may not 
have an associated tumor (thymoma, ovarian teratoma, etc.), are likely to 
improve with immunomodulatory treatment (and tumor removal for paraneoplastic 
cases) and have, overall, a better prognosis. Immunotherapy in patients with 
limbic encephalitis may be escalated according to the severity of neurological 
symptoms, the associated antibodies and the predicted success of antineoplastic 
treatment. First-line immunotherapies include high dose steroids, intravenous 
immunoglobulins and plasma exchange. Second-line drugs include Rituximab and 
Cyclophosphamide. For some patients, maintenance treatment with 
immunosuppressants might be required to prevent deterioration or relapses. 
Supportive treatment includes antiepileptic drugs, psychopharmacologic agents 
and scrutiny and prophylaxis of opportunistic infections.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-012-0212-7
PMID: 23250843