---
reference_id: "PMID:25403825"
title: Ebola virus disease, transmission risk to laboratory personnel, and pretransfusion testing.
authors:
- Katz LM
- Tobian AA
journal: Transfusion
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/trf.12913
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus disease, transmission risk to laboratory personnel, and pretransfusion testing.
**Authors:** Katz LM, Tobian AA
**Journal:** Transfusion (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/trf.12913](https://doi.org/10.1111/trf.12913)

## Content

1. Transfusion. 2014 Dec;54(12):3247-51. doi: 10.1111/trf.12913. Epub 2014 Nov
18.

Ebola virus disease, transmission risk to laboratory personnel, and 
pretransfusion testing.

Katz LM(1), Tobian AA.

Author information:
(1)America's Blood Centers, Washington, DC; Internal Medicine, Infectious 
Diseases, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA.

As Ebola virus has infected thousands of individuals in West Africa, there is 
growing concern about the appropriate response of hospitals in developed nations 
caring for patients and handling laboratory specimens for patients suspected of 
Ebola virus disease (EVD). Guidelines for caring for EVD patients are 
proliferating rapidly from national and state public health authorities, 
professional societies, and individual hospitals. It is no surprise that they 
differ from one another, and some very conservative recommendations call for 
suspension of routine laboratory testing, including pretransfusion testing. EVD 
is transmitted by direct contact with blood, secretions, organs, and other body 
fluids and not by airborne routes. Based on experimental and observational data, 
the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that 
clinicians follow contact and droplet precautions. Laboratory personnel are 
required to follow the blood-borne pathogen standard, especially the use of 
appropriate barriers consisting of gloves, gown, goggles, mask to cover nose and 
mouth, and plexiglass shield, where splashes of potentially infectious materials 
may be generated. Their recommendations are permissive of clinically appropriate 
laboratory testing, including pretransfusion testing, using barrier isolation 
precautions. Most individuals with suspected EVD will have a fever of another 
etiology, such as Plasmodium falciparum malaria. We believe that forgoing all 
routine pretransfusion laboratory testing may result in a greater increase in 
poor clinical outcomes than any diminution in the risks to laboratory personnel 
will justify. It is imperative for all laboratory directors, working with 
institutional infection control and safety personnel, to evaluate their hospital 
policies for potentially infectious patients and provide a safe environment for 
their patients and employees.

© 2014 AABB.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.12913
PMID: 25403825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]