---
reference_id: "PMID:31578652"
title: "Population-based study of environmental/occupational lead exposure and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Meng E
- Mao Y
- Yao Q
- Han X
- Li X
- Zhang K
- Jin W
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-019-04067-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Population-based study of environmental/occupational lead exposure and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Meng E, Mao Y, Yao Q, Han X, Li X, Zhang K, Jin W
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-019-04067-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-019-04067-z)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2020 Jan;41(1):35-40. doi: 10.1007/s10072-019-04067-z. Epub 2019
Oct  2.

Population-based study of environmental/occupational lead exposure and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Meng E(1), Mao Y(1), Yao Q(1), Han X(1), Li X(1), Zhang K(1), Jin W(2).

Author information:
(1)Yangzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 36 Yanfu Dong Road, 
Yangzhou, 225001, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(2)Yangzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 36 Yanfu Dong Road, 
Yangzhou, 225001, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. 3051953331@qq.com.

Lead is a known risk factor for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). However, 
the results of studies exploring the relationship between lead exposure and the 
occurrence of ALS are inconsistent. To clarify this issue, we conducted a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of relevant published articles on the 
relationship between lead exposure and the occurrence of ALS. We searched the 
PubMed, MEDLINE, Embase, and Science Direct databases for relevant publications. 
The quality of the articles was judged according to the Newcastle-Ottawa scale, 
and the meta-analysis was conducted using a random effect model. A total of 583 
items were retrieved of which 11 case-control studies were selected. The ratio 
of maximal/minimal lead exposure yielded a pooled odds ratio (OR) of 1.46 (95% 
confidence interval (CI) 1.16-1.83) with moderate heterogeneity (I2 = 51.8%; 
p = 0.019). Subgroup and sensitivity analyses showed stable results. There was 
evidence of publication bias, but the recalculated OR after employing the "fill 
and trim" method was 1.28 (95% CI 1.02-1.63). These results indicated that 
environmental/occupational lead exposure was positively proportional to the risk 
of ALS.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-019-04067-z
PMID: 31578652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]