---
reference_id: "PMID:30853934"
title: "Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Is a Common Phenotypic Finding in ARG1 Deficiency, P5CS Deficiency and HHH Syndrome: Three Inborn Errors of Metabolism Caused by Alteration of an Interconnected Pathway of Glutamate and Urea Cycle Metabolism."
authors:
- Panza E
- Martinelli D
- Magini P
- Dionisi Vici C
- Seri M
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Is a Common Phenotypic Finding in ARG1 Deficiency, P5CS Deficiency and HHH Syndrome: Three Inborn Errors of Metabolism Caused by Alteration of an Interconnected Pathway of Glutamate and Urea Cycle Metabolism.
**Authors:** Panza E, Martinelli D, Magini P, Dionisi Vici C, Seri M
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2019.00131](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2019.00131)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2019 Feb 22;10:131. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00131. eCollection
2019.

Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Is a Common Phenotypic Finding in ARG1 Deficiency,
P5CS Deficiency and HHH Syndrome: Three Inborn Errors of Metabolism Caused by
Alteration of an Interconnected Pathway of Glutamate and Urea Cycle Metabolism.

Panza E(1), Martinelli D(2), Magini P(3), Dionisi Vici C(2), Seri M(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Division of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Children's Research Hospital, Rome,
Italy.
(3)Medical Genetics Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy.

Hereditary Spastic Paraplegias (HSPs) are a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by a
progressive rigidity and weakness of the lower limbs, caused by pyramidal tract
lesions. As of today, 80 different forms of HSP have been mapped, 64 genes have
been cloned, and new forms are constantly being described. HSPs represent an
intensively studied field, and the functional understanding of the biochemical
and molecular pathogenetic pathways are starting to be elucidated. Recently,
dominant and recessive mutations in the ALDH18A1 gene resulting in the
deficiency of the encoded enzyme (delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase,
P5CS) have been pathogenetically linked to HSP. P5CS is a critical enzyme in the
conversion of glutamate to pyrroline-5-carboxylate, an intermediate that enters
in the proline biosynthesis and that is connected with the urea cycle.
Interestingly, two urea cycle disorders, Argininemia and
Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria syndrome, are clinically
characterized by highly penetrant spastic paraplegia. These three diseases
represent a peculiar group of HSPs caused by Inborn Errors of Metabolism. Here
we comment on these forms, on the common features among them and on the
hypotheses for possible shared pathogenetic mechanisms causing the HSP
phenotype.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00131
PMCID: PMC6395431
PMID: 30853934
