---
reference_id: "PMID:30522498"
title: "Hyperammonaemia in classic organic acidaemias: a review of the literature and two case histories."
authors:
- Häberle J
- Chakrapani A
- Ah Mew N
- Longo N
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-018-0963-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperammonaemia in classic organic acidaemias: a review of the literature and two case histories.
**Authors:** Häberle J, Chakrapani A, Ah Mew N, Longo N
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-018-0963-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-018-0963-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2018 Dec 6;13(1):219. doi: 10.1186/s13023-018-0963-7.

Hyperammonaemia in classic organic acidaemias: a review of the literature and 
two case histories.

Häberle J(1), Chakrapani A(2), Ah Mew N(3), Longo N(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Centre, University Children's 
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Clinical Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Great Ormond Street 
Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Children's National Rare Disease Institute, Children's National Health 
System, Washington, DC, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, 30 N 1900 E, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, USA. 
Nicola.Longo@hsc.utah.edu.

BACKGROUND: The 'classic' organic acidaemias (OAs) (propionic, methylmalonic and 
isovaleric) typically present in neonates or infants as acute metabolic 
decompensation with encephalopathy. This is frequently accompanied by severe 
hyperammonaemia and constitutes a metabolic emergency, as increased ammonia 
levels and accumulating toxic metabolites are associated with life-threatening 
neurological complications. Repeated and frequent episodes of hyperammonaemia 
(alongside metabolic decompensations) can result in impaired growth and 
intellectual disability, the severity of which increase with longer duration of 
hyperammonaemia. Due to the urgency required, diagnostic evaluation and initial 
management of patients with suspected OAs should proceed simultaneously. 
Paediatricians, who do not have specialist knowledge of metabolic disorders, 
have the challenging task of facilitating a timely diagnosis and treatment. This 
article outlines how the underlying pathophysiology and biochemistry of the 
organic acidaemias are closely linked to their clinical presentation and 
management, and provides practical advice for decision-making during early, 
acute hyperammonaemia and metabolic decompensation in neonates and infants with 
organic acidaemias.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT: The acute management of hyperammonaemia in organic 
acidaemias requires administration of intravenous calories as glucose and lipids 
to promote anabolism, carnitine to promote urinary excretion of urinary organic 
acid esters, and correction of metabolic acidosis with the substitution of 
bicarbonate for chloride in intravenous fluids. It may also include the 
administration of ammonia scavengers such as sodium benzoate or sodium 
phenylbutyrate. Treatment with N-carbamyl-L-glutamate can rapidly normalise 
ammonia levels by stimulating the first step of the urea cycle.
CONCLUSIONS: Our understanding of optimal treatment strategies for organic 
acidaemias is still evolving. Timely diagnosis is essential and best achieved by 
the early identification of hyperammonaemia and metabolic acidosis. Correcting 
metabolic imbalance and hyperammonaemia are critical to prevent brain damage in 
affected patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-018-0963-7
PMCID: PMC6282273
PMID: 30522498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: JH has 
received travel support and/or honoraria from Hyperion Therapeutics/Horizon 
Pharma, Lucane Pharma, Nutricia Metabolics, Orphan Europe Recordati Group, and 
Swedish Orphan Biovitrum (Sobi). NL has received travel support from Orphan 
Europe, receives support for clinical trials from Horizon Pharma, and is a 
consultant for Moderna Therapeutics and HemoShear Therapeutics. AC has received 
honoraria, lecture fees and travel support from Orphan Europe. NAM has received 
travel support from Orphan Europe and Horizon Pharma, and a grant from Recordati 
Rare Diseases Group USA. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.