---
reference_id: "PMID:20301460"
title: Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Milliner DS
- Harris PC
- Sas DJ
- Cogal AG
- Lieske JC
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Milliner DS, Harris PC, Sas DJ, Cogal AG, Lieske JC

## Content

1. Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1.

Milliner DS(1), Harris PC(1), Sas DJ(1), Cogal AG(1), Lieske JC(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2002 Jun 19 [updated 2025 Dec 11].

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1) is caused by
deficiency of the liver peroxisomal enzyme alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase
(AGT), which catalyzes the conversion of glyoxylate to glycine. When AGT
activity is reduced or absent, glyoxylate is converted to oxalate, which cannot
be metabolized and must be excreted by the kidneys. Insoluble calcium oxalate
crystals form due to high urinary oxalate concentration. Urinary crystals
aggregate, leading to nephrolithiasis (i.e., calcium oxalate kidney stones) in
the renal pelvis / urinary tract; often the crystals deposit in kidney
parenchyma (nephrocalcinosis). The age at presentation of PH1 ranges from
infancy (age <12 months) in 10% of individuals, childhood/adolescence (age 1-17
years) in 70%, and adulthood (age ≥18 years) in 20%. The natural history of
untreated PH1 is (1) progressive decline in kidney function due to complications
of nephrolithiasis (e.g., urinary obstruction, infection) and nephrocalcinosis,
and (2) in persons with advanced chronic kidney disease (CKD), high plasma
oxalate concentrations result in other organ and tissue damage from calcium
oxalate deposition (i.e., "oxalosis"), most commonly in the bones, heart, and
retina. In the absence of treatment, progression of oxalosis results in death
from kidney failure and/or other organ involvement.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PH1 is established in a proband with
supportive laboratory findings (excess excretion of oxalate in the urine and/or
markedly increased plasma oxalate concentration) and biallelic pathogenic
variants in AGXT identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: (1) Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) to reduce liver
oxalate production in individuals with missense AGXT variants known to be
pyridoxine responsive; (2) RNA interference (RNAi) therapeutics (lumasiran and
nedosiran) that target specific hepatic enzymes to reduce liver overproduction
of oxalate; and (3) liver transplantation to restore normal hepatic AGT enzyme
activity. Supportive care: Goal is to reduce stone formation, reduce frequency
of symptomatic stone events, and preserve kidney function. Advanced loss of
kidney function may require dialysis and kidney transplantation. Kidney and
liver transplantation can be performed simultaneously or sequentially.
Surveillance: Individuals with PH1 require lifelong care including regularly
scheduled assessments of (1) kidney function and urinalysis; (2) urine volume
and urine oxalate excretion; (3) kidney ultrasound examination; and (4) signs
and symptoms of systemic oxalosis (most commonly involving bones, heart, and
retina). The frequency of these assessments is based on the individual's kidney
function. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Intravascular volume depletion; high
doses of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or any pharmacologic agent that
can compromise kidney function; intake of vitamin C exceeding the recommended
daily allowance; loop diuretics; large intake of foods high in oxalate (e.g.,
chocolate, rhubarb, starfruit). Evaluation of relatives at risk: Family
screening for PH1, particularly sibs of the proband, is warranted given
intrafamilial variability, significant disease risks even in asymptomatic family
members, and availability of therapeutic agents highly effective in reducing
urine oxalate. Pregnancy management: Although pregnancy does not appear to be an
important risk factor for developing end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) in most
women with PH1, close monitoring is warranted by both an obstetrician and
nephrologist during pregnancy and the postpartum period. Of note, the recently
approved targeted therapies, lumasiran and nedosiran, have not been studied
during human pregnancy. While preclinical animal studies have been reassuring,
pending more clinical data the authors would advise women to discontinue use of
either therapy prior to becoming pregnant and during pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PH1 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both
parents are known to be heterozygous for an AGXT pathogenic variant, each sib of
an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50%
chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected
and not a carrier. Once the AGXT pathogenic variants have been identified in an
affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives and
prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301460
