---
reference_id: "PMID:39636799"
title: Genetic variants associated with sepsis-associated acute kidney injury.
authors:
- Douville NJ
- Bastarache L
- Bertucci-Richter E
- Patil S
- Jewell ES
- Freundlich RE
- Kertai MD
- Engoren MC
journal: PLoS One
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0311318
keywords:
- Humans
- "Acute Kidney Injury/genetics, etiology"
- "Sepsis/genetics, complications"
- Female
- Male
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Risk Factors
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic variants associated with sepsis-associated acute kidney injury.
**Authors:** Douville NJ, Bastarache L, Bertucci-Richter E, Patil S, Jewell ES, Freundlich RE, Kertai MD, Engoren MC
**Journal:** PLoS One (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0311318](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0311318)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2024 Dec 5;19(12):e0311318. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0311318. 
eCollection 2024.

Genetic variants associated with sepsis-associated acute kidney injury.

Douville NJ(1)(2)(3), Bastarache L(4), Bertucci-Richter E(5), Patil S(5), Jewell 
ES(1), Freundlich RE(4)(6), Kertai MD(6), Engoren MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United 
States of America.
(2)Institute of Healthcare Policy & Innovation, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(3)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.
(5)Precision Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States 
of America.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Kidney dysfunction is a common complication in septic patients. 
Studies have identified numerous risk factors for sepsis-associated acute kidney 
injury (S-AKI), yet there is wide variability in the incidence even among 
patients with similar risk factors, suggesting the presence of additional 
uncharacterized risk factors, including genetic differences. The expansion of 
biobanks, advances in genotyping, and standardized diagnostic criteria have 
enabled large-scale, hypothesis-generating studies into the genetic mechanisms 
underlying S-AKI. We hypothesize that the genetic pathway behind S-AKI has 
overlapping mechanisms with key differences based upon the specific subtype of 
acute kidney injury (AKI).
METHODS: To test this hypothesis, we performed a genome-wide association study 
(GWAS) of S-AKI in three logistic regression models. Model 1, controlled for 1) 
age, 2) sex, 3) genotyping chip, and 4) the first five principal components. In 
Model 2, pre-sepsis baseline serum creatinine was added to the variables in 
Model 1. Finally, in Model 3, we controlled for the full range of patient, 
clinical, and ICU-related risk factors. Each of the 3-models were repeated in a 
pre-specified sensitivity analysis of higher severity S-AKI, defined as KDIGO 
Stage 2 or 3. We then compare associated variants and genes from our GWAS with 
previously published AKI sub-types and model other factors associated with S-AKI 
in our dataset.
FINDINGS: 3,348 qualifying Sepsis-3 patients have been genotyped in our dataset. 
Of these patients, 383 (11.4%) developed Stage 1, 2, or 3 AKI (primary outcome) 
and 181 (5.4%) developed Stage 2 or 3 AKI (sensitivity analysis). The median age 
was 61 years (interquartile range (IQR): 51,69), 42% were female, and the 
increase in SOFA score (between 48-hours before to 24-hours after the onset of 
suspected infection) was 2 (2-3). No variants exceeded our threshold for 
genome-wide significance (P<5x10-8), however, a total of 13 variants exceeded 
the suggestive (P<1x10-6) threshold. Notably, rs184516290 (chr1:199814965:G:A), 
near the NR5A2 gene, chr1:199805801:T:TA, also near the NR5A2 gene, and 
rs117313146 (chr15:31999784:G:C), near the CHRNA7 gene, were associated with 
S-AKI at the suggestive level in all three models presented. Variants in the 
suppressor of fused homolog (SUFU) gene, previously shown to be correlated with 
renal function in bacteremic patients, consistently exceeded the P<0.05 
threshold in our models.
CONCLUSIONS: While failing to identify any novel association for S-AKI at the 
level of genome-wide significance, our study did suggest multiple variants in 
previously characterized pathways for S-AKI including CHRNA7, NR5A2, and SUFU. 
We failed to replicate associations from multiple prior studies which may result 
from differences in how the phenotype was defined or, alternatively, limited 
genetic contribution and low heritability.

Copyright: © 2024 Douville et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0311318
PMCID: PMC11620412
PMID: 39636799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.