---
reference_id: "PMID:37410796"
title: Initial presentation of early rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Weman L
- Salo H
- Kuusalo L
- Huhtakangas J
- Kärki J
- Vähäsalo P
- Backström M
- Sokka-Isler T
journal: PLoS One
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0287707
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Initial presentation of early rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Weman L, Salo H, Kuusalo L, Huhtakangas J, Kärki J, Vähäsalo P, Backström M, Sokka-Isler T
**Journal:** PLoS One (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0287707](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0287707)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2023 Jul 6;18(7):e0287707. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0287707. 
eCollection 2023.

Initial presentation of early rheumatoid arthritis.

Weman L(1), Salo H(2), Kuusalo L(3), Huhtakangas J(4), Kärki J(5), Vähäsalo 
P(6), Backström M(7)(8), Sokka-Isler T(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Eastern Finland and Jyväskylä Central Hospital, Jyväskylä, 
Finland.
(2)Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Data and Analytics, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Turku and Turku University 
Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
(5)Department of Children and Adolescents, Kanta-Häme Central Hospital, 
Hämeenlinna, Finland.
(6)Department of Children and Adolescents, Research Unit of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and Medical Research Center, Oulu 
University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, Wellbeing Services County of Ostrobothnia, Vaasa, 
Finland.
(8)Research Unit of Clinical Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

OBJECTIVES: To study the joint distribution and clinical picture of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) at the initial presentation in seropositive (anti-citrullinated 
protein antibody (ACPA) and/or rheumatoid factor (RF) positive) and negative 
patients and the effect of duration of symptoms on the clinical picture.
METHODS: Data of patients who received reimbursement for DMARDs for newly 
diagnosed RA in 1/2019 to 9/2021 were extracted from the national databases. 
Joint counts, presence of symmetrical swelling, other disease activity measures, 
and patient reported outcomes (PROs) were compared in seropositive and negative 
patients. Regression analyses were applied to compare clinical variables in 
patients with duration of symptoms of <3, 3-6, and >6 months, adjusted for age, 
sex, and seropositivity.
RESULTS: Data of 1816 ACPA and RF-tested patients were included. Symmetrical 
swelling was present in 75% of patients. Seronegative versus positive patients 
had higher value for all disease activity measures and PROs including median 
swollen joint count (SJC46 10 versus 5) and DAS28 (4.7 versus 3.7), (p<0.001). 
Patients diagnosed in <3 months had higher median pain VAS (62 versus 52 and 50, 
p<0.001) and HAQ (1.1 versus 0.9 and 0.75, p = 0.002) compared to those with a 
duration of symptoms of 3-6 and >6 months. Patients diagnosed >6 months were 
ACPA-positive more frequently (77% versus 70% in other groups, p = 0.045).
CONCLUSION: Incident RA presents mainly as symmetric arthritis. Seronegative 
patients have higher disease burden at the initial presentation. Patients 
experiencing more severe pain and decreased functional ability are diagnosed 
earlier, regardless of ACPA- status.

Copyright: © 2023 Weman et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0287707
PMCID: PMC10325069
PMID: 37410796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.