---
reference_id: "PMID:9031493"
title: Human parvovirus B19 and blood products.
authors:
- Prowse C
- Ludlam CA
- Yap PL
journal: Vox Sang
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1046/j.1423-0410.1997.00001.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human parvovirus B19 and blood products.
**Authors:** Prowse C, Ludlam CA, Yap PL
**Journal:** Vox Sang (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1423-0410.1997.00001.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1423-0410.1997.00001.x)

## Content

1. Vox Sang. 1997;72(1):1-10. doi: 10.1046/j.1423-0410.1997.00001.x.

Human parvovirus B19 and blood products.

Prowse C(1), Ludlam CA, Yap PL.

Author information:
(1)National Science Laboratory, Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service, 
Edinburgh, UK.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Human B19 parvovirus (B19), identified in 1975, was 
only recognised as the causative agent of fifth disease in 1983. The incidence 
of viraemia is low, around 1 in 1,000, but is sufficient to ensure that most 
plasma pools for fractionation contain some virus. While infection usually 
occurs in childhood and is benign, chronic infection sometimes occurs and may be 
of concern in certain patient groups.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This review is based on a meeting held in March 1995, and 
addresses recent concerns regarding the potential transmission of B19 infection 
by pooled plasma products.
RESULTS: Recent data on the pathophysiology and assay of this virus are 
summarised along with possible approaches to donor screening, product screening, 
and virus removal. Only five cases of symptomatic infection have been reported 
in persons with haemophilia, but no technology for virus removal is established, 
and infection may be of concern in pregnant women, and in patients with enhanced 
red cell turnover or who are immunosuppressed, including those infected with 
human immunodeficiency virus, but only rarely in immunocompetent patients.
CONCLUSIONS: For the future, well-validated assays relevant to virus infectivity 
are required if blood donations, plasma pools, or plasma products are to be 
screened, and an in-process virus inactivation step for B19 would be highly 
desirable. In the interim, non-plasma or recombinant products or a selective 
transfusion policy might be used in patient groups in which B19 infection is of 
particular concern. Further clinical data on the prognosis and impact of B19 
infection are needed to justify both such policies and the future adoption of 
new technologies designed to reduce any excess B19 infectivity arising from 
transfused products.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1423-0410.1997.00001.x
PMID: 9031493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]