---
reference_id: "PMID:31885947"
title: Sporadic Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma with Paraneoplastic Cushing Syndrome.
authors:
- Pivovarova AI
- Patrick S
- Reddy PJ
journal: Case Rep Endocrinol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1155/2019/6414921
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sporadic Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma with Paraneoplastic Cushing Syndrome.
**Authors:** Pivovarova AI, Patrick S, Reddy PJ
**Journal:** Case Rep Endocrinol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2019/6414921](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/6414921)

## Content

1. Case Rep Endocrinol. 2019 Dec 8;2019:6414921. doi: 10.1155/2019/6414921. 
eCollection 2019.

Sporadic Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma with Paraneoplastic Cushing Syndrome.

Pivovarova AI(1)(2), Patrick S(1)(3), Reddy PJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine, 445 Health Sciences Blvd, Dothan, AL 
36303, USA.
(2)University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 N State St., Jackson, MS 
39216, USA.
(3)University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 910 Madison Ave, Memphis, TN 
38163, USA.
(4)Decatur Morgan Hospital, Department of Internal Medicine, 1201 7th St. SE, 
Decatur, AL 35601, USA.

Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is a rare form of neoplasm affecting the thyroid 
gland. This neuroendocrine tumor is capable of releasing active substances 
causing systemic manifestation in the form of flushing, diarrhea, and 
uncommonly, Ectopic Cushing's syndrome (ECS). MTC can be hereditary as a part of 
multiple endocrine neoplasm type 2 syndrome (MEN2) or arise sporadically. We 
report a case of a 74-year-old female presenting with chronic diarrhea, in whom 
diagnosis of sporadic MTC was delayed due to previous history of 
gastrointestinal (GI) disturbances. The patient developed liver metastases 
yielding ACTH dependent Cushing's Syndrome leading to abnormal clinical 
presentation and laboratory values driven by elevated cortisol level. Metastatic 
MTC should be considered in patients presenting with chronic diarrhea and 
weakness unexplained by other GI related causes.

Copyright © 2019 Aleksandra I. Pivovarova et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/6414921
PMCID: PMC6925804
PMID: 31885947

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.