---
reference_id: "PMID:28334439"
title: "A phase 2 trial of dasatinib in patients with locally advanced or stage IV mucosal, acral, or vulvovaginal melanoma: A trial of the ECOG-ACRIN Cancer Research Group (E2607)."
authors:
- Kalinsky K
- Lee S
- Rubin KM
- Lawrence DP
- Iafrarte AJ
- Borger DR
- Margolin KA
- Leitao MM Jr
- Tarhini AA
- Koon HB
- Pecora AL
- Jaslowski AJ
- Cohen GI
- Kuzel TM
- Lao CD
- Kirkwood JM
journal: Cancer
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.30663
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Dasatinib/therapeutic use
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, secondary"
- Middle Aged
- Mucous Membrane
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Neoplasm Staging
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Vaginal Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Vulvar Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# A phase 2 trial of dasatinib in patients with locally advanced or stage IV mucosal, acral, or vulvovaginal melanoma: A trial of the ECOG-ACRIN Cancer Research Group (E2607).
**Authors:** Kalinsky K, Lee S, Rubin KM, Lawrence DP, Iafrarte AJ, Borger DR, Margolin KA, Leitao MM Jr, Tarhini AA, Koon HB, Pecora AL, Jaslowski AJ, Cohen GI, Kuzel TM, Lao CD, Kirkwood JM
**Journal:** Cancer (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.30663](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.30663)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2017 Jul 15;123(14):2688-2697. doi: 10.1002/cncr.30663. Epub 2017 Mar
23.

A phase 2 trial of dasatinib in patients with locally advanced or stage IV
mucosal, acral, or vulvovaginal melanoma: A trial of the ECOG-ACRIN Cancer
Research Group (E2607).

Kalinsky K(1), Lee S(2), Rubin KM(3), Lawrence DP(3), Iafrarte AJ(3), Borger
DR(3), Margolin KA(4), Leitao MM Jr(5), Tarhini AA(6), Koon HB(7), Pecora AL(8),
Jaslowski AJ(9), Cohen GI(10), Kuzel TM(11), Lao CD(12), Kirkwood JM(6).

Author information:
(1)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York.
(2)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)City of Hope, Duarte, California.
(5)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer, New York, New York.
(6)University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(7)Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.
(8)Hackensack Medical Center, Hackensack, New Jersey.
(9)Saint Vincent Hospital, Green Bay, Wisconsin.
(10)Greater Baltimore Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland.
(11)Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois.
(12)University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center.

BACKGROUND: KIT-directed tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as imatinib have
demonstrated benefits in KIT-mutant (KIT+) mucosal, acral, vulvovaginal, and
chronically sun-damaged (CSD) melanoma. Dasatinib has superior preclinical
activity in comparison with other tyrosine kinase inhibitors against cells with
the most common KIT mutation, exon 11L576P . The ECOG-ACRIN E2607 trial assessed
dasatinib in patients with these melanoma subtypes.
METHODS: Patients received 70 mg of oral dasatinib twice daily. The primary
objective for this 2-stage phase 2 trial was response rate. Stage I was open to
KIT+ and wild-type KIT (KIT-) mucosal, acral, and CSD melanoma (n = 57). Stage
II accrued only KIT+ tumors (n = 30). To enrich the trial for KIT+ tumors,
vulvovaginal melanoma was added, and CSD melanoma was removed from eligibility.
Secondary objectives included progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival
(OS), and safety.
RESULTS: From May 2009 to December 2010, the first stage enrolled 57 patients.
Among the evaluable patients, 3 of 51 (5.9%) achieved a partial response: all
were KIT-. Stage II closed early because of slow accrual (November 2011 to
December 2015). In stage II, 4 of 22 evaluable patients (18.2%) had a partial
response; the median duration was 4.2 months. The median PFS was 2.1 months (n =
73; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.5-2.9 months). The median OS was 7.5 months
(95% CI, 6.0-11.9 months). In exploratory analyses, no differences were seen in
PFS or OS with the KIT status or subtype. Dasatinib was discontinued because of
adverse events in 9 of 75 patients (12%).
CONCLUSIONS: The dasatinib response rate among KIT+ melanoma patients was low.
In view of its clinical activity, it is recommended that imatinib remain the KIT
tyrosine kinase inhibitor of choice for unresectable KIT+ melanoma. Cancer
2017;123:2688-97. © 2017 American Cancer Society.

© 2017 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.30663
PMCID: PMC5498223
PMID: 28334439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interests: The authors would like
to report the following conflicts of interest: KK (Stock, Novartis: spouse;
Advisory: Biotheranostics, Lilly, Pfizer, Amgen, Novartis, Eisai), SK
(Employment: Nantkwest, Leadership: Nantkwest, Advisory: Roche), KR (Advisory:
Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb), AJI (Stock: Archer, Advisory: Debiopharm,
Constellation, Chugai; Research Funding: Blueprint; Patent (ArcherDx), AT
(Grant: Bristol-Myers Squibb, Advisory: Bristol-Myers Squibb), TK (Advisory:
Novartis), JK (Advisory: Bristol-Myers Squibb, Amgen, GreeenPeptide, Roche,
Solaran Rx, Checkmate, Novartis; Research Funding: Paometheus)

Melanoma is comprised of several tumor subtypes with distinct clinical behaviors and genetic makeup1. In contrast to melanoma that arise from non-chronically sun damaged skin (non-CSD), which demonstrates BRAF mutations frequently, mucosal, acral, and CSD melanoma harbor mutations in the KIT oncogene.

KIT plays a role in normal melanocyte development and is upstream of pathways important for differentiation, proliferation, and survival1-3. KIT mutant (KIT+) melanoma represents approximately 3% of melanoma1,4-8. KIT+ is identified in 20% of mucosal or acral melanoma1,4-6,9. While the rates of mutations in CSD melanoma were initially reported to have similar frequencies, more recent data demonstrate the rates of KIT+ in CSD melanoma is lower (~ 2%)10. Even though initial studies with KIT inhibitors in an unselected population did not demonstrate clinical benefit11,12, clinical activity has been observed in prospective trials with KIT inhibitors in KIT+ acral, mucosal, and/or CSD melanoma. These include trials with imatinib5,6,9, nilotinib after prior KIT inhibition13, and sunitinib7. While the response rate is approximately 16-23% with imatinib in patients with KIT+ acral, mucosal, and/or CSD melanoma, the response rate is around 40% in exon 11 or 13 KIT mutant melanoma (~ 70% of KIT mutations in melanoma)5,6,9. Since 2013, imatinib has been included in the National Comprehensive Network Clinical Practice (NCCN) Guidelines for KIT+ melanoma.

Dasatinib (Sprycel, BMS-354285) targets KIT, PDGFRbeta, BCR-ABL, and the SRC family. Dasatinib potently inhibits wild type KIT (KIT-), juxtamembrane domain mutant KIT autophosphorylation, and KIT-dependent activation of downstream pathways14. Pre-clinical data support that dasatinib is a potent inhibitor in the setting of imatinib-resistant KIT activation loop mutation14. In vitro drug testing has revealed dasatinib is a more potent inhibitor of cell proliferation than imatinib and nilotinib in Ba/F3 cell lines expressing KIT+ isoform L576P (exon 11), the most frequently detected KIT mutation in melanoma15. In WM3211 cells, which also harbor L576P KIT mutations, dasatinib inhibits cell viability in comparison to imatinib, nilotinib, or sorafenib16. Dasatinib has demonstrated activity against PDGFR, often co-amplified with KIT in these rare melanoma subtypes17, as well as SRC family kinases, which associate with metastatic potential18-21.

Based on these pre-clinical studies, we initiated ECOG-ACRIN 2607 (E2607) to investigate the activity of dasatinib in patients with mucosal, acral, or CSD cutaneous melanoma. After stage I, the study was modified to enroll only patients with KIT+ tumors. Vulvovaginal melanoma were substituted for CSD melanoma, given the low rate of KIT+ identified in CSD melanoma10. We report the efficacy and safety of dasatinib in patients accrued to E2607.

The initial E2607 eligibility criteria included histological or cytological confirmed unresectable melanoma of the following subtypes: a) acral, i.e., occurring on the palms, soles, or subungual sites; b) mucosal, or c) solar, defined as cutaneous melanoma with CSD, i.e., presence of solar elastosis in the skin adjacent to the melanoma1. Solar elastosis was determined by local pathology on the primary tumor. The trial was amended in November 2011 to exclude CSD melanoma and include patients with KIT+ melanoma arising from the vagina and/or vulva. While vulvovaginal melanoma constitute ~ 18% of mucosal melanoma, the rate of KIT+ in this subtype is approximately 27% compared to the 12% rate in those arising from the head and neck or anal region 22,23. Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) endorsed this study to aid in accruing these patients.

Additional entry criteria included measurable disease, per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria 1.0, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status 0 to 1; and appropriate hematologic, renal, and liver function. Both treatment naïve and previously treated patients were eligible, including those who received prior limb perfusion, chemotherapy, or immunotherapy. Exclusion criteria included patients with uveal melanoma, prior c-KIT-targeted therapy (i.e. imatinib, nilotinib, or sunitinib), any evidence of bleeding diathesis, prolonged QTc ≥ 480 msec, or any underlying cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Patients with brain metastases were allowed, as long as they had completed radiation or surgical treatment for brain lesions without evidence of progression for at least 8 weeks and no longer required corticosteroids.

Patients were assigned to receive dasatinib 70 mg PO twice daily on an open-label, single-arm basis, with adjustment for toxicity. The medication was taken once in the morning and once in the evening with or without food. The cycle length of dasatinib treatment was 21 days. There were no breaks between cycles.

KIT mutational status was determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequenced either locally or centrally at Massachusetts General Hospital (under supervision by JI), evaluating for mutations in exon 9, 11, 13, 17, or 18. If the local analysis identified c-KIT+ in an exon not listed above, prior approval was required centrally. With central testing, the resulting amplicons were evaluated for mutations, with bi-directional Sanger sequencing using the Big Dye Terminator V1.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit and the automated ABI 3730 DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The following mutations identified in melanoma were evaluated24-27: Exon 11 (Y553N, V559A, N566D, L576P), exon 13 (R634W, K642E), exon 17 (D816H), and exon 18 (A829P). A sample would be considered KIT+ if a second round of PCR amplification and sequencing confirmed the mutant sequence.

The primary endpoint was the response rate [complete response (CR) and partial response (PR)]. Secondary endpoints included the duration of response for responders, progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), and safety profile of dasatinib. PFS was defined as the time from initiation of dasatinib until objective tumor progression or death. OS was defined as the time from dasatinib initiation until death from any cause or last follow-up. Systemic imaging with CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis was performed every 6 weeks (2 cycles). Baseline brain imaging was conducted on all patients. Toxicities and adverse events (AEs) were classified according to Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 3.0. Study participation was discontinued if adverse effects persisted.

E2607 was originally designed to evaluate the response rates in patients with KIT+ and KIT- acral, mucosal, or CSD metastatic melanoma in 56 patients.

Accrual was suspended in 12/10 to allow for analysis of stage I. The interim analysis indicated that the response rate was low in KIT- patients. This led to a design change to enroll acral, mucosal and vulvovaginal melanoma that were KIT+, as determined either locally or centrally. CSD melanoma were no longer eligible. The revised study was reactivated in 11/11.

For the amended protocol (referred to as stage II), the plan was to accrue a maximum of 30 patients (for 28 eligible) with KIT+ melanoma in a two-stage design28. If dasatinib could improve the response rate from 15% to 37% in KIT+ cases, dasatinib would be considered a promising agent. In the first stage of stage II, 15 cases (for 14 eligible) would be accrued. If there were at least 3 responses, stage II accrual would continue to 30 patients. If there were at least 7 responses, this would be considered successful. This design would provide 90% power with a one-sided type I error rate of 0.10.

The response rate was estimated and 90% confidence interval was presented. For stage II response rate, the two-stage adjusted confidence interval was provided. The distributions of PFS and OS were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method29 with 95% CI calculated using Greenwood’s formula. All reported p-values were for 2-sided tests.

Between 5/09-12/10, 57 patients were accrued to stage I of E2607 (Figure 1 and Supplemental Figure). Of the 57 patients, 5 patients were ineligible (3 with newly diagnosed brain metastases and 2 had inadequate baseline measurements) and 1 never started dasatinib. Stage II opened in 11/11 and received endorsement through the Cancer Trials Support Unit in 3/13, with 290 institutions opening the trial at some point during the trial. Among the 15 patients enrolled in the first stage of stage II, there were at least 3 PRs. This allowed continuation to a total of planned 30 patients of stage II. However due to slow accrual, stage II accrual was terminated with a total of 24 patients in 12/15. Of these, 1 patient had inadequate baseline measurements and 1 patient refused dasatinib. Thus, eligible and treated patients (n=51 in stage I and n= 22 in stage II) were considered analyzable and included in the main efficacy analysis. For toxicity analysis, 75 treated patients were included.

Baseline clinical and pathologic features of analyzable patients are described in Table 1. Overall [stages I (n=51) and II (n=22)], patients were predominantly female (54.8%). The median age was 67 (range, 41-97 years), and the majority of patients had an ECOG performance status of 0 (57.5% vs. ECOG 1, 42.3%). The majority had mucosal tumors (n=29, 39.7%), followed by acral (n=22, 28.8%), CSD (n=15, 20.6%: stage I only), and vulvovaginal melanoma (n=8, 11%, stage II only).

Of those accrued in stage I, 3 patients had KIT+ tumors (Table 2), 42 patients had tumors that were KIT-, and 6 patients had mutation testing that was attempted and failed. For stage I, all mutations were assessed centrally. Of KIT+ melanoma, 1 had an acral melanoma and 2 were mucosal. In stage II, KIT mutation status was accessed locally, and all 22 evaluable tumors were KIT+ (8 acral, 6 mucosal, and 8 vulvovaginal). Of those from stage II (Table 2), 14 patients had only an exon 11 (7 with a L576P mutation), 2 had an exon 13, and 3 had exon 17 mutations. Three patients had more than 1 KIT mutation detected on metastatic tissue: 1) an exon 11 (Y568D) and 13 mutation (N655T), 2) exon 11 (D572E) and 17 mutation (D816Y and D820E), 3) and an exon 11 (D759 deletion) and 17 mutation (D816H).

Median follow-up of patients from stage I was 59.5 months (3.9-64 months), and stage II was 23.2 months (6-43 months). In terms of best response in stage I, 3/51 patients achieved a partial response (5.9% (90% CI: 1.6-14.5%): all KIT-: 2 mucosal and 1 CSD), 13 with stable disease (25.5%), 29 with progression of disease (56.9%), and 6 were unevaluable (11.8%): Table 3. Of 22 patients from stage II, 4 had a partial response (PR: 18.2% (Two-stage adjusted 90% CI: 10.4-46.6%), 7 had stable disease (31.8%), 6 progressed (27.7%), 6 were unknown/unevaluable (22.7%). Of those with a partial response in stage II, 3 were acral (2 with an exon 11 mutation and 1 with an exon 13 mutation) and 1 mucosal (exon 11 mutation). Of the 7 patients with a partial response, the median duration of response was 4.2 months (0-17.1 months). Notably, none of 7 patients with a L576P mutation achieved a partial response. Of the 20 patients with an exon 11 and/or exon 13 KIT mutation from stage I or II (including the patient with a dual exon 11 and 13 mutation), the partial response rate was 20% (90% CI: 7.1-40.1%).

Of the 73 evaluable patients, the median PFS was 2.1 months [95% confidence interval (CI); 1.5-2.9 months], as shown in Table 4. When broken down by KIT mutation status, the PFS for KIT+ melanoma (2.7 months; 1.4-5.0 months) was not significantly different compared to KIT- (2.0 months; 1.5-2.9 months) or KIT unknown (1.6 months; 0.7-3.1 months): p=0.11 (Figure 2a). Of those with exon 11 and/or exon 13 mutations, the median PFS was 4.7 months (95% CI; 1.6-5.6 months). When comparing PFS by subtype, acral patients numerically had the longest PFS (2.8 months; 1.6-5.7 months) compared to mucosal (2.5 months; 1.6-4.4 months), vulvovaginal (2.0 months; 1.2-4.0 months), or CSD melanoma (1.3 months; 1.2-2.1 months); however, the number of patients in these subtypes is small and did not reach statistical significance, p=0.17 (Figure 2b).

Of the evaluable patients, all but 14 patients have died (median OS: 7.5 months, 95% CI; 6.0-11.9 months: Table 4). Similar to PFS, the overall survival in those with KIT+ tumors (11.8 months; 4.7-25.7 months) was not significantly longer than those who were KIT- (6.9 months; 5.2-11.6 months) or KIT unknown (7.9 months; 2.4-27.6 months), p=0.56 (Figure 2c). Of those with exon 11 and/or exon 13 mutations, the median OS was 412.3 months (95% CI; 4.7-29.7 months). Overall survival in acral patients (21.1 months; 7.6-28.6 months) was higher compared to other subtypes: mucosal (6.9 months; 4.7-10.5 months), vulvovaginal (8.8 months; 4.0 months-not reached), or CSD melanoma (6.0 months; 2.4-11.6 months); however, this difference was not statistically significant, p=0.19 (Figure 2d).

The starting dose of dasatinib was 70 mg orally twice a day. The worst degree toxicity was Grade III for 33/75 (44%) patients. The following grade III events occurred in ≥ 2 patients: fatigue (n=10), dyspnea (n=9), nausea (n=8), anemia (n=5), pleural effusion (n=4), neutropenia (n=3), vomiting (n=3), anorexia (n-2), hypoxia (n=2), hypertension (n=2), lymphopenia (n=2), myocardial infarction (n=2) (Table 5). One patient had grade IV dyspnea and another had grade IV elevated lipase. Dasatinib was discontinued due to adverse events in 9/75 patients (12%).

While we observed clinical activity with dasatinib in patients with KIT+ melanoma, the response rate in E2607 was lower than expected. No complete responses were identified. The partial response rate was higher in those with KIT+ melanoma (18% in stage II, Two-stage adjusted 90% CI: 10.4-46.6%) as compared to KIT - melanoma (5.9% in stage I, 90% CI: 1.6-14.5%). Among patients with exon 11 and/or 13 KIT mutations, the partial response rate was 20% (90% CI: 7.1-40.1%). Thus, we failed to reject the null hypothesis and did not find a significant increase in response.

E2607 represents a large, collaborative effort to identify patients with this rare somatic mutation in melanoma. Stage II was discontinued early due to slow accrual. Given responses observed with other KIT inhibitors and the inclusion of imatinib in NCCN guidelines, these factors also likely contributed to difficulty with enrollment. While pre-clinical data identified that dasatinib would demonstrate more clinical activity than other KIT inhibitors15,16, these findings did not translate clinically. Though this study had a limited sample size, and prompts caution in comparing this trial to other relatively small studies with KIT-directed tyrosine kinase inhibitors, it was notable that no patients with L576P mutations responded to dasatinib. In gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), some exon 11 substitutions (such as L576P) are associated with a favorable prognosis30. In GIST, approximately 90% of patients respond to imatinib with the presence of a KIT exon 11 mutation and approximately 50% with an exon 9 mutation31. While dasatinib demonstrated a response rate of 32% in a phase II in patients with imatinib and sunitinib-refractory GIST, the pre-specified 6 month PFS rate was not achieved32. Imatinib and sunitinib remain the only FDA approved KIT-directed therapy for GIST.

In addition to KIT, dasatinib inhibits other kinases including SRC family kinases, PDGFβ receptor, and EPHA2. SRC activation regulates melanoma proliferation and invasion33. The broad range of targets likely explains the 3 patients with KIT- melanoma who experienced a PR to dasatinib. E2607 is in accordance with other dasatinib trials in melanoma. In a phase II trial in patients with unresectable melanoma of cutaneous, mucosal, or ocular origin, 2/36 patients (5.6%) of patients achieved a PR: 1 KIT- and 1 KIT+ with a primary subungual melanoma (K462E mutation)34. In a phase I trial of dasatinib plus dacarbazine, 4/29 evaluable patients (13.8%) had a partial response: all KIT- except for 1 NRAS mutation35.

KIT+ is associated with a worse prognosis in melanoma36. Compared to other mutations in melanoma which are associated with one or two hotspot mutations such as BRAF mutations, KIT mutations demonstrate a broader spectrum37. While most of the KIT mutations in GIST are deletions or insertions, the majority in melanoma are point mutations. No responses were seen in patients whose melanomas harbored common KIT mutations, including L576P and K642E mutations. In cell lines harboring a L576P mutation, dasatinib inhibited cellular proliferation and KIT phosphorylation to a greater degree compared to other KIT inhibitors. Though dasatinib is a promiscuous tyrosine kinase inhibitor, it is surprising and unclear why patients with this mutation did not respond. Rather, responses were identified in patients with tumors exhibiting less frequent mutations, including a P577-D579 deletion and one patient with a dual exon 11 and 13 mutation. Biologic significance has not been elucidated in a number of these less common KIT mutation, which may be more passenger in nature. Including these potentially biologically insignificant mutations may dampen the biologic activity observed in a phase II trial.

As a secondary analysis, we explored whether there were any differences in PFS and OS in patients with KIT+ or KIT- melanoma or by melanoma subtype. No such differences were identified, albeit, with the understanding that these subgroups are small and not pre-specified. Of note, the majority of patients stopped therapy due to progression of disease. Approximately 12% of patients discontinued therapy due to adverse events. While there were no unexpected toxicities, it is worth noting that the side effect profile is different than other KIT inhibitors, including pleural effusion and dyspnea. Given the relatively low rate of discontinuation, this does not explain the limited clinical activity.

In addition to stopping the trial early due to slow accrual, there are a number of study limitations. The treatments that patients received before and after going on E2607 were not well captured. This study was activated prior to the approval of anti-CTLA-4 blockade and checkpoint inhibitors. While there were likely a few patients who received these immunotherapeutic agents prior to or after E2607, the exact number is unclear. Recently, single agent activity in acral and mucosal melanoma with anti-PD-1 inhibition has been described as ~ 32% in acral and 23% in mucosal melanoma38. We did not collect tissue at baseline, on treatment, or at progression to assess for markers of response/resistance. While there are a number of proposed mechanisms of secondary resistance to KIT inhibition, including secondary KIT or NRAS mutations7 and activation of downstream pathway signaling, such as ERK and the PI3K/Akt pathway39, we are unable to explore these findings.

In summary, though study closed early due to slow accrual, we observed modest clinical activity with dasatinib in patients with unresectable acral, mucosal, vulvovaginal, and CSD melanoma. Given the clinical activity and minimal toxicity observed with imatinib, we conclude that, at this time, imatinib should remain the KIT inhibitor of choice for patients with unresectable KIT+ melanoma.

Diagram demonstrating the study flow for stages I and II of E2607
