---
reference_id: "PMID:39266530"
title: Bispecific antibodies in the treatment of multiple myeloma.
authors:
- Devasia AJ
- Chari A
- Lancman G
journal: Blood Cancer J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41408-024-01139-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Multiple Myeloma/immunology, drug therapy, therapy"
- "Antibodies, Bispecific/therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bispecific antibodies in the treatment of multiple myeloma.
**Authors:** Devasia AJ, Chari A, Lancman G
**Journal:** Blood Cancer J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41408-024-01139-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41408-024-01139-y)

## Content

1. Blood Cancer J. 2024 Sep 12;14(1):158. doi: 10.1038/s41408-024-01139-y.

Bispecific antibodies in the treatment of multiple myeloma.

Devasia AJ(1), Chari A(2), Lancman G(3).

Author information:
(1)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada. Guido.lancman@uhn.ca.

The treatment paradigm in myeloma is constantly changing. Upfront use of 
monoclonal antibodies like daratumumab along with proteasome inhibitors (PI)s, 
and immune modulators (IMiD)s have significantly improved survival and outcomes, 
but also cause unique challenges at the time of relapse. Engaging immune T cells 
for tumour cell kill with chimeric antigenic T-cell (CAR T-cell) therapy and 
bispecific antibodies have become important therapeutic options in relapsed 
multiple myeloma. Bispecific antibodies are dual antigen targeting constructs 
that engage the T cells to plasma cells through various target antigens like 
B-cell membrane antigen (BCMA), G-protein-coupled receptor family C group 5 
member D (GPRC5D), and Fc receptor-homolog 5 (FcRH5). These agents have proven 
to induce deep and durable responses in heavily pre-treated myeloma patients 
with a predictable safety profile and the ease of off-the-shelf availability. 
Significant research is ongoing to overcome resistance mechanisms like T cell 
exhaustion, target antigen mutation or loss and high disease burden. Various 
trials are also studying these agents as first line options in the newly 
diagnosed setting. These agents play an important role in the relapsed setting, 
and efforts are underway to optimize their sequencing in the myeloma treatment 
algorithm.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41408-024-01139-y
PMCID: PMC11393350
PMID: 39266530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AJD has no conflicts to declare. AC receives 
consultancy from Abbvie, Adaptive, Amgen, Antengene, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Forus, Genetech/Roche, Glaxo Smith Klein, Janssen, Karyopharm, Millenium/Takeda, 
Sanofi/Genzyme; and research funding from Janssen. GL receives consultancy from 
Janssen and Takeda, honoraria from Janssen, Takeda, Forus, Sanofi & Pfizer.