---
reference_id: "PMID:25845505"
title: "Acute kidney injury in severe sepsis: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment recommendations."
authors:
- Keir I
- Kellum JA
journal: J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/vec.12297
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/complications, diagnosis, veterinary"
- Animals
- "Biomarkers/blood, urine"
- Critical Care
- Critical Illness
- "Dog Diseases/blood, diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy, urine"
- Dogs
- Humans
- Hydroxyethyl Starch Derivatives/adverse effects
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Sepsis/complications, diagnosis, veterinary"
- Veterinary Medicine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute kidney injury in severe sepsis: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment recommendations.
**Authors:** Keir I, Kellum JA
**Journal:** J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/vec.12297](https://doi.org/10.1111/vec.12297)

## Content

1. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 2015 Mar-Apr;25(2):200-9. doi: 
10.1111/vec.12297.

Acute kidney injury in severe sepsis: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment 
recommendations.

Keir I(1), Kellum JA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Critical Care Nephrology, The CRISMA (Clinical Research, 
Investigation, and Systems Modeling of Acute Illness) Center, Department of 
Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260.

OBJECTIVE: To review the unique pathophysiology of sepsis-induced acute kidney 
injury (AKI) and highlight the relevant aspects of the Kidney Disease: Improving 
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury that 
may apply to veterinary patients.
DATA SOURCES: Electronic search of MEDLINE database.
HUMAN DATA SYNTHESIS: Sepsis-induced AKI is diagnosed in up to 47% of human ICU 
patients and is seen as a major public health concern associated with increased 
mortality and increased progression to chronic kidney disease (CKD). Consensus 
criteria for the definition and classification of AKI has allowed for accurate 
description of the epidemiology of patients with AKI. AKI develops from a 
complex relationship between the initial insult and activation of inflammation 
and coagulation. In contrast to the traditional view, clinical and experimental 
data dispute the role of renal ischemia-reperfusion in the development of 
sepsis-induced AKI. Renal tubular dysfunction with activation of the 
tubuloglomerular feedback mechanism appears to be a crucial contributor to 
sepsis-induced AKI. Furosemide and n-acetylcysteine (NAC) do not appear to be 
helpful in the treatment of AKI. Hydroxyethyl starches (HES), dopamine, and 
supraphysiological concentrations of chloride are harmful in patients with AKI.
VETERINARY DATA SYNTHESIS: Community and hospital-acquired AKI is a significant 
factor affecting survival in critical ill patients. Sepsis-induced AKI occurs in 
12% of dogs with abdominal sepsis and is an important contributor to mortality. 
Early detection of AKI in hospitalized patients currently offers the best 
opportunity to improve patient outcome. The use of urinary biomarkers to 
diagnose early AKI should be evaluated in critical care patients.
CONCLUSION: Veterinary clinical trials comparing treatment choices with the 
development of AKI are needed to make evidence-based recommendations for the 
prevention and treatment of AKI.

© Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Society 2015.

DOI: 10.1111/vec.12297
PMID: 25845505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]