---
reference_id: "PMID:19462862"
title: "[Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome]."
authors:
- Frank M
journal: Rev Prat
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome].
**Authors:** Frank M
**Journal:** Rev Prat (2009)

## Content

1. Rev Prat. 2009 Apr 20;59(4):459-61.

[Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome].

[Article in French]

Frank M(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre d'investigations cliniques 9201-Inserm, Paris, France. 
michael.frank@egp.aphp.fr

Vascular type Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a rare inherited disease with an 
autosomal dominant trait. The mutation of the COL3A1 gene which encodes type III 
collagen, is responsible of early vascular (spontaneous arterial rupture or 
dissection), digestive (perforation) and obstetrical events (uterine and 
arterial rupture). Diagnosis of the disease is primarily clinical, especially in 
case of characteristic morphologic features. Diagnostic certainty is obtained by 
evidencing the mutation of the COL3A1 gene. Some arterial lesions are suggestive 
of the disease, as dissecting aneurysms of the internal carotid, of the iliac 
arteries, and of the anterior visceral aortic branches, fusiform aneurisms of 
the splenic artery, and the occurrence of a non traumatic direct 
carotid-cavernous fistula. The occurrence of a spontaneous peritonitis or of an 
extensive perineal tear after delivery should also draw physician's attention. 
Because of the unpredictability of arterial or organ rupture, any patient 
diagnosed with vascular type EDS presenting with an acute pain syndrome should 
be considered as a trauma situation and be investigated straightaway by CT-scan 
or MRI testing, in order to eliminate a life threatening complication.

PMID: 19462862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]