---
reference_id: "PMID:1757925"
title: Rheumatoid factors antedating clinical rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Aho K
- Heliövaara M
- Maatela J
- Tuomi T
- Palosuo T
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '1991'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid factors antedating clinical rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Aho K, Heliövaara M, Maatela J, Tuomi T, Palosuo T
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (1991)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 1991 Sep;18(9):1282-4.

Rheumatoid factors antedating clinical rheumatoid arthritis.

Aho K(1), Heliövaara M, Maatela J, Tuomi T, Palosuo T.

Author information:
(1)National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.

The relationship between rheumatoid factors (RF) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
was studied in the Mini-Finland Health Survey. This covered a representative 
sample of the Finnish population over 30 years of age, initially comprising 
8,000 persons, of whom 7,217 participated in the field survey carried out in 
1978-80. The participants were followed using record linkage with the Social 
Insurance Institution's population register to identify patients entitled to 
free medication. Until the end of 1988, 21 persons had developed new 
seropositive RA. In 15 cases, preillness specimens contained elevated levels 
(greater than or equal to 20 IU/ml) of RF. In the remaining 6 cases with RF 
negative preillness specimens, the interval from taking the blood specimen to 
the onset of disease was 4 years or more. RF represent a key element in the 
rheumatoid inflammatory process. Their occurrence in preillness specimens 
suggests that they may have a primary role in the pathogenesis of the disease.

PMID: 1757925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]