---
reference_id: "PMID:30701543"
title: Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors for pulmonary hypertension.
authors:
- Barnes H
- Brown Z
- Burns A
- Williams T
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD012621.pub2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors for pulmonary hypertension.
**Authors:** Barnes H, Brown Z, Burns A, Williams T
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD012621.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD012621.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Jan 31;1(1):CD012621. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD012621.pub2.

Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors for pulmonary hypertension.

Barnes H(1), Brown Z, Burns A, Williams T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Alfred Hospital, Commercial Rd, 
Melbourne, Australia, 3004.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD012621.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary hypertension (PH) comprises a group of complex and 
heterogenous conditions, characterised by elevated pulmonary artery pressure, 
and which left untreated leads to right-heart failure and death. PH includes 
World Health Organisation (WHO) Group 1 pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH); 
Group 2 consists of PH due to left-heart disease (PH-LHD); Group 3 comprises PH 
as a result of lung diseases or hypoxia, or both; Group 4 includes PH due to 
chronic thromboembolic occlusion of pulmonary vasculature (CTEPH), and Group 5 
consists of cases of PH due to unclear and/or multifactorial mechanisms 
including haematological, systemic, or metabolic disorders. Phosphodiesterase 
type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors increase vasodilation and inhibit proliferation.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the efficacy of PDE5 inhibitors for pulmonary 
hypertension in adults and children.
SEARCH METHODS: We performed searches of CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, and 
Web of Science up to 26 September 2018. We handsearched review articles, 
clinical trial registries, and reference lists of retrieved articles.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials that compared any 
PDE5 inhibitor versus placebo, or any other PAH disease-specific therapies, for 
at least 12 weeks. We include separate analyses for each PH group.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We imported studies identified by the search into 
a reference manager database. We retrieved the full-text versions of relevant 
studies, and two review authors independently extracted data. Primary outcomes 
were: change in WHO functional class, six-minute walk distance (6MWD), and 
mortality. Secondary outcomes were haemodynamic parameters, quality of 
life/health status, dyspnoea, clinical worsening (hospitalisation/intervention), 
and adverse events. When appropriate, we performed meta-analyses and subgroup 
analyses by severity of lung function, connective tissue disease diagnosis, and 
radiological pattern of fibrosis. We assessed the evidence using the GRADE 
approach and created 'Summary of findings' tables.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 36 studies with 2999 participants (with pulmonary 
hypertension from all causes) in the final review. Trials were conducted for 14 
weeks on average, with some as long as 12 months. Two trials specifically 
included children.Nineteen trials included group 1 PAH participants. PAH 
participants treated with PDE5 inhibitors were more likely to improve their WHO 
functional class (odds ratio (OR) 8.59, 95% confidence interval (CI) 3.95 to 
18.72; 4 trials, 282 participants), to walk 48 metres further in 6MWD (95% CI 40 
to 56; 8 trials, 880 participants), and were 22% less likely to die over a mean 
duration of 14 weeks (95% CI 0.07 to 0.68; 8 trials, 1119 participants) compared 
to placebo (high-certainty evidence). The number needed to treat to prevent one 
additional death was 32 participants. There was an increased risk of adverse 
events with PDE5 inhibitors, especially headache (OR 1.97, 95% CI 1.33 to 2.92; 
5 trials, 848 participants), gastrointestinal upset (OR 1.63, 95% CI 1.07 to 
2.48; 5 trials, 848 participants), flushing (OR 4.12, 95% CI 1.83 to 9.26; 3 
trials, 748 participants), and muscle aches and joint pains (OR 2.52, 95% CI 
1.59 to 3.99; 4 trials, 792 participants).Data comparing PDE5 inhibitors to 
placebo whilst on other PAH-specific therapy were limited by the small number of 
included trials. Those PAH participants on PDE5 inhibitors plus combination 
therapy walked 19.66 metres further in six minutes (95% CI 9 to 30; 4 trials, 
509 participants) compared to placebo (moderate-certainty evidence). There were 
limited trials comparing PDE5 inhibitors directly with other PAH-specific 
therapy (endothelin receptor antagonists (ERAs)). Those on PDE5 inhibitors 
walked 49 metres further than on ERAs (95% CI 4 to 95; 2 trials, 36 
participants) (low-certainty evidence). There was no evidence of a difference in 
WHO functional class or mortality across both treatments.Five trials compared 
PDE5 inhibitors to placebo in PH secondary to left-heart disease (PH-LHD). The 
quality of data were low due to imprecision and inconsistency across trials. In 
those with PH-LHD there were reduced odds of an improvement in WHO functional 
class using PDE5 inhibitors compared to placebo (OR 0.53, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.87; 3 
trials, 285 participants), and those using PDE5 inhibitors walked 34 metres 
further compared to placebo (95% CI 23 to 46; 3 trials, 284 participants). There 
was no evidence of a difference in mortality. Five trials compared PDE5 
inhibitors to placebo in PH secondary to lung disease/hypoxia, mostly in COPD. 
Data were of low quality due to imprecision of effect and inconsistency across 
trials. There was a small improvement of 27 metres in 6MWD using PDE5 inhibitors 
compared to placebo in those with PH due to lung disease. There was no evidence 
of worsening hypoxia using PDE5 inhibitors, although data were limited. Three 
studies compared PDE5 inhibitors to placebo or other PAH-specific therapy in 
chronic thromboembolic disease. There was no significant difference in any 
outcomes. Data quality was low due to imprecision of effect and heterogeneity 
across trials.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: PDE5 inhibitors appear to have clear beneficial effects in 
group 1 PAH. Sildenafil, tadalafil and vardenafil are all efficacious in this 
clinical setting, and clinicians should consider the side-effect profile for 
each individual when choosing which PDE5 inhibitor to prescribe.While there 
appears to be some benefit for the use of PDE5 inhibitors in PH-left-heart 
disease, it is not clear based on the mostly small, short-term studies, which 
type of left-heart disease stands to benefit. These data suggest possible harm 
in valvular heart disease. There is no clear benefit for PDE5 inhibitors in 
pulmonary hypertension secondary to lung disease or chronic thromboembolic 
disease. Further research is required into the mechanisms of pulmonary 
hypertension secondary to left-heart disease, and cautious consideration of 
which subset of these patients may benefit from PDE5 inhibitors. Future trials 
in PH-LHD should be sufficiently powered, with long-term follow-up, and should 
include invasive haemodynamic data, WHO functional class, six-minute walk 
distance, and clinical worsening.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012621.pub2
PMCID: PMC6354064
PMID: 30701543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HB: H Barnes received a travel scholarship that 
was determined by an independent abstract committee, funded by GSK. GSK had no 
involvement in the determination of recipients. The Cochrane funding arbiter was 
consulted and agreed it did not represent a conflict of interest as GSK had no 
role in the allocation of the travel scholarship. ZB: none known AB: none known 
TW: Actelion Australia Scientific Advisory Board and Research/Education 
unrestricted grant; GSK Australia Scientific Advisory Board; Bayer Australia 
Scientific Advisory Board