---
reference_id: "PMID:36477354"
title: Fine-Mapping and Comparative Genomic Analysis Reveal the Gene Composition at the S and Z Self-incompatibility Loci in Grasses.
authors:
- Rohner M
- Manzanares C
- Yates S
- Thorogood D
- Copetti D
- Lübberstedt T
- Asp T
- Studer B
journal: Mol Biol Evol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac259
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fine-Mapping and Comparative Genomic Analysis Reveal the Gene Composition at the S and Z Self-incompatibility Loci in Grasses.
**Authors:** Rohner M, Manzanares C, Yates S, Thorogood D, Copetti D, Lübberstedt T, Asp T, Studer B
**Journal:** Mol Biol Evol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/molbev/msac259](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msac259)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac259. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac259.

Fine-Mapping and Comparative Genomic Analysis Reveal the Gene Composition at the 
S and Z Self-incompatibility Loci in Grasses.

Rohner M(1), Manzanares C(1), Yates S(1), Thorogood D(2), Copetti D(1)(3), 
Lübberstedt T(4), Asp T(5), Studer B(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Plant Breeding, Institute of Agricultural Sciences, ETH Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences (IBERS), 
Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth, United Kingdom.
(3)Arizona Genomics Institute, School of Plant Sciences, College of Agriculture 
and Life Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Agronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.
(5)Center for Quantitative Genetics and Genomics, Faculty of Technical Sciences, 
Aarhus University, Slagelse, Denmark.

Self-incompatibility (SI) is a genetic mechanism of hermaphroditic plants to 
prevent inbreeding after self-pollination. Allogamous Poaceae species exhibit a 
unique gametophytic SI system controlled by two multi-allelic and independent 
loci, S and Z. Despite intense research efforts in the last decades, the genes 
that determine the initial recognition mechanism are yet to be identified. Here, 
we report the fine-mapping of the Z-locus in perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne 
L.) and provide evidence that the pollen and stigma components are determined by 
two genes encoding DUF247 domain proteins (ZDUF247-I and ZDUF247-II) and the 
gene sZ, respectively. The pollen and stigma determinants are located 
side-by-side and were genetically linked in 10,245 individuals of two 
independent mapping populations segregating for Z. Moreover, they exhibited high 
allelic diversity as well as tissue-specific gene expression, matching the 
expected characteristics of SI determinants known from other systems. Revisiting 
the S-locus using the latest high-quality whole-genome assemblies revealed a 
similar gene composition and structure as found for Z, supporting the hypothesis 
of a duplicated origin of the two-locus SI system of grasses. Ultimately, 
comparative genomic analyses across a wide range of self-compatible and 
self-incompatible Poaceae species revealed that the absence of a functional copy 
of at least one of the six putative SI determinants is accompanied by a 
self-compatible phenotype. Our study provides new insights into the origin and 
evolution of the unique gametophytic SI system in one of the largest and 
economically most important plant families.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac259
PMCID: PMC9825253
PMID: 36477354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]