---
reference_id: "PMID:26983037"
title: Post-Ebola Syndrome, Sierra Leone.
authors:
- Scott JT
- Sesay FR
- Massaquoi TA
- Idriss BR
- Sahr F
- Semple MG
journal: Emerg Infect Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3201/eid2204.151302
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-Ebola Syndrome, Sierra Leone.
**Authors:** Scott JT, Sesay FR, Massaquoi TA, Idriss BR, Sahr F, Semple MG
**Journal:** Emerg Infect Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3201/eid2204.151302](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2204.151302)

## Content

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2016 Apr;22(4):641-6. doi: 10.3201/eid2204.151302.

Post-Ebola Syndrome, Sierra Leone.

Scott JT, Sesay FR, Massaquoi TA, Idriss BR, Sahr F, Semple MG.

Thousands of persons have survived Ebola virus disease. Almost all survivors 
describe symptoms that persist or develop after hospital discharge. A 
cross-sectional survey of the symptoms of all survivors from the Ebola treatment 
unit (ETU) at 34th Regimental Military Hospital, Freetown, Sierra Leone (MH34), 
was conducted after discharge at their initial follow-up appointment within 3 
weeks after their second negative PCR result. From its opening on December 1, 
2014, through March 31, 2015, the MH34 ETU treated 84 persons (8-70 years of 
age) with PCR-confirmed Ebola virus disease, of whom 44 survived. Survivors 
reported musculoskeletal pain (70%), headache (48%), and ocular problems (14%). 
Those who reported headache had had lower admission cycle threshold Ebola PCR 
than did those who did not (p<0.03). This complete survivor cohort from 1 ETU 
enables analysis of the proportion of symptoms of post-Ebola syndrome. The Ebola 
epidemic is waning, but the effects of the disease will remain.

DOI: 10.3201/eid2204.151302
PMCID: PMC4806950
PMID: 26983037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]