---
reference_id: "PMID:29641941"
title: Implementation and new insights in molecular diagnostics for HIV infection.
authors:
- Tsang HF
- Chan LW
- Tong JC
- Wong HT
- Lai CK
- Au TC
- Chan AK
- Ng LP
- Cho WC
- Wong SC
journal: Expert Rev Mol Diagn
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/14737159.2018.1464393
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Implementation and new insights in molecular diagnostics for HIV infection.
**Authors:** Tsang HF, Chan LW, Tong JC, Wong HT, Lai CK, Au TC, Chan AK, Ng LP, Cho WC, Wong SC
**Journal:** Expert Rev Mol Diagn (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737159.2018.1464393](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737159.2018.1464393)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2018 May;18(5):433-441. doi: 
10.1080/14737159.2018.1464393. Epub 2018 Apr 19.

Implementation and new insights in molecular diagnostics for HIV infection.

Tsang HF(1), Chan LW(1), Tong JC(2), Wong HT(3), Lai CK(4), Au TC(5), Chan 
AK(4), Ng LP(4), Cho WC(6), Wong SC(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Health Technology and Informatics, Faculty of Health and 
Social Sciences , The Hong Kong Polytechnic University , Kowloon , Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region , China.
(2)b School of Medical and Health Sciences , Tung Wah College , Kowloon , Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region , China.
(3)c Department of Pathology , Kiang Wu Hospital , Macau Special Administrative 
Region , China.
(4)d Department of Pathology , Queen Elizabeth Hospital , Kowloon , Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region , China.
(5)e State Key Laboratory in Oncology in South China, Sir Y K Pao Centre for 
Cancer, Department of Clinical Oncology, Hong Kong Cancer Institute and Prince 
of Wales Hospital, Shatin , The Chinese University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region , China.
(6)f Department of Clinical Oncology , Queen Elizabeth Hospital , Kowloon , Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region , China.

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a kind of acquired disease that 
breaks down the immune system. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the 
causative agent of AIDS. By the end of 2016, there were 36.7 million people 
living with HIV worldwide. Early diagnosis can alert infected individuals to 
risk behaviors in order to control HIV transmission. Infected individuals are 
also benefited from proper treatment and management upon early diagnosis. Thanks 
to the public awareness of the disease, the annual increase of new HIV 
infections has been slowly declining over the past decades. The advent of 
molecular diagnostics has allowed early detection and better management of HIV 
infected patients. Areas covered: In this review, the authors summarized and 
discussed the current and future technologies in molecular diagnosis as well as 
the biomarkers developed for HIV infection. Expert Commentary: A simple and 
rapid detection of viral load is important for patients and doctors to monitor 
HIV progression and antiretroviral treatment efficiency. In the near future, it 
is expected that new technologies such as digital PCR and CRISPR-based 
technology will play more important role in HIV detection and patient 
management.

DOI: 10.1080/14737159.2018.1464393
PMID: 29641941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]