---
reference_id: "PMID:35994614"
title: Characteristics and Outcomes of Critically Ill Children With Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome.
authors:
- Snooks K
- Scanlon MC
- Remy KE
- Shein SL
- Klein MJ
- Zee-Cheng J
- Rogerson CM
- Rotta AT
- Lin A
- McCluskey CK
- Carroll CL
journal: Pediatr Crit Care Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/PCC.0000000000003054
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics and Outcomes of Critically Ill Children With Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome.
**Authors:** Snooks K, Scanlon MC, Remy KE, Shein SL, Klein MJ, Zee-Cheng J, Rogerson CM, Rotta AT, Lin A, McCluskey CK, Carroll CL
**Journal:** Pediatr Crit Care Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PCC.0000000000003054](https://doi.org/10.1097/PCC.0000000000003054)

## Content

1. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2022 Nov 1;23(11):e530-e535. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0000000000003054. Epub 2022 Aug 22.

Characteristics and Outcomes of Critically Ill Children With Multisystem 
Inflammatory Syndrome.

Snooks K(1), Scanlon MC(1), Remy KE(2), Shein SL(2), Klein MJ(3), Zee-Cheng 
J(4), Rogerson CM(4), Rotta AT(5), Lin A(6), McCluskey CK(7), Carroll CL(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western University School of Medicine, Rainbow 
Babies and Children's Hospital, Cleveland, OH.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Children's Hospital 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University of School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, West Virginia University School of Medicine, 
Morgantown, WV.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Connecticut Children's, Hartford, CT.

OBJECTIVES: To characterize the prevalence of pediatric critical illness from 
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) and to assess the 
influence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) strain 
on outcomes.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING: Database evaluation using the Virtual Pediatric Systems Database.
PATIENTS: All children with MIS-C admitted to the PICU in 115 contributing 
hospitals between January 1, 2020, and June 30, 2021.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Of the 145,580 children admitted to the PICU 
during the study period, 1,338 children (0.9%) were admitted with MIS-C with the 
largest numbers of children admitted in quarter 1 (Q1) of 2021 ( n = 626). The 
original SARS-CoV-2 viral strain and the D614G Strain were the predominant 
strains through 2020, with Alpha B.1.1.7 predominating in Q1 and quarter 2 (Q2) 
of 2021. Overall, the median PICU length of stay (LOS) was 2.7 days (25-75% 
interquartile range [IQR], 1.6-4.7 d) with a median hospital LOS of 6.6 days 
(25-75% IQR, 4.7-9.3 d); 15.2% received mechanical ventilation with a median 
duration of mechanical ventilation of 3.1 days (25-75% IQR, 1.9-5.8 d), and 
there were 11 hospital deaths. During the study period, there was a significant 
decrease in the median PICU and hospital LOS and a decrease in the frequency of 
mechanical ventilation, with the most significant decrease occurring between 
quarter 3 and quarter 4 (Q4) of 2020. Children admitted to a PICU from the 
general care floor or from another ICU/step-down unit had longer PICU LOS than 
those admitted directly from an emergency department.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall mortality from MIS-C was low, but the disease burden was 
high. There was a peak in MIS-C cases during Q1 of 2021, following a shift in 
viral strains in Q1 of 2021. However, an improvement in MIS-C outcomes starting 
in Q4 of 2020 suggests that viral strain was not the driving factor for outcomes 
in this population.

Copyright © 2022 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the World 
Federation of Pediatric Intensive and Critical Care Societies.

DOI: 10.1097/PCC.0000000000003054
PMCID: PMC9624236
PMID: 35994614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Remy’s institution received funding from the 
National Institute of General Medical Sciences (K08 7K08GM129763); he received 
support for article research from the National Institutes of Health. Dr. Shein 
received funding from Hill Ward Henderson. Dr. Rotta received funding from 
Vapotherm, Breas US, and Elsevier. Dr. Lin’s institution received funding from 
University of California San Francisco subawards Department of Health and Human 
Services: ASPR U3REP190616 and HRSA U1I43532. The remaining authors have 
disclosed that they do not have any potential conflicts of interest.