---
reference_id: "PMID:25196205"
title: Frequency and features of TP53 mutation in 30 Chinese patients with sporadic basal cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Wang YM
- Huang YS
- Ma ZH
- Bu DF
- Wang Y
- Tu P
- Li H
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/ced.12411
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Asian People/genetics
- Basal Cell Carcinoma/genetics
- China
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- "Genes, p53"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Patched Receptors
- Patched-1 Receptor
- Point Mutation/radiation effects
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics"
- Skin Neoplasms/genetics
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency and features of TP53 mutation in 30 Chinese patients with sporadic basal cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Wang YM, Huang YS, Ma ZH, Bu DF, Wang Y, Tu P, Li H
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ced.12411](https://doi.org/10.1111/ced.12411)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2014 Oct;39(7):829-34. doi: 10.1111/ced.12411. Epub 2014
Sep  5.

Frequency and features of TP53 mutation in 30 Chinese patients with sporadic
basal cell carcinoma.

Wang YM(1), Huang YS, Ma ZH, Bu DF, Wang Y, Tu P, Li H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China;
Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Diagnosis on Dermatoses, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is a prevalent form of nonmelanoma skin
cancer. Although numerous studies in white populations suggest that mutations in
the TP53 gene play an important role in the development of BCC, it is not clear
whether this is also the case in East Asian populations such as in China.
AIM: To investigate the frequency and the features of TP53 mutation in sporadic
BCC in a Chinese population.
METHODS: In total, 30 patients with sporadic BCC, who had previously taken part
in a study on PTCH1 mutations, were enrolled. BCC and control cells were
obtained by laser-capture microdissection, and DNA was amplified and sequenced
for analysis of TP53 mutations.
RESULTS: In the 30 BCC samples, 6 TP53 point mutations were found (frequency of
20%), and 4 of these 6 mutations had ultraviolet (UV)-specific alterations.
Combining these results with those of the previous study on PTCH1 mutations, we
found that two patients with had three types of genetic alterations (each had
two PTCH1 mutations and one TP53 point mutation). A further two patients each
had one PTCH1 mutation and one UV signature TP53 mutation. In addition, the
total number of UV-specific mutations of PTCH1 and TP53 accounted for 20% of the
total patient group.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of TP53 mutation in BCC in our Chinese subjects was
lower than that reported for white populations. Many of the patients carried
mutations of other genes in addition to of TP53. The majority of TP53 mutations
were UV-induced specific alterations. However, the results of the two studies on
TP53 and PTCH1 indicated that the incidence of UV-specific mutations is much
lower in Chinese than in white populations.

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.12411
PMID: 25196205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
