---
reference_id: "PMID:23823268"
title: A taste of periodic fever syndromes.
authors:
- Koyfman A
- Lovallo E
- Hazen MM
- Chiang VW
journal: Pediatr Emerg Care
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/PEC.0b013e318298df8b
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A taste of periodic fever syndromes.
**Authors:** Koyfman A, Lovallo E, Hazen MM, Chiang VW
**Journal:** Pediatr Emerg Care (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PEC.0b013e318298df8b](https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0b013e318298df8b)

## Content

1. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2013 Jul;29(7):842-8; quiz 849-51. doi: 
10.1097/PEC.0b013e318298df8b.

A taste of periodic fever syndromes.

Koyfman A(1), Lovallo E, Hazen MM, Chiang VW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Illinois College of Medicine 
at Peoria, OSF Saint Francis Medical Center, Peoria, IL 61637, USA. 
akoyfman8@gmail.com

Periodic fevers are acquired or inherited disorders of innate immunity, which 
were first described in the 1940s. The patients are typically young at onset and 
have regularly recurring fevers for a few days to a few weeks with systemic 
inflammatory symptoms that are interrupted by symptom-free periods. There is a 
variety of clinical manifestations including gastrointestinal complaints, 
myalgias, arthralgias, and rash. A differential diagnosis in these patients may 
include recurrent infections, other inflammatory disorders, and neoplastic 
disease. This clinical review focuses on a sample of autoinflammatory disorders 
including familial Mediterranean fever, tumor necrosis factor receptor 
1-associated periodic syndrome, hyperimmunoglobulinemia D syndrome, the 
cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome, and periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, 
pharyngitis, and cervical adenitis syndrome. We review the basics, pertinent 
clinical and laboratory features, and management of each entity.

DOI: 10.1097/PEC.0b013e318298df8b
PMID: 23823268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]