---
reference_id: "PMID:9927656"
title: Mitochondrial disease in superoxide dismutase 2 mutant mice.
authors:
- Melov S
- Coskun P
- Patel M
- Tuinstra R
- Cottrell B
- Jun AS
- Zastawny TH
- Dizdaroglu M
- Goodman SI
- Huang TT
- Miziorko H
- Epstein CJ
- Wallace DC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.3.846
keywords:
- "Aconitate Hydratase/deficiency, metabolism"
- Animals
- Brain/metabolism
- "Carboxylic Acids/metabolism, urine"
- "Crosses, Genetic"
- DNA Damage
- Female
- Fumarate Hydratase/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Mitochondria, Heart/metabolism"
- "Mitochondria, Muscle/metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Myopathies/enzymology, genetics"
- Oxidative Phosphorylation
- "Oxo-Acid-Lyases/deficiency, metabolism"
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- "Superoxide Dismutase/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial disease in superoxide dismutase 2 mutant mice.
**Authors:** Melov S, Coskun P, Patel M, Tuinstra R, Cottrell B, Jun AS, Zastawny TH, Dizdaroglu M, Goodman SI, Huang TT, Miziorko H, Epstein CJ, Wallace DC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.3.846](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.3.846)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Feb 2;96(3):846-51. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.3.846.

Mitochondrial disease in superoxide dismutase 2 mutant mice.

Melov S(1), Coskun P, Patel M, Tuinstra R, Cottrell B, Jun AS, Zastawny TH,
Dizdaroglu M, Goodman SI, Huang TT, Miziorko H, Epstein CJ, Wallace DC.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Oxidative stress has been implicated in many diseases. The chief source of
reactive oxygen species within the cell is the mitochondrion. We have
characterized a variety of the biochemical and metabolic effects of inactivation
of the mouse gene for the mitochondrial superoxide dismutase (CD1-Sod2(tm1Cje)).
The Sod2 mutant mice exhibit a tissue-specific inhibition of the respiratory
chain enzymes NADH-dehydrogenase (complex I) and succinate dehydrogenase
(complex II), inactivation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle enzyme aconitase,
development of a urine organic aciduria in conjunction with a partial defect in
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase, and accumulation of oxidative DNA damage.
These results indicate that the increase in mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species can result in biochemical aberrations with features reminiscent of
mitochondrial myopathy, Friedreich ataxia, and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA
lyase deficiency.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.3.846
PMCID: PMC15313
PMID: 9927656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
