---
reference_id: "PMID:11528396"
title: Mutations in the gene encoding immunoglobulin mu-binding protein 2 cause spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1.
authors:
- Grohmann K
- Schuelke M
- Diers A
- Hoffmann K
- Lucke B
- Adams C
- Bertini E
- Leonhardt-Horti H
- Muntoni F
- Ouvrier R
- Pfeufer A
- Rossi R
- Van Maldergem L
- Wilmshurst JM
- Wienker TF
- Sendtner M
- Rudnik-Schöneborn S
- Zerres K
- Hübner C
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/ng703
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Carrier Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 11"
- DNA Primers
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/genetics"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Respiratory Distress Syndrome, Newborn/genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding immunoglobulin mu-binding protein 2 cause spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1.
**Authors:** Grohmann K, Schuelke M, Diers A, Hoffmann K, Lucke B, Adams C, Bertini E, Leonhardt-Horti H, Muntoni F, Ouvrier R, Pfeufer A, Rossi R, Van Maldergem L, Wilmshurst JM, Wienker TF, Sendtner M, Rudnik-Schöneborn S, Zerres K, Hübner C
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng703](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng703)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Sep;29(1):75-7. doi: 10.1038/ng703.

Mutations in the gene encoding immunoglobulin mu-binding protein 2 cause spinal 
muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1.

Grohmann K(1), Schuelke M, Diers A, Hoffmann K, Lucke B, Adams C, Bertini E, 
Leonhardt-Horti H, Muntoni F, Ouvrier R, Pfeufer A, Rossi R, Van Maldergem L, 
Wilmshurst JM, Wienker TF, Sendtner M, Rudnik-Schöneborn S, Zerres K, Hübner C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropediatrics, Charité, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Humboldt 
University, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

Classic spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is caused by mutations in the telomeric 
copy of SMN1. Its product is involved in various cellular processes, including 
cytoplasmic assembly of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins, pre-mRNA 
processing and activation of transcription. Spinal muscular atrophy with 
respiratory distress (SMARD) is clinically and genetically distinct from SMA. 
Here we demonstrate that SMARD type 1 (SMARD1) results from mutations in the 
gene encoding immunoglobulin micro-binding protein 2 (IGHMBP2; on chromosome 
11q13.2-q13.4). In six SMARD1 families, we detected three recessive missense 
mutations (exons 5, 11 and 12), two nonsense mutations (exons 2 and 5), one 
frameshift deletion (exon 5) and one splice donor-site mutation (intron 13). 
Mutations in mouse Ighmbp2 (ref. 14) have been shown to be responsible for 
spinal muscular atrophy in the neuromuscular degeneration (nmd) mouse, whose 
phenotype resembles the SMARD1 phenotype. Like the SMN1 product, IGHMBP2 
colocalizes with the RNA-processing machinery in both the cytoplasm and the 
nucleus. Our results show that IGHMBP2 is the second gene found to be defective 
in spinal muscular atrophy, and indicate that IGHMBP2 and SMN share common 
functions important for motor neuron maintenance and integrity in mammals.

DOI: 10.1038/ng703
PMID: 11528396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]