---
reference_id: "PMID:9218066"
title: "Review article: the therapy of gastrointestinal infections associated with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome."
authors:
- Wilcox CM
- Mönkemüller KE
journal: Aliment Pharmacol Ther
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2036.1997.00159.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review article: the therapy of gastrointestinal infections associated with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
**Authors:** Wilcox CM, Mönkemüller KE
**Journal:** Aliment Pharmacol Ther (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2036.1997.00159.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2036.1997.00159.x)

## Content

1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 1997 Jun;11(3):425-43. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-2036.1997.00159.x.

Review article: the therapy of gastrointestinal infections associated with the 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.

Wilcox CM(1), Mönkemüller KE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama of Birmingham 35294-0007.

Although there have been dramatic strides in the therapy of human 
immunodeficiency virus infection over the last few years, the number of infected 
people world-wide is tremendous and, at least in developing countries, continues 
to expand. Complications which involve the gastrointestinal tract are common in 
these patients, because the gut is a major site for involvement by opportunistic 
infections and neoplasms in patients with the acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome. It is important to recognize the clinical spectrum of gastrointestinal 
diseases, as well as the appropriate and most cost-effective diagnostic 
strategies, as therapies for a number of these disorders are both widely 
available and high effective. This review summarizes the major gastrointestinal 
infections which are seen in patients with the acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome, and their treatment.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2036.1997.00159.x
PMCID: PMC7159661
PMID: 9218066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]