---
reference_id: "PMID:25361920"
title: "Pathogenesis of post primary tuberculosis: immunity and hypersensitivity in the development of cavities."
authors:
- Hunter RL
- Actor JK
- Hwang SA
- Karev V
- Jagannath C
journal: Ann Clin Lab Sci
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of post primary tuberculosis: immunity and hypersensitivity in the development of cavities.
**Authors:** Hunter RL, Actor JK, Hwang SA, Karev V, Jagannath C
**Journal:** Ann Clin Lab Sci (2014)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2014 Fall;44(4):365-87.

Pathogenesis of post primary tuberculosis: immunity and hypersensitivity in the 
development of cavities.

Hunter RL(1), Actor JK(2), Hwang SA(2), Karev V(3), Jagannath C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas-Houston 
Medical School Houston, Texas, USA Robert.L.Hunter@uth.tmc.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas-Houston 
Medical School Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Scientific-Research Institute of Childhood Diseases of the Federal Medical 
and Biological Agency, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

M. Tuberculosis (MTB) is an obligate human parasite even though humans are more 
resistant than any of the animals used for study. It is a human parasite because 
only humans develop post primary tuberculosis (TB) in their lungs that mediates 
transmission of infection to new hosts. The extreme paucity of human lung tissue 
with post primary TB has forced scientists to study animal models and human 
tissues that do not have the disease. Consequently, the unique features of post 
primary TB remain largely unknown and misconceptions are widely accepted. This 
manuscript presents a revised pathogenesis of post primary TB based on studies 
of lung tissues of thousands of patients by multiple authors and related 
literature. Primary TB stimulates systemic immunity that kills organisms and 
heals granulomas resulting in both protection from disseminated TB and 
resistance to new infection. Post primary TB, in contrast, requires systemic 
immunity that it subverts to produce local susceptibility in the apex of the 
lung. It begins in the part of lung with the lowest ventilation, perfusion and 
movement and then proceeds to paralyze alveolar macrophages, block the exits and 
suppress inflammation to further isolate the area with post obstructive 
pneumonia. This provides a safe place for a small number of MTB to drive 
prolonged accumulation of host lipids and mycobacterial antigens in an otherwise 
immune person. After many months, the affected lung suddenly undergoes caseation 
necrosis with vanishingly few MTB. The necrotic tissue fragments to produce a 
cavity or hardens to develop fibrocaseous disease. Evidence suggests that this 
is triggered by a hypersensitivity reaction against cord factor and then 
progresses as the Koch phenomenon against many antigens. MTB grow in perfusion 
only in dead tissue or on a cavity wall. We anticipate that a more accurate 
understanding of the pathogenesis of post primary TB will facilitate focusing 
modern technologies to produce rapid advances in understanding and combating TB.

© 2014 by the Association of Clinical Scientists, Inc.

PMID: 25361920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]