---
reference_id: "PMID:32702750"
title: Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias.
authors:
- Iolascon A
- Andolfo I
- Russo R
journal: Blood
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2019000948
keywords:
- "Anemia, Dyserythropoietic, Congenital/classification, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Animals
- Blood Transfusion
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- "Glycoproteins/genetics, physiology"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Hepcidins
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Hydrops Fetalis/diagnosis, etiology"
- Iron Overload/etiology
- "Kruppel-Like Transcription Factors/genetics, physiology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Peptide Hormones/physiology
- "Vesicular Transport Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Zebrafish
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias.
**Authors:** Iolascon A, Andolfo I, Russo R
**Journal:** Blood (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2019000948](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2019000948)

## Content

1. Blood. 2020 Sep 10;136(11):1274-1283. doi: 10.1182/blood.2019000948.

Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias.

Iolascon A(1)(2), Andolfo I(1)(2), Russo R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, "Federico II" 
University of Naples, Naples, Italy; and.
(2)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy.

Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) are a heterogeneous group of 
inherited anemias that affect the normal differentiation-proliferation pathways 
of the erythroid lineage. They belong to the wide group of ineffective 
erythropoiesis conditions that mainly result in monolinear cytopenia. CDAs are 
classified into the 3 major types (I, II, III), plus the transcription 
factor-related CDAs, and the CDA variants, on the basis of the distinctive 
morphological, clinical, and genetic features. Next-generation sequencing has 
revolutionized the field of diagnosis of and research into CDAs, with reduced 
time to diagnosis, and ameliorated differential diagnosis in terms of 
identification of new causative/modifier genes and polygenic conditions. The 
main improvements regarding CDAs have been in the study of iron metabolism in 
CDAII. The erythroblast-derived hormone erythroferrone specifically inhibits 
hepcidin production, and its role in the mediation of hepatic iron overload has 
been dissected out. We discuss here the most recent advances in this field 
regarding the molecular genetics and pathogenic mechanisms of CDAs, through an 
analysis of the clinical and molecular classifications, and the complications 
and clinical management of patients. We summarize also the main cellular and 
animal models developed to date and the possible future therapies.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2019000948
PMID: 32702750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]