---
reference_id: "PMID:35139868"
title: "Loss of Drosophila Coq8 results in impaired survival, locomotor deficits and photoreceptor degeneration."
authors:
- Hura AJ
- Hawley HR
- Tan WJ
- Penny RJ
- Jacobsen JC
- Fitzsimons HL
journal: Mol Brain
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13041-022-00900-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Ataxia/genetics
- Drosophila/metabolism
- Female
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- Muscle Weakness
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics, metabolism"
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of Drosophila Coq8 results in impaired survival, locomotor deficits and photoreceptor degeneration.
**Authors:** Hura AJ, Hawley HR, Tan WJ, Penny RJ, Jacobsen JC, Fitzsimons HL
**Journal:** Mol Brain (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13041-022-00900-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13041-022-00900-3)

## Content

1. Mol Brain. 2022 Feb 9;15(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s13041-022-00900-3.

Loss of Drosophila Coq8 results in impaired survival, locomotor deficits and
photoreceptor degeneration.

Hura AJ(1), Hawley HR(1), Tan WJ(1), Penny RJ(1), Jacobsen JC(2), Fitzsimons
HL(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Natural Sciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
(2)Centre for Brain Research, School of Biological Sciences, The University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)School of Natural Sciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
h.l.fitzsimons@massey.ac.nz.

Coenzyme Q8A encodes the homologue of yeast coq8, an ATPase that is required for
the biosynthesis of Coenzyme Q10, an essential component of the electron
transport chain. Mutations in COQ8A in humans result in CoQ10 deficiency, the
clinical features of which include early-onset cerebellar ataxia, seizures and
intellectual disability. The rapid advancement of massively parallel sequencing
has resulted in the identification of more than 40 new mutations in COQ8A and
functional studies are required to confirm causality and to further research
into determining the specific mechanisms through which the mutations result in
loss of function. To that end, a Drosophila model of Coq8 deficiency was
developed and characterized to determine its appropriateness as a model system
to further explore the role of Coq8 in the brain, and for functional
characterisation of Coq8 mutations. Pan-neuronal RNAi knockdown of Coq8 was
largely lethal, with female escapers displaying severe locomotor deficits.
Knockdown of Coq8 in the eye resulted in degeneration of photoreceptors,
progressive necrosis and increased generation of reactive oxygen species.
Reintroduction of wild-type Coq8 restored normal function, however expression of
human wild-type COQ8A exacerbated the eye phenotype, suggesting it was acting as
a dominant-negative. This model is therefore informative for investigating the
function of Drosophila Coq8, however human COQ8A mutations cannot be assessed as
hCOQ8A does not rescue Coq8 deficiency.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13041-022-00900-3
PMCID: PMC8827264
PMID: 35139868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no competing
interests.
