---
reference_id: "PMID:17845145"
title: Schizophrenia endophenotypes as treatment targets.
authors:
- Thaker GK
journal: Expert Opin Ther Targets
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1517/14728222.11.9.1189
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schizophrenia endophenotypes as treatment targets.
**Authors:** Thaker GK
**Journal:** Expert Opin Ther Targets (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1517/14728222.11.9.1189](https://doi.org/10.1517/14728222.11.9.1189)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2007 Sep;11(9):1189-206. doi: 
10.1517/14728222.11.9.1189.

Schizophrenia endophenotypes as treatment targets.

Thaker GK(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Maryland Psychiatric Research 
Center, Department of Psychiatry, PO Box 21247, Baltimore, MD 21228, USA. 
gthaker@mprc.umaryland.edu

Schizophrenia is a complex disorder that encompasses several clinical symptom 
domains and functional impairments. Existing treatments are meager, effective 
only against positive symptoms without benefiting negative symptoms and 
functional impairments. The drug discovery process has focused mostly on 
targeting D2 dopamine receptors. This followed the serendipitous discovery of 
the antipsychotic effects of chlorpromazine in the 1950s and, more recently, 
clozapine. There is a need to identify novel mechanisms in order to discover 
novel drugs that are effective against each of the symptom clusters and 
functional impairments associated with the illness. Neurophysiological studies 
in schizophrenia over the past 3 decades have identified several brain deficits 
that are stable, using valid animal models that are related to the etiology of 
the disorder. Many of these deficits are distinct and heritable; these are 
called endophenotypes. Many have well-characterized neurobiology and may 
therefore provide molecular targets for drug development. In addition, these 
endophenotypes help reduce the heterogeneity by identifying homogeneous 
subgroups of patients with similar pathophysiology, symptoms and functional 
deficits. Clinical trials of drugs, whose development is based on an 
endophenotype, will have enhanced statistical power when the trial is carried 
out in an appropriate cohort of subjects using outcome measures related to the 
corresponding endophenotype. Furthermore, genes that are associated with these 
endophenotypes are beginning to be identified. These findings will identify 
novel molecular targets for drug development with treatment implications for 
clinical symptom complex and functional deficits marked by the endophenotype. As 
endophenotypes are present during childhood and adolescence, novel drugs that 
are developed on the basis of this subgroup could have implications for 
preventive strategies in schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1517/14728222.11.9.1189
PMID: 17845145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]