---
reference_id: "PMID:8571172"
title: Hepatitis B virus immunopathology.
authors:
- Chisari FV
- Ferrari C
journal: Springer Semin Immunopathol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1007/BF00196169
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B virus immunopathology.
**Authors:** Chisari FV, Ferrari C
**Journal:** Springer Semin Immunopathol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00196169](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00196169)

## Content

1. Springer Semin Immunopathol. 1995;17(2-3):261-81. doi: 10.1007/BF00196169.

Hepatitis B virus immunopathology.

Chisari FV(1), Ferrari C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Approximately 5% of the world population is infected by the hepatitis B virus 
(HBV) which causes a necroinflammatory liver disease of variable duration and 
severity. Chronically infected patients with active liver disease carry a high 
risk of developing cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. The immune response 
to HBV-encoded antigens is responsible both for viral clearance and for disease 
pathogenesis during this infection. While the humoral antibody response to viral 
envelope antigens contributes to the clearance of circulating virus particles, 
the cellular immune response to the envelope, nucleocapsid and polymerase 
antigens eliminates infected cells. The class I- and class II-restricted T cell 
responses to the virus are vigorous, polyclonal and multispecific in acutely 
infected patients who successfully clear the virus, and they are relatively weak 
and more narrowly focussed in chronically infected patients who do not. The 
pathogenetic and antiviral potential of the cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) 
response to HBV have been demonstrated by the induction of a severe 
necroinflammatory liver disease following the adoptive transfer of HBV surface 
antigen-specific CTL into HBV transgenic mice, and by the noncytolytic 
suppression of viral gene expression and replication in the same animals by a 
post-transcriptional mechanism mediated by interferon-gamma, tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha and interleukin-2. The dominant cause of viral persistence during 
HBV infection is the development of a weak antiviral immune response to the 
viral antigens. While neonatal tolerance probably plays an important role in 
viral persistence in patients infected at birth, the basis for poor 
responsiveness in adult onset infection is not well understood and requires 
further analysis. Viral evasion by epitope inactivation and T cell receptor 
antagonism may contribute to the worsening of viral persistence in the setting 
of an ineffective immune response, as can the incomplete down-regulation of 
viral gene expression and the infection of immunologically privileged tissues. 
Chronic liver cell injury and the attendant inflammatory and regenerative 
responses create the mutagenic and mitogenic stimuli for the development of DNA 
damage that can cause hepatocellular carcinoma. Elucidation of the immunological 
and virological basis for HBV persistence may yield immunotherapeutic and 
antiviral strategies to terminate chronic HBV infection and reduce the risk of 
its life-threatening sequellae.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00196169
PMID: 8571172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]