---
reference_id: "PMID:23318126"
title: "Prevalence and natural history of pain in adults with multiple sclerosis: systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Foley PL
- Vesterinen HM
- Laird BJ
- Sena ES
- Colvin LA
- Chandran S
- MacLeod MR
- Fallon MT
journal: Pain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.12.002
keywords:
- Adult
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Disease Progression
- "Headache/epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Multiple Sclerosis/complications
- "Neuralgia/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Pain/epidemiology, etiology"
- Pain Measurement
- Prevalence
- Recurrence
- Regression Analysis
- Sex Factors
- "Spasm/complications, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Trigeminal Neuralgia/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and natural history of pain in adults with multiple sclerosis: systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Foley PL, Vesterinen HM, Laird BJ, Sena ES, Colvin LA, Chandran S, MacLeod MR, Fallon MT
**Journal:** Pain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pain.2012.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2012.12.002)

## Content

1. Pain. 2013 May;154(5):632-642. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.12.002. Epub 2012 Dec
14.

Prevalence and natural history of pain in adults with multiple sclerosis:
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Foley PL(1), Vesterinen HM, Laird BJ, Sena ES, Colvin LA, Chandran S, MacLeod
MR, Fallon MT.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Department of Palliative Medicine, Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK European Palliative Care Research Centre (PRC),
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway The Florey
Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Melbourne Brain Centre, University
of Melbourne, Heidelberg, Australia Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

The prevalence, associations, and natural history of pain in multiple sclerosis
(MS) are poorly understood. The objective of this work was to study the
prevalence of pain syndromes in MS both cross-sectionally, and longitudinally
during the MS disease course. We systematically identified prospective studies
detailing pain prevalence in definite MS. We used pooled prevalence estimates,
explored heterogeneity using meta-regression, and analysed prevalence during the
disease course using both estimates at disease milestones and longitudinal
studies. Twenty-eight articles (7101 subjects) describing overall pain, or pain
syndromes, met inclusion criteria. Pooled overall pain prevalence (17 studies,
5319 subjects) was 63% (95% confidence interval [CI] 55-70%). Marked
heterogeneity in this estimate was not significantly explained by selected study
design variables (use of outpatient sample, timeframe prior to study over which
pain was assessed) or sample demographic variables (mean Expanded Disability
Status Scale, mean disease duration, proportion of female sex, and proportion
with progressive MS). We quantified prevalence of headache (43%; 95% CI 33-52%),
neuropathic extremity pain (26%; 95% CI 7-53%), back pain (20%; 95% CI 13-28%),
painful spasms (15%; 95% CI 8.5-23%), Lhermitte sign (16%; 95% CI 10-25%), and
trigeminal neuralgia (3.8%; 95% CI 2-6%) in included studies. Prevalence of pain
at MS disease milestones (prior to onset, at onset, and at relapse) and during
longitudinal follow-up was poorly described. Pain is common in MS, as are
specific pain syndromes. The clinical associations and natural history of pain
in MS require clarification. Future study could be enhanced by standardised
study design.

Copyright © 2012 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.12.002
PMID: 23318126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
