---
reference_id: "PMID:17920542"
title: "Corticosteroids for multiple sclerosis: I. Application for treating exacerbations."
authors:
- Frohman EM
- Shah A
- Eggenberger E
- Metz L
- Zivadinov R
- Stüve O
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.07.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Corticosteroids for multiple sclerosis: I. Application for treating exacerbations.
**Authors:** Frohman EM, Shah A, Eggenberger E, Metz L, Zivadinov R, Stüve O
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nurt.2007.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nurt.2007.07.008)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2007 Oct;4(4):618-26. doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.07.008.

Corticosteroids for multiple sclerosis: I. Application for treating 
exacerbations.

Frohman EM(1), Shah A, Eggenberger E, Metz L, Zivadinov R, Stüve O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75235, USA. elliot.frohman@utsouthwestern.edu

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disorder characterized 
by a multiphasic course of neurological exacerbations, periods of clinical 
remission, and, in most patients, ultimately progressive deterioration of 
functional capabilities. The relapsing-remitting phase of the disease involves 
acute interruption in neurological functioning relating to areas of inflammation 
in discrete central-tract systems. The treatment of MS exacerbations with 
anti-inflammatory agents such as corticosteroids and adrenocorticotropic hormone 
has represented an established practice throughout the neurology community. 
Although there is scientific rationale supporting application of these agents 
for this purpose, the broad diversity of approaches to using these drugs in 
clinical practice is a derivative of expert opinion and anecdotal experience. 
Ultimately, the treatment of MS-related exacerbations is part science, but 
mostly art. This review discusses the pharmacology of these agents, to better 
understand how they may act to mitigate attacks and to provide some practical 
formulations for how to use them in the clinic for the benefit of patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.07.008
PMCID: PMC7479685
PMID: 17920542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]