---
reference_id: "PMID:15086927"
title: Nephrin gene (NPHS1) in patients with minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS).
authors:
- Lahdenkari AT
- Kestilä M
- Holmberg C
- Koskimies O
- Jalanko H
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00583.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Drug Resistance
- Female
- Genetic Variation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Membrane Proteins
- Mutation
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Proteins/genetics
- Steroids/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephrin gene (NPHS1) in patients with minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS).
**Authors:** Lahdenkari AT, Kestilä M, Holmberg C, Koskimies O, Jalanko H
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00583.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00583.x)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2004 May;65(5):1856-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00583.x.

Nephrin gene (NPHS1) in patients with minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS).

Lahdenkari AT(1), Kestilä M, Holmberg C, Koskimies O, Jalanko H.

Author information:
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents and Biomedicum Helsinki, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2004 Oct;66(4):1715-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.938_9.x.

BACKGROUND: Minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS) is a major problem in 
pediatric nephrology. While the pathogenesis of MCNS is not known, the latest 
discoveries in the genetic diseases indicate that glomerular epithelial cells 
(podocytes) and the slit diaphragm play a primary role in development of 
proteinuria. Because nephrin is known to be a major component of the slit 
diaphragm, we analyzed the structure of nephrin gene (NPHS1) in patients with 
MCNS of different severity.
METHODS: Clinical data and DNA samples were collected from 25 adults who had 
biopsy-proven MCNS in childhood. A direct sequencing was performed to all 29 
exons of the NPHS1 gene. The significance of the findings was evaluated by 
similar analysis of DNA samples from 25 healthy control patients.
RESULTS: The analysis of NPHS1 revealed no specific MCNS-associated mutation. 
However, 5 of the 25 MCNS patients had heterozygous allelic variants leading to 
nonconservative amino acid substitutions not previously reported (G879R; R800C; 
T294I; A916S). One of the five patients also had the Fin-major mutation, and two 
had new, conservative amino acid substitutions (S786N; A342G). Three of the five 
patients were classified as steroid sensitive, one was an early nonresponder, 
and one patient showed clear resistance to steroid treatment. Six known 
polymorphic changes in NPHS1 were also found, three of them leading to amino 
acid changes. The number of allelic variants was high both in MCNS patients and 
control patients (mean 3.0 and 2.6).
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that genetic changes in nephrin may have a 
pathogenetic role in some patients with MCNS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00583.x
PMID: 15086927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]