---
reference_id: "PMID:32306062"
title: Pathogenic mechanisms underlying spinocerebellar ataxia type 1.
authors:
- Tejwani L
- Lim J
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-020-03520-z
keywords:
- Animals
- Cerebellum/pathology
- Humans
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/pathology
- Spinocerebellar Degenerations/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic mechanisms underlying spinocerebellar ataxia type 1.
**Authors:** Tejwani L, Lim J
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-020-03520-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-020-03520-z)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2020 Oct;77(20):4015-4029. doi: 10.1007/s00018-020-03520-z.
 Epub 2020 Apr 18.

Pathogenic mechanisms underlying spinocerebellar ataxia type 1.

Tejwani L(1)(2), Lim J(3)(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale School of Medicine, 295 Congress 
Avenue, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06510, 
USA.
(3)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale School of Medicine, 295 Congress 
Avenue, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. janghoo.lim@yale.edu.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06510, 
USA. janghoo.lim@yale.edu.
(5)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. 
janghoo.lim@yale.edu.
(6)Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair, Yale School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. janghoo.lim@yale.edu.
(7)Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. 
janghoo.lim@yale.edu.

The family of hereditary cerebellar ataxias is a large group of disorders with 
heterogenous clinical manifestations and genetic etiologies. Among these, over 
30 autosomal dominantly inherited subtypes have been identified, collectively 
referred to as the spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs). Generally, the SCAs are 
characterized by a progressive gait impairment with classical cerebellar 
features, and in a subset of SCAs, accompanied by extra-cerebellar features. 
Beyond the common gait impairment and cerebellar atrophy, the wide range of 
additional clinical features observed across the SCAs is likely explained by the 
diverse set of mutated genes that encode proteins with seemingly disparate 
functional roles in nervous system biology. By synthesizing knowledge obtained 
from studies of the various SCAs over the past several decades, convergence onto 
a few key cellular changes, namely ion channel dysfunction and transcriptional 
dysregulation, has become apparent and may represent central mechanisms of 
cerebellar disease pathogenesis. This review will detail our current 
understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of the SCAs, focusing primarily on 
the first described autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia, SCA1, as well as 
the emerging common core mechanisms across the various SCAs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-020-03520-z
PMCID: PMC7541529
PMID: 32306062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]