---
reference_id: "PMID:18426576"
title: Practical aspects in the management of hypokalemic periodic paralysis.
authors:
- Levitt JO
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-6-18
keywords:
- Diet
- Disease Management
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Potassium/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications/therapy
- Self-Help Groups
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practical aspects in the management of hypokalemic periodic paralysis.
**Authors:** Levitt JO
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1479-5876-6-18](https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5876-6-18)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2008 Apr 21;6:18. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-6-18.

Practical aspects in the management of hypokalemic periodic paralysis.

Levitt JO.

Erratum in
    J Transl Med. 2014;12:198. Dosage error in article text.

Management considerations in hypokalemic periodic paralysis include accurate
diagnosis, potassium dosage for acute attacks, choice of diuretic for
prophylaxis, identification of triggers, creating a safe physical environment,
peri-operative measures, and issues in pregnancy. A positive genetic test in the
context of symptoms is the gold standard for diagnosis. Potassium chloride is
the favored potassium salt given at 0.5-1.0 mEq/kg for acute attacks. The oral
route is favored, but if necessary, a mannitol solvent can be used for
intravenous administration. Avoidance of or potassium prophylaxis for common
triggers, such as rest after exercise, high carbohydrate meals, and sodium, can
prevent attacks. Chronically, acetazolamide, dichlorphenamide, or
potassium-sparing diuretics decrease attack frequency and severity but are of
little value acutely. Potassium, water, and a telephone should always be at a
patient's bedside, regardless of the presence of weakness. Perioperatively, the
patient's clinical status should be checked frequently. Firm data on the
management of periodic paralysis during pregnancy is lacking. Patient support
can be found at http://www.periodicparalysis.org.

DOI: 10.1186/1479-5876-6-18
PMCID: PMC2374768
PMID: 18426576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
