---
reference_id: "PMID:26318825"
title: "Fatigue, dyspnea, and intermittent symptoms are associated with treatment-seeking delay for symptoms of atrial fibrillation before diagnosis."
authors:
- McCabe PJ
- Rhudy LM
- Chamberlain AM
- DeVon HA
journal: Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1177/1474515115603901
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatigue, dyspnea, and intermittent symptoms are associated with treatment-seeking delay for symptoms of atrial fibrillation before diagnosis.
**Authors:** McCabe PJ, Rhudy LM, Chamberlain AM, DeVon HA
**Journal:** Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1474515115603901](https://doi.org/10.1177/1474515115603901)

## Content

1. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2016 Oct;15(6):459-68. doi: 10.1177/1474515115603901. 
Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Fatigue, dyspnea, and intermittent symptoms are associated with 
treatment-seeking delay for symptoms of atrial fibrillation before diagnosis.

McCabe PJ(1), Rhudy LM(2), Chamberlain AM(3), DeVon HA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nursing, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN, USA 
mccabe.pamela2@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Nursing, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN, USA School of Nursing, 
University of Minnesota, USA.
(3)Division of Epidemiology, Mayo College of Medicine, USA.
(4)College of Nursing, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA.

BACKGROUND: Delay in seeking treatment for symptoms of atrial fibrillation (AF) 
at onset results in a missed opportunity for vital early treatment of AF which 
is important for reducing stroke, tachycardia induced heart failure, and 
treatment-resistant AF. Little is known about factors that contribute to 
treatment-seeking delay for symptoms of AF.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to identify factors associated with 
treatment-seeking delay for symptoms of AF before diagnosis.
METHODS: For this descriptive study, 150 participants with recently detected AF 
completed structured interviews to collect data about symptoms, symptom 
characteristics, symptom representation regarding cause, seriousness, 
controllability of symptoms, responses to symptoms before diagnosis, and time 
from symptom onset to treatment-seeking. Chi-square analysis was used to 
identify factors associated with delay (>1 week) versus no delay (⩽1 week) in 
treatment-seeking after symptom onset.
RESULTS: Participants were 51% female (n=76) with a mean age of 66.5 (standard 
deviation (SD)±11.1) years. A majority (70%, n=105) delayed treatment-seeking. 
Factors associated with delay included experiencing fatigue, dyspnea, 
intermittent symptoms, attributing symptoms to deconditioning, overwork, 
inadequate sleep, and perceiving symptoms as not very serious and amenable to 
self-management. Responses such as a wait and see approach, working through 
symptoms, reporting no fear of symptoms, or attempting to ignore symptoms were 
associated with delay.
CONCLUSION: Experiencing fatigue, dyspnea and intermittent symptoms produced 
symptom representations and emotional and behavioral responses associated with 
treatment-seeking delay. There is a critical need to develop and test 
educational interventions to increase awareness of the spectrum and 
characteristics of AF symptoms and appropriate treatment-seeking behaviors.

© The European Society of Cardiology 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1474515115603901
PMID: 26318825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]