---
reference_id: "PMID:25850074"
title: "The synergistic mechanism of graphene and MoS2 for hydrogen generation: insights from density functional theory."
authors:
- Yuan Y
- Gong X
- Wang H
journal: Phys Chem Chem Phys
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1039/c5cp00011d
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The synergistic mechanism of graphene and MoS2 for hydrogen generation: insights from density functional theory.
**Authors:** Yuan Y, Gong X, Wang H
**Journal:** Phys Chem Chem Phys (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1039/c5cp00011d](https://doi.org/10.1039/c5cp00011d)

## Content

1. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2015 May 7;17(17):11375-81. doi: 10.1039/c5cp00011d.

The synergistic mechanism of graphene and MoS2 for hydrogen generation: insights 
from density functional theory.

Yuan Y(1), Gong X, Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Advanced Study, Nanchang University, Nanchang, 330031, China. 
Hongmingwang@ncu.edu.cn.

The synergistic effect of graphene and MoS2 was investigated by using density 
functional theory (DFT) calculations on the enhanced photocatalytic H2 
production activity of TiO2/graphene/MoS2 ternary nanoparticles. Our results 
indicate that it can form a weak covalent bond between the Ti atom of TiO2 
nanocluster and the nearest C atom on graphene, which not only makes the 
original degenerate C(2p) orbital level of the graphene (part of the conduction 
band energy level) split, resulting in the production of a lower level of C(2p) 
that makes it easier to accept the excited electron from the Ti(3d) orbital, but 
also forms a +/- sequence electric field in the interface between them. It is 
conclusive that the electron moves from the TiO2 cluster to the graphene. In 
addition, we also find that the band gap of the TiO2 cluster can be doped by the 
graphene and MoS2, and the conduction band consists predominantly of C(2p), 
S(3p) and Mo(4d) orbital energy level near the Fermi level. These results 
illustrate that the excited electron will eventually accumulate in the graphene 
or MoS2 film, which can effectively enhance the separation between the excited 
electrons and the holes in the TiO2 clusters, thereby increasing the efficiency 
of hydrogen evolution. Our results are consistent with the experimental results, 
and can provide some valuable information for the design of photocatalytic 
composites.

DOI: 10.1039/c5cp00011d
PMID: 25850074