---
reference_id: "PMID:29020635"
title: "Human Organ Chip Models Recapitulate Orthotopic Lung Cancer Growth, Therapeutic Responses, and Tumor Dormancy In Vitro."
authors:
- Hassell BA
- Goyal G
- Lee E
- Sontheimer-Phelps A
- Levy O
- Chen CS
- Ingber DE
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.09.043
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- ErbB Receptors/metabolism
- Humans
- Lab-On-A-Chip Devices
- "Lung Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-met/metabolism
- "Respiratory Mucosa/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Organ Chip Models Recapitulate Orthotopic Lung Cancer Growth, Therapeutic Responses, and Tumor Dormancy In Vitro.
**Authors:** Hassell BA, Goyal G, Lee E, Sontheimer-Phelps A, Levy O, Chen CS, Ingber DE
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2017.09.043](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.09.043)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2017 Oct 10;21(2):508-516. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.09.043.

Human Organ Chip Models Recapitulate Orthotopic Lung Cancer Growth, Therapeutic 
Responses, and Tumor Dormancy In Vitro.

Hassell BA(1), Goyal G(2), Lee E(3), Sontheimer-Phelps A(4), Levy O(2), Chen 
CS(3), Ingber DE(5).

Author information:
(1)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied 
Sciences, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(2)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Biological 
Design Center, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(5)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied 
Sciences, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Vascular Biology Program and Department of 
Surgery, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, USA. Electronic address: don.ingber@wyss.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    Cell Rep. 2018 Jun 19;23(12):3698. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.06.028.

Here, we show that microfluidic organ-on-a-chip (organ chip) cell culture 
technology can be used to create in vitro human orthotopic models of 
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that recapitulate organ 
microenvironment-specific cancer growth, tumor dormancy, and responses to 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy observed in human patients in vivo. Use 
of the mechanical actuation functionalities of this technology revealed a 
previously unknown sensitivity of lung cancer cell growth, invasion, and TKI 
therapeutic responses to physical cues associated with breathing motions, which 
appear to be mediated by changes in signaling through epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) and MET protein kinase. These findings might help to explain the 
high level of resistance to therapy in cancer patients with minimal residual 
disease in regions of the lung that remain functionally aerated and mobile, in 
addition to providing an experimental model to study cancer persister cells and 
mechanisms of tumor dormancy in vitro.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.09.043
PMID: 29020635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]