---
reference_id: "PMID:32123305"
title: Primary mammary angiosarcomas harbor frequent mutations in KDR and PIK3CA and show evidence of distinct pathogenesis.
authors:
- Beca F
- Krings G
- Chen YY
- Hosfield EM
- Vohra P
- Sibley RK
- Troxell ML
- West RB
- Allison KH
- Bean GR
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41379-020-0511-6
keywords:
- Adult
- Breast Neoplasms/genetics
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Female
- Hemangiosarcoma/genetics
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-2/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary mammary angiosarcomas harbor frequent mutations in KDR and PIK3CA and show evidence of distinct pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Beca F, Krings G, Chen YY, Hosfield EM, Vohra P, Sibley RK, Troxell ML, West RB, Allison KH, Bean GR
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41379-020-0511-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41379-020-0511-6)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2020 Aug;33(8):1518-1526. doi: 10.1038/s41379-020-0511-6. Epub
2020  Mar 2.

Primary mammary angiosarcomas harbor frequent mutations in KDR and PIK3CA and
show evidence of distinct pathogenesis.

Beca F(1), Krings G(2), Chen YY(2), Hosfield EM(3), Vohra P(2), Sibley RK(1),
Troxell ML(1), West RB(1), Allison KH(1), Bean GR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kaiser Permanente San Francisco Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA. beang@stanford.edu.

Angiosarcoma (AS) is the most frequent primary sarcoma of the breast but
nevertheless remains uncommon, accounting for <0.05% of breast malignancies.
Secondary mammary AS arise following radiation therapy for breast cancer, in
contrast to primary AS which occur sporadically. Essentially all show aggressive
clinical behavior independent of histologic grade and most are treated by
mastectomy. MYC amplification is frequently identified in radiation-induced AS
but only rarely in primary mammary AS (PMAS). As a heterogeneous group, AS from
various anatomic sites have been shown to harbor recurrent alterations in TP53,
MAP kinase pathway genes, and genes involved in angiogenic signaling including
KDR (VEGFR2) and PTPRB. In part due to its rarity, the pathogenesis of PMAS has
not been fully characterized. In this study, we examined the clinical,
pathologic, and genomic features of ten cases of PMAS, including one patient
with bilateral disease. Recurrent genomic alterations were identified in KDR
(70%), PIK3CA/PIK3R1 (70%), and PTPRB (30%), each at higher frequencies than
reported in AS across all sites. Six tumors harbored a KDR p.T771R hotspot
mutation, and all seven KDR-mutant cases showed evidence suggestive of
biallelism (four with loss of heterozygosity and three with two aberrations). Of
the seven tumors with PI3K alterations, six harbored pathogenic mutations other
than in the canonical PIK3CA residues which are most frequent in breast cancer.
Three AS were hypermutated (≥10 mutations/megabase (Mb)); hypermutation was seen
concurrent with KDR or PIK3CA mutations. The patient with bilateral disease
demonstrated shared alterations, indicative of contralateral metastasis. No MYC
or TP53 aberrations were detected in this series. Immunohistochemistry for
VEGFR2 was unable to discriminate between KDR-mutant tumors and benign vascular
lesions of the breast. These findings highlight the underrecognized frequency of
KDR and PIK3CA mutation in PMAS, and a significant subset with hypermutation,
suggesting a pathogenesis distinct from other AS.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-020-0511-6
PMID: 32123305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
