---
reference_id: "PMID:9887343"
title: Haploinsufficiency of desmoplakin causes a striate subtype of palmoplantar keratoderma.
authors:
- Armstrong DK
- McKenna KE
- Purkis PE
- Green KJ
- Eady RA
- Leigh IM
- Hughes AE
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.1.143
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Desmoplakins
- "Desmosomes/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Lod Score
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haploinsufficiency of desmoplakin causes a striate subtype of palmoplantar keratoderma.
**Authors:** Armstrong DK, McKenna KE, Purkis PE, Green KJ, Eady RA, Leigh IM, Hughes AE
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/8.1.143](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/8.1.143)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Jan;8(1):143-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.1.143.

Haploinsufficiency of desmoplakin causes a striate subtype of palmoplantar 
keratoderma.

Armstrong DK(1), McKenna KE, Purkis PE, Green KJ, Eady RA, Leigh IM, Hughes AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, The Queen's University of Belfast, Belfast 
City Hospital, Belfast BT9 7AB, UK.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet 1999 May;8(5):943.

Desmosomes are highly organized intercellular adhesive junctions that are 
particularly prominent in epidermis and other tissues experiencing mechanical 
stress. Desmoplakin, a constitutive component of the desmosomal plaque, is the 
most abundant protein present in such junctions and plays a critical role in 
linking the intermediate filament network to the plasma membrane in these 
tissues. Here we report the first mutation in the gene encoding desmoplakin. The 
identified mutation, resulting in a null allele and haploinsufficiency, was 
observed in genomic DNA from a kindred with the dominantly inherited skin 
disorder, striate palmoplantar keratoderma. Affected individuals had a linear 
pattern of skin thickening on the fingers and palms and circumscribed areas of 
skin thickening on the soles. Affected skin demonstrated loosening of 
intercellular connections, disruption of desmosome-keratin intermediate filament 
interactions and a proportion of rudimentary desmosomal structures. The disorder 
mapped to chromosome 6p21 with a maximum lod score of 10.67. The mutation was a 
heterozygous C-->T transition in exon 4 of the desmoplakin gene and predicted a 
premature termination codon in the N-terminal region of the peptide. This is the 
first reported mutation of desmo-plakin and also the first inherited skin 
disorder in which haploinsufficiency of a structural component has been 
implicated. It identifies dosage of desmoplakin as critical in maintaining 
epidermal integrity.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/8.1.143
PMID: 9887343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]