---
reference_id: "PMID:18627762"
title: Striate palmoplantar keratoderma (Brunauer-Fohs-Siemens syndrome).
authors:
- Bragg J
- Rizzo C
- Mengden S
journal: Dermatol Online J
year: '2008'
keywords:
- Biopsy
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Hand
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Striate palmoplantar keratoderma (Brunauer-Fohs-Siemens syndrome).
**Authors:** Bragg J, Rizzo C, Mengden S
**Journal:** Dermatol Online J (2008)

## Content

1. Dermatol Online J. 2008 May 15;14(5):26.

Striate palmoplantar keratoderma (Brunauer-Fohs-Siemens syndrome).

Bragg J(1), Rizzo C, Mengden S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, New York University, USA.

A 64-year-old man presented with focal hyperkeratotic plaques on the fingers,
palms, and soles. Histopathologic and electron microscopic results were
consistent with striate palmoplantar keratoderma. Treatment with topical
keratolytics was unsuccessful. Striate palmoplantar keratoderma or
Brunauer-Fohs-Siemens syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition that presents
with linear hyperkeratosis on the palms and fingers and focal plaques on the
plantar aspects of the feet. Histopathologic features include hyperkeratosis,
hypergranulosis, and acanthosis with no epidermolysis. Electron microscopic
examination shows diminished desmosomes, clumped keratin filaments, and enlarged
keratohyalin granules. The syndrome has been linked to mutations in desmoglein
1, desmoplakin, and keratin 1. Treatment may include keratolytics, oral
retinoids, and surgical debridement.

PMID: 18627762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
