---
reference_id: "PMID:33628209"
title: "Clinical, Immunological, and Molecular Features of Severe Combined Immune Deficiency: A Multi-Institutional Experience From India."
authors:
- Vignesh P
- Rawat A
- Kumrah R
- Singh A
- Gummadi A
- Sharma M
- Kaur A
- Nameirakpam J
- Jindal A
- Suri D
- Gupta A
- Khadwal A
- Saikia B
- Minz RW
- Sharma K
- Desai M
- Taur P
- Gowri V
- Pandrowala A
- Dalvi A
- Jodhawat N
- Kambli P
- Madkaikar MR
- Bhattad S
- Ramprakash S
- Cp R
- Jayaram A
- Sivasankaran M
- Munirathnam D
- Balaji S
- Rajendran A
- Aggarwal A
- Singh K
- Na F
- George B
- Mehta A
- Lashkari HP
- Uppuluri R
- Raj R
- Bartakke S
- Gupta K
- Sreedharanunni S
- Ogura Y
- Kato T
- Imai K
- Chan KW
- Leung D
- Ohara O
- Nonoyama S
- Hershfield M
- Lau YL
- Singh S
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.619146
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- India/epidemiology
- Infant
- Male
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/epidemiology, genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, Immunological, and Molecular Features of Severe Combined Immune Deficiency: A Multi-Institutional Experience From India.
**Authors:** Vignesh P, Rawat A, Kumrah R, Singh A, Gummadi A, Sharma M, Kaur A, Nameirakpam J, Jindal A, Suri D, Gupta A, Khadwal A, Saikia B, Minz RW, Sharma K, Desai M, Taur P, Gowri V, Pandrowala A, Dalvi A, Jodhawat N, Kambli P, Madkaikar MR, Bhattad S, Ramprakash S, Cp R, Jayaram A, Sivasankaran M, Munirathnam D, Balaji S, Rajendran A, Aggarwal A, Singh K, Na F, George B, Mehta A, Lashkari HP, Uppuluri R, Raj R, Bartakke S, Gupta K, Sreedharanunni S, Ogura Y, Kato T, Imai K, Chan KW, Leung D, Ohara O, Nonoyama S, Hershfield M, Lau YL, Singh S
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2020.619146](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.619146)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Feb 8;11:619146. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.619146.
eCollection  2020.

Clinical, Immunological, and Molecular Features of Severe Combined Immune 
Deficiency: A Multi-Institutional Experience From India.

Vignesh P(1), Rawat A(1), Kumrah R(1), Singh A(1), Gummadi A(1), Sharma M(1), 
Kaur A(1), Nameirakpam J(1), Jindal A(1), Suri D(1), Gupta A(1), Khadwal A(2), 
Saikia B(3), Minz RW(3), Sharma K(1), Desai M(4), Taur P(4), Gowri V(4), 
Pandrowala A(5), Dalvi A(6), Jodhawat N(6), Kambli P(6), Madkaikar MR(6), 
Bhattad S(7), Ramprakash S(8), Cp R(8), Jayaram A(9), Sivasankaran M(10), 
Munirathnam D(10), Balaji S(11), Rajendran A(11), Aggarwal A(12), Singh K(12), 
Na F(13), George B(13), Mehta A(14), Lashkari HP(15), Uppuluri R(16), Raj R(16), 
Bartakke S(17), Gupta K(18), Sreedharanunni S(19), Ogura Y(20), Kato T(20), Imai 
K(20)(21), Chan KW(22), Leung D(22), Ohara O(23), Nonoyama S(20), Hershfield 
M(24), Lau YL(22), Singh S(1).

Author information:
(1)Allergy Immunology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Advanced Pediatrics 
Centre, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, 
India.
(2)Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Post 
Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.
(3)Department of Immunopathology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education 
and Research, Chandigarh, India.
(4)Department of Immunology, Bai Jerbai Wadia Hospital for Children, Mumbai, 
India.
(5)Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, Bai Jerbai Wadia Hospital for Children, 
Mumbai, India.
(6)ICMR-National Institute of Immunohematology, Mumbai, India.
(7)Pediatric Immunology and Rheumatology, Aster CMI hospital, Bengaluru, India.
(8)Pediatric Hemat-oncology and BMT Unit, Aster CMI Hospital, Bengaluru, India.
(9)Anand Neuberg Diagnostic and Research Centre, Bengaluru, India.
(10)Kanchi Kamakoti Child Trust Hospitals for Children, Chennai, India.
(11)Institute of Child Health, Madras Medical College, Chennai, India.
(12)Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India.
(13)Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.
(14)Zydus Hospitals, Ahmedabad, India.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore, India.
(16)Apollo Children's Hospital, Chennai, India.
(17)Aditya Birla Memorial Hospital, Pune, India.
(18)Department of Histopathology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education 
and Research, Chandigarh, India.
(19)Department of Hematology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, National Defense Medical College, Saitama, Japan.
(21)Department of Community Pediatrics, Perinatal and Maternal Medicine, Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(22)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(23)Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Chiba, Japan.
(24)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States.

BACKGROUND: Severe Combined Immune Deficiency (SCID) is an inherited defect in 
lymphocyte development and function that results in life-threatening 
opportunistic infections in early infancy. Data on SCID from developing 
countries are scarce.
OBJECTIVE: To describe clinical and laboratory features of SCID diagnosed at 
immunology centers across India.
METHODS: A detailed case proforma in an Excel format was prepared by one of the 
authors (PV) and was sent to centers in India that care for patients with 
primary immunodeficiency diseases. We collated clinical, laboratory, and 
molecular details of patients with clinical profile suggestive of SCID and their 
outcomes. Twelve (12) centers provided necessary details which were then 
compiled and analyzed. Diagnosis of SCID/combined immune deficiency (CID) was 
based on 2018 European Society for Immunodeficiencies working definition for 
SCID.
RESULTS: We obtained data on 277 children; 254 were categorized as SCID and 23 
as CID. Male-female ratio was 196:81. Median (inter-quartile range) age of onset 
of clinical symptoms and diagnosis was 2.5 months (1, 5) and 5 months (3.5, 8), 
respectively. Molecular diagnosis was obtained in 162 patients - IL2RG (36), 
RAG1 (26), ADA (19), RAG2 (17), JAK3 (15), DCLRE1C (13), IL7RA (9), PNP (3), 
RFXAP (3), CIITA (2), RFXANK (2), NHEJ1 (2), CD3E (2), CD3D (2), RFX5 (2), ZAP70 
(2), STK4 (1), CORO1A (1), STIM1 (1), PRKDC (1), AK2 (1), DOCK2 (1), and SP100 
(1). Only 23 children (8.3%) received hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT). Of these, 11 are doing well post-HSCT. Mortality was recorded in 210 
children (75.8%).
CONCLUSION: We document an exponential rise in number of cases diagnosed to have 
SCID over the last 10 years, probably as a result of increasing awareness and 
improvement in diagnostic facilities at various centers in India. We suspect 
that these numbers are just the tip of the iceberg. Majority of patients with 
SCID in India are probably not being recognized and diagnosed at present. 
Newborn screening for SCID is the need of the hour. Easy access to pediatric 
HSCT services would ensure that these patients are offered HSCT at an early age.

Copyright © 2021 Vignesh, Rawat, Kumrah, Singh, Gummadi, Sharma, Kaur, 
Nameirakpam, Jindal, Suri, Gupta, Khadwal, Saikia, Minz, Sharma, Desai, Taur, 
Gowri, Pandrowala, Dalvi, Jodhawat, Kambli, Madkaikar, Bhattad, Ramprakash, CP, 
Jayaram, Sivasankaran, Munirathnam, Balaji, Rajendran, Aggarwal, Singh, Na, 
George, Mehta, Lashkari, Uppuluri, Raj, Bartakke, Gupta, Sreedharanunni, Ogura, 
Kato, Imai, Chan, Leung, Ohara, Nonoyama, Hershfield, Lau and Singh.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.619146
PMCID: PMC7897653
PMID: 33628209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.