---
reference_id: "PMID:1576585"
title: Laboratory diagnosis of bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Gray LD
- Fedorko DP
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.5.2.130
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laboratory diagnosis of bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Gray LD, Fedorko DP
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.5.2.130](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.5.2.130)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1992 Apr;5(2):130-45. doi: 10.1128/CMR.5.2.130.

Laboratory diagnosis of bacterial meningitis.

Gray LD(1), Fedorko DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Services, Bethesda North Hospital, 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45242.

Bacterial meningitis is relatively common, can progress rapidly, and can result 
in death or permanent debilitation. This infection justifiably elicits strong 
emotional reactions and, hopefully, immediate medical intervention. This review 
is a brief presentation of the pathogenesis of bacterial meningitis and a review 
of current knowledge, literature, and recommendations on the subject of 
laboratory diagnosis of bacterial meningitis. Those who work in clinical 
microbiology laboratories should be familiar with the tests used in detecting 
bacteria and bacterial antigens in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and should always 
have the utmost appreciation for the fact that results of such tests must always 
be reported immediately. Academic and practical aspects of the laboratory 
diagnosis of bacterial meningitis presented in this review include the 
following: anatomy of the meninges; pathogenesis; changes in the composition of 
CSF; etiological agents; processing CSF; microscopic examination of CSF; 
culturing CSF; methods of detecting bacterial antigens and bacterial components 
in CSF (counter-immunoelectrophoresis, coagglutination, latex agglutination, 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, Limulus amebocyte lysate assay, and 
gas-liquid chromatography); use of the polymerase chain reaction; and practical 
considerations for testing CSF for bacterial antigens.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.5.2.130
PMCID: PMC358232
PMID: 1576585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]