---
reference_id: "PMID:17564757"
title: Evidence for the effectiveness of botulinum toxin for spasmodic dysphonia from high-quality research designs.
authors:
- Watts CR
- Truong DD
- Nye C
journal: J Neural Transm (Vienna)
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/s00702-007-0757-x
keywords:
- Anti-Dyskinesia Agents/therapeutic use
- Botulinum Toxins/therapeutic use
- Cohort Studies
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Humans
- Prospective Studies
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Research Design
- Voice Disorders/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence for the effectiveness of botulinum toxin for spasmodic dysphonia from high-quality research designs.
**Authors:** Watts CR, Truong DD, Nye C
**Journal:** J Neural Transm (Vienna) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00702-007-0757-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-007-0757-x)

## Content

1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2008;115(4):625-30. doi: 10.1007/s00702-007-0757-x. 
Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Evidence for the effectiveness of botulinum toxin for spasmodic dysphonia from 
high-quality research designs.

Watts CR(1), Truong DD, Nye C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, James Madison University, 
Harrisonberg, Virginia 22840, USA. wattscr@jmu.edu

The practice of evidence-based medicine promotes use of the knowledge 
ascertained from high quality research designs. The objective of this review was 
to determine what evidence has been provided from high quality research designs 
(e.g., randomized control trials or high quality prospective, matched group 
cohort studies), through December of 2006, relative to the effectiveness of 
botulinum toxin for treating spasmodic dysphonia. Results of the review 
indicated that no new high quality (Class I or Class II) studies have been 
published since 2001. One Class I study has been published since 1973, which 
found significant treatment effects for acoustic and perceptual variables of 
vocal function. Four Class II studies have been published during this same time 
frame, all finding significant treatment effects, though the nature of studied 
factors was variable between investigations. Based on the quality of evidence 
scale used, botulinum toxin can be considered an effective treatment for 
adductor spasmodic dysphonia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-007-0757-x
PMID: 17564757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]