---
reference_id: "PMID:25584912"
title: "Smoke exposure as a risk factor for asthma in childhood: a review of current evidence."
authors:
- Ferrante G
- Antona R
- Malizia V
- Montalbano L
- Corsello G
- La Grutta S
journal: Allergy Asthma Proc
year: '2014'
doi: 10.2500/aap.2014.35.3789
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smoke exposure as a risk factor for asthma in childhood: a review of current evidence.
**Authors:** Ferrante G, Antona R, Malizia V, Montalbano L, Corsello G, La Grutta S
**Journal:** Allergy Asthma Proc (2014)
**DOI:** [10.2500/aap.2014.35.3789](https://doi.org/10.2500/aap.2014.35.3789)

## Content

1. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2014 Nov-Dec;35(6):454-61. doi: 10.2500/aap.2014.35.3789.

Smoke exposure as a risk factor for asthma in childhood: a review of current 
evidence.

Ferrante G(1), Antona R, Malizia V, Montalbano L, Corsello G, La Grutta S.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Science for Health Promotion and Mother and Child, Università 
di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Asthma is a common chronic multifactorial disease that affects >300 million 
people worldwide. Outdoor and indoor pollution exposure has been associated with 
respiratory health effects in adults and children. Smoking still represents a 
huge public health problem and millions of children suffer the detrimental 
effects of passive smoke exposure. This study was designed to review the current 
evidences on exposure to passive smoke as a risk factor for asthma onset in 
childhood. A review of the most recent studies on this topic was undertaken to 
provide evidence about the magnitude of the effect of passive smoking on the 
risk of incidence of asthma in children. The effects of passive smoking are 
different depending on individual and environmental factors. Environmental 
tobacco smoke (ETS) is one of the most important indoor air pollutants and can 
interact with other air pollutants in eliciting respiratory outcomes during 
childhood. The increased risk of respiratory outcomes in children exposed to 
prenatal and early postnatal passive smoke might be caused by an adverse effect 
on both the immune system and the structural and functional development of the 
lung; this may explain the subsequent increased risk of incident asthma. The 
magnitude of the exposure is quite difficult to precisely quantify because it is 
significantly influenced by the child's daily activities. Because exposure to 
ETS is a likely cause for asthma onset in childhood, there is a strong need to 
prevent infants and children from breathing air contaminated with tobacco smoke.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2014.35.3789
PMID: 25584912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]