---
reference_id: "PMID:10599740"
title: "17Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency: diagnosis, phenotypic variability, population genetics, and worldwide distribution of ancient and de novo mutations."
authors:
- Boehmer AL
- Brinkmann AO
- Sandkuijl LA
- Halley DJ
- Niermeijer MF
- Andersson S
- de Jong FH
- Kayserili H
- de Vroede MA
- Otten BJ
- Rouwé CW
- Mendonça BB
- Rodrigues C
- Bode HH
- de Ruiter PE
- Delemarre-van de Waal HA
- Drop SL
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1210/jcem.84.12.6174
keywords:
- "17-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenases/deficiency, genetics"
- Androstenedione/blood
- "Disorders of Sex Development/enzymology, genetics"
- Gene Frequency
- "Genetics, Population"
- Haplotypes
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Netherlands
- Phenotype
- RNA Splicing
- Testosterone/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 17Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency: diagnosis, phenotypic variability, population genetics, and worldwide distribution of ancient and de novo mutations.
**Authors:** Boehmer AL, Brinkmann AO, Sandkuijl LA, Halley DJ, Niermeijer MF, Andersson S, de Jong FH, Kayserili H, de Vroede MA, Otten BJ, Rouwé CW, Mendonça BB, Rodrigues C, Bode HH, de Ruiter PE, Delemarre-van de Waal HA, Drop SL
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.84.12.6174](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.84.12.6174)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Dec;84(12):4713-21. doi:
10.1210/jcem.84.12.6174.

17Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency: diagnosis, phenotypic
variability, population genetics, and worldwide distribution of ancient and de
novo mutations.

Boehmer AL(1), Brinkmann AO, Sandkuijl LA, Halley DJ, Niermeijer MF, Andersson
S, de Jong FH, Kayserili H, de Vroede MA, Otten BJ, Rouwé CW, Mendonça BB,
Rodrigues C, Bode HH, de Ruiter PE, Delemarre-van de Waal HA, Drop SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. boehmer@ALKG.AZR.NL

17Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 (17betaHSD3) deficiency is an autosomal
recessive form of male pseudohermaphroditism caused by mutations in the HSD17B3
gene. In a nationwide study on male pseudohermaphroditism among all pediatric
endocrinologists and clinical geneticists in The Netherlands, 18
17betaHSD3-deficient index cases were identified, 12 of whom initially had
received the tentative diagnosis androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS). The
phenotypes and genotypes of these patients were studied. Endocrine diagnostic
methods were evaluated in comparison to mutation analysis of the HSD17B3 gene.
RT-PCR studies were performed on testicular ribonucleic acid of patients
homozygous for two different splice site mutations. The minimal incidence of
17betaHSD3 deficiency in The Netherlands and the corresponding carrier frequency
were calculated. Haplotype analysis of the chromosomal region of the HSD17B3
gene in Europeans, North Americans, Latin Americans, Australians, and Arabs was
used to establish whether recurrent identical mutations were ancient or had
repeatedly occurred de novo. In genotypically identical cases, phenotypic
variation for external sexual development was observed. Gonadotropin-stimulated
serum testosterone/androstenedione ratios in 17betaHSD3-deficient patients were
discriminative in all cases and did not overlap with ratios in normal controls
or with ratios in AIS patients. In all investigated patients both HSD17B3
alleles were mutated. The intronic mutations 325 + 4;A-->T and 655-1;G-->A
disrupted normal splicing, but a small amount of wild-type messenger ribonucleic
acid was still made in patients homozygous for 655-1;G-->A. The minimal
incidence of 17betaHSD3 deficiency in The Netherlands was shown to be 1:
147,000, with a heterozygote frequency of 1:135. At least 4 mutations, 325 +
4;A-->T, N74T, 655-1;G-->A, and R80Q, found worldwide, appeared to be ancient
and originating from genetic founders. Their dispersion could be reconstructed
through historical analysis. The HSD17B3 gene mutations 326-1;G-->C and P282L
were de novo mutations. 17betaHSD3 deficiency can be reliably diagnosed by
endocrine evaluation and mutation analysis. Phenotypic variation can occur
between families with the same homozygous mutations. The incidence of 17betaHSD3
deficiency is 0.65 times the incidence of AIS, which is thought to be the most
frequent known cause of male pseudohermaphroditism without dysgenic gonads. A
global inventory of affected cases demonstrated the ancient origin of at least
four mutations. The mutational history of this genetic locus offers views into
human diversity and disease, provided by national and international
collaboration.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.84.12.6174
PMID: 10599740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
