---
reference_id: "PMID:39621157"
title: Holter Monitoring and Cardiac Biomarkers in Screening for Cardiac Sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Bakker ALM
- Mathijssen H
- Huitema MP
- Kapteijns L
- Grutters JC
- Veltkamp M
- Keijsers RG
- Akdim F
- van Es HW
- Peper J
- Post MC
journal: Lung
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00408-024-00772-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, blood, complications"
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnosis, blood"
- "Electrocardiography, Ambulatory"
- Retrospective Studies
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Natriuretic Peptide, Brain/blood"
- Troponin T/blood
- Adult
- Peptide Fragments/blood
- Sex Factors
- Aged
- Early Diagnosis
- Predictive Value of Tests
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Holter Monitoring and Cardiac Biomarkers in Screening for Cardiac Sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Bakker ALM, Mathijssen H, Huitema MP, Kapteijns L, Grutters JC, Veltkamp M, Keijsers RG, Akdim F, van Es HW, Peper J, Post MC
**Journal:** Lung (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00408-024-00772-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00408-024-00772-5)

## Content

1. Lung. 2024 Dec 2;203(1):10. doi: 10.1007/s00408-024-00772-5.

Holter Monitoring and Cardiac Biomarkers in Screening for Cardiac Sarcoidosis.

Bakker ALM(1)(2), Mathijssen H(3), Huitema MP(3), Kapteijns L(3), Grutters 
JC(4)(5), Veltkamp M(4)(5), Keijsers RG(6), Akdim F(3), van Es HW(7), Peper 
J(3), Post MC(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, St. Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands. 
abakker3@amphia.nl.
(2)Department of Cardiology Amphia Hospital, Breda, The Netherlands. 
abakker3@amphia.nl.
(3)Department of Cardiology, St. Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(4)ILD Center of Excellence, Member of European Reference Network-Lung, St 
Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(5)Division of Heart and Lungs, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Nuclear Medicine, St Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Radiology, St Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Early detection of cardiac sarcoidosis (CS) is crucial due to its 
association with severe complications such as ventricular arrhythmias, heart 
failure, and sudden cardiac death. Advanced imaging techniques like cardiac 
magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) and 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission 
Tomography/Computed Tomography (FDG-PET/CT) are effective in detecting CS but 
not easily accessible. The optimal method for selecting patients for advanced 
screening remains uncertain.
METHODS: In this retrospective cohort study, all extracardiac sarcoidosis 
patients screened for CS were reviewed. CS was defined as a multidisciplinary 
team (MDT) consensus diagnosis. Univariate and multivariate binary logistic 
regressions were used to identify factors associated with CS, assessing their 
diagnostic performance, and integrating them into a diagnostic model.
RESULTS: Out of 354 patients (average age 51.5 years, 52.5% male), 18.4% were 
diagnosed with CS. In our cohort, male gender, a QRS duration > 120 ms, and nsVT 
on Holter monitoring were identified as significant markers associated with CS. 
Combining age, gender, AV-block or QRS > 120ms on ECG, and nsVT on Holter 
monitoring provided the highest diagnostic accuracy (AUC of 0.82). Cardiac 
biomarkers NT-proBNP and troponin T did not improve the diagnostic performance.
CONCLUSION: In our cohort, male gender, a QRS duration > 120 ms, and nsVT on 
Holter monitoring were identified as significant markers associated with the 
presence of cardiac sarcoidosis. These clinical markers may aid in selecting 
sarcoidosis patients for screening with advanced cardiac imaging, potentially 
leading to earlier detection and management of the disease.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-024-00772-5
PMID: 39621157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
declare no competing interests.