---
reference_id: "PMID:21993137"
title: Transmission parameters of vector-borne infections.
authors:
- Desenclos JC
journal: Med Mal Infect
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2011.07.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transmission parameters of vector-borne infections.
**Authors:** Desenclos JC
**Journal:** Med Mal Infect (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medmal.2011.07.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medmal.2011.07.016)

## Content

1. Med Mal Infect. 2011 Nov;41(11):588-93. doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2011.07.016.
Epub  2011 Oct 10.

Transmission parameters of vector-borne infections.

Desenclos JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de veille Sanitaire, 12, rue du Val-d'Osne, 94415 Saint-Maurice, 
France. Jc.desenclos@invs.sante.fr

Vector-borne infections are those for which the agent (virus, bacteria, or 
parasite) is transmitted from an infected host (animal or human) to another by a 
hematophagous arthropod (mosquito, tick, lice, and flea). Two parameters 
quantify the dynamics of a vector-borne infection: (1) the basic reproductive 
number (R(0)) that is the mean number of secondary infections transmitted from 
an infectious host by the bite of the vector and (2) the generation interval 
that explores the speed of occurrence of secondary cases transmitted by the 
vector from an infectious case. In a population in which some individuals are 
immune, the parameter of interest is the net reproduction number (R) function of 
R(0) and the proportion of those immune. For vector-borne infectious agents, 
R(0) is determined by the number of vectors in contact with a given individual 
(m), the number of a given vector bites/day on individuals (a), the daily 
survival rate of the vector (p), the duration of the pathogenic agent's 
development cycle in the vector (n), the proportion of infected vectors that are 
really infectious (vector competence) (b), the probability of agent transmission 
from a viremic individual to the vector for one bite (c) and the host's 
infectiousness clearance rate (r) with R(0)=(m. a(2). p(n)/-lnp). b. c/r. These 
parameters are related to geographic and climatic conditions and cannot, 
therefore, be extrapolated from one situation to another.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medmal.2011.07.016
PMID: 21993137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]