---
reference_id: "PMID:40436881"
title: Cleavage of the Meckel-Gruber syndrome protein TMEM67 by ADAMTS9 uncouples Wnt signaling and ciliogenesis.
authors:
- Ahmed M
- Fischer S
- Robert KL
- Lange KI
- Stuck MW
- Best S
- Johnson CA
- Pazour GJ
- Blacque OE
- Nandadasa S
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-60294-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cleavage of the Meckel-Gruber syndrome protein TMEM67 by ADAMTS9 uncouples Wnt signaling and ciliogenesis.
**Authors:** Ahmed M, Fischer S, Robert KL, Lange KI, Stuck MW, Best S, Johnson CA, Pazour GJ, Blacque OE, Nandadasa S
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-60294-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60294-3)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 May 28;16(1):4946. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-60294-3.

Cleavage of the Meckel-Gruber syndrome protein TMEM67 by ADAMTS9 uncouples Wnt 
signaling and ciliogenesis.

Ahmed M(1), Fischer S(1), Robert KL(1), Lange KI(2), Stuck MW(3), Best S(4)(5), 
Johnson CA(4), Pazour GJ(3), Blacque OE(2), Nandadasa S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA.
(2)School of Biomolecular & Biomedical Science, University College Dublin, 
Belfield, Ireland.
(3)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical 
School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(4)Division of Molecular Medicine, Leeds Institute of Medical Research, The 
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, 
UK.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA. Sumeda.Nandadasa@Umassmed.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Sep 05:2024.09.04.611229. doi: 10.1101/2024.09.04.611229.

TMEM67 mutations cause Meckel-Gruber syndrome and other related ciliopathies. 
TMEM67 is involved in both ciliary transition zone assembly, and non-canonical 
Wnt signaling mediated by its extracellular domain. How TMEM67 performs these 
two separate functions is not known. We identify a cleavage motif in the 
extracellular domain of TMEM67 cleaved by the extracellular matrix 
metalloproteinase ADAMTS9. This cleavage regulates the abundance of two 
functional forms: a C-terminal portion which localizes to the ciliary transition 
zone regulating ciliogenesis, and a non-cleaved form which regulates Wnt 
signaling. By characterizing three TMEM67 ciliopathy patient variants within the 
cleavage motif utilizing mammalian cell culture and C. elegans, we show the 
cleavage motif is essential for cilia structure and function, highlighting its 
clinical significance. We generated a non-cleavable TMEM67 mouse model which 
develop severe ciliopathies phenocopying Tmem67-/- mice, but in contrast, 
transduces normal Wnt signaling, substantiating the existence of two functional 
forms of TMEM67.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-60294-3
PMCID: PMC12119803
PMID: 40436881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests