---
reference_id: "PMID:38348279"
title: "Pyroptosis in Osteoarthritis: Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutic Implications."
authors:
- Chen Y
- Zeng D
- Wei G
- Liao Z
- Liang R
- Huang X
- Lu WW
- Chen Y
journal: J Inflamm Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2147/JIR.S445573
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pyroptosis in Osteoarthritis: Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutic Implications.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Zeng D, Wei G, Liao Z, Liang R, Huang X, Lu WW, Chen Y
**Journal:** J Inflamm Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2147/JIR.S445573](https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S445573)

## Content

1. J Inflamm Res. 2024 Feb 8;17:791-803. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S445573. eCollection 
2024.

Pyroptosis in Osteoarthritis: Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutic Implications.

Chen Y(#)(1), Zeng D(#)(1), Wei G(#)(1), Liao Z(1)(2), Liang R(1), Huang 
X(1)(2), Lu WW(3), Chen Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bone and Joint Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, People's Republic of China.
(2)Collaborative Innovation Centre of Regenerative Medicine and Medical 
BioResource Development and Application Co-Constructed by the Province and 
Ministry, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, People's Republic of 
China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, the University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Osteoarthritis (OA) is a chronic disease that causes pain and functional 
impairment by affecting joint tissue. Its global impact is noteworthy, causing 
significant economic losses and property damage. Despite extensive research, the 
underlying pathogenesis of OA remain an area of ongoing investigation. It has 
recently been discovered that the OA progression is significantly influenced by 
pyroptosis. Pyroptosis is a complex process that involves three pathways 
culminating in the assembly of Gasdermin-D (GSDMD)-N-terminal (GSDMD-NT) into 
pores through aggregation on the plasma membrane. The aggregation of GSDMD-NT 
proteins stimulates the release of inflammatory mediators, such as 
Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), Interleukin-18 (IL-18), and Matrix Metallopeptidase 13 
(MMP13), ultimately leading to cellular lysis. The pyroptosis process in 
specific cells, including synovial macrophages, fibroblast-like synoviocytes 
(FLS), chondrocytes, and subchondral osteoblasts, contributs factor to the 
development of OA. Currently, the specific cells that undergo pyroptosis first 
are not yet fully understood, and it remains unknown whether pyroptosis in one 
cell can trigger the same process in other cells. Therefore, targeting 
pyroptosis could potentially offer a novel treatment approach for OA patients. 
We present a comprehensive analysis of the molecular mechanisms and key features 
of pyroptosis. We also outline the current research progress on various aspects, 
including synovial tissue, articular cartilage, extracellular matrix (ECM), and 
subchondral bone, with a focus on pyroptosis. The aim is to provide theoretical 
references for the effective management of OA.

© 2024 Chen et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S445573
PMCID: PMC10860821
PMID: 38348279

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the authors involved in 
the research had absolutely no commercial or financial relationships that could 
in any way be seen as a potential conflict of interest.