---
reference_id: "PMID:34662579"
title: "Prenatal arsenic exposure, arsenic methylation efficiency, and neuropsychological development among preschool children in a Spanish birth cohort."
authors:
- Soler-Blasco R
- Murcia M
- Lozano M
- Sarzo B
- Esplugues A
- Riutort-Mayol G
- Vioque J
- Lertxundi N
- Santa Marina L
- Lertxundi A
- Irizar A
- Braeuer S
- Ballester F
- Llop S
journal: Environ Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112208
keywords:
- Arsenic/analysis
- Birth Cohort
- Cacodylic Acid/urine
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Methylation
- Pregnancy
- Vitamins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal arsenic exposure, arsenic methylation efficiency, and neuropsychological development among preschool children in a Spanish birth cohort.
**Authors:** Soler-Blasco R, Murcia M, Lozano M, Sarzo B, Esplugues A, Riutort-Mayol G, Vioque J, Lertxundi N, Santa Marina L, Lertxundi A, Irizar A, Braeuer S, Ballester F, Llop S
**Journal:** Environ Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envres.2021.112208](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.112208)

## Content

1. Environ Res. 2022 May 1;207:112208. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112208. Epub
2021  Oct 15.

Prenatal arsenic exposure, arsenic methylation efficiency, and
neuropsychological development among preschool children in a Spanish birth
cohort.

Soler-Blasco R(1), Murcia M(2), Lozano M(3), Sarzo B(4), Esplugues A(5),
Riutort-Mayol G(4), Vioque J(6), Lertxundi N(7), Santa Marina L(8), Lertxundi
A(9), Irizar A(10), Braeuer S(11), Ballester F(5), Llop S(12).

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology and Environmental Health Joint Research Unit,
FISABIO-Universitat Jaume I-Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Epidemiology and Environmental Health Joint Research Unit,
FISABIO-Universitat Jaume I-Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain; Health
Information Systems Analysis Service, Conselleria de Sanitat, Generalitat
Valenciana, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Epidemiology and Environmental Health Joint Research Unit,
FISABIO-Universitat Jaume I-Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain; Preventive
Medicine and Public Health, Food Sciences, Toxicology and Forensic Medicine
Department, Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Foundation for the Promotion of Health and Biomedical Research in the
Valencian Region, FISABIO-Public Health, Valencia, Spain.
(5)Epidemiology and Environmental Health Joint Research Unit,
FISABIO-Universitat Jaume I-Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain; Spanish
Consortium for Research on Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP), Madrid,
Spain; Department of Nursing, Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain.
(6)Alicante Institute for Health and Biomedical Research, ISABIAL-UMH, Alicante,
Spain.
(7)Biodonostia Health Research Institute, San Sebastian, Spain; Faculty of
Psychology of the University of the Basque Country, UPV/ EHU, San Sebastian,
Spain.
(8)Spanish Consortium for Research on Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP),
Madrid, Spain; Biodonostia Health Research Institute, San Sebastian, Spain;
Public Health Division of Gipuzkoa, Basque Government, San Sebastian, Spain.
(9)Spanish Consortium for Research on Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP),
Madrid, Spain; Biodonostia Health Research Institute, San Sebastian, Spain;
Departament of Preventive Medicine and Public Health of the University of the
Basque Country, UPV/EHU, Leioa, Spain. Electronic address:
aitana.lertxundi@ehu.eus.
(10)Biodonostia Health Research Institute, San Sebastian, Spain; Departament of
Preventive Medicine and Public Health of the University of the Basque Country,
UPV/EHU, Leioa, Spain.
(11)Institute of Chemistry, University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(12)Epidemiology and Environmental Health Joint Research Unit,
FISABIO-Universitat Jaume I-Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain; Spanish
Consortium for Research on Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP), Madrid,
Spain.

BACKGROUND: Prenatal arsenic (As) exposure could negatively affect child
neuropsychological development, but the current evidence is inconclusive.
OBJECTIVES: To explore the relationship between prenatal urinary total As (TAs)
concentrations, the As species and the methylation efficiency, and child
neuropsychological development in a Spanish birth cohort. We also studied the
effect modification produced by sex and several nutrients and elements.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Study subjects were 807 mother-child pairs participating
in the INMA (Childhood and Environment) Project. Urinary TAs and its
metabolites, monomethylarsonic acid (MMA), dimethylarsinic acid (DMA), inorganic
As (iAs) and arsenobetaine were measured in the first trimester of pregnancy.
Methylation efficiency was determined through the percentages of the metabolites
and using principal component analysis. Children's neuropsychological
development was assessed at the age of 4-5 years using the McCarthy Scales of
Children's Abilities (MSCA). Multivariable linear regression models were built
to assess the association between TAs, the As species and the maternal
methylation efficiency, and the neuropsychological scores. We explored effect
modification by sex, iron status, maternal nutrients status (serum manganese and
selenium, and urinary zinc), and maternal vitamins intake (folate, and vitamins
B12 and B6).
RESULTS: The geometric mean (95%CI) of ∑As (sum of DMA, MMA and iAs) was 7.78
(7.41, 8.17) μg/g creatinine. MMA concentrations were inversely associated with
the scores for the general, verbal, quantitative, memory, executive function and
working memory scales (i.e. β [CI95%] = -1.37 [-2.33, -0.41] for the general
scale). An inverse association between %MMA and the memory scores was found.
Children whose mothers had lower manganese, zinc and ferritin concentrations
obtained lower scores on several MSCA scales with decreasing As methylation
efficiency.
DISCUSSION: An inverse association was observed between MMA concentrations and
children's neuropsychological development. Maternal levels of manganese, zinc
and ferritin affected the association between As methylation efficiency and MSCA
scores.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112208
PMID: 34662579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
