---
reference_id: "PMID:12870261"
title: "A case of intimal hyperplasia induced by stenting for vertebral artery origin stenosis: assessed on intravascular ultrasound."
authors:
- Hayashi K
- Kitagawa N
- Morikawa M
- Kaminogo M
journal: Neurol Res
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1179/016164103101201689
keywords:
- Aged
- "Angioplasty, Balloon/adverse effects"
- Humans
- Hyperplasia
- Male
- "Postoperative Complications/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- Recurrence
- Stents/adverse effects
- Tunica Intima/pathology
- "Ultrasonography, Interventional"
- "Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency/diagnostic imaging, etiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of intimal hyperplasia induced by stenting for vertebral artery origin stenosis: assessed on intravascular ultrasound.
**Authors:** Hayashi K, Kitagawa N, Morikawa M, Kaminogo M
**Journal:** Neurol Res (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1179/016164103101201689](https://doi.org/10.1179/016164103101201689)

## Content

1. Neurol Res. 2003 Jun;25(4):357-60. doi: 10.1179/016164103101201689.

A case of intimal hyperplasia induced by stenting for vertebral artery origin 
stenosis: assessed on intravascular ultrasound.

Hayashi K(1), Kitagawa N, Morikawa M, Kaminogo M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, 1-7-1 
Sakamoto, Nagasaki-city, Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan. 
Kentaro.Hayashi@ma8.seikyou.ne.jp

We report a case of proximal vertebral artery restenosis following stent 
placement. Intravascular ultrasound study helped delineate its characteristics. 
A 69-year-old man was admitted because of dysarthria and dysphagia. Angiography 
revealed hypoplasia of left vertebral artery (VA) and remarkable stenosis of the 
proximal right VA with inadequate collateral flow from the anterior circulation. 
Balloon angioplasty and stent placement at the VA was performed to an excellent 
angiographic result with recovery of neurological symptoms. His condition 
deteriorated six months later due to intimal hyperplasia, which we evaluated by 
intravascular ultrasound (IVUS). Balloon angioplasty was then performed. Stent 
placement may induce intimal hyperplasia and IVUS is useful to assess the 
lesion.

DOI: 10.1179/016164103101201689
PMID: 12870261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]