---
reference_id: "PMID:39036884"
title: Randomized clinical trial of astaxanthin supplement on serum inflammatory markers and ER stress-apoptosis gene expression in PBMCs of women with PCOS.
authors:
- Jabarpour M
- Amidi F
- Aleyasin A
- Nashtaei MS
- Marghmaleki MS
journal: J Cell Mol Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/jcmm.18464
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized clinical trial of astaxanthin supplement on serum inflammatory markers and ER stress-apoptosis gene expression in PBMCs of women with PCOS.
**Authors:** Jabarpour M, Amidi F, Aleyasin A, Nashtaei MS, Marghmaleki MS
**Journal:** J Cell Mol Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jcmm.18464](https://doi.org/10.1111/jcmm.18464)

## Content

1. J Cell Mol Med. 2024 Jul;28(14):e18464. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.18464.

Randomized clinical trial of astaxanthin supplement on serum inflammatory 
markers and ER stress-apoptosis gene expression in PBMCs of women with PCOS.

Jabarpour M(1)(2), Amidi F(1)(3), Aleyasin A(2), Nashtaei MS(1)(2), Marghmaleki 
MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Infertility, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Infertility, Yas Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is related to pro-apoptotic and 
pro-inflammatory conditions generated by Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. This 
study aimed to determine the effect of Astaxanthin (ASX), as carotenoid with 
potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, on serum inflammatory 
markers, apoptotic factors and ER stress-apoptotic genes in peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of women with PCOS. This randomized, double-blind 
clinical trial included 56 PCOS patients aged 18-40. For 8 weeks, subjects were 
randomly assigned to one of two groups: either 12 mg ASX (n = 28) or placebo 
(n = 28). Real-time PCR was used to quantify gene expression associated with ER 
stress-apoptosis in PCOS women's PBMCs. The levels of TNF-α, IL18, IL6 and CRP 
were determined by obtaining blood samples from all patients before and after 
the intervention using Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Also, the 
levels of active caspase-3 and caspase-8 were detected in the PBMC by ELISA kit. 
Furthermore, we evaluated the efficacy of ASX on disease symptoms. Following the 
8-week intervention, ASX supplementation was able to reduce the expression of 
GRP78 (p = 0.051), CHOP (p = 0.008), XBP1 (p = 0.002), ATF4 (0.038), ATF6 
(0.157) and DR5 (0.016) when compared to the placebo. However, this decrease was 
not statistically significant for ATF6 (p = 0.067) and marginally significant 
for GRP78 (p = 0.051). The levels of TNF-α (p = 0.009), IL-18 (p = 0.003), IL-6 
(p = 0.013) and active caspase-3 (p = 0.012) were also statistically significant 
lower in the therapy group. However, there was no significant difference in CRP 
(p = 0.177) and caspase-8 (p = 0.491) levels between the treatment and control 
groups. In our study, ASX had no significant positive effect on BMI, hirsutism, 
hair loss and regularity of the menstrual cycle. It appears that ASX may benefit 
PCOS by changing the ER stress-apoptotic pathway and reducing serum inflammatory 
markers; however, additional research is required to determine this compound's 
potential relevance.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by 
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.18464
PMCID: PMC11261353
PMID: 39036884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.