---
reference_id: "PMID:26858336"
title: First-in-Human Phase I/II Study of NEOD001 in Patients With Light Chain Amyloidosis and Persistent Organ Dysfunction.
authors:
- Gertz MA
- Landau H
- Comenzo RL
- Seldin D
- Weiss B
- Zonder J
- Merlini G
- Schönland S
- Walling J
- Kinney GG
- Koller M
- Schenk DB
- Guthrie SD
- Liedtke M
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.6530
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First-in-Human Phase I/II Study of NEOD001 in Patients With Light Chain Amyloidosis and Persistent Organ Dysfunction.
**Authors:** Gertz MA, Landau H, Comenzo RL, Seldin D, Weiss B, Zonder J, Merlini G, Schönland S, Walling J, Kinney GG, Koller M, Schenk DB, Guthrie SD, Liedtke M
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2015.63.6530](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2015.63.6530)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2016 Apr 1;34(10):1097-103. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.6530. Epub 
2016 Feb 8.

First-in-Human Phase I/II Study of NEOD001 in Patients With Light Chain 
Amyloidosis and Persistent Organ Dysfunction.

Gertz MA(1), Landau H(2), Comenzo RL(2), Seldin D(2), Weiss B(2), Zonder J(2), 
Merlini G(2), Schönland S(2), Walling J(2), Kinney GG(2), Koller M(2), Schenk 
DB(2), Guthrie SD(2), Liedtke M(2).

Author information:
(1)Morie A. Gertz, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Heather Landau, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; Raymond L. Comenzo, Tufts Medical Center; 
David Seldin, Boston University, Boston, MA; Brendan Weiss, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; Jeffrey Zonder, Karmanos Cancer Institute, 
Detroit, MI; Giampaolo Merlini, Fondazione Instituto Di Ricovero e Cura a 
Carattere Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo and University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy; Stefan Schönland, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; Jackie 
Walling, JW Consulting, Hillsborough; Gene G. Kinney, Martin Koller, Dale B. 
Schenk, and Spencer D. Guthrie, Prothena Biosciences, Inc., South San Francisco; 
and Michaela Liedtke, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
gertz.morie@mayo.edu.
(2)Morie A. Gertz, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Heather Landau, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; Raymond L. Comenzo, Tufts Medical Center; 
David Seldin, Boston University, Boston, MA; Brendan Weiss, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; Jeffrey Zonder, Karmanos Cancer Institute, 
Detroit, MI; Giampaolo Merlini, Fondazione Instituto Di Ricovero e Cura a 
Carattere Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo and University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy; Stefan Schönland, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; Jackie 
Walling, JW Consulting, Hillsborough; Gene G. Kinney, Martin Koller, Dale B. 
Schenk, and Spencer D. Guthrie, Prothena Biosciences, Inc., South San Francisco; 
and Michaela Liedtke, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA.

PURPOSE: Light chain (AL) amyloidosis is caused by the accumulation of misfolded 
proteins, which induces the dysfunction of vital organs. NEOD001 is a monoclonal 
antibody targeting these misfolded proteins. We report interim data from a phase 
I/II dose-escalation/expansion study of NEOD001 in patients with AL amyloidosis 
and persistent organ dysfunction (NCT01707264).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients who had completed at least one previous 
anti-plasma cell-directed therapy, had partial hematologic response or better, 
and had persistent organ dysfunction received NEOD001 intravenously every 28 
days. Dose levels of 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and 24 mg/kg were evaluated (3 + 3 
study design). Primary objectives were to determine the maximum tolerated dose 
and the recommended dose for future studies and to evaluate safety/tolerability. 
Secondary and exploratory objectives included pharmacokinetics, immunogenicity, 
and organ responses on the basis of published consensus criteria.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven patients were enrolled in seven cohorts (dose-escalation 
component). No drug-related serious adverse events (AEs), discontinuations 
because of drug-related AEs, dose-limiting toxicities, or antidrug antibodies 
were reported. The most frequent AEs were fatigue, upper respiratory tract 
infection, cough, and dyspnea. Recommended dosing was 24 mg/kg. Pharmacokinetics 
support intravenous dosing every 28 days. Of 14 cardiac-evaluable patients, 
eight (57%) met the criteria for cardiac response and six (43%) had stable 
disease. Of 15 renal-evaluable patients, nine (60%) met the criteria for renal 
response and six (40%) had stable disease.
CONCLUSION: Monthly infusions of NEOD001 were safe and well tolerated. 
Recommended future dosing was 24 mg/kg. Organ response rates compared favorably 
with those reported previously for chemotherapy. A phase II expansion is 
ongoing. A global phase III study (NCT02312206) has been initiated. Antibody 
therapy targeting misfolded proteins is a potential new therapy for the 
management of AL amyloidosis.

© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2015.63.6530
PMCID: PMC5470113
PMID: 26858336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' disclosures of potential conflicts of 
interest are found in the article online at www.jco.org. Author contributions 
are found at the end of this article.