---
reference_id: "PMID:25598239"
title: Evaluation of children with steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome in terms of allergies.
authors:
- Yılmaz D
- Yenigün A
- Sönmez F
- Kurt Ömürlü İ
journal: Ren Fail
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2014.996087
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Eosinophils/immunology
- Female
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Hypersensitivity/complications, diagnosis, immunology"
- Immunoglobulin E/blood
- Leukocyte Count
- Male
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/drug therapy, etiology, immunology, physiopathology"
- Patient Acuity
- Skin Tests/methods
- Statistics as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of children with steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome in terms of allergies.
**Authors:** Yılmaz D, Yenigün A, Sönmez F, Kurt Ömürlü İ
**Journal:** Ren Fail (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3109/0886022X.2014.996087](https://doi.org/10.3109/0886022X.2014.996087)

## Content

1. Ren Fail. 2015 Apr;37(3):387-91. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2014.996087. Epub 2015 
Jan 19.

Evaluation of children with steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome in terms of 
allergies.

Yılmaz D(1), Yenigün A, Sönmez F, Kurt Ömürlü İ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine , Adnan Menderes University, Aydın , Turkey .

BACKGROUND: The etiology of minimal-change disease is not fully known, it is 
believed to be mediated by the immune system. Minimal-change disease also 
reported as having association with atopy. In this study, atopy history, the 
levels of serum IgE, and skin prick test in children with steroid-sensitive 
nephrotic syndrome were investigated.
METHODS: A group of 30 children (mean age 7.7 ± 2.2 years, 56.6% male) diagnosed 
with steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome were included in the study. Serum 
immunoglobulin E levels and eosinophil counts were evaluated in children with 
steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome both in relapse and remission. Skin prick 
test was performed in remission.
RESULTS: Of the 30 children investigated, 11 (36.7%) had a history of atopy. The 
median serum total IgE levels in nephrotic children in relapse, with (445 IU/mL) 
and without atopy (310 IU/mL) were significantly higher than those in remission 
(respectively, 200 IU/mL, p = 0.021, and 42 IU/mL, p = 0.001). The skin prick 
tests for all the allergens were evaluated as negative in all the patients.
CONCLUSION: It was thought that increased IgE may reflect the activation of 
immune mechanism following various stimuli rather than a direct association with 
atopy in children with steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome.

DOI: 10.3109/0886022X.2014.996087
PMID: 25598239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]