---
reference_id: "PMID:36275728"
title: "Phenotypic spectrum in recessive STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy: Four novel cases and analysis of previously reported cases."
authors:
- Wan R
- Fänder J
- Zakaraia I
- Lee-Kirsch MA
- Wolf C
- Lucas N
- Olfe LI
- Hendrich C
- Jonigk D
- Holzinger D
- Steindor M
- Schmidt G
- Davenport C
- Klemann C
- Schwerk N
- Griese M
- Schlegelberger B
- Stehling F
- Happle C
- Auber B
- Steinemann D
- Wetzke M
- von Hardenberg S
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1029423
keywords:
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Vascular Diseases/genetics
- "Skin Diseases, Vascular"
- Interferons/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic spectrum in recessive STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy: Four novel cases and analysis of previously reported cases.
**Authors:** Wan R, Fänder J, Zakaraia I, Lee-Kirsch MA, Wolf C, Lucas N, Olfe LI, Hendrich C, Jonigk D, Holzinger D, Steindor M, Schmidt G, Davenport C, Klemann C, Schwerk N, Griese M, Schlegelberger B, Stehling F, Happle C, Auber B, Steinemann D, Wetzke M, von Hardenberg S
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.1029423](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.1029423)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Oct 6;13:1029423. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1029423.
eCollection 2022.

Phenotypic spectrum in recessive STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in
infancy: Four novel cases and analysis of previously reported cases.

Wan R(1), Fänder J(2), Zakaraia I(2), Lee-Kirsch MA(3), Wolf C(3), Lucas N(3),
Olfe LI(1), Hendrich C(1), Jonigk D(4)(5), Holzinger D(6)(7), Steindor M(8),
Schmidt G(1), Davenport C(1), Klemann C(9), Schwerk N(9), Griese M(10),
Schlegelberger B(1), Stehling F(8), Happle C(9), Auber B(1), Steinemann D(1),
Wetzke M(9), von Hardenberg S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Martin Luther
University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital and Medical Faculty Carl
Gustav-Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(4)Institute of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hanover, Germany.
(5)German Center for Lung Research, Biomedical Research in Endstage and
Obstructive Lung Disease, Hannover, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatric Haemato-Oncology, University of Duisburg-Essen,
Essen, Germany.
(7)Department of Applied Health Sciences, University of Applied Sciences Bochum,
Bochum, Germany.
(8)Pediatric Pulmonology and Sleep Medicine, Cystic Fibrosis Center, Children's
Hospital, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatric Pneumology, Allergology and Neonatology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(10)Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, German Center
for Lung Research, University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU)
Munich, Munich, Germany.

Gain-of-function variants in the stimulator of interferon response cGAMP
interactor 1 (STING1) gene cause STING-Associated Vasculopathy with onset in
Infancy (SAVI). Previously, only heterozygous and mostly de novo STING1 variants
have been reported to cause SAVI. Interestingly, one variant that only leads to
SAVI when homozygous, namely c.841C>T p.(Arg281Trp), has recently been
described. However, there are no entries in public databases regarding an
autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Here, we report four additional
unrelated SAVI patients carrying c.841C>T in homozygous state. All patients had
interstitial lung disease and displayed typical interferon activation patterns.
Only one child displayed cutaneous vasculitis, while three other patients
presented with a relatively mild SAVI phenotype. Steroid and baricitinib
treatment had a mitigating effect on the disease phenotype in two cases, but
failed to halt disease progression. Heterozygous c.841C>T carriers in our
analysis were healthy and showed normal interferon activation. Literature review
identified eight additional cases with autosomal recessive SAVI caused by
c.841C>T homozygosity. In summary, we present four novel and eight historic
cases of autosomal recessive SAVI. We provide comprehensive clinical data and
show treatment regimens and clinical responses. To date, SAVI has been listed as
an exclusively autosomal dominant inherited trait in relevant databases. With
this report, we aim to raise awareness for autosomal recessive inheritance in
this rare, severe disease which may aid in early diagnosis and development of
optimized treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2022 Wan, Fänder, Zakaraia, Lee-Kirsch, Wolf, Lucas, Olfe, Hendrich,
Jonigk, Holzinger, Steindor, Schmidt, Davenport, Klemann, Schwerk, Griese,
Schlegelberger, Stehling, Happle, Auber, Steinemann, Wetzke and von Hardenberg.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1029423
PMCID: PMC9583393
PMID: 36275728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
