---
reference_id: "PMID:32679915"
title: "Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Harbinger of the Vicious Cycle of Diabetes."
authors:
- Alejandro EU
- Mamerto TP
- Chung G
- Villavieja A
- Gaus NL
- Morgan E
- Pineda-Cortel MRB
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/ijms21145003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Harbinger of the Vicious Cycle of Diabetes.
**Authors:** Alejandro EU, Mamerto TP, Chung G, Villavieja A, Gaus NL, Morgan E, Pineda-Cortel MRB
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms21145003](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21145003)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jul 15;21(14):5003. doi: 10.3390/ijms21145003.

Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Harbinger of the Vicious Cycle of Diabetes.

Alejandro EU(1), Mamerto TP(2)(3), Chung G(1), Villavieja A(2)(3), Gaus NL(3), 
Morgan E(4), Pineda-Cortel MRB(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, Medical School, University 
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(2)Research Center for the Natural and Applied Sciences, University of Santo 
Tomas, Manila 1015, Philippines.
(3)The Graduate School, University of Santo Tomas, Manila 1015, Philippines.
(4)Baystate Medical Center, Baystate Health, Springfield, MA 01199, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Santo 
Tomas, Manila 1015, Philippines.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), characterized by a transitory form of 
diabetes induced by insulin resistance and pancreatic β-cell dysfunction during 
pregnancy, has been identified as one of the major obstacles in achieving 
improved maternal and child health. Approximately 9-25% of pregnancies worldwide 
are impacted by the acute, long-term, and transgenerational health complications 
of this disease. Here, we discuss how GDM affects longstanding maternal and 
neonatal outcomes, as well as health risks that likely persist into future 
generations. In addition to the current challenges in the management and 
diagnosis of and the complications associated with GDM, we discuss current 
preclinical models of GDM to better understand the underlying pathophysiology of 
the disease and the timely need to increase our scientific toolbox to identify 
strategies to prevent and treat GDM, thereby advancing clinical care.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21145003
PMCID: PMC7404253
PMID: 32679915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.