---
reference_id: "PMID:24243991"
title: "Diuretics: a review and update."
authors:
- Roush GC
- Kaur R
- Ernst ME
journal: J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1177/1074248413497257
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diuretics: a review and update.
**Authors:** Roush GC, Kaur R, Ernst ME
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1074248413497257](https://doi.org/10.1177/1074248413497257)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2014 Jan;19(1):5-13. doi:
10.1177/1074248413497257.  Epub 2013 Nov 15.

Diuretics: a review and update.

Roush GC(1), Kaur R, Ernst ME.

Author information:
(1)1UCONN School of Medicine and St Vincent's Medical Center, Bridgeport, CT, 
USA.

Diuretics have been recommended as first-line treatment of hypertension and are 
also valuable in the management of hypervolemia and electrolyte disorders. This 
review summarizes the key features of the most commonly used diuretics. We then 
provide an update of clinical trials for diuretics during the past 5 years. 
Compared to other classes of medications, thiazide diuretics are at least as 
effective in reducing cardiovascular events (CVEs) in patients with hypertension 
and are more effective than β-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors in reducing stroke. Observational cohort data and a network analysis 
have shown that CVEs are lowered by one-fifth from chlorthalidone when compared 
to the commonly used thiazide, hydrochlorothiazide. Relative to placebo, 
chlorthalidone increases life expectancy. In those aged 80 years and older, the 
diuretic, indapamide, lowers CVEs relative to placebo. The aldosterone 
antagonist, eplerenone, lowers total mortality in early congestive heart 
failure. The benefit of eplerenone following acute myocardial infarction (MI) is 
limited to administration within 3 to 6 days post-MI. Aldosterone antagonists 
have been shown to lower the incidence of sudden cardiac death and to reduce 
proteinuria. In the setting of heart failure, long acting loop diuretics 
azosemide and torasemide are more effective in improving heart failure outcomes 
than the far more commonly used short acting furosemide. Evening dosing of 
diuretics appears to lower CVEs relative to morning dosing. In conclusion, 
diuretics are a diverse class of drugs that remain extremely important in the 
management of hypertension and hypervolemic states.

DOI: 10.1177/1074248413497257
PMID: 24243991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]