---
reference_id: "PMID:25018051"
title: "The development of Wilms tumor: from WT1 and microRNA to animal models."
authors:
- Tian F
- Yourek G
- Shi X
- Yang Y
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.07.003
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics"
- "Genes, Wilms Tumor"
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- MicroRNAs/physiology
- "Neoplasms, Experimental"
- Rats
- WT1 Proteins/physiology
- "Wilms Tumor/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The development of Wilms tumor: from WT1 and microRNA to animal models.
**Authors:** Tian F, Yourek G, Shi X, Yang Y
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.07.003)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Aug;1846(1):180-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.07.003.  Epub 2014 Jul 11.

The development of Wilms tumor: from WT1 and microRNA to animal models.

Tian F(1), Yourek G(2), Shi X(3), Yang Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medicine, Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, PR China.
(2)DL Biotech USA, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Urology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, 
Shanghai, PR China.
(4)Center for Translational Medicine, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military 
Medical University, Shanghai, PR China. Electronic address: 
nathanyang@hotmail.com.

Wilms tumor recapitulates the development of the kidney and represents a unique 
opportunity to understand the relationship between normal and tumor development. 
This has been illustrated by the findings that mutations of Wnt/β-catenin 
pathway-related WT1, β-catenin, and WTX together account for about one-third of 
Wilms tumor cases. While intense efforts are being made to explore the genetic 
basis of the other two-thirds of tumor cases, it is worth noting that, 
epigenetic changes, particularly the loss of imprinting of the DNA region 
encoding the major fetal growth factor IGF2, which results in its biallelic 
over-expression, are closely associated with the development of many Wilms 
tumors. Recent investigations also revealed that mutations of Drosha and Dicer, 
the RNases required for miRNA generation, and Dis3L2, the 3'-5' exonuclease that 
normally degrades miRNAs and mRNAs, could cause predisposition to Wilms tumors, 
demonstrating that miRNA can play a pivotal role in Wilms tumor development. 
Interestingly, Lin28, a direct target of miRNA let-7 and potent regulator of 
stem cell self-renewal and differentiation, is significantly elevated in some 
Wilms tumors, and enforced expression of Lin28 during kidney development could 
induce Wilms tumor. With the success in establishing mice nephroblastoma models 
through over-expressing IGF2 and deleting WT1, and advances in understanding the 
ENU-induced rat model, we are now able to explore the molecular and cellular 
mechanisms induced by these genetic, epigenetic, and miRNA alterations in animal 
models to understand the development of Wilms tumor. These animal models may 
also serve as valuable systems to assess new treatment targets and strategies 
for Wilms tumor.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.07.003
PMID: 25018051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]