---
reference_id: "PMID:31759959"
title: "Cardiovascular Risk in COPD: Deciphering the Contribution of Tobacco Smoking."
authors:
- Soumagne T
- Roche N
- Guillien A
- Bouhaddi M
- Rocchi S
- Hue S
- Claudé F
- Bizard L
- Andujar P
- Dalphin JC
- Degano B
journal: Chest
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.11.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular Risk in COPD: Deciphering the Contribution of Tobacco Smoking.
**Authors:** Soumagne T, Roche N, Guillien A, Bouhaddi M, Rocchi S, Hue S, Claudé F, Bizard L, Andujar P, Dalphin JC, Degano B
**Journal:** Chest (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2019.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2019.11.002)

## Content

1. Chest. 2020 Apr;157(4):834-845. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.11.002. Epub 2019
Nov  22.

Cardiovascular Risk in COPD: Deciphering the Contribution of Tobacco Smoking.

Soumagne T(1), Roche N(2), Guillien A(3), Bouhaddi M(4), Rocchi S(5), Hue S(6), 
Claudé F(7), Bizard L(8), Andujar P(9), Dalphin JC(10), Degano B(11).

Author information:
(1)Service de Physiologie-Explorations Fonctionnelles, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Besançon, Besançon, France; Service de Pneumologie, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire Besançon, Besançon, France. Electronic address: 
thibaud_soumagne@live.fr.
(2)Service de Pneumologie et Soins Intensifs Respiratoires, Groupe Hospitalier 
Cochin, Site Val de Grâce, AP-HP, and Université Paris Descartes (EA2511), 
Sorbonne-Paris-Cité, Paris, France.
(3)Equipe d'Epidémiologie Environnementale, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, 
Centre de Recherche UGA, INSERM U1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Grenoble, France.
(4)Service de Physiologie-Explorations Fonctionnelles, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Besançon, Besançon, France.
(5)Service de Parasitologie-Mycologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Besançon, Besancon, France.
(6)Immunologie-Biologie, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, AP-HP, Paris, France; INSERM 
Unité U955, Equipe 4, Créteil, France.
(7)Service de Pneumologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Besançon, Besançon, 
France.
(8)INSERM Unité U955, Equipe 4, Créteil, France.
(9)INSERM Unité U955, Equipe 4, Créteil, France; Faculté de Médecine, Université 
Paris-Est Créteil, Créteil, France; Service de Pathologie Professionnelle et de 
l'Environnement, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Créteil, Créteil, France.
(10)Service de Pneumologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Besançon, Besançon, 
France; UMR CNRS Chrono Environnement, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, 
France.
(11)Service Hospitalier Universitaire Pneumologie Physiologie, Pôle Thorax et 
Vaisseaux, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Grenoble-Alpes, Grenoble, France; 
Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.

Comment in
    Chest. 2020 Apr;157(4):753-754. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2020.01.008.

BACKGROUND: The observation that COPD is an independent risk factor for 
cardiovascular disease (CVDs) comes from comparisons between smokers with COPD 
and smokers without COPD. The mechanisms that explain increased risk of CVD in 
patients with COPD are still unclear.
OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to assess systemic arterial stiffness (a 
predictor of CVD mortality) and to evaluate its determinants in a group of 
patients with mild to moderate COPD secondary to organic dust exposure, tobacco 
smoking, or both.
METHODS: Systemic arterial stiffness was assessed by using aortic pulse wave 
velocity (aPWV). Measurements were made in 142 patients with COPD and 155 
healthy control subjects matched for age, sex, BMI, and tobacco smoking, exposed 
to tobacco smoking (n = 56/70 for COPD/control subjects, respectively), organic 
dusts (n = 44/48), or both (n = 42/37).
RESULTS: aPWV was higher in COPD than in healthy controls in subjects exposed to 
tobacco smoking and to both organic dusts and tobacco smoking. By contrast, 
among never smokers exposed to organic dusts, patients with COPD and matched 
control subjects had similar aPWV. Multivariate analysis of the 142 patients 
with COPD (exposed to tobacco smoking and/or to organic dusts) showed that 
tobacco smoking was associated with high aPWV. Moreover, soluble suppression of 
tumorigenicity 2, a marker of major cardiovascular events, was correlated with 
aPWV in these patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of an unselected group of patients with COPD with 
different causes suggests that: (1) COPD by itself is not sufficient to explain 
increased aPWV; and (2) tobacco smoking is a risk factor for elevated aPWV in 
COPD.

Copyright © 2019 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2019.11.002
PMID: 31759959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]