---
reference_id: "PMID:36058493"
title: "Early Onset Marfan Syndrome with multivalvular insufficiency: Report from a tertiary hospital in Tanzania, and a review of the recurrent c.7606G>A p.0 variant in FBN1."
authors:
- Mbwasi RM
- Maugeri A
- Joel HN
- Sadiq A
- Ahmad B
- Hamel BC
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104576
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Onset Marfan Syndrome with multivalvular insufficiency: Report from a tertiary hospital in Tanzania, and a review of the recurrent c.7606G>A p.0 variant in FBN1.
**Authors:** Mbwasi RM, Maugeri A, Joel HN, Sadiq A, Ahmad B, Hamel BC
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104576](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104576)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2022 Nov;65(11):104576. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104576. Epub
 2022 Sep 2.

Early Onset Marfan Syndrome with multivalvular insufficiency: Report from a 
tertiary hospital in Tanzania, and a review of the recurrent c.7606G>A p.0 
variant in FBN1.

Mbwasi RM(1), Maugeri A(2), Joel HN(3), Sadiq A(4), Ahmad B(5), Hamel BC(6).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Paediatrics and Child Health, Kilimanjaro Christian Medical 
Centre, P O Box 3010, Moshi, Tanzania; Department of Paediatrics and Child 
Health, Kilimanjaro Christian Medical University College, P O Box 2240, Moshi, 
Tanzania. Electronic address: ronald.mbwasi@protonmail.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Departments of Paediatrics and Child Health, Kilimanjaro Christian Medical 
Centre, P O Box 3010, Moshi, Tanzania.
(4)Department of Radiology, Kilimanjaro Christian Medical Centre, P O Box 3010, 
Moshi, Tanzania.
(5)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Kilimanjaro Christian Medical 
University College, P O Box 2240, Moshi, Tanzania.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, P O Box 
9101, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Marfan Syndrome is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder caused by 
mutations in the FBN1 gene. Early Onset Marfan Syndrome is at the severe end of 
the Marfan syndrome spectrum and is frequently associated with variants in exons 
24-32 of the FBN1 gene. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first 
molecularly confirmed patient from Sub-Saharan Africa with Early Onset Marfan 
Syndrome who presented with tall stature, arachnodactyly, multivalvular 
insufficiency and ectopia lentis. Sequencing analysis of FBN1 gene revealed a 
pathogenic (class 5) heterozygous recurrent variant in exon 61 (c.7606G > A 
p.0NM_000138.3), which was up to now not associated with rapidly progressive 
Marfan syndrome with multivalvular insufficiency and congestive cardiac failure. 
This further supports the notion that the interplay of the given FBN1 mutation, 
one or more genetic modifiers and epigenetic and environmental factors defines 
the disease phenotype.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104576
PMID: 36058493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]