---
reference_id: "PMID:29053796"
title: Exome sequencing and network analysis identifies shared mechanisms underlying spinocerebellar ataxia.
authors:
- Nibbeling EAR
- Duarri A
- Verschuuren-Bemelmans CC
- Fokkens MR
- Karjalainen JM
- Smeets CJLM
- de Boer-Bergsma JJ
- van der Vries G
- Dooijes D
- Bampi GB
- van Diemen C
- Brunt E
- Ippel E
- Kremer B
- Vlak M
- Adir N
- Wijmenga C
- van de Warrenburg BPC
- Franke L
- Sinke RJ
- Verbeek DS
journal: Brain
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awx251
keywords:
- Animals
- COS Cells
- Cadherins/genetics
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- E1A-Associated p300 Protein/genetics
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Gene Regulatory Networks/genetics
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Kinesins/genetics
- Male
- Pedigree
- Phospholipase D/genetics
- Plasmids
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
- Transfection
- Exodeoxyribonucleases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing and network analysis identifies shared mechanisms underlying spinocerebellar ataxia.
**Authors:** Nibbeling EAR, Duarri A, Verschuuren-Bemelmans CC, Fokkens MR, Karjalainen JM, Smeets CJLM, de Boer-Bergsma JJ, van der Vries G, Dooijes D, Bampi GB, van Diemen C, Brunt E, Ippel E, Kremer B, Vlak M, Adir N, Wijmenga C, van de Warrenburg BPC, Franke L, Sinke RJ, Verbeek DS
**Journal:** Brain (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awx251](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awx251)

## Content

1. Brain. 2017 Nov 1;140(11):2860-2878. doi: 10.1093/brain/awx251.

Exome sequencing and network analysis identifies shared mechanisms underlying 
spinocerebellar ataxia.

Nibbeling EAR(1), Duarri A(1), Verschuuren-Bemelmans CC(1), Fokkens MR(1), 
Karjalainen JM(1), Smeets CJLM(1), de Boer-Bergsma JJ(1), van der Vries G(1), 
Dooijes D(2), Bampi GB(1), van Diemen C(1), Brunt E(3), Ippel E(2), Kremer B(3), 
Vlak M(4), Adir N(5), Wijmenga C(1), van de Warrenburg BPC(6), Franke L(1), 
Sinke RJ(1), Verbeek DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology, Medical Center Haaglanden and Bronovo-Nebo, Den 
Hague, The Netherlands.
(5)Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, 
Technion City, Israel.
(6)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Brain. 2018 Nov 1;141(11):e78. doi: 10.1093/brain/awy258.
    Brain. 2018 Nov 1;141(11):e79. doi: 10.1093/brain/awy259.

The autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias, referred to as spinocerebellar 
ataxias in genetic nomenclature, are a rare group of progressive 
neurodegenerative disorders characterized by loss of balance and coordination. 
Despite the identification of numerous disease genes, a substantial number of 
cases still remain without a genetic diagnosis. Here, we report five novel 
spinocerebellar ataxia genes, FAT2, PLD3, KIF26B, EP300, and FAT1, identified 
through a combination of exome sequencing in genetically undiagnosed families 
and targeted resequencing of exome candidates in a cohort of singletons. We 
validated almost all genes genetically, assessed damaging effects of the gene 
variants in cell models and further consolidated a role for several of these 
genes in the aetiology of spinocerebellar ataxia through network analysis. Our 
work links spinocerebellar ataxia to alterations in synaptic transmission and 
transcription regulation, and identifies these as the main shared mechanisms 
underlying the genetically diverse spinocerebellar ataxia types.

© The Author (2017). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awx251
PMID: 29053796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]