---
reference_id: "PMID:29964160"
title: "\"Hearts that strain\": Distinguishing athlete's heart from hypertensive disease in the echo lab and beyond."
authors:
- Tsioufis C
journal: Hellenic J Cardiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.hjc.2018.06.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# "Hearts that strain": Distinguishing athlete's heart from hypertensive disease in the echo lab and beyond.
**Authors:** Tsioufis C
**Journal:** Hellenic J Cardiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hjc.2018.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hjc.2018.06.006)

## Content

1. Hellenic J Cardiol. 2018 May-Jun;59(3):189-191. doi:
10.1016/j.hjc.2018.06.006.  Epub 2018 Jun 28.

"Hearts that strain": Distinguishing athlete's heart from hypertensive disease 
in the echo lab and beyond.

Tsioufis C(1).

Author information:
(1)First Cardiology Clinic, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University 
of Athens, Hippokration Hospital, Athens, Greece. Electronic address: 
ktsioufis@hippocratio.gr.

Individuals with hypertension that engage in regular exercise comprise a special 
patient group that needs a careful approach to differentiate hypertensive 
cardiac damage from physiologic cardiac adaptations. Echocardiography is the 
diagnostic modality of choice in such cases. Hypertensive left ventricular 
hypertrophy is expected to resemble isometric exercise-associated hypertrophy in 
some but not all cases. On the other side, the hearts of regularly exercising 
individuals are expected to be normal or present with a variable mix of 
increased end-diastolic volume and increased wall thickness. It is therefore 
important to clearly document the type, frequency and duration of exercise 
performed. Diastolic dysfunction even without hypertrophy is often the first and 
only presentation in hypertension. On the contrary, diastolic function in 
athletes may be enhanced in order to maintain a stroke volume in high heart 
rates. Novel imaging techniques such as global longitudinal strain are helpful 
to identify subclinical systolic dysfunction that is inconsistent with athletic 
cardiac changes.

Copyright © 2018 Hellenic Society of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hjc.2018.06.006
PMID: 29964160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]