---
reference_id: "PMID:18239550"
title: Loss of control is central to psychological disturbance associated with binge eating disorder.
authors:
- Colles SL
- Dixon JB
- "O'Brien PE"
journal: Obesity (Silver Spring)
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/oby.2007.99
keywords:
- "Adaptation, Psychological"
- Adult
- Aged
- Appetite Regulation
- Bariatric Surgery
- Body Image
- Body Mass Index
- "Bulimia Nervosa/complications, psychology, therapy"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Depression/etiology
- "Diet, Reducing"
- Feeding Behavior
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Obesity/complications, diet therapy, psychology, surgery"
- Quality of Life
- Self-Help Groups
- "Stress, Psychological/etiology"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of control is central to psychological disturbance associated with binge eating disorder.
**Authors:** Colles SL, Dixon JB, O'Brien PE
**Journal:** Obesity (Silver Spring) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/oby.2007.99](https://doi.org/10.1038/oby.2007.99)

## Content

1. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008 Mar;16(3):608-14. doi: 10.1038/oby.2007.99. Epub
 2008 Jan 17.

Loss of control is central to psychological disturbance associated with binge 
eating disorder.

Colles SL(1), Dixon JB, O'Brien PE.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Obesity Research and Education (CORE), Monash University, The 
Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. susan.colles@med.monash.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: Binge eating disorder (BED) is positively associated with obesity and 
psychological distress, yet the behavioral features of BED that drive these 
associations are largely unexplored. The primary aim of this study was to 
investigate which core behavioral features of binge eating are most strongly 
related to psychological disturbance.
METHODS AND PROCEDURES: A cross-sectional study involved 180 bariatric surgery 
candidates, 93 members of a non-surgical weight loss support group, and 158 
general community respondents (81 men/350 women, mean age 45.8 +/- 13.3, mean 
BMI 34.8 +/- 10.8, BMI range 17.7-66.7). Validated questionnaires assessed BED 
and binge eating, symptoms of depression, appearance dissatisfaction (AD), 
quality of life (QoL) and eating-related behaviors. Features of binge eating 
were confirmed by interview. BMI was determined by clinical assessment and 
self-report.
RESULTS: The loss of control (LOC) over eating, that is, being unable to stop 
eating or control what or how much was consumed was most closely related to 
psychological markers of distress common in BED. In particular, those who 
experienced severe emotional disturbance due to feelings of LOC reported higher 
symptoms of depression (P < 0.001), AD (P = 0.009), and poorer mental 
health-related QoL (P = 0.027).
DISCUSSION: Persons who report subjective binge episodes or do not meet BED 
frequency criteria for objective binge episodes may still be at elevated risk of 
psychological disturbance and benefit from clinical intervention. Feelings of 
LOC could drive binge eaters to seek bariatric surgery in an attempt to gain 
control over body weight and psychologically disturbing eating behavior.

DOI: 10.1038/oby.2007.99
PMID: 18239550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]