---
reference_id: "PMID:8808594"
title: Premature chain termination is a unifying mechanism for COL1A1 null alleles in osteogenesis imperfecta type I cell strains.
authors:
- Willing MC
- Deschenes SP
- Slayton RL
- Roberts EJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Premature chain termination is a unifying mechanism for COL1A1 null alleles in osteogenesis imperfecta type I cell strains.
**Authors:** Willing MC, Deschenes SP, Slayton RL, Roberts EJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1996)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Oct;59(4):799-809.

Premature chain termination is a unifying mechanism for COL1A1 null alleles in 
osteogenesis imperfecta type I cell strains.

Willing MC(1), Deschenes SP, Slayton RL, Roberts EJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA. 
marcia-willing@uiowa.edu

Nonsense and frameshift mutations, which predict premature termination of 
translation, often cause a dramatic reduction in the amount of transcript from 
the mutant allele (nonsense-mediated mRNA decay). In some genes, these mutations 
also influence RNA splicing and induce skipping of the exon that contains the 
nonsense codon. To begin to dissect how premature termination alters the 
metabolism of RNA from the COL1A1 gene, we studied nonsense and frameshift 
mutations distributed over exons 11-49 of the gene. These mutations were 
originally identified in 10 unrelated families with osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) 
type 1. We observed marked reduction in steady-state amounts of mRNA from the 
mutant allele in both total cellular and nuclear RNA extracts of cells from 
affected individuals, suggesting that nonsense-mediated decay of COL1A1 RNA is a 
nuclear phenomenon. Position of the mutation within the gene did not influence 
this observation. None of the mutations induced skipping of either the exon 
containing the mutation or, for the frameshifts, the downstream exons with the 
new termination sites. Our data suggest that nonsense and frameshift mutations 
throughout most of the COL1A1 gene result in a null allele, which is associated 
with the predictable mild clinical phenotype, OI type 1.

PMCID: PMC1914787
PMID: 8808594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]