---
reference_id: "PMID:11305285"
title: "Aromatase deficiency and estrogen resistance: from molecular genetics to clinic."
authors:
- Bulun SE
journal: Semin Reprod Med
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1055/s-2000-13481
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aromatase deficiency and estrogen resistance: from molecular genetics to clinic.
**Authors:** Bulun SE
**Journal:** Semin Reprod Med (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2000-13481](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2000-13481)

## Content

1. Semin Reprod Med. 2000;18(1):31-9. doi: 10.1055/s-2000-13481.

Aromatase deficiency and estrogen resistance: from molecular genetics to clinic.

Bulun SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Molecular Genetics, Division of 
Reproductive Endocrinology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.

Our knowledge of the physiologic roles of estrogen in women and men has been 
advanced by recent descriptions of mutations disrupting estrogen biosynthesis 
and action. Aromatase deficiency results from autosomal recessive inheritance of 
mutations in the CYP19 gene. It gives rise to ambiguous genitalia in 46,XX 
individuals. At puberty, affected girls have hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, 
fail to develop secondary sexual characteristics, and exhibit progressive 
virilization. The affected 46,XY individuals have normal male sexual 
differentiation and pubertal maturation. These men are extremely tall and have 
eunuchoid proportions with continued linear growth into adulthood, lack of 
epiphyseal closure, and osteoporosis due to estrogen deficiency. Although 
estrogen was shown to be essential for normal sperm production and function in 
mice, its role in fertility is not clear in men. Thus far, one 
estrogen-resistant human, a man with a mutant estrogen receptor-alpha gene, has 
been described. His clinical presentation was similar to that of 
aromatase-deficient men.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2000-13481
PMID: 11305285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]