---
reference_id: "PMID:10944856"
title: Molecular and structural studies of Japanese patients with sialidosis type 1.
authors:
- Naganawa Y
- Itoh K
- Shimmoto M
- Takiguchi K
- Doi H
- Nishizawa Y
- Kobayashi T
- Kamei S
- Lukong KE
- Pshezhetsky AV
- Sakuraba H
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s100380070034
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- COS Cells
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mucolipidoses/enzymology, genetics"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Neuraminidase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Protein Conformation
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and structural studies of Japanese patients with sialidosis type 1.
**Authors:** Naganawa Y, Itoh K, Shimmoto M, Takiguchi K, Doi H, Nishizawa Y, Kobayashi T, Kamei S, Lukong KE, Pshezhetsky AV, Sakuraba H
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s100380070034](https://doi.org/10.1007/s100380070034)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2000;45(4):241-9. doi: 10.1007/s100380070034.

Molecular and structural studies of Japanese patients with sialidosis type 1.

Naganawa Y(1), Itoh K, Shimmoto M, Takiguchi K, Doi H, Nishizawa Y, Kobayashi T,
Kamei S, Lukong KE, Pshezhetsky AV, Sakuraba H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical
Science, Tokyo Metropolitan Organization for Medical Research, Japan.

To gain insight into the pathogenesis of sialidosis type 1, we performed
molecular investigations of two unrelated Japanese patients. Both of them are
compound heterozygotes for base substitutions of 649G-to-A and 727G-to-A, which
result in amino acid alterations V217M and G243R, respectively. Using homology
modeling, the structure of human lysosomal neuraminidase was constructed and the
structural changes caused by these missense mutations were deduced. The
predicted change due to V217M was smaller than that caused by G243R, the latter
resulting in a drastic, widespread alteration. The overexpressed gene products
containing these mutations had the same molecular weight as that of the wild
type, although the amounts of the products were moderately decreased. A
biochemical study demonstrated that the expressed neuraminidase containing a
V217M mutation was partly transported to lysosomes and showed residual enzyme
activity, although a G243R mutant was retained in the endoplasmic
reticulum/Golgi area and had completely lost the enzyme activity. Considering
the data, we surmise that the V217M substitution may be closely associated with
the phenotype of sialidosis type 1 with a late onset and moderate clinical
course.

DOI: 10.1007/s100380070034
PMID: 10944856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
