---
reference_id: "PMID:9671334"
title: Experience with epoetin alfa and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome anemia.
authors:
- Henry DH
journal: Semin Oncol
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Experience with epoetin alfa and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome anemia.
**Authors:** Henry DH
**Journal:** Semin Oncol (1998)

## Content

1. Semin Oncol. 1998 Jun;25(3 Suppl 7):64-8.

Experience with epoetin alfa and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome anemia.

Henry DH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Allegheny University and Graduate 
Hospital, Philadelphia, PA 19146, USA.

Anemia is common in patients infected with the human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV). The etiology is often multifactorial and may include the HIV infection 
itself, opportunistic infections, cancer, medications (particularly zidovudine 
and sulfa-containing drugs), or anemia of chronic disease. Epoetin alfa therapy 
may play a supportive role in some HIV-infected patients by increasing 
hemoglobin, decreasing fatigue, and reducing the need for exposure to red blood 
cell transfusions. A large, placebo-controlled trial in the United States for 
anemic patients with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome taking zidovudine 
demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in hematocrit in patients 
treated with epoetin alfa compared with placebo. Transfusion requirements 
decreased in epoetin alfa-treated patients over a 3-month period compared with 
placebo with a trend toward improvement in quality of life. Epoetin alfa was 
effective, however, only in patients whose pretreatment erythropoietin levels 
were less than 500 mU/mL. These advantages of epoetin alfa treatment may become 
especially important as HIV becomes more of a chronic disease, with the concern 
that red blood cell transfusion may accelerate progression of HIV.

PMID: 9671334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]