---
reference_id: "PMID:34034587"
title: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
authors:
- Schneider J
- Tilford B
- Safa R
- Dentel J
- Veenstra M
- Ang J
- Cashen K
journal: Perfusion
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/02676591211020904
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
**Authors:** Schneider J, Tilford B, Safa R, Dentel J, Veenstra M, Ang J, Cashen K
**Journal:** Perfusion (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/02676591211020904](https://doi.org/10.1177/02676591211020904)

## Content

1. Perfusion. 2022 Sep;37(6):639-642. doi: 10.1177/02676591211020904. Epub 2021
May  26.

Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for multisystem inflammatory syndrome in 
children.

Schneider J(1), Tilford B(1), Safa R(1)(2), Dentel J(3), Veenstra M(4), Ang 
J(5), Cashen K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Children's Hospital of 
Michigan, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, 
MI, USA.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Children's Hospital of Michigan, 
Detroit, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, 
MI, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital of Michigan, 
Detroit, MI, USA.

Early reports suggested that pediatric COVID-19 cases were less severe in 
children. Most children requiring intensive care admission in these reports had 
underlying medical conditions. Shortly after the surge of adult COVID-19 cases 
in Detroit, Michigan, previously healthy children began to present with shock 
with multiorgan dysfunction, elevated inflammatory markers, and physical exam 
findings with features of Kawasaki disease. This disease process was later 
called multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C.) In this case 
series, we describe three previously healthy children who presented with severe 
manifestations of MIS-C, including cardiogenic shock and profound systemic 
inflammation. These children developed severely depressed myocardial function 
with end-organ injury and were cannulated to veno-arterial extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) due to cardiogenic shock with arrhythmia. All 
three children improved with VA-ECMO support and anti-inflammatory treatment. 
All had complete recovery of myocardial function at discharge and 6-month 
follow-up with no significant morbidity.

DOI: 10.1177/02676591211020904
PMID: 34034587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]