---
reference_id: "PMID:36422921"
title: "Management and Prevention of Traveler's Diarrhea: A Cross-Sectional Study on Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices in Italian Occupational Physicians (2019 and 2022)."
authors:
- Riccò M
- Zaniboni A
- Satta E
- Baldassarre A
- Cerviere MP
- Marchesi F
- Peruzzi S
journal: Trop Med Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/tropicalmed7110370
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management and Prevention of Traveler's Diarrhea: A Cross-Sectional Study on Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices in Italian Occupational Physicians (2019 and 2022).
**Authors:** Riccò M, Zaniboni A, Satta E, Baldassarre A, Cerviere MP, Marchesi F, Peruzzi S
**Journal:** Trop Med Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/tropicalmed7110370](https://doi.org/10.3390/tropicalmed7110370)

## Content

1. Trop Med Infect Dis. 2022 Nov 11;7(11):370. doi: 10.3390/tropicalmed7110370.

Management and Prevention of Traveler's Diarrhea: A Cross-Sectional Study on 
Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices in Italian Occupational Physicians (2019 and 
2022).

Riccò M(1), Zaniboni A(2), Satta E(2), Baldassarre A(3), Cerviere MP(4), 
Marchesi F(2), Peruzzi S(5).

Author information:
(1)Servizio di Prevenzione e Sicurezza Negli Ambienti di Lavoro (SPSAL), 
Department of Public Health, AUSL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, I-42122 Reggio Emilia, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, I-43126 Parma, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
I-50134 Florence, Italy.
(4)Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, I-00168 Rome, Italy.
(5)Laboratorio Analisi Chimico Cliniche e Microbiologiche, Ospedale Civile di 
Guastalla, AUSL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, I-42016 Guastalla, Italy.

Even though Italian Occupational Physicians (OP) are increasingly involved in 
the managing of overseas workers, their knowledge, attitudes, and practices 
(KAP) in travel medicine are mostly undefined. We, therefore, permed a KAP study 
specifically targeting the management of travelers' diarrhea (TD) by OP. A total 
of 371 professionals (43.4% males; mean age 40.8 ± 10.9 years) completed in 2 
rounds (2019 and 2022) a specifically designed web questionnaire that inquired 
participating OP on their knowledge status (KS), risk perception, and management 
of TD through pre- and post-travel advice and interventions. Multivariable odds 
ratios (aOR) for predictors of a better knowledge status were calculated through 
regression analysis. Eventually, the majority of participants (53.4%) had 
participated in the management of cases of TD in the previous months, but only 
26.4% were reportedly involved in pre-travel consultations. The overall 
knowledge status was unsatisfying (potential range: 0-100%, actual average of 
the sample 59.6% ± 14.6), with substantial uncertainties in the management of 
antimicrobial treatment. Interestingly, only a small subset of participants had 
previously prescribed antimicrobial prophylaxis or treatment (3.5% and 1.9%, 
respectively). Main effectors of a better knowledge status were: having a 
background qualification in Hygiene and Public Health (aOR 14.769, 95%CI 5.582 
to 39.073), having previously managed any case of (aOR 3.107, 95%CI 1.484 to 
6.506), and having higher concern on TD, reported by acknowledging high 
frequency (aOR 8.579, 95%CI 3.383 to 21.756) and severity (aOR 3.386; 95%CI 
1.741 to 6.585) of this disorder. As the adherence of participating OP to 
official recommendations for TD management was unsatisfying, continuous 
Education on Travel Medicine should be improved by sharing up-to-date official 
recommendations on appropriate treatment options for TD.

DOI: 10.3390/tropicalmed7110370
PMCID: PMC9692574
PMID: 36422921

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.