---
reference_id: "PMID:35163362"
title: "Assays of CFTR Function In Vitro, Ex Vivo and In Vivo."
authors:
- Ramalho AS
- Boon M
- Proesmans M
- Vermeulen F
- Carlon MS
- Boeck K
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23031437
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assays of CFTR Function In Vitro, Ex Vivo and In Vivo.
**Authors:** Ramalho AS, Boon M, Proesmans M, Vermeulen F, Carlon MS, Boeck K
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23031437](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23031437)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 27;23(3):1437. doi: 10.3390/ijms23031437.

Assays of CFTR Function In Vitro, Ex Vivo and In Vivo.

Ramalho AS(1), Boon M(1)(2), Proesmans M(1)(2), Vermeulen F(1)(2), Carlon 
MS(3)(4), Boeck K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CF Research Lab, Woman and Child Unit, Department of Development and 
Regeneration, KU Leuven (Catholic University of Leuven), B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Pulmonology, University Hospital of 
Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, Department of Pharmaceutical and 
Pharmacological Sciences, KU Leuven (Catholic University of Leuven), B-3000 
Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases and Thoracic Surgery (BREATHE), Department 
CHROMETA, KU Leuven (Catholic University of Leuven), B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Cystic fibrosis, a multi-organ genetic disease, is characterized by abnormal 
function of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) 
protein, a chloride channel at the apical membrane of several epithelia. In 
recent years, therapeutic strategies have been developed to correct the CFTR 
defect. To evaluate CFTR function at baseline for diagnosis, or the efficacy of 
CFTR-restoring therapy, reliable tests are needed to measure CFTR function, in 
vitro, ex vivo and in vivo. In vitro techniques either directly or indirectly 
measure ion fluxes; direct measurement of ion fluxes and quenching of 
fluorescence in cell-based assays, change in transmembrane voltage or current in 
patch clamp or Ussing chamber, swelling of CFTR-containing organoids by 
secondary water influx upon CFTR activation. Several cell or tissue types can be 
used. Ex vivo and in vivo assays similarly evaluate current (intestinal current 
measurement) and membrane potential differences (nasal potential difference), on 
tissues from individual patients. In the sweat test, the most frequently used in 
vivo evaluation of CFTR function, chloride concentration or stimulated sweat 
rate can be directly measured. Here, we will describe the currently available 
bio-assays for quantitative evaluation of CFTR function, their indications, 
advantages and disadvantages, and correlation with clinical outcome measures.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23031437
PMCID: PMC8836180
PMID: 35163362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest 
related to this paper.