---
reference_id: "PMID:31908149"
title: "2019 American College of Rheumatology/Arthritis Foundation Guideline for the Management of Osteoarthritis of the Hand, Hip, and Knee."
authors:
- Kolasinski SL
- Neogi T
- Hochberg MC
- Oatis C
- Guyatt G
- Block J
- Callahan L
- Copenhaver C
- Dodge C
- Felson D
- Gellar K
- Harvey WF
- Hawker G
- Herzig E
- Kwoh CK
- Nelson AE
- Samuels J
- Scanzello C
- White D
- Wise B
- Altman RD
- DiRenzo D
- Fontanarosa J
- Giradi G
- Ishimori M
- Misra D
- Shah AA
- Shmagel AK
- Thoma LM
- Turgunbaev M
- Turner AS
- Reston J
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/acr.24131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2019 American College of Rheumatology/Arthritis Foundation Guideline for the Management of Osteoarthritis of the Hand, Hip, and Knee.
**Authors:** Kolasinski SL, Neogi T, Hochberg MC, Oatis C, Guyatt G, Block J, Callahan L, Copenhaver C, Dodge C, Felson D, Gellar K, Harvey WF, Hawker G, Herzig E, Kwoh CK, Nelson AE, Samuels J, Scanzello C, White D, Wise B, Altman RD, DiRenzo D, Fontanarosa J, Giradi G, Ishimori M, Misra D, Shah AA, Shmagel AK, Thoma LM, Turgunbaev M, Turner AS, Reston J
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.24131](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.24131)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2020 Feb;72(2):149-162. doi: 10.1002/acr.24131. 
Epub 2020 Jan 6.

2019 American College of Rheumatology/Arthritis Foundation Guideline for the 
Management of Osteoarthritis of the Hand, Hip, and Knee.

Kolasinski SL(1), Neogi T(2), Hochberg MC(3), Oatis C(4), Guyatt G(5), Block 
J(6), Callahan L(7), Copenhaver C(8), Dodge C(9), Felson D(2), Gellar K(10), 
Harvey WF(11), Hawker G(12), Herzig E(13), Kwoh CK(14), Nelson AE(7), Samuels 
J(15), Scanzello C(1), White D(16), Wise B(17), Altman RD(18), DiRenzo D(19), 
Fontanarosa J(20), Giradi G(20), Ishimori M(21), Misra D(2), Shah AA(22), 
Shmagel AK(23), Thoma LM(7), Turgunbaev M(22), Turner AS(22), Reston J(20).

Author information:
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia.
(2)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)University of Maryland School of Medicine and Veterans Affairs Maryland 
Health Care System, Baltimore.
(4)Arcadia University, Glenside, Pennsylvania.
(5)McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois.
(7)University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill.
(8)South Holland Recreational Services, University of Chicago, and Ingalls 
Memorial Hospital, Thornton, Illinois.
(9)University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor.
(10)Watchung, New Jersey.
(11)Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(12)University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(13)Fairfield, Ohio.
(14)University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson.
(15)New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, New York.
(16)University of Delaware, Newark.
(17)University of California, Davis.
(18)Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, California.
(19)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(20)ECRI Institute, Plymouth Meeting, Pennsylvania.
(21)Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California.
(22)American College of Rheumatology, Atlanta, Georgia.
(23)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.

Erratum in
    Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2021 May;73(5):764. doi: 10.1002/acr.24615.

Comment in
    Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2020 Nov;72(11):1664-1665. doi: 
10.1002/acr.24405.
    Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2020 Nov;72(11):1665. doi: 10.1002/acr.24406.

OBJECTIVE: To develop an evidence-based guideline for the comprehensive 
management of osteoarthritis (OA) as a collaboration between the American 
College of Rheumatology (ACR) and the Arthritis Foundation, updating the 2012 
ACR recommendations for the management of hand, hip, and knee OA.
METHODS: We identified clinically relevant population, intervention, comparator, 
outcomes questions and critical outcomes in OA. A Literature Review Team 
performed a systematic literature review to summarize evidence supporting the 
benefits and harms of available educational, behavioral, psychosocial, physical, 
mind-body, and pharmacologic therapies for OA. Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and Evaluation methodology was used to rate the quality 
of the evidence. A Voting Panel, including rheumatologists, an internist, 
physical and occupational therapists, and patients, achieved consensus on the 
recommendations.
RESULTS: Based on the available evidence, either strong or conditional 
recommendations were made for or against the approaches evaluated. Strong 
recommendations were made for exercise, weight loss in patients with knee and/or 
hip OA who are overweight or obese, self-efficacy and self-management programs, 
tai chi, cane use, hand orthoses for first carpometacarpal (CMC) joint OA, 
tibiofemoral bracing for tibiofemoral knee OA, topical nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for knee OA, oral NSAIDs, and intraarticular 
glucocorticoid injections for knee OA. Conditional recommendations were made for 
balance exercises, yoga, cognitive behavioral therapy, kinesiotaping for first 
CMC OA, orthoses for hand joints other than the first CMC joint, patellofemoral 
bracing for patellofemoral knee OA, acupuncture, thermal modalities, 
radiofrequency ablation for knee OA, topical NSAIDs, intraarticular steroid 
injections and chondroitin sulfate for hand OA, topical capsaicin for knee OA, 
acetaminophen, duloxetine, and tramadol.
CONCLUSION: This guideline provides direction for clinicians and patients making 
treatment decisions for the management of OA. Clinicians and patients should 
engage in shared decision-making that accounts for patients' values, 
preferences, and comorbidities. These recommendations should not be used to 
limit or deny access to therapies.

© 2020, American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.24131
PMCID: PMC11488261
PMID: 31908149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]