---
reference_id: "PMID:34399110"
title: Updated International Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Diagnostic Criteria and Surveillance and Management Recommendations.
authors:
- Northrup H
- Aronow ME
- Bebin EM
- Bissler J
- Darling TN
- de Vries PJ
- Frost MD
- Fuchs Z
- Gosnell ES
- Gupta N
- Jansen AC
- Jóźwiak S
- Kingswood JC
- Knilans TK
- McCormack FX
- Pounders A
- Roberds SL
- Rodriguez-Buritica DF
- Roth J
- Sampson JR
- Sparagana S
- Thiele EA
- Weiner HL
- Wheless JW
- Towbin AJ
- Krueger DA
- International Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Consensus Group
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.07.011
keywords:
- Child
- Consensus
- Humans
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Tuberous Sclerosis/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updated International Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Diagnostic Criteria and Surveillance and Management Recommendations.
**Authors:** Northrup H, Aronow ME, Bebin EM, Bissler J, Darling TN, de Vries PJ, Frost MD, Fuchs Z, Gosnell ES, Gupta N, Jansen AC, Jóźwiak S, Kingswood JC, Knilans TK, McCormack FX, Pounders A, Roberds SL, Rodriguez-Buritica DF, Roth J, Sampson JR, Sparagana S, Thiele EA, Weiner HL, Wheless JW, Towbin AJ, Krueger DA, International Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Consensus Group
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.07.011)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2021 Oct;123:50-66. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.07.011. 
Epub 2021 Jul 24.

Updated International Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Diagnostic Criteria and 
Surveillance and Management Recommendations.

Northrup H(1), Aronow ME(2), Bebin EM(3), Bissler J(4), Darling TN(5), de Vries 
PJ(6), Frost MD(7), Fuchs Z(8), Gosnell ES(9), Gupta N(10), Jansen AC(11), 
Jóźwiak S(12), Kingswood JC(13), Knilans TK(14), McCormack FX(10), Pounders 
A(8), Roberds SL(8), Rodriguez-Buritica DF(15), Roth J(16), Sampson JR(17), 
Sparagana S(18), Thiele EA(19), Weiner HL(20), Wheless JW(21), Towbin AJ(22), 
Krueger DA(23); International Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Consensus Group.

Collaborators: Annear NMP, Aronow ME, Bartels U, Bebin EM, Berhouma M, Bissler 
JJ, Budde K, Byars A, Chugani H, Cowen EW, Crino PB, Curatolo P, Darling TN, de 
Vries P, Dilling DF, Dunn DW, Ekong R, Ess KC, Franz DN, Frost M, Fuchs ZDB, 
Gosnell E, Guay-Woodford L, Gupta N, Haddad L, Halbert A, Hebert AA, Henske EP, 
Holmes GL, Hook D, Hulbert J, Jansen A, Johnson SR, Jóźwiak S, King B, Kingswood 
JC, Knilans TK, Koenig MK, Korf B, Krueger DA, Kwiatkowski DJ, McCormack FX, 
Moss J, Mowat D, Mowrey K, Nabbout R, Nellist MD, Northrup H, O'Callaghan F, 
Patel U, Pounders A, Roach ES, Roberds SL, Rodriguez-Buritica D, Romp R, Roth J, 
Rozenberg M, Ruoss SJ, Sahin M, Sampson J, Samuels JA, Sauter M, Smith CA, 
Soltani K, Sparagana S, Srivastava S, Stuart C, Teng JMC, Thiele EA, Towbin AJ, 
Trout A, van Eeghen A, Vanclooster S, Wang HZ, Wataya-Kaneda M, Weiner HL, 
Wheless JW, Witman P, Wright T, Wu JY, Young L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, McGovern Medical School, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas.
(2)Retina Service, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center and 
Le Bonheur Children's Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee.
(5)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland.
(6)Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Cape Town, Cape 
Town, South Africa.
(7)Minnesota Epilepsy Group, St. Paul, Minnesota.
(8)TSC Alliance, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, and 
Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(10)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(11)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, UZ Brussel, 
Neurogenetics Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(12)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(13)Cardiology Clinical Academic Group, Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research 
Centre, St Georges University of London, London, UK.
(14)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(15)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, McGovern Medical 
School, University of Texas at Houston Medical Center, Houston, Texas.
(16)Dana Children's Hospital, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, 
Israel.
(17)Institute of Medical Genetics, Division of Cancer and Genetics, Cardiff 
University Medical School, Cardiff, Wales, UK.
(18)Scottish Rite for Children and the University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas.
(19)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(20)Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(21)Professor & Chief of Pediatric Neurology, Le Bonheur Chair in Pediatric 
Neurology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center; Director, Neuroscience 
Institute & Le Bonheur Comprehensive Epilepsy Program, Co-Director Le Bonheur 
Tuberous Sclerosis Center of Excellence, Le Bonheur Children's Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee.
(22)Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Department of Radiology, University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(23)Division of Neurology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, Ohio. Electronic address: darcy.krueger@cchmc.og.

BACKGROUND: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant genetic 
disease affecting multiple body systems with wide variability in presentation. 
In 2013, Pediatric Neurology published articles outlining updated diagnostic 
criteria and recommendations for surveillance and management of disease 
manifestations. Advances in knowledge and approvals of new therapies 
necessitated a revision of those criteria and recommendations.
METHODS: Chairs and working group cochairs from the 2012 International TSC 
Consensus Group were invited to meet face-to-face over two days at the 2018 
World TSC Conference on July 25 and 26 in Dallas, TX, USA. Before the meeting, 
working group cochairs worked with group members via e-mail and telephone to (1) 
review TSC literature since the 2013 publication, (2) confirm or amend prior 
recommendations, and (3) provide new recommendations as required.
RESULTS: Only two changes were made to clinical diagnostic criteria reported in 
2013: "multiple cortical tubers and/or radial migration lines" replaced the more 
general term "cortical dysplasias," and sclerotic bone lesions were reinstated 
as a minor criterion. Genetic diagnostic criteria were reaffirmed, including 
highlighting recent findings that some individuals with TSC are genetically 
mosaic for variants in TSC1 or TSC2. Changes to surveillance and management 
criteria largely reflected increased emphasis on early screening for 
electroencephalographic abnormalities, enhanced surveillance and management of 
TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorders, and new medication approvals.
CONCLUSIONS: Updated TSC diagnostic criteria and surveillance and management 
recommendations presented here should provide an improved framework for optimal 
care of those living with TSC and their families.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.07.011
PMID: 34399110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]