---
reference_id: "PMID:27222028"
title: "Pathophysiological mechanisms of diarrhea caused by the Vibrio cholerae O1 El Tor variant: an in vivo study in mice."
authors:
- Satitsri S
- Pongkorpsakol P
- Srimanote P
- Chatsudthipong V
- Muanprasat C
journal: Virulence
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1080/21505594.2016.1192743
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiological mechanisms of diarrhea caused by the Vibrio cholerae O1 El Tor variant: an in vivo study in mice.
**Authors:** Satitsri S, Pongkorpsakol P, Srimanote P, Chatsudthipong V, Muanprasat C
**Journal:** Virulence (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21505594.2016.1192743](https://doi.org/10.1080/21505594.2016.1192743)

## Content

1. Virulence. 2016 Oct 2;7(7):789-805. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2016.1192743. Epub 
2016 May 24.

Pathophysiological mechanisms of diarrhea caused by the Vibrio cholerae O1 El 
Tor variant: an in vivo study in mice.

Satitsri S(1), Pongkorpsakol P(2), Srimanote P(3), Chatsudthipong V(1)(4)(5), 
Muanprasat C(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Physiology , Faculty of Science, Mahidol University , 
Ratchathewi , Bangkok , Thailand.
(2)b Graduate Program in Translational Medicine, Research Center, Faculty of 
Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University , Ratchathewi , Bangkok , 
Thailand.
(3)c Graduate Studies, Faculty of Allied Health Science, Thammasat University , 
Rangsit , Prathumthani , Thailand.
(4)d Excellent Center for Drug Discovery, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University 
, Ratchathewi , Bangkok , Thailand.
(5)e Center of Excellence on Medical Biotechnology (CEMB), S&T Postgraduate 
Education and Research Development Office (PERDO), Ministry of Education , 
Bangkok , Thailand.

Comment in
    Virulence. 2016 Oct 2;7(7):751-3. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2016.1212156.

Cholera is caused by infection with Vibrio cholerae. This study aimed to 
investigate the pathophysiology of diarrhea caused by the V. cholerae O1 El Tor 
variant (EL), a major epidemic strain causing severe diarrhea in several 
regions. In the ligated ileal loop model of EL-induced diarrhea in the ICR mice, 
a cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) inhibitor and a 
calcium-activated chloride channel (CaCC) inhibitor similarly inhibited 
intestinal fluid secretion. In addition, barrier disruption and NF-κB-mediated 
inflammatory responses, e.g., iNOS and COX-2 expression, were observed in the 
infected ileal loops. Interestingly, intestinal fluid secretion and barrier 
disruption were suppressed by NF-κB and COX-2 inhibitors, whereas an iNOS 
inhibitor suppressed barrier disruption without affecting fluid secretion. 
Furthermore, EP2 and EP4 PGE2 receptor antagonists ameliorated the fluid 
secretion in the infected ileal loops. The amount of cholera toxin (CT) produced 
in the ileal loops by the EL was ∼2.4-fold of the classical biotype. The CT 
transcription inhibitor virstatin, a toll-like receptor-4 (TLR-4) antibody and a 
CT antibody suppressed the EL-induced intestinal fluid secretion, barrier 
disruption and COX-2 expression. The CT at levels detected during EL infection 
induced mild intestinal barrier disruption without inducing inflammatory 
responses in mouse intestine. Collectively, this study indicates that CT-induced 
intestinal barrier disruption and subsequent TLR-4-NF-κB-mediated COX-2 
expression are involved in the pathogenesis of EL-induced diarrhea and represent 
promising novel therapeutic targets of cholera.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2016.1192743
PMCID: PMC5029298
PMID: 27222028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]