---
reference_id: "PMID:34798982"
title: Chemoprevention Considerations in Patients with Hereditary Colorectal Cancer Syndromes.
authors:
- Macaron C
- Mankaney GN
- Haider M
- Mouchli M
- Hurley K
- Burke CA
journal: Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.giec.2021.08.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chemoprevention Considerations in Patients with Hereditary Colorectal Cancer Syndromes.
**Authors:** Macaron C, Mankaney GN, Haider M, Mouchli M, Hurley K, Burke CA
**Journal:** Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.giec.2021.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giec.2021.08.005)

## Content

1. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am. 2022 Jan;32(1):131-146. doi: 
10.1016/j.giec.2021.08.005.

Chemoprevention Considerations in Patients with Hereditary Colorectal Cancer 
Syndromes.

Macaron C(1), Mankaney GN(2), Haider M(3), Mouchli M(4), Hurley K(5), Burke 
CA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Desk A 30, 9500 
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Virginia Mason Franciscan 
Health, 1100 9th Avenue, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.
(3)John W. Deming Department of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, 
1430 Tulane Avenue, #8016, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Desk A 30, 9500 
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA; Department of Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology, and Nutrition, Digestive Disease and Surgical Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Center for Behavioral Health, Desk P57, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 
44195, USA.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Desk A 30, 9500 
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA; Department of Colorectal Surgery, 
Sanford R. Weiss MD Center for Hereditary Gastrointestinal Neoplasia, Digestive 
Disease and Surgical Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. Electronic 
address: burkec1@ccf.org.

Secondary prevention of colorectal neoplasia with chemoprevention is 
long-studied area of research and clinical use in patients with the 2 most 
common hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes including Lynch syndrome and 
familial adenomatous polyposis. No medication is currently approved for use for 
the prevention of colorectal polyps or cancer in either the general population 
or individuals with the hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes. Emerging data in 
animal models and limited data in humans suggest vaccines may be the next 
breakthrough for neoplasia prevention in patients with hereditary colorectal 
cancer. Clinicians must acknowledge chemoprevention is an adjunct and does not 
supplant endoscopic surveillance.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.giec.2021.08.005
PMID: 34798982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author contributions C.A. Burke: concept, 
design, drafting, critical revision, final approval, and accountability for 
work; C. Macaron, G.N. Mankaney, M. Haider, M. Mouchli, K. Hurley: drafting, 
critical revision, final approval, and accountability for work.