---
reference_id: "PMID:39704248"
title: Expansion of the Phenotype of You-Hoover-Fong Syndrome and Possible Increased Risk of Cancer.
authors:
- De Falco A
- De Gregorio F
- Abate ME
- Paolella C
- Nigro V
- Scala I
- Brunetti-Pierri N
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63966
keywords:
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Male
- Female
- Child
- "Microcephaly/genetics, pathology, complications"
- "Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Exome Sequencing
- "Hepatoblastoma/genetics, pathology"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Siblings
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- "Liver Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expansion of the Phenotype of You-Hoover-Fong Syndrome and Possible Increased Risk of Cancer.
**Authors:** De Falco A, De Gregorio F, Abate ME, Paolella C, Nigro V, Scala I, Brunetti-Pierri N
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63966](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63966)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2025 May;197(5):e63966. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63966. Epub 2024
 Dec 20.

Expansion of the Phenotype of You-Hoover-Fong Syndrome and Possible Increased 
Risk of Cancer.

De Falco A(1), De Gregorio F(2), Abate ME(2), Paolella C(3), Nigro V(4)(5), 
Scala I(6), Brunetti-Pierri N(1)(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, University of Naples Federico 
II, Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Santobono-Pausilipon Children's Hospital, 
Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, 
Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 
Naples, Italy.
(5)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy.
(6)Department of Maternal and Child Health, Federico II University Hospital, 
Naples, Italy.
(7)Genomics and Experimental Medicine Program, Scuola Superiore Meridionale 
(SSM, School of Advanced Studies), Naples, Italy.

You-Hoover-Fong syndrome (YHFS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by global developmental delay, microcephaly, dysmorphic facial 
features, and a spectrum of neurodevelopmental abnormalities. YHFS is caused by 
pathogenic variants in TELO2, a gene involved in regulation of the cell cycle. 
To date, 29 individuals with YHFS have been reported and none of them has been 
reported to develop tumors. We describe two siblings with YHFS both presenting 
with bilateral acoustic nerve agenesis, microcephaly, and dysmorphic features. 
Notably, one sibling developed hepatoblastoma at the age of 7.5 years. Clinical 
exome sequencing revealed in both siblings compound heterozygous variants in the 
TELO2 gene. Although the development of hepatoblastoma might be coincidental, 
given the role of TELO2 in cell cycle, we suspect YHFS might be associated with 
an increased cancer susceptibility. Further cases are needed to confirm whether 
YHFS is associated with an increased risk of cancer.

© 2024 The Author(s). American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63966
PMID: 39704248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]