---
reference_id: "PMID:24555472"
title: "Interferon-stimulated genes: a complex web of host defenses."
authors:
- Schneider WM
- Chevillotte MD
- Rice CM
journal: Annu Rev Immunol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-032713-120231
keywords:
- Animals
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Immunity/physiology
- Interferons/metabolism
- Janus Kinases/metabolism
- "Receptors, Interferon/metabolism"
- STAT Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interferon-stimulated genes: a complex web of host defenses.
**Authors:** Schneider WM, Chevillotte MD, Rice CM
**Journal:** Annu Rev Immunol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-immunol-032713-120231](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-immunol-032713-120231)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Immunol. 2014;32:513-45. doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-032713-120231. 
Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Interferon-stimulated genes: a complex web of host defenses.

Schneider WM(1), Chevillotte MD, Rice CM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065; email: wschneider@rockefeller.edu , 
mchevillot@rockefeller.edu , ricec@rockefeller.edu.

Interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) products take on a number of diverse roles. 
Collectively, they are highly effective at resisting and controlling pathogens. 
In this review, we begin by introducing interferon (IFN) and the JAK-STAT 
signaling pathway to highlight features that impact ISG production. Next, we 
describe ways in which ISGs both enhance innate pathogen-sensing capabilities 
and negatively regulate signaling through the JAK-STAT pathway. Several ISGs 
that directly inhibit virus infection are described with an emphasis on those 
that impact early and late stages of the virus life cycle. Finally, we describe 
ongoing efforts to identify and characterize antiviral ISGs, and we provide a 
forward-looking perspective on the ISG landscape.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-032713-120231
PMCID: PMC4313732
PMID: 24555472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]