---
reference_id: "PMID:24774721"
title: Randomized phase II trial of hypofractionated proton versus carbon ion radiation therapy in patients with sacrococcygeal chordoma-the ISAC trial protocol.
authors:
- Uhl M
- Edler L
- Jensen AD
- Habl G
- Oelmann J
- Röder F
- Jäckel O
- Debus J
- Herfarth K
journal: Radiat Oncol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/1748-717X-9-100
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Carbon/therapeutic use
- "Chordoma/mortality, pathology, radiotherapy"
- "Dose Fractionation, Radiation"
- Feasibility Studies
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Ions/therapeutic use
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- Proton Therapy
- Quality of Life
- "Radiotherapy Planning, Computer-Assisted"
- "Radiotherapy, Intensity-Modulated"
- "Sacrococcygeal Region/pathology, radiation effects"
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized phase II trial of hypofractionated proton versus carbon ion radiation therapy in patients with sacrococcygeal chordoma-the ISAC trial protocol.
**Authors:** Uhl M, Edler L, Jensen AD, Habl G, Oelmann J, Röder F, Jäckel O, Debus J, Herfarth K
**Journal:** Radiat Oncol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1748-717X-9-100](https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-717X-9-100)

## Content

1. Radiat Oncol. 2014 Apr 29;9:100. doi: 10.1186/1748-717X-9-100.

Randomized phase II trial of hypofractionated proton versus carbon ion radiation 
therapy in patients with sacrococcygeal chordoma-the ISAC trial protocol.

Uhl M(1), Edler L, Jensen AD, Habl G, Oelmann J, Röder F, Jäckel O, Debus J, 
Herfarth K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer 
Feld 400, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Matthias.Uhl@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: Chordomas are relatively rare lesions of the bones. About 30% occur 
in the sacrococcygeal region. Surgical resection is still the standard 
treatment. Due to the size, proximity to neurovascular structures and the 
complex anatomy of the pelvis, a complete resection with adequate safety margin 
is difficult to perform. A radical resection with safety margins often leads to 
the loss of bladder and rectal function as well as motoric/sensoric dysfunction. 
The recurrence rate after surgery alone is comparatively high, such that 
adjuvant radiation therapy is very important for improving local control rates. 
Proton therapy is still the international standard in the treatment of 
chordomas. High-LET beams such as carbon ions theoretically offer biologic 
advantages in slow-growing tumors. Data of a Japanese study of patients with 
unresectable sacral chordoma showed comparable high control rates after 
hypofractionated carbon ion therapy only.
METHODS AND DESIGN: This clinical study is a prospective randomized, monocentric 
phase II trial. Patients with histologically confirmed sacrococcygeal chordoma 
will be randomized to either proton or carbon ion radiation therapy stratified 
regarding the clinical target volume. Target volume delineation will be carried 
out based on CT and MRI data. In each arm the PTV will receive 64 GyE in 16 
fractions. The primary objective of this trial is safety and feasibility of 
hypofractionated irradiation in patients with sacrococygeal chordoma using 
protons or carbon ions in raster scan technique for primary or additive 
treatment after R2 resection. The evaluation is therefore based on the 
proportion of treatments without Grade 3-5 toxicity (CTCAE, version 4.0) up to 
12 months after treatment and/or discontinuation of the treatment for any reason 
as primary endpoint. Local-progression free survival, overall survival and 
quality of life will be analyzed as secondary end points.
DISCUSSION: The aim of this study is to confirm the toxicity results of the 
Japanese data in raster scan technique and to compare it with the toxicity 
analysis of proton therapy given in the same fractionation. Using this data, a 
further randomized phase III trial is planned, comparing hypofractionated proton 
and carbon ion irradiation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01811394.

DOI: 10.1186/1748-717X-9-100
PMCID: PMC4016619
PMID: 24774721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]