---
reference_id: "PMID:34675305"
title: Creation of X-linked Alport syndrome rat model with Col4a5 deficiency.
authors:
- Namba M
- Kobayashi T
- Kohno M
- Koyano T
- Hirose T
- Fukushima M
- Matsuyama M
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00354-y
keywords:
- Animals
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Male
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, pathology"
- Rats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Creation of X-linked Alport syndrome rat model with Col4a5 deficiency.
**Authors:** Namba M, Kobayashi T, Kohno M, Koyano T, Hirose T, Fukushima M, Matsuyama M
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-021-00354-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-00354-y)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2021 Oct 21;11(1):20836. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-00354-y.

Creation of X-linked Alport syndrome rat model with Col4a5 deficiency.

Namba M(1), Kobayashi T(#)(1), Kohno M(#)(1), Koyano T(1), Hirose T(2)(3),
Fukushima M(1)(4), Matsuyama M(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Shigei Medical Research Institute, 2117
Yamada, Minami-ku, Okayama, 701-0202, Japan.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine, Tohoku Medical
and Pharmaceutical University, Sendai, Japan.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Applied Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(4)Shigei Medical Research Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(5)Division of Molecular Genetics, Shigei Medical Research Institute, 2117
Yamada, Minami-ku, Okayama, 701-0202, Japan. matsuyama@shigei.or.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2021 Nov 8;11(1):22137. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-01409-w.

Alport syndrome is an inherited chronic human kidney disease, characterized by
glomerular basement membrane abnormalities. This disease is caused by mutations
in COL4A3, COL4A4, or COL4A5 gene. The knockout mice for Col4α3, Col4α4, and
Col4α5 are developed and well characterized for the study of Alport syndrome.
However, disease progression and effects of pharmacological therapy depend on
the genetic variability. This model was reliable only to mouse. In this study,
we created a novel Alport syndrome rat model utilizing the rGONAD technology,
which generated rat with a deletion of the Col4α5 gene. Col4α5 deficient rats
showed hematuria, proteinuria, high levels of BUN, Cre, and then died at 18 to
28 weeks of age (Hemizygous mutant males). Histological and ultrastructural
analyses displayed the abnormalities including parietal cell hyperplasia,
mesangial sclerosis, and interstitial fibrosis. Then, we demonstrated that
α3/α4/α5 (IV) and α5/α5/α6 (IV) chains of type IV collagen disrupted in Col4α5
deficient rats. Thus, Col4α5 mutant rat is a reliable candidate for the Alport
syndrome model for underlying the mechanism of kidney diseases and further
identifying potential therapeutic targets for human renal diseases.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-00354-y
PMCID: PMC8531394
PMID: 34675305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
