---
reference_id: "PMID:20301546"
title: Hereditary Motor and Sensory Neuropathy with Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Gauvreau C
- Brisson JD
- Dupré N
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Motor and Sensory Neuropathy with Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Gauvreau C, Brisson JD, Dupré N

## Content

1. Hereditary Motor and Sensory Neuropathy with Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum.

Gauvreau C(1), Brisson JD(2), Dupré N(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2006 Feb 2 [updated 2020 Sep 17].

Author information:
(1)Neurology resident, CHU de Québec – Enfant-Jésus, Laval University, Quebec
City, Canada
(2)Neurologist, Groupe de Recherche Interdisciplinaire sur les Maladies
Neuromusculaires, Centre Intégré Universitaire de Santé et de Services Sociaux
du Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean;, Sherbrooke University, Quebec, Canada
(3)Neurologist, Neurogenetics Clinic, Department of Neurological Sciences, CHA –
Enfant-Jésus, Quebec City, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy with agenesis
of the corpus callosum (HMSN/ACC), a neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative
disorder, is characterized by severe progressive sensorimotor neuropathy with
resulting hypotonia, areflexia, and amyotrophy, and by variable degrees of
dysgenesis of the corpus callosum. Mild-to-severe intellectual disability and
"psychotic episodes" during adolescence are observed. Sensory modalities are
moderately to severely affected beginning in infancy. The average age of onset
of walking is 3.8 years; the average age of loss of walking is 13.8 years; the
average age of death is 33 years.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of HMSN/ACC is established in a proband with
suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC12A6 identified by
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Walking aids such as canes or walkers
are required. As the disease progresses, orthoses for upper and lower limbs and
physiotherapy are needed to prevent contractures. Early
developmental/educational intervention addresses cognitive delays. Depending on
severity, individuals with HMSN/ACC usually require corrective surgery for
scoliosis. Neuroleptics may be used to treat psychiatric manifestations, usually
during adolescence. Surveillance: Monitor in the early teens for scoliosis and
in the late teens for psychiatric manifestations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: HMSN/ACC is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of
being unaffected and not a carrier. Heterozygotes (carriers) are asymptomatic.
Once the SLC12A6 pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family
member, carrier testing for at-risk family members and prenatal and
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301546
