---
reference_id: "PMID:39849212"
title: Compound heterozygous TMEM67 biallelic variants including a novel frameshift mutation in two Filipino adolescent siblings with Joubert syndrome.
authors:
- Solijon KLK
- Engkong RO
- Cavan BCV
- Ong LY
- Chen YH
- Lin HI
- Lin CH
- Saranza G
journal: J Neural Transm (Vienna)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00702-025-02885-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compound heterozygous TMEM67 biallelic variants including a novel frameshift mutation in two Filipino adolescent siblings with Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Solijon KLK, Engkong RO, Cavan BCV, Ong LY, Chen YH, Lin HI, Lin CH, Saranza G
**Journal:** J Neural Transm (Vienna) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00702-025-02885-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-025-02885-4)

## Content

1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2025 May;132(5):655-661. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-025-02885-4. Epub 2025 Jan 23.

Compound heterozygous TMEM67 biallelic variants including a novel frameshift 
mutation in two Filipino adolescent siblings with Joubert syndrome.

Solijon KLK(#)(1), Engkong RO(#)(2), Cavan BCV(3)(4), Ong LY(2), Chen YH(5), Lin 
HI(5), Lin CH(5), Saranza G(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Section of Adult Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chong Hua 
Hospital, Fuente, Cebu, Philippines.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center, Cebu, 
Philippines.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Chong Hua Hospital &Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical 
Center, Cebu, Philippines.
(4)Center for Human Genetics Services, Institute of Human Genetics, National 
Institutes of Health, University of the Philippines Manila, Pedro Gil St, 
Ermita, Manila, 1000, Philippines.
(5)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Section of Adult Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chong Hua 
Hospital, Fuente, Cebu, Philippines. gerardsaranza@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center, Cebu, 
Philippines. gerardsaranza@gmail.com.
(8)Movement Disorders Service, Chong Hua Hospital & Vicente Sotto Memorial 
Medical Center, Cebu, Philippines. gerardsaranza@gmail.com.
(9)Departments of Anatomy & Internal Medicine, Cebu Institute of Medicine, Cebu, 
Philippines. gerardsaranza@gmail.com.
(10)Department of Neurosciences, University of the Philippines-Philippine 
General Hospital, Manila, Philippines. gerardsaranza@gmail.com.
(11), Room 809, Medical Mall, Chong Hua Hospital, Cebu, Philippines. 
gerardsaranza@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Joubert Syndrome (JS) is a congenital cerebellar ataxia typically inherited in 
an autosomal recessive pattern, although rare X-linked inheritance can occur. It 
is characterized by hypotonia evolving into ataxia, global developmental delay, 
oculomotor apraxia, breathing dysregulation, and multiorgan involvement. To 
date, there are 40 causative genes implicated in JS, all of which encode 
proteins of the primary cilium. Primary cilia play a crucial role in the normal 
development and function of many organs, including parts of the brain 
(cerebellum and brainstem), kidneys, and the retina. This likely explains the 
multiorgan involvement seen in JS. In this report, we present the first 
genetically confirmed case of JS in two Filipino adolescent siblings who had 
early onset ataxia, hepatomegaly, and global developmental delay. A cranial CT 
scan revealed the Molar Tooth Sign (MTS). Whole Exome Sequencing (WES), 
performed via buccal swab, showed biallelic pathogenic variants at 
NM_153704.6:c.2086 C > T (NP_714915.3:p.Leu696Phe) and NM_153704.6:c.431del 
(NP_714915.3:p.Leu144CysfsTer19) in TMEM67, which are associated with Joubert 
Syndrome 6 (OMIM:610688) in a compound heterozygous state. The prevalence of 
NM_153704.6:c.2086 C > T (NP_714915.3:p.Leu696Phe) in TMEM67 variant is very 
rare (< 0.001%), and the NM_153704.6:c.431del (NP_714915.3:p.Leu144CysfsTer19) 
has not been recorded. This case contributes valuable information to the 
expanding knowledge of JS and its related disorders.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Austria, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-025-02885-4
PMID: 39849212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Consent to participate: Informed 
consent was obtained from all involved family members. Counseling was provided 
before the genetic testing and during the discussion of the test results. 
Consent for publication: Patients’ guardians signed informed consent regarding 
publishing their data and photographs. Competing interests: The authors have no 
competing interests to declare that are relevant to this article’s content.