---
reference_id: "PMID:21389910"
title: Medical management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Naghi JJ
- Siegel RJ
journal: Rev Cardiovasc Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.3909/ricm0546
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medical management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Naghi JJ, Siegel RJ
**Journal:** Rev Cardiovasc Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3909/ricm0546](https://doi.org/10.3909/ricm0546)

## Content

1. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2010 Fall;11(4):202-17. doi: 10.3909/ricm0546.

Medical management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Naghi JJ(1), Siegel RJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology and the Heart Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common genetically transmitted 
cardiomyopathy. The underlying cause of HCM has been attributed to a number of 
mutations within genes encoding primarily for sarcomeric proteins, which lead to 
a heterogeneous phenotype of left ventricular hypertrophy in the absence of 
other causes (eg, hypertension, aortic stenosis, or a discrete membranous 
subaortic stenosis). Symptoms may range from mild to severely limiting and 
consist of dyspnea and chest pain with exertion or at rest, syncope, or even 
sudden cardiac death (SCD). The majority of patients with HCM are treated 
medically. The primary aim of therapy is to reduce symptoms, but it should also 
address the risk of SCD. Throughout the years, numerous medical treatments have 
been used to achieve symptom control in these patients, and include medications 
such as β-blockers, calcium channel blockers, amiodarone, disopyramide, and 
angiotensin receptor blockers. This review provides an overview of the current 
medical treatment of HCM.

DOI: 10.3909/ricm0546
PMID: 21389910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]