---
reference_id: "PMID:28796572"
title: Endoglin and alk1 as therapeutic targets for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.
authors:
- Ruiz-Llorente L
- Gallardo-Vara E
- Rossi E
- Smadja DM
- Botella LM
- Bernabeu C
journal: Expert Opin Ther Targets
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/14728222.2017.1365839
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endoglin and alk1 as therapeutic targets for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Ruiz-Llorente L, Gallardo-Vara E, Rossi E, Smadja DM, Botella LM, Bernabeu C
**Journal:** Expert Opin Ther Targets (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14728222.2017.1365839](https://doi.org/10.1080/14728222.2017.1365839)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2017 Oct;21(10):933-947. doi: 
10.1080/14728222.2017.1365839. Epub 2017 Aug 20.

Endoglin and alk1 as therapeutic targets for hereditary hemorrhagic 
telangiectasia.

Ruiz-Llorente L(1), Gallardo-Vara E(1), Rossi E(2), Smadja DM(2), Botella LM(1), 
Bernabeu C(1).

Author information:
(1)a Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 
Raras (CIBERER) , Madrid , Spain.
(2)b Faculté de Pharmacie , Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité and 
Inserm UMR-S1140 , Paris , France.

Erratum in
    Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2017 Oct;21(10):995. doi: 
10.1080/14728222.2017.1372091.

Hereditary Haemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT) is as an autosomal dominant trait 
characterized by frequent nose bleeds, mucocutaneous telangiectases, 
arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) of the lung, liver and brain, and 
gastrointestinal bleedings due to telangiectases. HHT is originated by mutations 
in genes whose encoded proteins are involved in the transforming growth factor β 
(TGF-β) family signalling of vascular endothelial cells. In spite of the great 
advances in the diagnosis as well as in the molecular, cellular and animal 
models of HHT, the current treatments remain just at the palliative level. Areas 
covered: Pathogenic mutations in genes coding for the TGF-β receptors endoglin 
(ENG) (HHT1) or the activin receptor-like kinase-1 (ACVRL1 or ALK1) (HHT2), are 
responsible for more than 80% of patients with HHT. Therefore, ENG and ALK1 are 
the main potential therapeutic targets for HHT and the focus of this review. The 
current status of the preclinical and clinical studies, including the 
anti-angiogenic strategy, have been addressed. Expert opinion: Endoglin and ALK1 
are attractive therapeutic targets in HHT. Because haploinsufficiency is the 
pathogenic mechanism in HHT, several therapeutic approaches able to enhance 
protein expression and/or function of endoglin and ALK1 are keys to find novel 
and efficient treatments for the disease.

DOI: 10.1080/14728222.2017.1365839
PMID: 28796572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]