---
reference_id: "PMID:23254328"
title: "[Osteochondrosis of the pediatric foot]."
authors:
- Arbab D
- Wingenfeld C
- Rath B
- Lüring C
- Quack V
- Tingart M
journal: Orthopade
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00132-012-1988-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Foot Diseases/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteochondrosis/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Pain/diagnosis, etiology, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Osteochondrosis of the pediatric foot].
**Authors:** Arbab D, Wingenfeld C, Rath B, Lüring C, Quack V, Tingart M
**Journal:** Orthopade (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00132-012-1988-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00132-012-1988-6)

## Content

1. Orthopade. 2013 Jan;42(1):20-9. doi: 10.1007/s00132-012-1988-6.

[Osteochondrosis of the pediatric foot].

[Article in German]

Arbab D(1), Wingenfeld C, Rath B, Lüring C, Quack V, Tingart M.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Orthopädie, Universitätsklinikum Aachen, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074, 
Aachen, Deutschland. darbab@gmx.de

Osteochondrosis is a heterogeneous group of self-limiting conditions 
characterized by disturbance of enchondral ossification caused by a lack of 
circulation. Foot pain is a relatively common problem in children and 
adolescents and may be due to osteochondrosis. Osteochondrosis of the growing 
foot shows painful radiological alterations including increased density, 
fragmentation and irregularity of the epiphyses, physes and apophyses. Lacking 
etiologic and pathophysiologic information, ostoechondroses have been documented 
in almost every bone of the foot and therefore should be considered in the 
differential diagnosis when evaluating pediatric foot pain. The most common 
localizations of osteochondroses of the growing foot include the navicular as 
Kohler's syndrome, the metatarsal as Freiberg's infraction and calcaneal 
apophysitis as Sever's disease. Prognosis and final outcome vary considerably 
between the different localizations. Physicians should therefore be informed 
about the etiology, clinical presentation and treatment options for 
osteochondroses of the growing foot.

DOI: 10.1007/s00132-012-1988-6
PMID: 23254328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]