---
reference_id: "PMID:34449152"
title: "Clinical and molecular characteristics of carnitineacylcarnitine translocase deficiency with c.270delC and a novel c.408C>A variant."
authors:
- Gürbüz BB
- Yılmaz DY
- Özgül RK
- Koşukcu C
- Dursun A
- Sivri HS
- Coşkun T
- Tokatlı A
journal: Turk J Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.04.017
keywords:
- Carnitine
- Carnitine Acyltransferases/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
- Membrane Transport Proteins
- Muscular Diseases
- Mutation
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular characteristics of carnitineacylcarnitine translocase deficiency with c.270delC and a novel c.408C>A variant.
**Authors:** Gürbüz BB, Yılmaz DY, Özgül RK, Koşukcu C, Dursun A, Sivri HS, Coşkun T, Tokatlı A
**Journal:** Turk J Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.24953/turkjped.2021.04.017](https://doi.org/10.24953/turkjped.2021.04.017)

## Content

1. Turk J Pediatr. 2021;63(4):691-696. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.04.017.

Clinical and molecular characteristics of carnitineacylcarnitine translocase
deficiency with c.270delC and a novel c.408C>A variant.

Gürbüz BB(1), Yılmaz DY(2), Özgül RK(2), Koşukcu C(3), Dursun A(1), Sivri HS(1),
Coşkun T(1), Tokatlı A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Metabolism, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine,
Ankara.
(2)Department of Pediatric Metabolism, Hacettepe University Institute of Child
Health, Ankara.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, Hacettepe University Institute of Health
Sciences, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency (CACTD) is a rare,
autosomal recessive, and highly lethal fatty acid oxidation (FAO) disorder
caused by defective acylcarnitine transport across the mitochondrial membrane.
CACTD is characterized by severe episodes of hypoglycemia and hyperammonemia,
seizures, cardiomyopathy, liver dysfunction, severe neurological damage, and
muscle weakness. Herein, we described the clinical features, biochemical, and
molecular findings of three patients with CACTD, presented with poor feeding,
hypoglycemia, liver dysfunctions, and hyperammonemia, but died despite intensive
treatment.
CASES: All cases had similar signs and symptoms like poor feeding and
respiratory failure associated with liver dysfunction. Urinary organic acid
profiles in the presence of hypoglycemia and hyperammonemia led us to the
possible diagnosis of one of fatty acid β-oxidation defects. Results of the
molecular analyses were compatible with CACTD. In addition to known mutation
(c.270delC;p.Phe91Leufs*38) we detected a novel one (c.408C > A;p.Cys136*).
CONCLUSIONS: All three cases died despite a very intensive therapy. Based on our
experience with these three cases, it can be said that CACTD has a relatively
poor prognosis, molecular studies are of most importance in suspected cases for
the final diagnosis and such studies might be of help while giving genetic
counselling and guidance to parents for future pregnancies.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.04.017
PMID: 34449152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
