---
reference_id: "PMID:11508279"
title: "The accelerator hypothesis: weight gain as the missing link between Type I and Type II diabetes."
authors:
- Wilkin TJ
journal: Diabetologia
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1007/s001250100548
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The accelerator hypothesis: weight gain as the missing link between Type I and Type II diabetes.
**Authors:** Wilkin TJ
**Journal:** Diabetologia (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s001250100548](https://doi.org/10.1007/s001250100548)

## Content

1. Diabetologia. 2001 Jul;44(7):914-22. doi: 10.1007/s001250100548.

The accelerator hypothesis: weight gain as the missing link between Type I and 
Type II diabetes.

Wilkin TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Postgraduate Medical School, Derriford Hospital, 
Plymouth, UK. T.Wilkin@plymouth.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2002 Feb;45(2):288-9; author reply 289. doi: 
10.1007/s00125-001-0724-2.
    Diabetologia. 2007 Aug;50(8):1780. doi: 10.1007/s00125-007-0725-x.

Blood glucose concentrations are controlled by a loop incorporating two 
components, the beta cells which secrete insulin and the insulin-sensitive 
tissues (liver, muscle, adipose) which respond to it. Loss of blood glucose 
control might result from failure of the beta cells to secrete insulin, 
resistance of the tissues to its action, or a combination of both. The 
distinctions between Type I (insulin-dependent) and Type II 
(non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus are becoming increasingly blurred both 
clinically and aetiologically, where beta-cell insufficiency is the shared 
characteristic. The 'Accelerator Hypothesis' identifies three processes which 
variably accelerate the loss of beta cells through apoptosis: constitution, 
insulin resistance and autoimmunity. None of the accelerators leads to diabetes 
without excess weight gain, a trend which the 'Accelerator Hypothesis' deems 
central to the rising incidence of both types of diabetes in the industrially 
developed world. Weight gain causes an increase in insulin resistance, which 
results in the weakening of glucose control. The rising blood glucose 
(glucotoxicity) accelerates beta-cell apoptosis directly in all and, by inducing 
beta-cell immunogens, further accelerates it in a subset genetically predisposed 
to autoimmunity. Rather than overlap between two types of diabetes, the 
'Accelerator Hypothesis' envisages overlay. Body mass is central to the 
development and rising incidence of all diabetes. Only tempo distinguishes the 
'types'. The control of weight gain, and with it insulin resistance, could be 
the means of minimising both.

DOI: 10.1007/s001250100548
PMID: 11508279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]