---
reference_id: "PMID:31981610"
title: Molecular epidemiology and evolution of Haemophilus influenzae.
authors:
- Wen S
- Feng D
- Chen D
- Yang L
- Xu Z
journal: Infect Genet Evol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104205
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular epidemiology and evolution of Haemophilus influenzae.
**Authors:** Wen S, Feng D, Chen D, Yang L, Xu Z
**Journal:** Infect Genet Evol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104205](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104205)

## Content

1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Jun;80:104205. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104205. Epub
 2020 Jan 22.

Molecular epidemiology and evolution of Haemophilus influenzae.

Wen S(1), Feng D(1), Chen D(2), Yang L(3), Xu Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Electronic address: 
jykresearch@126.com.
(4)School of Food Science and Engineering, Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for 
Green Processing of Natural Products and Product Safety, South China University 
of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China; Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, 
University of Maryland, Baltimore 21201, USA; Overseas Expertise Introduction 
Center for Discipline Innovation of Food Nutrition and Human Health (111 
Center), Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: zhenbo.xu@hotmail.com.

Haemophilus influenzae remains a common cause of illness in children worldwide. 
H. influenzae type b is the leading cause of bacterial meningitis in children 
before introduction of vaccination and is a common cause of pneumonia, 
epiglottis and septic arthritis. Since the implementation of the Hib conjugate 
vaccine, the non-typeable H. influenzae has rapidly decreased in respiratory and 
invasive infections in children and adults. However, the rate of antibiotic 
resistance of H. influenzae varies with region and period and is usually on the 
rise. In this review, typing of H. influenzae, virulence factors and resistance 
will be dissertated.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104205
PMID: 31981610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
report no conflicts of interest.