---
reference_id: "PMID:30909051"
title: "Arsenic release from marine sedimentary rock after excavation from urbanized coastal areas: Oxidation of framboidal pyrite and subsequent natural suppression of arsenic release."
authors:
- Kamata A
- Katoh M
journal: Sci Total Environ
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.03.217
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic release from marine sedimentary rock after excavation from urbanized coastal areas: Oxidation of framboidal pyrite and subsequent natural suppression of arsenic release.
**Authors:** Kamata A, Katoh M
**Journal:** Sci Total Environ (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.03.217](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.03.217)

## Content

1. Sci Total Environ. 2019 Jun 20;670:752-759. doi: 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.03.217. Epub 2019 Mar 15.

Arsenic release from marine sedimentary rock after excavation from urbanized 
coastal areas: Oxidation of framboidal pyrite and subsequent natural suppression 
of arsenic release.

Kamata A(1), Katoh M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, School of Agriculture, Meiji 
University, 1-1-1, Higashimita, Tama, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.
(2)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, School of Agriculture, Meiji 
University, 1-1-1, Higashimita, Tama, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan. 
Electronic address: mkatoh@meiji.ac.jp.

Massive quantities of marine sedimentary rock are excavated from urban coastal 
areas for making underground spaces available for infrastructure projects 
globally. The excavated rock often contains low levels of framboidal pyrite, 
which can release arsenic (As) to levels that exceed environmental standards. In 
the present study, changes in As release and its phases were investigated during 
oxidation of framboidal pyrite in marine sedimentary rock following exposure to 
the atmosphere. Batch leaching tests showed that As release increases with 
atmospheric exposures over 14 days, and then decreases. In unexposed rock, 79% 
of As released was As(III), but the proportion of As(V) increased with 
atmospheric exposure times. The ratio of readily soluble As fractions (fraction 
1 + 2) following sequential extraction also increased during the first 14 days 
of atmospheric exposures, and then decreased. In comparisons of As phases before 
and after leaching tests of atmosphere-exposed rocks, ratios of readily soluble 
As fractions decreased over 90-day atmospheric exposures. Amounts of amorphous 
iron also increased with the duration of atmospheric exposures. However, X-ray 
diffraction and scanning electron microscope analyses showed that framboidal 
pyrite morphology was maintained after 90 days of atmospheric exposure. Herein, 
we identify factors that control As release and its phases from marine 
sedimentary rock after excavation. The results will inform future studies that 
will indicate when and how to evaluate the risks of As release from marine 
sedimentary rocks containing framboidal pyrite.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.03.217
PMID: 30909051