---
reference_id: "PMID:37085424"
title: Current Landscape of Genomic Biomarkers in Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma.
authors:
- Cotta BH
- Choueiri TK
- Cieslik M
- Ghatalia P
- Mehra R
- Morgan TM
- Palapattu GS
- Shuch B
- Vaishampayan U
- Van Allen E
- Ari Hakimi A
- Salami SS
journal: Eur Urol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2023.04.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Landscape of Genomic Biomarkers in Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Cotta BH, Choueiri TK, Cieslik M, Ghatalia P, Mehra R, Morgan TM, Palapattu GS, Shuch B, Vaishampayan U, Van Allen E, Ari Hakimi A, Salami SS
**Journal:** Eur Urol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eururo.2023.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2023.04.003)

## Content

1. Eur Urol. 2023 Aug;84(2):166-175. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2023.04.003. Epub 2023
 Apr 19.

Current Landscape of Genomic Biomarkers in Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma.

Cotta BH(1), Choueiri TK(2), Cieslik M(3), Ghatalia P(4), Mehra R(5), Morgan 
TM(6), Palapattu GS(6), Shuch B(7), Vaishampayan U(8), Van Allen E(2), Ari 
Hakimi A(9), Salami SS(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Michigan 
Center for Translational Pathology, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Michigan 
Center for Translational Pathology, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 
University of Michigan Rogel Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Urology, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; University of 
Michigan Rogel Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(7)Department of Urology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)University of Michigan Rogel Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Department of 
Internal Medicine, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(9)Division of Urology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA.
(10)Department of Urology, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Michigan 
Center for Translational Pathology, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 
University of Michigan Rogel Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Electronic 
address: simpa@med.umich.edu.

CONTEXT: Dramatic gains in our understanding of the molecular biology of clear 
cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) have created a foundation for clinical 
translation to improve patient care.
OBJECTIVE: To review and contextualize clinically impactful data surrounding 
genomic biomarkers in ccRCC.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: A systematic literature search was conducted focusing on 
genomic-based biomarkers with an emphasis on studies assessing clinical 
outcomes.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: The advancement of tumor sequencing techniques has led to a 
rapid increase in the knowledge of the molecular underpinnings of ccRCC and with 
that the discovery of multiple candidate genomic biomarkers. These include 
somatic gene mutations such as VHL, PBRM1, SETD2, and BAP1; copy number 
variations; transcriptomic multigene signatures; and specific immune cell 
populations. Many of these biomarkers have been assessed for their association 
with survival and a smaller number as potential predictors of a response to 
systemic therapy. In this scoping review, we discuss many of these biomarkers in 
detail. Further studies are needed to continue to refine and validate these 
molecular tools for risk stratification, with the ultimate goal of improving 
clinical decision-making and patient outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: While no tissue or blood-based biomarkers for ccRCC have been 
incorporated into routine clinical practice to date, the field continues to 
expand rapidly. There remains a critical need to develop and validate these 
tools in order to improve the care for patients with kidney cancer.
PATIENT SUMMARY: Genomic biomarkers have the potential to better predict outcome 
and select the most appropriate treatment for patients with kidney cancer; 
however, further research is needed before any of these currently developed 
biomarkers are adopted into clinical practice.

Copyright © 2023 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eururo.2023.04.003
PMCID: PMC11175840
PMID: 37085424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]