---
reference_id: "PMID:37062653"
title: Recrudescence of Scarlet Fever and Its Implications for Dental Professionals.
authors:
- Matsubara VH
- Christoforou J
- Samaranayake L
journal: Int Dent J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.identj.2023.03.009
keywords:
- Humans
- "Scarlet Fever/complications, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Dentists
- COVID-19
- Professional Role
- Streptococcus pyogenes
- Recurrence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recrudescence of Scarlet Fever and Its Implications for Dental Professionals.
**Authors:** Matsubara VH, Christoforou J, Samaranayake L
**Journal:** Int Dent J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.identj.2023.03.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.identj.2023.03.009)

## Content

1. Int Dent J. 2023 Jun;73(3):331-336. doi: 10.1016/j.identj.2023.03.009. Epub
2023  Apr 14.

Recrudescence of Scarlet Fever and Its Implications for Dental Professionals.

Matsubara VH(1), Christoforou J(1), Samaranayake L(2).

Author information:
(1)Dental School, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, 
Australia.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Special 
Administrative Region, China; Hamdan Bin Mohammed College of Dental Medicine, 
Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Electronic address: lakshman@hku.hk.

A significant increase in the incidence of scarlet fever, mainly in Europe, has 
been noted during the COVID-19 postpandemic period. Scarlet fever is caused by a 
pyrogenic exotoxin-producing streptococcus-Streptococcus pyogenes-responsible 
for more than 500,000 deaths annually worldwide. Superantigens (SAgs) secreted 
by this Group A streptococcus (GAS) usually overstimulate the human immune 
system, causing an amplified hypersensitivity reaction leading to initial 
symptoms such as sore throat, high fever, and a sandpaper-like skin rash. There 
could be concurrent oral manifestations known as "strawberry tongue" or 
"raspberry tongue," which may be first noted by oral health professionals. The 
early diagnosis and treatment of this disease is critical to obviate the 
development of local and systemic sequelae such as acute rheumatic fever, 
endocarditis, and glomerulonephritis. Antibiotics should be prescribed early to 
mitigate its duration, sequelae, and community spread. Dental practitioners 
should be aware of the early symptoms of scarlet fever for infection detection, 
emergency patient management, and appropriate referral. This concise review 
outlines the prevalence, pathogenicity, oral and systemic manifestations, as 
well as the dental implications of scarlet fever.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.identj.2023.03.009
PMCID: PMC10213718
PMID: 37062653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None disclosed.