---
reference_id: "PMID:37664708"
title: "Mucins and mucinous ovarian carcinoma: Development, differential diagnosis, and treatment."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Liu L
- Yu Y
journal: Heliyon
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e19221
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucins and mucinous ovarian carcinoma: Development, differential diagnosis, and treatment.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Liu L, Yu Y
**Journal:** Heliyon (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e19221](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e19221)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2023 Aug 17;9(8):e19221. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e19221. 
eCollection 2023 Aug.

Mucins and mucinous ovarian carcinoma: Development, differential diagnosis, and 
treatment.

Wang Y(1), Liu L(1), Yu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Dalian Municipal Central Hospital, 
Dalian, China.

Mucinous ovarian carcinoma (MOC) is a rare histological type of epithelial 
ovarian cancer. It has poor response to conventional platinum-based chemotherapy 
regimens and PARPi-based maintenance treatment, resulting in short survival and 
poor prognosis in advanced-disease patients. MOC is characterized by mucus that 
is mainly composed of mucin in the cystic cavity. Our review discusses in detail 
the role of mucins in MOC. Mucins are correlated with MOC development. 
Furthermore, they are valuable in the differential diagnosis of primary and 
secondary ovarian mucinous tumors. Some types of mucins have been studied in the 
context of chemoresistance and targeted therapy for ovarian cancer. This review 
may provide a new direction for the diagnosis and treatment of advanced MOC.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e19221
PMCID: PMC10468386
PMID: 37664708

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.