---
reference_id: "PMID:38373926"
title: "Sex-specific difference in phenotype of Kabuki syndrome type 2 patients: a matched case-control study."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Xu Y
- Chen Y
- Hu Y
- Li Q
- Liu S
- Wang J
- Wang X
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-024-04562-z
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- China
- Phenotype
- "Heart Defects, Congenital"
- Mutation
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Face/abnormalities
- Hematologic Diseases
- Vestibular Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex-specific difference in phenotype of Kabuki syndrome type 2 patients: a matched case-control study.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Xu Y, Chen Y, Hu Y, Li Q, Liu S, Wang J, Wang X
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-024-04562-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-024-04562-z)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2024 Feb 19;24(1):133. doi: 10.1186/s12887-024-04562-z.

Sex-specific difference in phenotype of Kabuki syndrome type 2 patients: a 
matched case-control study.

Wang Y(#)(1), Xu Y(#)(2), Chen Y(1), Hu Y(3), Li Q(1), Liu S(3)(4), Wang J(2), 
Wang X(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Children's Medical 
Center,, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of NeurologySchool of Medicine, Shanghai Children's Medical 
Center, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Children Health Advocacy Institute, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, 
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(4)School of Public Health, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, School of 
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Children's Medical 
Center,, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 
wangxiumin@scmc.com.cn.
(6)Department of NeurologySchool of Medicine, Shanghai Children's Medical 
Center, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 
wangxiumin@scmc.com.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a monogenic disorder leading to special 
facial features, mental retardation, and multiple system malformations. Lysine 
demethylase 6A, (KDM6A, MIM*300128) is the pathogenic gene of Kabuki syndrome 
type 2 (KS2, MIM#300867), which accounts for only 5%-8% of KS. Previous studies 
suggested that female patients with KS2 may have a milder phenotype.
METHOD: We summarized the phenotype and genotype of KS2 patients who were 
diagnosed in Shanghai Children's Medical Center since July 2017 and conducted a 
1:3 matched case-control study according to age and sex to investigate 
sex-specific differences between patients with and without KS2.
RESULTS: There were 12 KS2 cases in this study, and 8 of them matched with 24 
controls. The intelligence quotient (IQ) score of the case group was 
significantly lower than that of the control group (P < 0.001). In addition, 
both the incidence of intellectual disability (ID) (IQ < 70) and 
moderate-to-severe ID (IQ < 55) were significantly higher in the case group than 
those in the control group. No sex-specific difference was found in the 
incidence of ID or moderate-to-severe ID between the female cases and female 
controls, whereas there was a significant difference between male cases and male 
controls. Furthermore, the rate of moderate-to-severe ID and congenital heart 
disease (CHD) was significantly higher in the male group than that in the female 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that a sex-specific difference was exhibited in 
the clinical phenotypes of KS2 patients. The incidence of CHD was higher in male 
patients, and mental retardation was significantly impaired. However, the female 
patients' phenotype was mild.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-024-04562-z
PMCID: PMC10875883
PMID: 38373926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.