---
reference_id: "PMID:37925359"
title: Autologous fat injection for empty-nose syndrome.
authors:
- Buiret G
journal: Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.anorl.2023.10.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autologous fat injection for empty-nose syndrome.
**Authors:** Buiret G
**Journal:** Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anorl.2023.10.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anorl.2023.10.017)

## Content

1. Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis. 2024 Aug;141(4):235-239. doi: 
10.1016/j.anorl.2023.10.017. Epub 2023 Nov 2.

Autologous fat injection for empty-nose syndrome.

Buiret G(1).

Author information:
(1)Service d'ORL et de Chirurgie Cervicofaciale, Centre Hospitalier de Valence, 
179, boulevard du Maréchal-Juin, 26953 Valence, France. Electronic address: 
gbuiret@ch-valence.fr.

AIMS: Inferior meatus augmentation by injection or implants is one of the 
treatments for empty-nose syndrome (ENS), but levels of evidence of efficacy are 
low. We present the technique and evaluate our experience. The primary objective 
was to analyze changes in Empty Nose Syndrome 6-item Questionnaire (ENS6Q) 
scores after treating patients with ENS by autologous fat injection. Secondary 
objectives were the analysis of the evolution of each of the six ENS6Q items and 
identification of complications. Eleven patients underwent a minimally invasive 
approach to limit nasal airflow using fat injection between March 2021 and 
December 2022.
RESULTS: Ten of the 11 patients showed a decrease in overall ENS6Q score 
(P=0.0058); 6 had a final ENS6Q score<11. Ten were satisfied with the procedure, 
but remained symptomatic. The procedure did not result in any complications.
CONCLUSION: These encouraging results confirm the data in the literature 
suggesting that fat injection improves symptomatology in empty nose syndrome. 
However, like other minimally invasive approaches to limit nasal airflow, it 
does not eliminate all symptoms. These results need to be confirmed by studies 
on larger cohorts with longer follow-up, preferably in a multicenter setting.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anorl.2023.10.017
PMID: 37925359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]