---
reference_id: "PMID:31082500"
title: Investigation of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with integrating transcriptomics and genome wide association information.
authors:
- Gorji AE
- Roudbari Z
- Alizadeh A
- Sadeghi B
journal: Gene
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.05.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigation of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with integrating transcriptomics and genome wide association information.
**Authors:** Gorji AE, Roudbari Z, Alizadeh A, Sadeghi B
**Journal:** Gene (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2019.05.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2019.05.004)

## Content

1. Gene. 2019 Jul 20;706:181-187. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.05.004. Epub 2019 May 
11.

Investigation of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with integrating 
transcriptomics and genome wide association information.

Gorji AE(1), Roudbari Z(2), Alizadeh A(3), Sadeghi B(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Animal Sciences and Fisheries, Sari 
Agricultural and Natural Resources University, Sari, Iran.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Jiroft, 
Jiroft, Iran. Electronic address: Roudbari.zahra@ujiroft.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Tissue Engineering and Applied Cell Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Semnan, Iran.
(4)Food Hygiene and Public Health Department, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Shahid Bahonar University of Kerman, Kerman, Iran. Electronic address: 
sadeghi.balal@uk.ac.ir.

Systemic lupus erythematous (SEL) is a heterogeneous, systemic autoimmune 
disorder which is defined by its autoantibody pattern. Transcriptomic data 
analysis has shown pathways and immune system responses associated with SLE. 
Eight up-regulated genes (SOCE, MMP9, CXCL8, JUN, IL1B, NFKBIA, TNF and FOS) 
have been examined with four interactions among different pathways. These genes 
are associated with SNPs which have been identified through two datasets from 
SLE genome-wide association studies (GWAS). In this investigation, the GWAS 
results were integrated with pathway analysis of transcriptomes and several 
genes were detected with known SLE-related variations (TYK2, C5, SH2B, IRF5, 
IL2RA, STAT4, FCGR2A, IL7R, LYN, HLA-DRB and TNFAIP3). Pathway-based analysis on 
the Wikipathway Human Collection allowed the identification of prioritized 
variants in the relevant pathways, such as thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) 
signaling pathway linked to LYN, IL7R, STAT4 and rs7574865. Analysis of existing 
transcriptomes and GWAS data identified eight up-regulated candidate genes with 
more than four relationships among the different pathways associated with SNPs 
to pinpoint the relevant loci linked to SLE. The results of this investigation 
have expanded the number of candidate genes related to SLE and have highlighted 
possible pathways and GWAS-based methods for gene detection. Identification of 
the fundamental genes would assist in revealing the mechanisms responsible for 
SLE.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.05.004
PMID: 31082500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]