---
reference_id: PMID:35789269
title: "Increased Incidence of Hashimoto Thyroiditis in Selenium Deficiency: A Prospective 6-Year Cohort Study."
authors:
- Wu Q
- Wang Y
- Chen P
- Wei J
- Lv H
- Wang S
- Wu Y
- Zhao X
- Peng X
- Rijntjes E
- Wang Y
- Schomburg L
- Shi B
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgac410
keywords:
- Autoantibodies
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Hashimoto Disease
- Humans
- Incidence
- Iodide Peroxidase
- Iodine
- Malnutrition
- Prospective Studies
- Selenium
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased Incidence of Hashimoto Thyroiditis in Selenium Deficiency: A Prospective 6-Year Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Wu Q, Wang Y, Chen P, Wei J, Lv H, Wang S, Wu Y, Zhao X, Peng X, Rijntjes E, Wang Y, Schomburg L, Shi B
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgac410](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgac410)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2022 Aug 18;107(9):e3603-e3611. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgac410.

Increased Incidence of Hashimoto Thyroiditis in Selenium Deficiency: A 
Prospective 6-Year Cohort Study.

Wu Q(1)(2), Wang Y(3), Chen P(4), Wei J(1)(2), Lv H(3), Wang S(1)(2), Wu 
Y(1)(2), Zhao X(1)(2), Peng X(5), Rijntjes E(6), Wang Y(2), Schomburg L(6), Shi 
B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Xi'an 
Jiaotong University Health Science Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China.
(2)Global Health Institute, Health Science Center, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 
Xi'an 710061, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University Health Science Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710061, China.
(4)Endemic Disease Control Institute of Shaanxi Province, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 
710003, China.
(5)Ningshan County People's Hospital, Ningshan, Ankang, Shaanxi, 711600, China.
(6)Institute for Experimental Endocrinology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, 10115, Germany.

CONTEXT: In 2015, we reported an increased prevalence of thyroid disease in a 
county of low habitual selenium (Se) intake in comparison to a neighboring 
county with higher intake in a cross-sectional survey in Shaanxi Province, 
China.
OBJECTIVE: To explore longitudinal effects of low Se status, a prospective 
cohort study was conducted in the same area from 2013 to 2019, and thyroid 
peroxidase autoantibodies (TPO-Abs) and disease incidence were compared.
METHODS: A total 1254 individuals from 1500 reinvited participants were 
successfully enrolled. Venous blood, fingernails, and urine samples were 
collected and analyzed to evaluate thyroid status, TPO-Abs, serum Se, and 
urinary iodine. Diagnosis of Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT) was based on elevated 
thyrotropin, presence of TPO-Abs, and ultrasound characteristics. Se deficiency 
was categorized using a serum concentration of 80 µg/L as a threshold, and 
tested by logistic regression for a relationship to TPO-Abs and HT.
RESULTS: Se deficiency was observed in 46.2% of participants from the 
adequate-Se county (Ziyang) and in 89.7% from the low-Se county (Ningshan). Se 
concentrations in fingernails differed strongly by residency (Ziyang vs 
Ningshan; 678.7 vs 364.3 μg/kg; Z = -9.552; P < .001). Newly diagnosed HT in 
Ziyang was less frequent than in Ningshan (0.09% vs 0.31%; χ 2 = 4.350; 
P = .037). The conversion rate to seropositive TPO-Abs was 10.2% in Ningshan vs 
5.6% in Ziyang. Excluding iodine as confounding factor, low-Se was confirmed as 
a risk factor for HT (relative risk [95% CI]; 3.65 [1.03-12.90]; P < .05).
CONCLUSION: The data indicate an increased incidence of TPO-Ab seroconversion 
with low Se supply and support the hypothesis that Se deficiency contributes to 
HT as a modifiable risk factor.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgac410
PMID: 35789269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]