---
reference_id: "PMID:35667865"
title: Assisted reproduction in patients with Klinefelter syndrome.
authors:
- Crha Karel
- Ješeta Michal
- Pilka Radovan
- Kašík Marek
- Mekiňová Lenka
- Vodička Jan
- Crha Tomáš
journal: Ceska Gynekol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.48095/cccg2022133
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assisted reproduction in patients with Klinefelter syndrome.
**Authors:** Crha Karel, Ješeta Michal, Pilka Radovan, Kašík Marek, Mekiňová Lenka, Vodička Jan, Crha Tomáš
**Journal:** Ceska Gynekol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.48095/cccg2022133](https://doi.org/10.48095/cccg2022133)

## Content

1. Ceska Gynekol. 2022;87(2):133-136. doi: 10.48095/cccg2022133.

Assisted reproduction in patients with Klinefelter syndrome.

[Article in English]

Crha Karel, Ješeta Michal, Pilka Radovan, Kašík Marek, Mekiňová Lenka, Vodička 
Jan, Crha Tomáš.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this article is to present the current knowledge of 
Klinefelter syndrome and its impact on male reproductive function as well as the 
current treatment options.
METHODS: PubMed/Medline, WoS and Scopus were searched for articles indexed until 
November 2021.
TEXT: Klinefelter syndrome is a chromosomal aberration with an additional X 
chromosome in males. This may adversely affect testicular growth and 
spermatogenesis, thus resulting in male infertility. Recently, new knowledge has 
appeared about the treatment of male infertility.
CONCLUSION: Interdisciplinary approach enables early dia-gnosis and treatment of 
patients with Klinefelter syndrome. Assisted reproductive technology is 
essential for infertility treatment in patients with Klinefelter syndrome.

DOI: 10.48095/cccg2022133
PMID: 35667865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]