---
reference_id: "PMID:39343950"
title: "Causal relationship between rheumatoid arthritis and carpal tunnel syndrome: a bidirectional two-sample Mendelian randomization study."
authors:
- Gong C
- Zhao D
- Wen X
- Kong D
- Zhang J
- Kong P
journal: J Orthop Surg Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13018-024-05059-2
keywords:
- "Carpal Tunnel Syndrome/genetics, etiology, epidemiology"
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/genetics, complications"
- Mendelian Randomization Analysis
- Humans
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Causality
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Causal relationship between rheumatoid arthritis and carpal tunnel syndrome: a bidirectional two-sample Mendelian randomization study.
**Authors:** Gong C, Zhao D, Wen X, Kong D, Zhang J, Kong P
**Journal:** J Orthop Surg Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13018-024-05059-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018-024-05059-2)

## Content

1. J Orthop Surg Res. 2024 Sep 30;19(1):613. doi: 10.1186/s13018-024-05059-2.

Causal relationship between rheumatoid arthritis and carpal tunnel syndrome: a 
bidirectional two-sample Mendelian randomization study.

Gong C(1), Zhao D(1), Wen X(1), Kong D(1), Zhang J(#)(2), Kong P(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)The First Clinical Medical School, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Jinan, 250000, China.
(2)Department of Minimally Invasive Orthopedics, The Affiliated Hospital of 
Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, 250000, China. 
13583189595@163.com.
(3)Department of Minimally Invasive Orthopedics, The Affiliated Hospital of 
Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, 250000, China. 
wcgkkp@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Although there is considerable evidence of a robust correlation 
between rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) in previous 
research, the causal link between the two remains a topic of controversy.
METHODS: We conducted a two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) study to explore 
the causal impact of RA on CTS. We obtained aggregate data from genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS) of CTS (ebi database and GEO database) and RA 
(FinnGen database). This study employed five MR analysis methods, with a focus 
on the inverse variance-weighted (IVW) method. Sensitivity analyses were 
conducted to ensure the robustness of the results of this study. Additionally, 
we performed reverse MR analysis.
RESULTS: We selected 84 and 78 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
significantly associated with RA from two databases as instrumental variables 
(IVs), respectively. Our results showed that RA patients have a higher risk of 
getting CTS regardless of whether the ebi database (IVW, OR = 1.045, 95% CI: 
1.016-1.075, P = 0.002) or the GEO database (IVW, OR = 1.001, 95% CI: 
1.001-1.002, P = 0.001) is selected for CTS data. However, the MR analysis 
showed no causal link between CTS and the increased risk of RA (ebi: IVW, 
OR = 1.084, 95% CI: 0.918-1.279, P = 0.341; GEO: IVW, OR = 1.968, 95% CI: 
0.011-360.791, P = 0.799).
CONCLUSION: The analysis revealed that RA can increase the risk of CTS, but did 
not support the causal relationship that CTS can increase the risk of RA.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13018-024-05059-2
PMCID: PMC11441067
PMID: 39343950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.