---
reference_id: "PMID:25998117"
title: Genetic testing and counseling in the diagnosis and management of young-onset dementias.
authors:
- Goldman JS
journal: Psychiatr Clin North Am
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.psc.2015.01.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic testing and counseling in the diagnosis and management of young-onset dementias.
**Authors:** Goldman JS
**Journal:** Psychiatr Clin North Am (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psc.2015.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psc.2015.01.008)

## Content

1. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2015 Jun;38(2):295-308. doi:
10.1016/j.psc.2015.01.008.  Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Genetic testing and counseling in the diagnosis and management of young-onset 
dementias.

Goldman JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, 
Columbia University Medical Center, 630 West 168th Street, Box 16, New York, NY 
10032, USA. Electronic address: jg2673@cumc.columbia.edu.

Young-onset dementia is hereditary, multifactorial, or sporadic. The most common 
hereditary dementias include Alzheimer disease, frontotemporal degeneration, 
Huntington disease, prion diseases, and cerebral autosomal-dominant arteriopathy 
with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy. Careful attainment of family 
history assists with diagnosis and determining the likelihood of a genetic 
cause, and can direct genetic testing. The type of genetic testing depends on 
confidence of the diagnosis, patient's and affected relatives' symptoms, and the 
number of disease genes. Single gene, disease-specific gene panels, and large 
dementia panels are available. Genetic counseling should be given and informed 
consent obtained. Predictive testing follows the Huntington disease protocol.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psc.2015.01.008
PMID: 25998117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]