---
reference_id: "PMID:6822598"
title: Osteogenesis imperfecta with dominant inheritance and normal sclerae.
authors:
- Paterson CR
- McAllion S
- Miller R
journal: J Bone Joint Surg Br
year: '1983'
doi: 10.1302/0301-620X.65B1.6822598
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dentinogenesis Imperfecta/complications
- Female
- "Fractures, Spontaneous/etiology"
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Counseling
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Radiography
- Sclera/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta with dominant inheritance and normal sclerae.
**Authors:** Paterson CR, McAllion S, Miller R
**Journal:** J Bone Joint Surg Br (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1302/0301-620X.65B1.6822598](https://doi.org/10.1302/0301-620X.65B1.6822598)

## Content

1. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 1983 Jan;65(1):35-9. doi:
10.1302/0301-620X.65B1.6822598.

Osteogenesis imperfecta with dominant inheritance and normal sclerae.

Paterson CR, McAllion S, Miller R.

Most patients with dominantly inherited osteogenesis imperfecta have blue
sclerae and relatively mild symptoms. However, in a small group of families the
patients have normal sclerae and this disorder has been classified as Type 4
osteogenesis imperfecta. This paper reports the clinical and radiographical
features of 48 patients from 16 families with Type 4 osteogenesis imperfecta and
compares the findings with those of the classical disorder with blue sclerae
(Type 1 osteogenesis imperfecta). The two types are similar in usually causing a
mild disease but with a wide range of severity, and in both types the rate of
fracture declines in adolescence. There are, however, some significant
differences apart from the colour of the sclerae. In Type 4 the first fracture
more commonly occurs at birth, dentinogenesis imperfecta is more frequent than
in Type 1 and bruising and nose-bleeds are less common. As in Type 1, the
radiographic appearances of the bones may be normal. It is important that Type 4
osteogenesis imperfecta should be recognised because of the need for competent
genetic counselling, because the management may be different from that
appropriate for Type 1 and because it may be mistaken for idiopathic juvenile
osteoporosis or child abuse.

DOI: 10.1302/0301-620X.65B1.6822598
PMID: 6822598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
