---
reference_id: "PMID:12039433"
title: "A unilateral presentation of 'Satoyoshi syndrome'."
authors:
- Uddin AB
- Walters AS
- Ali A
- Brannan T
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s1353-8020(00)00080-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A unilateral presentation of 'Satoyoshi syndrome'.
**Authors:** Uddin AB, Walters AS, Ali A, Brannan T
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1353-8020(00)00080-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1353-8020(00)00080-8)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2002 Jan;8(3):211-3. doi: 
10.1016/s1353-8020(00)00080-8.

A unilateral presentation of 'Satoyoshi syndrome'.

Uddin AB(1), Walters AS, Ali A, Brannan T.

Author information:
(1)New Jersey Neuroscience Institute at JFK Medical Center, Edison, NJ, USA. 
salahuddin@dnamail.com

Satoyoshi syndrome is a rare, slowly progressive disorder of unknown etiology 
with a poor long-term prognosis. The syndrome consists of the following clinical 
features: (1) painful, intermittent muscle spasms; (2) alopecia; (3) diarrhea; 
and (4) skeletal abnormalities in cases of juvenile onset. The age of onset is 
typically less than 20 years of age, although three adult onset cases had been 
reported. There had been no case report of Satoyoshi syndrome with strict 
unilateral presentation. We present a 25-year-old man with progressive 
unilateral hair loss and muscle spasms. Although previous literature had 
postulated malabsorption and autoimmune mechanism as pathogenic for Satoyoshi 
syndrome, the presence of a strictly unilateral presentation argues against 
those hypotheses. However, these hypotheses should still be considered, as our 
patient did not fit a typical Satoyoshi syndrome. Therefore, more research is 
needed to understand the pathophysiology and develop an effective treatment to 
prevent the progression of the disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s1353-8020(00)00080-8
PMID: 12039433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]