---
reference_id: "PMID:35142342"
title: Zebrafish models of alx-linked frontonasal dysplasia reveal a role for Alx1 and Alx3 in the anterior segment and vasculature of the developing eye.
authors:
- Yoon B
- Yeung P
- Santistevan N
- Bluhm LE
- Kawasaki K
- Kueper J
- Dubielzig R
- VanOudenhove J
- Cotney J
- Liao EC
- Grinblat Y
journal: Biol Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1242/bio.059189
keywords:
- Animals
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Ethanol/metabolism
- Face/abnormalities
- Zebrafish
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zebrafish models of alx-linked frontonasal dysplasia reveal a role for Alx1 and Alx3 in the anterior segment and vasculature of the developing eye.
**Authors:** Yoon B, Yeung P, Santistevan N, Bluhm LE, Kawasaki K, Kueper J, Dubielzig R, VanOudenhove J, Cotney J, Liao EC, Grinblat Y
**Journal:** Biol Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1242/bio.059189](https://doi.org/10.1242/bio.059189)

## Content

1. Biol Open. 2022 May 15;11(5):bio059189. doi: 10.1242/bio.059189. Epub 2022 Jun
 7.

Zebrafish models of alx-linked frontonasal dysplasia reveal a role for Alx1 and 
Alx3 in the anterior segment and vasculature of the developing eye.

Yoon B(1)(2), Yeung P(3), Santistevan N(1)(2), Bluhm LE(1), Kawasaki K(3), 
Kueper J(3)(4), Dubielzig R(5), VanOudenhove J(6), Cotney J(6), Liao EC(3), 
Grinblat Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Integrative Biology and Neuroscience, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(2)Genetics Ph.D. Training Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, 
USA.
(3)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, and Shriners Hospital for Children, 
Boston, 02114, USA.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Venusberg-Campus 1, 53127 
Bonn, Germany.
(5)Comparative Ocular Pathology Laboratory of Wisconsin (COPLOW), University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(6)University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Department of Genetics and 
Genome Sciences, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

The cellular and genetic mechanisms that coordinate formation of facial sensory 
structures with surrounding skeletal and soft tissue elements remain poorly 
understood. Alx1, a homeobox transcription factor, is a key regulator of 
midfacial morphogenesis. ALX1 mutations in humans are linked to severe 
congenital anomalies of the facial skeleton (frontonasal dysplasia, FND) with 
malformation or absence of eyes and orbital contents (micro- and anophthalmia). 
Zebrafish with loss-of-function alx1 mutations develop with craniofacial and 
ocular defects of variable penetrance, likely due to compensatory upregulation 
in expression of a paralogous gene, alx3. Here we show that zebrafish alx1;alx3 
mutants develop with highly penetrant cranial and ocular defects that resemble 
human ALX1-linked FND. alx1 and alx3 are expressed in anterior cranial neural 
crest (aCNC), which gives rise to the anterior neurocranium (ANC), anterior 
segment structures of the eye and vascular pericytes. Consistent with a 
functional requirement for alx genes in aCNC, alx1; alx3 mutants develop with 
nearly absent ANC and grossly aberrant hyaloid vasculature and ocular anterior 
segment, but normal retina. In vivo lineage labeling identified a requirement 
for alx1 and alx3 during aCNC migration, and transcriptomic analysis suggested 
oxidative stress response as a key target mechanism of this function. Oxidative 
stress is a hallmark of fetal alcohol toxicity, and we found increased 
penetrance of facial and ocular malformations in alx1 mutants exposed to 
ethanol, consistent with a protective role for alx1 against ethanol toxicity. 
Collectively, these data demonstrate a conserved role for zebrafish alx genes in 
controlling ocular and facial development, and a novel role in protecting these 
key midfacial structures from ethanol toxicity during embryogenesis. These data 
also reveal novel roles for alx genes in ocular anterior segment formation and 
vascular development and suggest that retinal deficits in alx mutants may be 
secondary to aberrant ocular vascularization and anterior segment defects. This 
study establishes robust zebrafish models for interrogating conserved genetic 
mechanisms that coordinate facial and ocular development, and for exploring 
gene--environment interactions relevant to fetal alcohol syndrome.

© 2022. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.059189
PMCID: PMC9167625
PMID: 35142342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.