---
reference_id: "PMID:22985835"
title: Total colonic aganglionosis in Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Moore SW
journal: Semin Pediatr Surg
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2012.07.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Total colonic aganglionosis in Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Moore SW
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Surg (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2012.07.004](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2012.07.004)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2012 Nov;21(4):302-9. doi:
10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2012.07.004.

Total colonic aganglionosis in Hirschsprung disease.

Moore SW(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatric Surgery, University of Stellenbosch, Tygerberg, South 
Africa. swm@sun.ac.za

Total colonic aganglionosis (TCA) is a relatively uncommon form of Hirschsprung 
disease (HSCR), occurring in approximately 2%-13% of cases. It can probably be 
classified as TCA (defined as aganglionosis extending from the anus to at least 
the ileocecal valve, but not >50 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve) and total 
colonic and small bowel aganglionosis, which may involve a very long segment of 
aganglionosis. It is not yet clear whether TCA merely represents a long form of 
HSCR or a different expression of the disease. There are many differences 
between TCA and other forms of HSCR, which require explanation if its ubiquitous 
clinical features are to be understood. Clinically, TCA appears to represent a 
different spectrum of disease in terms of presentation and difficulties that may 
be experienced in diagnosis, suggesting a different pathophysiology from the 
more common forms of HSCR. There is also some evidence suggesting that instead 
of being purely congenital, it may represent certain different pathophysiologic 
mechanisms. This study, in addition to reviewing current understanding and 
differences between TCA and the more frequently encountered rectosigmoid (or 
short-segment) expression, correlates them with what is currently known about 
the genetic and molecular biological background. Moreover, it reviews current 
outcomes to find consensus on management.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2012.07.004
PMID: 22985835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]