---
reference_id: "PMID:24475193"
title: Endoplasmic reticulum stress-unfolding protein response-apoptosis cascade causes chondrodysplasia in a col2a1 p.Gly1170Ser mutated mouse model.
authors:
- Liang G
- Lian C
- Huang D
- Gao W
- Liang A
- Peng Y
- Ye W
- Wu Z
- Su P
- Huang D
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086894
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endoplasmic reticulum stress-unfolding protein response-apoptosis cascade causes chondrodysplasia in a col2a1 p.Gly1170Ser mutated mouse model.
**Authors:** Liang G, Lian C, Huang D, Gao W, Liang A, Peng Y, Ye W, Wu Z, Su P, Huang D
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0086894](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0086894)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 27;9(1):e86894. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086894. 
eCollection 2014.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress-unfolding protein response-apoptosis cascade causes 
chondrodysplasia in a col2a1 p.Gly1170Ser mutated mouse model.

Liang G(1), Lian C(1), Huang D(2), Gao W(1), Liang A(1), Peng Y(1), Ye W(1), Wu 
Z(1), Su P(3), Huang D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Breast Surgery, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

The collagen type II alpha 1 (COL2A1) mutation causes severe skeletal 
malformations, but the pathogenic mechanisms of how this occurs are unclear. To 
understand how this may happen, a col2a1 p.Gly1170Ser mutated mouse model was 
constructed and in homozygotes, the chondrodysplasia phenotype was observed. 
Misfolded procollagen was largely synthesized and retained in dilated 
endoplasmic reticulum and the endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS)-unfolded 
protein response (UPR)-apoptosis cascade was activated. Apoptosis occurred prior 
to hypertrophy, prevented the formation of a hypertrophic zone, disrupted normal 
chondrogenic signaling pathways, and eventually caused chondrodysplasia. 
Heterozygotes had normal phenotypes and endoplasmic reticulum stress intensity 
was limited with no abnormal apoptosis detected. Our results suggest that 
earlier chondrocyte death was related to the ERS-UPR-apoptosis cascade and that 
this was the chief cause of chondrodysplaia. The col2a1 p.Gly1170Ser mutated 
mouse model offered a novel connection between misfolded collagen and skeletal 
malformation. Further investigation of this mouse mutant model can help us 
understand mechanisms of type II collagenopathies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086894
PMCID: PMC3903611
PMID: 24475193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.