---
reference_id: "PMID:33797620"
title: Two novel missense variants in SPTBN2 likely associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 5.
authors:
- Bian X
- Wang S
- Jin S
- Xu S
- Zhang H
- Wang D
- Shang W
- Wang P
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-021-05204-3
keywords:
- Cerebellar Ataxia
- Female
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Spectrin/genetics
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel missense variants in SPTBN2 likely associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 5.
**Authors:** Bian X, Wang S, Jin S, Xu S, Zhang H, Wang D, Shang W, Wang P
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-021-05204-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-021-05204-3)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2021 Dec;42(12):5195-5203. doi: 10.1007/s10072-021-05204-3. Epub
2021 Apr 2.

Two novel missense variants in SPTBN2 likely associated with spinocerebellar
ataxia type 5.

Bian X(#)(1), Wang S(#)(1), Jin S(1), Xu S(1), Zhang H(1), Wang D(1), Shang
W(1), Wang P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
250033, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
250033, Shandong, China. wping0108@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a heterozygous group of
neurodegenerative disorders. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 5 (SCA5) is a rare
autosomal-dominant ataxia with pure cerebellum involvement. The clinical
characteristics are limb and gait ataxia, trunk ataxia, sensory deficits,
abnormal eye movement, dysarthria, and hyperactive tendon reflexes. Spectrin
beta nonerythrocytic 2 gene (SPTBN2), coding β-III spectrin protein, was
identified to be associated with SCA5. To date, more than 19 variants of SPTBN2
have been reported.
METHODS: A family and an apparently sporadic patient with ataxia and cerebellar
atrophy were recruited from Shandong Province (China). To discover the
disease-causing variants, capillary electrophoresis and targeted next-generation
sequencing were performed in the proband of the family and the sporadic patient.
The candidate variants were verified by Sanger sequencing and analyzed by
bioinformatics software.
RESULTS: In our study, we verified two novel heterozygous variants in SPTBN2 in
a SCA pedigree and a sporadic patient. The proband of the pedigree and her
mother presented with walking instability and progressively getting worse. The
sporadic patient suffered from slurred speech, walking instability, and drinking
water choking cough. MRI examination of the proband and sporadic patient both
displayed moderate cerebellar atrophy. The variants identified were
traditionally conserved and predicted probably damaging and disease-causing by
bioinformatics analysis.
CONCLUSION: We identified two novel heterozygous variants of SPTBN2 resulting in
severe ataxia which further delineated the correlation between the genotype and
phenotype of SCA5, and pathogenesis of variants in SPTBN2 should be further
researched.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-021-05204-3
PMCID: PMC8642373
PMID: 33797620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
