---
reference_id: "PMID:31345518"
title: Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.
authors:
- Szmuilowicz ED
- Josefson JL
- Metzger BE
journal: Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ecl.2019.05.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.
**Authors:** Szmuilowicz ED, Josefson JL, Metzger BE
**Journal:** Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ecl.2019.05.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecl.2019.05.001)

## Content

1. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2019 Sep;48(3):479-493. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecl.2019.05.001. Epub 2019 Jun 18.

Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.

Szmuilowicz ED(1), Josefson JL(2), Metzger BE(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 645 North 
Michigan Avenue, 530-24, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of 
Chicago, 225 East Chicago Avenue, Box 54, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Tarry Building, 
Room 12-703, 300 East Superior, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address: 
bem@northwestern.edu.

Although it has been accepted for decades that women with gestational diabetes 
mellitus (GDM) are at high risk for future development of type 2 diabetes, 
vigorous debate regarding the value of detecting and treating GDM has persisted 
into the twenty-first century. Although results from 2 randomized trials provide 
strong evidence that treating GDM reduces adverse perinatal outcomes, it remains 
to be determined whether treatment impacts long-term offspring outcomes. Insulin 
is the first-line pharmacologic treatment and is added when glycemic goals are 
not met with nutritional modifications. Oral agent use is controversial, as data 
on long-term offspring outcomes are lacking.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecl.2019.05.001
PMCID: PMC7008467
PMID: 31345518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]