---
reference_id: "PMID:35130982"
title: Two case reports of chorea-acanthocytosis and review of literature.
authors:
- Huang S
- Zhang J
- Tao M
- Lv Y
- Xu L
- Liang Z
journal: Eur J Med Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s40001-022-00646-7
keywords:
- Acanthocytes/pathology
- Adult
- Female
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Neuroacanthocytosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two case reports of chorea-acanthocytosis and review of literature.
**Authors:** Huang S, Zhang J, Tao M, Lv Y, Xu L, Liang Z
**Journal:** Eur J Med Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40001-022-00646-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40001-022-00646-7)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Res. 2022 Feb 7;27(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s40001-022-00646-7.

Two case reports of chorea-acanthocytosis and review of literature.

Huang S(#)(1)(2), Zhang J(#)(2), Tao M(2), Lv Y(2), Xu L(2), Liang Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Second Clinical Medical College, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, 
Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Yantai, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Yantai, Shandong, China. zgliang@hotmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc), as the most common subtype of 
neuroacanthocytosis syndrome, is characterized by the presence of acanthocytes 
and neurological symptoms. It is thought to be caused by the VPS13A (vacuolar 
protein sorting-associated protein 13A) mutations. This article reports two 
confirmed cases of ChAc and summarizes some suggestive features, which provide 
direction for the diagnosis and treatment of acanthocytosis in the future.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here, we present two cases of ChAc diagnosed based on typical 
clinical symptoms, neuroimaging features, genetic findings of VPS13A, and 
response to the symptomatic treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Chorea-acanthocytosis is a rare neurodegenerative disease with 
various early clinical manifestations. The final diagnosis of the ChAc can be 
established by either genetic analysis or protein expression by Western 
blotting. Supportive treatments and nursing are helpful to improve the quality 
of the patient's life. Nevertheless, it is imperative to investigate the impact 
of neuroimaging and neuropathological diagnosis in a larger group of ChAc in 
future studies.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40001-022-00646-7
PMCID: PMC8822714
PMID: 35130982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest or financial 
ties to disclose.