---
reference_id: "PMID:26027498"
title: Recessive osteogenesis imperfecta caused by missense mutations in SPARC.
authors:
- Mendoza-Londono R
- Fahiminiya S
- Majewski J
- Care4Rare Canada Consortium
- Tétreault M
- Nadaf J
- Kannu P
- Sochett E
- Howard A
- Stimec J
- Dupuis L
- Roschger P
- Klaushofer K
- Palomo T
- Ouellet J
- Al-Jallad H
- Mort JS
- Moffatt P
- Boudko S
- Bächinger HP
- Rauch F
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.04.021
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Collagen Type I/metabolism
- "Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel"
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, pathology"
- "Osteonectin/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Protein Conformation
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive osteogenesis imperfecta caused by missense mutations in SPARC.
**Authors:** Mendoza-Londono R, Fahiminiya S, Majewski J, Care4Rare Canada Consortium, Tétreault M, Nadaf J, Kannu P, Sochett E, Howard A, Stimec J, Dupuis L, Roschger P, Klaushofer K, Palomo T, Ouellet J, Al-Jallad H, Mort JS, Moffatt P, Boudko S, Bächinger HP, Rauch F
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.04.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.04.021)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Jun 4;96(6):979-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.04.021. Epub
 2015 May 28.

Recessive osteogenesis imperfecta caused by missense mutations in SPARC.

Mendoza-Londono R(1), Fahiminiya S(2), Majewski J(2); Care4Rare Canada 
Consortium; Tétreault M(2), Nadaf J(2), Kannu P(1), Sochett E(3), Howard A(4), 
Stimec J(5), Dupuis L(1), Roschger P(6), Klaushofer K(6), Palomo T(7), Ouellet 
J(7), Al-Jallad H(7), Mort JS(7), Moffatt P(7), Boudko S(8), Bächinger HP(8), 
Rauch F(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, 
Canada; The Bone Health Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X8, Canada.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University and Génome Québec Innovation 
Centre, Montréal, QC H3A 1B1, Canada.
(3)The Bone Health Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, 
Canada; Division of Endocrinology, Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for 
Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(4)The Bone Health Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, 
Canada; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Hospital for Sick Children and 
The University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(5)The Bone Health Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, 
Canada; Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(6)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch Hospital of WGKK and 
AUVA Trauma Center Meidling, 1st Med. Department, Hanusch Hospital, Vienna 1140, 
Austria.
(7)Shriners Hospital for Children, Montréal, QC H3G 1A6, Canada.
(8)Shriners Hospital for Children, Portland, OR 97239, USA.
(9)Shriners Hospital for Children, Montréal, QC H3G 1A6, Canada. Electronic 
address: frauch@shriners.mcgill.ca.

Secreted protein, acidic, cysteine-rich (SPARC) is a glycoprotein that binds to 
collagen type I and other proteins in the extracellular matrix. Using 
whole-exome sequencing to identify the molecular defect in two unrelated girls 
with severe bone fragility and a clinical diagnosis of osteogenesis imperfecta 
type IV, we identified two homozygous variants in SPARC (GenBank: NM_003118.3; 
c.497G>A [p.Arg166His] in individual 1; c.787G>A [p.Glu263Lys] in individual 2). 
Published modeling and site-directed mutagenesis studies had previously shown 
that the residues substituted by these mutations form an intramolecular salt 
bridge in SPARC and are essential for the binding of SPARC to collagen type I. 
The amount of SPARC secreted by skin fibroblasts was reduced in individual 1 but 
appeared normal in individual 2. The migration of collagen type I alpha chains 
produced by these fibroblasts was mildly delayed on SDS-PAGE gel, suggesting 
some overmodification of collagen during triple helical formation. Pulse-chase 
experiments showed that collagen type I secretion was mildly delayed in skin 
fibroblasts from both individuals. Analysis of an iliac bone sample from 
individual 2 showed that trabecular bone was hypermineralized on the material 
level. In conclusion, these observations show that homozygous mutations in SPARC 
can give rise to severe bone fragility in humans.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.04.021
PMCID: PMC4457955
PMID: 26027498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]