---
reference_id: "PMID:35129281"
title: New insights into the pathogenesis of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome.
authors:
- Li W
- Hao CJ
- Hao ZH
- Ma J
- Wang QC
- Yuan YF
- Gong JJ
- Chen YY
- Yu JY
- Wei AH
journal: Pigment Cell Melanoma Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/pcmr.13030
keywords:
- Animals
- "Hermanski-Pudlak Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into the pathogenesis of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome.
**Authors:** Li W, Hao CJ, Hao ZH, Ma J, Wang QC, Yuan YF, Gong JJ, Chen YY, Yu JY, Wei AH
**Journal:** Pigment Cell Melanoma Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pcmr.13030](https://doi.org/10.1111/pcmr.13030)

## Content

1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2022 May;35(3):290-302. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.13030.
Epub  2022 Feb 13.

New insights into the pathogenesis of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome.

Li W(1)(2), Hao CJ(1)(2), Hao ZH(1)(2), Ma J(1)(2), Wang QC(1)(2), Yuan 
YF(1)(2), Gong JJ(1)(2), Chen YY(1)(2), Yu JY(1)(2), Wei AH(3).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory for Genetics of Birth Defects, Beijing Pediatric 
Research Institute, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Center of Rare Diseases, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, China.
(2)MOE Key Laboratory of Major Diseases in Children, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.

Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) is characterized by defects of multiple 
tissue-specific lysosome-related organelles (LROs), typically manifesting with 
oculocutaneous albinism or ocular albinism, bleeding tendency, and in some cases 
with pulmonary fibrosis, inflammatory bowel disease or immunodeficiency, 
neuropsychological disorders. Eleven HPS subtypes in humans and at least 
15 subtypes in mice have been molecularly identified. Current understanding of 
the underlying mechanisms of HPS is focusing on the defective biogenesis of 
LROs. Compelling evidences have shown that HPS protein-associated complexes 
(HPACs) function in cargo transport, cargo recycling, and cargo removal to 
maintain LRO homeostasis. Further investigation on the molecular and cellular 
mechanism of LRO biogenesis and secretion will be helpful for better 
understanding of its pathogenesis and for the precise intervention of HPS.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pcmr.13030
PMID: 35129281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]