---
reference_id: "PMID:40498787"
title: "Glanders: An ancient and emergent disease with no vaccine or treatment on site."
authors:
- Torres AG
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0013160
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- "Glanders/epidemiology, diagnosis, microbiology, pathology, immunology, prevention & control"
- "Burkholderia mallei/immunology, isolation & purification, physiology"
- "Communicable Diseases, Emerging/epidemiology, microbiology, pathology"
- Bacterial Vaccines/immunology
- "Zoonoses/epidemiology, microbiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glanders: An ancient and emergent disease with no vaccine or treatment on site.
**Authors:** Torres AG
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0013160](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013160)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2025 Jun 11;19(6):e0013160. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013160. eCollection 2025 Jun.

Glanders: An ancient and emergent disease with no vaccine or treatment on site.

Torres AG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

Glanders is a highly contagious and potentially fatal zoonotic disease that
primarily affects equines but can also infect humans. Caused by the bacterium
Burkholderia mallei, the disease is characterized by nodular lesions in the
lungs and ulcerations of the skin and mucous membranes. This review explores the
historical significance of glanders, from its early recognition to its role as a
biothreat agent. Additionally, it examines the global distribution and
epidemiology of glanders, emphasizing its status as a re-emerging disease in
certain regions. Finally, the clinical presentation, diagnosis, and
host-immunity responses to B. mallei infection are discussed, with a focus on
the ongoing efforts to develop a viable vaccine.

Copyright: © 2025 Alfredo G. Torres. This is an open access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0013160
PMCID: PMC12157308
PMID: 40498787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author has declared that no competing
interests exist.
