---
reference_id: "PMID:37042384"
title: Fahr´s Syndrome; Pseudohypoparathyroidism Type Ib Masquerading as Epileptic Seizures.
authors:
- Kutilek S
- Plasilova I
- Talabova M
- Senkerikova M
- Solarova P
- Rondzikova E
- Stefackova S
journal: Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ)
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fahr´s Syndrome; Pseudohypoparathyroidism Type Ib Masquerading as Epileptic Seizures.
**Authors:** Kutilek S, Plasilova I, Talabova M, Senkerikova M, Solarova P, Rondzikova E, Stefackova S
**Journal:** Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ) (2022)

## Content

1. Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ). 2022 Jul-Sep;20(79):384-387.

Fahr´s Syndrome; Pseudohypoparathyroidism Type Ib Masquerading as Epileptic 
Seizures.

Kutilek S (1), Plasilova I (2), Talabova M (3), Senkerikova M (4), Solarova P 
(4), Rondzikova E (5), Stefackova S (3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Pardubice Hospital, Czech Republic. and Department 
of Paediatrics, Klatovy Hospital, Czech Republic. and Departments of 
Paediatrics, Hradec Kralove Faculty Hospital and Medical Faculty, Charles 
University, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Pardubice Hospital, Czech Republic and Departments 
of Paediatrics, Hradec Kralove Faculty Hospital and Medical Faculty, Charles 
University, Czech Republic.
(3)Departments of Neurology, Hradec Kralove Faculty Hospital and Medical 
Faculty, Charles University, Czech Republic.
(4)Departments of Genetics, Hradec Kralove Faculty Hospital and Medical Faculty, 
Charles University, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Klatovy Hospital, Czech Republic.

Hypocalcaemia of various origin can be manifested by paresthesia, muscle cramps, 
muscle weakness, syncope, convulsions and even severe psychomotor retardation. 
Such symptoms can be initially considered as signs of epilepsy. We present a 12- 
year old boy with partial seizures and basal ganglia calcifications, initially 
diagnosed as having Fahr´s disease and epilepsy, where severe hypocalcaemia, due 
to genetically confirmed pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib was the underlying 
cause. Excellent clinical improvement was observed after calcium and vitamin D 
therapy. The basal ganglia calcifications were secondary due to chronic 
hypocalcaemia, therefore the appropriate diagnosis was pseudohypoparathyroidism 
type Ib with Fahr´s syndrome, but not Fahr´s disease. In conclusion, the serum 
evaluation of minerals, especially calcium and phosphate, should be performed in 
all patients with convulsions, cramps and psychomotor retardation. This is 
essential in arriving at a proper diagnosis and early initiation of appropriate 
treatment.

PMID: 37042384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]