---
reference_id: "PMID:34389230"
title: "Effects of Statin Therapy and Dose on Cardiovascular and Limb Outcomes in Peripheral Arterial Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Sofat S
- Chen X
- Chowdhury MM
- Coughlin PA
journal: Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2021.05.025
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Amputation, Surgical"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/diagnosis, mortality, prevention & control"
- Cause of Death
- "Dyslipidemias/diagnosis, drug therapy, mortality"
- Female
- Heart Disease Risk Factors
- Humans
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Reductase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Peripheral Arterial Disease/diagnosis, drug therapy, mortality"
- Primary Prevention
- Risk Assessment
- Secondary Prevention
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of Statin Therapy and Dose on Cardiovascular and Limb Outcomes in Peripheral Arterial Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Sofat S, Chen X, Chowdhury MM, Coughlin PA
**Journal:** Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejvs.2021.05.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejvs.2021.05.025)

## Content

1. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2021 Sep;62(3):450-461. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejvs.2021.05.025. Epub 2021 Aug 10.

Effects of Statin Therapy and Dose on Cardiovascular and Limb Outcomes 
in Peripheral Arterial Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Sofat S(1), Chen X(2), Chowdhury MM(2), Coughlin PA(2).

Author information:
(1)Five Rivers Vascular Unit, Colchester General Hospital, Colchester, UK. 
Electronic address: samick.sofat@nhs.net.
(2)Department of Vascular Surgery, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2021 Sep;62(3):462. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejvs.2021.05.002.

OBJECTIVE: Statin therapy is indicated in patients with peripheral arterial 
disease (PAD). National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines 
suggest the use of "high intensity" statins, although evidence with PAD specific 
data are lacking. The effect of statin therapy and dose on outcomes in PAD is 
investigated.
DATA SOURCES: Studies measuring statin use in PAD patients and outcomes were 
identified based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) criteria. The EMBASE and MEDLINE databases were 
interrogated from January 1957 until February 2020. Twenty-two observational 
cohort studies and two randomised control trials were included (n = 268 611).
REVIEW METHODS: Pooled estimates of dichotomous outcome data were calculated 
using the odds/hazard ratios (OR/HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). 
Meta-analysis was conducted using the inverse variance or Mantel-Haenszel 
method. Outcomes included all cause mortality (ACM), cardiovascular mortality 
(CVM), major adverse cardiac events (MACE), and amputation. Subgroup analysis 
was performed on studies comparing patients taking high dose vs. combined low 
and moderate doses of statins. The GRADE criteria assessed the quality of 
evidence for outcomes.
RESULTS: Statin therapy (vs. no statins) was significantly protective for ACM: 
OR 0.68 (95% CI 0.60 - 0.76) (number needed to treat [NNT] = 48), HR 0.74 (95% 
CI 0.70 - 0.78) (NNT = 10 - 91); MACE: OR 0.84 (95% CI 0.78 - 0.92) (NNT = 53), 
HR 0.78 (95% CI 0.65 - 0.93) (NNT = 167); and amputations: OR 0.59 (95% CI 0.33 
- 1.07) (NNT = 333), HR 0.74 (95% CI 0.62 - 0.89) (NNT = 50). High doses of 
statins (vs. combined low and moderate doses) were significantly better 
protective against ACM OR 0.69 (95% CI 0.43 - 1.09) (NNT = 17), HR 0.74 (95% CI 
0.62 - 0.89) (NNT = 16 - 200) but work less significantly for MACE OR 0.77 (95% 
CI 0.49 - 1.21) (NNT = 25). Amputations were less frequent in patients on high 
doses HR 0.78 (95% CI 0.69 - 0.90) (NNT = 53 - 1 000).
CONCLUSION: Higher dosing of statins confers a significant improvement in 
patient outcomes, especially ACM and amputations, although the quality of the 
evidence was variable. Such findings require confirmation in larger, PAD 
specific trials.

Copyright © 2021 European Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2021.05.025
PMID: 34389230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]