---
reference_id: "PMID:7698890"
title: Serial evoked potentials in multiple sclerosis bouts. Relation to steroid treatment.
authors:
- La Mantia L
- Riti F
- Milanese C
- Salmaggi A
- Eoli M
- Ciano C
- Avanzini G
journal: Ital J Neurol Sci
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1007/BF02339929
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serial evoked potentials in multiple sclerosis bouts. Relation to steroid treatment.
**Authors:** La Mantia L, Riti F, Milanese C, Salmaggi A, Eoli M, Ciano C, Avanzini G
**Journal:** Ital J Neurol Sci (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02339929](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02339929)

## Content

1. Ital J Neurol Sci. 1994 Oct;15(7):333-40. doi: 10.1007/BF02339929.

Serial evoked potentials in multiple sclerosis bouts. Relation to steroid 
treatment.

La Mantia L(1), Riti F, Milanese C, Salmaggi A, Eoli M, Ciano C, Avanzini G.

Author information:
(1)Divisione di Neurologia, Istituto Neurologico C. Besta di Milano, Italy.

Serial recordings of multimodal sensory (visual, acoustic and somatosensory) 
evoked potentials were made in 19 relapsing-remitting Multiple Sclerosis 
patients enrolled in a clinical trial designed to evaluate the efficacy of 
dexamethasone versus high- and low-dose methylprednisolone in acute multiple 
sclerosis bouts. Electrophysiological and clinical evaluations were performed at 
the onset of therapy and until 6 months after the end of treatment. Using an 
arbitrary Evoked Potentials score that takes into account both latency and 
waveform alterations, we found a positive correlation between evoked potentials 
and clinical disability scores. Furthermore, different electrophysiological 
profiles were detected in the three therapeutic subgroups. Evoked potentials may 
be useful for monitoring acute Multiple Sclerosis bouts and evaluating the 
effect of therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02339929
PMID: 7698890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]