---
reference_id: "PMID:36212776"
title: Dual targeting of EZH1 and EZH2 for the treatment of malignant rhabdoid tumors.
authors:
- Shinohara H
- Sawado R
- Nakagawa M
- Hattori A
- Yamagata K
- Tauchi K
- Ito J
- Kuwahara Y
- Okuda T
- Ogawa C
- Kitabayashi I
journal: Mol Ther Oncolytics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.omto.2022.09.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dual targeting of EZH1 and EZH2 for the treatment of malignant rhabdoid tumors.
**Authors:** Shinohara H, Sawado R, Nakagawa M, Hattori A, Yamagata K, Tauchi K, Ito J, Kuwahara Y, Okuda T, Ogawa C, Kitabayashi I
**Journal:** Mol Ther Oncolytics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omto.2022.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omto.2022.09.006)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Oncolytics. 2022 Sep 19;27:14-25. doi: 10.1016/j.omto.2022.09.006.
eCollection 2022 Dec 15.

Dual targeting of EZH1 and EZH2 for the treatment of malignant rhabdoid tumors.

Shinohara H(1), Sawado R(1), Nakagawa M(1)(2), Hattori A(1)(3), Yamagata K(1),
Tauchi K(1), Ito J(1)(4), Kuwahara Y(5), Okuda T(5), Ogawa C(6), Kitabayashi
I(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematological Malignancy, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-Ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(3)Department of Biosystems Science, Institute for Frontier Life and Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, 160-8582 Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji,
Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatric Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-Ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs) are rare and highly aggressive pediatric
cancers with no standard of care. MRTs are characterized by loss of SMARCB1,
which results in upregulated expression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2),
which is responsible for the methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3),
leading to the repression of gene expression. Although previous reports suggest
EZH2 as an effective therapeutic target, the functions of EZH1, the other
homolog of EZH, in MRT remain unknown. Here, we show that EZH1, as well as EZH2,
contributes to MRT cell growth and H3K27 methylation. Depletion or selective
inhibition of EZH2 led to a compensatory increase in EZH1 expression, and
depletion of EZH1 enhanced the effect of EZH2 inhibition. EZH1/2 dual inhibitors
suppressed MRT cell growth markedly, reflecting the reduction of H3K27me3
accumulation at one of the EZH1/2 targets, the CDKN2A locus. Dual inhibition of
EZH1/2 in vivo suppressed tumor growth completely, with no significant adverse
effects. These findings indicate that both EZH1 and EZH2 are potential targets
for MRT therapy, and that EZH1/2 dual inhibitors may be promising therapeutic
strategies for MRT.

© 2022.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omto.2022.09.006
PMCID: PMC9529991
PMID: 36212776

Conflict of interest statement: I.K. received research grants from Daiichi
Sankyo Company (CH24043) and Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma (C2018-189).
