---
reference_id: "PMID:26090644"
title: "Pathophysiological advances in membranous nephropathy: time for a shift in patient's care."
authors:
- Ronco P
- Debiec H
journal: Lancet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60731-0
keywords:
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Autoimmunity/immunology
- Complement Membrane Attack Complex/immunology
- Forecasting
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/etiology, immunology, pathology"
- Humans
- Podocytes/immunology
- "Receptors, Phospholipase A2/immunology"
- Thrombospondins/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiological advances in membranous nephropathy: time for a shift in patient's care.
**Authors:** Ronco P, Debiec H
**Journal:** Lancet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60731-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60731-0)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2015 May 16;385(9981):1983-92. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60731-0.

Pathophysiological advances in membranous nephropathy: time for a shift in
patient's care.

Ronco P(1), Debiec H(2).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 1155, Paris, France; INSERM,
UMR_S 1155, Paris, France; AP-HP, Department of Nephrology and Dialysis, Hôpital
Tenon, Paris, France. Electronic address: pierreronco@yahoo.fr.
(2)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 1155, Paris, France; INSERM,
UMR_S 1155, Paris, France.

Membranous nephropathy is a major cause of nephrotic syndrome of non-diabetic
origin in adults. It is the second or third leading cause of end-stage renal
disease in patients with primary glomerulonephritis, and is the leading
glomerulopathy that recurs after kidney transplantation (occurring in about 40%
of patients). Treatment with costly and potentially toxic drugs remains
controversial and challenging, partly because of insufficient insight into the
pathogenesis of the disease and absence of sensitive biomarkers of disease
activity. The disease is caused by the formation of immune deposits on the outer
aspect of the glomerular basement membrane, which contain podocyte or planted
antigens and circulating antibodies specific to those antigens, resulting in
complement activation. In 2002, podocyte neutral endopeptidase was identified as
an antigenic target of circulating antibodies in alloimmune neonatal
nephropathy, and in 2009, podocyte phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) was
reported as an antigenic target in autoimmune adult membranous nephropathy.
These major breakthroughs were translated to clinical practice very quickly.
Measurement of anti-PLA2R antibodies in serum and detection of PLA2R antigen in
glomerular deposits can now be done routinely. Anti-PLA2R antibodies have high
specificity (close to 100%), sensitivity (70-80%), and predictive value. PLA2R
detection in immune deposits allows for retrospective diagnosis of PLA2R-related
membranous nephropathy in archival kidney biopsies. These tests already have a
major effect on diagnosis and monitoring of treatment, including after
transplantation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60731-0
PMID: 26090644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
