---
reference_id: "PMID:36662765"
title: Prevalence of Chiari malformation type 1 is increased in pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A and associated with aberrant bone development.
authors:
- Krishnan N
- McMullan P
- Yang Q
- Buscarello AN
- Germain-Lee EL
journal: PLoS One
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0280463
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- Prevalence
- "Pseudohypoparathyroidism/epidemiology, genetics, complications"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics"
- Bone Development
- Genotype
- "Arnold-Chiari Malformation/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, genetics"
- Chromogranins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Chiari malformation type 1 is increased in pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A and associated with aberrant bone development.
**Authors:** Krishnan N, McMullan P, Yang Q, Buscarello AN, Germain-Lee EL
**Journal:** PLoS One (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0280463](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0280463)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2023 Jan 20;18(1):e0280463. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0280463.
eCollection 2023.

Prevalence of Chiari malformation type 1 is increased in
pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A and associated with aberrant bone development.

Krishnan N(1)(2), McMullan P(1)(3), Yang Q(1)(3), Buscarello AN(2), Germain-Lee
EL(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology & Diabetes,
University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut, United
States of America.
(2)Albright Center, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology & Diabetes, Connecticut
Children's, Farmington, Connecticut, United States of America.
(3)Department of Reconstructive Sciences, Center for Regenerative Medicine and
Skeletal Development, University of Connecticut School of Dental Medicine,
Farmington, Connecticut, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) is caused by heterozygous
inactivating mutations in GNAS. Patients with maternally-inherited mutations
develop pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A (PHP1A) with multi-hormone resistance
and aberrant craniofacial and skeletal development among other abnormalities.
Chiari malformation type 1 (CM1), a condition in which brain tissue extends into
the spinal canal when the skull is too small, has been reported in isolated
cases of PHP1A. It has been hypothesized to be associated with growth hormone
(GH) deficiency. Given the adverse clinical sequelae that can occur if CM1 goes
unrecognized, we investigated the previously undetermined prevalence of CM1, as
well as any potential correlations with GH status, given the known increased
prevalence of GH deficiency in PHP1A. We also investigated these metrics for low
lying cerebellar tonsils (LLCT), defined as tonsillar descent less than 5 mm
below the foramen magnum. In addition, we investigated possible correlations of
CM1/LLCT with advanced hand/wrist bone ages and craniofacial abnormalities known
to occur in PHP1A to determine whether premature chondrocyte differentiation
and/or aberrant craniofacial development could be potential etiologies of
CM1/LLCT through both human studies and investigations of our AHO mouse model.
METHODS: We examined patients with PHP1A in our clinic and noticed CM1 more
frequently than expected. Therefore, we set out to determine the true prevalence
of CM1 and LLCT in a cohort of 54 mutation-confirmed PHP1A participants who had
clinically-indicated brain imaging. We examined potential correlations with GH
status, clinical features, biological sex, genotype, and hand/wrist bone age
determinations. In addition, we investigated the craniofacial development in our
mouse model of AHO (Gnas E1+/-m) by histologic analyses, dynamic
histomorphometry, and micro-computerized tomographic imaging (MCT) in order to
determine potential etiologies of CM1/LLCT in PHP1A.
RESULTS: In our cohort of PHP1A, the prevalence of CM1 is 10.8%, which is at
least 10-fold higher than in the general population. If LLCT is included, the
prevalence increases to 21.7%. We found no correlation with GH status,
biological sex, genotype, or hand/wrist bone age. Through investigations of our
Gnas E1+/-m mice, the correlate to PHP1A, we identified a smaller cranial vault
and increased cranial dome angle with evidence of hyperostosis due to increased
osteogenesis. We also demonstrated that there was premature closure of the
spheno-occipital synchondrosis (SOS), a cartilaginous structure essential to the
development of the cranial base. These findings lead to craniofacial
abnormalities and could contribute to CM1 and LLCT development in PHP1A.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of CM1 is at least 10-fold higher in PHP1A compared
to the general population and 20-fold higher when including LLCT. This is
independent of the GH deficiency that is found in approximately two-thirds of
patients with PHP1A. In light of potential serious consequences of CM1,
clinicians should have a low threshold for brain imaging. Investigations of our
AHO mouse model revealed aberrant cranial formation including a smaller cranium,
increased cranial dome angle, hyperostosis, and premature SOS closure rates,
providing a potential etiology for the increased prevalence of CM1 and LLCT in
PHP1A.

Copyright: © 2023 Krishnan et al. This is an open access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0280463
PMCID: PMC9858345
PMID: 36662765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
