---
reference_id: "PMID:7501090"
title: "[Bacterial brain abscess]."
authors:
- Schielke E
journal: Nervenarzt
year: '1995'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Bacterial brain abscess].
**Authors:** Schielke E
**Journal:** Nervenarzt (1995)

## Content

1. Nervenarzt. 1995 Oct;66(10):745-53.

[Bacterial brain abscess].

[Article in German]

Schielke E(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurologische Universittsklinik der Charité, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin.

The most common symptom of brain abscesses are headache, nausea, fever, 
disturbance of consciousness, focal signs and seizures. CT is the most useful 
investigation, showing ring-enhancing lesions with perifocal edema. Systemic 
inflammatory signs, cerebrospinal fluid changes and cerebral enhancement on 
leukocyte scintigraphy are of limited diagnostic value. In 10-20% of cases, 
diagnosis can only be established by biopsy. The most frequent organisms are 
aerobic streptococci, anaerobes, gram-negative bacilli and staphylococci. 
Metronidazole in combination with a third-generation cephalosporin and--in 
certain cases--an antistaphylococcal antibiotic should be given for at least 4 
weeks. Conservative treatment can give satisfactory results in abscesses less 
than 2-3 cm in diameter. Medium-sized and deep-seated abscesses are treated by 
CT-guided stereotactic aspiration. In very large abscesses with the risk of 
herniation craniotomy and excision are necessary. Mortality is nowadays 5-15% 
and does not depend on treatment modalities. Prognosis is mainly determined by 
the patient's level of consciousness on admission.

PMID: 7501090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]