---
reference_id: "PMID:3955486"
title: Nosocomial outbreak of Pseudomonas aeruginosa folliculitis associated with a physiotherapy pool.
authors:
- Schlech WF 3rd
- Simonsen N
- Sumarah R
- Martin RS
journal: CMAJ
year: '1986'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nosocomial outbreak of Pseudomonas aeruginosa folliculitis associated with a physiotherapy pool.
**Authors:** Schlech WF 3rd, Simonsen N, Sumarah R, Martin RS
**Journal:** CMAJ (1986)

## Content

1. CMAJ. 1986 Apr 15;134(8):909-13.

Nosocomial outbreak of Pseudomonas aeruginosa folliculitis associated with a 
physiotherapy pool.

Schlech WF 3rd, Simonsen N, Sumarah R, Martin RS.

Outbreaks of community-acquired Pseudomonas aeruginosa folliculitis have 
recently been described in association with health spa whirlpools. In February 
1984 we detected an outbreak of Pseudomonas folliculitis among hospital staff 
and patients using a swimming pool in a newly constructed physiotherapy unit. A 
rash developed in 5 (45%) of the 11 physiotherapists who had used the pool, as 
compared with 0 of the 17 who had not (p less than 0 005). Pseudomonas 
folliculitis also developed in 6 (21%) of 29 outpatients and 4 (33%) of 12 
inpatients who had used the facility; Pseudomonas infection of a surgical wound 
also developed in 1 of the 4 inpatients. The epidemic curve was consistent with 
a continuing common-source outbreak. P. aeruginosa, serotype O:10, was isolated 
from three physiotherapists, the patient with an infected surgical wound and the 
pool. A case-control study of pool users did not identify risk factors for 
infection, although the physiotherapists had spent longer in the pool than had 
the patients. After hyperchlorination and structural repairs to the pool, no 
further cases were identified among pool users. This outbreak is the first 
reported nosocomial outbreak of Pseudomonas folliculitis. Further investigation 
is needed to determine the risk of serious Pseudomonas infections in 
hospitalized patients using physiotherapy pools.

PMCID: PMC1490981
PMID: 3955486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]