---
reference_id: "PMID:25439356"
title: Developing and emerging clinical asthma phenotypes.
authors:
- Hekking PP
- Bel EH
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2014.09.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developing and emerging clinical asthma phenotypes.
**Authors:** Hekking PP, Bel EH
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2014.09.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2014.09.007)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2014 Nov-Dec;2(6):671-80; quiz 681. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2014.09.007. Epub 2014 Oct 5.

Developing and emerging clinical asthma phenotypes.

Hekking PP(1), Bel EH(2).

Author information:
(1)The Department of Respiratory Medicine, Academic Medical Centre, University 
of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: p.w.hekking@amc.nl.
(2)The Department of Respiratory Medicine, Academic Medical Centre, University 
of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

For more than a century, clinicians have attempted to subdivide asthma into 
different phenotypes based on triggers that cause asthma attacks, the course of 
the disease, or the prognosis. The first phenotypes that were described included 
allergic asthma, intrinsic or nonallergic asthma, infectious asthma, and 
aspirin-exacerbated asthma. These phenotypes are being reviewed elsewhere in 
this issue of the journal. The present article focuses on developing and 
emerging clinical asthma phenotypes. First, asthma phenotypes that are 
associated with environmental exposures (occupational agents, cigarette smoke, 
air pollution, cold dry air); second, asthma phenotypes that are associated with 
specific symptoms or clinical characteristics (cough, obesity, adult onset of 
disease); and third, asthma phenotypes that are based on biomarkers. This latter 
approach is the most promising because it attempts to identify asthma phenotypes 
with different underlying mechanisms so that therapies can be better targeted 
toward disease-specific features and disease outcomes can be improved.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2014.09.007
PMID: 25439356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]