---
reference_id: "PMID:10418977"
title: "Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: update on prenatal diagnosis and treatment."
authors:
- Carlson AD
- Obeid JS
- Kanellopoulou N
- Wilson RC
- New MI
journal: J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0960-0760(99)00059-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: update on prenatal diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Carlson AD, Obeid JS, Kanellopoulou N, Wilson RC, New MI
**Journal:** J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-0760(99)00059-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-0760(99)00059-x)

## Content

1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1999 Apr-Jun;69(1-6):19-29. doi: 
10.1016/s0960-0760(99)00059-x.

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: update on prenatal diagnosis and treatment.

Carlson AD(1), Obeid JS, Kanellopoulou N, Wilson RC, New MI.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology, The New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, NY 
10021, USA.

The diagnostic term congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) applies to a family of 
inherited disorders of steroidogenesis caused by an abnormality in one of the 
five enzymatic steps necessary in the conversion of cholesterol to cortisol. The 
enzyme defects are translated as autosomal recessive traits, with the enzyme 
deficient in more than 90% of CAH cases being 21-hydroxylase. In the classical 
forms of CAH (simple virilizing and salt wasting), owing to 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency (21-OHD), androgen excess causes external genital ambiguity in 
newborn females and progressive postnatal virilization in males and females. 
Non-classical 21-OHD (NC21OHD) refers to the condition in which partial 
deficiencies of 21-hydroxylation produce less extreme hyperandrogenemia and 
milder symptoms. Females do not demonstrate genital ambiguity at birth. The gene 
for adrenal 21-hydroxylase, CYP21, is located on chromosome 6p in the area of 
HLA genes. Specific mutations may be correlated with a given degree of enzymatic 
compromise and the clinical form of 21-OHD. NC21OHD patients are predicted to 
have mild mutations on both alleles or one severe and one mild mutation of the 
21-OH locus (compound heterozygote). In most cases the mutation groups represent 
one diagnosis (e.g., Del/Del with SW CAH), however we have found several 
non-correlations of genotype to phenotype. Non-classical and classical patients 
were found within the same mutation group. Phenotypic variability within each 
mutation group has important implications for prenatal diagnosis and treatment. 
Prenatal treatment of 21-OHD with dexamethasone has been utilized for a decade. 
An algorithm has been developed for prenatal diagnosis and treatment, which, 
when followed closely, has been safe for both the mother and the fetus, and has 
been effective in preventing ambiguous genitalia in the affected female newborn. 
This is an instance of an inborn metabolic error successfully treated 
prenatally. Since 1986, prenatal diagnosis and treatment of congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21-OHD) has been carried out in 
403 pregnancies in The New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center. In 280, 
diagnoses were made by amniocentesis, while 123 were diagnosed using chorionic 
villus sampling. Of the 403 pregnancies evaluated, 84 babies were affected with 
classical 21-OHD. Of these, 52 were females, 36 of whom were treated prenatally 
with dexamethasone. Dexamethasone administered at or before 10 weeks of 
gestation (23 affected female fetuses) was effective in reducing virilization. 
Thirteen cases had affected female sibs (Prader stages 1-4); 6 of these fetuses 
were born with entirely normal female genitalia, while 6 were significantly less 
virilized (Prader stages 1-2) than their sibs, and one was Prader stage 3. Eight 
newborns had male sibs: 4 were born with normal genitalia, 3 were Prader stages 
1-2, and 3 were born Prader stages 3-4. No significant or enduring side effects 
were noted in either the mothers or the fetuses, indicating that dexamethasone 
treatment is safe. Prenatally treated newborns did not differ in weight, length, 
or head circumference from untreated, unaffected newborns. Based on our 
experience, proper prenatal diagnosis and treatment of 21-OHD is effective in 
significantly reducing or eliminating virilization in the newborn female. This 
spares the affected female the consequences of genital ambiguity of genital 
surgery, sex misassignment, and gender confusion.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-0760(99)00059-x
PMID: 10418977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]