---
reference_id: "PMID:35448471"
title: "PNPLA6/NTE, an Evolutionary Conserved Phospholipase Linked to a Group of Complex Human Diseases."
authors:
- Kretzschmar D
journal: Metabolites
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/metabo12040284
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PNPLA6/NTE, an Evolutionary Conserved Phospholipase Linked to a Group of Complex Human Diseases.
**Authors:** Kretzschmar D
**Journal:** Metabolites (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/metabo12040284](https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo12040284)

## Content

1. Metabolites. 2022 Mar 24;12(4):284. doi: 10.3390/metabo12040284.

PNPLA6/NTE, an Evolutionary Conserved Phospholipase Linked to a Group of Complex 
Human Diseases.

Kretzschmar D(1).

Author information:
(1)Oregon Institute of Occupational Health Sciences, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing protein 6 (PNPLA6), originally 
called Neuropathy Target Esterase (NTE), belongs to a family of hydrolases with 
at least eight members in mammals. PNPLA6/NTE was first identified as a key 
factor in Organophosphate-induced delayed neuropathy, a degenerative syndrome 
that occurs after exposure to organophosphates found in pesticides and nerve 
agents. More recently, mutations in PNPLA6/NTE have been linked with a number of 
inherited diseases with diverse clinical symptoms that include spastic 
paraplegia, ataxia, and chorioretinal dystrophy. A conditional knockout of 
PNPLA6/NTE in the mouse brain results in age-related neurodegeneration, whereas 
a complete knockout causes lethality during embryogenesis due to defects in the 
development of the placenta. PNPLA6/NTE is an evolutionarily conserved protein 
that in Drosophila is called Swiss-Cheese (SWS). Loss of SWS in the fly also 
leads to locomotory defects and neuronal degeneration that progressively worsen 
with age. This review will describe the identification of PNPLA6/NTE, its 
expression pattern, and normal role in lipid homeostasis, as well as the 
consequences of altered NPLA6/NTE function in both model systems and patients.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo12040284
PMCID: PMC9025805
PMID: 35448471

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.