---
reference_id: "PMID:9854604"
title: Cutaneous vasculitis in children and adults. Associated diseases and etiologic factors in 303 patients.
authors:
- Blanco R
- Martínez-Taboada VM
- Rodríguez-Valverde V
- García-Fuentes M
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1097/00005792-199811000-00007
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Skin Diseases/classification, etiology, pathology"
- "Vasculitis/classification, etiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous vasculitis in children and adults. Associated diseases and etiologic factors in 303 patients.
**Authors:** Blanco R, Martínez-Taboada VM, Rodríguez-Valverde V, García-Fuentes M
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00005792-199811000-00007](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005792-199811000-00007)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 1998 Nov;77(6):403-18. doi:
10.1097/00005792-199811000-00007.

Cutaneous vasculitis in children and adults. Associated diseases and etiologic
factors in 303 patients.

Blanco R(1), Martínez-Taboada VM, Rodríguez-Valverde V, García-Fuentes M.

Author information:
(1)Service of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla,
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, Spain.

Cutaneous vasculitis (CV), a condition characterized by palpable purpura and
nonspecific histopathologic findings, presents a diagnostic and therapeutic
challenge because it may be a primary disorder or it may be a cutaneous
manifestation of another entity, such as systemic necrotizing vasculitis,
connective tissue disease, systemic bacterial infection, or malignancy. We
studied 303 unselected patients (172 adults and 131 children) with CV to assess
the disease associations and etiologic factors, to identify the frequency of
primary and secondary CV in different age-groups, and to characterize features
that help to distinguish between primary and secondary CV. Of the 131 children,
130 had primary CV: Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) in 116 and hypersensitivity
vasculitis (HV) in 14. In contrast, of the 172 adults, only 120 had primary CV:
HSP in 39, HV in 70, and essential mixed cryoglobulinemia in 11. CV was a
manifestation of systemic necrotizing vasculitis in 23 adults (polyarteritis
nodosa in 17, Wegener granulomatosis in 4, and Churg-Strauss syndrome in 2). CV
was secondary to other processes in 29 adults: in 20 patients CV was associated
with connective tissue disease or another autoimmune or rheumatic disease, in 5
patients CV was a manifestation of severe bacterial infection, especially
bacterial endocarditis (4 cases), and in the other 4 patients CV was the
presenting symptom of an underlying malignancy. The patients for whom CV was a
manifestation of systemic necrotizing vasculitis or secondary to a connective
tissue disease, severe bacterial infection, or malignancy had clinical and
laboratory data suggestive of the associated disorder. The clinical picture and
outcome of primary CV in both children and adults were benign. By contrast, the
prognosis of patients with CV in the context of systemic necrotizing vasculitis
or secondary to other entities depended on the primary process. Given the
different disease association in children and adults, we propose a simple
diagnostic workup in children with CV. By contrast the diagnostic approach in
adults with CV should be more cautious and the workup more extensive. The early
differentiation between primary CV, secondary CV, and CV presenting as a symptom
of systemic necrotizing vasculitis, especially in adults, is of paramount
importance for an adequate diagnosis and appropriate treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/00005792-199811000-00007
PMID: 9854604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
