---
reference_id: "PMID:23039796"
title: Impact of atopic dermatitis and loss-of-function mutations in the filaggrin gene on the development of occupational irritant contact dermatitis.
authors:
- Visser MJ
- Landeck L
- Campbell LE
- McLean WHI
- Weidinger S
- Calkoen F
- John SM
- Kezic S
journal: The British journal of dermatology
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.12083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of atopic dermatitis and loss-of-function mutations in the filaggrin gene on the development of occupational irritant contact dermatitis.
**Authors:** Visser MJ, Landeck L, Campbell LE, McLean WHI, Weidinger S, Calkoen F, John SM, Kezic S
**Journal:** The British journal of dermatology (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.12083](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.12083)

## Content

BACKGROUND: Atopic dermatitis (AD) and loss-of-function mutations in the
filaggrin gene (FLG) are both associated with chronic irritant contact dermatitis
(ICD). As FLG mutations also are a major risk factor for AD, it is not clear
whether FLG mutations are an independent risk factor for ICD or whether the risk
is mediated by AD. OBJECTIVES: To investigate the relative contribution and
interaction of FLG mutations and AD in German patients with occupational ICD and
controls (vocational school apprentices). METHODS: A total of 634 patients and
393 controls were genotyped for R501X, 2282del4, R2447X and S3247X. Current or
past flexural eczema was used as an indicator of AD. RESULTS: FLG mutations were
found in 15·9% of the patients with ICD and 8·3% of the controls, with a crude
odds ratio (OR) of 2·09 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1·33-3·28] for the combined
genotype. The adjusted OR for FLG mutations, corrected for AD, was 1·62 (95% CI
1·01-2·58). Subjects with AD were at approximately three times higher risk of
developing ICD than controls (OR 2·89; 95% CI 2·09-3·99). There was no evidence
of an interaction between these two risk factors. CONCLUSIONS: Our results
indicate that both FLG mutations and AD increase the risk of ICD. Individuals
with concurrent FLG mutations and AD are at the highest risk of developing ICD.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.12083
PMID: 23039796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
