---
reference_id: "PMID:28845582"
title: Pathophysiology of exercise intolerance in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
authors:
- Tran DL
- Lau EMT
- Celermajer DS
- Davis GM
- Cordina R
journal: Respirology
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/resp.13141
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of exercise intolerance in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
**Authors:** Tran DL, Lau EMT, Celermajer DS, Davis GM, Cordina R
**Journal:** Respirology (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/resp.13141](https://doi.org/10.1111/resp.13141)

## Content

1. Respirology. 2018 Feb;23(2):148-159. doi: 10.1111/resp.13141. Epub 2017 Aug
27.

Pathophysiology of exercise intolerance in pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Tran DL(1)(2)(3), Lau EMT(3)(4), Celermajer DS(3)(4), Davis GM(1), Cordina 
R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Pulmonary Hypertension Service, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(4)Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a chronic disease with poor prognosis 
and important exercise limitation despite the proliferation of treatment options 
in the last decade. Chronically increased right ventricular (RV) afterload 
results in right heart failure and without treatment, rapid clinical 
deterioration is common. Exercise intolerance is the cardinal feature of the 
disease impacting upon quality of life and clinical outcome. The 
pathophysiological mechanisms that lead to reduced exercise capacity in this 
population are complex with ventriculoarterial uncoupling likely to be the 
predominant feature. The relative contributions of additional factors that 
contribute to exercise limitation beyond ventriculoarterial uncoupling have not 
been characterized. This review addresses these factors with a focus on recent 
developments and uncertainties. RV maladaptation and the intricate interplay 
between the heart, abnormal pulmonary vascular bed and peripheral factors such 
as dysfunction of the respiratory and peripheral muscles are discussed in 
detail.

© 2017 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.13141
PMID: 28845582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]