---
reference_id: "PMID:40830229"
title: Neurobehavioral profile of individuals with pathogenic variants in CHD3.
authors:
- Ionescu A
- Mazur-Lainé E
- Proteau-Lemieux M
- Knoth IS
- Vachon K
- Whitlock K
- Biag HMB
- Rabouhi N
- Van Heesbeen HJ
- Jacquemont S
- Hessl D
- Abbeduto L
- Anagnostou E
- Bolduc F
- Hagerman RJ
- Campeau PM
- Lippé S
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-025-01926-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Child
- Adolescent
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics, physiopathology"
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex/genetics
- "Fragile X Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics
- Phenotype
- Mutation
- Young Adult
- DNA Helicases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurobehavioral profile of individuals with pathogenic variants in CHD3.
**Authors:** Ionescu A, Mazur-Lainé E, Proteau-Lemieux M, Knoth IS, Vachon K, Whitlock K, Biag HMB, Rabouhi N, Van Heesbeen HJ, Jacquemont S, Hessl D, Abbeduto L, Anagnostou E, Bolduc F, Hagerman RJ, Campeau PM, Lippé S
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-025-01926-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-025-01926-6)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2025 Oct;33(10):1350-1358. doi: 10.1038/s41431-025-01926-6.
Epub 2025 Aug 19.

Neurobehavioral profile of individuals with pathogenic variants in CHD3.

Ionescu A(#)(1)(2), Mazur-Lainé E(#)(1)(2), Proteau-Lemieux M(1)(2), Knoth
IS(2), Vachon K(3), Whitlock K(3), Biag HMB(4), Rabouhi N(2), Van Heesbeen
HJ(2), Jacquemont S(1)(2), Hessl D(4), Abbeduto L(4), Anagnostou E(5), Bolduc
F(3), Hagerman RJ(4), Campeau PM(6)(7), Lippé S(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Azrieli Research Center of the Sainte-Justine University Hospital, Montreal,
QC, Canada.
(3)University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(4)MIND Institute of the University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(5)Holland Bloorview Research Center, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. p.campeau@umontreal.ca.
(7)Azrieli Research Center of the Sainte-Justine University Hospital, Montreal,
QC, Canada. p.campeau@umontreal.ca.
(8)University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. sarah.lippe@umontreal.ca.
(9)Azrieli Research Center of the Sainte-Justine University Hospital, Montreal,
QC, Canada. sarah.lippe@umontreal.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome (SNIBCPS), a neurodevelopmental disorder first
described in 2018, is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in CHD3. Its
encoded protein plays a crucial role in the development of the nervous system of
embryos. While phenotypic traits have been broadly defined, i.e., global
neurodevelopmental delays such as intellectual disabilities and delayed speech
acquisition, and physical features such as characteristic facial features and
macrocephaly, the phenotypic spectrum has not been further assessed. We present
the neurobehavioral profile of 38 individuals with variants in CHD3 and compare
it to the ones of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and Fragile X syndrome (FXS)
cohorts. Profound clinical deficits were found in adaptive functioning,
communication skills, and sensorimotor functioning in most SNIBCPS participants.
Similarities between FXS and SNIBCPS cohorts were unveiled, characterized by
diminished levels of global adaptive behavior and adaptive functioning in the
social and communication domains. Nevertheless, despite profound challenges in
global adaptive behavior in SNIBCPS, we reveal the social domain as showing the
highest adaptive levels alongside minimal emotional/behavioral issues within the
sample, suggesting relative strengths inherent to SNIBCPS. This study enriches
the scarce SNIBCPS literature by delineating the neurobehavioral phenotypic
spectrum of SNIBCPS and by innovating comparisons with clinically akin
neurodevelopmental disorders.

© 2025. Crown.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-025-01926-6
PMCID: PMC12480949
PMID: 40830229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests. Ethics approval and consent to participate: Consent for
participation in this study was obtained via the individual themselves or the
individuals’ legal guardian(s), and the study was approved by the Research
Ethics Committee of the CHU Sainte-Justine (#2016-962) and was carried out
according to the Declaration of Helsinki.
