---
reference_id: "PMID:33394739"
title: New approaches to risk stratification for Wilms tumor.
authors:
- Nelson MV
- van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM
- Graf N
- Dome JS
journal: Curr Opin Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000988
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Kidney Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/genetics, therapy"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Risk Assessment
- "Wilms Tumor/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# New approaches to risk stratification for Wilms tumor.
**Authors:** Nelson MV, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Graf N, Dome JS
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOP.0000000000000988](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000000988)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2021 Feb 1;33(1):40-48. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000988. 
Epub 2020 Dec 29.

New approaches to risk stratification for Wilms tumor.

Nelson MV(1), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(2), Graf N(3), Dome JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oncology, Children's National Hospital and the George Washington 
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington DC, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric 
Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatric Oncology, University Hospital of Saarland, Homburg, 
Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The treatment of Wilms tumor is one of the great achievements 
in the field of oncology. One of the key success factors has been improved risk 
stratification, enabling augmentation or reduction of therapy depending on a 
patient's risk of relapse. This article highlights the evolution of clinical and 
biological prognostic markers that have been applied in the treatment of Wilms 
tumor.
RECENT FINDINGS: Historically, tumor stage and histology were the sole 
determinants of Wilms tumor treatment. Recent clinical trials conducted by the 
Children's Oncology Group (COG) and the International Society of Pediatric 
Oncology (SIOP) Renal Tumor Study Group have expanded the menu of prognostic 
factors to include histologic and volumetric response to therapy and 
tumor-specific loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at chromosomes 1p and 16q. 
Augmentation of therapy has been able to overcome the adverse risk factors. An 
emerging prognostic marker is chromosome 1q gain, will be incorporated into 
future clinical trials.
SUMMARY: The application of new clinical and biological prognostic factors has 
created unprecedented ability to tailor therapy for Wilms tumor, accompanied 
with improved outcomes. Current and future trials will continue to enhance 
precision medicine for Wilms tumor.

Copyright © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000988
PMCID: PMC7919941
PMID: 33394739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Wilms tumor (WT) is the second most common extracranial solid tumor and the most common malignant renal tumor in children. It accounts for 5% of all childhood malignancies and 80% of all diagnosed renal cancers in children and teenagers. Because WT is a malignant embryonal tumor, most cases are diagnosed in children under the age of 5 years. In the United States and Canada, the estimated incidence is about 9 per million children under 15 years old, affecting 1 in 10,000 children [1–2]. Similar rates are reported in Europe, Australia, and New Zealand, with lower rates in Asia, Central and South America. Areas such as Harare, Zimbabwe, in Africa, have higher incidence of 16.5 per million [1]. Most cases of WT are unilateral, with 5–10% of cases affecting both kidneys. Bilateral WT is more common in patients with underlying genetic syndromes.

More than 15 different syndromes are associated with WT, including WAGR (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary abnormalities, and a range of developmental delays), Denys-Drash (Wilms tumor, diffuse mesangial sclerosis leading to early-onset renal failure, and intersex disorders that can range from ambiguous to normal-appearing female genitalia in both XY & XX individuals), and Beckwith-Wiedemann (embryonal tumors, macrosomia, macroglossia, hemihypertrophy, visceromegaly, omphalocele, neonatal hypoglycemia, and ear creases/pits) [3]. Only 10% of WT cases are associated with an underlying constitutional mutation, and therefore the etiology of most cases is unknown [4].

Patients with WT are usually asymptomatic at initial diagnosis. In most cases, a parent will identify an abdominal mass upon bathing or dressing their child, or a pediatrician will palpate a mass upon examining the child during a routine well-child visit. However, up to 35% of patients can present with either hematuria, hypertension, fever, or flank pain [5]. Rarely, a patient can present with an acute abdomen in the setting of tumor rupture and bleeding into surrounding tissue. If the diagnosis of WT is clinically suspected, an initial ultrasound of the abdomen with doppler is indicated, followed by referral to a pediatric general surgeon and oncologist for additional work-up and treatment.

The advancement in treatment of Wilms tumor (WT) is one of the great achievements in the field of oncology [6–7]. Stepwise advances made by the National Wilms Tumor Study Group (NWTSG), which was succeeded by the Children’s Oncology Group (COG), and the International Society of Pediatric Oncology (SIOP) Renal Tumor Study Group (RTSG) have not only improved survival to 90%, but have also decreased the burden of therapy [6–7]. A key factor to success has been the refinement of clinical and biological prognostic markers that have enabled risk-directed therapy. This article reviews the evolution of clinical and biological factors that have been adopted for WT.

The original NWTSG and SIOP studies relied solely on tumor stage to define treatment. Over time, additional factors were incorporated into the risk stratification schema, allowing for a multifactorial precision medicine approach (Figure 1). It is important to recognize that prognostic factors must be interpreted in the context of the accompanying treatment regimen. This principle is relevant to WT because COG studies advocate for immediate nephrectomy for most patients whereas SIOP studies advocate for preoperative chemotherapy.

The COG approach of upfront nephrectomy allows for immediate histologic diagnosis, molecular analysis, and accurate local staging assessment. This knowledge can identify a subset of patients with very low-risk WT who may be treated with nephrectomy alone.

Tumor stage was the earliest known prognostic factor for WT, with outcomes worsening with advancing stage [7]. Stage V designates bilateral disease, which has been associated with the least favorable outcome, though survival was markedly improved in the recent COG AREN0534 study [8]. Recent analyses have uncovered prognostic differences within the same stage category. A retrospective analysis of NWTS-5 demonstrated that the disparate factors defining stage III (positive surgical margins, positive lymph nodes, tumor rupture, peritoneal implants) impact the risk of recurrence to a varying and often additive extent [9]. Among patients with stage III disease enrolled on COG study AREN0532, 4-year event-free survival (EFS) was 82% with positive lymph nodes, compared to 94% with negative lymph nodes (p<0.01) [10]. An additive effect was observed when lymph node positivity was combined with loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at either chromosome 1p or 16q. Four-year EFS was 74% with both positive lymph nodes and LOH at either 1p or 16q, 86–87% with either positive lymph nodes or LOH at one of the loci, and 97% with negative lymph nodes and lack of LOH (p<0.001). Based on this observation, patients with positive lymph nodes and LOH at either 1p or 16q will receive additional chemotherapy drugs in the next COG study.

The ideal number of lymph nodes that should be sampled remains unknown, though studies have suggested that sampling more nodes increases the yield of detecting tumor [11]. Investigators have suggested that sampling 6–10 lymph nodes [12*] or >7 nodes [11] is optimal to detect WT involvement.

The presence of anaplasia has long been recognized as an adverse prognostic factor for WT [13–16*]. Although anaplastic histology is a marker of resistance to therapy, recent studies have shown that this resistance can be partially overcome with additional chemotherapy drugs. For stage I anaplastic WT, the addition of flank radiation and doxorubicin to vincristine/dactinomycin improved the four-year EFS from 70% on NWTS-5 to 100% on COG AREN0321 [14,16*]. Retrospective analyses of stage I anaplastic WT suggested a clear contribution of doxorubicin, with an uncertain role for flank radiation [16*,17*]. For stage II-IV diffuse anaplastic WT, inclusion of carboplatin in addition to vincristine/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide/etoposide, the inclusion of vincristine/irinotecan for stage IV disease, and a higher dose of flank radiation for stage III disease improved four-year relapse-free survival from 58% to 73%, though the new therapy was associated with increased toxicity [15*].

Two studies demonstrated that detection of a TP53 mutation in anaplastic WT was associated with adverse outcome [18–19]. However, careful analysis including copy number assessment and immunohistochemistry, as well as confirming that anaplasia was present in the portion of tumor undergoing mutation analysis, indicated that nearly all anaplastic WT have TP53 mutations if one looks hard enough [19]. Hence, the detection of a TP53 mutation in a randomly selected tumor sample may represent a surrogate for the burden of anaplasia.

A retrospective review of stage I epithelial-predominant WT revealed outstanding prognosis, with four-year EFS and OS of 96% and 100%, respectively [20*]. The upcoming COG study will prospectively assess whether this group of patients can be treated with nephrectomy only.

Increasing patient age is associated with increased risk of recurrence and worse outcome. This is partially attributed to the fact that anaplastic histology is rare in very young patients, however older patients with favorable histology WT also have worse outcomes than younger patients [21]. On NWTS-5, patients less than 2 years old with stage I disease, favorable histology, and tumor weight <550 grams were treated with nephrectomy alone. A lower than expected 4-year EFS of 84% triggered predefined stopping rules and the study was discontinued [22–23]. However, nearly all patients ultimately survived, leading the COG AREN0532 study to revisit this question. Among 116 patients enrolled, four-year EFS and OS were 89.7% and 100%, confirming that nephrectomy-only is an acceptable approach for this group [24]. Interestingly, tumor-specific LOH or loss of imprinting (LOI) at chromosome 11p15 (the Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome locus) was associated with an increased risk of relapse. While only 3% of patients without LOH/LOI relapsed, 20% with LOH 11p15 and 25% with LOI 11p15 relapsed [24], confirming earlier observations [25–26]. Based on these findings, patients whose tumors demonstrate LOH 11p15 will not be candidates for nephrectomy-only in the upcoming COG study. Conversely, tumor weight will no longer be a criterion for the surgery-only approach and patients up to age 4 years will be eligible for the study based on findings from the United Kingdom Children’s Cancer Study Group [24]. Expanding the age range and eliminating the tumor weight criteria will double the number of patients eligible for surgery only.

NWTS-5 prospectively evaluated the prognostic significance of LOH for chromosomes 16q and 1p in favorable histology WT. LOH for either chromosome segment was found to correlate with increased risk of relapse and death, however the most significant impact was in groups with LOH for both 1p and 16q [27]. Based on these findings, AREN0532 and AREN0533 assessed escalation of therapy for patients with combined LOH of 1p and 16q (patients with LOH at either 1p or 16q received the standard treatment regimens). Patients with stage I and II favorable histology WT who had LOH of 1p and 16q received intensified therapy with Regimen DD4A (vincristine/dactinomycin/doxorubicin) instead of the historic Regimen EE4A (vincristine/dactinomycin). Patients with stage III and IV favorable histology WT received four cycles of cyclophosphamide and etoposide in addition vincristine/dactinomycin/doxorubicin (Regimen M) instead of the historic Regimen DD4A. Four-year EFS for stage I/II improved to 87% (versus 69% in NWTS-5, p=0.42) and 4-year EFS for stage III/IV improved to 90% (versus 61% in NWTS-5, p=0.001). OS estimates were also improved but not statistically different [28*]. Based on these findings, LOH at 1p and 16q will be carried forward as a risk stratification factor in the upcoming COG studies.

Combined LOH 1p and 16q has limited impact as a prognostic marker because only 5% of favorable histology WT carry this molecular change. By contrast, gain of chromosome 1q is one of the most commonly observed cytogenetic abnormalities in WT, seen in as many as 30% of patients [29]. A retrospective analysis of more than 1000 patients in NWTS-5 demonstrated that 1q gain was associated with inferior EFS and OS across all tumor stages [29]. There also was a correlation between LOH 16q/1p and gain of 1q because a translocation involving chromosomes 1p and 16q can result in both molecular lesions [30]. In the next generation of COG studies, patients with 1q gain will generally receive augmented therapy and will not be eligible for planned reductions in therapy, such as surgery-only for patients with stage I favorable histology WT.

On NWTSG studies, all patients with pulmonary metastasis were subjected to whole lung radiation (WLI). A subgroup of the SIOP 93–01 and 2001 populations analyzed by the German Society of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology indicated that patients with complete lung nodule response after 6 weeks of chemotherapy had superior EFS and OS compared to patients with incomplete response [31]. Based on these findings, COG trial AREN0533 used a risk-adapted approach to stage IV favorable histology WT and pulmonary metastases. Patients with incomplete response of lung nodules after six weeks of DD4A chemotherapy received WLI and escalated to chemotherapy Regimen M. With this approach, 4-year EFS was 90% (versus an expected 75% based on NWTS-5, p<0.001) and 4-year OS was 96%, strongly suggesting a benefit to Regimen M. A pitfall to Regimen M is its cumulative cyclophosphamide dose of 8.8 g/m2, placing patients at risk for late effects including infertility, especially males. Future COG studies plan to limit the cyclophosphamide cumulative dose to 4.4 g/m2, replacing two cyclophosphamide/etoposide cycles with vincristine/irinotecan.

Patients with complete lung nodule response after 6 weeks of DD4A chemotherapy had WLI omitted, resulting in a 4-year EFS of 79% (versus an expected 85% based on NWTS-5, p=0.052) and 4-year OS of 96% [32]. Although the OS was excellent, the number of relapses was greater than expected with omission of WLI. A post-hoc analysis showed that chromosome 1q gain provided a valuable marker to select patients with complete lung nodule response who should not be candidates for omission of WLI; among complete responders, EFS was 57% in those with 1q gain compared to 86% in those without 1q gain (p=0.001). By contrast, there was no difference in outcome according to 1q gain status in the incomplete lung nodule responders who received Regimen M, suggesting that Regimen M overcame the negative effect of 1q gain.

A summation of prognostic factors, treatments and outcomes utilized in recent COG trials is provided in Table 1.

The SIOP nephroblastoma studies and trials have centered around preoperative therapy since their inception in 1971. The early studies showed that neoadjuvant chemotherapy prevents intraoperative tumor rupture and induces favorable stage distribution. Subsequent trials modified post-operative treatment based on tumor stage and histology, leading to the current UMBRELLA protocol, which will identify and refine new biomarkers for the management of nephroblastoma independent of tumor type, socio-economic status, or geographic region [33].

In the SIOP system, patients are staged at diagnosis by imaging studies into local (stage I-III), metastatic (stage IV), or bilateral disease (stage V). To define metastatic disease by chest CT-scan, a clear description of lung lesions and their interpretation is done in a prospective way. Standardization and quality improvement of imaging studies are of utmost importance, therefore, analysis by reference radiology is mandatory in the UMBRELLA protocol. After preoperative chemotherapy and surgery, the local stage is redefined, which determines the intensity of postoperative treatment, which varies between no further treatment in totally necrotic stage I tumors, to more than 6 months intensive chemotherapy [33].

As in the COG system, diffuse anaplasia is a high-risk histological subtype. Additionally, preoperative chemotherapy allows for assessment of histologic response to treatment. Low-risk histology, defined as completely necrotic tumor, occurs in 5% of tumors. High-risk histology includes blastemal-type tumors, as a predominance of residual blastemal cells is a marker of chemotherapy resistance. Intermediate-risk histology represents all others [34]. Stromal and epithelia-type nephroblastoma show an excellent outcome after preoperative chemotherapy [35]. In retrospective analyses, the absolute blastemal volume after preoperative chemotherapy seems to be of prognostic relevance, showing that patients with more than 20 ml blastema have a poorer outcome than those with less blastema [36]. Importantly, an increase in therapy on the SIOP-2001 study improved event-free survival in patients with localized blastemal-type WT [37] whereas outcomes for stage IV blastemal-type or diffuse anaplastic WT remained unsatisfactory [38*].

If available, diffusion-weighted MRI is recommended as this may help characterize the tumor. The apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value correlates with cell density and may help to correlate with histology after preoperative chemotherapy [39–42].

Data from the SIOP 93–01 and 2001 cohorts (5631 patients, median age 3.4 years) were explored to study the independent prognostic value of age on survival [43*]. Although optimal cutoffs for age could not be identified, previously described cutoffs for EFS (2 and 4 years) and OS (4 years) demonstrated the prognostic significance of age in children with WT treated with preoperative chemotherapy. These findings encourage the consideration of age in the design of future SIOP-RTSG protocols especially in combination with molecular markers, such as 1q gain.

In vivo response to preoperative chemotherapy is an important stratification parameter in the SIOP trials [44]. Treatment response encompasses both volumetric and histologic response (described above). Residual tumor volume above 500 ml is an adverse prognostic factor for intermediate-risk histology other than epithelial and stromal-type tumors [33]. This is thought to be due to the absolute volume of remaining blastema [36]. Tumor shrinkage also allows for nephron sparing surgery (NSS), but this should be performed by experienced surgeons to avoid a high postoperative local stage [45]. To better assess the impact of NSS on late effects, a new predictive formula has been developed and evaluated. This formula takes into account not only the surgical and histological resection margin, but also the remaining normal kidney [46].

Response of distant metastases is also prognostically important. Patients with stage IV WT achieving a complete remission after preoperative chemotherapy do not require lung irradiation [47]. In patients with remaining lung nodules, metastastectomy and histological confirmation of metastasis is advised. Irradiation can be avoided for completely necrotic metastasis and complete response achieved with surgical resection.

In contrast to COG, molecular markers are not used for adapting postoperative treatment in WT. In a retrospective analysis of different molecular markers in tumor samples from 586 patients enrolled on SIOP-2001, an association of 1q gain with poorer EFS retained significance in multivariable analysis adjusted for 1p and 16q loss, sex, stage, age, and histologic risk group. In addition, MYCN gain and TP53 loss were associated with poorer outcome [48–49]. These results and their association with the blastemal subtype are being evaluated prospectively in the ongoing UMBRELLA protocol. It is important to take the intratumoral heterogeneity into account to get reliable results [50].

Liquid biopsies show promise to play an important role to diagnose kidney tumors together with imaging studies, for surveillance and predicting earlier relapse, and for overcoming tumor heterogeneity [51–52]. Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) and microRNA (miRNA) have shown promise to detect WT, distinguish histologic subtypes, and correlate with chemosensitivity [53–54].

A summary of risk-groups, treatments, and patient outcomes for recent SIOP studies is depicted in Table 2.

The application of new clinical and biological prognostic factors has created unprecedented ability to tailor therapy for WT. Recent clinical trials have demonstrated that augmented therapy can overcome the effect of certain adverse prognostic factors. The ongoing SIOP UMBRELLA protocol and future COG trials seek to further refine prognostic factors to enhance precision medicine for WT.