---
reference_id: "PMID:32064670"
title: Quality of life, emotion dysregulation, attention deficit and psychiatric comorbidity in children and adolescents with vitiligo.
authors:
- Ucuz I
- Altunisik N
- Sener S
- Turkmen D
- Kavuran NA
- Marsak M
- Colak C
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/ced.14196
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quality of life, emotion dysregulation, attention deficit and psychiatric comorbidity in children and adolescents with vitiligo.
**Authors:** Ucuz I, Altunisik N, Sener S, Turkmen D, Kavuran NA, Marsak M, Colak C
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ced.14196](https://doi.org/10.1111/ced.14196)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2021 Apr;46(3):510-515. doi: 10.1111/ced.14196. Epub 2020
May  19.

Quality of life, emotion dysregulation, attention deficit and psychiatric 
comorbidity in children and adolescents with vitiligo.

Ucuz I(1), Altunisik N(2), Sener S(2), Turkmen D(2), Kavuran NA(1), Marsak M(2), 
Colak C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu 
University, Malatya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu University, Malatya, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, 
Inonu University, Malatya, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Vitiligo is an acquired pigmentation disorder, which can have a 
negative effect on patient quality of life (QoL).
AIM: To evaluate QoL and psychiatric comorbidity in paediatric patients with 
vitiligo.
METHODS: In total, 30 patients aged 8-18 years who were diagnosed with vitiligo 
and 30 age- and sex-matched healthy controls (HCs) were included in the study. 
The Children's Depression Inventory, Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders, 
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Children and Child Somatization Inventory were 
completed for both patients and controls. The Schedule for Affective Disorders 
and Schizophrenia for School Age Children-Present and Lifetime Version 
(K-SADS-PL) was administered to all patients by a child psychiatrist. Families 
were also asked to complete the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory and Emotion 
Regulation Checklist for children.
RESULTS: The K-SADS-PL evaluation showed that 90% of the patients in the 
vitiligo group had at least one psychiatric diagnosis, whereas this rate was 20% 
in the HCs (P < 0.001). There were statistically significant differences between 
vitiligo and HCs in terms of anxiety, state and trait anxiety scores (P < 0.05). 
Attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) was detected in 36.6% of the 
patients.
CONCLUSION: The most important finding of this study is that anxiety disorders 
are more prominent than depression in childhood vitiligo. Another important 
finding of this study is that the prevalence of ADHD is significantly higher 
than the normal population.

© 2020 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.14196
PMID: 32064670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]