---
reference_id: "PMID:27929101"
title: Hookworm infection.
authors:
- Loukas A
- Hotez PJ
- Diemert D
- Yazdanbakhsh M
- McCarthy JS
- Correa-Oliveira R
- Croese J
- Bethony JM
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.88
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hookworm infection.
**Authors:** Loukas A, Hotez PJ, Diemert D, Yazdanbakhsh M, McCarthy JS, Correa-Oliveira R, Croese J, Bethony JM
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2016.88](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2016.88)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 Dec 8;2:16088. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.88.

Hookworm infection.

Loukas A(1), Hotez PJ(2)(3)(4), Diemert D(5)(6), Yazdanbakhsh M(7), McCarthy 
JS(8)(9), Correa-Oliveira R(10), Croese J(1)(11), Bethony JM(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Biodiscovery and Molecular Development of Therapeutics, Australian 
Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, Building E4, James Cook University, 
McGregor Rd, Smithfield, Cairns, Queensland 4878, Australia.
(2)Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular Virology and Microbiology, National 
School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College Of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Sabin Vaccine Institute, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Texas Children's Hospital Center for Vaccine Development, Houston, Texas, 
USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Tropical Medicine and Immunology, George 
Washington University, Washington DC, USA.
(6)Sabin Vaccine Institute, Washington DC, USA.
(7)Department of Parasitology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Queensland Institute of Medical Research (QIMR) Berghofer Medical Research 
Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(9)University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(10)Centro de Pesquisas Rene Rachou-Fiocruz, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(11)Department of Gastroenterology, Prince Charles Hospital, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.

Hookworms are soil-transmitted nematode parasites that can reside for many years 
in the small intestine of their human hosts; Necator americanus is the 
predominant infecting species. Adult worms feed on the blood of a host and can 
cause iron deficiency anaemia, especially in high-risk populations (children and 
women of childbearing age). Almost 500 million people in developing tropical 
countries are infected, and simulation models estimate that hookworm infection 
is responsible for >4 million disability-adjusted life years lost annually. 
Humans mount an immune response to hookworms, but it is mostly unsuccessful at 
removing adult worms from the bowel. Accordingly, the host switches to an 
immune-tolerant state that enables hookworms to reside in the gut for many 
years. Although anthelmintic drugs are available and widely used, their efficacy 
varies and the drugs do not prevent reinfection. Thus, other control strategies 
aimed at improving water quality, sanitation and hygiene are needed. In 
addition, efforts are underway to develop a human hookworm vaccine through 
public-private partnerships. However, hookworms could also be a resource; as 
hookworms have the capability to regulate the host's inflammation, researchers 
are experimentally infecting patients to treat some inflammatory diseases as an 
approach to discover new anti-inflammatory molecules. This area of endeavour 
might well yield new biotherapeutics for autoimmune and allergic diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.88
PMID: 27929101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]