---
reference_id: "PMID:30898950"
title: Osteomyelitis of the mandible secondary to malignant infantile osteopetrosis in an adult.
authors:
- Dunphy L
- Warfield A
- Williams R
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2018-224452
keywords:
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/administration & dosage"
- Female
- Humans
- "Mandible/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Meropenem/administration & dosage"
- "Osteomyelitis/complications, drug therapy, microbiology, pathology"
- Osteopetrosis/complications
- "Streptococcus constellatus/isolation & purification"
- "Streptococcus mitis/isolation & purification"
- "Streptococcus oralis/isolation & purification"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteomyelitis of the mandible secondary to malignant infantile osteopetrosis in an adult.
**Authors:** Dunphy L, Warfield A, Williams R
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2018-224452](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2018-224452)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2019 Mar 20;12(3):e224452. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2018-224452.

Osteomyelitis of the mandible secondary to malignant infantile osteopetrosis in 
an adult.

Dunphy L(1), Warfield A(2), Williams R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Milton Keynes University Hospital, Milton Keynes, UK.
(2)Department of Histopathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, 
Birmingham, UK.

Malignant infantile osteopetrosis (MIOP), an autosomal-recessive disorder, is 
extremely rare, presenting early in life with extreme sclerosis of the skeleton 
and reduced activity of osteoclasts. It was first described by Albers Schonberg 
in 1904. Disease manifestations include compensatory extramedullary 
haematopoiesis at sites such as the liver and spleen, hepatosplenomegaly, 
anaemia and thrombocytopaenia. Neurological manifestations can also occur due to 
narrowing of osseous foramina resulting in visual impairment, hearing loss, 
facial palsy and hydrocephalus. In addition, growth retardation and recurrent 
infections requiring long-term antibiotic use are common. The incidence of MIOP 
is 1/2 000 000 and if untreated, then it has a fatal outcome, with the majority 
of cases occurring within the first 5 years of life. At present, the only 
potentially curative option is a haematopoietic stem cell transplant. We present 
a 21-year-old woman, diagnosed with malignant infantile osteopetrosis, due to a 
mutation in the T-cell immune regulator 1 gene when aged 6 weeks, presenting 
with chronic osteomyelitis of her left mandible. As malignant infantile 
osteopetrosis has a high mortality in infancy, we felt it prudent to report this 
rare case in a patient surviving to adulthood.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2019. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2018-224452
PMCID: PMC6453288
PMID: 30898950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.