---
reference_id: "PMID:25002079"
title: "A study of oxidative stress, cytokines and glutamate in Wilson disease and their asymptomatic siblings."
authors:
- Kalita J
- Kumar V
- Misra UK
- Ranjan A
- Khan H
- Konwar R
journal: J Neuroimmunol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.06.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A study of oxidative stress, cytokines and glutamate in Wilson disease and their asymptomatic siblings.
**Authors:** Kalita J, Kumar V, Misra UK, Ranjan A, Khan H, Konwar R
**Journal:** J Neuroimmunol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.06.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.06.013)

## Content

1. J Neuroimmunol. 2014 Sep 15;274(1-2):141-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.06.013.  Epub 2014 Jun 24.

A study of oxidative stress, cytokines and glutamate in Wilson disease and their 
asymptomatic siblings.

Kalita J(1), Kumar V(2), Misra UK(2), Ranjan A(2), Khan H(3), Konwar R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate medical Sciences, 
Lucknow, India. Electronic address: jayanteek@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate medical Sciences, 
Lucknow, India.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, 
India.

BACKGROUND: Free copper in Wilson disease (WD) is toxic and may reduce 
antioxidant, increase oxidative stress marker and thereby cytokine release and 
excitotoxic injury, but there is paucity of studies in humans. We report 
oxidative stress markers, cytokines and glutamate in neurologic WD and correlate 
these with their clinical severity, laboratory findings and extent of Magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) changes.
METHODS: 29 patients with neurologic WD and 9 asymptomatic WD siblings were 
included and their clinical, treatment history, disease severity, biochemical 
findings and MRI changes were noted. Glutathione (GSH), total antioxidant 
capacity (TAC) and malonodialdehyde (MDA) were measured by spectrophotometer, 
cytokines by cytokine bead array and glutamate by the fluorometer.
RESULTS: In WD patients, the glutathione (mean±SEM, 2.20±0.06 vs. 
2.73±0.04mg/dl, P<0.001) and TAC (1.70±0.03 vs. 2.29±0.02 Trolox_Eq_mmol/l, 
P<0.001) were reduced, and MDA and glutamate (23.93±0.54 vs. 19.96±0.27μmol/l; 
P<0.001) were increased (4.7±0.11 vs. 3.03±0.52nmol/ml, P<0.001) compared to 
controls. The serum IL6 {median (IQRs), 9.42(10.92) vs. 5.2(5.34) pg/ml; 
P=0.001}, IL8 {12.37(10.92) vs. 5.63(5.52) pg/ml; P<0.001}, IL10 {8.33(8.3) vs. 
2.05(1.37) pg/ml; P=0.001} and TNFα {6.14(8.95) vs. 3.61(3.58) pg/ml; P<0.001} 
were also increased in WD patients compared to controls. These changes were more 
marked in the neurologic WD compared to asymptomatic WD and in the untreated 
compared to treated patients. TAC correlated with duration of illness, serum 
free copper, 24hour urinary copper and serum ceruloplasmin, and glutamate with 
MDA, TNFα, ceruloplasmin and 24-hour urinary copper.
CONCLUSIONS: In WD patients, antioxidants are reduced and MDA, cytokines and 
glutamate are increased which are more marked in symptomatic neurologic WD than 
asymptomatic patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.06.013
PMID: 25002079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]