---
reference_id: "PMID:35625928"
title: "Alcohol Use Disorder: Neurobiology and Therapeutics."
authors:
- Yang W
- Singla R
- Maheshwari O
- Fontaine CJ
- Gil-Mohapel J
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10051192
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alcohol Use Disorder: Neurobiology and Therapeutics.
**Authors:** Yang W, Singla R, Maheshwari O, Fontaine CJ, Gil-Mohapel J
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines10051192](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines10051192)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2022 May 21;10(5):1192. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10051192.

Alcohol Use Disorder: Neurobiology and Therapeutics.

Yang W(1), Singla R(1), Maheshwari O(2), Fontaine CJ(3), Gil-Mohapel J(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Island Medical Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada.
(2)Psychiatry Residency Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Victoria, BC V8W 3P5, Canada.
(3)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 2Y2, 
Canada.

Alcohol use disorder (AUD) encompasses the dysregulation of multiple brain 
circuits involved in executive function leading to excessive consumption of 
alcohol, despite negative health and social consequences and feelings of 
withdrawal when access to alcohol is prevented. Ethanol exerts its toxicity 
through changes to multiple neurotransmitter systems, including serotonin, 
dopamine, gamma-aminobutyric acid, glutamate, acetylcholine, and opioid systems. 
These neurotransmitter imbalances result in dysregulation of brain circuits 
responsible for reward, motivation, decision making, affect, and the stress 
response. Despite serious health and psychosocial consequences, this disorder 
still remains one of the leading causes of death globally. Treatment options 
include both psychological and pharmacological interventions, which are aimed at 
reducing alcohol consumption and/or promoting abstinence while also addressing 
dysfunctional behaviours and impaired functioning. However, stigma and social 
barriers to accessing care continue to impact many individuals. AUD treatment 
should focus not only on restoring the physiological and neurological impairment 
directly caused by alcohol toxicity but also on addressing psychosocial factors 
associated with AUD that often prevent access to treatment. This review 
summarizes the impact of alcohol toxicity on brain neurocircuitry in the context 
of AUD and discusses pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapies currently 
available to treat this addiction disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10051192
PMCID: PMC9139063
PMID: 35625928

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.