---
reference_id: "PMID:40835974"
title: The NuRD component CHD3 promotes BMP signalling during cranial neural crest cell specification.
authors:
- Mitchell ZH
- den Hoed J
- Claassen W
- Demurtas M
- Deelen L
- Campeau PM
- Liu K
- Fisher SE
- Trizzino M
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s44319-025-00555-w
keywords:
- "Neural Crest/cytology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, cytology"
- "Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex/metabolism, genetics"
- "Skull/embryology, cytology"
- "Transcription Factors/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The NuRD component CHD3 promotes BMP signalling during cranial neural crest cell specification.
**Authors:** Mitchell ZH, den Hoed J, Claassen W, Demurtas M, Deelen L, Campeau PM, Liu K, Fisher SE, Trizzino M
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s44319-025-00555-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44319-025-00555-w)

## Content

1. EMBO Rep. 2025 Oct;26(19):4723-4741. doi: 10.1038/s44319-025-00555-w. Epub
2025  Aug 20.

The NuRD component CHD3 promotes BMP signalling during cranial neural crest cell
specification.

Mitchell ZH(1), den Hoed J(2), Claassen W(2), Demurtas M(1), Deelen L(1),
Campeau PM(3)(4), Liu K(5), Fisher SE(2)(6), Trizzino M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistic,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, King's College London,
London, UK.
(6)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Raboud University,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
m.trizzino@imperial.ac.uk.

Pathogenic genetic variants in the NuRD component CHD3 cause Snijders
Blok-Campeau Syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder manifesting with
intellectual disability and craniofacial anomalies. To investigate the role of
CHD3 in craniofacial development, we differentiated control and CHD3-depleted
human-induced pluripotent stem cells into cranial neural crest cells (CNCCs). In
control lines, CHD3 is upregulated in early stages of CNCC specification, where
it enhances the BMP signalling response by opening chromatin at BMP-responsive
cis-regulatory elements and by increasing expression of BMP-responsive
transcription factors, including DLX paralogs. CHD3 loss leads to repression of
BMP target genes and loss of chromatin accessibility at cis-regulatory elements
usually bound by BMP-responsive factors, causing an imbalance between BMP and
Wnt signalling. Consequently, the CNCC specification fails, replaced by aberrant
early-mesoderm identity, which can be partially rescued by titrating Wnt levels.
Our findings highlight a novel role for CHD3 as a pivotal regulator of BMP
signalling, essential for proper neural crest specification and craniofacial
development. Moreover, these results suggest a molecular mechanism for the
craniofacial anomalies of Snijders Blok-Campeau Syndrome.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s44319-025-00555-w
PMCID: PMC12508100
PMID: 40835974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure and competing interests statement.
The authors declare no competing interests.
