---
reference_id: "PMID:23430882"
title: "Three Japanese Patients with Beta-Ketothiolase Deficiency Who Share a Mutation, c.431A>C (H144P) in ACAT1 : Subtle Abnormality in Urinary Organic Acid Analysis and Blood Acylcarnitine Analysis Using Tandem Mass Spectrometry."
authors:
- Fukao T
- Maruyama S
- Ohura T
- Hasegawa Y
- Toyoshima M
- Haapalainen AM
- Kuwada N
- Imamura M
- Yuasa I
- Wierenga RK
- Yamaguchi S
- Kondo N
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2011_72
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three Japanese Patients with Beta-Ketothiolase Deficiency Who Share a Mutation, c.431A>C (H144P) in ACAT1 : Subtle Abnormality in Urinary Organic Acid Analysis and Blood Acylcarnitine Analysis Using Tandem Mass Spectrometry.
**Authors:** Fukao T, Maruyama S, Ohura T, Hasegawa Y, Toyoshima M, Haapalainen AM, Kuwada N, Imamura M, Yuasa I, Wierenga RK, Yamaguchi S, Kondo N
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2011_72](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2011_72)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2012;3:107-15. doi: 10.1007/8904_2011_72. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Three Japanese Patients with Beta-Ketothiolase Deficiency Who Share a Mutation,
c.431A>C (H144P) in ACAT1 : Subtle Abnormality in Urinary Organic Acid Analysis
and Blood Acylcarnitine Analysis Using Tandem Mass Spectrometry.

Fukao T(1), Maruyama S, Ohura T, Hasegawa Y, Toyoshima M, Haapalainen AM, Kuwada
N, Imamura M, Yuasa I, Wierenga RK, Yamaguchi S, Kondo N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, 1-1
Yanagido, Gifu, 501-1194, Japan, toshi-gif@umin.net.

Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2) deficiency affects both isoleucine
catabolism and ketone body metabolism. The disorder is characterized by
intermittent ketoacidotic episodes. We report three Japanese patients. One
patient (GK69) experienced two ketoacidotic episodes at the age of 9 months and
3 years, and no further episodes until the age of 25 years. She had two
uncomplicated pregnancies. GK69 was a compound heterozygote of the c.431A>C
(H144P) and c.1168T>C (S390P) mutations in T2 (ACAT1) gene. She was not
suspected of having T2 deficiency during her childhood, but she was diagnosed as
T2 deficient at the age of 25 years by enzyme assay using fibroblasts. The other
two patients were identical twin siblings who presented their first ketoacidotic
crisis simultaneously at the age of 3 years 4 months. One of them (GK77b) died
during the first crisis and the other (GK77) survived. Even during severe
crises, C5-OH and C5:1 were within normal ranges in their blood acylcarnitine
profiles and trace amounts of tiglylglycine and small amounts of
2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyrate were detected in their urinary organic acid profiles.
They were H144P homozygotes. This H144P mutation has retained the highest
residual T2 activity in the transient expression analysis of mutant cDNA thus
far, while the S390P mutation did not retain any residual T2 activity. The
"mild" H144P mutation may result in subtle profiles in blood acylcarnitine and
urinary organic acid analyses. T2-deficient patients with "mild" mutations have
severe ketoacidotic crises but their chemical phenotypes may be subtle even
during acute crises.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2011_72
PMCID: PMC3509868
PMID: 23430882
