---
reference_id: "PMID:36619750"
title: Human parvovirus B19 infection in hospitalized patients suspected of infection with pathogenic microorganism.
authors:
- Guo J
- Wang Y
- Zhang M
- Zheng H
- Zang Q
- Huang P
- Wen L
- Song D
- Yang F
- Dong R
- Miao W
journal: Front Cell Infect Microbiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.1083839
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human parvovirus B19 infection in hospitalized patients suspected of infection with pathogenic microorganism.
**Authors:** Guo J, Wang Y, Zhang M, Zheng H, Zang Q, Huang P, Wen L, Song D, Yang F, Dong R, Miao W
**Journal:** Front Cell Infect Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcimb.2022.1083839](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2022.1083839)

## Content

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Dec 21;12:1083839. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.1083839. eCollection 2022.

Human parvovirus B19 infection in hospitalized patients suspected of infection 
with pathogenic microorganism.

Guo J(1)(2), Wang Y(1), Zhang M(3), Zheng H(3), Zang Q(1), Huang P(1), Wen L(1), 
Song D(1), Yang F(1), Dong R(1), Miao W(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuro-Intensive Care Unit of the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(2)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Science, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(3)General intensive care unit of Zhengzhou Seventh People's Hospital, 
Zhengzhou, Henan, China.

BACKGROUND: Human parvovirus B19 (HPV B19) is a single-stranded DNA virus. The 
detection rate of HPV B19 in the blood of healthy blood donors using PCR 
technology was reported to be 6.323/100000. However, that among hospitalized 
patients suspected of being infected with a pathogenic microorganism is unknown.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted on 2,182 high-throughput NGS 
results for 1,484 inpatients admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University from January 2020 to October 2021 who were suspected of 
being infected with a pathogenic microorganism, as well as on clinical data of 
some HPV B19-positive patients.
RESULTS: Human parvovirus B19 was detected in 39 samples from 33 patients. The 
positivity rate was 2.22% among patients and 1.78% among samples. HPV B19 was 
detected in 20 cerebrospinal fluid samples, 13 blood samples, 3 alveolar lavage 
fluid samples, 2 tissue samples, and 1 throat swab. Based on clinical symptoms 
and NGS results, 16 patients were diagnosed with HPV B19 infection. The number 
of HPV B19 sequences in these patients was greater than 6, and the patients 
showed common symptoms such as fever (14 cases), anemia (11 cases), and severe 
nervous system symptoms such as meningoencephalitis (9 cases) and Guillain-Barré 
syndrome with peripheral motor and sensory nerve axon damage (4 cases). All 16 
patients had experienced events likely to lead to decreased immunity (11 had a 
history of trauma/surgery/major disease, 4 had a history of precursor infection, 
and 3 had used immunosuppressants) and 7 had a history of blood transfusion 
during hospitalization. After treatment with antiviral drugs (12 cases) and 
intravenous human immunoglobulin (3 cases), of the 16 patients, 14 patients 
improved.
CONCLUSION: The HPV B19 infection rate in hospitalized patients suspected of 
microbial infection was 2.22%. Most patients with HPV B19 infection had a 
history of low immunity and blood transfusion. HPV B19 could be detected in 
various bodily fluids and tissues (especially cerebrospinal fluid) using NGS. 
Patients with severe HPV B19 infection may have nervous system damage such as 
Guillain-Barré syndrome and meningoencephalitis. Early diagnosis using NGS and 
treatment with antiviral drugs and immunoglobulin can improve prognosis.

Copyright © 2022 Guo, Wang, Zhang, Zheng, Zang, Huang, Wen, Song, Yang, Dong and 
Miao.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.1083839
PMCID: PMC9812433
PMID: 36619750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.