---
reference_id: "PMID:30184102"
title: "Global Cholera Epidemiology: Opportunities to Reduce the Burden of Cholera by 2030."
authors:
- Legros D
- Partners of the Global Task Force on Cholera Control
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiy486
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global Cholera Epidemiology: Opportunities to Reduce the Burden of Cholera by 2030.
**Authors:** Legros D, Partners of the Global Task Force on Cholera Control
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiy486](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiy486)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2018 Oct 15;218(suppl_3):S137-S140. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiy486.

Global Cholera Epidemiology: Opportunities to Reduce the Burden of Cholera by 
2030.

Legros D(1); Partners of the Global Task Force on Cholera Control.

Author information:
(1)World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    J Infect Dis. 2019 Jan 9;219(3):509. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiy619.

While safe drinking water and advanced sanitation systems have made the Global 
North cholera-free for decades, the disease still affects 47 countries across 
the globe resulting in an estimated 2.86 million cases and 95,000 deaths per 
year worldwide. Cholera impacts communities already burdened by conflict, lack 
of infrastructure, poor health systems, and malnutrition. In October 2017, the 
Global Task Force on Cholera Control (GTFCC) launched an initiative titled 
Ending Cholera: A Global Roadmap to 2030, with the objective to reduce cholera 
deaths by 90% worldwide, and eliminate cholera in at least 20 countries by 2030. 
The GTFCC is working to position cholera control not as a vertical programme but 
instead using cholera as a marker of inequity and an indicator of poverty, 
linking the objectives of the Roadmap to the SDGs. The roadmap consists of 
targeted multi-sectoral interventions, supported by a coordination mechanism, 
along 3 axes: (1) early detection and quick response to contain outbreaks; (2) a 
multisectoral approach to prevent cholera recurrence in hotspots; (3) an 
effective partnership mechanism of coordination for technical support, countries 
capacity building, research and M&E, advocacy and resource mobilization. Every 
case and every death from cholera is preventable with the tools we have today.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiy486
PMCID: PMC6207143
PMID: 30184102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]