---
reference_id: "PMID:27881449"
title: Primary Cilia and Mammalian Hedgehog Signaling.
authors:
- Bangs F
- Anderson KV
journal: Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a028175
keywords:
- Animals
- Cilia/physiology
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- Mammals/physiology
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Cilia and Mammalian Hedgehog Signaling.
**Authors:** Bangs F, Anderson KV
**Journal:** Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1101/cshperspect.a028175](https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a028175)

## Content

1. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2017 May 1;9(5):a028175. doi: 
10.1101/cshperspect.a028175.

Primary Cilia and Mammalian Hedgehog Signaling.

Bangs F(1), Anderson KV(1).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065.

It has been a decade since it was discovered that primary cilia have an 
essential role in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in mammals. This discovery came from 
screens in the mouse that identified a set of genes that are required for both 
normal Hh signaling and for the formation of primary cilia. Since then, dozens 
of mouse mutations have been identified that disrupt cilia in a variety of ways 
and have complex effects on Hedgehog signaling. Here, we summarize the genetic 
and developmental studies used to deduce how Hedgehog signal transduction is 
linked to cilia and the complex effects that perturbation of cilia structure can 
have on Hh signaling. We conclude by describing the current status of our 
understanding of the cell-type-specific regulation of ciliogenesis and how that 
determines the ability of cells to respond to Hedgehog ligands.

Copyright © 2017 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a028175
PMCID: PMC5411695
PMID: 27881449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]