---
reference_id: "PMID:37752101"
title: Double heterozygous pathogenic mutations in KIF3C and ZNF513 cause hereditary gingival fibromatosis.
authors:
- Chen J
- Xu X
- Chen S
- Lu T
- Zheng Y
- Gan Z
- Shen Z
- Ma S
- Wang D
- Su L
- He F
- Shang X
- Xu H
- Chen D
- Zhang L
- Xiong F
journal: Int J Oral Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41368-023-00244-1
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/genetics, pathology"
- Gingiva
- Kinesins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Double heterozygous pathogenic mutations in KIF3C and ZNF513 cause hereditary gingival fibromatosis.
**Authors:** Chen J, Xu X, Chen S, Lu T, Zheng Y, Gan Z, Shen Z, Ma S, Wang D, Su L, He F, Shang X, Xu H, Chen D, Zhang L, Xiong F
**Journal:** Int J Oral Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41368-023-00244-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41368-023-00244-1)

## Content

1. Int J Oral Sci. 2023 Sep 26;15(1):46. doi: 10.1038/s41368-023-00244-1.

Double heterozygous pathogenic mutations in KIF3C and ZNF513 cause hereditary 
gingival fibromatosis.

Chen J(#)(1)(2), Xu X(#)(3), Chen S(1), Lu T(4), Zheng Y(1), Gan Z(1), Shen 
Z(1), Ma S(1), Wang D(1), Su L(1), He F(1), Shang X(1), Xu H(4), Chen D(5), 
Zhang L(6), Xiong F(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Experimental Education/Administration Center, 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Experimental Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Institute, The Third 
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Precision Medicine, Shenzhen Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Department of Stomatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Stomatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(6)Department of Stomatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China. homer120@smu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Experimental Education/Administration Center, 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. 
xiongfu@smu.edu.cn.
(8)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Single Cell Technology and 
Application, Guangzhou, China. xiongfu@smu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Fetal Medicine and Prenatal Diagnosis, Zhujiang Hospital, 
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. xiongfu@smu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) is a rare inherited condition with 
fibromatoid hyperplasia of the gingival tissue that exhibits great genetic 
heterogeneity. Five distinct loci related to non-syndromic HGF have been 
identified; however, only two disease-causing genes, SOS1 and REST, inducing HGF 
have been identified at two loci, GINGF1 and GINGF5, respectively. Here, based 
on a family pedigree with 26 members, including nine patients with HGF, we 
identified double heterozygous pathogenic mutations in the ZNF513 (c.C748T, 
p.R250W) and KIF3C (c.G1229A, p.R410H) genes within the GINGF3 locus related to 
HGF. Functional studies demonstrated that the ZNF513 p.R250W and KIF3C p.R410H 
variants significantly increased the expression of ZNF513 and KIF3C in vitro and 
in vivo. ZNF513, a transcription factor, binds to KIF3C exon 1 and participates 
in the positive regulation of KIF3C expression in gingival fibroblasts. 
Furthermore, a knock-in mouse model confirmed that heterozygous or homozygous 
mutations within Zfp513 (p.R250W) or Kif3c (p.R412H) alone do not led to clear 
phenotypes with gingival fibromatosis, whereas the double mutations led to 
gingival hyperplasia phenotypes. In addition, we found that ZNF513 binds to the 
SOS1 promoter and plays an important positive role in regulating the expression 
of SOS1. Moreover, the KIF3C p.R410H mutation could activate the PI3K and KCNQ1 
potassium channels. ZNF513 combined with KIF3C regulates gingival fibroblast 
proliferation, migration, and fibrosis response via the PI3K/AKT/mTOR and 
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathways. In summary, these results demonstrate ZNF513 + KIF3C 
as an important genetic combination in HGF manifestation and suggest that ZNF513 
mutation may be a major risk factor for HGF.

© 2023. West China School of Stomatology Sichuan University.

DOI: 10.1038/s41368-023-00244-1
PMCID: PMC10522663
PMID: 37752101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.