---
reference_id: "PMID:35371379"
title: "Solitary gastric Peutz-Jeghers polyp: a case report."
authors:
- Khsiba A
- Bradai S
- Nakhli A
- Chelbi E
- Mahmoudi M
- Mohamed AB
- Medhioub M
- Hamzaoui L
- Azouz MM
journal: Pan Afr Med J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.11604/pamj.2022.41.65.29526
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Solitary gastric Peutz-Jeghers polyp: a case report.
**Authors:** Khsiba A, Bradai S, Nakhli A, Chelbi E, Mahmoudi M, Mohamed AB, Medhioub M, Hamzaoui L, Azouz MM
**Journal:** Pan Afr Med J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.11604/pamj.2022.41.65.29526](https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2022.41.65.29526)

## Content

1. Pan Afr Med J. 2022 Jan 24;41:65. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2022.41.65.29526. 
eCollection 2022.

Solitary gastric Peutz-Jeghers polyp: a case report.

Khsiba A(1), Bradai S(1), Nakhli A(1), Chelbi E(2), Mahmoudi M(1), Mohamed 
AB(1), Medhioub M(1), Hamzaoui L(1), Azouz MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Mohamed Tahar Maamouri Hospital, Nabeul, 
Tunisia.
(2)Department Histopathology, Mohamed Tahar Maamouri Hospital, Nabeul, Tunisia.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is an inherited condition that is characterized by 
mucocutaneous pigmentation and hamartomatous polyposis in the gastrointestinal 
tract. It increases significantly the risk for developing of several cancers 
such as breast, colon, rectum, pancreas and stomach. Solitary Peutz-Jeghers 
polyp is defined as a unique hamartomatous polyp having the same histological 
features as Peutz-Jeghers syndrome polyps without associated intestinal 
polyposis, mucocutaneous pigmentation and family history of Peutz-Jeghers 
syndrome. Gastric solitary Peutz-Jeghers polyp is extremely rare. We found only 
13 cases in the literature. We report a new case of solitary gastric 
Peutz-Jeghers polyp associated with a branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasm revealed by an acute pancreatitis. Computed tomography of the abdomen 
found a branch duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm with a pedicled 
polypoid formation in the greater gastric curvature. Endoscopic resection was 
performed without complications. Histologic examination showed Peutz-Jeghers 
hamartomatous polyp. The risk of cancer remains unclear in this entity. 
Therefore, the follow-up of these patients is necessary because of the possible 
risk of malignancy.

Copyright: Amal Khsiba et al.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2022.41.65.29526
PMCID: PMC8933450
PMID: 35371379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]