---
reference_id: "PMID:28670758"
title: Congenital Long QT syndrome and torsade de pointes.
authors:
- El-Sherif N
- Turitto G
- Boutjdir M
journal: Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/anec.12481
keywords:
- Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Electrocardiography/methods
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Torsades de Pointes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Long QT syndrome and torsade de pointes.
**Authors:** El-Sherif N, Turitto G, Boutjdir M
**Journal:** Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/anec.12481](https://doi.org/10.1111/anec.12481)

## Content

1. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2017 Nov;22(6):e12481. doi:
10.1111/anec.12481.  Epub 2017 Jul 2.

Congenital Long QT syndrome and torsade de pointes.

El-Sherif N(1)(2), Turitto G(3), Boutjdir M(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Downstate Medical Center, State University of New York, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(2)VA NY Harbor Healthcare System, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(3)NewYork-Presbyterian Brooklyn Methodist Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
(4)NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Since its initial description by Jervell and Lange-Nielsen in 1957, the
congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) has been the most investigated cardiac ion
channelopathy. A prolonged QT interval in the surface electrocardiogram is the
sine qua non of the LQTS and is a surrogate measure of the ventricular action
potential duration (APD). Congenital as well as acquired alterations in certain
cardiac ion channels can affect their currents in such a way as to increase the
APD and hence the QT interval. The inhomogeneous lengthening of the APD across
the ventricular wall results in dispersion of APD. This together with the
tendency of prolonged APD to be associated with oscillations at the plateau
level, termed early afterdepolarizations (EADs), provides the substrate of
ventricular tachyarrhythmia associated with LQTS, usually referred to as torsade
de pointes (TdP) VT. This review will discuss the genetic, molecular, and
phenotype characteristics of congenital LQTS as well as current management
strategies and future directions in the field.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/anec.12481
PMCID: PMC6931590
PMID: 28670758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
