---
reference_id: "PMID:27074284"
title: Vascular Calcification Induced by Chronic Kidney Disease Is Mediated by an Increase of 1α-Hydroxylase Expression in Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells.
authors:
- Torremadé N
- Bozic M
- Panizo S
- Barrio-Vazquez S
- Fernandez-Martín JL
- Encinas M
- Goltzman D
- Arcidiacono MV
- Fernandez E
- Valdivielso JM
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2852
keywords:
- "25-Hydroxyvitamin D3 1-alpha-Hydroxylase/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Animals
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Muscle, Smooth, Vascular/enzymology, pathology"
- "Myocytes, Smooth Muscle/enzymology, pathology"
- Rats
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "Vascular Calcification/enzymology, etiology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vascular Calcification Induced by Chronic Kidney Disease Is Mediated by an Increase of 1α-Hydroxylase Expression in Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells.
**Authors:** Torremadé N, Bozic M, Panizo S, Barrio-Vazquez S, Fernandez-Martín JL, Encinas M, Goltzman D, Arcidiacono MV, Fernandez E, Valdivielso JM
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.2852](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2852)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Oct;31(10):1865-1876. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2852. Epub 2016
 May 4.

Vascular Calcification Induced by Chronic Kidney Disease Is Mediated by an 
Increase of 1α-Hydroxylase Expression in Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells.

Torremadé N(1), Bozic M(1), Panizo S(2), Barrio-Vazquez S(2), Fernandez-Martín 
JL(2), Encinas M(3), Goltzman D(4), Arcidiacono MV(1), Fernandez E(1), 
Valdivielso JM(5).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Research Department, REDinREN del ISCIII, IRBLleida, University 
Hospital Arnau de Vilanova, Lleida, Spain.
(2)Bone and Mineral Research Unit, Instituto Reina Sofía de Investigación, 
REDinREN del ISCIII, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain.
(3)Oncogenic Signaling and Development group. IRBLleida, University of Lleida, 
Spain.
(4)Calcium Research Laboratory, McGill University Health Center and Department 
of Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(5)Nephrology Research Department, REDinREN del ISCIII, IRBLleida, University 
Hospital Arnau de Vilanova, Lleida, Spain. valdivielso@medicina.udl.es.

Vascular calcification (VC) is a complication of chronic kidney disease that 
predicts morbidity and mortality. Uremic serum promotes VC, but the mechanism 
involved is unknown. A role for 1,25(OH)2 D3 in VC has been proposed, but the 
mechanism is unclear because both low and high levels have been shown to 
increase it. In this work we investigate the role of 1,25(OH)2 D3 produced in 
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in VC. Rats with subtotal nephrectomy and 
kidney recipient patients showed increased arterial expression of 1α-hydroxylase 
in vivo. VSMCs exposed in vitro to serum obtained from uremic rats also showed 
increased 1α-hydroxylase expression. Those increases were parallel to an 
increase in VC. After 6 days with high phosphate media, VSMCs overexpressing 
1α-hydroxylase show significantly higher calcium content and RUNX2 expression 
than control cells. 1α-hydroxylase null mice (KO) with subtotal nephrectomy and 
treated with calcitriol (400 ng/kg) for 2 weeks showed significantly lower 
levels of vascular calcium content, Alizarin red staining, and RUNX2 expression 
than wild-type (WT) littermates. Serum calcium, phosphorus, blood urea nitrogen 
(BUN), PTH, and 1,25(OH)2 D3 levels were similar in both calcitriol-treated 
groups. In vitro, WT VSMCs treated with uremic serum also showed a significant 
increase in 1α-hydroxylase expression and higher calcification that was not 
observed in KO cells. We conclude that local activation of 1α-hydroxylase in the 
artery mediates VC observed in uremia. © 2016 American Society for Bone and 
Mineral Research.

© 2016 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2852
PMID: 27074284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]