---
reference_id: "PMID:20301631"
title: Citrullinemia Type I.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Quinonez SC
- Lee KN
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Citrullinemia Type I.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Quinonez SC, Lee KN

## Content

1. Citrullinemia Type I.

Quinonez SC(1), Lee KN(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2004 Jul 7 [updated 2022 Aug 18].

Author information:
(1)Clinical Assistant Professor, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Citrullinemia type I (CTLN1) presents as a spectrum 
that includes a neonatal acute form (the "classic" form), a milder late-onset 
form (the "non-classic" form), a form in which women have onset of symptoms at 
pregnancy or post partum, and a form without symptoms or hyperammonemia. 
Distinction between the forms is based primarily on clinical findings, although 
emerging evidence suggests that measurement of residual argininosuccinate 
synthase enzyme activity may help to predict those who are likely to have a 
severe phenotype and those who are likely to have an attenuated phenotype. 
Infants with the acute neonatal form appear normal at birth. Shortly thereafter, 
they develop hyperammonemia and become progressively lethargic, feed poorly, 
often vomit, and may develop signs of increased intracranial pressure (ICP). 
Without prompt intervention, hyperammonemia and the accumulation of other toxic 
metabolites (e.g., glutamine) result in increased ICP, increased neuromuscular 
tone, spasticity, ankle clonus, seizures, loss of consciousness, and death. 
Children with the severe form who are treated promptly may survive for an 
indeterminate period of time, but usually with significant neurologic deficits. 
Even with chronic protein restriction and scavenger therapy, long-term 
complications such as liver failure and other (rarely reported) organ system 
manifestations are possible. The late-onset form may be milder than that seen in 
the acute neonatal form, but commences later in life for reasons that are not 
completely understood. The episodes of hyperammonemia are similar to those seen 
in the acute neonatal form, but the initial neurologic findings may be more 
subtle because of the older age of the affected individuals. Women with onset of 
severe symptoms including acute hepatic decompensation during pregnancy or in 
the postpartum period have been reported. Furthermore, previously asymptomatic 
and non-pregnant individuals have been described who remained asymptomatic up to 
at least age ten years, with the possibility that they could remain asymptomatic 
lifelong.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CTLN1 is established in a proband with 
elevated plasma ammonia concentration (>150 µmol/L; may range to ≥2000-3000 
µmol/L), elevated plasma citrulline concentration (usually >500 µmol/L), and 
absent argininosuccinate and/or by identification of biallelic pathogenic 
variants in ASS1 on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Liver transplantation is the only known 
curative therapy and eliminates the need for dietary restriction. 
Transplantation is ideally performed in affected individuals who are younger 
than age one year (prior to the development of any neurocognitive impairment) 
but older than age three months and/or above 5 kg body weight. Daily routine 
treatment in those who have not undergone a liver transplantation includes 
lifelong protein restriction in conjunction with a metabolic nutritionist; 
nitrogen scavenger medications; arginine supplementation; consideration of 
carnitine supplementation in those with secondary carnitine deficiency; 
addressing increased energy/caloric demands through tube feedings (as needed); 
and routine treatment of developmental delay / intellectual disability. Acute 
inpatient treatment of a metabolic crisis includes addressing hyperammonemia 
through withholding of all protein intake for a maximum of 24 to 28 hours; 
pharmacologic nitrogen scavenger therapy; and consideration of dialysis (the 
most effective means of reducing plasma ammonia concentration rapidly). To 
address increased catabolism, administration of high-energy fluids (and insulin, 
as needed) and intravenous intralipids is typically required. However, care must 
be taken to avoid electrolyte imbalance and fluid overload, which can contribute 
to the development of increased intracranial pressure. The patient should be 
maintained on the dry side of fluid balance (approximately 85 mL/kg of body 
weight per day in infants and appropriate corresponding fluid restriction in 
children and adults). Prevention of secondary complications: Education of 
parents and caregivers such that diligent observation and management can be 
administered expediently in the setting of intercurrent illness or other 
catabolic stressors; written protocols for maintenance and emergency treatment 
should be provided to parents and primary care providers / pediatricians, and to 
teachers and school staff. For those affected individuals requiring any sedated 
procedure where a person cannot eat for an extended period of time, drug 
treatment should be switched to IV and nutrition with 10% glucose with 
age-appropriate electrolytes should be administered via IV to promote anabolism 
starting as soon as the patient is NPO. Surveillance: Follow up in a metabolic 
clinic with a qualified metabolic nutritionist and clinical biochemical 
geneticist is required. Measurement of growth parameters; evaluation of 
nutrition status and safety of oral intake; assessment for early warning signs 
of impending hyperammonemic episodes (mood changes, headache, lethargy, nausea, 
refusal to eat); review of dietary assessment; monitoring of developmental 
progress/educational needs; assessment of mobility and self-help skills; and 
measurement of carnitine levels (for those on sodium benzoate) at each visit. 
Plasma amino acid analysis at least every three months during the first year of 
life and every six to 12 months in the teenage/adult years (depending on 
clinical stability). Agents/circumstances to avoid: Excessive protein intake, 
prolonged fasting, and obvious exposure to communicable diseases. Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: It is important that at-risk sibs be identified as soon as 
possible, either through molecular genetic testing (if the pathogenic variants 
in the family are known) or measurement of plasma concentrations of ammonia and 
citrulline on the first day of life. Elevation of either above acceptable levels 
(ammonia >100 µmol/L or plasma citrulline >~100 µmol/L) is sufficient evidence 
to initiate treatment in a newborn. Pregnancy management: Because women with 
onset of severe symptoms during pregnancy or in the postpartum period have been 
reported, scrupulous attention needs to be paid to diet and medication during 
these periods.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CTLN1 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and 
prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk are possible if the 
pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301631