---
reference_id: "PMID:37884945"
title: "Case report: JAK1/2 inhibition with baricitinib in the treatment of STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy."
authors:
- Wu J
- Zhou Q
- Zhou H
- Lu M
journal: Pediatr Rheumatol Online J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12969-023-00916-6
keywords:
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Azetidines/therapeutic use
- Inflammation/drug therapy
- Janus Kinase 1/genetics
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/etiology, genetics"
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Vascular Diseases/drug therapy
- Male
- Purines
- Sulfonamides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: JAK1/2 inhibition with baricitinib in the treatment of STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy.
**Authors:** Wu J, Zhou Q, Zhou H, Lu M
**Journal:** Pediatr Rheumatol Online J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12969-023-00916-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12969-023-00916-6)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2023 Oct 26;21(1):131. doi:
10.1186/s12969-023-00916-6.

Case report: JAK1/2 inhibition with baricitinib in the treatment of
STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy.

Wu J(1), Zhou Q(2), Zhou H(3), Lu M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology Immunology and Allergy, Children's Hospital,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, National Clinical Research Center for
Child Health, 3333, Binsheng Road, Hangzhou, 310052, China.
(2)Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Rheumatology Immunology and Allergy, Children's Hospital,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, National Clinical Research Center for
Child Health, 3333, Binsheng Road, Hangzhou, 310052, China.
meipinglu@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Gain-of-function mutations in STING1 (also known as TMEM173) which
result in constitutive activation of STING, have been reported to cause
STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI). Although a wider
spectrum of associated manifestations and perturbations in disease onset have
been observed since its description, the genotype-phenotype correlations are not
definite, and there is no established treatment protocol for SAVI.
CASE PRESENTATION: Herein, we report a kindred, heterozygous STING mutation
(p.V155M) in which the 2-year-old proband suffered from severe interstitial lung
disease (ILD) while her father was initially misdiagnosed with connective tissue
disease associated with ILD at an adult age. Baricitinib was initiated after the
diagnosis of SAVI in the proband combined with steroids, and during the 14-month
follow-up, the respiratory symptoms were improved. However, as the improvement
of laboratory indicators was limited, especially in autoimmune indices, and the
lung CT images remained unaltered, it seems that JAK1/2 inhibition was
unsatisfactory in completely controlling the inflammation of the disease in our
study.
CONCLUSIONS: Baricitinib was shown to elicit some effect on the ILD but failed
to control the inflammation of the disease completely. Further exploration of
JAK inhibitors or other therapeutic strategies are needed to more optimally
treat this inflammatory disease.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-023-00916-6
PMCID: PMC10601276
PMID: 37884945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
