---
reference_id: "PMID:34717022"
title: Erythrokeratodermia variabilis et progressiva due to a novel mutation in GJB4.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Xu P
- Lu J
- Ding Y
- Gu J
- Shi Y
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/exd.14490
keywords:
- Connexins/genetics
- "Erythrokeratodermia Variabilis/genetics, pathology"
- HeLa Cells
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythrokeratodermia variabilis et progressiva due to a novel mutation in GJB4.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Xu P, Lu J, Ding Y, Gu J, Shi Y
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/exd.14490](https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.14490)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2022 Apr;31(4):594-599. doi: 10.1111/exd.14490. Epub 2021 Nov 7.

Erythrokeratodermia variabilis et progressiva due to a novel mutation in GJB4.

Zhang X(1)(2), Xu P(2)(3), Lu J(1)(2), Ding Y(1)(2), Gu J(1)(2)(3), Shi Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shanghai Skin Disease Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Institute of Psoriasis, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

Erythrokeratodermia variabilis et progressiva (EKVP) is a rare genodermatosis of 
clinical and genetic heterogeneity, characterized by the manifestations of 
localized or disseminated persistent hyperkeratotic plagues and stationary to 
migratory transient erythematous patches. The majority of EKVP cases display an 
autosomal dominant mode of inheritance with incomplete penetrance, although 
recessive transmission has also been described. Mutations associated with EKVP 
have been primarily detected in connexin (Cx) genes. We herein reported a 
Chinese sporadic case of late-onset EKVP with a novel heterozygous missense 
mutation c.109G>A (p.V37M) in GJB4 (Cx30.3) gene, which resulted in a 
significant reduction of GJB4 expression in the epidermis of the patient. In 
accordance, while wild-type GJB4 localized at the cell membrane of HeLa cells 
forming intercellular junctions and intracellular puncta, V37M mutant variant 
was diffusely expressed within HeLa cells at a considerably lower level. Our 
findings reveal an essential role of GJB4 in the pathogenesis of EKVP and 
provides insights into the therapeutic potential of the disease.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14490
PMID: 34717022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]