---
reference_id: "PMID:39489523"
title: "Persistent symptoms after COVID-19: an Australian stratified random health survey on long COVID."
authors:
- Holmes A
- Emerson L
- Irving LB
- Tippett E
- Pullin JM
- Young J
- Watters DA
- Hamilton A
journal: Med J Aust
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5694/mja2.52473
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Persistent symptoms after COVID-19: an Australian stratified random health survey on long COVID.
**Authors:** Holmes A, Emerson L, Irving LB, Tippett E, Pullin JM, Young J, Watters DA, Hamilton A
**Journal:** Med J Aust (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5694/mja2.52473](https://doi.org/10.5694/mja2.52473)

## Content

1. Med J Aust. 2024 Nov 4;221 Suppl 9:S12-S17. doi: 10.5694/mja2.52473.

Persistent symptoms after COVID-19: an Australian stratified random health 
survey on long COVID.

Holmes A(1)(2), Emerson L(3), Irving LB(1), Tippett E(4), Pullin JM(3), Young 
J(3), Watters DA(5)(6), Hamilton A(3).

Author information:
(1)Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, VIC.
(2)University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC.
(3)Department of Health, Melbourne, VIC.
(4)Clinic Nineteen, Melbourne, VIC.
(5)Deakin University, Geelong, VIC.
(6)Safer Care Victoria, Melbourne, VIC.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the impact of persistent symptoms after coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19) in an Australian population.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS: We conducted a statewide health survey of a 
stratified random sample of adults who had had a confirmed acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection (COVID-19-positive group) and 
their close contacts (control group). The sample was drawn from Victoria's 
COVID-19 database between January 2020 and October 2022. Data were collected 
from 12 688 survey respondents between September 2022 and April 2023 (11 174 in 
the COVID-19-positive group and 1514 in the control group).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Persistent new symptoms, recovery, and daily function 
using validated questionnaires for fatigue, neurocognitive symptoms, anxiety, 
depression and quality of life.
RESULTS: At a mean of 12.6 months after infection, 4560 respondents in the 
COVID-19-positive group (39.1%; 95% CI, 37.9-40.3%) reported at least one 
persistent new symptom, compared with 216 respondents in the control group 
(20.8%; 95% CI, 18.5-23.1%). A total of 1656 respondents (14.2%; 95% CI, 
13.4-15.0%) were classified as having clinical long COVID using the criteria of 
at least one persistent new symptom and less than 80% recovery three months 
after the infection. Of the respondents with clinical long COVID, 535 (3.2%; 95% 
CI, 2.6-3.8%) reported at least moderate problems with usual activities at 12 
months after their infection. The proportion of respondents with clinical long 
COVID was lower for those with more recent infections. The risk factors for 
clinical long COVID were female sex, age 40-49 years, infection severity, 
chronic illness, and past anxiety or depression. Factors associated with a 
decreased risk of having clinical long COVID included infection when the Omicron 
strain was dominant and infection when the Delta strain was dominant, as 
compared with when the ancestral strain of the virus was dominant.
CONCLUSION: Persistent symptoms after COVID-19 are common, though with a lower 
incidence following infection from less virulent strains. Although long COVID 
can be largely managed in primary care, a minority of people who have persistent 
symptoms and impaired function may require specialist care pathways, the 
effectiveness of which should be a focus of future research.

© 2024 The Author(s). Medical Journal of Australia published by John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of AMPCo Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.5694/mja2.52473
PMID: 39489523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]