---
reference_id: "PMID:40670222"
title: "Gene-Environment Interaction: Lessons From Complement-Mediated Kidney Disease."
authors:
- Klomjit N
- Miao J
- Java A
journal: Semin Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2025.151657
keywords:
- Humans
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- Complement Activation/genetics
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/genetics, immunology, etiology"
- "Complement System Proteins/genetics, immunology"
- "Lupus Nephritis/genetics, immunology"
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/genetics, immunology"
- "Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody-Associated Vasculitis/genetics, immunology"
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/genetics, immunology"
- "Thrombotic Microangiopathies/genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene-Environment Interaction: Lessons From Complement-Mediated Kidney Disease.
**Authors:** Klomjit N, Miao J, Java A
**Journal:** Semin Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semnephrol.2025.151657](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semnephrol.2025.151657)

## Content

1. Semin Nephrol. 2025 Jul;45(4):151657. doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2025.151657.
Epub 2025 Jul 16.

Gene-Environment Interaction: Lessons From Complement-Mediated Kidney Disease.

Klomjit N(1), Miao J(2), Java A(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Washington University School of Medicine in St.
Louis, St. Louis, MO. Electronic address: ajava@wustl.edu.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) or complement-mediated thrombotic
microangiopathy (CM-TMA) and C3 glomerulopathy are two prototypical diseases of
complement dysregulation occurring due to genetic variants in complement
proteins or acquired factors such as autoantibodies. Despite the presence of an
underlying genetic etiology, an environmental trigger is often necessary to
manifest disease, a phenomenon known as incomplete penetrance. These triggers
could include infections, pregnancy, medication, cancers, or
ischemia-reperfusion injury and antibody-mediated rejection in the setting of
transplantation and highlight the complex interplay between genetic etiology and
environmental factors. Other diseases in which complement activation may also be
a part of the underlying pathophysiology and where the gene-environment
interaction also plays out are IgA nephropathy, lupus nephritis, ANCA-associated
vasculitis, and membranous nephropathy. Genetic polymorphisms and haplotypes may
further skew the balance between complement over activation and control. In this
article, we discuss the activation and regulation of the complement system and
the role of complement in various kidney diseases. We also attempt to provide an
in-depth understanding of the genetic drivers and environmental triggers
associated with complement activation using aHUS as a key example. Semin Nephrol
36:x-xx © 20XX Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2025.151657
PMID: 40670222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
