---
reference_id: "PMID:36241363"
title: "Global epidemiology of systemic lupus erythematosus: a comprehensive systematic analysis and modelling study."
authors:
- Tian J
- Zhang D
- Yao X
- Huang Y
- Lu Q
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/ard-2022-223035
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Bayes Theorem
- Incidence
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Poland
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global epidemiology of systemic lupus erythematosus: a comprehensive systematic analysis and modelling study.
**Authors:** Tian J, Zhang D, Yao X, Huang Y, Lu Q
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard-2022-223035](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard-2022-223035)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2023 Mar;82(3):351-356. doi: 10.1136/ard-2022-223035. Epub 2022
 Oct 14.

Global epidemiology of systemic lupus erythematosus: a comprehensive systematic 
analysis and modelling study.

Tian J(1)(2)(3), Zhang D(4)(5), Yao X(1), Huang Y(6), Lu Q(7)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Nanjing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Basic and Translational Research on Immune-Mediated Skin 
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Nanjing, China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Skin Diseases and STIs, 
Nanjing, China.
(4)Graduate Program in Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Yale University, New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(5)Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(7)Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Nanjing, China qianlu5860@pumcderm.cams.cn.

OBJECTIVES: To quantify global, regional and country-specific estimates of 
epidemiology of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: Four databases were systematically searched, and a Bayesian 
hierarchical linear mixed model was constructed to estimate the global, 
regional, and country-specific incidence and prevalence of SLE.
RESULTS: 112 studies met the inclusion criteria. The global SLE incidence and 
newly diagnosed population were estimated to be 5.14 (1.4 to 15.13) per 100 000 
person-years and 0.40 million people annually, respectively. In women, the 
values were 8.82 (2.4 to 25.99) per 100 000 person-years and 0.34 million people 
annually, while in men, the estimates were 1.53 (0.41 to 4.46) per 100 000 
person-years and 0.06 million people annually, respectively. Poland, the USA and 
Barbados had the highest estimates of SLE incidence. Regarding prevalence, the 
global SLE prevalence and affected population were estimated to be 43.7 (15.87 
to 108.92) per 100 000 persons and 3.41 million people, respectively. In women, 
the values were 78.73 (28.61 to 196.33) per 100 000 persons and 3.04 million 
people, while in men the estimates were 9.26 (3.36 to 22.97) per 100 000 persons 
and 0.36 million people, respectively. The United Arab Emirates, Barbados and 
Brazil had the highest SLE prevalence. In addition to regional and sex 
differences, age and prevalence estimation method (period or point prevalence) 
differences could also lead to variations in epidemiological SLE findings.
CONCLUSIONS: Epidemiological data on SLE are lacking for 79.8% of countries 
worldwide. The epidemiology of SLE varies substantially between different sex 
and age groups and is distributed unequally among geographical regions; 
specifically, SLE occurs more frequently in high-income countries.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/ard-2022-223035
PMCID: PMC9933169
PMID: 36241363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.