---
reference_id: "PMID:37280644"
title: Real-world analysis of healthcare resource utilization by patients with X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) in the United States.
authors:
- Graham RJ
- Darras BT
- Haselkorn T
- Fisher D
- Genetti CA
- Miller W
- Beggs AH
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02733-2
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Child
- United States
- Genetic Testing
- "Myopathies, Structural, Congenital/genetics, therapy, diagnosis"
- Patient Acceptance of Health Care
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-world analysis of healthcare resource utilization by patients with X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) in the United States.
**Authors:** Graham RJ, Darras BT, Haselkorn T, Fisher D, Genetti CA, Miller W, Beggs AH
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02733-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02733-2)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Jun 6;18(1):138. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02733-2.

Real-world analysis of healthcare resource utilization by patients with X-linked 
myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) in the United States.

Graham RJ(1), Darras BT(2), Haselkorn T(3), Fisher D(4), Genetti CA(5), Miller 
W(6), Beggs AH(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Neuromuscular Program, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Astellas Gene Therapies, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)IPM.Ai, Florham Park, NJ, USA.
(5)Division of Genetics and Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease 
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 3 Blackfan Circle 
- BCH3150, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(6)Formerly of Astellas Gene Therapies, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Division of Genetics and Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease 
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 3 Blackfan Circle 
- BCH3150, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. beggs@enders.tch.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a rare, life-threatening 
congenital myopathy with multisystem involvement, often requiring invasive 
ventilator support, gastrostomy tube feeding, and wheelchair use. Understanding 
healthcare resource utilization in patients with XLMTM is important for 
development of targeted therapies but data are limited.
METHODS: We analyzed individual medical codes as governed by Healthcare Common 
Procedure Coding System, Current Procedural Terminology, and International 
Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision (ICD-10) for a defined cohort of XLMTM 
patients within a US medical claims database. Using third-party tokenization 
software, we defined a cohort of XLMTM patient tokens from a de-identified 
dataset in a research registry of diagnostically confirmed XLMTM patients and 
de-identified data from a genetic testing company. After approval of an ICD-10 
diagnosis code for XLMTM (G71.220) in October 2020, we identified additional 
patients.
RESULTS: A total of 192 males with a diagnosis of XLMTM were included: 80 
patient tokens and 112 patients with the new ICD-10 code. From 2016 to 2020, the 
annual number of patients with claims increased from 120 to 154 and the average 
number of claims per patient per year increased from 93 to 134. Of 146 patients 
coded with hospitalization claims, 80 patients (55%) were first hospitalized 
between 0 and 4 years of age. Across all patients, 31% were hospitalized 1-2 
times, 32% 3-9 times, and 14% ≥ 10 times. Patients received care from multiple 
specialty practices: pulmonology (53%), pediatrics (47%), neurology (34%), and 
critical care medicine (31%). The most common conditions and procedures related 
to XLMTM were respiratory events (82%), ventilation management (82%), feeding 
difficulties (81%), feeding support (72%), gastrostomy (69%), and tracheostomy 
(64%). Nearly all patients with respiratory events had chronic respiratory 
claims (96%). The most frequent diagnostic codes were those investigating 
hepatobiliary abnormalities.
CONCLUSIONS: This innovative medical claims analysis shows substantial 
healthcare resource use in XLMTM patients that increased over the last 5 years. 
Most patients required respiratory and feeding support and experienced multiple 
hospitalizations throughout childhood and beyond for those that survived. This 
pattern delineation will inform outcome assessments with the emergence of novel 
therapies and supportive care measures.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02733-2
PMCID: PMC10242920
PMID: 37280644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TH and WM are employees and shareholders of 
Astellas Gene Therapies (formerly, Audentes Therapeutics). AHB has consulted and 
received compensation or honoraria from Astellas Gene Therapies, Biogen, F. 
Hoffman-La Roche AG, Kate Therapeutics, GLG Inc, and Guidepoint Global, he holds 
equity in KineaBio and Kate Therapeutics and is an inventor on a US patent 
describing a method for gene therapy of XLMTM. DF is an employee of IPM.ai, 
which received funding from Astellas Gene Therapies for this study analysis.