---
reference_id: "PMID:20301329"
title: Hypophosphatasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Dahir KM
- Nunes ME
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypophosphatasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Dahir KM, Nunes ME

## Content

1. Hypophosphatasia.

Dahir KM(1), Nunes ME(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 Nov 20 [updated 2025 Mar 27].

Author information:
(1)Program for Metabolic Bone Disorders, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee
(2)Director of Genetics, Genomics, and Metabolism, Cure 4 the Kids Foundation, 
Las Vegas, Nevada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hypophosphatasia is characterized by defective 
mineralization of growing or remodeling bone, with or without root-intact tooth 
loss, in the presence of low activity of serum and bone alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP). Biallelic ALPL pathogenic variants often result in severe 
hypophosphatasia that can result in stillbirth without mineralized bone, while 
heterozygous ALPL pathogenic variants are more likely to manifest as modest, 
mild, or even asymptomatic disease. Regardless of the number of ALPL pathogenic 
variants, many individuals with hypophosphatasia suffer from pain, disability, 
and reduced quality of life. Variability of clinical manifestations is common in 
both childhood and adult forms of hypophosphatasia and even occurs within 
affected families. While the disease spectrum is a continuum, seven clinical 
forms of hypophosphatasia are usually recognized based on age at diagnosis and 
severity of features. Perinatal (severe): Characterized by restrictive lung 
disease, respiratory failure, vitamin B6-dependent seizures, hypercalcemia with 
high morbidity, and mortality Perinatal (benign): Prenatal skeletal 
manifestations that slowly resolve into one of the milder forms Infantile: Onset 
between birth and age six months of clinical features of rickets without 
elevated serum ALP activity Severe childhood (juvenile): Variable presenting 
features progressing to rickets Mild childhood: Present later in childhood 
without rachitic disease, low bone mineral density for age, increased risk of 
fracture, and premature loss of primary teeth with intact roots Adult: 
Characterized by osteomalacia and stress fractures and pseudofractures of the 
lower extremities in middle age, sometimes associated with early loss of adult 
dentition. Adults with hypophosphatasia may also have significant bone pain and 
pronounced non-skeletal disease, with muscle weakness, dental problems, and 
reduced quality of life. Odontohypophosphatasia: Characterized by premature 
exfoliation of primary teeth and/or severe dental caries without skeletal 
manifestations
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of hypophosphatasia can be established 
in a proband based on clinical diagnostic criteria. The molecular diagnosis of 
hypophosphatasia can be established in a proband with one major or two minor 
criteria and biallelic loss-of-function ALPL pathogenic variants or a 
heterozygous ALPL pathogenic variant with dominant-negative effect identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Asfotase alfa enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) 
Supportive care: For the perinatal (severe) type: expectant management and 
family support; respiratory support; management of calcium homeostasis and bone 
health per endocrinologist and orthopedist; pain management; neurosurgical 
management of craniosynostosis; management of kidney disease per nephrologist; 
dental care. For the infantile and early childhood (juvenile) types: respiratory 
support; management of calcium homeostasis and bone health per endocrinologist 
and orthopedist; pain management; treatment of seizures with vitamin B6; 
neurosurgical management of craniosynostosis; management of kidney disease per 
nephrologist; dental care. For all other types: dental care starting at age one 
year; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for osteoarthritis, bone pain, and 
osteomalacia; internal fixation for pseudofractures and stress fractures. In 
adult hypophosphatasia, there is limited experience in treating osteomalacia 
with teriparatide. For all types: psychological support, social work support, 
and referral to mental health professionals as needed. Surveillance: Monitor 
calcium homeostasis and bone health per endocrinologist, nephrologist, and 
orthopedist; physical medicine and rehabilitation, physical therapy, and 
occupational therapy evaluations as needed; monitor children with infantile type 
for increased intracranial pressure secondary to craniosynostosis; renal 
ultrasound annually and nephrology evaluations as needed for kidney disease; 
neurology evaluations as needed for seizures; dental visits twice yearly 
starting at age one year. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Bisphosphonates, 
denosumab, and excess vitamin D; teriparatide is contraindicated in children. 
Pregnancy management: The use of asfotase alfa ERT during human pregnancy has 
not been extensively studied; therefore, any potential risk to the fetus of a 
pregnant woman taking this therapy during pregnancy is unknown.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Perinatal and infantile hypophosphatasia are typically 
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Milder forms of hypophosphatasia, 
especially adult and odontohypophosphatasia, may be inherited in an autosomal 
recessive or autosomal dominant manner depending on the effect that the ALPL 
pathogenic variant has on alkaline phosphatase, tissue-nonspecific isozyme 
(TNSALP) activity. Autosomal recessive hypophosphatasia: If both parents are 
known to be heterozygous for an ALPL pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected 
individual has at conception a 25% chance of inheriting biallelic pathogenic 
variants and being affected, a 50% chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% 
chance of inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Depending on 
the ALPL pathogenic variant, heterozygous sibs may be either clinically 
asymptomatic (manifesting only biochemical abnormality) or have milder clinical 
manifestations than the proband. Autosomal dominant hypophosphatasia: Unless an 
individual with autosomal dominant hypophosphatasia has children with an 
individual who has a heterozygous or biallelic ALPL pathogenic variant(s), 
offspring have a 50% chance of inheriting the ALPL pathogenic variant. Once the 
ALPL pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, 
heterozygote testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic 
testing for hypophosphatasia are possible. Recurrence of perinatal 
hypophosphatasia may reliably be identified by prenatal ultrasound examination.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301329