---
reference_id: "PMID:26426469"
title: Pathophysiology of Myocardial Infarction.
authors:
- Frangogiannis NG
journal: Compr Physiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/cphy.c150006
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Cell Respiration
- Humans
- "Myocardial Infarction/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of Myocardial Infarction.
**Authors:** Frangogiannis NG
**Journal:** Compr Physiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cphy.c150006](https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c150006)

## Content

1. Compr Physiol. 2015 Sep 20;5(4):1841-75. doi: 10.1002/cphy.c150006.

Pathophysiology of Myocardial Infarction.

Frangogiannis NG(1).

Author information:
(1)The Wilf Family Cardiovascular Research Institute, Division of Cardiology, 
Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
USA.

Myocardial infarction is defined as sudden ischemic death of myocardial tissue. 
In the clinical context, myocardial infarction is usually due to thrombotic 
occlusion of a coronary vessel caused by rupture of a vulnerable plaque. 
Ischemia induces profound metabolic and ionic perturbations in the affected 
myocardium and causes rapid depression of systolic function. Prolonged 
myocardial ischemia activates a "wavefront" of cardiomyocyte death that extends 
from the subendocardium to the subepicardium. Mitochondrial alterations are 
prominently involved in apoptosis and necrosis of cardiomyocytes in the 
infarcted heart. The adult mammalian heart has negligible regenerative capacity, 
thus the infarcted myocardium heals through formation of a scar. Infarct healing 
is dependent on an inflammatory cascade, triggered by alarmins released by dying 
cells. Clearance of dead cells and matrix debris by infiltrating phagocytes 
activates anti-inflammatory pathways leading to suppression of cytokine and 
chemokine signaling. Activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and 
release of transforming growth factor-β induce conversion of fibroblasts into 
myofibroblasts, promoting deposition of extracellular matrix proteins. Infarct 
healing is intertwined with geometric remodeling of the chamber, characterized 
by dilation, hypertrophy of viable segments, and progressive dysfunction. This 
review manuscript describes the molecular signals and cellular effectors 
implicated in injury, repair, and remodeling of the infarcted heart, the 
mechanistic basis of the most common complications associated with myocardial 
infarction, and the pathophysiologic effects of established treatment 
strategies. Moreover, we discuss the implications of pathophysiological insights 
in design and implementation of new promising therapeutic approaches for 
patients with myocardial infarction.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cphy.c150006
PMID: 26426469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]