---
reference_id: "PMID:30067485"
title: "Clinical Outcomes and Modes of Death in Timothy Syndrome: A Multicenter International Study of a Rare Disorder."
authors:
- Dufendach KA
- Timothy K
- Ackerman MJ
- Blevins B
- Pflaumer A
- Etheridge S
- Perry J
- Blom NA
- Temple J
- Chowdhury D
- Skinner JR
- Johnsrude C
- Bratincsak A
- Bos JM
- Shah M
journal: JACC Clin Electrophysiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacep.2017.08.007
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Anti-Arrhythmia Agents/therapeutic use
- "Autistic Disorder/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality, therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac"
- "Defibrillators, Implantable"
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Humans
- Hypoglycemia
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Long QT Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality, therapy"
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- "Syndactyly/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality, therapy"
- Ventricular Fibrillation
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Outcomes and Modes of Death in Timothy Syndrome: A Multicenter International Study of a Rare Disorder.
**Authors:** Dufendach KA, Timothy K, Ackerman MJ, Blevins B, Pflaumer A, Etheridge S, Perry J, Blom NA, Temple J, Chowdhury D, Skinner JR, Johnsrude C, Bratincsak A, Bos JM, Shah M
**Journal:** JACC Clin Electrophysiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacep.2017.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacep.2017.08.007)

## Content

1. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2018 Apr;4(4):459-466. doi:
10.1016/j.jacep.2017.08.007. Epub 2017 Nov 6.

Clinical Outcomes and Modes of Death in Timothy Syndrome: A Multicenter
International Study of a Rare Disorder.

Dufendach KA(1), Timothy K(2), Ackerman MJ(3), Blevins B(4), Pflaumer A(5),
Etheridge S(2), Perry J(6), Blom NA(7), Temple J(8), Chowdhury D(9), Skinner
JR(10), Johnsrude C(11), Bratincsak A(12), Bos JM(3), Shah M(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Perelman School
of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Division of Heart Rhythm Services,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Pediatric Cardiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; Department of Molecular
Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics, Windland Smith Rice Sudden Death
Genomics Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Naval Medical
Center San Diego, San Diego, California.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Royal Children's
Hospital, MCRI, and University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Rady Children's
Hospital/UC San Diego, San Diego, California.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands; Department of Medicine, Division of
Pediatric Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(8)Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware.
(9)Cardiology Care for Children, Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Starship
Children's Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(11)University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky.
(12)Pediatric and Adult Congenital Cardiology, Kapi'olani Medical Specialists,
Honolulu, Hawaii.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Electronic address:
shahm@email.chop.edu.

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to evaluate contemporary clinical
outcomes and identify triggers for arrhythmias or sudden death in an
international cohort of Timothy Syndrome (TS) patients including those with
novel TS-associated CACNA1C mutations.
BACKGROUND: TS is an extremely rare genetic disorder of the L-type cardiac
channel Cav1.2 encoded by CACNA1C. The syndrome is characterized by multisystem
abnormalities consisting of QT prolongation, congenital heart defects,
syndactyly, facial dysmorphism, and neurological symptoms.
METHODS: Patients diagnosed with TS between January 1, 1994, and April 1, 2016,
from 12 international tertiary care pediatric centers were included in this
retrospective study. Data were gathered via survey from the
patients' electrophysiologists.
RESULTS: Seventeen patients diagnosed with TS were identified. Length of
follow-up was 4.9 years (range 3.0 to 19.0 years). Mean QTc was 640 ms (range
500 to 976 ms). All patients were treated with beta-blockers; 13 patients (76%)
were also treated with an implantable defibrillator. Eleven patients experienced
an episode of aborted cardiac arrest, 6 associated with general anesthesia and 2
with hypoglycemia. Four patients died suddenly due to ventricular fibrillation,
2 of whom had associated hypoglycemia.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that mortality in TS patients is due to
multifactorial mechanisms, which include ventricular arrhythmias, pulseless
electrical activity, and hypoglycemia. A simple nomenclature for ongoing studies
of TS and related syndromes is described. A worldwide prospective registry is
needed for continued exploration of this syndrome.

Copyright © 2018 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacep.2017.08.007
PMID: 30067485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
