---
reference_id: "PMID:19438997"
title: Molecular structure and concentration of melanin in the stratum corneum of patients with melasma.
authors:
- Moncada B
- Sahagún-Sánchez LK
- Torres-Alvarez B
- Castanedo-Cázares JP
- Martínez-Ramírez JD
- González FJ
journal: Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0781.2009.00425.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular structure and concentration of melanin in the stratum corneum of patients with melasma.
**Authors:** Moncada B, Sahagún-Sánchez LK, Torres-Alvarez B, Castanedo-Cázares JP, Martínez-Ramírez JD, González FJ
**Journal:** Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0781.2009.00425.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0781.2009.00425.x)

## Content

1. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. 2009 Jun;25(3):159-60. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0781.2009.00425.x.

Molecular structure and concentration of melanin in the stratum corneum of 
patients with melasma.

Moncada B(1), Sahagún-Sánchez LK, Torres-Alvarez B, Castanedo-Cázares JP, 
Martínez-Ramírez JD, González FJ.

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Department, Hospital Central Dr Ignacio Morones Prieto, 
Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosí, SLP, México. moncadab@uaslp.mx

Melasma is an abnormal acquired hyperpigmentation of the face of unknown origin, 
it is considered a single disease and very little has been found regarding its 
pathogenesis. It is usually assumed that melasma is due to excessive melanin 
production, but excessive retention or abnormal metabolism of this molecule has 
not yet been considered. In order to search for an alternate explanation for the 
excessive pigmentation in melasma the molecular structure and concentration of 
melanin in the stratum corneum of patients with melasma was analyzed using Raman 
spectroscopy and optical transmission spectroscopy, respectively. From this 
study it became apparent that in melasma melanin is concentrated in the deeper 
layers of the skin but its exteriorization remains the same as for healthy skin. 
Raman spectroscopy measurements showed degraded molecules of melanin in some 
subjects, which may help explain the variable success rate of the standard 
therapy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0781.2009.00425.x
PMID: 19438997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]