---
reference_id: "PMID:16343966"
title: "delta-Aminolevulinate dehydratase (ALAD) porphyria: the first case in North America with two novel ALAD mutations."
authors:
- Akagi R
- Kato N
- Inoue R
- Anderson KE
- Jaffe EK
- Sassa S
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.10.011
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- CHO Cells
- Catalytic Domain
- Cricetinae
- Cricetulus
- "Erythrocytes/drug effects, enzymology"
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- Lead/pharmacology
- Male
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Porphobilinogen Synthase/chemistry, genetics"
- "Porphyrias/enzymology, genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Zinc/metabolism, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# delta-Aminolevulinate dehydratase (ALAD) porphyria: the first case in North America with two novel ALAD mutations.
**Authors:** Akagi R, Kato N, Inoue R, Anderson KE, Jaffe EK, Sassa S
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.10.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.10.011)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2006 Apr;87(4):329-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.10.011. Epub
 2005 Dec 15.

delta-Aminolevulinate dehydratase (ALAD) porphyria: the first case in North
America with two novel ALAD mutations.

Akagi R(1), Kato N, Inoue R, Anderson KE, Jaffe EK, Sassa S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Science, Okayama Prefectural University, Soja,
Japan. akagirei@fhw.ok-pu.ac.jp

The molecular basis of the enzymatic defect responsible for
delta-aminolevulinate dehydratase (ALAD) porphyria (ADP) was investigated in a
14-year-old male who presented clinical and laboratory findings typical of ADP.
Nucleotide sequence analysis of ALAD cDNAs from the proband revealed two novel
mutations, a 265G to A base transition (C1) and a 394C to T base transition
(C2), resulting in amino acid substitutions, Glu89Lys and Cys132Arg,
respectively. Both mutations were present within exon 5 of the ALAD gene, and
appeared to influence the binding of zinc to the enzyme which is essential for
enzyme activity. It was found that the C1 mutation was inherited from his
father, while the C2 mutation was from his mother. Expression of these mutant
ALAD cDNAs in Chinese hamster ovary cells produced normal ALAD mRNA levels, but
markedly decreased ALAD protein and enzyme activity. These results suggest that
the combination of the two aberrant ALADs with little enzyme activity accounts
for the markedly decreased ALAD activity observed in the proband. This case
represents the molecular analysis of the ALAD gene defects in the first case of
ADP identified in North America, who is a compound heterozygote for two novel
ALAD gene defects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.10.011
PMID: 16343966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
