---
reference_id: "PMID:20301352"
title: Mitochondrial DNA-Associated Leigh Syndrome Spectrum.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Ball M
- Thorburn DR
- Rahman S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial DNA-Associated Leigh Syndrome Spectrum.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Ball M, Thorburn DR, Rahman S

## Content

1. Mitochondrial DNA-Associated Leigh Syndrome Spectrum.

Ball M(1)(2)(3), Thorburn DR(4)(2)(3), Rahman S(5).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2003 Oct 30 [updated 2024 May 9].

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Fellow, PhD Candidate, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Victoria, Australia
(2)Royal Children's Hospital, Victoria, Australia
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
(4)Professorial Fellow, Murdoch Children's Research Institute and Genetic Health
Services Victoria, Victoria, Australia
(5)Professor of Paediatric Metabolic Medicine, Genetics and Genomic Medicine
Department, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United
Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Mitochondrial DNA-associated Leigh syndrome spectrum
(mtDNA-LSS) is part of a continuum of progressive neurodegenerative disorders
caused by abnormalities of mitochondrial energy generation, which includes the
overlapping phenotypes mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome and mtDNA-associated
Leigh-like syndrome. Mitochondrial DNA-LSS is characterized by onset of
manifestations typically between ages three and 12 months, often following an
intercurrent illness (usually viral) or metabolic challenge (vaccinations,
surgery, prolonged fasting). Decompensation (often with elevated lactate levels
in blood and/or cerebrospinal fluid) is typically associated with developmental
delay and/or regression. Neurologic features include hypotonia, spasticity,
seizures, movement disorders, cerebellar ataxia, and peripheral neuropathy.
Brain stem dysfunction may manifest with respiratory symptoms, swallowing
difficulties, ophthalmoparesis, and abnormalities in thermoregulation.
Extraneurologic manifestations may include poor weight gain, cardiomyopathy, and
conduction defects. Up to 50% of individuals die by age three years, most often
from respiratory or cardiac failure.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of mtDNA-LSS is established in a proband
fulfilling clinical diagnostic criteria for LSS by identification of a
heteroplasmic or homoplasmic pathogenic variant in one of the 15 mtDNA genes
known to be involved in mtDNA-LSS.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is supportive. Sodium
bicarbonate or sodium citrate for significant acidosis (THAM may be used if
there is hypernatraemia); anti-seizure medication for seizures; dystonia therapy
with benzhexol, baclofen, tetrabenazine, or gabapentin alone or in combination,
or by botulinum toxin injection; treatment of respiratory compromise per
pulmonologist; caloric and nutritional supplementation and feeding therapy as
needed; developmental and educational support; physical therapy and occupational
therapy; standard treatment of eye movement disorders; medical management of
cardiomyopathy; treatment of constipation as needed; treatment of liver failure
per hepatologist; treatment of electrolyte abnormalities per nephrologist;
hearing aids or cochlear implants for sensorineural hearing loss; speech therapy
and hearing support services as needed; management of diabetes mellitus and
adrenal insufficiency per endocrinologist; standard treatments for anxiety
and/or depression; psychological support and care coordination for the affected
individual and family. Surveillance: Affected individuals should be followed at
regular intervals to monitor for progression of disease and associated
complications. Neurologic assessment for ataxia and seizures at each visit along
with an assessment of pulmonary issues, growth, nutrition, and gastrointestinal
manifestations. Development, educational, and cognitive assessment and
assessment of mobility and self-help skills at least annually. Ophthalmology
assessment every six to 12 months or as advised by ophthalmologist. Annual blood
pressure, EKG, and echocardiogram or as advised by cardiologist. Liver function
tests, urinalysis, urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio, urine amino acids, serum
electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, complete blood count, and fasting
glucose annually. Annual audiology assessment. Assessment of care coordination
and family psychosocial needs at each visit. Agents/circumstances to avoid:
Sodium valproate, medications that cause acidosis, and dichloroacetate should be
avoided or used with caution; administration of anesthesia requires careful
consideration to avoid aggravation of respiratory symptoms and precipitation of
respiratory failure.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Mitochondrial DNA-LSS is transmitted by maternal
inheritance. The mother of a proband may have the mtDNA pathogenic variant and
may exhibit mild clinical manifestations of mtDNA-LSS. Many affected individuals
have no known family history of mtDNA-LSS or other mitochondrial disorder. The
explanation for apparently simplex cases may be absence of a comprehensive
and/or reliable family history, a maternal heteroplasmy level below the disease
threshold (i.e., the minimum level of heteroplasmy expected to result in
mitochondrial disease), or a de novo mtDNA pathogenic variant in the proband. If
the mother of the proband has the mtDNA pathogenic variant identified in the
proband, all sibs of the proband are at risk of inheriting the pathogenic
variant. Sibs may inherit the pathogenic variant at varying heteroplasmy levels
due to the bottleneck effect and variant-specific segregation patterns. The risk
to a sib of developing clinical manifestations is difficult to determine and
depends on heteroplasmy level, the variation in heteroplasmy levels among
different tissues, and the disease threshold for the specific variant.
Recurrence risk assessment and prenatal testing for disorders caused by
pathogenic variants in mtDNA is challenging due to the intricacies of mtDNA
transmission and the inherent challenge in using prenatal genetic test results
to predict clinical outcome. Reproductive options for the family members of a
proband with an mtDNA pathogenic variant may include prenatal testing,
preimplantation genetic testing, and oocyte donation.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301352
