---
reference_id: "PMID:27940460"
title: Minimal Change Disease.
authors:
- Vivarelli M
- Massella L
- Ruggiero B
- Emma F
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.05000516
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Drug Resistance
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/drug therapy, epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Recurrence
- Steroids/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Minimal Change Disease.
**Authors:** Vivarelli M, Massella L, Ruggiero B, Emma F
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.05000516](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.05000516)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017 Feb 7;12(2):332-345. doi: 10.2215/CJN.05000516.
Epub  2016 Dec 9.

Minimal Change Disease.

Vivarelli M(1), Massella L(1), Ruggiero B(2), Emma F(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy; and.
(2)Clinical Research Center for Rare Diseases "Aldo e Cele Daccò", IRCCS - 
Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Ranica, Bergamo, Italy.

Minimal change disease (MCD) is a major cause of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome 
(NS), characterized by intense proteinuria leading to edema and intravascular 
volume depletion. In adults, it accounts for approximately 15% of patients with 
idiopathic NS, reaching a much higher percentage at younger ages, up to 70%-90% 
in children >1 year of age. In the pediatric setting, a renal biopsy is usually 
not performed if presentation is typical and the patient responds to therapy 
with oral prednisone at conventional doses. Therefore, in this setting 
steroid-sensitive NS can be considered synonymous with MCD. The pathologic 
hallmark of disease is absence of visible alterations by light microscopy and 
effacement of foot processes by electron microscopy. Although the cause is 
unknown and it is likely that different subgroups of disease recognize a 
different pathogenesis, immunologic dysregulation and modifications of the 
podocyte are thought to synergize in altering the integrity of the glomerular 
basement membrane and therefore determining proteinuria. The mainstay of therapy 
is prednisone, but steroid-sensitive forms frequently relapse and this leads to 
a percentage of patients requiring second-line steroid-sparing 
immunosuppression. The outcome is variable, but forms of MCD that respond to 
steroids usually do not lead to chronic renal damage, whereas forms that are 
unresponsive to steroids may subsequently reveal themselves as FSGS. However, in 
a substantial number of patients the disease is recurrent and requires long-term 
immunosuppression, with significant morbidity because of side effects. Recent 
therapeutic advances, such as the use of anti-CD20 antibodies, have provided 
long-term remission off-therapy and suggest new hypotheses for disease 
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2017 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.05000516
PMCID: PMC5293332
PMID: 27940460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]