---
reference_id: "PMID:16086756"
title: "Treatment of acne with topical antibiotics: lessons from clinical studies."
authors:
- Simonart T
- Dramaix M
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2005.06614.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of acne with topical antibiotics: lessons from clinical studies.
**Authors:** Simonart T, Dramaix M
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2005.06614.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2005.06614.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2005 Aug;153(2):395-403. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2005.06614.x.

Treatment of acne with topical antibiotics: lessons from clinical studies.

Simonart T(1), Dramaix M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Erasme University Hospital, 808 Route de Lennik, 
B-1070 Brussels, Belgium. tsimonar@ulb.ac.be

BACKGROUND: Over the past 20 years, major concerns have been repeatedly 
expressed over antibiotic-resistant acne in Europe and in the U.S.A. However, 
the clinical significance of these resistance patterns is poorly defined so that 
topical antibiotics remain one of the cornerstones of acne management.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether we are facing decreased efficacy of topical 
formulations of erythromycin and clindamycin in clinical trials of therapeutic 
interventions for acne.
METHODS: To review systematically the results of the clinical trials 
investigating topical formulations of erythromycin and clindamycin for the 
treatment of inflammatory acne and to establish whether or not there is a 
decrease in the efficacy of these topical antibiotic formulations since their 
widespread introduction in the mid 1970s.
RESULTS: Of the 50 eligible controlled trials identified using a systematic 
electronic database search strategy, 45 (90%) incorporated a lesion count, 
making comparison across trials possible. Analysis of clinical studies 
investigating the effect of topical erythromycin in acne patients indicates a 
significant decrease in the effect of this antibiotic on inflammatory and 
noninflammatory lesion count over time (r = -2.140, P = 0.001 and r = -2.032, P 
= 0.001, respectively). Efficacy of topical clindamycin remained stable during 
the study period.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a gradual decrease in the efficacy of topical erythromycin 
in clinical trials of therapeutic intervention for acne, which is probably 
related to the development of antibiotic-resistant propionibacteria.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2005.06614.x
PMID: 16086756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]