---
reference_id: "PMID:32222376"
title: "Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS): A critical assessment."
authors:
- Olshansky B
- Cannom D
- Fedorowski A
- Stewart J
- Gibbons C
- Sutton R
- Shen WK
- Muldowney J
- Chung TH
- Feigofsky S
- Nayak H
- Calkins H
- Benditt DG
journal: Prog Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2020.03.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS): A critical assessment.
**Authors:** Olshansky B, Cannom D, Fedorowski A, Stewart J, Gibbons C, Sutton R, Shen WK, Muldowney J, Chung TH, Feigofsky S, Nayak H, Calkins H, Benditt DG
**Journal:** Prog Cardiovasc Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pcad.2020.03.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcad.2020.03.010)

## Content

1. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2020 May-Jun;63(3):263-270. doi: 
10.1016/j.pcad.2020.03.010. Epub 2020 Mar 25.

Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS): A critical assessment.

Olshansky B(1), Cannom D(2), Fedorowski A(3), Stewart J(4), Gibbons C(5), Sutton 
R(6), Shen WK(7), Muldowney J(6), Chung TH(8), Feigofsky S(9), Nayak H(10), 
Calkins H(11), Benditt DG(12).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States 
of America. Electronic address: brian-olshansky@uiowa.edu.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los 
Angeles, CA, United States of America.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(4)Center for Pediatric Hypotensive Disease, New York Medical College, 
Hawthorne, NY, United States of America.
(5)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Boston, MA, United States of America.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, England, 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
(7)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic Arizona Phoenix, AZ, 
United States of America.
(8)Department of Neurology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
MD, United States of America.
(9)Iowa Heart Center, Carroll, IA, United States of America.
(10)Division of Cardiology, Pritzker School of Medicine, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, United States of America.
(11)Division of Cardiology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
MD, United States of America.
(12)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States of America.

Comment in
    Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2021 Jul-Aug;67:1. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2021.07.011.

Although diagnostic criteria have been developed characterizing postural 
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), no single set of criteria is 
universally accepted. Furthermore, there are gaps in the present criteria used 
to identify individuals who have this condition. The reproducibility of the 
physiological findings, the relationship of symptoms to physiological findings, 
the presence of symptoms alone without any physiological findings and the 
response to various interventions confuse rather than clarify this condition. As 
many disease entities can be confused with POTS, it becomes critical to identify 
what this syndrome is. What appears to be POTS may be an underlying condition 
that requires specific therapy. POTS is not simply orthostatic intolerance and 
symptoms or intermittent orthostatic tachycardia but the syndrome needs to be 
characterized over time and with reproducibility. Here we address critical 
issues regarding the pathophysiology and diagnosis of POTS in an attempt to 
arrive at a rational approach to categorize the syndrome with the hope that it 
may help both better identify individuals and better understand approaches to 
therapy.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcad.2020.03.010
PMCID: PMC9012474
PMID: 32222376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]