---
reference_id: "PMID:33520059"
title: "Thanatophoric dysplasia: a case report."
authors:
- Jagun OE
- Olusola-Bello MA
- Adekanmbi AF
- Jagun OO
- Oduwole T
journal: Pan Afr Med J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.11604/pamj.2020.37.220.21211
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Trimester, Third"
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thanatophoric dysplasia: a case report.
**Authors:** Jagun OE, Olusola-Bello MA, Adekanmbi AF, Jagun OO, Oduwole T
**Journal:** Pan Afr Med J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.11604/pamj.2020.37.220.21211](https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2020.37.220.21211)

## Content

1. Pan Afr Med J. 2020 Nov 5;37:220. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2020.37.220.21211.
eCollection 2020.

Thanatophoric dysplasia: a case report.

Jagun OE(1), Olusola-Bello MA(2), Adekanmbi AF(3), Jagun OO(4), Oduwole T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Olabisi Onabanjo University
Teaching Hospital, Olabisi Onabanjo University Sagamu, Ogun state, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Radiology Olabisi Onabanjo University Sagamu, Sagamu, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Olabisi Onabanjo University Teaching Hospital
Sagamu, Sagamu, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Ophthamology, Babcock University Teaching Hospital, Ilishan,
Nigeria.
(5)Alpha Clinic and Ultrasound Unit, Sagamu, Ogun state, Nigeria.

A case of thanatophoric dysplasia with sudden death at term is hereby presented.
Thanatophoric dysplasia is an uncommon, lethal skeletal dysplasia which is
associated with mutation in the extracellular region of fibroblast growth factor
receptor 3 (FGFR3). It is an autosommal dominant condition that has sporadic
occurrence and early ultrasound scan has not been of great benefit in its
detection. Diagnosis is mostly made in the third trimester. The fetal death is
usually due to severe respiratory insufficiency from a reduced thoracic capacity
and hypoplastic lungs and/or respiratory failure due to brainstem compression.
In view of the autosomal dominance of TD, it will be advisable for a woman with
previous history to have prenatal screening to relieve parental anxiety and
prevent late detection.

Copyright: Olusoji Edward Jagun et al.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2020.37.220.21211
PMCID: PMC7821799
PMID: 33520059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
