---
reference_id: "PMID:24333723"
title: Hypoxia and lymphangiogenesis in tumor microenvironment and metastasis.
authors:
- Ji RC
journal: Cancer Lett
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.12.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypoxia and lymphangiogenesis in tumor microenvironment and metastasis.
**Authors:** Ji RC
**Journal:** Cancer Lett (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canlet.2013.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2013.12.001)

## Content

1. Cancer Lett. 2014 Apr 28;346(1):6-16. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.12.001. Epub 
2013 Dec 11.

Hypoxia and lymphangiogenesis in tumor microenvironment and metastasis.

Ji RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, Oita, 
Japan. Electronic address: JI@oita-u.ac.jp.

Hypoxia and lymphangiogenesis are closely related processes that play a pivotal 
role in tumor invasion and metastasis. Intratumoral hypoxia is exacerbated as a 
result of oxygen consumption by rapidly proliferating tumor cells, insufficient 
blood supply and poor lymph drainage. Hypoxia induces functional responses in 
lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs), including cell proliferation and migration. 
Multiple factors (e.g., ET-1, AP-1, C/EBP-δ, EGR-1, NF-κB, and MIF) are involved 
in the events of hypoxia-induced lymphangiogenesis. Among them, HIF-1α is known 
to be the master regulator of cellular oxygen homeostasis, mediating 
transcriptional activation of lymphangiogenesis via regulation of signaling 
cascades like VEGF-A/-C/-D, TGF-β and Prox-1 in experimental and human tumors. 
Although the underlying molecular mechanisms remain incompletely elucidated, the 
investigation of lymphangiogenesis in hypoxic conditions may provide insight 
into potential therapeutic targets for lymphatic metastasis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.12.001
PMID: 24333723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]