---
reference_id: "PMID:11276328"
title: "How common is hearing impairment in osteogenesis imperfecta?"
authors:
- Paterson CR
- Monk EA
- McAllion SJ
journal: J Laryngol Otol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1258/0022215011907442
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Hearing Disorders/epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Middle Aged
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, epidemiology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How common is hearing impairment in osteogenesis imperfecta?
**Authors:** Paterson CR, Monk EA, McAllion SJ
**Journal:** J Laryngol Otol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1258/0022215011907442](https://doi.org/10.1258/0022215011907442)

## Content

1. J Laryngol Otol. 2001 Apr;115(4):280-2. doi: 10.1258/0022215011907442.

How common is hearing impairment in osteogenesis imperfecta?

Paterson CR(1), Monk EA, McAllion SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland. 
c.r.paterson@dundee.ac.uk.

Hearing impairment has long been recognized as a common feature in osteogenesis 
imperfecta. The figures in some publications could be taken to imply that, with 
increasing age, the proportion of osteogenesis imperfecta patients with hearing 
impairment approaches 100 per cent. The incidence of hearing loss in a large 
survey of 1394 patients with osteogenesis imperfecta was examined. It was found 
that the most common age of onset was in the second, third and fourth decades of 
life. At the age of 50 approximately 50 per cent of the patients had symptoms of 
hearing impairment; over the next 20 years there was little further increase. 
Differences were shown between patients with different clinical types of 
osteogenesis imperfecta as delineated in the Sillence classification; hearing 
loss was significantly less common in the type IV disease than in the type I 
disorder. Among the 29 families with osteogenesis imperfecta type IA there were 
distinct differences in the likelihood of hearing loss. These findings provide 
insights which will be valuable in giving patients advice on the likelihood of 
developing hearing loss in the future.

DOI: 10.1258/0022215011907442
PMID: 11276328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]