---
reference_id: "PMID:34608945"
title: "CBTRUS Statistical Report: Primary Brain and Other Central Nervous System Tumors Diagnosed in the United States in 2014-2018."
authors:
- Ostrom QT
- Cioffi G
- Waite K
- Kruchko C
- Barnholtz-Sloan JS
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab200
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain
- "Brain Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Central Nervous System Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Meningeal Neoplasms
- Registries
- United States/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CBTRUS Statistical Report: Primary Brain and Other Central Nervous System Tumors Diagnosed in the United States in 2014-2018.
**Authors:** Ostrom QT, Cioffi G, Waite K, Kruchko C, Barnholtz-Sloan JS
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noab200](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noab200)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2021 Oct 5;23(12 Suppl 2):iii1-iii105. doi:
10.1093/neuonc/noab200.

CBTRUS Statistical Report: Primary Brain and Other Central Nervous System Tumors 
Diagnosed in the United States in 2014-2018.

Ostrom QT(1)(2)(3)(4), Cioffi G(1)(5), Waite K(1)(5), Kruchko C(1), 
Barnholtz-Sloan JS(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Central Brain Tumor Registry of the United States, Hinsdale, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, 
USA.
(3)The Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center, Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(5)Trans Divisional Research Program (TDRP), Division of Cancer Epidemiology and 
Genetics (DCEG), National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)Center for Biomedical Informatics & Information Technology (CBIIT), National 
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.

The Central Brain Tumor Registry of the United States (CBTRUS), in collaboration 
with the CDC and NCI, is the largest population-based registry focused 
exclusively on primary brain and other central nervous system (CNS) tumors in 
the United States (US) and represents the entire US population. This report 
contains the most up-to-date population-based data on primary brain tumors 
available and supersedes all previous reports in terms of completeness and 
accuracy and is the first CBTRUS Report to provide the distribution of molecular 
markers for selected brain and CNS tumor histologies. All rates are age-adjusted 
using the 2000 US standard population and presented per 100,000 population. The 
average annual age-adjusted incidence rate (AAAIR) of all malignant and 
non-malignant brain and other CNS tumors was 24.25 (Malignant AAAIR=7.06, 
Non-malignant AAAIR=17.18). This overall rate was higher in females compared to 
males (26.95 versus 21.35) and non-Hispanics compared to Hispanics (24.68 versus 
22.12). The most commonly occurring malignant brain and other CNS tumor was 
glioblastoma (14.3% of all tumors and 49.1% of malignant tumors), and the most 
common non-malignant tumor was meningioma (39% of all tumors and 54.5% of 
non-malignant tumors). Glioblastoma was more common in males, and meningioma was 
more common in females. In children and adolescents (age 0-19 years), the 
incidence rate of all primary brain and other CNS tumors was 6.21. An estimated 
88,190 new cases of malignant and non-malignant brain and other CNS tumors are 
expected to be diagnosed in the US population in 2021 (25,690 malignant and 
62,500 non-malignant). There were 83,029 deaths attributed to malignant brain 
and other CNS tumors between 2014 and 2018. This represents an average annual 
mortality rate of 4.43 per 100,000 and an average of 16,606 deaths per year. The 
five-year relative survival rate following diagnosis of a malignant brain and 
other CNS tumor was 66.9%, for a non-malignant brain and other CNS tumors the 
five-year relative survival rate was 92.1%.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noab200
PMCID: PMC8491279
PMID: 34608945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]