---
reference_id: "PMID:25681578"
title: "Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy: A fresh perspective."
authors:
- Chowers I
- Tiosano L
- Audo I
- Grunin M
- Boon CJ
journal: Prog Retin Eye Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2015.02.001
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Electroretinography
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Phagocytosis/physiology
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Retina/pathology
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/pathology
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/diagnosis, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy: A fresh perspective.
**Authors:** Chowers I, Tiosano L, Audo I, Grunin M, Boon CJ
**Journal:** Prog Retin Eye Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preteyeres.2015.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2015.02.001)

## Content

1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2015 Jul;47:64-85. doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2015.02.001. 
Epub 2015 Feb 11.

Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy: A fresh perspective.

Chowers I(1), Tiosano L(2), Audo I(3), Grunin M(2), Boon CJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah - Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel. Electronic address: chowers@hadassah.org.il.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah - Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)INSERM, U968, Paris, F-75012, France; Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 
06, UMR_S 968, Institut de la Vision, Paris, F-75012, France; CNRS, UMR_7210, 
Paris, F-75012, France; Centre Hospitalier National d'Ophtalmologie des 
Quinze-Vingts, DHU ViewMaintain, INSERM-DHOS CIC 1423, Paris, F-75012, France.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 
2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.

Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy (AFVD) was first described by 
Gass four decades ago. AFVD is characterized by subretinal vitelliform macular 
lesions and is usually diagnosed after the age of 40. The lesions gradually 
increase and then decrease in size over the years, leaving an area of atrophic 
outer retina and retinal pigment epithelium. This process is accompanied by a 
loss of visual acuity. Vitelliform lesions are hyperautofluorescent and 
initially have a dome-shaped appearance on optical coherence tomography. The 
electro-oculogram and full-field electroretinogram are typically normal, 
indicating localized retinal pathology. Phenocopies are also associated with 
other ocular disorders, such as vitreomacular traction, age-related macular 
degeneration, pseudodrusen, and central serous chorioretinopathy. A minority of 
AFVD patients have a mutation in the PRPH2, BEST1, IMPG1, or IMPG2 genes. A 
single-nucleotide polymorphism in the HTRA1 gene has also been associated with 
this phenotype. Accordingly, the phenotype can arise from alterations in the 
photoreceptors, retinal pigment epithelium, and/or interphotoreceptor matrix 
depending on the underlying gene defect. Excess photoreceptor outer segment 
production and/or impaired outer segment uptake due to impaired phagocytosis are 
likely underlying mechanisms. At present, no cure is available for AFVD. Thus, 
the current challenges in the field include identifying the underlying cause in 
the majority of AFVD cases and the development of effective therapeutic 
approaches.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2015.02.001
PMID: 25681578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]