---
reference_id: "PMID:35832491"
title: Cell-Dependent Pathogenic Roles of Filamin B in Different Skeletal Malformations.
authors:
- Wu H
- Wang Y
- Chen X
- Yao Y
- Zhao W
- Fang L
- Sun X
- Wang N
- Jiang J
- Gao L
- Zhao J
- Xu C
journal: Oxid Med Cell Longev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/8956636
keywords:
- Core Binding Factor Alpha 1 Subunit/metabolism
- Dwarfism/metabolism
- Facies
- "Filamins/genetics, metabolism"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell-Dependent Pathogenic Roles of Filamin B in Different Skeletal Malformations.
**Authors:** Wu H, Wang Y, Chen X, Yao Y, Zhao W, Fang L, Sun X, Wang N, Jiang J, Gao L, Zhao J, Xu C
**Journal:** Oxid Med Cell Longev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/8956636](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/8956636)

## Content

1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2022 Jul 4;2022:8956636. doi: 10.1155/2022/8956636.
eCollection 2022.

Cell-Dependent Pathogenic Roles of Filamin B in Different Skeletal
Malformations.

Wu H(1)(2)(3)(4), Wang Y(5), Chen X(1)(2)(3)(4), Yao Y(5), Zhao W(1)(2)(3)(4),
Fang L(1)(2)(3)(4), Sun X(3)(4), Wang N(3)(4), Jiang J(1)(2)(3)(4), Gao
L(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhao J(1)(2)(3)(4), Xu C(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shandong Provincial Hospital,
Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, 250021 Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shandong Provincial Hospital
Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, 250021 Shandong, China.
(3)Institute of Endocrinology, Shandong Academy of Clinical Medicine, Jinan,
250021 Shandong, China.
(4)Shandong Clinical Medical Center of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Jinan,
250021 Shandong, China.
(5)Department of Pediatric Orthopedics, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated
to Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, 250021 Shandong, China.

Mutations of filamin B (FLNB) gene can lead to a spectrum of autosomal skeletal
malformations including spondylocarpotarsal syndrome (SCT), Larsen syndrome
(LRS), type I atelosteogenesis (AO1), type III atelosteogenesis (AO3), and
boomerang dysplasia (BD). Among them, LRS is milder while BD causes a more
severe phenotype. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the differences in
clinical phenotypes of different FLNB variants has not been fully determined.
Here, we presented two patients suffering from autosomal dominant LRS and
autosomal recessive vitamin D-dependent rickets type IA (VDDR-IA). Whole-exome
sequencing revealed two novel missense variants in FLNB, c.4846A>G (p.T1616A)
and c.7022T>G (p.I2341R), which are located in repeat 15 and 22 of filamin B,
respectively. The expression of FLNBI2341R in the muscle tissue from our LRS
patient was remarkably increased. And in vitro studies showed that both variants
led to a lack of filopodia and accumulation of the mutants in the perinuclear
region in HEK293 cells. We also found that c.4846A>G (p.T1616A) and c.7022T>G
(p.I2341R) regulated endochondral osteogenesis in different ways. c.4846A>G
(p.T1616A) activated AKT pathways through inhibiting SHIP2, suppressed the Smad3
pathway, and impaired the expression of Runx2 in both Saos-2 and ATDC5 cells.
c.7022T>G (p.I2341R) activated both AKT and Smad3 pathways and increased the
expression of Runx2 in Saos-2 cells, while in ATDC5 cells it activated AKT
pathways through inhibiting SHIP2, suppressed the Smad3 pathway, and reduced the
expression of Runx2. Our study demonstrated the pathogenic mechanisms of two
novel FLNB variants in two different clinical settings and proved that FLNB
variants could not only directly cause skeletal malformations but also worsen
skeletal symptoms in the setting of other skeletal diseases. Besides, FLNB
variants differentially affect skeletal development which contributes to
clinical heterogeneity of FLNB-related disorders.

Copyright © 2022 Huixiao Wu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/8956636
PMCID: PMC9273461
PMID: 35832491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
