---
reference_id: "PMID:28739660"
title: A Gene Implicated in Activation of Retinoic Acid Receptor Targets Is a Novel Renal Agenesis Gene in Humans.
authors:
- Brophy PD
- Rasmussen M
- Parida M
- Bonde G
- Darbro BW
- Hong X
- Clarke JC
- Peterson KA
- Denegre J
- Schneider M
- Sussman CR
- Sunde L
- Lildballe DL
- Hertz JM
- Cornell RA
- Murray SA
- Manak JR
journal: Genetics
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1534/genetics.117.1125
keywords:
- Animals
- "Congenital Abnormalities/genetics, pathology"
- Exome
- Female
- Humans
- "Kidney/abnormalities, embryology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Kidney Diseases/congenital, genetics, pathology"
- Loss of Function Mutation
- Male
- Membrane Proteins
- Mice
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Retinoic Acid/genetics, metabolism"
- Zebrafish
- "Zebrafish Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Gene Implicated in Activation of Retinoic Acid Receptor Targets Is a Novel Renal Agenesis Gene in Humans.
**Authors:** Brophy PD, Rasmussen M, Parida M, Bonde G, Darbro BW, Hong X, Clarke JC, Peterson KA, Denegre J, Schneider M, Sussman CR, Sunde L, Lildballe DL, Hertz JM, Cornell RA, Murray SA, Manak JR
**Journal:** Genetics (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.117.1125](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.117.1125)

## Content

1. Genetics. 2017 Sep;207(1):215-228. doi: 10.1534/genetics.117.1125. Epub 2017
Jul  24.

A Gene Implicated in Activation of Retinoic Acid Receptor Targets Is a Novel 
Renal Agenesis Gene in Humans.

Brophy PD(1), Rasmussen M(2), Parida M(3), Bonde G(4), Darbro BW(1), Hong X(3), 
Clarke JC(1), Peterson KA(5), Denegre J(5), Schneider M(6), Sussman CR(7), Sunde 
L(2), Lildballe DL(2), Hertz JM(8), Cornell RA(4), Murray SA(5), Manak 
JR(1)(3)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby, Denmark 
8200.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 
52242.
(5)Genetics and Genomics, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609.
(6)Medical Genetics, Carle Foundation Hospital and Physician Group, Urbana, 
Illinois 61801.
(7)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 
55905.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark 
5000.
(9)459 Biology Bldg., Department of Biology, University of Iowa, 129 E. 
Jefferson St., Iowa City, IA 52242. john-manak@uiowa.edu

Renal agenesis (RA) is one of the more extreme examples of congenital anomalies 
of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). Bilateral renal agenesis is almost 
invariably fatal at birth, and unilateral renal agenesis can lead to future 
health issues including end-stage renal disease. Genetic investigations have 
identified several gene variants that cause RA, including EYA1, LHX1, and WT1 
However, whereas compound null mutations of genes encoding α and γ retinoic acid 
receptors (RARs) cause RA in mice, to date there have been no reports of 
variants in RAR genes causing RA in humans. In this study, we carried out whole 
exome sequence analysis of two families showing inheritance of an RA phenotype, 
and in both identified a single candidate gene, GREB1L Analysis of a zebrafish 
greb1l loss-of-function mutant revealed defects in the pronephric kidney just 
prior to death, and F0 CRISPR/Cas9 mutagenesis of Greb1l in the mouse revealed 
kidney agenesis phenotypes, implicating Greb1l in this disorder. GREB1L resides 
in a chromatin complex with RAR members, and our data implicate GREB1L as a 
coactivator for RARs. This study is the first to associate a component of the 
RAR pathway with renal agenesis in humans.

Copyright © 2017 by the Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.117.1125
PMCID: PMC5586373
PMID: 28739660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]