---
reference_id: "PMID:31655616"
title: "Neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy in China: a large multicentric cohort study."
authors:
- Zhang W
- Wen B
- Lu J
- Zhao Y
- Hong D
- Zhao Z
- Zhang C
- Luo Y
- Qi X
- Zhang Y
- Song X
- Zhao Y
- Zhao C
- Hu J
- Yang H
- Wang Z
- Yan C
- Yuan Y
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1209-z
keywords:
- China
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, genetics"
- Male
- "Muscle, Skeletal/diagnostic imaging"
- "Muscular Diseases/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy in China: a large multicentric cohort study.
**Authors:** Zhang W, Wen B, Lu J, Zhao Y, Hong D, Zhao Z, Zhang C, Luo Y, Qi X, Zhang Y, Song X, Zhao Y, Zhao C, Hu J, Yang H, Wang Z, Yan C, Yuan Y
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1209-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1209-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Oct 26;14(1):234. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1209-z.

Neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy in China: a large multicentric 
cohort study.

Zhang W(1), Wen B(2), Lu J(3), Zhao Y(1), Hong D(4), Zhao Z(5), Zhang C(6), Luo 
Y(7), Qi X(8), Zhang Y(9), Song X(10), Zhao Y(2), Zhao C(3), Hu J(5), Yang H(7), 
Wang Z(1), Yan C(11), Yuan Y(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, No.8 Xishiku 
Street, West District, Beijing, 100034, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, No. 107, West 
Wenhua Road, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 
People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing, 
People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Neurology, the Third Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang, Hebei province, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong province, People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan province, People's Republic of China.
(8)Department of Neurology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi province, People's Republic of China.
(9)Department of Neurology, Third Hospital, Peking University, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China.
(10)Department of Neurology, the Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang, Hebei province, People's Republic of China.
(11)Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, No. 107, West 
Wenhua Road, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, China. chuanzhuyan@163.com.
(12)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, No.8 Xishiku 
Street, West District, Beijing, 100034, China. yuanyun2002@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Neutral lipid storage disease with myopathy (NLSDM) is a rare 
clinical heterogeneous disorder caused by mutations in the patatin-like 
phospholipase domain-containing 2 (PNPLA2) gene. NLSDM usually presents skeletal 
myopathy, cardiomyopathy and the multiple organs dysfunction. Around 50 cases of 
NLSDM have been described worldwide, whereas the comprehensive understanding of 
this disease are still limited. We therefore recruit NLSDM patients from 10 
centers across China, summarize the clinical, muscle imaging, pathological and 
genetic features, and analyze the genotype-phenotype relationship.
RESULTS: A total of 45 NLSDM patients (18 men and 27 women) were recruited from 
40 unrelated families. Thirteen patients were born from consanguineous parents. 
The phenotypes were classified as asymptomatic hyperCKemia (2/45), pure skeletal 
myopathy (18/45), pure cardiomyopathy (4/45), and the combination of skeletal 
myopathy and cardiomyopathy (21/45). Right upper limb weakness was the early and 
prominent feature in 61.5% of patients. On muscle MRI, the long head of the 
biceps femoris, semimembranosus and adductor magnus on thighs, the soleus and 
medial head of the gastrocnemius on lower legs showed the most severe fatty 
infiltration. Thirty-three families were carrying homozygous mutations, while 
seven families were carrying compound heterozygous mutations. A total of 23 
mutations were identified including 11 (47.8%) point mutations, eight (34.8%) 
deletions and four (17.4%) insertions. c.757 + 1G > T, c.245G > A and 
c.187 + 1G > A were the three most frequent mutations. Among four groups of 
phenotypes, significant differences were shown in disease onset (< 20 years 
versus ≥20 years old, p = 0.003) and muscle pathology (with rimmed vacuoles 
versus without rimmed vacuoles, p = 0.001). PNPLA2 mutational type or functional 
defects did not show great impact on phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: We outline the clinical and genetic spectrum in a large cohort of 
NLSDM patients. Selective muscle fatty infiltration on posterior compartment of 
legs are characteristic of NLSDM. Chinese patients present with distinctive and 
relative hotspot PNPLA2 mutations. The disease onset age and pathological 
appearance of rimmed vacuoles are proved to be related with the clinical 
manifestations. The phenotypes are not strongly influenced by genetic defects, 
suggesting the multiple environmental risk factors in the development of NLSDM.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1209-z
PMCID: PMC6815004
PMID: 31655616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.