---
reference_id: "PMID:20846490"
title: "Alterations in dopamine and glutamate neurotransmission in tetrahydrobiopterin deficient spr-/- mice: relevance to schizophrenia."
authors:
- Choi YK
- Tarazi FI
journal: BMB Rep
year: '2010'
doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2010.43.9.593
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alterations in dopamine and glutamate neurotransmission in tetrahydrobiopterin deficient spr-/- mice: relevance to schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Choi YK, Tarazi FI
**Journal:** BMB Rep (2010)
**DOI:** [10.5483/BMBRep.2010.43.9.593](https://doi.org/10.5483/BMBRep.2010.43.9.593)

## Content

1. BMB Rep. 2010 Sep;43(9):593-8. doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2010.43.9.593.

Alterations in dopamine and glutamate neurotransmission in tetrahydrobiopterin 
deficient spr-/- mice: relevance to schizophrenia.

Choi YK(1), Tarazi FI.

Author information:
(1)Mailman Research Center, McLean Division of Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Belmont, USA. ykchoi@mclean.harvard.edu

Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) is a pivotal cofactor for enzymes responsible for the 
synthesis and release of monoamine neurotransmitters including dopamine (DA) and 
serotonin (5-HT) as well as the release of glutamate (Glu). Deficiencies in BH4 
levels and reduced activities of BH(4)-associated enzymes have been recently 
reported in patients with schizophrenia. Accordingly, it is possible that 
abnormalities in the biochemical cascades regulated by BH(4) may alter DA, 5-HT 
and Glu neurotransmission, and consequently contribute to the pathophysiology of 
different neuropsychiatric diseases including schizophrenia. The development of 
a novel strain of mutant mice that is deficient in BH(4) by knocking out the 
expression of a functional sepiapterin reductase gene (spr -/-) has added new 
insights into the potential role of BH(4) in the pathophysiology and improved 
treatment of schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.5483/BMBRep.2010.43.9.593
PMID: 20846490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]