---
reference_id: "PMID:40645015"
title: "Generation of an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line (XMUi001-A) derived from a patient harboring homozygous mutations c.370G > A (p.Gly124Ser) in the COQ4 gene."
authors:
- Wang M
- Pan P
- Jian J
- Zhuang W
- Chen Z
- Lu M
journal: Stem Cell Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2025.103764
keywords:
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, cytology"
- Homozygote
- "Ubiquinone/deficiency, genetics, analogs & derivatives"
- Mutation/genetics
- Cell Line
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Ataxia/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- "Muscle Weakness/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation of an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line (XMUi001-A) derived from a patient harboring homozygous mutations c.370G > A (p.Gly124Ser) in the COQ4 gene.
**Authors:** Wang M, Pan P, Jian J, Zhuang W, Chen Z, Lu M
**Journal:** Stem Cell Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scr.2025.103764](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scr.2025.103764)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Res. 2025 Sep;87:103764. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2025.103764. Epub 2025
Jul  3.

Generation of an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line (XMUi001-A) derived
from a patient harboring homozygous mutations c.370G > A (p.Gly124Ser) in the
COQ4 gene.

Wang M(1), Pan P(2), Jian J(1), Zhuang W(3), Chen Z(4), Lu M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Women and Children's Hospital, School of Medicine,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361002, China.
(2)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510000, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Women and Children's Hospital, School of Medicine,
Xiamen University,Xiamen, Fujian 361002, China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Women and Children's Hospital, School of Medicine,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361002, China; Scientific Research and
Innovation Center, Women and Children's Hospital, School of Medicine, Xiamen
University, Xiamen, Fujian 361002, China. Electronic address:
xiaoyue910@sohu.com.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Xiang'an Hospital, School of Medicine, Xiamen
University, Xiamen, Fujian 361100, China. Electronic address:
lm800529@xmu.edu.cn.

Primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency type 7 (CoQ10D7) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the COQ4 gene
on chromosome 9q34. The c.370G > A mutation in the COQ4 gene has been identified
as a founder mutation in the Southern China. We established an induced
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line from a patient harboring the c.370G > A
homozygous mutation. The cell line exhibited typical iPSC morphology, expressed
high levels of stemness markers, and exhibited normal karyotype. The generation
of these iPSCs provides a valuable CoQ10D7 model for studying the molecular and
cellular consequences of CoQ10 deficiency.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2025.103764
PMID: 40645015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
