---
reference_id: "PMID:29700090"
title: Cardiac amyloidosis.
authors:
- Martinez-Naharro A
- Hawkins PN
- Fontana M
journal: Clin Med (Lond)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.7861/clinmedicine.18-2-s30
keywords:
- Amyloidosis
- Cardiomyopathies
- Echocardiography
- "Heart/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Myocardium/pathology
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Martinez-Naharro A, Hawkins PN, Fontana M
**Journal:** Clin Med (Lond) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.7861/clinmedicine.18-2-s30](https://doi.org/10.7861/clinmedicine.18-2-s30)

## Content

1. Clin Med (Lond). 2018 Apr 1;18(Suppl 2):s30-s35. doi: 
10.7861/clinmedicine.18-2-s30.

Cardiac amyloidosis.

Martinez-Naharro A(1), Hawkins PN(1), Fontana M(2).

Author information:
(1)National Amyloidosis Centre, University College London, Royal Free Hospital, 
London, UK.
(2)National Amyloidosis Centre, University College London, Royal Free Hospital, 
London, UK m.fontana@ucl.ac.uk.

Systemic amyloidosis comprises an uncommon group of disorders caused by the 
extracellular deposition of misfolded proteins in various organs. Cardiac 
amyloid deposition, causing an infiltrative/restrictive cardiomyopathy, is a 
frequent feature of amyloidosis and a major determinant of survival. It may be 
the presenting feature of the disease or may be identified while investigating a 
patient presenting with other organ involvement. The need for a high index of 
suspicion and the critical importance of precise biochemical typing of the 
amyloid deposits is paramount in light of recent therapeutic advances that can 
significantly improve prognosis. Most cases of cardiac amyloidosis are of either 
transthyretin type, which may be acquired in older individuals or inherited in 
younger patients, or acquired monoclonal immunoglobulin light chain (AL) type. 
This article aims to review recent developments in diagnosis and management of 
cardiac amyloidosis.

© Royal College of Physicians 2018. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.7861/clinmedicine.18-2-s30
PMCID: PMC6334035
PMID: 29700090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]