---
reference_id: "PMID:21054511"
title: "Witkop tooth and nail syndrome: a report of three cases in a family."
authors:
- Memarpour M
- Shafiei F
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1470.2010.01198.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Anodontia/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Bicuspid/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Family Health
- Female
- Humans
- "Incisor/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Male
- Nails/pathology
- "Nails, Malformed/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Radiography
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Witkop tooth and nail syndrome: a report of three cases in a family.
**Authors:** Memarpour M, Shafiei F
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1525-1470.2010.01198.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1525-1470.2010.01198.x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2011 May-Jun;28(3):281-5. doi: 
10.1111/j.1525-1470.2010.01198.x. Epub 2010 Nov 5.

Witkop tooth and nail syndrome: a report of three cases in a family.

Memarpour M(1), Shafiei F.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Dentistry Department, School of Dentistry, Shiraz University of 
Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

Witkop tooth and nail syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant ectodermal dysplasia 
manifested by hypodontia and nail dysplasia. Tooth shape may vary, and conical 
and narrow crowns are common. Mandibular incisors, second molars, and maxillary 
canines are the most frequently missing teeth. Nail dysplasia affects the 
fingernails and especially the toenails and is often more severe in childhood. 
Nails may be spoon-shaped, ridged, slow-growing, and easily broken. We examined 
an Eastern Mediterranean family in which three siblings (two girls, one boy) had 
this syndrome. The severity of finger and toenail anomalies varied. The 
children's mother had no Witkop-related abnormalities, but their father was 
reported to have dental and nail anomalies. Early intervention is recommended to 
manage orofacial disfigurement and avoid negative social consequences for these 
children.

© 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1525-1470.2010.01198.x
PMID: 21054511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]