---
reference_id: "PMID:40191670"
title: Andrographolide Reduces Cytokine Release and Cyclooxygenase-2 Expression by Inhibiting the JNK and NF-κB Pathways in Glioblastoma Cells Exposed to Cadmium.
authors:
- Kasemsuk T
- Vivithanaporn P
- Woonfak P
- Khemawoot P
journal: J Exp Pharmacol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2147/JEP.S506062
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Andrographolide Reduces Cytokine Release and Cyclooxygenase-2 Expression by Inhibiting the JNK and NF-κB Pathways in Glioblastoma Cells Exposed to Cadmium.
**Authors:** Kasemsuk T, Vivithanaporn P, Woonfak P, Khemawoot P
**Journal:** J Exp Pharmacol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2147/JEP.S506062](https://doi.org/10.2147/JEP.S506062)

## Content

1. J Exp Pharmacol. 2025 Mar 31;17:169-179. doi: 10.2147/JEP.S506062. eCollection
 2025.

Andrographolide Reduces Cytokine Release and Cyclooxygenase-2 Expression by 
Inhibiting the JNK and NF-κB Pathways in Glioblastoma Cells Exposed to Cadmium.

Kasemsuk T(1), Vivithanaporn P(2), Woonfak P(2), Khemawoot P(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Burapha University, Chonburi, 20131, Thailand.
(2)Chakri Naruebodindra Medical Institute, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi 
Hospital, Mahidol University, Samut Prakan, 10540, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Neuroinflammation is associated with brain cancer and several 
neurodegenerative diseases. At nontoxic concentrations, the environmental 
pollutant cadmium is known to increase the secretion of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, and chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 
2 (CCL2) by activating the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear 
factor kappa B (NF-κB) pathways. Andrographolide, a diterpenoid lactone, 
exhibits anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activity in vitro and in vivo. Hence, 
in this study, we aimed to determine the effects of andrographolide on 
cadmium-induced inflammation and the underlying mechanisms in U-87 MG 
glioblastoma cells.
METHODS: U-87 MG cells, obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), 
are adherent cells derived from malignant gliomas and express the astrocyte cell 
marker glial fibrillary acidic protein. Cell viability was measured using the 
methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) assay. Human IL-6, IL-8, and CCL2 levels were 
measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs). Cyclooxygenase-2 
(COX-2) and the proteins involved in the MAPK and NF-κB pathways were detected 
via Western blotting.
RESULTS: Treating cells with andrographolide or cadmium alone or in combination 
did not alter cell viability. Andrographolide decreased cadmium-induced IL-6, 
IL-8, and CCL2 release and downregulated cadmium-induced COX-2 expression. 
Andrographolide also reduced the levels of cadmium-induced phospho-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK) and phospho-p65.
CONCLUSION: In this study, andrographolide exerted an anti-inflammatory effect 
on cadmium-induced inflammation by inhibiting the JNK and NF-κB pathways. These 
findings have implications for the development of therapies for cadmium 
poisoning since the efficacy of current therapeutic approaches is limited.

© 2025 Kasemsuk et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JEP.S506062
PMCID: PMC11970311
PMID: 40191670

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicting interests.