---
reference_id: "PMID:40070078"
title: "Efficacy of human papillomavirus vaccines in the prevention of male genital diseases: a systematic review."
authors:
- Kardoust Parizi M
- Singla N
- Matsukawa A
- Tsuboi I
- Mancon S
- Miszczyk M
- Chlosta P
- Shariat SF
journal: BJU Int
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/bju.16692
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Condylomata Acuminata/prevention & control, virology"
- "Genital Diseases, Male/prevention & control, virology"
- "Papillomavirus Infections/prevention & control"
- "Papillomavirus Vaccines/administration & dosage"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of human papillomavirus vaccines in the prevention of male genital diseases: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Kardoust Parizi M, Singla N, Matsukawa A, Tsuboi I, Mancon S, Miszczyk M, Chlosta P, Shariat SF
**Journal:** BJU Int (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bju.16692](https://doi.org/10.1111/bju.16692)

## Content

1. BJU Int. 2025 Jun;135(6):902-907. doi: 10.1111/bju.16692. Epub 2025 Mar 11.

Efficacy of human papillomavirus vaccines in the prevention of male genital 
diseases: a systematic review.

Kardoust Parizi M(1)(2), Singla N(3), Matsukawa A(1)(4), Tsuboi I(1)(5), Mancon 
S(1)(6), Miszczyk M(1)(7), Chlosta P(8), Shariat SF(1)(9)(10)(11)(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Urology, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Urology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Urology, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, Izumo, 
Shimane, Japan.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, 
Italy.
(7)Collegium Medicum - Faculty of Medicine, WSB University, Dąbrowa Górnicza, 
Poland.
(8)Department of Urology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland.
(9)Karl Landsteiner Institute of Urology and Andrology, Vienna, Austria.
(10)Urology Department, Research Center for Evidence Medicine, Tabriz University 
of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(11)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(12)Department of Urology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.
(13)Department of Urology, Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(14)Division of Urology, Department of Special Surgery, The University of 
Jordan, Amman, Jordan.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the results of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) 
regarding the efficacy of human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination in preventing 
male genital-related diseases.
METHODS: A systematic search of English language literature using PubMed, 
Scopus, and Cochrane Library was performed in April 2024 according to the 
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) 
protocol.
RESULTS: Evidence from four RCTs (including 7008 male participants) support the 
efficacy of the quadrivalent HPV vaccine in preventing genital warts and 
persistent HPV infection in HPV-naïve men. The low incidence of male genital 
malignancies in the control groups of the reported studies lead to underpowered 
evidence. However, vaccination leads to durable protection with a long-term 
follow-up of 10 years showing efficacy of 91.8% to prevent HPV 6-, 11-, 16-, or 
18-related external genital lesions (EGLs) in HPV-naïve subjects. Additionally, 
the quadrivalent vaccine seems to effectively reduce the detection of DNA from 
all four HPV types.
CONCLUSION: In summary, early quadrivalent HPV vaccination demonstrates efficacy 
in preventing HPV infection and EGLs in males. Well controlled prospective 
studies are needed to confirm the long-term efficacy, specifically in cancer 
prevention, in all men and specific subject subgroups, and to identify the 
targeted population who is most likely to benefit from early vaccination.

© 2025 The Author(s). BJU International published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of BJU International.

DOI: 10.1111/bju.16692
PMCID: PMC12053093
PMID: 40070078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]