---
reference_id: "PMID:30684971"
title: PD-L1 expression and its clinicopathological correlation in advanced esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in a Chinese population.
authors:
- Rong L
- Liu Y
- Hui Z
- Zhao Z
- Zhang Y
- Wang B
- Yuan Y
- Li W
- Guo L
- Ying J
- Song Y
- Wang L
- Zhou Z
- Xue L
- Lu N
journal: Diagn Pathol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13000-019-0778-4
keywords:
- B7-H1 Antigen/metabolism
- Chemoradiotherapy
- Cohort Studies
- Disease-Free Survival
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Lymphocytes, Tumor-Infiltrating/pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoadjuvant Therapy
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/metabolism
- Tissue Array Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PD-L1 expression and its clinicopathological correlation in advanced esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in a Chinese population.
**Authors:** Rong L, Liu Y, Hui Z, Zhao Z, Zhang Y, Wang B, Yuan Y, Li W, Guo L, Ying J, Song Y, Wang L, Zhou Z, Xue L, Lu N
**Journal:** Diagn Pathol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13000-019-0778-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13000-019-0778-4)

## Content

1. Diagn Pathol. 2019 Jan 26;14(1):6. doi: 10.1186/s13000-019-0778-4.

PD-L1 expression and its clinicopathological correlation in advanced esophageal 
squamous cell carcinoma in a Chinese population.

Rong L(1), Liu Y(2), Hui Z(3), Zhao Z(4), Zhang Y(2), Wang B(1), Yuan Y(1), Li 
W(1), Guo L(1), Ying J(1), Song Y(4), Wang L(3), Zhou Z(5), Xue L(6)(7), Lu 
N(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Resident Training Base, National Cancer 
Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, 
China.
(2)Department of Endoscopy, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research 
Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
(3)Department of Radiotherapy, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research 
Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Center/National 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China.
(5)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and Resident Training Base, National Cancer 
Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, 
China. xuely@cicams.ac.cn.
(7)Center for Cancer Precision Medicine, National Cancer Center/National 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China. 
xuely@cicams.ac.cn.
(8)Department of Pathology and Resident Training Base, National Cancer 
Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, 
China. nlu03@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is a ligand for the inhibitory 
programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1), which are targeted by several anti-PD-1 
and PD-L1 drugs for a variety of human cancers. However, only a few studies have 
evaluated PD-L1 expression in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) with a 
large Chinese cohort. Our present study is to evaluate the association of PD-L1 
expression with clinicopathological features on ESCC.
METHODS: Using tissue microarray and immunohistochemistry, PD-L1 expression on 
tumor cells and tumor-infiltrating immune cells was studied in 378 advanced ESCC 
patients without neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Its correlation with 
clinicopathological parameters was analyzed.
RESULTS: PD-L1 was expressed on 29.9% (113/378) ESCC tumor cells and 40.2% 
(152/378) tumor-infiltrating immune cells. PD-L1 expression in tumor cells was 
significantly correlated with age, degree of differentiation, T stage, N stage 
and metachronous hematogenous metastasis, and PD-L1 expression in 
tumor-infiltrating immune cells was significantly associated with N stage 
(P < 0.05). Patients with PD-L1 expression in tumor cells had poor disease-free 
survival (Hazard ratio [HR] = 1.436, P = 0.009). There was a positive 
association between tumor cells and tumor-infiltrating immune cells for PD-L1 
expression (r = 0.16, P = 0.002). However, PD-L1 expression in 
tumor-infiltrating immune cells was not significantly correlated with 
disease-free survival and overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: PD-L1 expression in tumor cells and tumor infiltrating immune cells 
is not only an indicator for immunotherapy, but also significantly related with 
age, differentiation, stage, metastasis and disease free survival.

DOI: 10.1186/s13000-019-0778-4
PMCID: PMC6347821
PMID: 30684971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study was conducted after approval by the Independent Ethics Committee from 
National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer 
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College. 
The consent was not required from each patient because this was a retrospective 
study. All procedures were performed in line with the declaration of Helsinki’s 
version of 1983. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: 
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding the 
publication of this article. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral 
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.