---
reference_id: "PMID:39135208"
title: "Congenital hydrocephalus: a review of recent advances in genetic etiology and molecular mechanisms."
authors:
- Liu XY
- Song X
- Czosnyka M
- Robba C
- Czosnyka Z
- Summers JL
- Yu HJ
- Gao GY
- Smielewski P
- Guo F
- Pang MJ
- Ming D
journal: Mil Med Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40779-024-00560-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hydrocephalus/genetics, etiology"
- Animals
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital hydrocephalus: a review of recent advances in genetic etiology and molecular mechanisms.
**Authors:** Liu XY, Song X, Czosnyka M, Robba C, Czosnyka Z, Summers JL, Yu HJ, Gao GY, Smielewski P, Guo F, Pang MJ, Ming D
**Journal:** Mil Med Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40779-024-00560-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40779-024-00560-5)

## Content

1. Mil Med Res. 2024 Aug 12;11(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s40779-024-00560-5.

Congenital hydrocephalus: a review of recent advances in genetic etiology and 
molecular mechanisms.

Liu XY(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Song X(#)(1), Czosnyka M(5), Robba C(6), Czosnyka Z(5), 
Summers JL(7), Yu HJ(8), Gao GY(9), Smielewski P(5), Guo F(10), Pang MJ(11), 
Ming D(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Medical School, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Advanced Medical Materials and Devices, Tianjin 
University, Tianjin, 300072, China.
(3)Haihe Laboratory of Brain-Computer Interaction and Human-Machine Integration, 
Tianjin, 300380, China.
(4)School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, 300072, 
Tianjin, China.
(5)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.
(6)San Martino Policlinico Hospital, IRCCS for Oncology and Neuroscience, 16132, 
Genoa, Italy.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, 21287, USA.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, 
Tianjin, 300052, China.
(9)Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100070, China.
(10)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Huanhu Hospital, Tianjin, 300350, China.
(11)Medical School, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China. 
meijun.pang@tju.edu.cn.
(12)Medical School, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China. 
richardming@tju.edu.cn.
(13)State Key Laboratory of Advanced Medical Materials and Devices, Tianjin 
University, Tianjin, 300072, China. richardming@tju.edu.cn.
(14)Haihe Laboratory of Brain-Computer Interaction and Human-Machine 
Integration, Tianjin, 300380, China. richardming@tju.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The global prevalence rate for congenital hydrocephalus (CH) is approximately 
one out of every five hundred births with multifaceted predisposing factors at 
play. Genetic influences stand as a major contributor to CH pathogenesis, and 
epidemiological evidence suggests their involvement in up to 40% of all cases 
observed globally. Knowledge about an individual's genetic susceptibility can 
significantly improve prognostic precision while aiding clinical decision-making 
processes. However, the precise genetic etiology has only been pinpointed in 
fewer than 5% of human instances. More occurrences of CH cases are required for 
comprehensive gene sequencing aimed at uncovering additional potential genetic 
loci. A deeper comprehension of its underlying genetics may offer invaluable 
insights into the molecular and cellular basis of this brain disorder. This 
review provides a summary of pertinent genes identified through gene sequencing 
technologies in humans, in addition to the 4 genes currently associated with CH 
(two X-linked genes L1CAM and AP1S2, two autosomal recessive MPDZ and CCDC88C). 
Others predominantly participate in aqueduct abnormalities, ciliary movement, 
and nervous system development. The prospective CH-related genes revealed 
through animal model gene-editing techniques are further outlined, focusing 
mainly on 4 pathways, namely cilia synthesis and movement, ion channels and 
transportation, Reissner's fiber (RF) synthesis, cell apoptosis, and 
neurogenesis. Notably, the proper functioning of motile cilia provides 
significant impulsion for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) circulation within the brain 
ventricles while mutations in cilia-related genes constitute a primary cause 
underlying this condition. So far, only a limited number of CH-associated genes 
have been identified in humans. The integration of genotype and phenotype for 
disease diagnosis represents a new trend in the medical field. Animal models 
provide insights into the pathogenesis of CH and contribute to our understanding 
of its association with related complications, such as renal cysts, scoliosis, 
and cardiomyopathy, as these genes may also play a role in the development of 
these diseases. Genes discovered in animals present potential targets for new 
treatments but require further validation through future human studies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40779-024-00560-5
PMCID: PMC11318184
PMID: 39135208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.