---
reference_id: "PMID:30593885"
title: Oro-dental and cranio-facial characteristics of osteogenesis imperfecta type V.
authors:
- Retrouvey JM
- Taqi D
- Tamimi F
- Dagdeviren D
- Glorieux FH
- Lee B
- Hazboun R
- Krakow D
- Sutton VR
- Members of the BBD Consortium
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.12.011
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oro-dental and cranio-facial characteristics of osteogenesis imperfecta type V.
**Authors:** Retrouvey JM, Taqi D, Tamimi F, Dagdeviren D, Glorieux FH, Lee B, Hazboun R, Krakow D, Sutton VR, Members of the BBD Consortium
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.12.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.12.011)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2019 Dec;62(12):103606. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.12.011. Epub
 2018 Dec 26.

Oro-dental and cranio-facial characteristics of osteogenesis imperfecta type V.

Retrouvey JM(1), Taqi D(2), Tamimi F(2), Dagdeviren D(2), Glorieux FH(3), Lee
B(4), Hazboun R(5), Krakow D(6), Sutton VR(4); Members of the BBD Consortium.

Collaborators: Bober M(7), Esposito P(8), Eyre DR(9), Gomez D(10), Harris G(11),
Hart T(12), Jain M(3), Krisher J(13), Nagamani SC(3), Orwoll ES(14), Raggio
CL(15), Rush E(8), Smith P(11), Tosi L(16), Rauch F(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic
address: jean-marc.retrouvey@mcgill.ca.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Shriners Hospital for Children and McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.
(5)UCLA School of Dentistry, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Division of Medical Genetics, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children,
Wilmington, DE, USA.
(8)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(9)Department of Orthopedic and Sports Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA.
(10)Shriners Hospital for Children - Tampa, Tampa, FL, USA.
(11)Shriners Hospital for Children - Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(12)Osteogenesis Imperfecta Foundation, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(13)Health Informatics Institute, Morsani College of Medicine, University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.
(14)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(15)Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY, USA.
(16)Bone Health Program, Children's National Health System, Washington, DC, USA.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type V is an ultrarare heritable bone disorder
caused by the heterozygous c.-14C > T mutation in IFITM5. The oro-dental and
craniofacial phenotype has not been described in detail, which we therefore
undertook to evaluate in a multicenter study (Brittle Bone Disease Consortium).
Fourteen individuals with OI type V (age 3-50 years; 10 females, 4 males)
underwent dental and craniofacial assessment. None of the individuals had
dentinogenesis imperfecta. Six of the 9 study participants (66%) for whom
panoramic radiographs were obtained had at least one missing tooth (range 1-9).
Class II molar occlusion was present in 8 (57%) of the 14 study participants.
The facial profile was retrusive and lower face height was decreased in 8 (57%)
individuals. Cephalometry, performed in three study participants, revealed a
severely retrusive maxilla and mandible, and moderately to severly retroclined
incisors in a 14-year old girl, a protrusive maxilla and a retrusive mandible in
a 14-year old boy. Cone beam computed tomograpy scans were obtained from two
study participants and demonstrated intervertebral disc calcification at the
C2-C3 level in one individual. Our study observed that OI type V is associated
with missing permanent teeth, especially permanent premolar, but not with
dentinogenesis imperfecta. The pattern of craniofacial abnormalities in OI type
V thus differs from that in other severe OI types, such as OI type III and IV,
and could be described as a bimaxillary retrusive malocclusion with reduced
lower face height and multiple missing teeth.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.12.011
PMCID: PMC6594916
PMID: 30593885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
