---
reference_id: "PMID:36555584"
title: Pharmacological Agents with Antiviral Activity against Monkeypox Infection.
authors:
- Zovi A
- Ferrara F
- Langella R
- Vitiello A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232415941
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacological Agents with Antiviral Activity against Monkeypox Infection.
**Authors:** Zovi A, Ferrara F, Langella R, Vitiello A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232415941](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232415941)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Dec 14;23(24):15941. doi: 10.3390/ijms232415941.

Pharmacological Agents with Antiviral Activity against Monkeypox Infection.

Zovi A(1), Ferrara F(2), Langella R(3), Vitiello A(1).

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Health, Viale Giorgio Ribotta 5, 00144 Rome, Italy.
(2)Asl Napoli 3 Sud, Pharmaceutical Department, Dell'amicizia Street 22, 80035 
Nola, Italy.
(3)Italian Society of Hospital Pharmacy (SIFO), SIFO Secretariat of the Lombardy 
Region, Via Carlo Farini 81, 20159 Milan, Italy.

Monkeypox infection is caused by a virus of the genus Orthopoxvirus, a member of 
the Poxviridae family. Monkeypox virus is transmitted from individual to 
individual through contact with lesions, body fluids, and respiratory droplets. 
The infection caused by monkeypox is usually a self-limited disease with mild 
symptoms lasting 2 to 4 weeks. Monkeypox typically presents with fever, rash, 
and enlarged lymph nodes. New vaccines have recently been authorized for the 
prevention of monkeypox infection, whereas there are no specific pharmacological 
antiviral treatments for monkeypox infection. However, because the viruses which 
cause adult smallpox and monkeypox are similar, antiviral drugs developed in the 
past have also shown efficacy against monkeypox. In this review, we highlight 
the in vitro and clinical evidence found in the literature on the efficacy and 
safety of pharmacological agents with antiviral activity against monkeypox 
infection and the different regulatory aspects of countries.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232415941
PMCID: PMC9784635
PMID: 36555584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.