---
reference_id: "PMID:30333046"
title: TERT promoter wild-type glioblastomas show distinct clinical features and frequent PI3K pathway mutations.
authors:
- Williams EA
- Miller JJ
- Tummala SS
- Penson T
- Iafrate AJ
- Juratli TA
- Cahill DP
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-018-0613-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TERT promoter wild-type glioblastomas show distinct clinical features and frequent PI3K pathway mutations.
**Authors:** Williams EA, Miller JJ, Tummala SS, Penson T, Iafrate AJ, Juratli TA, Cahill DP
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-018-0613-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-018-0613-2)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2018 Oct 17;6(1):106. doi: 10.1186/s40478-018-0613-2.

TERT promoter wild-type glioblastomas show distinct clinical features and 
frequent PI3K pathway mutations.

Williams EA(1)(2), Miller JJ(1)(3), Tummala SS(1), Penson T(1), Iafrate AJ(2), 
Juratli TA(1), Cahill DP(4).

Author information:
(1)Translational Neuro-Oncology Laboratory, Department of Neurosurgery, 
Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit 
street, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Stephen E. and Catherine Pappas Center for Neuro-Oncology, Department of 
Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit 
Street, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.
(4)Translational Neuro-Oncology Laboratory, Department of Neurosurgery, 
Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit 
street, Boston, MA, USA. cahill@mgh.harvard.edu.

TERT promoter (TERTp) mutations are found in the majority of World Health 
Organization (WHO) grade IV adult IDH wild-type glioblastoma (IDH-wt GBM). Here, 
we characterized the subset of IDH-wt GBMs that do not have TERTp mutations. In 
a cohort of 121 adult grade IV gliomas, we identified 109 IDH-wt GBMs, after 
excluding 11 IDH-mutant cases and one H3F3A -mutant case. Within the IDH-wt 
cases, 16 cases (14.7%) were TERTp wild-type (TERTp-wt). None of the 16 had BRAF 
V600E or H3F3A G34 hotspot mutations. When compared to TERTp mutants, patients 
with TERTp-wt GBMs, were significantly younger at first diagnosis (53.2 years 
vs. 60.7 years, p = 0.0096), and were more frequently found to have cerebellar 
location (p = 0.0027). Notably, 9 of 16 (56%) of TERTp-wt GBMs contained a 
PIK3CA or PIK3R1 mutation, while only 16/93 (17%) of TERTp-mutant GBMs harbored 
these alterations (p = 0.0018). As expected, 8/16 (50%) of TERTp-wt GBMs 
harbored mutations in the BAF complex gene family (ATRX, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, and 
ARID1A), compared with only 8/93 (9%) of TERTp-mutant GBMs (p = 0.0003). 
Mutations in BAF complex and PI3K pathway genes co-occurred more frequently in 
TERTp-wt GBMs (p = 0.0002), an association that has been observed in other 
cancers, suggesting a functional interaction indicative of a distinct pathway of 
gliomagenesis. Overall, our finding highlights heterogeneity within WHO-defined 
IDH wild-type GBMs and enrichment of the TERTp-wt subset for BAF/PI3K-altered 
tumors, potentially comprising a distinct clinical subtype of gliomas.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-018-0613-2
PMCID: PMC6193287
PMID: 30333046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interest. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.