---
reference_id: "PMID:31439486"
title: "Moyamoya disease with epileptic nystagmus: A case report."
authors:
- Nakayama C
- Mikami T
- Ukai R
- Chiba R
- Enatsu R
- Suzuki H
- Hirano T
- Mikuni N
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2019.08.069
keywords:
- Cerebral Revascularization/methods
- Epilepsy/etiology
- Female
- Humans
- "Moyamoya Disease/complications, surgery"
- "Nystagmus, Pathologic/etiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Moyamoya disease with epileptic nystagmus: A case report.
**Authors:** Nakayama C, Mikami T, Ukai R, Chiba R, Enatsu R, Suzuki H, Hirano T, Mikuni N
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2019.08.069](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2019.08.069)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2019 Dec;70:251-254. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2019.08.069. Epub
2019  Aug 19.

Moyamoya disease with epileptic nystagmus: A case report.

Nakayama C(1), Mikami T(2), Ukai R(1), Chiba R(1), Enatsu R(1), Suzuki H(1), 
Hirano T(3), Mikuni N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Japan. 
Electronic address: tmikami@sapmed.ac.jp.
(3)Division of Radiology, Sapporo Medical University Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.

Epileptic nystagmus is a quick, repetitive, jerky movement of the eyeball caused 
by seizure activity, which is unaccompanied by other ictal phenomena. We report 
a case of moyamoya disease with epileptic nystagmus. A 23-year-old woman 
presented with a headache and transient hemiparesis on her left side. Magnetic 
resonance imaging showed no ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke lesions. Digital 
subtraction angiography confirmed stenosis of the terminal portion of the right 
internal carotid artery and the formation of moyamoya vessels on the right side. 
123I-N-isopropyl-iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP) single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) showed decreased uptake in the right basal ganglia, frontal, 
and parietal regions. After electroencephalography (EEG) and a hyperventilation 
test were performed, nystagmus appeared and was accompanied with a declining 
level of consciousness. Ictal EEG during an attack showed no epileptiform 
discharge. Moreover, the patient sometimes experienced simultaneous upper 
limb-shaking and gelastic attacks. After superficial temporal artery to middle 
cerebral artery bypass surgery was performed on the right side, symptom 
frequency and duration gradually decreased. Decreased 123I-IMP SPECT blood flow 
in the right frontal region is considered a mechanism that causes the onset of 
epileptic nystagmus. It is presumed that the attack was caused by an ischemic 
abnormality in the saccade region of the frontal eye field. Moreover, 
revascularization can effectively treat the symptoms of moyamoya disease.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2019.08.069
PMID: 31439486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]