---
reference_id: "PMID:27378692"
title: A recurrent p.Arg92Trp variant in steroidogenic factor-1 (NR5A1) can act as a molecular switch in human sex development.
authors:
- Bashamboo A
- Donohoue PA
- Vilain E
- Rojo S
- Calvel P
- Seneviratne SN
- Buonocore F
- Barseghyan H
- Bingham N
- Rosenfeld JA
- Mulukutla SN
- Jain M
- Burrage L
- Dhar S
- Balasubramanyam A
- Lee B
- Members of UDN
- Dumargne MC
- Eozenou C
- Suntharalingham JP
- de Silva K
- Lin L
- Bignon-Topalovic J
- Poulat F
- Lagos CF
- McElreavey K
- Achermann JC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw186
keywords:
- Adult
- "Androgen-Insensitivity Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Cell Lineage/genetics
- Child
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Disorder of Sex Development, 46,XY/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Gonads/growth & development, pathology"
- Humans
- Karyotype
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Ovary/growth & development, pathology"
- Pedigree
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics, pathology"
- Sex Determination Processes
- Sexual Development/genetics
- Steroidogenic Factor 1/genetics
- "Testis/growth & development, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A recurrent p.Arg92Trp variant in steroidogenic factor-1 (NR5A1) can act as a molecular switch in human sex development.
**Authors:** Bashamboo A, Donohoue PA, Vilain E, Rojo S, Calvel P, Seneviratne SN, Buonocore F, Barseghyan H, Bingham N, Rosenfeld JA, Mulukutla SN, Jain M, Burrage L, Dhar S, Balasubramanyam A, Lee B, Members of UDN, Dumargne MC, Eozenou C, Suntharalingham JP, de Silva K, Lin L, Bignon-Topalovic J, Poulat F, Lagos CF, McElreavey K, Achermann JC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddw186](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddw186)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Aug 15;25(16):3446-3453. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw186. Epub
2016  Jul 4.

A recurrent p.Arg92Trp variant in steroidogenic factor-1 (NR5A1) can act as a 
molecular switch in human sex development.

Bashamboo A(1), Donohoue PA(2), Vilain E(3), Rojo S(1), Calvel P(1), Seneviratne 
SN(4), Buonocore F(5), Barseghyan H(6), Bingham N(7), Rosenfeld JA(8), Mulukutla 
SN(9), Jain M(8), Burrage L(8), Dhar S(8), Balasubramanyam A(9), Lee B(8); 
Members of UDN; Dumargne MC(1), Eozenou C(1), Suntharalingham JP(5), de Silva 
K(4), Lin L(5), Bignon-Topalovic J(1), Poulat F(10), Lagos CF(11), McElreavey 
K(12), Achermann JC(5).

Author information:
(1)Human Developmental Genetics, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 75724 France.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology & Diabetes, Medical college of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(3)Departments of Human Genetics, Pediatrics and Urology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at UCLA, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, Colombo 
08, Sri Lanka.
(5)Genetics & Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of Child Health, University 
College London, London, UK.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, CA, 
USA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics, 
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(8)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, TX.
(9)Department of Medicine, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston TX, USA.
(10)Genetic and Development Department, Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS, 
Montpellier, France.
(11)Department of Endocrinology, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, and 
Universidad San Sebastián, Santiago, Chile.
(12)Human Developmental Genetics, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 75724 France 
kenmce@pasteur.fr.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Dec 1;25(23):5286. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw390.

Cell lineages of the early human gonad commit to one of the two mutually 
antagonistic organogenetic fates, the testis or the ovary. Some individuals with 
a 46,XX karyotype develop testes or ovotestes (testicular or ovotesticular 
disorder of sex development; TDSD/OTDSD), due to the presence of the 
testis-determining gene, SRY Other rare complex syndromic forms of TDSD/OTDSD 
are associated with mutations in pro-ovarian genes that repress testis 
development (e.g. WNT4); however, the genetic cause of the more common 
non-syndromic forms is unknown. Steroidogenic factor-1 (known as NR5A1) is a key 
regulator of reproductive development and function. Loss-of-function changes in 
NR5A1 in 46,XY individuals are associated with a spectrum of phenotypes in 
humans ranging from a lack of testis formation to male infertility. Mutations in 
NR5A1 in 46,XX women are associated with primary ovarian insufficiency, which 
includes a lack of ovary formation, primary and secondary amenorrhoea as well as 
early menopause. Here, we show that a specific recurrent heterozygous missense 
mutation (p.Arg92Trp) in the accessory DNA-binding region of NR5A1 is associated 
with variable degree of testis development in 46,XX children and adults from 
four unrelated families. Remarkably, in one family a sibling raised as a girl 
and carrying this NR5A1 mutation was found to have a 46,XY karyotype with 
partial testicular dysgenesis. These unique findings highlight how a specific 
variant in a developmental transcription factor can switch organ fate from the 
ovary to testis in mammals and represents the first missense mutation causing 
isolated, non-syndromic 46,XX testicular/ovotesticular DSD in humans.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw186
PMCID: PMC5179941
PMID: 27378692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]