---
reference_id: "PMID:33184706"
title: "Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis: a review of the treatments used during the past 30 years and future directions."
authors:
- Saha BK
- Milman NT
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-020-05507-4
keywords:
- Adult
- Azathioprine/therapeutic use
- Hemoptysis
- Hemosiderosis/drug therapy
- Humans
- Lung Diseases/drug therapy
- "Hemosiderosis, Pulmonary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis: a review of the treatments used during the past 30 years and future directions.
**Authors:** Saha BK, Milman NT
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-020-05507-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-020-05507-4)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2021 Jul;40(7):2547-2557. doi: 10.1007/s10067-020-05507-4.
Epub  2020 Nov 12.

Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis: a review of the treatments used during the
past 30 years and future directions.

Saha BK(1), Milman NT(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Ozarks Medical Center, 1100
Kentucky Avenue, West Plains, MO, 65775, USA. spanophiliac@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Næstved Hospital, University College
Zealand, DK-4700, Næstved, Denmark.

This paper reviews the literature on the treatment modalities for idiopathic
pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH) used over the past 30 years, attempting to define
treatment options that appear to be efficacious and safe, and in addition
presents a treatment algorithm. IPH is an uncommon etiology of diffuse alveolar
hemorrhage. IPH is a rare disease in adults and often associated with a
significant temporal delay in diagnosis. Patients present with hemoptysis,
radiographic chest abnormalities, and iron deficiency anemia. Although several
pathogenetic hypotheses have been proposed, IPH appears to be an immunologic
disease, possibly with a genetic component. Corticosteroid therapy represents
the first line of treatment, including liposome-incorporated dexamethasone
palmitate (liposteroid). Additional immunomodulatory/immunosuppressive
medications have been used with varying success, especially in the setting of
steroid-refractory disease. Cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, hydroxychloroquine,
mycophenolate mofetil, and mesenchymal cell transplantation have been attempted
to improve outcome and reduce side effects. Controlled studies are needed to
assess the optimal combination of medications, which are effective to control
the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-020-05507-4
PMID: 33184706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
