---
reference_id: "PMID:39088359"
title: "Malignant Rhabdoid Tumor and Related Pediatric Tumors: Multimodality Imaging Review with Pathologic Correlation."
authors:
- Lorca MC
- Huang J
- Schafernak K
- Biyyam D
- Stanescu AL
- Hull NC
- Katzman PJ
- Ellika S
- Chaturvedi A
journal: Radiographics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1148/rg.240015
keywords:
- Humans
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Multimodal Imaging/methods
- Child
- Infant
- SMARCB1 Protein/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- DNA Helicases
- Nuclear Proteins
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant Rhabdoid Tumor and Related Pediatric Tumors: Multimodality Imaging Review with Pathologic Correlation.
**Authors:** Lorca MC, Huang J, Schafernak K, Biyyam D, Stanescu AL, Hull NC, Katzman PJ, Ellika S, Chaturvedi A
**Journal:** Radiographics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1148/rg.240015](https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.240015)

## Content

1. Radiographics. 2024 Aug;44(8):e240015. doi: 10.1148/rg.240015.

Malignant Rhabdoid Tumor and Related Pediatric Tumors: Multimodality Imaging
Review with Pathologic Correlation.

Lorca MC(1), Huang J(1), Schafernak K(1), Biyyam D(1), Stanescu AL(1), Hull
NC(1), Katzman PJ(1), Ellika S(1), Chaturvedi A(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Imaging Sciences (M.C.L., S.E., A.C.) and Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (P.J.K.), University of Rochester Medical
Center, 601 Elmwood Ave, Box 648, Rochester, NY 14642; University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY (J.H.); Departments of Pathology
(K.S.) and Radiology (D.B.), Phoenix Children's Hospital, Phoenix, Ariz;
Department of Radiology, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Wash (A.L.S.);
and Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn (N.C.H.).

Malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs) are rare but lethal solid neoplasms that
overwhelmingly affect infants and young children. While the central nervous
system is the most common site of occurrence, tumors can develop at other sites,
including the kidneys and soft tissues throughout the body. The anatomic site of
involvement dictates tumor nomenclature and nosology. While the clinical and
imaging manifestations of MRTs and other more common entities may overlap, there
are some site-specific distinctive imaging characteristics. Irrespective of the
site of occurrence, somatic and germline mutations in SMARCB1, and rarely in
SMARCA4, underlie the entire spectrum of rhabdoid tumors. MRTs have a simple and
remarkably stable genome but can demonstrate considerable molecular and biologic
heterogeneity. Related neoplasms encompass an expanding category of
phenotypically dissimilar (nonrhabdoid tumors driven by SMARC-related
alterations) entities. US, CT, MRI, and fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT or PET/MRI
facilitate diagnosis, initial staging, and follow-up, thus informing therapeutic
decision making. Multifocal synchronous or metachronous rhabdoid tumors occur
predominantly in the context of underlying rhabdoid tumor predisposition
syndromes (RTPSs). These autosomal dominant disorders are driven in most cases
by pathogenic variants in SMARCB1 (RTPS type 1) and rarely by pathogenic
variants in SMARCA4 (RTPS type 2). Genetic testing and counseling are imperative
in RTPS. Guidelines for imaging surveillance in cases of RTPS are based on age
at diagnosis. ©RSNA, 2024 Supplemental material is available for this article.

DOI: 10.1148/rg.240015
PMID: 39088359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
