---
reference_id: "PMID:39158206"
title: Serum biomarkers for predicting microvascular complications of diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Wang J
- Song X
- Xia Z
- Feng S
- Zhang H
- Xu C
- Zhang H
journal: Expert Rev Mol Diagn
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/14737159.2024.2391021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum biomarkers for predicting microvascular complications of diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Wang J, Song X, Xia Z, Feng S, Zhang H, Xu C, Zhang H
**Journal:** Expert Rev Mol Diagn (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737159.2024.2391021](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737159.2024.2391021)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2024 Aug;24(8):703-713. doi: 
10.1080/14737159.2024.2391021. Epub 2024 Aug 19.

Serum biomarkers for predicting microvascular complications of diabetes 
mellitus.

Wang J(1)(2), Song X(3), Xia Z(4), Feng S(1), Zhang H(1), Xu C(1), Zhang H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, 
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital 
Chuandong Hospital ＆ Dazhou First People's Hospital, Dazhou, China.
(3)School of medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu, China.
(4)Laboratory medicine, Qianwei People's Hospital, Leshan, Sichuan, China.
(5)Department of Ultrasound, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, University of 
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.

INTRODUCTION: Diabetic microvascular complications such as retinopathy, 
nephropathy, and neuropathy are primary causes of blindness, terminal renal 
failure, and neuropathic disorders in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients. 
Identifying reliable biomarkers promptly is pivotal for early detection and 
intervention in these severe complications.
AREAS COVERED: This review offers a thorough examination of the latest research 
concerning serum biomarkers for the prediction and assessment of diabetic 
microvascular complications. It encompasses biomarkers associated with 
glycation, oxidative stress, inflammation, endothelial dysfunction, basement 
membrane thickening, angiogenesis, and thrombosis. The review also highlights 
the potential of emerging biomarkers, such as microRNAs and long non-coding 
RNAs.
EXPERT OPINION: Serum biomarkers are emerging as valuable tools for the early 
assessment and therapeutic guidance of diabetic microvascular complications. The 
biomarkers identified not only reflect the underlying pathophysiology but also 
align with the extent of the disease. However, further validation across diverse 
populations and improvement of the practicality of these biomarkers in routine 
clinical practice are necessary. Pursuing these objectives is essential to 
advance early diagnosis, risk assessment, and individualized treatment regimens 
for those affected by diabetes.

DOI: 10.1080/14737159.2024.2391021
PMID: 39158206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]