---
reference_id: "PMID:40487758"
title: "Retrospective analysis of children with 46,XX testicular/ovotesticular DSD: a 10-year single-center experience."
authors:
- Gong Y
- Yin X
- Xu J
- Li Y
- Liu Q
- Zhou S
- Wang F
- Lyu Y
- Guo S
- Huang W
- Li P
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2025.1571467
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Child
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Ovotesticular Disorders of Sex Development/genetics, pathology"
- "46, XX Disorders of Sex Development/genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Testis/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrospective analysis of children with 46,XX testicular/ovotesticular DSD: a 10-year single-center experience.
**Authors:** Gong Y, Yin X, Xu J, Li Y, Liu Q, Zhou S, Wang F, Lyu Y, Guo S, Huang W, Li P
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2025.1571467](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2025.1571467)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2025 May 23;16:1571467. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2025.1571467. eCollection 2025.

Retrospective analysis of children with 46,XX testicular/ovotesticular DSD: a 
10-year single-center experience.

Gong Y(1), Yin X(1), Xu J(1), Li Y(1), Liu Q(1), Zhou S(1), Wang F(1), Lyu Y(2), 
Guo S(1), Huang W(3), Li P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Shanghai Children's Hospital, School of 
medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Shanghai Children's Hospital, School of medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Shanghai Children's Hospital, School of medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: 46,XX testicular/ovotesticular differences/disorders of sexual 
development (TDSD/OTDSD) are rare in childhood and exhibit marked distinctions 
compared to those in adulthood. This study aimed to summarize the clinical 
characteristics and outcomes of 46,XX TDSD/OTDSD in childhood.
METHODS: The sexual development characteristics, hormone profiles, chromosomal 
analysis, fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis (FISH) sex-determining 
region Y (SRY) analysis (peripheral blood and tissues), molecular genetic 
etiology, gonadal pathology, risk of gonadal tumors, and assigned gender of 52 
patients were collected and analyzed.
RESULTS: The median age at initial presentation was 18 months, and external 
masculinization score(EMS) within the range of 3 < EMS ≤ 6 was more prevalent. 
There were no statistical differences in hormone levels [luteinizing hormone 
(LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and testosterone (T)] between the 
different age groups. Among the 52 children, 4 showed positive SRY in peripheral 
blood, whereas none of the 8 children exhibited positive SRY in tissue samples. 
A total of 29 children underwent whole exome sequencing (WES) and copy number 
variant (CNV) analysis, but no genetic variants were identified. A total of 47 
children underwent gonadal biopsy and showed no evidence of tumors. However, 
immunohistochemical analysis revealed that 2 of 16 children were OCT3/4 
positive. The most frequent type of gonadal pathology (17/47) was bilateral 
seminiferous tubules. After the assessment, gender assignment was revised in six 
cases: five individuals originally assigned as female at birth were reassigned 
as male, while one individual assigned as male was changed to female. In seven 
cases, the gender of rearing remained undetermined pending further longitudinal 
psychosocial assessment. Among the female-reared cohort, three children were 
more than 11 years old. As a result of undergoing bilateral gonadectomy at an 
early age, the patients were unable to spontaneously enter puberty. However, 
given their short stature, they are receiving growth hormone (GH) treatment and 
have not yet received sufficient sex hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Among 
the male-reared cohort, seven children had entered puberty. The average age at 
puberty onset was 12 ± 0.87 years, the average testicular volume was 5.14 ± 1.57 
mL, the mean basal LH level was 6.44 ± 4.19 IU/L, the mean basal FSH level was 
13.18 ± 10.22 IU/L, and the mean basal T was 3.40 ± 1.63 nmol/L.
CONCLUSION: Compared to adults, children with 46,XX testicular/ovotesticular DSD 
were very different. SRY-negative children were predominant and tended to have 
more severe external genital abnormalities during childhood. Peripheral blood or 
tissue SRY mosaicism was not a prevalent cause and the intricate genetic 
pathways behind these cases were unknown. There were no statistical differences 
in hormone levels (LH, FSH, and T) between the different age groups. The 
assigned gender is mainly male, and the incidence of gonadal tumor risk markers 
was modest. During adolescence, their testosterone levels could normalize 
despite elevated FSH and LH levels.

Copyright © 2025 Gong, Yin, Xu, Li, Liu, Zhou, Wang, Lyu, Guo, Huang and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2025.1571467
PMCID: PMC12141018
PMID: 40487758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationship that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.