---
reference_id: "PMID:14746382"
title: "Prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in children with Down syndrome: polygraphic findings in 108 children."
authors:
- de Miguel-Díez J
- Villa-Asensi JR
- Alvarez-Sala JL
journal: Sleep
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/sleep/26.8.1006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Down Syndrome/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Oxygen/metabolism
- Polysomnography
- Prevalence
- Prospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Sleep Apnea Syndromes/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Sleep Apnea, Obstructive/complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in children with Down syndrome: polygraphic findings in 108 children.
**Authors:** de Miguel-Díez J, Villa-Asensi JR, Alvarez-Sala JL
**Journal:** Sleep (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/sleep/26.8.1006](https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/26.8.1006)

## Content

1. Sleep. 2003 Dec 15;26(8):1006-9. doi: 10.1093/sleep/26.8.1006.

Prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in children with Down syndrome:
polygraphic findings in 108 children.

de Miguel-Díez J(1), Villa-Asensi JR, Alvarez-Sala JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón,
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. med012585@saludalia.com

Comment in
    Sleep. 2004 Aug 1;27(5):1023-4; author reply 1025.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To assess the prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in a
nonselected group of children with Down syndrome and to determine significant
predisposing factors for this condition.
DESIGN: Prospective study.
SETTING: Tertiary care university hospital in Madrid, Spain.
PATIENTS: The study population included 108 consecutive children with Down
syndrome (mean [SD] age, 7.9 [4.5] years; range, 1-18 years) independently of
whether or not suggestive clinical features of sleep-disordered breathing were
present.
INTERVENTIONS: In addition to history, physical examination, and lateral
radiographs of the nasopharynx, all participants underwent an overnight
cardiorespiratory polygraphy at the hospital using a portable ambulatory device
(Apnoescreen II plus). An apnea-hypopnea index of at least 3 was required for
defining the presence of sleep-disordered breathing.
RESULTS: The prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing was 54.6%, with a
significantly higher prevalence in boys (64.7%) than in girls (38.5%) (P < .05).
The group with sleep-disordered breathing was significantly younger (6.4 [3.9]
years) than those with normal polysomnographic recordings (9.6 [4.6] years) (P <
.001). In the multivariate analysis, age (less than 8 years old) (odds ratio
[OR], 3.36; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.40, 8.06); male sex (OR, 3.32; 95%
CI, 1.32, 8.12); and tonsillar hyperplasia (OR, 5.24; 95% CI, 1.52, 19.03) were
significantly associated with sleep-disordered breathing. Body mass index,
adenoid hyperplasia, previous tonsillectomy or adenoidectomy, congenital heart
disease, malocclusion, and macroglossia did not affect the prevalence of
sleep-disordered breathing.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in children with Down
syndrome is very high, particularly in boys. Tonsillar hyperplasia may play a
role in the pathophysiology of sleep-disordered breathing in these patients.
Adenoid hyperplasia, obesity, and congenital heart disease were not important
risk factors for sleep-disordered breathing.

DOI: 10.1093/sleep/26.8.1006
PMID: 14746382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
