---
reference_id: "PMID:32426821"
title: "Loss of Snord116 alters cortical neuronal activity in mice: a preclinical investigation of Prader-Willi syndrome."
authors:
- Pace M
- Colombi I
- Falappa M
- Freschi A
- Bandarabadi M
- Armirotti A
- Encarnación BM
- Adamantidis AR
- Amici R
- Cerri M
- Chiappalone M
- Tucci V
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa084
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electroencephalography
- Genomic Imprinting/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- "RNA, Small Nucleolar/genetics"
- "Sleep/genetics, physiology"
- "Sleep, REM/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of Snord116 alters cortical neuronal activity in mice: a preclinical investigation of Prader-Willi syndrome.
**Authors:** Pace M, Colombi I, Falappa M, Freschi A, Bandarabadi M, Armirotti A, Encarnación BM, Adamantidis AR, Amici R, Cerri M, Chiappalone M, Tucci V
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddaa084](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddaa084)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 Jul 29;29(12):2051-2064. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa084.

Loss of Snord116 alters cortical neuronal activity in mice: a preclinical 
investigation of Prader-Willi syndrome.

Pace M(1), Colombi I(1)(2), Falappa M(1)(2), Freschi A(1), Bandarabadi M(3), 
Armirotti A(4), Encarnación BM(4), Adamantidis AR(3)(5), Amici R(6), Cerri M(6), 
Chiappalone M(7), Tucci V(1).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Epigenetics of Behaviour (GEB), Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia 
(IIT), Genova 16163, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Riabilitazione, Oftalmologia, Genetica e 
Scienze Materno-Infantili (DINOGMI), Università degli Studi di Genova, Genova 
16132, Italy.
(3)Centre for Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurology, Inselspital 
University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern 3010, Switzerland.
(4)Analytical Chemistry Facility, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), Genova 
16163, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical Research, Inselspital University Hospital, University 
of Bern, Bern 3010, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, Alma Mater 
Studiorum-University of Bologna, Bologna 40126, Italy.
(7)Rehab Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), Genova 16163, 
Italy.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that is 
characterized by metabolic alteration and sleep abnormalities mostly related to 
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep disturbances. The disease is caused by genomic 
imprinting defects that are inherited through the paternal line. Among the genes 
located in the PWS region on chromosome 15 (15q11-q13), small nucleolar RNA 116 
(Snord116) has been previously associated with intrusions of REM sleep into 
wakefulness in humans and mice. Here, we further explore sleep regulation of PWS 
by reporting a study with PWScrm+/p- mouse line, which carries a paternal 
deletion of Snord116. We focused our study on both macrostructural 
electrophysiological components of sleep, distributed among REMs and nonrapid 
eye movements. Of note, here, we study a novel electroencephalography (EEG) 
graphoelements of sleep for mouse studies, the well-known spindles. EEG 
biomarkers are often linked to the functional properties of cortical neurons and 
can be instrumental in translational studies. Thus, to better understand 
specific properties, we isolated and characterized the intrinsic activity of 
cortical neurons using in vitro microelectrode array. Our results confirm that 
the loss of Snord116 gene in mice influences specific properties of REM sleep, 
such as theta rhythms and, for the first time, the organization of REM episodes 
throughout sleep-wake cycles. Moreover, the analysis of sleep spindles present 
novel specific phenotype in PWS mice, indicating that a new catalog of sleep 
biomarkers can be informative in preclinical studies of PWS.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa084
PMID: 32426821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]