---
reference_id: "PMID:39798988"
title: Mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency.
authors:
- Decru B
- Lys M
- Truijens K
- Mercier N
- Papadopoulos J
- Rymen D
- Roland D
- Dewulf JP
- Vermeersch P
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.109007
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/genetics, deficiency"
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, genetics"
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, diagnosis"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency.
**Authors:** Decru B, Lys M, Truijens K, Mercier N, Papadopoulos J, Rymen D, Roland D, Dewulf JP, Vermeersch P
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.109007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.109007)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2025 Jan;144(1):109007. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.109007.
Epub  2024 Dec 26.

Mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency.

Decru B(1), Lys M(2), Truijens K(3), Mercier N(4), Papadopoulos J(5), Rymen
D(6), Roland D(7), Dewulf JP(8), Vermeersch P(9).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine, University Hospitals Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium; Metabolomics Expertise Center, Center for Cancer Biology,
CCB-VIB, VIB-KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine, University Hospitals Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium; Department of Pediatric, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc,
Brussels, Belgium; Department of Pediatrics, CHU Helora, La Louvière, Belgium.
(3)Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine, University Hospitals Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, CHU Helora, La Louvière, Belgium.
(5)Department of Pediatrics ICU, CHU Helora, La Louvière, Belgium.
(6)Metabolic Centre, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Centre des maladies métaboliques héréditaires, Département de génétique
humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium.
(8)Biochemical Genetics and Newborn Screening Laboratory, Department of Clinical
Chemistry, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(9)Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine, University Hospitals Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium; Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. Electronic address: pieter.vermeersch@uzleuven.be.

Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase 2 (HMGCS2) deficiency is a
rare, potentially life-threatening autosomal recessive disorder resulting from
mutations in the HMGCS2 gene, leading to impaired ketogenesis. We systematically
reviewed the clinical presentations, biochemical and genetic abnormalities in 93
reported cases and 2 new patients diagnosed based on biochemical findings.
Reported onset ages ranged from 3 months to 6 years, mostly before the age of 3.
Children younger than one year old are more prone to a severe clinical course.
In most patients, the initial metabolic decompensation occurs after an episode
of gastroenteritis or gastroenteritis-like symptoms. Other commonly observed
symptoms during the first clinical episode included poor intake, altered
consciousness, dyspnea, seizures and hepatomegaly. Severity was correlated with
the number of truncating mutations. Most patients presented with acute metabolic
decompensation with hypoglycemia, dicarboxyluria and inadequate ketonuria.
Dicarboxylic acid levels were elevated in 54/56 cases. The organic acid
4-hydroxy-6-methyl-2-pyrone (4HMP) was detected in 33/35 urine samples taken
during the acute episodes, but typically only retrospectively. The plasma C2/C0
acylcarnitine ratio was abnormal in 16/18 (88.9 %) of acute plasma samples, but
only in 2/6 (33 %) of DBS samples. Other metabolites that have been reported are
hydroxyhexenoic acid, 3,5-dihydroxyhexanoic (1,5 lactone), glutaric acidand
3-OH-isovaleric acid. Laboratories should look for 4HMP in urinary organic acid
analysis and an increased plasma C2/C0 acylcarnitine ratio to facilitate the
diagnosis of HMGCS2 deficiency, especially in cases of metabolic decompensation
with dicarboxyluria without adequate ketonuria.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.109007
PMID: 39798988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.
