---
reference_id: "PMID:15571233"
title: "Thymidine phosphorylase deficiency causes MNGIE: an autosomal recessive mitochondrial disorder."
authors:
- Hirano M
- Martí R
- Spinazzola A
- Nishino I
- Nishigaki Y
journal: Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1081/NCN-200027485
keywords:
- "Blotting, Southern"
- Brain Diseases/genetics
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Linkage
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/enzymology, genetics"
- "Models, Biological"
- Muscular Diseases/genetics
- Mutation
- Point Mutation
- Spectrophotometry
- Thymidine/metabolism
- "Thymidine Phosphorylase/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thymidine phosphorylase deficiency causes MNGIE: an autosomal recessive mitochondrial disorder.
**Authors:** Hirano M, Martí R, Spinazzola A, Nishino I, Nishigaki Y
**Journal:** Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1081/NCN-200027485](https://doi.org/10.1081/NCN-200027485)

## Content

1. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2004 Oct;23(8-9):1217-25. doi: 
10.1081/NCN-200027485.

Thymidine phosphorylase deficiency causes MNGIE: an autosomal recessive 
mitochondrial disorder.

Hirano M(1), Martí R, Spinazzola A, Nishino I, Nishigaki Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) is an autosomal 
recessive disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding thymidine 
phosphorylase (TP). The disease is characterized clinically by impaired eye 
movements, gastrointestinal dysmotility, cachexia, peripheral neuropathy, 
myopathy, and leukoencephalopathy. Molecular genetic studies of MNGIE patients' 
tissues have revealed multiple deletions, depletion, and site-specific point 
mutations of mitochondrial DNA. TP is a cytosolic enzyme required for nucleoside 
homeostasis. In MNGIE, TP activity is severely reduced and consequently levels 
of thymidine and deoxyuridine in plasma are dramatically elevated. We have 
hypothesized that the increased levels of intracellular thymidine and 
deoxyuridine cause imbalances of mitochondrial nucleotide pools that, in turn, 
lead to the mtDNA abnormalities. MNGIE was the first molecularly characterized 
genetic disorder caused by abnormal mitochondrial nucleoside/nucleotide 
metabolism. Future studies are likely to reveal further insight into this 
expanding group of diseases.

DOI: 10.1081/NCN-200027485
PMID: 15571233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]