---
reference_id: "PMID:7581322"
title: Identification and partial purification of a stage-specific 33 kDa mitochondrial protein as the alternative oxidase of the Trypanosoma brucei brucei bloodstream trypomastigotes.
authors:
- Chaudhuri M
- Ajayi W
- Temple S
- Hill GC
journal: J Eukaryot Microbiol
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1111/j.1550-7408.1995.tb05892.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and partial purification of a stage-specific 33 kDa mitochondrial protein as the alternative oxidase of the Trypanosoma brucei brucei bloodstream trypomastigotes.
**Authors:** Chaudhuri M, Ajayi W, Temple S, Hill GC
**Journal:** J Eukaryot Microbiol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1550-7408.1995.tb05892.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1550-7408.1995.tb05892.x)

## Content

1. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 1995 Sep-Oct;42(5):467-72. doi: 
10.1111/j.1550-7408.1995.tb05892.x.

Identification and partial purification of a stage-specific 33 kDa mitochondrial 
protein as the alternative oxidase of the Trypanosoma brucei brucei bloodstream 
trypomastigotes.

Chaudhuri M(1), Ajayi W, Temple S, Hill GC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, 
Tennessee 37208, USA.

The glycerophosphate oxidase (GPO), the unique terminal oxidase of bloodstream 
trypanosome (TAO), appears to be functionally similar to the alternative 
oxidases of some plants and higher fungi. Immunoblotting of mitochondrial 
proteins of bloodstream trypomastigotes of Trypanosoma brucei with monoclonal or 
polyclonal antibodies to Sauromatum guttatum (voodoo lily) and Symplocarpus 
foetidus (skunk cabbage) alternative oxidases respectively revealed two proteins 
of about 33 kDa (p33) and 68 kDa (p68). These proteins are not present in 
procyclic trypomastigotes. Electrophoresis under rigorous denaturing conditions 
indicated p68 to be the dimer of p33. Indirect immunofluorescent studies of 
bloodstream and procyclic trypomastigotes with monoclonal antibody to plant 
alternative oxidase also showed the localization of 33 kDa protein in the 
mitochondria of the bloodstream trypomastigotes. The functional TAO activity 
could be solubilized efficiently from the mitochondrial membrane of the 
bloodstream trypomastigotes by 1% NP-40 or 10 mM lauryl maltoside. When 
fractionated by Superose 12 gel filtration chromatography, p33 was co-purified 
with the TAO enzymatic activity. The apparent molecular size of the active 
enzyme complex was found to be 160 kDa. Gradual disappearance of the 33 kDa 
protein and the TAO enzymatic activity were well correlated during in vitro 
differentiation of the bloodstream to procyclic trypomastigotes. This study 
implies that the net biosynthesis of p33, an essential subunit of TAO, is 
decreased during differentiation from bloodstream to procyclic trypomastigotes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1550-7408.1995.tb05892.x
PMID: 7581322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]