---
reference_id: "PMID:19233695"
title: "The global prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Nkhoma ET
- Poole C
- Vannappagari V
- Hall SA
- Beutler E
journal: Blood Cells Mol Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.12.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The global prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Nkhoma ET, Poole C, Vannappagari V, Hall SA, Beutler E
**Journal:** Blood Cells Mol Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.12.005)

## Content

1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2009 May-Jun;42(3):267-78. doi:
10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.12.005.  Epub 2009 Feb 23.

The global prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Nkhoma ET(1), Poole C, Vannappagari V, Hall SA, Beutler E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
CB#7435, 2106 McGavran-Greenberg Hall, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7435, USA.

Glucose-6-phosphate deficiency is the most prevalent enzyme deficiency, with an 
estimated 400 million people affected worldwide. This inherited deficiency 
causes neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and chronic hemolytic anemia. Although most 
affected individuals are asymptomatic, exposure to oxidative stressors such as 
certain drugs or infection, can elicit acute hemolysis. To characterize the 
global prevalence of G6PD deficiency, we conducted a systematic review of the 
G6PD deficiency literature, drawing studies from various databases, including 
MEDLINE/Pubmed and Biosis. Selected studies included cross-sectional and 
longitudinal studies published between 1960 and 2008. Additionally, 
meta-analytic procedures were employed to assess the degree of heterogeneity 
amongst prevalence estimates and, where appropriate, pool them. The searches 
yielded a total of 280 prevalence estimates, corresponding to 88 countries. The 
highest prevalence rates were reported among Sub-Saharan African countries, even 
after adjusting for assessment method. Meta-analysis revealed a high degree of 
heterogeneity for regional and global prevalence estimates. This heterogeneity 
in reported estimates appeared to be due to differences in G6PD deficiency 
assessment and diagnostic procedures. The magnitude and variation in global, 
regional, and country-level prevalence rates of G6PD deficiency are of public 
health import, particularly in planning programs to improve neonatal health and 
in the distribution of various medications, especially antimalarial drugs, as 
G6PD deficiency is most prevalent in malaria-endemic areas.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.12.005
PMID: 19233695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]