---
reference_id: "PMID:39310593"
title: Cardiohistological Findings in Refeeding Syndrome.
authors:
- Miyoshi T
- Higashi H
- Amemiya K
- Ikeda Y
- Yamaguchi O
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.67430
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiohistological Findings in Refeeding Syndrome.
**Authors:** Miyoshi T, Higashi H, Amemiya K, Ikeda Y, Yamaguchi O
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.67430](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.67430)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Aug 21;16(8):e67430. doi: 10.7759/cureus.67430. eCollection 2024 
Aug.

Cardiohistological Findings in Refeeding Syndrome.

Miyoshi T(1), Higashi H(1), Amemiya K(2), Ikeda Y(2), Yamaguchi O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Pulmonology, Hypertension and Nephrology, Ehime 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Toon, JPN.
(2)Department of Pathology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, 
JPN.

Severe eating disorders may develop refeeding syndrome, which sometimes 
resembles severe cardiac dysfunction. A woman in her thirties was admitted to 
our hospital because of cardiogenic shock. Transthoracic echocardiography showed 
reduced left ventricular systolic function. In her medical history, she had been 
diagnosed with refeeding syndrome. A ventricular endocardial biopsy was 
performed to exclude other cardiac diseases. A histological examination showed 
conspicuously atrophied cardiomyocytes with nuclear swelling and irregularities; 
the myocardial sequence was disturbed with fibrosis. Immunostaining revealed 
that lipid droplet markers, adipose triglyceride lipase, and perilipin 2 were 
poorly observed in the cardiomyocytes, while expression of both proteins was 
attenuated in fibroblasts within the myocardial layer. The abnormal metabolism 
of fatty acids was the presumed cause of cardiac dysfunction.

Copyright © 2024, Miyoshi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.67430
PMCID: PMC11415296
PMID: 39310593

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.