---
reference_id: "PMID:38368032"
title: "Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: A Brief Overview."
authors:
- Braunwald E
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.10.075
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: A Brief Overview.
**Authors:** Braunwald E
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.10.075](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.10.075)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 2024 Feb 1;212S:S1-S3. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.10.075. Epub 
2024 Jan 29.

Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: A Brief Overview.

Braunwald E(1).

Author information:
(1)TIMI Study Group, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. 
Electronic address: ebraunwald@mgb.org.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a complex, heterogeneous disorder that 
affects approximately 1 in every 500 persons worldwide and about 750,000 
Americans. It is characterized by left ventricular hypertrophy that is usually 
asymmetric, with enlarged myocytes in disarray, unexplained by loading 
conditions. Obstruction to left ventricular outflow occurs in approximately 60% 
of patients. The natural history and cardiac morphology of HCM are quite 
heterogeneous. Although most patients with HCM are asymptomatic or mildly 
symptomatic, a minority are disabled by dyspnea, angina, or syncope, develop 
advanced heart failure, or die suddenly.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2023.10.075
PMID: 38368032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The author has 
no competing interests to declare.