---
reference_id: "PMID:12677556"
title: Genetic interaction of BBS1 mutations with alleles at other BBS loci can result in non-Mendelian Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Beales PL
- Badano JL
- Ross AJ
- Ansley SJ
- Hoskins BE
- Kirsten B
- Mein CA
- Froguel P
- Scambler PJ
- Lewis RA
- Lupski JR
- Katsanis N
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1086/375178
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic interaction of BBS1 mutations with alleles at other BBS loci can result in non-Mendelian Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Beales PL, Badano JL, Ross AJ, Ansley SJ, Hoskins BE, Kirsten B, Mein CA, Froguel P, Scambler PJ, Lewis RA, Lupski JR, Katsanis N
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1086/375178](https://doi.org/10.1086/375178)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 May;72(5):1187-99. doi: 10.1086/375178. Epub 2003 Apr 3.

Genetic interaction of BBS1 mutations with alleles at other BBS loci can result 
in non-Mendelian Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Beales PL(1), Badano JL, Ross AJ, Ansley SJ, Hoskins BE, Kirsten B, Mein CA, 
Froguel P, Scambler PJ, Lewis RA, Lupski JR, Katsanis N.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, United Kingdom.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous disorder 
caused by mutations in at least seven loci (BBS1-7), five of which are cloned 
(BBS1, BBS2, BBS4, BBS6, and BBS7). Genetic and mutational analyses have 
indicated that, in some families, a combination of three mutant alleles at two 
loci (triallelic inheritance) is necessary for pathogenesis. To date, four of 
the five known BBS loci have been implicated in this mode of oligogenic disease 
transmission. We present a comprehensive analysis of the spectrum, distribution, 
and involvement in non-Mendelian trait transmission of mutant alleles in BBS1, 
the most common BBS locus. Analyses of 259 independent families segregating a 
BBS phenotype indicate that BBS1 participates in complex inheritance and that, 
in different families, mutations in BBS1 can interact genetically with mutations 
at each of the other known BBS genes, as well as at unknown loci, to cause the 
phenotype. Consistent with this model, we identified homozygous M390R alleles, 
the most frequent BBS1 mutation, in asymptomatic individuals in two families. 
Moreover, our statistical analyses indicate that the prevalence of the M390R 
allele in the general population is consistent with an oligogenic rather than a 
recessive model of disease transmission. The distribution of BBS oligogenic 
alleles also indicates that all BBS loci might interact genetically with each 
other, but some genes, especially BBS2 and BBS6, are more likely to participate 
in triallelic inheritance, suggesting a variable ability of the BBS proteins to 
interact genetically with each other.

DOI: 10.1086/375178
PMCID: PMC1180271
PMID: 12677556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]