---
reference_id: "PMID:25805746"
title: "Classification, epidemiology and clinical subgrouping of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis."
authors:
- Watts RA
- Mahr A
- Mohammad AJ
- Gatenby P
- Basu N
- Flores-Suárez LF
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfv022
keywords:
- "Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody-Associated Vasculitis/classification, epidemiology, pathology"
- Europe/epidemiology
- Humans
- Incidence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classification, epidemiology and clinical subgrouping of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis.
**Authors:** Watts RA, Mahr A, Mohammad AJ, Gatenby P, Basu N, Flores-Suárez LF
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfv022](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfv022)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2015 Apr;30 Suppl 1:i14-22. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfv022.

Classification, epidemiology and clinical subgrouping of antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis.

Watts RA(1), Mahr A(2), Mohammad AJ(3), Gatenby P(4), Basu N(5), Flores-Suárez 
LF(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Ipswich Hospital and Norwich Medical School, 
University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Saint-Louis, University Paris 7, 
Paris, France.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, Rheumatology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden 
Vasculitis and Lupus Clinic, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Immunology, The Canberra Hospital and Medical School Australian 
National University, Canberra, Australia.
(5)Musculoskeletal Collaboration (Epidemiology Group), University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, UK.
(6)Primary Systemic Vasculitides Clinic, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades 
Respiratorias, Mexico City, Mexico.

It is now 25 years since the first European studies on vasculitis--the 
anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) standardization project. Over that 
period of time, there have been major developments in the classification of the 
vasculitides, which has permitted the conduct of high-quality epidemiology 
studies. Studying the epidemiology of rare diseases such as the ANCA-associated 
vasculitides (AAV) poses considerable challenges to epidemiologists. The first 
is the need for a clear definition of a case with good differentiation from 
similar disorders. The second is case capture. The vasculitides are rare, and 
therefore, a large population is required to determine the incidence and 
prevalence, and this poses questions of feasibility. A large population 
increases the risk of incomplete case detection but permits a reasonable number 
of cases to be collected in a practicable time frame, whereas a smaller 
population requires a much longer time frame to collect the necessary cases, 
which may also not be feasible. Statistical methods of capture-recapture 
analysis enable estimates to be made of the number of missing cases. The third 
is case ascertainment. The AAV are virtually always managed in secondary care, 
and therefore, hospital-based case ascertainment may be appropriate. Fourthly, 
the rarity of the conditions makes prospective case-control studies 
investigating risk factors difficult to conduct because the population size 
required to achieve statistical confidence is in excess of that which is readily 
available. Thus, much of the data on risk factors are derived from retrospective 
studies with inherent potential bias.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfv022
PMID: 25805746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]