---
reference_id: "PMID:30124157"
title: Hydrops Fetalis and THE Parvovirus B-19.
authors:
- Kontomanolis EN
- Fasoulakis Z
journal: Curr Pediatr Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2174/1573396314666180820154340
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hydrops Fetalis and THE Parvovirus B-19.
**Authors:** Kontomanolis EN, Fasoulakis Z
**Journal:** Curr Pediatr Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573396314666180820154340](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573396314666180820154340)

## Content

1. Curr Pediatr Rev. 2018;14(4):239-252. doi: 10.2174/1573396314666180820154340.

Hydrops Fetalis and THE Parvovirus B-19.

Kontomanolis EN(1), Fasoulakis Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Democritus University of Medicine in 
Thrace, Konotin, Greece.

DEFINITION: Hydrops Fetalis (HF) or fetal hydrops is identified as an abnormal 
interstitial collection of fluid in at least 2 or more compartments of the fetal 
torso (peritoneal cavity, pleura, and pericardium). An alternative definition 
discusses about liquor accumulation in two fetal anatomical areas or an effusion 
in one site and anasarca.
BACKGROUND: Parvovirus B-19 is a common childhood illness; the virus can cause 
fetal anemia, non-immune fetal hydrops, and spontaneous abortion and might lead 
to fetal demise. HF is the pathological distribution of body fluids between the 
interstitial and the intravascular areas of the fetus. Normally, in the fetal 
organism there is a continuous circular movement of the lymph from the 
interstitial space into the vascular system and vice versa. The detection of a 
solely effusion represents the initial stage of a systemic disorder that will 
lead to a fully developed hydrops or remain just a local disorder.
OBJECTIVE: The connection between parvovirus B-19 and fetal hydrops.
CONCLUSION: The view is unbeatable, severely swollen babies; immune hydrops is 
surfaced because of the maternal antibodies targeted against red blood cells 
with Rh positive antibody of the fetus, while the non-immune is due to a variety 
of pathological conditions in pregnancy.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573396314666180820154340
PMID: 30124157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]