---
reference_id: "PMID:11471165"
title: Clinical manifestations in a cohort of 41 Rothmund-Thomson syndrome patients.
authors:
- Wang LL
- Levy ML
- Lewis RA
- Chintagumpala MM
- Lev D
- Rogers M
- Plon SE
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '2001'
doi: "10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<11::aid-ajmg1413>3.0.co;2-a"
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 8/genetics"
- Cohort Studies
- Cytogenetic Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Karyotyping
- Male
- "Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- Trisomy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical manifestations in a cohort of 41 Rothmund-Thomson syndrome patients.
**Authors:** Wang LL, Levy ML, Lewis RA, Chintagumpala MM, Lev D, Rogers M, Plon SE
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<11::aid-ajmg1413>3.0.co;2-a](https://doi.org/10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<11::aid-ajmg1413>3.0.co;2-a)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Jul 22;102(1):11-7. doi: 
10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<11::aid-ajmg1413>3.0.co;2-a.

Clinical manifestations in a cohort of 41 Rothmund-Thomson syndrome patients.

Wang LL(1), Levy ML, Lewis RA, Chintagumpala MM, Lev D, Rogers M, Plon SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS) is a rare autosomal recessive genodermatosis 
characterized by a poikilodermatous rash starting in infancy, small stature, 
skeletal abnormalities, juvenile cataracts, and predisposition to specific 
cancers. We have identified a contemporary cohort of 41 patients to better 
define the clinical profile, diagnostic criteria, and management of patients 
with RTS. Patients with the diagnosis of RTS were ascertained by referrals from 
dermatology, ophthalmology, genetics, and oncology or from direct contact with 
the patient's family. Medical information was obtained from interviews with 
physicians, patients, and their parents and a review of medical records. The age 
range at ascertainment was 9 months to 42 years (28 males and 13 females; M:F, 
2:1). All subjects displayed a characteristic rash. Thirteen subjects had 
osteosarcoma (OS) (32%), eight had radial defects (20%), seven had 
gastrointestinal findings (17%), two had cataracts (6%), and one had skin cancer 
(2%). Twenty-two of 28 patients without OS were less than 15 years old and thus 
remain at significant risk for this tumor. This case-series study reveals a 
clinical profile of RTS that includes a higher prevalence of OS and fewer 
cataracts, compared with historical reports. These differences may reflect 
either allelic or genetic heterogeneity. This study documents the frequency of 
clinical anomalies in a contemporary cohort of RTS patients and revises 
guidelines for diagnosis and management of RTS.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1096-8628(20010722)102:1<11::aid-ajmg1413>3.0.co;2-a
PMID: 11471165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]