---
reference_id: "PMID:11560750"
title: Parvovirus B19 infection in pediatric solid-organ and bone marrow transplantation.
authors:
- Broliden K
journal: Pediatr Transplant
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1034/j.1399-3046.2001.00035.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parvovirus B19 infection in pediatric solid-organ and bone marrow transplantation.
**Authors:** Broliden K
**Journal:** Pediatr Transplant (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1034/j.1399-3046.2001.00035.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-3046.2001.00035.x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Transplant. 2001 Oct;5(5):320-30. doi:
10.1034/j.1399-3046.2001.00035.x.

Parvovirus B19 infection in pediatric solid-organ and bone marrow 
transplantation.

Broliden K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Virology, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University 
Hospital, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden. kristina.broliden@viruslab.hs.sll.se

The clinical significance of parvovirus B19 infection in pediatric solid-organ 
and bone marrow transplanted patients is unclear. The overall prevalence of 
parvovirus B19 infection in these patients is about 1-2% during the first year 
after transplantation. The most common symptom is anemia, but leukopenia and 
thrombocytopenia have also been observed. Rare cases of hepatic dysfunction, 
myocarditis, vasculitis and respiratory failure have also been reported. Whereas 
serology is of limited value around the time of transplantation, it is 
recommended that a search for B19 DNA is included in first-line investigations 
in any transplanted patient with unexplained anemia. Specific antiviral therapy 
is not available, however, intravenous immunoglobulin produces rapid improvement 
in most cases. Although relatively rare, the severe complications following 
parvovirus B19 infection in the transplant setting can be avoided by early 
diagnosis and treatment.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-3046.2001.00035.x
PMID: 11560750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]