---
reference_id: "PMID:35986704"
title: Germline intergenic duplications at Xq26.1 underlie Bazex-Dupré-Christol basal cell carcinoma susceptibility syndrome.
authors:
- Liu Y
- Banka S
- Huang Y
- Hardman-Smart J
- Pye D
- Torrelo A
- Beaman GM
- Kazanietz MG
- Baker MJ
- Ferrazzano C
- Shi C
- Orozco G
- Eyre S
- van Geel M
- Bygum A
- Fischer J
- Miedzybrodzka Z
- Abuzahra F
- Rübben A
- Cuvertino S
- Ellingford JM
- Smith MJ
- Evans DG
- Weppner-Parren LJMT
- van Steensel MAM
- Chaudhary IH
- Mangham DC
- Lear JT
- Paus R
- Frank J
- Newman WG
- Zhang X
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.21842
keywords:
- Humans
- Basal Cell Carcinoma/pathology
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- DNA Copy Number Variations/genetics
- Germ Cells/pathology
- "Hypotrichosis/genetics, pathology"
- Microfilament Proteins
- Skin Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Germline intergenic duplications at Xq26.1 underlie Bazex-Dupré-Christol basal cell carcinoma susceptibility syndrome.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Banka S, Huang Y, Hardman-Smart J, Pye D, Torrelo A, Beaman GM, Kazanietz MG, Baker MJ, Ferrazzano C, Shi C, Orozco G, Eyre S, van Geel M, Bygum A, Fischer J, Miedzybrodzka Z, Abuzahra F, Rübben A, Cuvertino S, Ellingford JM, Smith MJ, Evans DG, Weppner-Parren LJMT, van Steensel MAM, Chaudhary IH, Mangham DC, Lear JT, Paus R, Frank J, Newman WG, Zhang X
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.21842](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.21842)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2022 Dec;187(6):948-961. doi: 10.1111/bjd.21842. Epub 2022 Sep
12.

Germline intergenic duplications at Xq26.1 underlie Bazex-Dupré-Christol basal
cell carcinoma susceptibility syndrome.

Liu Y(1), Banka S(2)(3), Huang Y(1), Hardman-Smart J(4)(5), Pye D(4), Torrelo
A(6), Beaman GM(2)(3), Kazanietz MG(7), Baker MJ(7), Ferrazzano C(8), Shi C(8),
Orozco G(8), Eyre S(8), van Geel M(9)(10), Bygum A(11)(12), Fischer J(13),
Miedzybrodzka Z(14)(15), Abuzahra F(16), Rübben A(17), Cuvertino S(2),
Ellingford JM(2)(3), Smith MJ(2)(3), Evans DG(2)(3), Weppner-Parren LJMT(18),
van Steensel MAM(19)(20), Chaudhary IH(21), Mangham DC(22), Lear JT(4)(23), Paus
R(4)(24)(25), Frank J(26), Newman WG(2)(3), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Zhang Center for Genetic Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, 100005, China.
(2)Division of Evolution, Infection and Genomics, Faculty of Biology, Medicine
and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK.
(3)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS Foundation
Trust, Manchester, M13 9WL, UK.
(4)The Centre for Dermatology Research, University of Manchester, MAHSC, and
National Institutes of Health Biomedical Research Center, Manchester, M13 9PL,
UK.
(5)St John's Institute of Dermatology, Kings College London, London, WC2R 2LS,
UK.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, 28009,
Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(8)Centre for Genetics and Genomics Versus Arthritis Division of Musculoskeletal
and Dermatological Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology,
Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK.
(9)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Maastricht, 6229, Maastricht,
the Netherlands.
(10)GROW School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University
Medical Center+, 6229, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, 5230, Odense,
Denmark.
(12)Hospital Clinical Institute, University of Southern Denmark, 5230, Odense,
Denmark.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, 79106,
Freiburg, Germany.
(14)School of Medicine, Medical Sciences, Nutrition and Dentistry, University of
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.
(15)Medical Genetics Department, NHS Grampian, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD,
UK.
(16)Department of Dermatology, Zaandam Medical Center, 1502, Zaandam, the
Netherlands.
(17)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University Hospital of RWTH
Aachen, 52062, Aachen, Germany.
(18)Department of Dermatology, Jeroen Bosch Hospital, 5223, 's-Hertogenbosch,
the Netherlands.
(19)Skin Research Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research (A*STAR), Singapore, 138543, Singapore.
(20)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University (NTU),
Singapore, 636921, Singapore.
(21)Department of Pathology, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool, L7
8XP, UK.
(22)Adult Histopathology, Laboratory Medicine, Manchester University NHS
Foundation Trust, Health Innovation Manchester, Manchester, M13 9WL, UK.
(23)Department of Dermatology, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester,
M6 8AD, UK.
(24)Dr Phillip Frost Department of Dermatology & Cutaneous Surgery, University
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, 33125, USA.
(25)Monasterium Laboratory, Nano-Bioanalytik Zentrum, D-48149, Münster, Germany.
(26)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University Medical
Center Göttingen, 37075, Göttingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2023 Jan 23;188(1):e2-e3. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljac030.

BACKGROUND: Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome (BDCS; MIM301845) is a rare X-linked
dominant genodermatosis characterized by follicular atrophoderma, congenital
hypotrichosis and multiple basal cell carcinomas (BCCs). Previous studies have
linked BDCS to an 11·4-Mb interval on chromosome Xq25-q27.1. However, the
genetic mechanism of BDCS remains an open question.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the genetic aetiology and molecular mechanisms
underlying BDCS.
METHODS: We ascertained multiple individuals from eight unrelated families
affected with BDCS (F1-F8). Whole-exome (F1 and F2) and genome sequencing (F3)
were performed to identify putative disease-causing variants within the linkage
region. Array comparative genomic hybridization and quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) were used to explore copy number variations, followed by
long-range gap PCR and Sanger sequencing to amplify the duplication junctions
and to define the head-tail junctions. Hi-C was performed on dermal fibroblasts
from two affected individuals with BDCS and one control. Public datasets and
tools were used to identify regulatory elements and transcription factor binding
sites within the minimal duplicated region. Immunofluorescence was performed in
hair follicles, BCCs and trichoepitheliomas from patients with BDCS and sporadic
BCCs. The ACTRT1 variant c.547dup (p.Met183Asnfs*17), previously proposed to
cause BDCS, was evaluated with t allele frequency calculator.
RESULTS: In eight families with BDCS, we identified overlapping 18-135-kb
duplications (six inherited and two de novo) at Xq26.1, flanked by ARHGAP36 and
IGSF1. Hi-C showed that the duplications did not affect the topologically
associated domain, but may alter the interactions between flanking genes and
putative enhancers located in the minimal duplicated region. We detected
ARHGAP36 expression near the control hair follicular stem cell compartment, and
found increased ARHGAP36 levels in hair follicles in telogen, in BCCs and in
trichoepitheliomas from patients with BDCS. ARHGAP36 was also detected in
sporadic BCCs from individuals without BDCS. Our modelling showed the predicted
maximum tolerated minor allele frequency of ACTRT1 variants in control
populations to be orders of magnitude higher than expected for a high-penetrant
ultra-rare disorder, suggesting loss of function of ACTRT1 variants to be an
unlikely cause for BDCS.
CONCLUSIONS: Noncoding Xq26.1 duplications cause BDCS. The BDCS duplications
most likely lead to dysregulation of ARHGAP36. ARHGAP36 is a potential
therapeutic target for both inherited and sporadic BCCs. What is already known
about this topic? Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome (BDCS) is a rare X-linked basal
cell carcinoma susceptibility syndrome linked to an 11·4-Mb interval on
chromosome Xq25-q27.1. Loss-of-function variants in ACTRT1 and its regulatory
elements were suggested to cause BDCS. What does this study add? BDCS is caused
by small tandem noncoding intergenic duplications at chromosome Xq26.1. The
Xq26.1 BDCS duplications likely dysregulate ARHGAP36, the flanking centromeric
gene. ACTRT1 loss-of-function variants are unlikely to cause BDCS. What is the
translational message? This study provides the basis for accurate genetic
testing for BDCS, which will aid precise diagnosis and appropriate surveillance
and clinical management. ARHGAP36 may be a novel therapeutic target for all
forms of sporadic basal cell carcinomas.

© 2022 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.21842
PMID: 35986704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
