---
reference_id: "PMID:26585748"
title: The Potential Impact of Vaccination on the Dynamics of Dengue Infections.
authors:
- Knipl D
- Moghadas SM
journal: Bull Math Biol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s11538-015-0120-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Potential Impact of Vaccination on the Dynamics of Dengue Infections.
**Authors:** Knipl D, Moghadas SM
**Journal:** Bull Math Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11538-015-0120-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11538-015-0120-6)

## Content

1. Bull Math Biol. 2015 Dec;77(12):2212-30. doi: 10.1007/s11538-015-0120-6. Epub 
2015 Nov 19.

The Potential Impact of Vaccination on the Dynamics of Dengue Infections.

Knipl D(1)(2), Moghadas SM(3).

Author information:
(1)Agent-Based Modelling Laboratory, York University, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, 
ON, M3J 1P3, Canada. knipl@yorku.ca.
(2)MTA-SZTE Analysis and Stochastic Research Group, University of Szeged, Aradi 
vértanúk tere 1, Szeged, 6720, Hungary. knipl@yorku.ca.
(3)Agent-Based Modelling Laboratory, York University, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, 
ON, M3J 1P3, Canada. moghadas@yorku.ca.

Dengue, classified as a 'neglected topical disease', is currently regarded 
globally as the most important mosquito-borne viral disease, which inflicts 
substantial socioeconomic and health burden in many tropical and subtropical 
regions of the world. While efforts continue towards developing and improving 
the efficacy of a tetravalent vaccine to protect individuals against all dengue 
virus serotypes, the long-term epidemiological impact of vaccination remains 
elusive. We develop a serotype-specific, vector-host compartmental model to 
evaluate the effect of vaccination in the presence of antibody-dependent 
enhancement and cross-protection following recovery from primary infection. 
Reproducing the reported multi-annual patterns of dengue infection, our model 
projects that vaccination can dramatically reduce the overall incidence of the 
disease. However, if the duration of vaccine-induced protection is shorter than 
the average lifetime of the human population, vaccination can potentially 
increase the incidence of severe infection of dengue haemorrhagic fever due to 
the effects of antibody-dependent enhancement. The magnitude and timelines for 
this increase depend strongly on the efficacy and duration of the 
vaccine-induced protection. Corresponding to the current estimates of vaccine 
efficacy, we show that dengue eradication is infeasible using an imperfect 
vaccine. Furthermore, for a vaccine that induces lifetime protection, a nearly 
full coverage of infant vaccination is required for dengue elimination. Our 
findings suggest that other vector control measures may still play a significant 
role in dengue prevention even when a vaccine with high protection efficacy 
becomes available.

DOI: 10.1007/s11538-015-0120-6
PMID: 26585748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]