---
reference_id: "PMID:11841538"
title: Compound heterozygosity for non-sense and mis-sense mutations in desmoplakin underlies skin fragility/woolly hair syndrome.
authors:
- Whittock NV
- Wan H
- Morley SM
- Garzon MC
- Kristal L
- Hyde P
- McLean WH
- Pulkkinen L
- Uitto J
- Christiano AM
- Eady RA
- McGrath JA
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01664.x
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence/genetics
- Base Sequence/genetics
- "Codon, Nonsense/physiology"
- Congenital Abnormalities/genetics
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Desmoplakins
- Hair/abnormalities
- Haplotypes
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Keratinocytes/physiology, ultrastructure"
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- "Mutation, Missense/physiology"
- Pedigree
- "Skin/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Skin Diseases/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Tissue Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compound heterozygosity for non-sense and mis-sense mutations in desmoplakin underlies skin fragility/woolly hair syndrome.
**Authors:** Whittock NV, Wan H, Morley SM, Garzon MC, Kristal L, Hyde P, McLean WH, Pulkkinen L, Uitto J, Christiano AM, Eady RA, McGrath JA
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01664.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01664.x)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2002 Feb;118(2):232-8. doi:
10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01664.x.

Compound heterozygosity for non-sense and mis-sense mutations in desmoplakin 
underlies skin fragility/woolly hair syndrome.

Whittock NV(1), Wan H, Morley SM, Garzon MC, Kristal L, Hyde P, McLean WH, 
Pulkkinen L, Uitto J, Christiano AM, Eady RA, McGrath JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, St John's Institute of 
Dermatology, The Guy's, King's College, and St Thomas' Hospitals' Medical 
School, London, UK. nwhittoc@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

The constitutive desmosomal plaque protein desmoplakin plays a vital part in 
keratinocyte adhesion in linking the transmembranous desmosomal cadherins to the 
cytoplasmic keratin filament network. Recently, mutations in desmoplakin have 
been shown to underlie some cases of the autosomal dominant disorder, striate 
palmoplantar keratoderma, as well as an autosomal recessive condition 
characterized by dilated cardiomyopathy, woolly hair, and keratoderma. Here, we 
describe two unrelated individuals with a new autosomal recessive genodermatosis 
characterized by focal and diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma, hyperkeratotic 
plaques on the trunk and limbs, varying degrees of alopecia, but no apparent 
cardiac anomalies. Mutation screening of desmoplakin demonstrated compound 
heterozygosity for a non-sense/mis-sense combination of mutations in both cases, 
C809X/N287K and Q664X/R2366C, respectively. Heterozygous carriers of any of 
these mutations displayed no phenotypic abnormalities. Immunohistochemistry of 
skin biopsies from both affected individuals revealed that desmoplakin was not 
just located at the cell periphery but there was also cytoplasmic staining. In 
addition, electron microscopy demonstrated acantholysis throughout all layers of 
the skin, focal detachment of desmosomes into the intercellular spaces, and 
perinuclear condensation of the suprabasal keratin intermediate filament 
network. Clinicopathologic and mutational analyses therefore demonstrate that 
desmoplakin haploinsufficiency can be tolerated in some cases, but that in 
combination with a mis-sense mutation on the other allele, the consequences are 
a severe genodermatosis with specific clinical manifestations.

DOI: 10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01664.x
PMID: 11841538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]