---
reference_id: "PMID:39644051"
title: "Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome: diagnosis, management, and discontinuation of therapy."
authors:
- Java A
journal: Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1182/hematology.2024000543
keywords:
- Humans
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy, genetics"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Complement System Proteins
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome: diagnosis, management, and discontinuation of therapy.
**Authors:** Java A
**Journal:** Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1182/hematology.2024000543](https://doi.org/10.1182/hematology.2024000543)

## Content

1. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2024 Dec 6;2024(1):200-205. doi:
10.1182/hematology.2024000543.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome: diagnosis, management, and discontinuation
of therapy.

Java A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a thrombotic microangiopathy
typically characterized by anemia, thrombocytopenia, and end-organ injury. aHUS
occurs due to endothelial injury resulting from overactivation of the
alternative pathway of the complement system. The etiology of the dysregulated
complement system is either a genetic mutation in 1 or more complement proteins
or an acquired deficiency due to autoantibodies. Over the past decade,
advancements in our understanding of the role of complement in the
pathophysiology of aHUS as well as the availability of anticomplement drugs has
been a game-changer for our patients. These drugs have revolutionized the
clinical course, outcome, and prognosis of this disease. Therefore, all patients
in whom aHUS is suspected should undergo testing for complement genetic variants
and autoantibodies. In approximately 30% to 40% of patients, a genetic variant
of uncertain significance (VUS) may be identified. Such patients should undergo
further testing to define the significance of the VUS. A combination of
antigenic, functional, and biomarker analyses can assist in establishing the
significance of the variants and thereby define the etiology in most patients.
These analyses will also help to determine the duration of treatment based on
the individual's genetic alteration. This review aims to shed light on the
diagnosis and management of aHUS and discusses how to stratify patients to
determine who can safely discontinue anticomplement therapy.

Copyright © 2024 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/hematology.2024000543
PMCID: PMC11665500
PMID: 39644051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Anuja Java reports serving on the scientific
advisory boards of Alexion, AstraZeneca Rare Disease, and Novartis International
AG and as a consultant for Dianthus Therapeutics and Aurinia Pharmaceuticals.
She is a principal investigator for Apellis Pharmaceuticals and Novartis
International AG and receives royalty from UpToDate.
