---
reference_id: "PMID:33623987"
title: "Epidemiology of cardiomyopathies: essential context knowledge for a tailored clinical work-up."
authors:
- Pasqualucci D
- Iacovoni A
- Palmieri V
- De Maria R
- Iacoviello M
- Battistoni I
- Macera F
- Olivotto I
- Arbustini E
- Mortara A
journal: Eur J Prev Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/eurjpc/zwaa035
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of cardiomyopathies: essential context knowledge for a tailored clinical work-up.
**Authors:** Pasqualucci D, Iacovoni A, Palmieri V, De Maria R, Iacoviello M, Battistoni I, Macera F, Olivotto I, Arbustini E, Mortara A
**Journal:** Eur J Prev Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurjpc/zwaa035](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurjpc/zwaa035)

## Content

1. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2022 May 27;29(8):1190-1199. doi: 10.1093/eurjpc/zwaa035.

Epidemiology of cardiomyopathies: essential context knowledge for a tailored 
clinical work-up.

Pasqualucci D(1), Iacovoni A(2), Palmieri V(3), De Maria R(4), Iacoviello M(5), 
Battistoni I(6), Macera F(7), Olivotto I(8), Arbustini E(9), Mortara A(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Azienda Ospedaliera Brotzu, Piazzale Ricchi 1, 
09134, Cagliari, Italy.
(2)Cardiovascular Department, ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Piazza OMS, 1, 
24127, Bergamo, Italy.
(3)Heart Transplantation Unit, Department of cardiac surgery and 
transplantation, Ospedali dei Colli ,Via L. Bianchi s.n.c. 80131 Naples, Italy.
(4)CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, CardioThoracic and Vascular Department, 
ASST Great Metropolitan Hospital Niguarda, Piazza Ospedale Maggiore 3 20162, 
Milan, Italy.
(5)Cardiology Unit of Riuniti Policlinic University Hospital, Department of 
Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Foggia, ViaLuigi Pinto 1, 71122, 
Foggia, Italy.
(6)CCU-Cardiology Department, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria "Ospedali 
Riuniti", via Conca 71 60020, Ancona, Italy.
(7)Heart Failure and Transplant Unit, De Gasperis CardioCenter, ASST Great 
Metropolitan Hospital Niguarda, P.zza Ospedale Maggiore 3, 20162 Milan, Italy.
(8)Cardiomiopathy Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Viale Pieraccini 1, 50134, 
Florence, Italy.
(9)Centre for Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, IRCCS Fondazione Policlinico 
San Matteo, Viale Camillo Golgi, 19, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
(10)Department of Clinical Cardiology, Policlinico di Monza, Via Carlo Amati, 
111, 20900 Monza, Italy.

Comment in
    Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2022 May 27;29(8):1188-1189. doi: 
10.1093/eurjpc/zwaa051.

Cardiomyopathies (CMPs) are primary disorders of myocardial structure and 
function in the absence of coronary artery disease, hypertension, valvular 
disease, and congenital heart disease. Knowledge of the incidence and prevalence 
of CMPs may help clinicians to compare their observations in clinical practice 
with expected cases per person-year and to avoid under-reporting in clinical 
context. Currently, available estimates of prevalence and incidence of CMPs are 
based on clinical data, collected with a wide variability in population-source, 
and before the genetic testing evolved as a standard diagnostic tool. This 
review focuses on the epidemiology of CMPs in subjects aged between 18 and 55 
years. A structured up-to-date diagnostic flow-chart for CMPs diagnosis and 
assessment is proposed to avoid misdiagnosis of CMPs in the young population and 
in subjects with unexplained cardiac disorders.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. 
© The Author(s) 2020. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/eurjpc/zwaa035
PMID: 33623987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]