---
reference_id: "PMID:11528394"
title: Mutations in the gene encoding epsilon-sarcoglycan cause myoclonus-dystonia syndrome.
authors:
- Zimprich A
- Grabowski M
- Asmus F
- Naumann M
- Berg D
- Bertram M
- Scheidtmann K
- Kern P
- Winkelmann J
- Müller-Myhsok B
- Riedel L
- Bauer M
- Müller T
- Castro M
- Meitinger T
- Strom TM
- Gasser T
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/ng709
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Blotting, Northern"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics
- Dystonic Disorders/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Myoclonus/genetics
- Pedigree
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Sarcoglycans
- Syndrome
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding epsilon-sarcoglycan cause myoclonus-dystonia syndrome.
**Authors:** Zimprich A, Grabowski M, Asmus F, Naumann M, Berg D, Bertram M, Scheidtmann K, Kern P, Winkelmann J, Müller-Myhsok B, Riedel L, Bauer M, Müller T, Castro M, Meitinger T, Strom TM, Gasser T
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng709](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng709)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Sep;29(1):66-9. doi: 10.1038/ng709.

Mutations in the gene encoding epsilon-sarcoglycan cause myoclonus-dystonia
syndrome.

Zimprich A(1), Grabowski M, Asmus F, Naumann M, Berg D, Bertram M, Scheidtmann
K, Kern P, Winkelmann J, Müller-Myhsok B, Riedel L, Bauer M, Müller T, Castro M,
Meitinger T, Strom TM, Gasser T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Klinikum Grobhadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany.

The dystonias are a common clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of
movement disorders. More than ten loci for inherited forms of dystonia have been
mapped, but only three mutated genes have been identified so far. These are
DYT1, encoding torsin A and mutant in the early-onset generalized form, GCH1
(formerly known as DYT5), encoding GTP-cyclohydrolase I and mutant in dominant
dopa-responsive dystonia, and TH, encoding tyrosine hydroxylase and mutant in
the recessive form of the disease. Myoclonus-dystonia syndrome (MDS; DYT11) is
an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by bilateral, alcohol-sensitive
myoclonic jerks involving mainly the arms and axial muscles. Dystonia, usually
torticollis and/or writer's cramp, occurs in most but not all affected patients
and may occasionally be the only symptom of the disease. In addition, patients
often show prominent psychiatric abnormalities, including panic attacks and
obsessive-compulsive behavior. In most MDS families, the disease is linked to a
locus on chromosome 7q21 (refs. 11-13). Using a positional cloning approach, we
have identified five different heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the
gene for epsilon-sarcoglycan (SGCE), which we mapped to a refined critical
region of about 3.2 Mb. SGCE is expressed in all brain regions examined.
Pedigree analysis shows a marked difference in penetrance depending on the
parental origin of the disease allele. This is indicative of a maternal
imprinting mechanism, which has been demonstrated in the mouse
epsilon-sarcoglycan gene.

DOI: 10.1038/ng709
PMID: 11528394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
