---
reference_id: "PMID:36409923"
title: Phenotypic variation in severe hemophilia A is related to endogenous thrombin potential and plasma levels of factor VII.
authors:
- Chaves DG
- Fonseca FML
- Araújo HCB
- de Oliveira LMM
- Amorim MVA
- Assis Neto CC
- Carvalho MDG
journal: Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/MBC.0000000000001176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic variation in severe hemophilia A is related to endogenous thrombin potential and plasma levels of factor VII.
**Authors:** Chaves DG, Fonseca FML, Araújo HCB, de Oliveira LMM, Amorim MVA, Assis Neto CC, Carvalho MDG
**Journal:** Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MBC.0000000000001176](https://doi.org/10.1097/MBC.0000000000001176)

## Content

1. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2022 Dec 1;33(8):463-467. doi: 
10.1097/MBC.0000000000001176. Epub 2022 Nov 3.

Phenotypic variation in severe hemophilia A is related to endogenous thrombin 
potential and plasma levels of factor VII.

Chaves DG(1), Fonseca FML(2), Araújo HCB(1), de Oliveira LMM(1), Amorim MVA(1), 
Assis Neto CC(1), Carvalho MDG(2).

Author information:
(1)Fundação Hemominas.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 
Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Hemophilia A is a bleeding disorder caused by deficiency or low activity of 
circulating factor VIII characterized by prolonged blood coagulation time and 
often spontaneous bleeding. Patients with the severe form of the disease may 
present considerable heterogeneity in the occurrence of bleeding episodes and 
some of them have a mild hemophilia A phenotype. This study aimed to evaluate 
the association of biomarkers and coagulation parameters to the differential 
hemorrhagic profile of severe hemophilia A patients. Polymorphisms in the genes 
of proteins C and S, factors V and VII and prothrombin were evaluated in a group 
of severe hemophilia A patients with a broad spectrum of bleeding profile. 
Plasma levels of coagulation factors and thrombin generation were also analyzed. 
This study included 59 Brazilian hemophilia A patients who were allocated into 
low bleeding profile (LBP; n = 33) and high bleeding profile (HBP; n = 26) 
groups based on their joint and muscle bleeding episodes requiring treatment in 
the 5 years before inclusion in the study. Results evidenced that endogenous 
thrombin potential (ETP) and plasma factor VII levels were significantly higher 
in the LBP group. Results indicate a prominent importance of FVII plasma 
activity and endogenous thrombin potential on the differential bleeding 
phenotype of hemophilia A patients.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MBC.0000000000001176
PMID: 36409923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]