---
reference_id: "PMID:22483517"
title: "The Rudolph sign of nasal vestibular furunculosis: questions raised by this common but under-recognized nasal mucocutaneous disorder."
authors:
- Dahle KW
- Sontheimer RD
journal: Dermatol Online J
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Rudolph sign of nasal vestibular furunculosis: questions raised by this common but under-recognized nasal mucocutaneous disorder.
**Authors:** Dahle KW, Sontheimer RD
**Journal:** Dermatol Online J (2012)

## Content

1. Dermatol Online J. 2012 Mar 15;18(3):6.

The Rudolph sign of nasal vestibular furunculosis: questions raised by this 
common but under-recognized nasal mucocutaneous disorder.

Dahle KW(1), Sontheimer RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, Utah, USA.

Nasal vestibular furunculosis is a mucocutaneous disorder commonly seen in the 
general population. Despite its prevalence in clinical practice, it has been 
inconsistently described and labeled in the medical literature. We present a 
case of nasal vestibular furunculosis presenting as recurrent exquisitely tender 
unilateral erythema and edema of the nasal tip (i.e., the Rudolph sign--as in 
Rudolph The Red Nosed Reindeer). This symptom complex responded rapidly to 
topical intranasal mupirocin ointment treatment after having previously failed 
other treatments including a topical intranasal triple antibiotic ointment and 
oral doxycycline. This case is instructive as it describes a heretofore 
under-recognized, but not uncommon, mucocutaneous clinical entity that has been 
linked to more serious head and neck infections and likely has relevance to the 
intranasal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus. We review the limited published 
literature on this mucocutaneous disorder including its nosology and propose 
future lines of investigation for better defining its clinical significance and 
pathogenesis.

PMID: 22483517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]