---
reference_id: "PMID:11158062"
title: Extrarenal expression of 25-hydroxyvitamin d(3)-1 alpha-hydroxylase.
authors:
- Zehnder D
- Bland R
- Williams MC
- McNinch RW
- Howie AJ
- Stewart PM
- Hewison M
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.2.7220
keywords:
- "25-Hydroxyvitamin D3 1-alpha-Hydroxylase/analysis, genetics"
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- Brain/enzymology
- "DNA, Complementary"
- Female
- Granuloma/enzymology
- Hair Follicle/enzymology
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Intestinal Mucosa/enzymology
- Keratinocytes/enzymology
- Kidney/enzymology
- Lymph Nodes/enzymology
- Mice
- Nephrons/enzymology
- Organ Specificity
- "Placenta/cytology, enzymology"
- Pregnancy
- Skin/enzymology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extrarenal expression of 25-hydroxyvitamin d(3)-1 alpha-hydroxylase.
**Authors:** Zehnder D, Bland R, Williams MC, McNinch RW, Howie AJ, Stewart PM, Hewison M
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.86.2.7220](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.86.2.7220)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Feb;86(2):888-94. doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.2.7220.

Extrarenal expression of 25-hydroxyvitamin d(3)-1 alpha-hydroxylase.

Zehnder D(1), Bland R, Williams MC, McNinch RW, Howie AJ, Stewart PM, Hewison M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United
Kingdom B15 2TH.

The mitochondrial enzyme 25-hydroxyvitamin D(3)-1 alpha-hydroxylase (1
alpha-hydroxylase) plays an important role in calcium homeostasis by catalyzing
synthesis of the active form of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3), in the
kidney. However, enzyme activity assays indicate that 1 alpha-hydroxylase is
also expressed in a variety of extrarenal tissues; recent cloning of cDNAs for 1
alpha-hydroxylase in different species suggests that a similar gene product is
found at both renal and extrarenal sites. Using specific complementary
ribonucleic acid probes and antisera to 1 alpha-hydroxylase, we have previously
reported the distribution of messenger ribonucleic acid and protein for the
enzyme along the mouse and human nephron. Here we describe further
immunohistochemical and Western blot analyses that detail for the first time the
extrarenal distribution of 1 alpha-hydroxylase in both normal and diseased
tissues. Specific staining for 1 alpha-hydroxylase was detected in skin (basal
keratinocytes, hair follicles), lymph nodes (granulomata), colon (epithelial
cells and parasympathetic ganglia), pancreas (islets), adrenal medulla, brain
(cerebellum and cerebral cortex), and placenta (decidual and trophoblastic
cells). Further studies using psoriatic skin highlighted overexpression of 1
alpha-hydroxylase throughout the dysregulated stratum spinosum. Increased
expression of skin 1alpha-hydroxylase was also associated with sarcoidosis. In
lymph nodes and skin from these patients 1 alpha-hydroxylase expression was
observed in cells positive for the surface antigen CD68 (macrophages). The data
presented here confirm the presence of protein for 1 alpha-hydroxylase in
several extrarenal tissues, such as skin, placenta, and lymph nodes. The
function of this enzyme at novel extrarenal sites, such as adrenal medulla,
brain, pancreas, and colon, remains to be determined. However, the discrete
patterns of staining in these tissues emphasizes a possible role for 1
alpha-hydroxylase as an intracrine modulator of vitamin D function in peripheral
tissues.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.86.2.7220
PMID: 11158062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
