---
reference_id: "PMID:37271124"
title: "Performance of Immunohistochemical and Molecular Methods in Detecting Microsatellite Instability in Gastric Cancer: A Multicenter Study."
authors:
- Sousa Marques D
- Gullo I
- Mascarenhas-Lemos L
- Silva JR
- Neto do Nascimento C
- Pontes P
- Pinho L
- Cirnes L
- Wen X
- Cravo M
- Carneiro F
journal: Pathobiology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000530997
keywords:
- Humans
- Microsatellite Instability
- "Stomach Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Immunohistochemistry
- Colorectal Neoplasms/genetics
- Microsatellite Repeats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Performance of Immunohistochemical and Molecular Methods in Detecting Microsatellite Instability in Gastric Cancer: A Multicenter Study.
**Authors:** Sousa Marques D, Gullo I, Mascarenhas-Lemos L, Silva JR, Neto do Nascimento C, Pontes P, Pinho L, Cirnes L, Wen X, Cravo M, Carneiro F
**Journal:** Pathobiology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000530997](https://doi.org/10.1159/000530997)

## Content

1. Pathobiology. 2023;90(6):389-399. doi: 10.1159/000530997. Epub 2023 Jun 2.

Performance of Immunohistochemical and Molecular Methods in Detecting 
Microsatellite Instability in Gastric Cancer: A Multicenter Study.

Sousa Marques D(1), Gullo I(1)(2)(3), Mascarenhas-Lemos L(4)(5)(6), Silva JR(1), 
Neto do Nascimento C(7), Pontes P(2), Pinho L(3), Cirnes L(3), Wen X(3)(8), 
Cravo M(9)(10), Carneiro F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto (FMUP), Porto, Portugal.
(2)Department of Pathology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João (CHUSJ), 
Porto, Portugal.
(3)I3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação Em Saúde and Institute of 
Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto (Ipatimup), Porto, 
Portugal.
(4)Faculty of Medicine of Catholic University of Portugal, Rio de Mouro, 
Portugal.
(5)Department of Pathology, Hospital da Luz de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(6)NOVA Medical School, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital Beatriz Ângelo, Loures, Portugal.
(8)Department of Pathology, Centro Hospitalar Do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital da Luz de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(10)Faculty of Medicine of the University of Lisbon, Lisboa, Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: Microsatellite instability (MSI) is an important prognostic 
molecular biomarker for gastric cancer (GC). MSI status may be detected by 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) for mismatch repair (MMR) proteins and polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR). Idylla™ MSI assay has not been validated for GC but may 
prove to be a valid alternative.
METHODS: In a series of 140 GC cases, MSI status was evaluated by IHC for MLH1, 
PMS2, MSH2, and MSH6; gold-standard pentaplex PCR panel (PPP) (BAT-25, BAT-26, 
NR-21, NR-24, and NR-27); and Idylla. Statistical analysis was performed using 
SPSS 27.0.
RESULTS: PPP identified 102 microsatellite stable (MSS) cases and 38 MSI-high 
cases. Only 3 cases showed discordant results. Compared with PPP, the 
sensitivity was 100% for IHC and 94.7% for Idylla. Specificity was 99% for IHC 
and 100% for Idylla. MLH1 IHC alone showed sensitivity and specificity of 97.4% 
and 98.0%, respectively. IHC identified three indeterminate cases; all were MSS 
according to PPP and Idylla.
CONCLUSION: IHC for MMR proteins represents an optimal screening tool for MSI 
status in GC. If resources are limited, isolated MLH1 evaluation may constitute 
a valuable option for preliminary screening. Idylla may help detect rare MSS 
cases with MMR-loss and define MSI status in indeterminate cases.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000530997
PMID: 37271124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]