---
reference_id: "PMID:29443656"
title: "Highlights for Dengue Immunopathogenesis: Antibody-Dependent Enhancement, Cytokine Storm, and Beyond."
authors:
- Kuczera D
- Assolini JP
- Tomiotto-Pellissier F
- Pavanelli WR
- Silveira GF
journal: J Interferon Cytokine Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1089/jir.2017.0037
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Highlights for Dengue Immunopathogenesis: Antibody-Dependent Enhancement, Cytokine Storm, and Beyond.
**Authors:** Kuczera D, Assolini JP, Tomiotto-Pellissier F, Pavanelli WR, Silveira GF
**Journal:** J Interferon Cytokine Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1089/jir.2017.0037](https://doi.org/10.1089/jir.2017.0037)

## Content

1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2018 Feb;38(2):69-80. doi: 10.1089/jir.2017.0037.

Highlights for Dengue Immunopathogenesis: Antibody-Dependent Enhancement, 
Cytokine Storm, and Beyond.

Kuczera D(1), Assolini JP(2), Tomiotto-Pellissier F(2), Pavanelli WR(2), 
Silveira GF(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Laboratório de Virologia Molecular, Instituto Carlos Chagas , 
ICC/Fiocruz/PR, Curitiba, Brazil .
(2)2 Departamento de Ciências Patológicas, Centro de Ciências Biológicas , 
Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Londrina, Brazil .

Infection with dengue virus (DENV) can lead to a wide spectrum of clinical 
presentations, ranging from asymptomatic infection to death. It is estimated 
that the disease manifests only in 90 million cases out of the total 390 million 
yearly infections. Even though research has not yet elucidated which are the 
precise pathophysiological mechanisms that trigger severe forms of dengue, the 
infection elicits a critical immune response significant for dengue pathogenesis 
development. Understanding how the immune response to DENV is established and 
how it can resolve the infection or turn into an immunopathology is of great 
importance in DENV research. Currently, studies have extensively debated 2 
hypotheses involving immune response: antibody-dependent enhancement and 
cytokine storm. However, despite its undeniable importance in severe forms of 
the disease, these 2 hypotheses are based on a primed immune status resulting 
from previous heterologous infection, abstaining them from explaining the severe 
forms of dengue in naive immune subjects, for example. Thus, it seems that a 
more intricate arrangement of causes and conditions must be achieved to severe 
dengue to occur. Among them, the cytokine network signature elicited, in 
association with viral aspects deserves special attention regarding the 
establishment of infection and evolution to pathogenesis. In this work, we 
intend to shed light on how those elements contribute to severe dengue 
development.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.2017.0037
PMID: 29443656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]