---
reference_id: "PMID:34174276"
title: Evidence-based pharmacological treatment options for ADHD in children and adolescents.
authors:
- Mechler K
- Banaschewski T
- Hohmann S
- Häge A
journal: Pharmacol Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107940
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Atomoxetine Hydrochloride/therapeutic use
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/drug therapy
- Central Nervous System Stimulants/therapeutic use
- Child
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Humans
- Methylphenidate/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence-based pharmacological treatment options for ADHD in children and adolescents.
**Authors:** Mechler K, Banaschewski T, Hohmann S, Häge A
**Journal:** Pharmacol Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107940](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107940)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Ther. 2022 Feb;230:107940. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107940.
Epub  2021 Jun 23.

Evidence-based pharmacological treatment options for ADHD in children and
adolescents.

Mechler K(1), Banaschewski T(2), Hohmann S(2), Häge A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central
Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim, Germany. Electronic address: konstantin.mechler@zi-mannheim.de.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central
Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim, Germany.

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder
characterized by inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity, causing functional
impairment. Its prevalence lies at approximately 5% in children and adolescents
and at approximately 2.5% in adults. The disorder follows a multifactorial
etiology and shows a high heritability. Patients show a high interindividual and
intraindividual variability of symptoms, with executive deficits in several
cognitive domains. Overall, ADHD is associated with high rates of psychiatric
comorbidities, and insufficient treatment is linked to adverse long-term
outcomes. Current clinical guidelines recommend an individualized multimodal
treatment approach including psychoeducation, pharmacological interventions, and
non-pharmacological interventions. Available medications include stimulants
(methylphenidate, amphetamines) and non-stimulants (atomoxetine, guanfacine,
clonidine). While available pharmacological treatment options for ADHD show
relatively large effect sizes (in short-term trials) and overall good
tolerability, there is still a need for improvement of current
pharmacotherapeutic strategies and for the development of novel medications.
This review summarizes available pharmacological treatment options for ADHD in
children and adolescents, identifies current issues in research and evidence
gaps, and provides an overview of ongoing efforts to develop new medications for
the treatment of ADHD in children and adolescents by means of a systematic
cross-sectional analysis of the clinical trials registry www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2021.107940
PMID: 34174276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Konstantin
Mechler was involved as investigator in clinical trials by Shire, Otsuka,
Sunovion, Servier, Lundbeck, Takeda, Nuvelution, Gedeon Richter, and Emalex.
Tobias Banaschewski served in an advisory or consultancy role for Lundbeck,
Medice, Neurim Pharmaceuticals, Oberberg GmbH, Takeda, and Infectopharm. He
received conference support or speaker's fees by Lilly, Medice, and Takeda. He
received royalties from Hogrefe, Kohlhammer, CIP Medien, Oxford University
Press. Sarah Hohmann was involved as investigator in a clinical trial by
Servier. Alexander Häge received conference support, speaker's fees and/or
served in an advisory role for Shire/Takeda and Lily. He was involved as
investigator in clinical trials by Shire, Takeda, Janssen-Cilag, Otsuka,
Sunovion, Servier, Lundbeck, Nuvelution, Gedeon Richter, and Emalex.
