---
reference_id: "PMID:22831780"
title: A novel distinctive cerebrovascular phenotype is associated with heterozygous Arg179 ACTA2 mutations.
authors:
- Munot P
- Saunders DE
- Milewicz DM
- Regalado ES
- Ostergaard JR
- Braun KP
- Kerr T
- Lichtenbelt KD
- Philip S
- Rittey C
- Jacques TS
- Cox TC
- Ganesan V
journal: Brain
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/brain/aws172
keywords:
- Actins/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Arginine/genetics
- "Cerebrovascular Disorders/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Moyamoya Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel distinctive cerebrovascular phenotype is associated with heterozygous Arg179 ACTA2 mutations.
**Authors:** Munot P, Saunders DE, Milewicz DM, Regalado ES, Ostergaard JR, Braun KP, Kerr T, Lichtenbelt KD, Philip S, Rittey C, Jacques TS, Cox TC, Ganesan V
**Journal:** Brain (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/aws172](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws172)

## Content

1. Brain. 2012 Aug;135(Pt 8):2506-14. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws172. Epub 2012 Jul
24.

A novel distinctive cerebrovascular phenotype is associated with heterozygous 
Arg179 ACTA2 mutations.

Munot P(1), Saunders DE, Milewicz DM, Regalado ES, Ostergaard JR, Braun KP, Kerr 
T, Lichtenbelt KD, Philip S, Rittey C, Jacques TS, Cox TC, Ganesan V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, 
London WC1N 3JH, UK.

Mutations in the ACTA2 gene lead to diffuse and diverse vascular diseases; the 
Arg179His mutation is associated with an early onset severe phenotype due to 
global smooth muscle dysfunction. Cerebrovascular disease associated with ACTA2 
mutations has been likened to moyamoya disease, but appears to have distinctive 
features. This study involved the analysis of neuroimaging of 13 patients with 
heterozygous missense mutations in ACTA2 disrupting Arg179. All patients had 
persistent ductus arteriosus and congenital mydriasis, and variable presentation 
of pulmonary hypertension, bladder and gastrointestinal problems associated with 
this mutation. Distinctive cerebrovascular features were dilatation of proximal 
internal carotid artery, occlusive disease of terminal internal carotid artery, 
an abnormally straight course of intracranial arteries, and absent basal 
'moyamoya' collaterals. Patterns of brain injury supported both large and small 
vessel disease. Key differences from moyamoya disease were more widespread 
arteriopathy, the combination of arterial ectasia and stenosis and, importantly, 
absence of the typical basal 'moyamoya' collaterals. Evaluation of previously 
published cases suggests some of these features are also seen in the ACTA2 
mutations disrupting Arg258. The observation that transition from dilated to 
normal/stenotic arterial calibre coincides with where the internal carotid 
artery changes from an elastic to muscular artery supports the hypothesis that 
abnormal smooth muscle cell proliferation caused by ACTA2 mutations is modulated 
by arterial wall components. Patients with persistent ductus arteriosus or 
congenital mydriasis with a label of 'moyamoya' should be re-evaluated to ensure 
the distinctive neuroimaging features of an ACTA2 mutation have not been 
overlooked. This diagnosis has prognostic and genetic implications, and mandates 
surveillance of other organ systems, in particular the aorta, to prevent 
life-threatening aortic dissection.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws172
PMCID: PMC3407424
PMID: 22831780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]