---
reference_id: "PMID:20559644"
title: "[Diseases of the outer eye in rheumatoid arthritis]."
authors:
- Feist E
- Pleyer U
journal: Z Rheumatol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s00393-009-0577-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Diseases of the outer eye in rheumatoid arthritis].
**Authors:** Feist E, Pleyer U
**Journal:** Z Rheumatol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00393-009-0577-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00393-009-0577-5)

## Content

1. Z Rheumatol. 2010 Jul;69(5):403-10. doi: 10.1007/s00393-009-0577-5.

[Diseases of the outer eye in rheumatoid arthritis].

[Article in German]

Feist E(1), Pleyer U.

Author information:
(1)Augenklinik, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, 
Augustenburger Platz 1, Berlin, Germany.

Eye involvement is a frequent finding in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and 
may represent the leading clinical manifestation of disease. In this context, 
all components of the visual organ might be affected. The main spectrum of eye 
involvement comprises keratoconjunctivitis sicca, episcleritis and scleritis as 
well as ulcerative keratitis. As with the underlying disease, autoimmune 
reactions based on a patient's genetic predisposition are assumed to be of 
significance in disease pathogenesis. Emerging evidence also points to 
additional morphological and physiological ocular characteristics in the 
pathogenesis of the various ocular pathologies. This article gives an overview 
of clinical aspects, pathogenetic background as well as therapeutic options for 
ocular involvement in rheumatoid arthritis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00393-009-0577-5
PMID: 20559644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]