---
reference_id: "PMID:28460018"
title: Evaluation of the diagnostic accuracy of hand and foot MRI for early Rheumatoid Arthritis.
authors:
- Nieuwenhuis WP
- van Steenbergen HW
- Mangnus L
- Newsum EC
- Bloem JL
- Huizinga TWJ
- le Cessie S
- Reijnierse M
- van der Helm-van Mil AHM
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kex167
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- Arthritis/diagnostic imaging
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Case-Control Studies
- Disease Progression
- Early Diagnosis
- Female
- Foot/diagnostic imaging
- Hand/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Odds Ratio
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Reproducibility of Results
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Tenosynovitis/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of the diagnostic accuracy of hand and foot MRI for early Rheumatoid Arthritis.
**Authors:** Nieuwenhuis WP, van Steenbergen HW, Mangnus L, Newsum EC, Bloem JL, Huizinga TWJ, le Cessie S, Reijnierse M, van der Helm-van Mil AHM
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kex167](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kex167)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017 Aug 1;56(8):1367-1377. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kex167.

Evaluation of the diagnostic accuracy of hand and foot MRI for early Rheumatoid 
Arthritis.

Nieuwenhuis WP(1), van Steenbergen HW(1), Mangnus L(1), Newsum EC(1), Bloem 
JL(2), Huizinga TWJ(1), le Cessie S(3)(4), Reijnierse M(2), van der Helm-van Mil 
AHM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology.
(2)Department of Radiology.
(3)Department of Clinical Epidemiology.
(4)Department of Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the diagnostic value of MRI for early RA. In some RA 
patients, a classifiable diagnosis cannot be made at first presentation; these 
patients present with unclassified arthritis (UA). The use of MRI for early 
diagnosis of RA is recommended, yet the evidence for its reliability is limited.
METHODS: MRI of hand and foot was performed in 589 early arthritis patients 
included in the Leiden Early Arthritis Clinic (229 presented with RA, 159 with 
other arthritides and 201 with UA). Symptom-free controls provided a reference 
for defining an abnormal MRI. In preliminary investigations, MRI of patients who 
presented with RA was compared with MRI of symptom-free controls and of patients 
with other arthritides. Thereafter, the value of MRI in early RA diagnosis was 
determined in UA patients using the 1-year follow-up on fulfilling the 1987 RA 
criteria and start of disease-modifying drugs as outcomes.
RESULTS: Preliminary investigations were promising. Of the UA patients, 14% 
developed RA and 37% started disease-modifying treatment. MRI-detected 
tenosynovitis was associated with RA development independent of other types of 
MRI-detected inflammation [odds ratio (OR) = 7.5, 95% CI: 2.4, 23] and also 
independent of age and other inflammatory measures (swollen joints, CRP) (OR = 
4.2, 95% CI: 1.4, 12.9). Within UA patients, the negative predictive value of 
abnormal tenosynovitis was 95% (95% CI: 89%, 98%) and the positive predictive 
value 25% (95% CI: 17%, 35%). The performance was best in the subgroup of UA 
patients presenting with oligoarthritis (18% developed RA): the positive 
predictive value was 36% (95% CI: 23%, 52%), the negative predictive value was 
98% (95% CI: 88%, 100%), the sensitivity was 93% (95% CI: 70%, 99%) and the 
specificity was 63% (95% CI: 51%, 74%).
CONCLUSION: MRI contributes to the identification of UA patients who will 
develop RA, mostly in UA patients presenting with oligoarthritis.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kex167
PMID: 28460018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]