---
reference_id: "PMID:17503513"
title: Clinical and genetic study of autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia type 1.
authors:
- Dupré N
- Gros-Louis F
- Chrestian N
- Verreault S
- Brunet D
- de Verteuil D
- Brais B
- Bouchard JP
- Rouleau GA
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/ana.21143
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Family Health
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic study of autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia type 1.
**Authors:** Dupré N, Gros-Louis F, Chrestian N, Verreault S, Brunet D, de Verteuil D, Brais B, Bouchard JP, Rouleau GA
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.21143](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.21143)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2007 Jul;62(1):93-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.21143.

Clinical and genetic study of autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia type 1.

Dupré N(1), Gros-Louis F, Chrestian N, Verreault S, Brunet D, de Verteuil D, 
Brais B, Bouchard JP, Rouleau GA.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Department of Neurological Sciences, 
Centre Hospitalier Affilié Universitaire de Québec-Enfant-Jésus, 18th Street, 
Quebec City, Québec, Canada. nicolas.dupre@cha.quebec.qc.ca

OBJECTIVE: Define the phenotype and genotype of a cluster of families with a 
relatively pure cerebellar ataxia referred to as autosomal recessive cerebellar 
ataxia type 1 (ARCA-1).
METHODS: We ascertained 64 probands and affected members of 30 French-Canadian 
families all showing similar clinical features and originating from the same 
region of Quebec. After informed consent, we performed detailed clinical 
history, neurological examination, brain imaging, nerve conduction studies, and 
SYNE1 mutation detection of all available subjects.
RESULTS: Based on the cases examined, ARCA-1 is a cerebellar syndrome 
characterized by recessive transmission, middle-age onset (mean, 31.60; range, 
17-46 years), slow progression and moderate disability, significant dysarthria, 
mild oculomotor abnormalities, occasional brisk reflexes in the lower 
extremities, normal nerve conduction studies, and diffuse cerebellar atrophy on 
imaging. We identified a total of seven mutations in our population, thereby 
providing evidence of genotypic heterogeneity. Patients with different mutations 
did not show significant phenotypic heterogeneity.
INTERPRETATION: We identified a cluster of French-Canadian families with a new 
recessive ataxia of relatively pure cerebellar type caused by mutations in 
SYNE1. The function of SYNE1 is thus critical in the maintenance of cerebellar 
structure in humans. We expect that this disease will be a common cause of 
middle-age-onset recessive ataxia worldwide.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21143
PMID: 17503513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]