---
reference_id: "PMID:26722515"
title: "Immunohistochemical detection of STAT6, CD34, CD99 and BCL-2 for diagnosing solitary fibrous tumors/hemangiopericytomas."
authors:
- Han Y
- Zhang Q
- Yu X
- Han X
- Wang H
- Xu Y
- Qiu X
- Jin F
journal: Int J Clin Exp Pathol
year: '2015'
keywords:
- 12E7 Antigen
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antigens, CD/analysis"
- "Antigens, CD34/analysis"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Cell Adhesion Molecules/analysis
- Female
- "Hemangiopericytoma/diagnosis, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-bcl-2/analysis
- STAT6 Transcription Factor/analysis
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Solitary Fibrous Tumors/diagnosis, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunohistochemical detection of STAT6, CD34, CD99 and BCL-2 for diagnosing solitary fibrous tumors/hemangiopericytomas.
**Authors:** Han Y, Zhang Q, Yu X, Han X, Wang H, Xu Y, Qiu X, Jin F
**Journal:** Int J Clin Exp Pathol (2015)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Oct 1;8(10):13166-75. eCollection 2015.

Immunohistochemical detection of STAT6, CD34, CD99 and BCL-2 for diagnosing 
solitary fibrous tumors/hemangiopericytomas.

Han Y(1), Zhang Q(2), Yu X(1), Han X(2), Wang H(3), Xu Y(1), Qiu X(2), Jin F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University Shenyang 110001, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University Shenyang 110001, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of China 
Medical University Shenyang 110001, People's Republic of China.

Solitary fibrous tumors (SFTs)/hemangiopericytomas (HPCs) are uncommon 
mesenchymal neoplasms of fibroblastic type that can arise anywhere in the body. 
Recently, NGFI-A binding protein 2 (NAB2)-signal transducer and the activator of 
transcription 6 (STAT6) fusion gene were discovered as a hallmark of SFTs/HPCs 
by using whole-exome, and transcriptome sequencing; consequently, the fusion 
gene can be rapidly detected by STAT6 immunohistochemistry. In this study, 53 
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues were performed using 
immunohistochemistry with antibodies against STAT6, CD34, CD99 and Bcl-2. 
Nuclear STAT6 positive staining was present in 51 cases (51/53, sensitivity 
96.2%), which were usually diffuse (4+ in 14 cases; 3+ in 13 cases; 2+ in 9 
cases; 1+ in 15 cases) and intense (strong in 17 cases; moderate in 22 cases; 
and weak in 12 cases) staining. CD34 was positive in 47 cases (47/53, 
sensitivity 88.7%), CD99 was positive in 50 cases (50/53, sensitivity 94.3%) and 
Bcl-2 was positive in 51 cases (51/53, sensitivity 96.2%). There is no 
difference among categories such as age, sex, location, tumor size, or estimated 
dignity in immunohistochemical staining of STAT6, CD34, CD99 and Bcl-2. The 
nuclear STAT6 being positive is a helpful and highly sensitive marker in 
diagnosis of SFTs/HPCs. Considering immunohistochemical STAT6, CD34, CD99 and 
Bcl-2 findings together can provide more supportive diagnostic information.

PMCID: PMC4680460
PMID: 26722515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]