---
reference_id: "PMID:33352325"
title: Role of the complement system in antibody-dependent enhancement of flavivirus infections.
authors:
- Byrne AB
- Talarico LB
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.12.039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the complement system in antibody-dependent enhancement of flavivirus infections.
**Authors:** Byrne AB, Talarico LB
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2020.12.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.12.039)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2021 Feb;103:404-411. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.12.039. Epub 
2020 Dec 19.

Role of the complement system in antibody-dependent enhancement of flavivirus 
infections.

Byrne AB(1), Talarico LB(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Investigaciones Infectológicas y Biología Molecular, Unidad de 
Infectología, Departamento de Medicina, Hospital de Niños Dr. Ricardo Gutiérrez, 
Buenos Aires 1425, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y 
Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos Aires 1425, Argentina. Electronic address: 
alanabyrne@conicet.gov.ar.
(2)Laboratorio de Investigaciones Infectológicas y Biología Molecular, Unidad de 
Infectología, Departamento de Medicina, Hospital de Niños Dr. Ricardo Gutiérrez, 
Buenos Aires 1425, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y 
Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos Aires 1425, Argentina. Electronic address: 
ltalarico@conicet.gov.ar.

Flavivirus infections have increased dramatically in the last decades in 
tropical and subtropical regions of the world. Antibody-dependent enhancement of 
dengue virus infections has been one of the main hypotheses to explain severity 
of disease and one of the major challenges to safe and effective vaccine 
development. In the presence of cross-reactive sub-neutralizing concentrations 
of anti-dengue antibodies, immune complexes can amplify viral infection in 
mononuclear phagocytic cells, triggering a cytokine cascade and activating the 
complement system that leads to severe disease. The complement system comprises 
a family of plasma and cellular surface proteins that recognize pathogen 
associated molecular patterns, modified ligands and immune complexes, 
interacting in a regulated manner and forming an enzymatic cascade. Pathogenic 
as well as protective effects of complement have been reported in flavivirus 
infections. This review provides updated knowledge on complement activation 
during flavivirus infection, including antiviral effects of complement and its 
regulation, as well as mechanisms of complement evasion and dysregulation of 
complement activity during viral infection leading to pathogenesis. 
Particularly, insights into classical pathway activation and its protective role 
on antibody-dependent enhancement of flavivirus infections are highlighted.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.12.039
PMID: 33352325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]