---
reference_id: "PMID:39705488"
title: "Expanded phenotypes and pathogenesis of geleophysic dysplasia 3 resulted from a de novo LTBP3 mutation: A case report."
authors:
- Liang J
- Han Y
- Tao H
- Wang X
- Zhang B
- Wu J
- Zhai J
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000041000
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Latent TGF-beta Binding Proteins/genetics
- Pregnancy
- Phenotype
- Mutation
- Adult
- Pedigree
- Exome Sequencing
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanded phenotypes and pathogenesis of geleophysic dysplasia 3 resulted from a de novo LTBP3 mutation: A case report.
**Authors:** Liang J, Han Y, Tao H, Wang X, Zhang B, Wu J, Zhai J
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000041000](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000041000)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2024 Dec 20;103(51):e41000. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000041000.

Expanded phenotypes and pathogenesis of geleophysic dysplasia 3 resulted from a
de novo LTBP3 mutation: A case report.

Liang J(1)(2), Han Y(1)(2), Tao H(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2), Zhang B(1)(2), Wu
J(1)(2), Zhai J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Xuzhou Clinical College of Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou Central
Hospital, Xuzhou, China.
(2)Department of Prenatal Diagnosis Medical Center, Xuzhou Central Hospital,
Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.

RATIONALE: The aim of this study is to investigate the de novo mutation and
clinical features of latent transforming growth factor-beta-binding protein 3
(LTBP3) gene-associated geleophysic dysplasia 3, and possible mechanisms of
action.
PATIENT CONCERNS: A nonconsanguineous couple was recruited for this study due to
the presence of intrauterine growth restriction. The pregnant woman and her
elder daughter presented with skeletal abnormalities with diabetes. The pregnant
woman underwent amniocentesis for cytogenetic analysis and copy number variation
sequencing. Furthermore, we employed a combination of pedigree whole exome
sequencing and bioinformatics analysis to predict the effects of mutations.
DIAGNOSES: The results of karyotyping and copy number variation sequencing were
normal. And the whole exome sequencing results indicated that the family carried
a de novo mutation c.852_853insAGG (p.L284_P285insR) in the LTBP3 gene
(NM_001130144.3) inherited from the mother. The results of bioinformatics
prediction demonstrated the mutation influenced the stability of the LTBP3 gene,
thereby enhanced the transforming growth factor β signaling pathways.
INTERVENTIONS: The couple terminated the pregnancy after comprehensive
consideration.
OUTCOMES: A de novo non-frameshift mutation of the LTBP3 gene might enhance the
transforming growth factor β signaling pathways, thereby leading to geleophysic
dysplasia 3.
LESSONS: As a rare multi-system musculoskeletal disorder, geleophysic dysplasia
3 necessitates early prenatal diagnosis and multidisciplinary consultation in
order to facilitate further diagnosis and evaluation of the patient and the
fetus.

Copyright © 2024 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000041000
PMCID: PMC11666154
PMID: 39705488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.
