---
reference_id: "PMID:30088174"
title: "PARK14 (D331Y) PLA2G6 Causes Early-Onset Degeneration of Substantia Nigra Dopaminergic Neurons by Inducing Mitochondrial Dysfunction, ER Stress, Mitophagy Impairment and Transcriptional Dysregulation in a Knockin Mouse Model."
authors:
- Chiu CC
- Lu CS
- Weng YH
- Chen YL
- Huang YZ
- Chen RS
- Cheng YC
- Huang YC
- Liu YC
- Lai SC
- Lin KJ
- Lin YW
- Chen YJ
- Chen CL
- Yeh TH
- Wang HL
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s12035-018-1118-5
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Base Sequence
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dopaminergic Neurons/pathology
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Chaperone BiP
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- Group VI Phospholipases A2/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Lewy Bodies/pathology
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mitochondria/pathology, ultrastructure"
- Mitophagy
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Degeneration/pathology
- Neuroprotection
- "Parkinson Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Substantia Nigra/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PARK14 (D331Y) PLA2G6 Causes Early-Onset Degeneration of Substantia Nigra Dopaminergic Neurons by Inducing Mitochondrial Dysfunction, ER Stress, Mitophagy Impairment and Transcriptional Dysregulation in a Knockin Mouse Model.
**Authors:** Chiu CC, Lu CS, Weng YH, Chen YL, Huang YZ, Chen RS, Cheng YC, Huang YC, Liu YC, Lai SC, Lin KJ, Lin YW, Chen YJ, Chen CL, Yeh TH, Wang HL
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12035-018-1118-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-018-1118-5)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 2019 Jun;56(6):3835-3853. doi: 10.1007/s12035-018-1118-5. Epub
2018 Aug 8.

PARK14 (D331Y) PLA2G6 Causes Early-Onset Degeneration of Substantia Nigra
Dopaminergic Neurons by Inducing Mitochondrial Dysfunction, ER Stress, Mitophagy
Impairment and Transcriptional Dysregulation in a Knockin Mouse Model.

Chiu CC(1)(2)(3), Lu CS(1)(3)(4)(5), Weng YH(1)(3)(4)(5), Chen YL(2), Huang
YZ(1)(3)(4)(5)(6), Chen RS(1)(3)(4)(5), Cheng YC(7), Huang YC(5)(8), Liu YC(9),
Lai SC(1)(3)(4)(5), Lin KJ(1)(10), Lin YW(1)(4), Chen YJ(1), Chen CL(1), Yeh
TH(11)(12), Wang HL(13)(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou, Linkou,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Nursing, Chang Gung University of Science and Technology,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Healthy Aging Research Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Movement Disorders, Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital at Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(5)College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.
(7)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Chang Gung University College of
Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.
(9)Division of Sports Medicine, Taiwan Landseed Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(10)Molecular Imaging Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.
(11)Department of Neurology, Taipei Medical University Hospital, No. 252, Wuxing
St, Xinyi District, Taipei City, 110, Taiwan. do2739@gmail.com.
(12)School of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
do2739@gmail.com.
(13)Neuroscience Research Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou,
Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan. hlwns@mail.cgu.edu.tw.
(14)Healthy Aging Research Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine,
Taoyuan, Taiwan. hlwns@mail.cgu.edu.tw.
(15)Division of Movement Disorders, Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital at Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan. hlwns@mail.cgu.edu.tw.
(16)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Chang Gung University College of
Medicine, No. 259, Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kweishan, Taoyuan, 333, Taiwan.
hlwns@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

PARK14 patients with homozygous (D331Y) PLA2G6 mutation display motor deficits
of pure early-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). The aim of this study is to
investigate the pathogenic mechanism of mutant (D331Y) PLA2G6-induced PD. We
generated knockin (KI) mouse model of PARK14 harboring homozygous (D331Y) PLA2G6
mutation. Then, we investigated neuropathological and neurological phenotypes of
PLA2G6D331Y/D331Y KI mice and molecular pathogenic mechanisms of (D331Y)
PLA2G6-induced degeneration of substantia nigra (SN) dopaminergic neurons.
Six-or nine-month-old PLA2G6D331Y/D331Y KI mice displayed early-onset cell death
of SNpc dopaminergic neurons. Lewy body pathology was found in the SN of
PLA2G6D331Y/D331Y mice. Six-or nine-month-old PLA2G6D331Y/D331Y KI mice
exhibited early-onset parkinsonism phenotypes. Disrupted cristae of mitochondria
were found in SNpc dopaminergic neurons of PLA2G6D331Y/D331Y mice.
PLA2G6D331Y/D331Y mice displayed mitochondrial dysfunction and upregulated ROS
production, which may lead to activation of apoptotic cascade. Upregulated
protein levels of Grp78, IRE1, PERK, and CHOP, which are involved in activation
of ER stress, were found in the SN of PLA2G6D331Y/D331Y mice. Protein expression
of mitophagic proteins, including parkin and BNIP3, was downregulated in the SN
of PLA2G6D331Y/D331Y mice, suggesting that (D331Y) PLA2G6 mutation causes
mitophagy dysfunction. In the SN of PLA2G6D331Y/D331Y mice, mRNA levels of eight
genes that are involved in neuroprotection/neurogenesis were decreased, while
mRNA levels of two genes that promote apoptotic death were increased. Our
results suggest that PARK14 (D331Y) PLA2G6 mutation causes degeneration of SNpc
dopaminergic neurons by causing mitochondrial dysfunction, elevated ER stress,
mitophagy impairment, and transcriptional abnormality.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-018-1118-5
PMID: 30088174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
