---
reference_id: "PMID:26896849"
title: Characterization of a JAZ7 activation-tagged Arabidopsis mutant with increased susceptibility to the fungal pathogen Fusarium oxysporum.
authors:
- Thatcher LF
- Cevik V
- Grant M
- Zhai B
- Jones JD
- Manners JM
- Kazan K
journal: J Exp Bot
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/jxb/erw040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of a JAZ7 activation-tagged Arabidopsis mutant with increased susceptibility to the fungal pathogen Fusarium oxysporum.
**Authors:** Thatcher LF, Cevik V, Grant M, Zhai B, Jones JD, Manners JM, Kazan K
**Journal:** J Exp Bot (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jxb/erw040](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erw040)

## Content

1. J Exp Bot. 2016 Apr;67(8):2367-86. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erw040. Epub 2016 Feb 19.

Characterization of a JAZ7 activation-tagged Arabidopsis mutant with increased 
susceptibility to the fungal pathogen Fusarium oxysporum.

Thatcher LF(1), Cevik V(2), Grant M(3), Zhai B(4), Jones JD(2), Manners JM(5), 
Kazan K(6).

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Agriculture, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St. Lucia, Queensland 
4067, Australia louise.thatcher@csiro.au.
(2)The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK.
(3)College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, UK.
(4)College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100093, China.
(5)CSIRO Agriculture, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St. Lucia, Queensland 
4067, Australia.
(6)CSIRO Agriculture, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St. Lucia, Queensland 
4067, Australia The Queensland Alliance for Agriculture & Food Innovation 
(QAAFI), The University of Queensland, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, Brisbane, 
Queensland 4072, Australia.

In Arabidopsis, jasmonate (JA)-signaling plays a key role in mediating Fusarium 
oxysporum disease outcome. However, the roles of JASMONATE ZIM-domain (JAZ) 
proteins that repress JA-signaling have not been characterized in host 
resistance or susceptibility to this pathogen. Here, we found most JAZ genes are 
induced following F. oxysporum challenge, and screening T-DNA insertion lines in 
Arabidopsis JAZ family members identified a highly disease-susceptible JAZ7 
mutant (jaz7-1D). This mutant exhibited constitutive JAZ7 expression and 
conferred increased JA-sensitivity, suggesting activation of JA-signaling. 
Unlike jaz7 loss-of-function alleles, jaz7-1D also had enhanced JA-responsive 
gene expression, altered development and increased susceptibility to the 
bacterial pathogen PstDC3000 that also disrupts host JA-responses. We also 
demonstrate that JAZ7 interacts with transcription factors functioning as 
activators (MYC3, MYC4) or repressors (JAM1) of JA-signaling and contains a 
functional EAR repressor motif mediating transcriptional repression via the 
co-repressor TOPLESS (TPL). We propose through direct TPL recruitment, in 
wild-type plants JAZ7 functions as a repressor within the JA-response network 
and that in jaz7-1D plants, misregulated ectopic JAZ7 expression hyper-activates 
JA-signaling in part by disturbing finely-tuned COI1-JAZ-TPL-TF complexes.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erw040
PMCID: PMC4809290
PMID: 26896849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]