---
reference_id: "PMID:34172897"
title: "Mucolipidosis type II and type III: a systematic review of 843 published cases."
authors:
- Dogterom EJ
- Wagenmakers MAEM
- Wilke M
- Demirdas S
- Muschol NM
- Pohl S
- Meijden JCV
- Rizopoulos D
- Ploeg ATV
- Oussoren E
journal: Genet Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-021-01244-4
keywords:
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Mucolipidoses/diagnosis, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Transferases (Other Substituted Phosphate Groups)/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucolipidosis type II and type III: a systematic review of 843 published cases.
**Authors:** Dogterom EJ, Wagenmakers MAEM, Wilke M, Demirdas S, Muschol NM, Pohl S, Meijden JCV, Rizopoulos D, Ploeg ATV, Oussoren E
**Journal:** Genet Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-021-01244-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-021-01244-4)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2021 Nov;23(11):2047-2056. doi: 10.1038/s41436-021-01244-4. Epub
2021  Jun 25.

Mucolipidosis type II and type III: a systematic review of 843 published cases.

Dogterom EJ(1), Wagenmakers MAEM(2), Wilke M(3), Demirdas S(3), Muschol NM(4), 
Pohl S(5), Meijden JCV(1), Rizopoulos D(6), Ploeg ATV(1), Oussoren E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, 
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, 
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)International Center for Lysosomal Disorders, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Skeletal Pathobiochemistry, Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, 
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, 
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
e.oussoren@erasmusmc.nl.

PURPOSE: Mucolipidosis (ML) II, MLIII alpha/beta, and MLIII gamma are rare 
autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorders. Data on the natural course of 
the diseases are scarce. These data are important for counseling, therapies 
development, and improvement of outcome. The aim of this study is to gain 
knowledge on the natural history of ML by obtaining data on survival, symptom 
onset, presenting symptoms, diagnosis, and pathogenic variants associated with 
the MLII or MLIII phenotype.
METHODS: A systematic review on all published MLII and MLIII cases between 1968 
and August 2019 was performed.
RESULTS: Three hundred one articles provided data on 843 patients. Median age at 
diagnosis: 0.7 for MLII and 9.0 years for MLIII. Median survival: 5.0 for MLII 
and 62.0 years for MLIIIII. Median age of death: 1.8 for MLII and 33.0 years for 
MLIII. Most frequent causes of death in all ML were pulmonary and/or cardiac 
complications. Pathogenic variants were described in 388 patients (GNPTAB: 571, 
GNPTG 179).
CONCLUSION: This review provides unique insights into the natural history of 
MLII and MLIII, with a clear genotype-phenotype correlation with the most 
frequent pathogenic variant c.3503_3504del in MLII and in MLIII alpha/beta 
c.22A>G for GNPTAB. All pathogenic GNPTG variants resulted in MLIII gamma.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the American College of 
Medical Genetics and Genomics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-021-01244-4
PMID: 34172897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]