---
reference_id: "PMID:11793093"
title: Podocyte proteins in Galloway-Mowat syndrome.
authors:
- Srivastava T
- Whiting JM
- Garola RE
- Dasouki MJ
- Ruotsalainen V
- Tryggvason K
- Hamed R
- Alon US
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1007/s004670100018
keywords:
- Central Nervous System/abnormalities
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Kidney Glomerulus/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Microfilament Proteins/metabolism
- Nephrotic Syndrome/metabolism
- Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases/metabolism
- Proteins/metabolism
- "Receptor-Like Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Class 3"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Podocyte proteins in Galloway-Mowat syndrome.
**Authors:** Srivastava T, Whiting JM, Garola RE, Dasouki MJ, Ruotsalainen V, Tryggvason K, Hamed R, Alon US
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004670100018](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004670100018)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2001 Dec;16(12):1022-9. doi: 10.1007/s004670100018.

Podocyte proteins in Galloway-Mowat syndrome.

Srivastava T(1), Whiting JM, Garola RE, Dasouki MJ, Ruotsalainen V, Tryggvason
K, Hamed R, Alon US.

Author information:
(1)Section of Nephrology, The Children's Mercy Hospital, University of Missouri
at Kansas City, 2401 Gillham Road, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.

Galloway-Mowat syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by
early onset nephrotic syndrome and central nervous system anomalies. Mutations
in podocyte proteins, such as nephrin, alpha-actinin 4, and podocin, are
associated with proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome. The genetic defect in
Galloway-Mowat syndrome is as yet unknown. We postulated that in Galloway-Mowat
syndrome the mutation would be in a protein that is expressed both in podocytes
and neurons, such as synaptopodin, GLEPP1, or nephrin. We therefore analyzed
kidney tissue from normal children (n=3), children with congenital nephrotic
syndrome of the Finnish type (CNF, n=3), minimal change disease (MCD, n=3),
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS, n=3), and Galloway-Mowat syndrome
(n=4) by immunohistochemistry for expression of synaptopodin, GLEPP1,
intracellular domain of nephrin (nephrin-I), and extracellular domain of nephrin
(nephrin-E). Synaptopodin, GLEPP1, and nephrin were strongly expressed in normal
kidney tissue. Nephrin was absent, and synaptopodin and GLEPP1 expression were
decreased in CNF. The expression of all three proteins was reduced in MCD and
FSGS; the decrease in expression being more marked in FSGS. Synaptopodin,
GLEPP1, and nephrin expression was present, although reduced in Galloway-Mowat
syndrome. We conclude that the reduced expression of synaptopodin, GLEPP1, and
nephrin in Galloway- Mowat syndrome is a secondary phenomenon related to the
proteinuria, and hence synaptopodin, GLEPP1, and nephrin are probably not the
proteins mutated in Galloway-Mowat syndrome.

DOI: 10.1007/s004670100018
PMID: 11793093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
