---
reference_id: "PMID:32131131"
title: "Omphalocele in Finland from 1993 to 2014: Trends, Prevalence, Mortality, and Associated Malformations-A Population-Based Study."
authors:
- Raitio A
- Tauriainen A
- Syvänen J
- Kemppainen T
- Löyttyniemi E
- Sankilampi U
- Vanamo K
- Gissler M
- Hyvärinen A
- Helenius I
journal: Eur J Pediatr Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1703012
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/epidemiology"
- "Abortion, Eugenic/statistics & numerical data"
- Adult
- Female
- Finland/epidemiology
- "Hernia, Umbilical/mortality"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Live Birth/epidemiology
- Pregnancy
- Prevalence
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
- Stillbirth/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Omphalocele in Finland from 1993 to 2014: Trends, Prevalence, Mortality, and Associated Malformations-A Population-Based Study.
**Authors:** Raitio A, Tauriainen A, Syvänen J, Kemppainen T, Löyttyniemi E, Sankilampi U, Vanamo K, Gissler M, Hyvärinen A, Helenius I
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0040-1703012](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1703012)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2021 Apr;31(2):172-176. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1703012. Epub 
2020 Mar 4.

Omphalocele in Finland from 1993 to 2014: Trends, Prevalence, Mortality, and 
Associated Malformations-A Population-Based Study.

Raitio A(1)(2), Tauriainen A(3), Syvänen J(1)(2), Kemppainen T(4)(5), 
Löyttyniemi E(4)(5), Sankilampi U(6), Vanamo K(7), Gissler M(8)(9), Hyvärinen 
A(10)(11), Helenius I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery and Orthopaedics, Turku University Hospital, 
Turku, Finland.
(2)Department of Paediatric Surgery and Orthopaedics, University of Turku 
Faculty of Medicine, Turku, Finland.
(3)Department of Paediatric Surgery, KYS, Kuopio, Finland.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
(7)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, 
Pohjois-Savo, Finland.
(8)Department of Information Services, National Institute for Health and 
Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.
(9)Department of Neurobiology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Stockholm 
County, Sweden.
(10)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, 
Finland.
(11)Department of Medicine, Tampere University Faculty of Medicine, Tampere, 
Finland.

INRODUCTION:  The aim of this study is to assess the changes in prevalence, 
mortality and termination pregnancy of omphalocele, and to identify associated 
anomalies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS:  A population-based nationwide register study. All cases 
with omphalocele were identified in the Finnish Register of Congenital 
Malformations and the Care Register for Health Care from 1993 to 2014 including 
live births, stillbirths, and terminations of pregnancy due to fetal anomalies. 
Associated anomalies were recorded and analyzed, and perinatal and infant 
mortality and prevalence were calculated.
RESULTS:  There were 600 cases with omphalocele including 229 live births, 39 
stillbirths, and 332 (55%) abortions. Birth prevalence in Finland was 1.96 per 
10,000 births with no consistent trend over time. However, total prevalence was 
much higher (4.71/10,000) because more than half of these families chose option 
for the termination of pregnancy. Omphalocele is often complicated with other 
anomalies; most commonly chromosomal abnormalities (9.3%), heart defects (6.3%), 
central nervous system anomalies (3.0%), gastrointestinal, and urogenital 
malformations (both 2.0%). Proportion of chromosomal and central nervous system 
abnormalities were even higher in terminated pregnancies. Overall infant 
mortality was 22%. Total 1-year survival rates for isolated omphalocele, cases 
with multiple anomalies and neonates with chromosomal defects were 80, 88, and 
17%, respectively.
CONCLUSION:  Omphalocele is a rare congenital anomaly, often associated with 
other malformations. Our data suggest that isolated cases may be more common 
than previously thought. In the absence of chromosomal defects, survival is 
reasonably good. Regardless, more than half of these pregnancies are often 
terminated.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0040-1703012
PMID: 32131131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.