---
reference_id: "PMID:37308910"
title: "Expanding genotype-phenotype correlations in FOXG1 syndrome: results from a patient registry."
authors:
- Brimble E
- Reyes KG
- Kuhathaas K
- Devinsky O
- Ruzhnikov MRZ
- Ortiz-Gonzalez XR
- Scheffer I
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Olson H
- FOXG1 Research Foundation
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02745-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Rett Syndrome
- Genotype
- Seizures
- Frameshift Mutation
- Registries
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
- Forkhead Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding genotype-phenotype correlations in FOXG1 syndrome: results from a patient registry.
**Authors:** Brimble E, Reyes KG, Kuhathaas K, Devinsky O, Ruzhnikov MRZ, Ortiz-Gonzalez XR, Scheffer I, Bahi-Buisson N, Olson H, FOXG1 Research Foundation
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02745-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02745-y)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Jun 12;18(1):149. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02745-y.

Expanding genotype-phenotype correlations in FOXG1 syndrome: results from a
patient registry.

Brimble E(1), Reyes KG(2), Kuhathaas K(3), Devinsky O(4), Ruzhnikov MRZ(5),
Ortiz-Gonzalez XR(6), Scheffer I(7), Bahi-Buisson N(8), Olson H(9); FOXG1
Research Foundation.

Author information:
(1)Invitae, San Francisco, CA, USA. elli.brimble@invitae.com.
(2)Cedars Sinai, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)MGH Institute of Health Professions, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, USA.
(5)U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(6)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(8)Paris Descartes University/Neckers Hospital, Paris, France.
(9)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: We refine the clinical spectrum of FOXG1 syndrome and expand
genotype-phenotype correlations through evaluation of 122 individuals enrolled
in an international patient registry.
METHODS: The FOXG1 syndrome online patient registry allows for remote collection
of caregiver-reported outcomes. Inclusion required documentation of a (likely)
pathogenic variant in FOXG1. Caregivers were administered a questionnaire to
evaluate clinical severity of core features of FOXG1 syndrome.
Genotype-phenotype correlations were determined using nonparametric analyses.
RESULTS: We studied 122 registry participants with FOXG1 syndrome,
aged < 12 months to 24 years. Caregivers described delayed or absent
developmental milestone attainment, seizures (61%), and movement disorders
(58%). Participants harbouring a missense variant had a milder phenotype.
Compared to individuals with gene deletions (0%) or nonsense variants (20%),
missense variants were associated with more frequent attainment of sitting
(73%). Further, individuals with missense variants (41%) achieved independent
walking more frequently than those with gene deletions (0%) or frameshift
variants (6%). Presence of epilepsy also varied by genotype and was
significantly more common in those with gene deletions (81%) compared to
missense variants (47%). Individuals with gene deletions were more likely to
have higher seizure burden than other genotypes with 53% reporting daily
seizures, even at best control. We also observed that truncations preserving the
forkhead DNA binding domain were associated with better developmental outcomes.
CONCLUSION: We refine the phenotypic spectrum of neurodevelopmental features
associated with FOXG1 syndrome. We strengthen genotype-driven outcomes, where
missense variants are associated with a milder clinical course.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02745-y
PMCID: PMC10262363
PMID: 37308910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no competing of interests.
