---
reference_id: "PMID:37371086"
title: "Familial Adult Myoclonus Epilepsy: A Non-Coding Repeat Expansion Disorder of Cerebellar-Thalamic-Cortical Loop."
authors:
- Cuccurullo C
- Striano P
- Coppola A
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12121617
keywords:
- Humans
- Adult
- Myoclonus
- Tremor/genetics
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
- Reflex
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Adult Myoclonus Epilepsy: A Non-Coding Repeat Expansion Disorder of Cerebellar-Thalamic-Cortical Loop.
**Authors:** Cuccurullo C, Striano P, Coppola A
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12121617](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12121617)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Jun 13;12(12):1617. doi: 10.3390/cells12121617.

Familial Adult Myoclonus Epilepsy: A Non-Coding Repeat Expansion Disorder of 
Cerebellar-Thalamic-Cortical Loop.

Cuccurullo C(1), Striano P(2)(3), Coppola A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive Sciences and Odontostomatology, 
Federico II University of Naples, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina 
Gaslini, 16147 Genova, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, 
Maternal and Child Health, University of Genova, 16126 Genova, Italy.

Familial adult myoclonus Epilepsy (FAME) is a non-coding repeat expansion 
disorder that has been reported under different acronyms and initially linked to 
four main loci: FAME1 (8q23.3-q24.1), FAME 2 (2p11.1-q12.1), FAME3 
(5p15.31-p15.1), and FAME4 (3q26.32-3q28). To date, it is known that the genetic 
mechanism underlying FAME consists of the expansion of similar non-coding 
pentanucleotide repeats, TTTCA and TTTTA, in different genes. FAME is 
characterized by cortical tremor and myoclonus usually manifesting within the 
second decade of life, and infrequent seizures by the third or fourth decade. 
Cortical tremor is the core feature of FAME and is considered part of a spectrum 
of cortical myoclonus. Neurophysiological investigations as jerk-locked back 
averaging (JLBA) and corticomuscular coherence analysis, giant somatosensory 
evoked potentials (SEPs), and the presence of long-latency reflex I (or C 
reflex) at rest support cortical tremor as the result of the sensorimotor cortex 
hyperexcitability. Furthermore, the application of transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS) protocols in FAME patients has recently shown that inhibitory 
circuits are also altered within the primary somatosensory cortex and the 
concomitant involvement of subcortical networks. Moreover, neuroimaging studies 
and postmortem autoptic studies indicate cerebellar alterations and abnormal 
functional connectivity between the cerebellum and cerebrum in FAME. 
Accordingly, the pathophysiological mechanism underlying FAME has been 
hypothesized to reside in decreased sensorimotor cortical inhibition through 
dysfunction of the cerebellar-thalamic-cortical loop, secondary to primary 
cerebellar pathology. In this context, the non-coding pentameric expansions have 
been proposed to cause cerebellar damage through an RNA-mediated toxicity 
mechanism. The elucidation of the underlying pathological mechanisms of FAME 
paves the way to novel therapeutic possibilities, such as RNA-targeting 
treatments, possibly applicable to other neurodegenerative non-coding disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12121617
PMCID: PMC10297251
PMID: 37371086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding 
author states that there are no conflict of interest.