---
reference_id: "PMID:39956285"
title: Autoimmunity in long COVID.
authors:
- Talwar S
- Harker JA
- Openshaw PJM
- Thwaites RS
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2025.02.005
keywords:
- Humans
- COVID-19/immunology
- Autoimmunity/immunology
- SARS-CoV-2/immunology
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Post-Acute COVID-19 Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmunity in long COVID.
**Authors:** Talwar S, Harker JA, Openshaw PJM, Thwaites RS
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2025.02.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2025.02.005)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2025 Apr;155(4):1082-1094. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2025.02.005. Epub 2025 Feb 14.

Autoimmunity in long COVID.

Talwar S(1), Harker JA(1), Openshaw PJM(1), Thwaites RS(2).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom.
(2)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: r.thwaites@imperial.ac.uk.

Long COVID (also termed postacute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2, or PASC) affects up to
10% of people recovering from infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Diagnosis is hampered by diffuse symptomatology,
lack of biomarkers, incomplete understanding of pathogenesis, and lack of
validated treatments. In terms of pathogenesis, hypothesized causes include
virus persistence, the legacy of endotheliitis and thrombosis, low-grade
tissue-based inflammation and/or scarring, perturbation of the host
virome/microbiome, or triggering of autoimmunity. Several studies show
preexisting and/or de novo production of autoantibodies after infection with
SARS-CoV-2, but the persistence of these antibodies and their role in causing
long COVID is debated. Here, we review the mechanisms through which autoimmune
responses can arise during and after viral infection, focusing on the evidence
for B-cell dysregulation and autoantibody production in acute and long COVID.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2025.02.005
PMID: 39956285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement This research was co-funded
by the NIHR Imperial Biomedical Research Centre (BRC), an Imperial College
Presidents Scholarship (to S.T.), the NIHR health protection research unit
(HPRU) in respiratory infections at Imperial College and the UK Coronavirus
Immunology Consortium (UK-CIC). Disclosure of potential conflict of interest:
The authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of interest.
