---
reference_id: "PMID:37061399"
title: Long COVID and rehabilitation.
authors:
- Chuang HJ
- Lin CW
- Hsiao MY
- Wang TG
- Liang HW
journal: J Formos Med Assoc
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2023.03.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long COVID and rehabilitation.
**Authors:** Chuang HJ, Lin CW, Hsiao MY, Wang TG, Liang HW
**Journal:** J Formos Med Assoc (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jfma.2023.03.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfma.2023.03.022)

## Content

1. J Formos Med Assoc. 2024 Jan;123 Suppl 1:S61-S69. doi: 
10.1016/j.jfma.2023.03.022. Epub 2023 Apr 13.

Long COVID and rehabilitation.

Chuang HJ(1), Lin CW(1), Hsiao MY(1), Wang TG(1), Liang HW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, National Taiwan 
University Hospital and College Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, National Taiwan 
University Hospital and College Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Department of 
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, National Taiwan University Hospital 
Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address: lianghw@ntu.edu.tw.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused tremendous morbidity and 
mortality worldwide. The large number of post-COVID survivors has drawn 
attention to the management of post-COVID condition, known as long COVID. This 
review examines current knowledge of long COVID, regarding its epidemiology, 
mechanism, and clinical presentations in both adults and children. We also 
review the rehabilitation principles, modules, and effects, and share Taiwan's 
efforts to provide a top-down, nationwide care framework for long COVID 
patients. Dyspnea, chronic cough, and fatigue are the most commonly reported 
symptoms in the first 6 months after infection, but cognitive impairment and 
psychological symptoms may persist beyond this time. Several possible mechanisms 
behind these symptoms were proposed, but remained unconfirmed. These symptoms 
negatively impact individuals' function, activities, participation and quality 
of life. Rehabilitation is a key element of management to achieve functional 
improvement. Early management should start with comprehensive evaluation and 
identification of red flags. Exercise-based therapy, an essential part of 
management of long COVID, can be conducted with different modules, including 
telerehabilitation. Post-exertional symptom exacerbation and orthostatic 
hypotension should be carefully monitored during exercise. Randomized control 
trials with a large sample size are needed to determine the optimal timing, 
dosage, and modules.

Copyright © 2023 Formosan Medical Association. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfma.2023.03.022
PMCID: PMC10101546
PMID: 37061399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.