---
reference_id: "PMID:39617898"
title: "Diagnostic flow analysis of tuberous sclerosis complex in Japan: a retrospective claims database study."
authors:
- Okanishi T
- Fujimori I
- Yamada M
- Tajima T
- Wataya-Kaneda M
- Seyama K
- Hatano T
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03460-y
keywords:
- "Tuberous Sclerosis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- Japan/epidemiology
- Female
- Male
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- "Databases, Factual"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic flow analysis of tuberous sclerosis complex in Japan: a retrospective claims database study.
**Authors:** Okanishi T, Fujimori I, Yamada M, Tajima T, Wataya-Kaneda M, Seyama K, Hatano T
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03460-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03460-y)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Dec 1;19(1):451. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03460-y.

Diagnostic flow analysis of tuberous sclerosis complex in Japan: a retrospective
claims database study.

Okanishi T(1), Fujimori I(2), Yamada M(3), Tajima T(4), Wataya-Kaneda M(5)(6),
Seyama K(7), Hatano T(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology, Brain and Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine,
Tottori University, Yonago, Japan.
(2)Novartis Pharma K.K, 1-23-1 Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-6333, Japan.
ikuwo190@gmail.com.
(3)Novartis Pharma K.K, 1-23-1 Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-6333, Japan.
(4)Division of Real-World Evidence, JMDC Inc., Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurocutaneous Medicine, Division of Health Science, Graduate
School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Osaka, Japan.
(7)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Graduate School of
Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Urology, Seirei Yokohama Hospital, Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a rare autosomal dominant
genetic disorder that affects multiple organs. However, precise diagnosis is
challenging owing to the lack of truly pathognomonic symptoms. This
retrospective observational study aimed to explore the real-world diagnostic
flow of Japanese patients with TSC by examining time to diagnosis (TTD) from the
onset of each TSC-related manifestation to TSC diagnosis and the role of TSC
clinic in timely diagnosis, using data from a health insurance database.
METHODS: Analyses were performed using data derived from the JMDC Claims
Database between January 2005 and December 2020. Patients with at least 1
confirmed diagnosis of TSC were stratified into 2 cohorts: Cohort 1 included
cases diagnosed after 2 years of age, and Cohort 2 included cases diagnosed
before 2 years of age. The primary endpoint was TTD in Cohorts 1 and 2.
Secondary endpoints were the incidence of each manifestation in Cohort 1 and the
incidence and risk ratios of TSC-unrelated symptoms in Cohort 2.
RESULTS: Cohorts 1 and 2 included 106 and 42 patients, respectively. In Cohort
1, patients with a renal tumor diagnosis as a primary TSC-related manifestation
had the longest TTD with a wide range (median: 23 months to up to 91 months);
patients with non-specific TSC-related manifestations such as brain
tumor/intraventricular tumor, epilepsy, or intellectual disabilities also
experienced a delay in TTD. In patients with TSC who developed epilepsy, those
attending facilities with a TSC clinic were diagnosed with TSC more quickly than
those attending facilities without a TSC clinic (median: 11.5 and 19.0 months,
respectively; p = 0.0379). Epilepsy was the manifestation with the highest
incidence (29.2%) among Cohort 1 patients, while cardiac rhabdomyoma had the
highest incidence (54.8%) among Cohort 2 patients. Dry skin was the most common
TSC-unrelated symptom in Cohort 2, with a 1.7-fold higher incidence rate than
that in controls (N = 619,936).
CONCLUSION: Japanese patients with renal lesions as a primary TSC-related
manifestation had the longest delay for a definitive diagnosis of TSC, followed
by those with epilepsy, brain tumor/intraventricular tumor, and intellectual
disabilities. The TSC clinic played an important role in the early diagnosis of
TSC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03460-y
PMCID: PMC11610214
PMID: 39617898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval and consent to
participate: This research does not contain identifiable patient information and
was exempted from medical research ethics review based on the decision of the
Institutional Ethics Committee of Tottori University Hospital. Consent for
publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: TO reports consulting fees and
lecture fees from Novartis. KS reports consulting fees from Nobelpharma and
Grifols SA; honoraria from Novartis, OrphanPacific, Kyorin Pharmaceuticals,
Boehringer Ingelheim, and Japan Blood Products Organization; and is a committee
member of the Japan Society of Pneumothorax and Cystic Lung Diseases and the
Japanese Society of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex. MWK reports consulting fees from
Novartis, Sanofi, Sumitomo Pharma, and AstraZeneca; and honoraria from Novartis,
Nobelpharma, and Maruho. MY is an employee of Novartis Pharma K.K. IF was an
employee of Novartis Pharma K.K during the study. TT is an employee of JMDC. TH
reports no conflict of interest.
