---
reference_id: "PMID:40521400"
title: "Eosinophilic Esophagitis Pathogenesis: All Clear?"
authors:
- Niess JH
- Kaymak T
journal: Inflamm Intest Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1159/000546241
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eosinophilic Esophagitis Pathogenesis: All Clear?
**Authors:** Niess JH, Kaymak T
**Journal:** Inflamm Intest Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000546241](https://doi.org/10.1159/000546241)

## Content

1. Inflamm Intest Dis. 2025 May 8;10(1):135-150. doi: 10.1159/000546241. 
eCollection 2025 Jan-Dec.

Eosinophilic Esophagitis Pathogenesis: All Clear?

Niess JH(1)(2), Kaymak T(1).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology, Department of Biomedicine, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Digestive 
Healthcare Center, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a food- and aeroallergen-driven, 
type 2-mediated chronic inflammation that develops in genetically predisposed 
individuals with an impaired esophageal epithelial barrier. How pollutants, 
including detergents, the esophageal microbiome, immunity, and genetics trigger 
the multifaceted pathophysiology of EoE is not clear.
SUMMARY: This review summarizes and discusses recent findings concerning the 
possible contribution of the environment/exposome, the esophageal microbiome, 
genetics, immunity, and epithelial barrier integrity to developing esophageal 
type 2 inflammation and fibrosis in EoE. After summarizing the current 
literature, we formulate research questions that we consider relevant to EoE.
KEY MESSAGES: The anticipated progress in preclinical EoE animal models, primary 
cell culture technologies, sequencing technologies, and clinical trials, driven 
by academic research and the pharmaceutical industry, is poised to revolutionize 
our understanding of EoE. These advancements may uncover novel pathways that can 
be targeted for EoE treatment, inspiring hope for improved patient quality of 
life.

© 2025 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000546241
PMCID: PMC12165646
PMID: 40521400

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have a conflict of interest 
related to this article.