---
reference_id: "PMID:40632386"
title: Cardiac Involvement in Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis.
authors:
- Srikantharajah M
- Gopalan D
- Wilson-Morkeh H
- Siddiqui S
- McAdoo SP
- Youngstein T
journal: Curr Cardiol Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s11886-025-02258-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis/complications
- Churg-Strauss Syndrome/complications
- "Heart Diseases/etiology, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Prognosis
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Echocardiography
- "Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Cine"
- Electrocardiography
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac Involvement in Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis.
**Authors:** Srikantharajah M, Gopalan D, Wilson-Morkeh H, Siddiqui S, McAdoo SP, Youngstein T
**Journal:** Curr Cardiol Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11886-025-02258-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-025-02258-z)

## Content

1. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2025 Jul 9;27(1):109. doi: 10.1007/s11886-025-02258-z.

Cardiac Involvement in Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis.

Srikantharajah M(1)(2), Gopalan D(3)(4), Wilson-Morkeh H(5)(6), Siddiqui 
S(5)(7), McAdoo SP(1)(2), Youngstein T(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Vasculitis Centre, Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Imperial 
College London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Renal Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Vasculitis Centre, Department of Imaging Sciences, Imperial College London, 
London, UK.
(4)Department of Non-Invasive Cardiac Imaging, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
(5)Vasculitis Centre, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
(8)Vasculitis Centre, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, UK. t.youngstein@imperial.ac.uk.
(9)Department of Rheumatology, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK. 
t.youngstein@imperial.ac.uk.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review highlights recent advances in the 
pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of cardiac disease in patients with 
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA). We outline a diagnostic 
approach to facilitate early identification of affected patients.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent advancements in diagnostic techniques including cardiac 
magnetic resonance (CMR) have improved recognition of cardiac disease in 
patients with EGPA. CMR has demonstrated a high prevalence of cardiac 
abnormalities, even in the absence of clinical symptoms, electrocardiographic or 
echocardiographic findings. Cardiac disease is a major cause of mortality in 
patients with EGPA, accounting for around 50% of disease-related deaths. 
However, due to the lack of standardised screening and diagnostic criteria, the 
true incidence remains unknown. Systemic immunosuppressive therapy is warranted 
to prevent acute complications as well as mitigate the long-term impact of 
chronic inflammation and tissue damage. Given the challenges in early detection 
and the prognostic significance of cardiac involvement, we recommend including 
CMR in the baseline evaluation of all EGPA patients at diagnosis.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11886-025-02258-z
PMCID: PMC12241301
PMID: 40632386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Human and Animal Rights and 
Informed Consent: This article does not contain any studies with human or animal 
subjects performed by any of the authors. Competing Interests: HWM has EGPA 
research funding from AstraZeneca via a grant award to SS.SS reports grant 
awards for EGPA from AstraZeneca, and Advisory services for EGPA for AstraZeneca 
and GSK; consulting fees from AstraZeneca, GSK, Chiesi, Sanofi, and Areteia; 
payments for educational events for EGPA from GSK and AstraZeneca; and the 
Steering Group for BSAR guidelines for ANCA associated vasculitis. SPM reports 
research funding from AstraZeneca, GSK, and Senya Therapeutics to his 
institution; consulting fees from Vifor, Alexion, and AstraZeneca; personal fees 
from Vifor; participation on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board 
for Obivas TSC (Roche sponsor); co-chair UKIVAS, and BSR Guidelines Group for 
ANCA vasculitis. The other authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.