---
reference_id: "PMID:8939939"
title: A novel abetalipoproteinemia genotype. Identification of a missense mutation in the 97-kDa subunit of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein that prevents complex formation with protein disulfide isomerase.
authors:
- Rehberg EF
- Samson-Bouma ME
- Kienzle B
- Blinderman L
- Jamil H
- Wetterau JR
- Aggerbeck LP
- Gordon DA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.47.29945
keywords:
- "Apolipoproteins B/blood, genetics"
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cholesterol Ester Transfer Proteins
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "DNA, Complementary"
- Genotype
- Glycoproteins
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Intestinal Mucosa/metabolism
- Intestines/pathology
- Isomerases/metabolism
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, genetics"
- Mutation
- Protein Disulfide-Isomerases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel abetalipoproteinemia genotype. Identification of a missense mutation in the 97-kDa subunit of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein that prevents complex formation with protein disulfide isomerase.
**Authors:** Rehberg EF, Samson-Bouma ME, Kienzle B, Blinderman L, Jamil H, Wetterau JR, Aggerbeck LP, Gordon DA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.47.29945](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.47.29945)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 22;271(47):29945-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.47.29945.

A novel abetalipoproteinemia genotype. Identification of a missense mutation in
the 97-kDa subunit of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein that prevents
complex formation with protein disulfide isomerase.

Rehberg EF(1), Samson-Bouma ME, Kienzle B, Blinderman L, Jamil H, Wetterau JR,
Aggerbeck LP, Gordon DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, New Jersey
08543-4000, USA.

The microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) is a heterodimer composed of
the ubiquitous multifunctional protein, protein disulfide isomerase, and a
unique 97-kDa subunit. Mutations that lead to the absence of a functional 97-kDa
subunit cause abetalipoproteinemia, an autosomal recessive disease characterized
by a defect in the assembly and secretion of apolipoprotein B (apoB) containing
lipoproteins. Previous studies of abetalipoproteinemic patient, C.L., showed
that the 97-kDa subunit was undetectable. In this report, [35S]methionine
labeling showed that this tissue was capable of synthesizing the 97-kDa MTP
subunit. Electrophoretic analysis showed two bands, one with a molecular mass of
the wild type 97-kDa subunit and the other with a slightly lower molecular
weight. Sequence analysis of cDNAs from additional intestinal biopsies showed
this patient to be a compound heterozygote. One allele contained a perfect
in-frame deletion of exon 10, explaining the lower molecular weight band. cDNAs
of the second allele were found to contain 3 missense mutations: His297 --> Gln,
Asp384 --> Ala, and Arg540 --> His. Transient expression of each mutant showed
that only the Arg540 --> His mutant was non-functional based upon its inability
to reconstitute apoB secretion in a cell culture system. The other amino acid
changes are silent polymorphisms. High level coexpression in a baculovirus
system of the wild type 97-kDa subunit or the Arg540 --> His mutant along with
human protein disulfide isomerase showed that the wild type was capable of
forming an active MTP complex while the mutant was not. Biochemical analysis of
lysates from these cells showed that the Arg to His conversion interrupted the
interaction between the 97-kDa subunit and protein disulfide isomerase.
Replacement of Arg540 with a lysine residue maintained the ability of the 97-kDa
subunit to complex with protein disulfide isomerase and form the active MTP
holoprotein. These results indicate that a positively charged amino acid at
position 540 in the 97-kDa subunit is critical for the productive association
with protein disulfide isomerase. Of the 13 mutant MTP 97-kDa subunit alleles
described to date, this is the first encoding a missense mutation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.47.29945
PMID: 8939939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
