---
reference_id: "PMID:25345092"
title: "Mucopolysaccharidosis type II, Hunter's syndrome."
authors:
- Tylki-Szymańska A
journal: Pediatr Endocrinol Rev
year: '2014'
keywords:
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Iduronate Sulfatase/therapeutic use
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis II/diagnosis, drug therapy, surgery"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucopolysaccharidosis type II, Hunter's syndrome.
**Authors:** Tylki-Szymańska A
**Journal:** Pediatr Endocrinol Rev (2014)

## Content

1. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2014 Sep;12 Suppl 1:107-13.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type II, Hunter's syndrome.

Tylki-Szymańska A.

Hunter syndrome is caused by deficiency of the lysososmal enzyme
iduronate-2-sulphatase that cleaves O-linked sulphate moieties from dermatan
sulphate and heparan sulphate and leads to accumulation of GAGs. The disease is
a X-linked condition affecting males and rarely females, clinically divided into
severe (2/3) and attenuated types. Children with severe form, diagnosed at 12-36
months, have coarse facial feature, short stature, joint stiffness, short neck,
broad chest, large head circumference, watery diarrhea, skeletal changes,
progressive and profound mental retardation, retinal degeneration' hearing loss,
cardiomyopathy, valvular involvement, with progressive thickening and stiffening
of the valve leaflets leading to mitral and aortic regurgitation and stenosis .
Recurrent and prolonged rhinitis with persistent nasal discharge are the first
symptoms of airway disease that manifests itself as noisy breathing and later
sleep apnea. Some patients develop ivory-colored skin lesions on the upper back
and sides of the upper arms, pathogenomic of Hunter syndrome. The scalp hair
becomes coarse, straight and bristly. Inguinal and umbilical hernias occur
caused by the disturbed structure of connective tissue and increased liver and
spleen volume. Patients with attenuated form have normal intelligence and a
milder phenotype. Physical features diagnosed later are similar but less
pronounced but progress to severe disease. Sceening is by quantitative
assessment of urinary GAGs excretion. Qualitative assessment of GAG by
electrophoresis can distinguish the type of mucopolysaccharidosis. Definitive
diagnosis is based on enzyme activity assay in leukocytes, fibroblasts or
plasma. Molecular testing is recommended mainly for genetic counseling and
carrier detection. Limited experience of Haematopoietic stem cell therapy in MPS
II showed progressive neurodegeneration. Recombinant 125 Idursulfase, is
indicated for long-term treatment. The response appears to depend on the
severity of the disease and the age treatment is started, Improvements in a
composite endpoint comprising: change in walking distance percentage of
predicted forced vital capacity (%FVC) ,decrease in liver and spleen volume and
urinary GAG levels were encouraging. Current research is focused on
pharmacological chaperones, gene therapy and substrate reduction therapy and
therapies that, unlike Idursulfase, do cross the blood-brain barrier.

PMID: 25345092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
