---
reference_id: "PMID:12953102"
title: The ATRX syndrome protein forms a chromatin-remodeling complex with Daxx and localizes in promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies.
authors:
- Xue Y
- Gibbons R
- Yan Z
- Yang D
- McDowell TL
- Sechi S
- Qin J
- Zhou S
- Higgs D
- Wang W
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1937626100
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Adenosine Triphosphate/metabolism
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Nucleus/metabolism
- Chromatin/metabolism
- Co-Repressor Proteins
- DNA Helicases/metabolism
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/metabolism"
- Molecular Chaperones
- Nuclear Proteins/metabolism
- X-linked Nuclear Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ATRX syndrome protein forms a chromatin-remodeling complex with Daxx and localizes in promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies.
**Authors:** Xue Y, Gibbons R, Yan Z, Yang D, McDowell TL, Sechi S, Qin J, Zhou S, Higgs D, Wang W
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1937626100](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1937626100)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 16;100(19):10635-40. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1937626100. Epub 2003 Sep 2.

The ATRX syndrome protein forms a chromatin-remodeling complex with Daxx and 
localizes in promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies.

Xue Y(1), Gibbons R, Yan Z, Yang D, McDowell TL, Sechi S, Qin J, Zhou S, Higgs 
D, Wang W.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of 
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

ATRX syndrome is characterized by X-linked mental retardation associated with 
alpha-thalassemia. The gene mutated in this disease, ATRX, encodes a plant 
homeodomain-like finger and a SWI2/SNF2-like ATPase motif, both of which are 
often found in chromatin-remodeling enzymes, but ATRX has not been characterized 
biochemically. By immunoprecipitation from HeLa extract, we found that ATRX is 
in a complex with transcription cofactor Daxx. The following evidence supports 
that ATRX and Daxx are components of an ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling 
complex: (i) Daxx and ATRX can be coimmunoisolated by antibodies specific for 
each protein; (ii) a proportion of Daxx cofractionates with ATRX as a complex of 
1 MDa by gel-filtration analysis; (iii) in extract from cells of a patient with 
ATRX syndrome, the level of the Daxx-ATRX complex is correspondingly reduced; 
(iv) a proportion of ATRX and Daxx colocalize in promyelocytic leukemia nuclear 
bodies, with which Daxx had previously been located; and (v) the ATRX complex 
displays ATP-dependent activities that resemble those of other 
chromatin-remodeling complexes, including triple-helix DNA displacement and 
alteration of mononucleosome disruption patterns. But unlike the previously 
described SWI/SNF or NURD complexes, the ATRX complex does not randomize DNA 
phasing of the mononucleosomes, suggesting that it may remodel chromatin 
differently. Taken together, the results suggest that ATRX functions in 
conjunction with Daxx in a novel chromatin-remodeling complex. The defects in 
ATRX syndrome may result from inappropriate expression of genes controlled by 
this complex.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1937626100
PMCID: PMC196856
PMID: 12953102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]