---
reference_id: "PMID:6338655"
title: "Thallium poisoning: a review."
authors:
- Saddique A
- Peterson CD
journal: Vet Hum Toxicol
year: '1983'
keywords:
- Animals
- Chemistry
- "Chemistry, Physical"
- "History, 19th Century"
- "History, 20th Century"
- Humans
- Kinetics
- "Thallium/history, metabolism, poisoning, toxicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thallium poisoning: a review.
**Authors:** Saddique A, Peterson CD
**Journal:** Vet Hum Toxicol (1983)

## Content

1. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1983 Feb;25(1):16-22.

Thallium poisoning: a review.

Saddique A, Peterson CD.

Thallium poisoning is one of the most complex and serious toxicities known to 
man. The symptomatology of its toxicity is usually nonspecific due to the 
multi-organ involvement. The initial symptoms of thallium poisoning may include 
fever, gastrointestinal problems, delirium, convulsions and coma. Symptoms may 
appear rapidly, but more commonly the acute toxicity subsides to be replaced by 
a gradual development of mild gastrointestinal disturbances, polyneuritis, 
encephalopathy, tachycardia, skin eruptions, stomatitis, atrophic changes of the 
skin, nail changes (Mee's lines), and skin hyperesthesia (mainly in the soles of 
the feet and the tibia). Degenerative changes of the heart, liver and kidney, 
subarchanoid hemorrhage, bone marrow depression, and increased radiopacity of 
the liver may also occur. Development of psychotic behavior with hallucinations 
and dementia has also been reported. In humans the most characteristic sign of 
thallium toxicity is alopecia which usually appears in cases when death is 
delayed for 15-20 days. Other signs and symptoms may develop at any stage of 
toxicity. The current therapy for thallium poisoning is the use of prussian blue 
and potassium chloride. Potassium therapy is probably the single most effective 
agent in the treatment of thallium poisoning. Further research, however, is 
needed to find an optimal antidote for thallium.

PMID: 6338655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]