---
reference_id: "PMID:37574498"
title: A novel splicing mutation in helicase for meiosis 1 leads to non-obstructive azoospermia.
authors:
- Yao L
- Ge Y
- Du T
- Chen T
- Ma J
- Song N
journal: J Assist Reprod Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10815-023-02907-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Azoospermia/pathology
- "Infertility, Male/genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Meiosis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel splicing mutation in helicase for meiosis 1 leads to non-obstructive azoospermia.
**Authors:** Yao L, Ge Y, Du T, Chen T, Ma J, Song N
**Journal:** J Assist Reprod Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10815-023-02907-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-023-02907-8)

## Content

1. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2023 Oct;40(10):2493-2498. doi: 
10.1007/s10815-023-02907-8. Epub 2023 Aug 14.

A novel splicing mutation in helicase for meiosis 1 leads to non-obstructive 
azoospermia.

Yao L(#)(1), Ge Y(#)(2), Du T(#)(3), Chen T(1), Ma J(4), Song N(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210029, China.
(2)Department of Reproductive Medical Center, Jinling Hospital, Affiliated 
Hospital of Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210002, China.
(3)Department of Reproductive Medical Center, Jinling Hospital, Affiliated 
Hospital of Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210002, China.
(4)Department of Reproductive Medical Center, Jinling Hospital, Affiliated 
Hospital of Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210002, China. 
majinzhao07@163.com.
(5)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210029, China. songninghong_urol@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) is an essential cause of male 
infertility for which treatment options are limited. The pathogenic mechanism of 
NOA, especially idiopathic NOA, remains unclear. Gene variations are associated 
with the occurrence of NOA. Our study was performed to investigate the genetic 
causes of NOA.
METHODS: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed in two probands diagnosed 
with NOA from a Chinese family. Sanger sequencing was applied to verify the 
pathogenic variants. A minigene assay was carried out to identify the effect of 
the splicing variants.
RESULTS: We detected a novel homozygous variant (c.2681-3 T > A) in the HFM1 
gene in the two siblings diagnosed with NOA, and their parents carried 
heterozygous mutations in the same gene. The results of the minigene assay 
revealed this splicing variant results in exon25 of HFM1 being skipped, leading 
to a protein truncation (p.Trp894Cysfs*44).
CONCLUSION: Our results showed that a deleterious splicing variant in HFM1 was 
related to NOA in these two patients. This novel variant of HFM1 may serve as a 
potential genetic biomarker for NOA patients.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10815-023-02907-8
PMCID: PMC10504198
PMID: 37574498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.