---
reference_id: "PMID:30594260"
title: "Increase in Reported Cholera Cases in Haiti Following Hurricane Matthew: An Interrupted Time Series Model."
authors:
- Hulland E
- Subaiya S
- Pierre K
- Barthelemy N
- Pierre JS
- Dismer A
- Juin S
- Fitter D
- Brunkard J
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0964
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increase in Reported Cholera Cases in Haiti Following Hurricane Matthew: An Interrupted Time Series Model.
**Authors:** Hulland E, Subaiya S, Pierre K, Barthelemy N, Pierre JS, Dismer A, Juin S, Fitter D, Brunkard J
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.17-0964](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.17-0964)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2019 Feb;100(2):368-373. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0964.

Increase in Reported Cholera Cases in Haiti Following Hurricane Matthew: An 
Interrupted Time Series Model.

Hulland E(1), Subaiya S(2), Pierre K(3), Barthelemy N(3), Pierre JS(3), Dismer 
A(1), Juin S(4), Fitter D(4)(1), Brunkard J(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)Global Immunization Division, Center for Global Health, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(3)MSPP Haiti, Directorate of Epidemiology, Laboratory and Research, Delmas, 
Haiti.
(4)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Haiti, Tabarre, Haiti.
(5)Division of Foodborne, Waterborne and Environmental Diseases, National Center 
for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.

Matthew, a category 4 hurricane, struck Haiti on October 4, 2016, causing 
widespread flooding and damage to buildings and crops, and resulted in many 
deaths. The damage caused by Matthew raised concerns of increased cholera 
transmission particularly in Sud and Grand'Anse departments, regions which were 
hit most heavily by the storm. To evaluate the change in reported cholera cases 
following Hurricane Matthew on reported cholera cases, we used interrupted time 
series regression models of daily reported cholera cases, controlling for the 
impact of both rainfall, following a 4-week lag, and seasonality, from 2013 
through 2016. Our results indicate a significant increase in reported cholera 
cases after Matthew, suggesting that the storm resulted in an immediate surge in 
suspect cases, and a decline in reported cholera cases in the 46-day post-storm 
period, after controlling for rainfall and seasonality. Regression models 
stratified by the department indicate that the impact of the hurricane was 
regional, with larger surges in the two most highly storm-affected departments: 
Sud and Grand'Anse. These models were able to provide input to the Ministry of 
Health in Haiti on the national and regional impact of Hurricane Matthew and, 
with further development, could provide the flexibility of use in other 
emergency situations. This article highlights the need for continued cholera 
prevention and control efforts, particularly in the wake of natural disasters 
such as hurricanes, and the continued need for intensive cholera surveillance 
nationally.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0964
PMCID: PMC6367609
PMID: 30594260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]