---
reference_id: "PMID:18668569"
title: "Klinefelter's syndrome (47,XXY) in male systemic lupus erythematosus patients: support for the notion of a gene-dose effect from the X chromosome."
authors:
- Scofield RH
- Bruner GR
- Namjou B
- Kimberly RP
- Ramsey-Goldman R
- Petri M
- Reveille JD
- Alarcón GS
- Vilá LM
- Reid J
- Harris B
- Li S
- Kelly JA
- Harley JB
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/art.23701
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Klinefelter's syndrome (47,XXY) in male systemic lupus erythematosus patients: support for the notion of a gene-dose effect from the X chromosome.
**Authors:** Scofield RH, Bruner GR, Namjou B, Kimberly RP, Ramsey-Goldman R, Petri M, Reveille JD, Alarcón GS, Vilá LM, Reid J, Harris B, Li S, Kelly JA, Harley JB
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.23701](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.23701)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Aug;58(8):2511-7. doi: 10.1002/art.23701.

Klinefelter's syndrome (47,XXY) in male systemic lupus erythematosus patients: 
support for the notion of a gene-dose effect from the X chromosome.

Scofield RH(1), Bruner GR, Namjou B, Kimberly RP, Ramsey-Goldman R, Petri M, 
Reveille JD, Alarcón GS, Vilá LM, Reid J, Harris B, Li S, Kelly JA, Harley JB.

Author information:
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, and Oklahoma City VAMC, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. 
hal-scofield@omrf.ouhsc.edu <hal-scofield@omrf.ouhsc.edu>

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic autoimmune disease 
that predominantly affects women. Despite isolated reports of patients with 
coexisting Klinefelter's syndrome (47,XXY) and SLE, no association of 
Klinefelter's syndrome with SLE or any other autoimmune disease has been 
established. The present study was undertaken to investigate the prevalence of 
Klinefelter's syndrome in a large population of patients with SLE.
METHODS: Sex chromosome genotyping was performed in 981 SLE patients, of whom 
213 were men. A first group of 844 SLE patients from 378 multiplex families and 
a second group of 137 men with nonfamilial SLE were evaluated. In selected 
cases, chromosomes were enumerated by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 
and karyotyping in transformed B cell lines.
RESULTS: Of 213 men with SLE, 5 had Klinefelter's syndrome (1 in 43). Four of 
them were heterozygous at X markers, and Klinefelter's syndrome was confirmed by 
FISH and karyotyping in the fifth. An overall rate of 47,XXY of 235 per 10,000 
male SLE patients was found (95% confidence interval 77-539), a dramatic 
increase over the known prevalence of Klinefelter's syndrome in an unselected 
population (17 per 10,000 live male births). Asking men with SLE about fertility 
was highly sensitive (100%) for Klinefelter's syndrome. All 768 women with SLE 
were heterozygous at X.
CONCLUSION: The frequency of Klinefelter's syndrome (47,XXY), often subclinical, 
is increased in men with SLE by approximately 14-fold compared with its 
prevalence in men without SLE. Diagnostic vigilance for 47,XXY in male patients 
with SLE is warranted. These data are the first to show an association of 
Klinefelter's syndrome with an autoimmune disease found predominantly in women. 
The risk of SLE in men with Klinefelter's syndrome is predicted to be similar to 
the risk in normal women with 46,XX and approximately 14-fold higher than in men 
with 46,XY, consistent with the notion that SLE susceptibility is partly 
explained by an X chromosome gene-dose effect.

DOI: 10.1002/art.23701
PMCID: PMC2824898
PMID: 18668569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]