---
reference_id: "PMID:30969733"
title: Brudzinski Sign(Archived).
authors:
- Stribos MP
- Jones EB
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brudzinski Sign(Archived).
**Authors:** Stribos MP, Jones EB

## Content

1. Brudzinski Sign(Archived).

Stribos MP(1), Jones EB(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2023 May 1.

Author information:
(1)UT Houston
(2)McGovern Medical School

Bacterial meningitis affects more than 1 million people per year globally and 
ranks as one of the top ten most deadly infectious diseases. Bacterial 
meningitis has a high frequency of neurologic sequelae and mortality and is 
treatable with antibiotics, which makes the diagnosis extremely important and 
time-sensitive. As compared with other febrile illnesses, bacterial meningitis 
is relatively rare. Because of this, many clinical tests have been described 
to help providers differentiate meningitis from other causes of fever and 
headache. Two of the most commonly used are Kernig's and Brudzinski's signs. The 
original report of Brudzinski's sign was in the late 1800s by Dr. Josef 
Brudzinski. At that time, he described four maneuvers to aid in the clinical 
diagnosis of meningitis. The four maneuvers he described included the 
Brudzinski's reflex, the cheek sign, the nape of the neck sign and the 
symphyseal sign. The most popular of the maneuvers is the nape of the neck sign, 
currently known as Brudzinski's sign.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30969733

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Michael Stribos declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Elizabeth Jones 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.