---
reference_id: "PMID:39199834"
title: Predicting Conservation Status of Testudoformes under Climate Change Using Habitat Models.
authors:
- Liao W
- Cao S
- Jiang Y
- Shao W
- Zhao L
- Yan C
journal: Animals (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ani14162300
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predicting Conservation Status of Testudoformes under Climate Change Using Habitat Models.
**Authors:** Liao W, Cao S, Jiang Y, Shao W, Zhao L, Yan C
**Journal:** Animals (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ani14162300](https://doi.org/10.3390/ani14162300)

## Content

1. Animals (Basel). 2024 Aug 7;14(16):2300. doi: 10.3390/ani14162300.

Predicting Conservation Status of Testudoformes under Climate Change Using 
Habitat Models.

Liao W(1)(2)(3), Cao S(1)(2)(3), Jiang Y(1)(4), Shao W(1)(2)(3), Zhao L(1)(3), 
Yan C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Southwest China Wildlife Resources Conservation (Ministry 
of Education), China West Normal University, Nanchong 637009, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Artificial Propagation and Utilization in Anurans of 
Nanchong City, China West Normal University, Nanchong 637009, China.
(3)College of Panda, China West Normal University, Nanchong 637009, China.
(4)School of Ecology and Nature Conservation, Beijing Forestry University, 
Beijing 100083, China.

Climate change promotes variations in distribution ranges, potentially leading 
to biodiversity loss and increased extinction risks for species. It is crucial 
to investigate these variations under future climate change scenarios for 
effective biodiversity conservation. Here, we studied the future distribution 
ranges of 268 Testudoformes species under climate change using habitat models, 
specifically species distribution models (SDMs), to assess their conservation 
status. Our results have indicated that over half of species are projected to 
experience declines in their potential distribution ranges under two scenarios. 
In particular, we found that three critically endangered species-Three-striped 
roofed turtle (Batagur dhongoka), Durango mud turtle (Kinosternon durangoense), 
and Colombian mud turtle (Kinosternon dunni)-displayed extraction of their 
distribution ranges and faced extinction under global climate change. 
Additionally, our analysis revealed that the potential distribution ranges of 
some species might increase under future climate scenarios. However, these 
findings must be interpreted with caution as they do not account for other 
significant factors such as biological invasions, population structure, land-use 
change, anthropogenic disturbances, and inter-organism interrelationships. 
Future studies should incorporate these factors to provide a more comprehensive 
assessment of extinction risks. Our findings suggest that climate change, in 
conjunction with habitat degradation and human activities, must be considered 
when assessing the extinction risks of Testudoformes.

DOI: 10.3390/ani14162300
PMCID: PMC11350788
PMID: 39199834

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.