---
reference_id: "PMID:38527764"
title: "Inhibition of JAK-STAT pathway corrects salivary gland inflammation and interferon driven immune activation in Sjögren's disease."
authors:
- Gupta S
- Yamada E
- Nakamura H
- Perez P
- Pranzatelli TJ
- Dominick K
- Jang SI
- Abed M
- Martin D
- Burbelo P
- Zheng C
- French B
- Alevizos I
- Khavandgar Z
- Beach M
- Pelayo E
- Walitt B
- Hasni S
- Kaplan MJ
- Tandon M
- Magone MT
- Kleiner DE
- Chiorini JA
- Baer A
- Warner BM
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/ard-2023-224842
keywords:
- Humans
- "Sjogren's Syndrome/drug therapy, immunology"
- "Janus Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Janus Kinases/metabolism
- STAT Transcription Factors/metabolism
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear/drug effects, immunology, metabolism"
- "Salivary Glands, Minor/immunology"
- Female
- Interferons
- "Piperidines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Middle Aged
- Male
- "Pyrimidines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Adult
- Inflammation
- "Pyrroles/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Epithelial Cells/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of JAK-STAT pathway corrects salivary gland inflammation and interferon driven immune activation in Sjögren's disease.
**Authors:** Gupta S, Yamada E, Nakamura H, Perez P, Pranzatelli TJ, Dominick K, Jang SI, Abed M, Martin D, Burbelo P, Zheng C, French B, Alevizos I, Khavandgar Z, Beach M, Pelayo E, Walitt B, Hasni S, Kaplan MJ, Tandon M, Magone MT, Kleiner DE, Chiorini JA, Baer A, Warner BM
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard-2023-224842](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard-2023-224842)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2024 Jul 15;83(8):1034-1047. doi: 10.1136/ard-2023-224842.

Inhibition of JAK-STAT pathway corrects salivary gland inflammation and 
interferon driven immune activation in Sjögren's disease.

Gupta S(#)(1), Yamada E(#)(2), Nakamura H(3), Perez P(4), Pranzatelli TJ(3), 
Dominick K(4), Jang SI(4), Abed M(4), Martin D(5), Burbelo P(5), Zheng C(5), 
French B(3), Alevizos I(4), Khavandgar Z(4)(6), Beach M(6), Pelayo E(6), Walitt 
B(6), Hasni S(7), Kaplan MJ(7)(8), Tandon M(4), Magone MT(9), Kleiner DE(10), 
Chiorini JA(3), Baer A(6), Warner BM(#)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Lupus Clinical Trials Unit, National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA sarthak.gupta@nih.gov eiko.yamada@nih.gov blake.warner@nih.gov.
(2)Salivary Disorder Unit, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial 
Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA 
sarthak.gupta@nih.gov eiko.yamada@nih.gov blake.warner@nih.gov.
(3)Adeno-Associated Virus Biology Section, National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Salivary Disorder Unit, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial 
Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Genomics and Computational Biology Core, National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(6)NIDCR Sjögren's Disease Clinic, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial 
Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(7)Lupus Clinical Trials Unit, National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(8)Systemic Autoimmunity Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(9)Consult Services Section, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(10)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Aug 21:2023.08.16.23294130. doi: 10.1101/2023.08.16.23294130.

OBJECTIVES: Inflammatory cytokines that signal through the Janus kinases-signal 
transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway, especially 
interferons (IFNs), are implicated in Sjögren's disease (SjD). Although 
inhibition of JAKs is effective in other autoimmune diseases, a systematic 
investigation of IFN-JAK-STAT signalling and the effect of JAK inhibitor (JAKi) 
therapy in SjD-affected human tissues has not been fully investigated.
METHODS: Human minor salivary glands (MSGs) and peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs) were investigated using bulk or single-cell (sc) RNA sequencing 
(RNAseq), immunofluorescence (IF) microscopy and flow cytometry. Ex vivo culture 
assays on PBMCs and primary salivary gland epithelial cell (pSGEC) lines were 
performed to model changes in target tissues before and after JAKi.
RESULTS: RNAseq and IF showed activated JAK-STAT pathway in SjD MSGs. Elevated 
IFN-stimulated gene (ISGs) expression associated with clinical variables (eg, 
focus scores, anti-SSA positivity). scRNAseq of MSGs exhibited cell 
type-specific upregulation of JAK-STAT and ISGs; PBMCs showed similar trends, 
including markedly upregulated ISGs in monocytes. Ex vivo studies showed 
elevated basal pSTAT levels in SjD MSGs and PBMCs that were corrected with JAKi. 
SjD-derived pSGECs exhibited higher basal ISG expressions and exaggerated 
responses to IFN-β, which were normalised by JAKi without cytotoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: SjD patients' tissues exhibit increased expression of ISGs and 
activation of the JAK-STAT pathway in a cell type-dependent manner. JAKi 
normalises this aberrant signalling at the tissue level and in PBMCs, suggesting 
a putative viable therapy for SjD, targeting both glandular and extraglandular 
symptoms. Predicated on these data, a phase Ib/IIa randomised controlled trial 
to treat SjD with tofacitinib was initiated.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/ard-2023-224842
PMCID: PMC11250564
PMID: 38527764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: BMW has Cooperative 
Research Award and Development Agreements (CRADA) from Pfizer and Mitobridge (a 
subsidiary of Astellas Pharma). NIAMS has CRADAs with AstraZeneca and Bristol 
Myers Squibb. These CRADA did not financially support the experimental results 
presented herein.