---
reference_id: "PMID:38263760"
title: Neurological outcome in long-chain hydroxy fatty acid oxidation disorders.
authors:
- Mütze U
- Ottenberger A
- Gleich F
- Maier EM
- Lindner M
- Husain RA
- Palm K
- Beblo S
- Freisinger P
- Santer R
- Thimm E
- Vom Dahl S
- Weinhold N
- Grohmann-Held K
- Haase C
- Hennermann JB
- Hörbe-Blindt A
- Kamrath C
- Marquardt I
- Marquardt T
- Behne R
- Haas D
- Spiekerkoetter U
- Hoffmann GF
- Garbade SF
- Grünert SC
- Kölker S
journal: Ann Clin Transl Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/acn3.52002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological outcome in long-chain hydroxy fatty acid oxidation disorders.
**Authors:** Mütze U, Ottenberger A, Gleich F, Maier EM, Lindner M, Husain RA, Palm K, Beblo S, Freisinger P, Santer R, Thimm E, Vom Dahl S, Weinhold N, Grohmann-Held K, Haase C, Hennermann JB, Hörbe-Blindt A, Kamrath C, Marquardt I, Marquardt T, Behne R, Haas D, Spiekerkoetter U, Hoffmann GF, Garbade SF, Grünert SC, Kölker S
**Journal:** Ann Clin Transl Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acn3.52002](https://doi.org/10.1002/acn3.52002)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2024 Apr;11(4):883-898. doi: 10.1002/acn3.52002. Epub 
2024 Jan 23.

Neurological outcome in long-chain hydroxy fatty acid oxidation disorders.

Mütze U(1), Ottenberger A(1), Gleich F(1), Maier EM(2), Lindner M(3), Husain 
RA(4), Palm K(5), Beblo S(6), Freisinger P(7), Santer R(8), Thimm E(9), Vom Dahl 
S(10), Weinhold N(11), Grohmann-Held K(12), Haase C(13), Hennermann JB(14), 
Hörbe-Blindt A(15), Kamrath C(16), Marquardt I(17), Marquardt T(18), Behne R(1), 
Haas D(1), Spiekerkoetter U(19), Hoffmann GF(1), Garbade SF(1), Grünert SC(19), 
Kölker S(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Faculty of Heidelberg, Center for Child and Adolescent Medicine, 
Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Heidelberg University, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, 
Germany.
(3)Division of Pediatric Neurology, University Children's Hospital Frankfurt, 
Frankfurt, Germany.
(4)Center for Inborn Metabolic Disorders, Department of Neuropediatrics, Jena 
University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(5)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolic Medicine, University 
Children's Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Women and Child Health, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, 
Center for Pediatric Research Leipzig (CPL), University Hospitals, University of 
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(7)Children's Hospital Reutlingen, Klinikum am Steinenberg, Reutlingen, Germany.
(8)University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, University Children's Hospital, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(9)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology, and Pediatric Cardiology, 
University Children's Hospital, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, 
University Hospital, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(11)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Nephrology and Metabolic Diseases, 
Center of Chronically Sick Children, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(12)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medicine 
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(13)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Helios Hospital Erfurt, 
Erfurt, Germany.
(14)Villa Metabolica, Center for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mainz 
University Medical Center, Mainz, Germany.
(15)Prof.-Hess Children's Hospital, Clinic Bremen Mitte, Bremen, Germany.
(16)Department of General Pediatrics and Neonatology, University Hospital of 
Gießen and Marburg, Gießen, Germany.
(17)Department of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital Oldenburg, Oldenburg, 
Germany.
(18)Department of General Pediatrics, Metabolic Diseases, University Children's 
Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
(19)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology, 
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to elucidate the long-term benefit of newborn 
screening (NBS) for individuals with long-chain 3-hydroxy-acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
(LCHAD) and mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP) deficiency, inherited 
metabolic diseases included in NBS programs worldwide.
METHODS: German national multicenter study of individuals with confirmed 
LCHAD/MTP deficiency identified by NBS between 1999 and 2020 or selective 
metabolic screening. Analyses focused on NBS results, confirmatory diagnostics, 
and long-term clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: Sixty-seven individuals with LCHAD/MTP deficiency were included in the 
study, thereof 54 identified by NBS. All screened individuals with LCHAD 
deficiency survived, but four with MTP deficiency (14.8%) died during the study 
period. Despite NBS and early treatment neonatal decompensations (28%), 
symptomatic disease course (94%), later metabolic decompensations (80%), 
cardiomyopathy (28%), myopathy (82%), hepatopathy (32%), retinopathy (17%), 
and/or neuropathy (22%) occurred. Hospitalization rates were high (up to a mean 
of 2.4 times/year). Disease courses in screened individuals with LCHAD and MTP 
deficiency were similar except for neuropathy, occurring earlier in individuals 
with MTP deficiency (median 3.9 vs. 11.4 years; p = 0.0447). Achievement of 
dietary goals decreased with age, from 75% in the first year of life to 12% at 
age 10, and consensus group recommendations on dietary management were often not 
achieved.
INTERPRETATION: While NBS and early treatment result in improved (neonatal) 
survival, they cannot reliably prevent long-term morbidity in screened 
individuals with LCHAD/MTP deficiency, highlighting the urgent need of better 
therapeutic strategies and the development of disease course-altering treatment.

© 2024 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.52002
PMCID: PMC11021608
PMID: 38263760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SK and GFH received research grants from the 
Dietmar Hopp Foundation, St. Leon‐Rot, Germany. All other authors have nothing 
to report.