---
reference_id: "PMID:22876373"
title: Proteus Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Biesecker LG
- Sapp JC
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteus Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Biesecker LG, Sapp JC

## Content

1. Proteus Syndrome.

Biesecker LG(1), Sapp JC(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2012 Aug 9 [updated 2023 May 25].

Author information:
(1)Center for Precision Health Research, National Human Genome Research 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Proteus syndrome (PS) is characterized by progressive 
segmental or patchy overgrowth most commonly affecting the skeleton, skin, 
adipose, and central nervous systems. In most individuals PS has modest or no 
manifestations at birth, develops and progresses rapidly beginning in the 
toddler period, and relentlessly progresses through childhood, causing severe 
overgrowth and disfigurement. It is associated with a range of tumors, pulmonary 
complications, and a striking predisposition to deep vein thrombosis and 
pulmonary embolism.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PS is established in a proband with all 
three general criteria (mosaic distribution of lesions, sporadic occurrence, 
progressive course) and a clinical score based on positive and negative criteria 
of at least ten points in an individual with a mosaic AKT1 pathogenic variant or 
at least 15 points in an individual without a mosaic AKT1 pathogenic variant 
identified by molecular genetic testing. The diagnosis of AKT1-related 
overgrowth spectrum is established in an individual with a mosaic AKT1 
pathogenic variant and a clinical score of 2-9.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management of overgrowth including 
orthopedic procedures to delay or halt linear bone growth; rehabilitation 
medicine care including physical and occupational therapy; correction of 
skeletal deformities such as scoliosis; dermatologic management of the skin 
manifestations, especially the cerebriform connective tissue nevi with pedorthic 
intervention as needed; surgery as needed for lipomatous overgrowth; evaluation 
and treatment of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism; treatment of 
tumors per surgeon and/or oncologist; treatment of bullous pulmonary disease per 
pulmonologist; developmental intervention and/or special education for 
developmental delays; psychosocial counseling is warranted in most individuals. 
Surveillance: Monitoring should be tailored to individual presentation. 
Orthopedic, rehabilitation medicine, physical therapy, occupational therapy, 
pulmonary, dermatology, and developmental evaluations as needed; routine 
monitoring for evidence of tumor development is by medical history and physical 
examination; periodic imaging is not indicated. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Medications that increase the risk of deep vein thrombosis or are procoagulant; 
medications that increase growth (e.g., androgenic steroids, growth hormone).
GENETIC COUNSELING: PS and AKT1-related overgrowth spectrum are not inherited: 
there are no confirmed occurrences of vertical transmission or sib recurrence. 
There is no known risk to offspring of an affected individual; however, the 
number of affected individuals who have reproduced is very small. Thus, the 
risks to the parents of an affected child and to affected persons who do 
reproduce are not increased compared to the general population. Because PS and 
AKT1-related overgrowth spectrum are not inherited, prenatal testing is not 
indicated.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 22876373