---
reference_id: "PMID:37375091"
title: "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency-Classification, Microbiology Association and Treatment."
authors:
- Justiz-Vaillant AA
- Gopaul D
- Akpaka PE
- Soodeen S
- Arozarena Fundora R
journal: Microorganisms
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11061589
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe Combined Immunodeficiency-Classification, Microbiology Association and Treatment.
**Authors:** Justiz-Vaillant AA, Gopaul D, Akpaka PE, Soodeen S, Arozarena Fundora R
**Journal:** Microorganisms (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/microorganisms11061589](https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms11061589)

## Content

1. Microorganisms. 2023 Jun 15;11(6):1589. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11061589.

Severe Combined Immunodeficiency-Classification, Microbiology Association and 
Treatment.

Justiz-Vaillant AA(1), Gopaul D(2), Akpaka PE(1)(3), Soodeen S(1), Arozarena 
Fundora R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, The 
University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Port of Spain General Hospital, The 
University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago.
(3)Eric Williams Medical Sciences Complex, North Central Regional Health 
Authority, Champs Fleurs, Trinidad and Tobago.
(4)Department of Clinical and Surgical Sciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
The University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago.

Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is a primary inherited immunodeficiency 
disease that presents before the age of three months and can be fatal. It is 
usually due to opportunistic infections caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, and 
protozoa resulting in a decrease in number and impairment in the function of T 
and B cells. Autosomal, X-linked, and sporadic forms exist. Evidence of 
recurrent opportunistic infections and lymphopenia very early in life should 
prompt immunological investigation and suspicion of this rare disorder. Adequate 
stem cell transplantation is the treatment of choice. This review aimed to 
provide a comprehensive approach to the microorganisms associated with severe 
combined immunodeficiency (SCID) and its management. We describe SCID as a 
syndrome and summarize the different microorganisms that affect children and how 
they can be investigated and treated.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms11061589
PMCID: PMC10304095
PMID: 37375091

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.