---
reference_id: "PMID:12500788"
title: "Ainhum (dactylolysis spontanea): a radiological survey of 6000 patients."
authors:
- Daccarett M
- Espinosa G
- Rahimi F
- Eckerman CM
- Wayne-Bruton S
- Couture M
- Rosenblum J
journal: J Foot Ankle Surg
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s1067-2516(02)80083-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ainhum (dactylolysis spontanea): a radiological survey of 6000 patients.
**Authors:** Daccarett M, Espinosa G, Rahimi F, Eckerman CM, Wayne-Bruton S, Couture M, Rosenblum J
**Journal:** J Foot Ankle Surg (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1067-2516(02)80083-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1067-2516(02)80083-7)

## Content

1. J Foot Ankle Surg. 2002 Nov-Dec;41(6):372-8. doi:
10.1016/s1067-2516(02)80083-7.

Ainhum (dactylolysis spontanea): a radiological survey of 6000 patients.

Daccarett M(1), Espinosa G, Rahimi F, Eckerman CM, Wayne-Bruton S, Couture M, 
Rosenblum J.

Author information:
(1)Thorek Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. mdaccare@uic.edu

Dactylolysis spontanea is an idiopathic condition affecting the fifth toe, and 
sometimes other toes, that is frequently bilateral, with lesions in different 
stages. Between 1977 and 1999, a total 6000 radiographic studies of the feet 
were reviewed in a mainly African American population in Chicago, Illinois. 
After an initial screening based on the Cole criteria, 581 patients were 
selected and re-examined, and amplification techniques were performed. After 
reviewing the complementary exams, 102 patients were diagnosed with dactylolysis 
spontanea or ainhum. Soft-tissue constriction was the most frequently presented 
radiological sign on the initial screening. Kurtosis at the digit plantar fold 
and marked rotation of the fifth toe were normal findings in asymptomatic 
patients. Demographics, comorbidities, and radiological findings were analyzed 
in the selected population. Associated diseases occurring in these patients 
appeared to have no specific etiologic correlation with ainhum. African 
Americans and the dark-skinned population are affected exclusively by this 
condition, presumably due to the fibrogenic tendency of these individuals. Early 
diagnosis and accurate staging of ainhum are facilitated by radiological 
examination of the feet. The findings suggest that this condition is 
underdiagnosed and overlooked because its low prevalence and variable clinical 
presentations that might mimic more common etiologies, including localized 
trauma.

DOI: 10.1016/s1067-2516(02)80083-7
PMID: 12500788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]