---
reference_id: PMID:37967143
title: Detection of Recurrence through microRNA-371a-3p Serum Levels in a Follow-up of Stage I Testicular Germ Cell Tumors in the DRKS-00019223 Study.
authors:
- Belge G
- Dumlupinar C
- Nestler T
- Klemke M
- Törzsök P
- Trenti E
- Pichler R
- Loidl W
- Che Y
- Hiester A
- Matthies C
- Pichler M
- Paffenholz P
- Kluth L
- Wenzel M
- Sommer J
- Heinzelbecker J
- Schriefer P
- Winter A
- Zengerling F
- Kramer MW
- Lengert M
- Frey J
- Heidenreich A
- Wülfing C
- Radtke A
- Dieckmann KP
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-0730
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of Recurrence through microRNA-371a-3p Serum Levels in a Follow-up of Stage I Testicular Germ Cell Tumors in the DRKS-00019223 Study.
**Authors:** Belge G, Dumlupinar C, Nestler T, Klemke M, Törzsök P, Trenti E, Pichler R, Loidl W, Che Y, Hiester A, Matthies C, Pichler M, Paffenholz P, Kluth L, Wenzel M, Sommer J, Heinzelbecker J, Schriefer P, Winter A, Zengerling F, Kramer MW, Lengert M, Frey J, Heidenreich A, Wülfing C, Radtke A, Dieckmann KP
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-0730](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-0730)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2024 Jan 17;30(2):404-412. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-0730.

Detection of Recurrence through microRNA-371a-3p Serum Levels in a Follow-up of 
Stage I Testicular Germ Cell Tumors in the DRKS-00019223 Study.

Belge G(#)(1), Dumlupinar C(#)(1), Nestler T(2), Klemke M(1), Törzsök P(3), 
Trenti E(4), Pichler R(5), Loidl W(6), Che Y(7), Hiester A(7), Matthies C(8), 
Pichler M(9), Paffenholz P(10), Kluth L(11), Wenzel M(11), Sommer J(12), 
Heinzelbecker J(13), Schriefer P(14), Winter A(15), Zengerling F(16), Kramer 
MW(17), Lengert M(1), Frey J(18), Heidenreich A(10), Wülfing C(19), Radtke 
A(#)(18), Dieckmann KP(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Genetics, Faculty of Biology and Chemistry, University of 
Bremen, Bremen, Germany.
(2)Department of Urology, Bundeswehrzentralkrankenhaus Koblenz, Koblenz, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Urology and Andrology, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg 
University Hospital, Salzburg, Austria.
(4)Central Hospital Bozen, Department Urology, Bozen, Italy.
(5)Department of Urology, University Hospital Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(6)Ordensklinikum Barmherzige Schwestern, Department Urology, Linz, Austria.
(7)Department of Urology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(8)Department of Urology, Bundeswehrkrankenhaus Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
(9)Research Unit of Non-Coding RNA, Division of Oncology, Medical University of 
Graz, Graz, Austria.
(10)Department of Urology, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(11)Department of Urology, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University 
Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(12)Department of Urology, St. Franziskus Krankenhaus Lohne, Lohne, Germany.
(13)Saarland University Medical Centre and Saarland University, Department of 
Urology, Homburg, Germany.
(14)Urologische Gemeinschaftspraxis Buxtehude, Buxtehude, Germany.
(15)Department of Urology, University Hospital Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(16)Department of Urology, Ulm University Hospital, Ulm, Germany.
(17)Department of Urology, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Campus 
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(18)miRdetect GmbH, Bremerhaven, Germany.
(19)Department of Urology, Asklepios Klinik Altona, Hamburg, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Surveillance of clinical stage I (CSI) testicular germ cell tumors 
(GCT) is hampered by low sensitivity and specificity of current biomarkers for 
detecting relapses. This study evaluated if serum levels of microRNA371a-3p 
(M371 test) can: (i) Accurately detect relapses, (ii) detect relapses earlier 
than conventional technology, and (iii) if elevated postoperative M371 levels 
may predict relapse.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In a multicentric setting, 258 patients with testicular CSI 
GCT were prospectively followed by surveillance for a median time of 18 months 
with serial measurements of serum M371 levels, in addition to standard 
diagnostic techniques. Diagnostic characteristics of M371 for detecting relapses 
were calculated using ROC curve analysis.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients recurred (15.1%), all with elevated M371 levels; 
eight without relapse had elevations, too. The test revealed the following 
characteristics: area under the ROC curve of 0.993, sensitivity 100%, 
specificity 96.3%, positive predictive value 83%, negative predictive value 
100%. Earlier relapse detection with the test was found in 28%, with 
non-significant median time gain to diagnosis. Postoperative M371 levels did not 
predict future relapse.
CONCLUSIONS: The sensitivity and specificity of the M371 test for detecting 
relapses in CSI GCTs are much superior to those of conventional diagnostics. 
However, post-orchiectomy M371 levels are not predictive of relapse, and there 
is no significant earlier relapse detection with the test. In all, there is 
clear evidence for the utility of the M371 test for relapse detection suggesting 
it may soon be ready for implementation into routine follow-up schedules for 
patients with testicular GCT.

©2023 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-23-0730
PMCID: PMC10792362
PMID: 37967143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]