---
reference_id: "PMID:12083817"
title: Analysis of the monkeypox virus genome.
authors:
- Shchelkunov SN
- Totmenin AV
- Safronov PF
- Mikheev MV
- Gutorov VV
- Ryazankina OI
- Petrov NA
- Babkin IV
- Uvarova EA
- Sandakhchiev LS
- Sisler JR
- Esposito JJ
- Damon IK
- Jahrling PB
- Moss B
journal: Virology
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1006/viro.2002.1446
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of the monkeypox virus genome.
**Authors:** Shchelkunov SN, Totmenin AV, Safronov PF, Mikheev MV, Gutorov VV, Ryazankina OI, Petrov NA, Babkin IV, Uvarova EA, Sandakhchiev LS, Sisler JR, Esposito JJ, Damon IK, Jahrling PB, Moss B
**Journal:** Virology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/viro.2002.1446](https://doi.org/10.1006/viro.2002.1446)

## Content

1. Virology. 2002 Jun 5;297(2):172-94. doi: 10.1006/viro.2002.1446.

Analysis of the monkeypox virus genome.

Shchelkunov SN(1), Totmenin AV, Safronov PF, Mikheev MV, Gutorov VV, Ryazankina 
OI, Petrov NA, Babkin IV, Uvarova EA, Sandakhchiev LS, Sisler JR, Esposito JJ, 
Damon IK, Jahrling PB, Moss B.

Author information:
(1)State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology Vector, Koltsovo, 
Novosibirsk Region, Russia.

Monkeypox virus (MPV) belongs to the orthopoxvirus genus of the family 
Poxviridae, is endemic in parts of Africa, and causes a human disease that 
resembles smallpox. The 196,858-bp MPV genome was analyzed with regard to 
structural features and open reading frames. Each end of the genome contains an 
identical but oppositely oriented 6379-bp terminal inverted repetition, which 
similar to that of other orthopoxviruses, includes a putative telomere 
resolution sequence and short tandem repeats. Computer-assisted analysis was 
used to identify 190 open reading frames containing >/=60 amino acid residues. 
Of these, four were present within the inverted terminal repetition. MPV 
contained the known essential orthopoxvirus genes but only a subset of the 
putative immunomodulatory and host range genes. Sequence comparisons confirmed 
the assignment of MPV as a distinct species of orthopoxvirus that is not a 
direct ancestor or a direct descendent of variola virus, the causative agent of 
smallpox.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2002.1446
PMCID: PMC9534300
PMID: 12083817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]