---
reference_id: "PMID:36251502"
title: Prevalence and Patterns of Renal Involvement Among Patients With Systemic Lupus Erythematous at a Tertiary Center.
authors:
- Hasan MA
- Alali L
- Alsadah F
- Alobud S
- Alsaif J
- Alali Z
journal: J Clin Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001914
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and Patterns of Renal Involvement Among Patients With Systemic Lupus Erythematous at a Tertiary Center.
**Authors:** Hasan MA, Alali L, Alsadah F, Alobud S, Alsaif J, Alali Z
**Journal:** J Clin Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RHU.0000000000001914](https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000001914)

## Content

1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2023 Mar 1;29(2):84-90. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001914. 
Epub 2022 Oct 17.

Prevalence and Patterns of Renal Involvement Among Patients With Systemic Lupus 
Erythematous at a Tertiary Center.

Hasan MA(1), Alali L(2), Alsadah F(2), Alobud S(2), Alsaif J(2), Alali Z(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, King 
Fahad Hospital of the University.
(2)Medical intern, College of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, 
Dammam, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disorder 
characterized by widespread inflammation and damage to multiple organ systems. 
One of the most common and severe manifestations of SLE is lupus nephritis (LN).
OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence of LN among subjects with SLE and to 
identify the demographic, clinical, and laboratory parameters of SLE in subjects 
diagnosed with LN.
METHODS: This is a descriptive study conducted at a tertiary hospital. Medical 
records were reviewed from outpatients who visited between January 2015 and 
October 2019 and who has fulfilled the classification criteria for diagnosis of 
SLE and had LN.
RESULTS: Among 365 patients with SLE, 36% had LN. The most prevalent World 
Health Organization class of LN was IV, which significantly correlated with both 
abnormal creatinine levels and nephrotic range proteinuria. Elevated serum 
creatinine correlated with the presence of hypertension and thrombocytopenia. 
Cutaneous manifestations were noted to be present in 100% of LN patients, 
followed by arthritis and/or arthralgia (82.9%), anemia (94.6%), and lymphopenia 
(87.6%).
CONCLUSION: This study aids in the recognition of the demographic, clinical, 
laboratory features, and the histological patterns of LN patients in Saudi 
Arabia, that probably has a role in the development and disease progression. A 
significant correlation was found between abnormal kidney function and 
hypertension, thrombocytopenia and nephrotic range proteinuria. The presence of 
World Health Organization class IV LN correlated with both impaired kidney 
function and nephrotic range proteinuria.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001914
PMID: 36251502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.