---
reference_id: "PMID:37016119"
title: "Comparative analysis of adjuvant therapy for stage III BRAF-mut melanoma: A real-world retrospective study from single center in China."
authors:
- Zhong J
- Sun W
- Hu T
- Wang C
- Yan W
- Luo Z
- Liu X
- Xu Y
- Chen Y
journal: Cancer Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/cam4.5866
keywords:
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects
- China
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Adjuvants, Immunologic/therapeutic use"
- Mutation
- Pyridones/adverse effects
- Pyrimidinones/adverse effects
- Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative analysis of adjuvant therapy for stage III BRAF-mut melanoma: A real-world retrospective study from single center in China.
**Authors:** Zhong J, Sun W, Hu T, Wang C, Yan W, Luo Z, Liu X, Xu Y, Chen Y
**Journal:** Cancer Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cam4.5866](https://doi.org/10.1002/cam4.5866)

## Content

1. Cancer Med. 2023 May;12(10):11475-11482. doi: 10.1002/cam4.5866. Epub 2023 Apr
 4.

Comparative analysis of adjuvant therapy for stage III BRAF-mut melanoma: A
real-world retrospective study from single center in China.

Zhong J(1), Sun W(1), Hu T(1), Wang C(1), Yan W(1), Luo Z(2), Liu X(2), Xu Y(1),
Chen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Musculoskeletal Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer
Center, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: BRAF V600 mutation is the most common oncogenic alternation in
melanoma and is visible in around 50% of cutaneous and 10%-15% of acral or
mucosal subtypes. Currently, immunotherapy with anti-PD-1 blockade and
dual-targeted therapy with Dabrafenib plus trametinib (D + T) target therapy
have been approved as adjuvant therapies for Stage III melanoma with BRAF V600
mutation. According to their phase III clinical trials, 3-year recurrence-free
survival (RFS) is around 60% for both types of treatment. However, early disease
control was slightly more effective with targeted therapy than immunotherapy.
With different drug approval deadlines in China, anti-PD1 monotherapy, D + T
combination, and Vemurafenib (V) monotherapy have all been used in real clinical
practice as adjuvant settings for stage III BRAF-mut melanoma in recent years.
We conducted this retrospective study to evaluate the efficacy of different
treatments in the Chinese melanoma population.
METHODS: Patients who underwent radical surgery and were diagnosed as Stage III
melanoma harboring BRAF V600 mutation by pathological report were
retrospectively identified at Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center from
January 2017 to December 2021. Patients with mucosal melanoma, or with follow-up
of <6 months, or receiving other adjuvant treatment were excluded. Pearson's
chi-squared test or Fisher's exact test was performed for univariable analysis
of the different adjuvant groups. Log-rank analysis was used to identify
prognostic factors for relapse-free survival (RFS).
RESULTS: Ninety-three patients with resected stage III melanoma with BRAF V600E
mutation were identified in our study, including 25 patients receiving adjuvant
anti-PD-1 immunotherapy (PD-1), 25 receiving adjuvant D + T, 23 receiving V, and
20 patients with observation-only (OBS). There were no statistical differences
between treatment groups in baseline characteristics including age, gender,
subtypes, primary thickness, ulceration, and nodal involvement. Median
relapse-free survival (RFS) time was not reached in the D + T group, 15 months
in the V group, 15 months in the PD-1 group, and 10 months in the OBS group,
respectively. Compared to OBS, all three other groups showed a tendency to
benefit from RFS, while only D + T achieved a statistical difference
(p = 0.002). However, compared to D + T, anti-PD-1 monotherapy also showed
significantly worse relapse control (p = 0.032).
CONCLUSIONS: For Chinese stage III melanoma with BRAF mutation, both novel
targeted therapy and immunotherapy showed potential benefits in relapse-free
survival compared to observation only. Dual-targeted D + T therapy may still be
the best choice for adjuvant therapy because anti-PD-1 monotherapy has failed to
report equivalent efficacy in real-world practice.

© 2023 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.5866
PMCID: PMC10242313
PMID: 37016119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors made no disclosures.
