---
reference_id: "PMID:39364729"
title: "Jejunal Dieulafoy's lesion - An exceptionally rare and challenging culprit of gastrointestinal bleeding."
authors:
- Gonçalves JC
- Magalhães J
- Moreira MJ
- Cotter J
journal: Rev Esp Enferm Dig
year: '2024'
doi: 10.17235/reed.2024.10785/2024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Jejunal Dieulafoy's lesion - An exceptionally rare and challenging culprit of gastrointestinal bleeding.
**Authors:** Gonçalves JC, Magalhães J, Moreira MJ, Cotter J
**Journal:** Rev Esp Enferm Dig (2024)
**DOI:** [10.17235/reed.2024.10785/2024](https://doi.org/10.17235/reed.2024.10785/2024)

## Content

1. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 2024 Oct 4. doi: 10.17235/reed.2024.10785/2024. Online
ahead  of print.

Jejunal Dieulafoy's lesion - An exceptionally rare and challenging culprit of 
gastrointestinal bleeding.

Gonçalves JC(1), Magalhães J(2), Moreira MJ(3), Cotter J(3).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology, Unidade Local de Saúde Alto Ave, Portugal.
(2)Gastroenterology , Unidade Local de Saúde do Alto Ave, Portugal.
(3)Gastroenterology, Unidade Local de Saúde do Alto Ave, Portugal.

A 78-year-old male presented to the emergency department with melena. He was 
hemodynamically stable but displayed a hemoglobin level of 5.8g/dL necessitating 
blood transfusion. Initial esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy failed to 
identify a bleeding source, prompting a capsule endoscopy that revealed an 
active bleeding site in the jejunum. A single-balloon enteroscopy identified an 
aberrant vessel in the mid-jejunum protruding through a 3mm mucosal defect, 
devoid of surrounding inflammation, consistent with a Dieulafoy's lesion, in 
which two through-the-scope clips were applied. Despite this, ongoing melena and 
decreasing hemoglobin levels in the subsequent days led to a second 
single-balloon enteroscopy, which confirmed continued bleeding. Definitive 
hemostasis was achieved through diluted adrenaline injection, four additional 
through-the-scope clips, and polidocanol sclerotherapy. Jejunal Dieulafoy's 
lesion is extremely rare and presents notable diagnostic and therapeutic 
challenges. Ávila et al. recently reported a case where, despite capsule 
endoscopy identifying the bleeding site, single-balloon enteroscopy failed to 
confirm the diagnosis, leading to the use of motorized enteroscopy with argon 
and metallic clip treatment. Similarly, our experience highlights the diagnostic 
value of capsule endoscopy and the crucial role of device-assisted enteroscopy 
in a multimodal therapeutic approach, which was essential for achieving 
successful hemostasis.

DOI: 10.17235/reed.2024.10785/2024
PMID: 39364729