---
reference_id: "PMID:34035646"
title: "Cutaneous and ocular rosacea: Common and specific physiopathogenic mechanisms and study models."
authors:
- Rodrigues-Braz D
- Zhao M
- Yesilirmak N
- Aractingi S
- Behar-Cohen F
- Bourges JL
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2021'
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Eye Diseases/etiology, immunology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- "Rosacea/etiology, immunology, physiopathology"
- "Skin Diseases/etiology, immunology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous and ocular rosacea: Common and specific physiopathogenic mechanisms and study models.
**Authors:** Rodrigues-Braz D, Zhao M, Yesilirmak N, Aractingi S, Behar-Cohen F, Bourges JL
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2021)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2021 May 13;27:323-353. eCollection 2021.

Cutaneous and ocular rosacea: Common and specific physiopathogenic mechanisms 
and study models.

Rodrigues-Braz D(1), Zhao M(1), Yesilirmak N(1)(2)(3), Aractingi S(4), 
Behar-Cohen F(1)(3), Bourges JL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Université de Paris, Sorbonne Université, 
Inserm, UMRS1138, Team 17, Physiopathology of ocular diseases: therapeutic 
innovations, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(3)Ophtalmopole, Assistance Publique -Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Cochin 
Hospital, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Dermatology, AP-HP, Cochin Hospital, Paris, France.

Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory disease that affects the face skin. It is 
clinically classified into the following four subgroups depending on its 
location and severity: erythematotelangiectatic, papulopustular, phymatous, and 
ocular. Rosacea is a multifactorial disease triggered by favoring factors, the 
pathogenesis of which remains imperfectly understood. Recognized mechanisms 
include the innate immune system, with the implication of Toll-like receptors 
(TLRs) and cathelicidins; neurovascular deregulation involving vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), transient receptor potential (TRP) ion 
channels, and neuropeptides; and dysfunction of skin sebaceous glands and ocular 
meibomian glands. Microorganisms, genetic predisposition, corticosteroid 
treatment, and ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation are favoring factors. In this 
paper, we review the common and specific molecular mechanisms involved in the 
pathogenesis of cutaneous and ocular rosacea and discuss laboratory and clinical 
studies, as well as experimental models.

Copyright © 2021 Molecular Vision.

PMCID: PMC8131178
PMID: 34035646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]