---
reference_id: "PMID:39060265"
title: Homozygous 6-bp deletion of IGFALS in a prepubertal boy with short stature.
authors:
- Doi H
- Kageyama I
- Katoh-Fukui Y
- Hattori A
- Fukami M
- Shimura N
journal: Hum Genome Var
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41439-024-00285-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous 6-bp deletion of IGFALS in a prepubertal boy with short stature.
**Authors:** Doi H, Kageyama I, Katoh-Fukui Y, Hattori A, Fukami M, Shimura N
**Journal:** Hum Genome Var (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41439-024-00285-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41439-024-00285-w)

## Content

1. Hum Genome Var. 2024 Jul 26;11(1):27. doi: 10.1038/s41439-024-00285-w.

Homozygous 6-bp deletion of IGFALS in a prepubertal boy with short stature.

Doi H(1)(2), Kageyama I(1), Katoh-Fukui Y(1), Hattori A(1), Fukami M(3), Shimura 
N(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Advanced Pediatric Medicine, Tohoku University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. fukami-m@ncchd.go.jp.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Rinkai Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Biallelic IGFALS variants lead to acid‒labile subunit (ALS) deficiency 
characterized by growth hormone resistance with or without delayed puberty. 
Here, we report a prepubertal boy with a homozygous 2-amino acid deletion within 
the fourth N-glycosylation motif (c.1103_1108del, p.N368_S370delinsT) associated 
with parental consanguinity. He showed short stature consistent with ALS 
deficiency. This case expands the mutation spectrum of IGFALS to include the 
elimination of only one N-glycosylation motif of ALS.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41439-024-00285-w
PMCID: PMC11282113
PMID: 39060265

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.