---
reference_id: "PMID:29140105"
title: "Durvalumab in non-small-cell lung cancer patients: current developments."
authors:
- Mezquita L
- Planchard D
journal: Future Oncol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2217/fon-2017-0373
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Durvalumab in non-small-cell lung cancer patients: current developments.
**Authors:** Mezquita L, Planchard D
**Journal:** Future Oncol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fon-2017-0373](https://doi.org/10.2217/fon-2017-0373)

## Content

1. Future Oncol. 2018 Feb;14(3):205-222. doi: 10.2217/fon-2017-0373. Epub 2017
Nov  15.

Durvalumab in non-small-cell lung cancer patients: current developments.

Mezquita L(1), Planchard D(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) are a key component of treating advanced 
cancer patients, principally antibodies against CTLA-4 and PD-1 or PD-L1. 
Durvalumab (MEDI4736) is a selective, high-affinity, human IgG1 monoclonal 
antibody that blocks PD-L1, which binds to PD-1 and CD80, but not to PD-L2. 
Single-agent durvalumab showed clinical efficacy and a manageable safety profile 
in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer, particularly the ≥25% PD-L1+ population. 
Durvalumab is under evaluation in early, locally advanced and advanced disease 
as monotherapy and combined with ICIs, targeted therapies, chemotherapy and 
radiotherapy. Impressive activity has been recently reported after 
chemoradiation in locally advanced patients; promising activity was observed 
with other ICI combinations, and potentially with other drugs including 
platinum-based chemotherapy. In contrast, early data reveal lower response rates 
in EGFR and ALK-positive patients.

DOI: 10.2217/fon-2017-0373
PMID: 29140105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]