---
reference_id: "PMID:32589303"
title: The effects of climate change on respiratory allergy and asthma induced by pollen and mold allergens.
authors:
- D'Amato G
- Chong-Neto HJ
- Monge Ortega OP
- Vitale C
- Ansotegui I
- Rosario N
- Haahtela T
- Galan C
- Pawankar R
- Murrieta-Aguttes M
- Cecchi L
- Bergmann C
- Ridolo E
- Ramon G
- Gonzalez Diaz S
- D'Amato M
- Annesi-Maesano I
journal: Allergy
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/all.14476
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effects of climate change on respiratory allergy and asthma induced by pollen and mold allergens.
**Authors:** D'Amato G, Chong-Neto HJ, Monge Ortega OP, Vitale C, Ansotegui I, Rosario N, Haahtela T, Galan C, Pawankar R, Murrieta-Aguttes M, Cecchi L, Bergmann C, Ridolo E, Ramon G, Gonzalez Diaz S, D'Amato M, Annesi-Maesano I
**Journal:** Allergy (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/all.14476](https://doi.org/10.1111/all.14476)

## Content

1. Allergy. 2020 Sep;75(9):2219-2228. doi: 10.1111/all.14476. Epub 2020 Aug 5.

The effects of climate change on respiratory allergy and asthma induced by 
pollen and mold allergens.

D'Amato G(1)(2), Chong-Neto HJ(3), Monge Ortega OP(4), Vitale C(5), Ansotegui 
I(6), Rosario N(7), Haahtela T(8), Galan C(9), Pawankar R(10), Murrieta-Aguttes 
M(11), Cecchi L(12), Bergmann C(13), Ridolo E(14), Ramon G(15), Gonzalez Diaz 
S(16), D'Amato M(17), Annesi-Maesano I(18).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases, Department of Chest Diseases, 
High Specialty A. Cardarelli Hospital, Napoli, Italy.
(2)Medical School of Specialization in Respiratory Diseases, University on 
Naples Federico II, Napoli, Italy.
(3)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, 
Brazil.
(4)Allergology Unit, San Juan de Dios Hospital, University of Costa Rica, San 
José, Costa Rica.
(5)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, Baronissi, Italy.
(6)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Hospital Quirónsalud Bizkaia Erandio, 
Bilbao, Spain.
(7)Allergy and Immunology Division, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, 
Brazil.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Allergology and Venereology, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(9)Department of Botany, Ecology and Plant Physiology, University of Cordoba, 
Cordoba, Spain.
(10)Nippon Medical School, Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Allergist 8 Rue Pierre Poli, Issy Les Moulineaux 92130, Paris, France.
(12)Department of SOS Allergy and Clinical Immunology, USL Toscana Centro Prato, 
Prato, Italy.
(13)Arzt für Lungen- und Bronchialheilkunde, Innere Medizin, Allergologie Klinik 
für Dermatologie, Venerologie und Allergologie, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(14)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, 
Parma, Italy.
(15)Instituto de Alergia e Inmunología del Sur, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(16)Titular Centro Regional de Alergia e Inmunología Clínica, Universidad 
Autonoma de Nuevo Leon, San Nicolás de los Garza, Mexico.
(17)First Division of Pneumology, High Speciality Hospital 'V. Monaldi' and 
University 'Federico II' Medical School Naples, Napoli, Italy.
(18)Research Director at the French NIH (INSERM) and Responsible of the EPAR 
Department, IPLESP, INSERM and Sorbonne University, Paris, France.

The impact of climate change on the environment, biosphere, and biodiversity has 
become more evident in the recent years. Human activities have increased 
atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2 ) and other greenhouse gases. 
Change in climate and the correlated global warming affects the quantity, 
intensity, and frequency of precipitation type as well as the frequency of 
extreme events such as heat waves, droughts, thunderstorms, floods, and 
hurricanes. Respiratory health can be particularly affected by climate change, 
which contributes to the development of allergic respiratory diseases and 
asthma. Pollen and mold allergens are able to trigger the release of 
pro-inflammatory and immunomodulatory mediators that accelerate the onset the 
IgE-mediated sensitization and of allergy. Allergy to pollen and pollen season 
at its beginning, in duration and intensity are altered by climate change. 
Studies showed that plants exhibit enhanced photosynthesis and reproductive 
effects and produce more pollen as a response to high atmospheric levels of 
carbon dioxide (CO2 ). Mold proliferation is increased by floods and rainy 
storms are responsible for severe asthma. Pollen and mold allergy is generally 
used to evaluate the interrelation between air pollution and allergic 
respiratory diseases, such as rhinitis and asthma. Thunderstorms during pollen 
seasons can cause exacerbation of respiratory allergy and asthma in patients 
with hay fever. A similar phenomenon is observed for molds. Measures to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions can have positive health benefits.

© 2020 EAACI and John Wiley and Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley and Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/all.14476
PMID: 32589303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]