---
reference_id: PMID:37650859
title: "Porphyrin precursors and risk of primary liver cancer in acute intermittent porphyria: A case-control study of 188 patients."
authors:
- Lissing M
- Wester A
- Vassiliou D
- Floderus Y
- Harper P
- Sardh E
- Wahlin S
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12676
keywords:
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent"
- Case-Control Studies
- Aminolevulinic Acid/urine
- Porphobilinogen/urine
- Porphyrins/urine
- Liver Neoplasms/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Porphyrin precursors and risk of primary liver cancer in acute intermittent porphyria: A case-control study of 188 patients.
**Authors:** Lissing M, Wester A, Vassiliou D, Floderus Y, Harper P, Sardh E, Wahlin S
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12676](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12676)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2023 Nov;46(6):1186-1194. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12676. Epub
2023 Sep 8.

Porphyrin precursors and risk of primary liver cancer in acute intermittent
porphyria: A case-control study of 188 patients.

Lissing M(1)(2), Wester A(2), Vassiliou D(3)(4)(5), Floderus Y(4)(6), Harper
P(4)(6), Sardh E(3)(4)(5), Wahlin S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Hepatology Division, Department of Upper GI Diseases, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medicine, Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(4)Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases (CMMS), Porphyria Centre Sweden,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is a rare hereditary metabolic disease
characterized by acute attacks and accumulation of the porphyrin precursors
5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG). Patients with AIP have a
high risk of primary liver cancer (PLC). We aimed to assess the association
between porphyrin precursor excretion and the risk for PLC in patients with AIP.
We studied 48 patients with AIP who developed PLC between 1987 and 2015 and 140
age and sex matched controls with AIP but no PLC. Data on all available urinary
PBG and ALA samples collected from 1975 until 1 year before PLC diagnosis were
analyzed and compared between cases and controls using logistic regression.
Porphyrin precursor excretion was higher in patients with PLC (PBG median 7.9
[IQR 4.4-21.9] mmol/mol creatinine) than in controls (3.8 [1.2-9.8]) (adjusted
odds ratio 1.07, 95% confidence interval: 1.02-1.12). None of the 28 patients
with all registered samples below the upper limit of normal (ULN) developed PLC,
and only one of the 45 patients with all samples <2× ULN developed PLC. Among
non-PLC controls, ALA and PBG levels decreased after age 50-60 while an
increasing trend was observed after age 65 among those who developed PLC.
Increased urinary porphyrin precursors are associated with a high risk of
developing PLC. Patients with normal levels appear to have a low risk while high
or increasing ALA and PBG after age 65 indicates high risk, which should be
considered in surveillance decisions.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12676
PMID: 37650859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
