---
reference_id: "PMID:28362189"
title: Canakinumab for the treatment of familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Ozdogan H
- Ugurlu S
journal: Expert Rev Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/1744666X.2017.1313116
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Canakinumab for the treatment of familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Ozdogan H, Ugurlu S
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1744666X.2017.1313116](https://doi.org/10.1080/1744666X.2017.1313116)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2017 May;13(5):393-404. doi: 
10.1080/1744666X.2017.1313116. Epub 2017 Apr 10.

Canakinumab for the treatment of familial Mediterranean fever.

Ozdogan H(1), Ugurlu S(1).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine , Cerrahpasa 
Medical Faculty, Istanbul University , Fatih , Istanbul , Turkey.

Erratum in
    Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2017 May;13(5):viii. doi: 
10.1080/1744666X.2017.1321874.

Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most frequent of all hereditary 
autoinflammatory syndromes. It is characterized by recurrent attacks of fever 
and serositis. If not treated it may be complicated with AA amyloidosis. It is 
caused by mutations in the MEFV gene that encodes pyrin which is involved in the 
regulation of IL-1β. The mainstay of treatment is colchicine, however a subset 
of patients requires an alternative treatment either due to inadequate response 
or intolerance. The accumulating data indicates that anti IL-1 drugs are 
effective in treating colchicine resistant FMF cases and improving their quality 
of life. Areas covered: This review focuses on canakinumab, a fully human anti 
IL-1β antibody, treatment in FMF. Expert commentary: Canakinumab became the 
first approved therapy by the Food and Drug Administration for FMF very 
recently, which highlights its importance as the alternative treatment in FMF.

DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2017.1313116
PMID: 28362189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]