---
reference_id: "PMID:39118750"
title: "Recent trends in septic shock management: a narrative review of current evidence and recommendations."
authors:
- Nofal MA
- Shitawi J
- Altarawneh HB
- Alrosan S
- Alqaisi Y
- Al-Harazneh AM
- Alamaren AM
- Abu-Jeyyab M
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000002048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent trends in septic shock management: a narrative review of current evidence and recommendations.
**Authors:** Nofal MA, Shitawi J, Altarawneh HB, Alrosan S, Alqaisi Y, Al-Harazneh AM, Alamaren AM, Abu-Jeyyab M
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MS9.0000000000002048](https://doi.org/10.1097/MS9.0000000000002048)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2024 May 15;86(8):4532-4540. doi:
10.1097/MS9.0000000000002048. eCollection 2024 Aug.

Recent trends in septic shock management: a narrative review of current evidence
and recommendations.

Nofal MA(1), Shitawi J(2), Altarawneh HB(3), Alrosan S(4), Alqaisi Y(3),
Al-Harazneh AM(5), Alamaren AM(3), Abu-Jeyyab M(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Jordan University Hospital, Amman, Jordan.
(2)Internal Medicine, Epsom and St Helier University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Sutton, GBR, UK.
(3)School of Medicine Mutah University Amman, Jordan.
(4)Internal Medicine, Saint Luke's Health System, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(5)Internal Medicine, Al-Karak Governmental Hospital, Amman, Jordan.

Septic shock stands for a group of manifestations that will cause a severe
hemodynamic and metabolic dysfunction, which leads to a significant increase in
the risk of death by a massive response of the immune system to any sort of
infection that ends up with refractory hypotension making it responsible for
escalating the numbers of hospitalized patients mortality rate, Organisms that
are isolated most of the time are Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and Staph aureus. The WHO considers sepsis to be a worldwide health
concern; the incidence of sepsis and septic shock have been increasing over the
years while being considered to be under-reported at the same time. This review
is a quick informative recap of the recent studies regarding diagnostic
approaches using lactic acid (Lac), procalcitonin (PCT), Sequential Organ
Failure Assessment (SOFA) score, acute physiology and chronic health evaluation
II (APACHE II) score, as well as management recommendations for using
vasopressors, fluid resuscitation, corticosteroids and antibiotics that should
be considered when dealing with such type of shock.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000002048
PMCID: PMC11305747
PMID: 39118750

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.
