---
reference_id: "PMID:19057675"
title: "Disruption of AP1S1, causing a novel neurocutaneous syndrome, perturbs development of the skin and spinal cord."
authors:
- Montpetit A
- Côté S
- Brustein E
- Drouin CA
- Lapointe L
- Boudreau M
- Meloche C
- Drouin R
- Hudson TJ
- Drapeau P
- Cossette P
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000296
keywords:
- "Adaptor Protein Complex 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Adaptor Protein Complex sigma Subunits/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Female
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Neurocutaneous Syndromes/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Skin/growth & development, metabolism"
- "Spinal Cord/growth & development, metabolism"
- "Zebrafish/genetics, growth & development, metabolism"
- "Zebrafish Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of AP1S1, causing a novel neurocutaneous syndrome, perturbs development of the skin and spinal cord.
**Authors:** Montpetit A, Côté S, Brustein E, Drouin CA, Lapointe L, Boudreau M, Meloche C, Drouin R, Hudson TJ, Drapeau P, Cossette P
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1000296](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000296)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2008 Dec;4(12):e1000296. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000296. Epub 
2008 Dec 5.

Disruption of AP1S1, causing a novel neurocutaneous syndrome, perturbs 
development of the skin and spinal cord.

Montpetit A(1), Côté S, Brustein E, Drouin CA, Lapointe L, Boudreau M, Meloche 
C, Drouin R, Hudson TJ, Drapeau P, Cossette P.

Author information:
(1)McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Adaptor protein (AP) complexes regulate clathrin-coated vesicle assembly, 
protein cargo sorting, and vesicular trafficking between organelles in 
eukaryotic cells. Because disruption of the various subunits of the AP complexes 
is embryonic lethal in the majority of cases, characterization of their function 
in vivo is still lacking. Here, we describe the first mutation in the human 
AP1S1 gene, encoding the small subunit sigma1A of the AP-1 complex. This founder 
splice mutation, which leads to a premature stop codon, was found in four 
families with a unique syndrome characterized by mental retardation, 
enteropathy, deafness, peripheral neuropathy, ichthyosis, and keratodermia 
(MEDNIK). To validate the pathogenic effect of the mutation, we knocked down 
Ap1s1 expression in zebrafish using selective antisens morpholino 
oligonucleotides (AMO). The knockdown phenotype consisted of perturbation in 
skin formation, reduced pigmentation, and severe motility deficits due to 
impaired neural network development. Both neural and skin defects were rescued 
by co-injection of AMO with wild-type (WT) human AP1S1 mRNA, but not by 
co-injecting the truncated form of AP1S1, consistent with a loss-of-function 
effect of this mutation. Together, these results confirm AP1S1 as the gene 
responsible for MEDNIK syndrome and demonstrate a critical role of AP1S1 in 
development of the skin and spinal cord.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000296
PMCID: PMC2585812
PMID: 19057675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.