---
reference_id: "PMID:35847784"
title: "Case Report: Combined Cataract Surgery and Minimally Invasive Glaucoma Surgery Provide an Alternative Treatment Approach for Lowe Syndrome."
authors:
- Wang C
- Zhang W
- Wang L
- Liu W
- Guo H
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.913229
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Combined Cataract Surgery and Minimally Invasive Glaucoma Surgery Provide an Alternative Treatment Approach for Lowe Syndrome.
**Authors:** Wang C, Zhang W, Wang L, Liu W, Guo H
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2022.913229](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2022.913229)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Jul 1;9:913229. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.913229.
eCollection 2022.

Case Report: Combined Cataract Surgery and Minimally Invasive Glaucoma Surgery
Provide an Alternative Treatment Approach for Lowe Syndrome.

Wang C(1), Zhang W(1), Wang L(1), Liu W(1), Guo H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
China.

We describe the case of a 4-month-old boy who presented with bilateral
congenital cataract and high intraocular pressure (IOP) in the left eye,
followed by mental retardation and delayed motor development. Genetic
investigation revealed the boy had a splicing variant (c.940-11G>A) of the
oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe (OCRL) gene. The boy underwent a lensectomy
for congenital cataract in his right eye, and lensectomy combined with a 360°
suture trabeculotomy to remove the clouded lens and to control IOP of the left
eye. During postoperative one-and-a-half-year follow-up, the boy exhibited an
improved visual acuity and a well-controlled IOP without the use of topical
IOP-lowering medications. Lowe syndrome is a rare multisystemic disorder that is
diagnosed through clinical manifestation and genetic testing. The possibility of
Lowe syndrome should be considered in patients presenting with typical triad,
and genetic analysis should be performed in time to confirm the diagnosis. We
recommend combined cataract surgery and minimally invasive glaucoma surgery
(MIGS) as a safe, feasible, and efficient method to treat congenital cataract
and glaucoma in Lowe syndrome patients.

Copyright © 2022 Wang, Zhang, Wang, Liu and Guo.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.913229
PMCID: PMC9283680
PMID: 35847784

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
