---
reference_id: "PMID:37323195"
title: The New Youngest Case of Grange Syndrome with a Novel Biallelic Pathogenic Variant in YY1AP1.
authors:
- Karakaya T
- Turkyilmaz A
- Eris D
- Kaya M
- Oksuz K
- Eryigit MA
- Gönen G
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000527785
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The New Youngest Case of Grange Syndrome with a Novel Biallelic Pathogenic Variant in YY1AP1.
**Authors:** Karakaya T, Turkyilmaz A, Eris D, Kaya M, Oksuz K, Eryigit MA, Gönen G
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000527785](https://doi.org/10.1159/000527785)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2023 Jun;14(3):239-245. doi: 10.1159/000527785. Epub 2023 Jan
26.

The New Youngest Case of Grange Syndrome with a Novel Biallelic Pathogenic 
Variant in YY1AP1.

Karakaya T(1), Turkyilmaz A(2), Eris D(3), Kaya M(4), Oksuz K(5), Eryigit MA(6), 
Gönen G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Isparta City Hospital, Isparta, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Karadeniz Technical University Faculty of 
Medicine, Trabzon, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Isparta City Hospital, Isparta, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Isparta City Hospital, Isparta, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Isparta City Hospital, Isparta, Turkey.
(6)Department of Radiology, Isparta City Hospital, Isparta, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Grange syndrome (OMIM 602531) is characterized by a constellation 
of symptoms of hypertension, stenosis, or occlusion of different arteries 
(including the cerebral, renal, abdominal, and coronary vessels) with a variable 
occurrence of brachysyndactyly, bone fragility, and congenital heart defects. 
Learning disabilities were also reported in some cases. Biallelic pathogenic 
variants in YY1AP1 are associated with the syndrome. Only 14 individuals with 
this ultra-rare syndrome (12 of them were molecularly confirmed) have hitherto 
been reported in the literature.
CASE PRESENTATION: We herein describe a 11/2-year-old additional female case of 
Grange syndrome with hypertension, patent ductus arteriosus, and 
brachysyndactyly who was subsequently confirmed to carry a novel homozygous 
frameshift variant (c.2291del; p.Pro764Leufs*12) in the YY1AP1 gene through 
whole-exome sequencing.
CONCLUSION: This report extends the allelic spectrum in Grange syndrome and 
helps provide insight into the potential role of YY1AP1 in the regulation of 
cellular processes.

Copyright © 2023 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000527785
PMCID: PMC10267489
PMID: 37323195

Conflict of interest statement: The authors reported no conflicts of interest.