---
reference_id: PMID:37971880
title: Disruption of CFAP418 interaction with lipids causes widespread abnormal membrane-associated cellular processes in retinal degenerations.
authors:
- Clark AM
- Yu D
- Neiswanger G
- Zhu D
- Zou J
- Maschek JA
- Burgoyne T
- Yang J
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.162621
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Ciliopathies
- Membrane Lipids
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Proteomics
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of CFAP418 interaction with lipids causes widespread abnormal membrane-associated cellular processes in retinal degenerations.
**Authors:** Clark AM, Yu D, Neiswanger G, Zhu D, Zou J, Maschek JA, Burgoyne T, Yang J
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.162621](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.162621)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Jan 9;9(1):e162621. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.162621.

Disruption of CFAP418 interaction with lipids causes widespread abnormal 
membrane-associated cellular processes in retinal degenerations.

Clark AM(1), Yu D(1), Neiswanger G(1), Zhu D(1), Zou J(1), Maschek JA(2), 
Burgoyne T(3), Yang J(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Moran Eye Center, and.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Integrative Physiology, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, Utah, USA.
(3)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College of London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, and.
(5)Department of Neurobiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Syndromic ciliopathies and retinal degenerations are large heterogeneous groups 
of genetic diseases. Pathogenic variants in the CFAP418 gene may cause both 
disorders, and its protein sequence is evolutionarily conserved. However, the 
disease mechanism underlying CFAP418 mutations has not been explored. Here, we 
apply quantitative lipidomic, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic profiling and 
affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry to address the molecular 
function of CFAP418 in the retina. We show that CFAP418 protein binds to the 
lipid metabolism precursor phosphatidic acid (PA) and mitochondrion-specific 
lipid cardiolipin but does not form a tight and static complex with proteins. 
Loss of Cfap418 in mice disturbs membrane lipid homeostasis and membrane-protein 
associations, which subsequently causes mitochondrial defects and 
membrane-remodeling abnormalities across multiple vesicular trafficking pathways 
in photoreceptors, especially the endosomal sorting complexes required for 
transport (ESCRT) pathway. Ablation of Cfap418 also increases the activity of 
PA-binding protein kinase Cα in the retina. Overall, our results indicate that 
membrane lipid imbalance is a pathological mechanism underlying syndromic 
ciliopathies and retinal degenerations which is associated with other known 
causative genes of these diseases.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.162621
PMCID: PMC10906455
PMID: 37971880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.