---
reference_id: "PMID:12609784"
title: Laser therapy of giant congenital melanocytic nevi.
authors:
- Michel JL
journal: Eur J Dermatol
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laser therapy of giant congenital melanocytic nevi.
**Authors:** Michel JL
**Journal:** Eur J Dermatol (2003)

## Content

1. Eur J Dermatol. 2003 Jan-Feb;13(1):57-64.

Laser therapy of giant congenital melanocytic nevi.

Michel JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Residence V Avenue, 14 place des Grenadiers, 42000 Saint-Etienne, France. 
jean.loic.michel@wanadoo.fr

Giant congenital melanocytic nevi (GCMN) are rare disfiguring potentially 
malignant lesions present at birth. The approach of these patients is based on 
two main considerations: attempt to minimize the risk of malignancy, and obtain 
an acceptable cosmetic result. Sometimes they are too large to be removed by 
multiple surgical excision or by use of osmotic expander. The objective of 
treatment of giant congenital nevi is to obtain ablation without side effects or 
after-effects from aesthetics. But for the moment such treatment doesn't exist. 
The aim of this review was to access treatment of GCMN with lasers as an 
alternative to surgery. Lasers should only be regarded as a treatment option for 
GCMN that cannot be surgically excised. For the moment laser therapy of GCMN 
should be restricted to well controlled studies or to individual patients in 
whom surgical procedures are not possible or would result in unacceptable 
scarring. Today ultrashort high energy pulsed CO2 laser and the normal mode ruby 
laser are the two lasers available. But the results are too unforeseeable, and 
painful with these two lasers. The combined use of normal mode and Q-switched 
ruby lasers or ultrashort high energy pulsed CO2 laser and Q-switched ruby or 
Nd:YAG lasers can give us a solution. In the future perhaps new Q-switched laser 
could give us a better way of treatment, with less pain, and no scars. We need 
an improvement of the technology in this field and hopefully the picosecond 
systems will be available in the future.

PMID: 12609784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]