---
reference_id: "PMID:6301756"
title: "Nonketotic hyperglycinemia: clinical, biochemical, and therapeutic considerations."
authors:
- Langan TJ
- Pueschel SM
journal: Curr Probl Pediatr
year: '1983'
doi: 10.1016/0045-9380(83)90016-6
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Animals
- Benzoates/therapeutic use
- Biological Transport
- Brain/pathology
- Carboxy-Lyases/metabolism
- "Dietary Proteins/administration & dosage"
- Glycine/metabolism
- Humans
- Hydrogen/metabolism
- Methylmalonyl-CoA Decarboxylase
- Mice
- Proteins/metabolism
- Rats
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/metabolism"
- "Receptors, Glycine"
- Salicylates/therapeutic use
- Serine/metabolism
- Strychnine/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonketotic hyperglycinemia: clinical, biochemical, and therapeutic considerations.
**Authors:** Langan TJ, Pueschel SM
**Journal:** Curr Probl Pediatr (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0045-9380(83)90016-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/0045-9380(83)90016-6)

## Content

1. Curr Probl Pediatr. 1983 Jan;13(3):1-30. doi: 10.1016/0045-9380(83)90016-6.

Nonketotic hyperglycinemia: clinical, biochemical, and therapeutic
considerations.

Langan TJ, Pueschel SM.

The salient features of nonketotic hyperglycinemia include apnea, feeding
difficulties, lethargy, seizures, abnormal muscle tone and reflex activity,
significant developmental delay, and, in most instances, early death. The
pathogenesis of the biochemical defect leading to increased glycine
concentration in blood, urine, and CSF is likely to concern derangements of the
glycine cleavage enzyme and/or transport mechanisms of glycine. Our current
state of knowledge of this disorder is incomplete. Therapeutic attempts, as
described in Table 2, have been largely unsuccessful. Further basic research on
the underlying biochemical perturbation, including additional documentation of
the glycine cleavage enzyme deficiency patterns, of substrate inhibition of key
metabolic pathways, and of glycine transport aberrations, as well as
investigations of new pharmacologic approaches, will be a challenge for
investigators in this field. It is hoped that new knowledge in these areas will
eventually lead to reduction of morbidity and mortality in children with
nonketotic hyperglycinemia.

DOI: 10.1016/0045-9380(83)90016-6
PMID: 6301756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
