---
reference_id: "PMID:29416296"
title: Association of genetic variants in RAB23 and ANXA11 with uveitis in sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Davoudi S
- Chang VS
- Navarro-Gomez D
- Stanwyck LK
- Sevgi DD
- Papavasileiou E
- Ren A
- Uchiyama E
- Sullivan L
- Lobo AM
- Papaliodis GN
- Sobrin L
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2018'
keywords:
- Aged
- Alleles
- Annexins/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Loci
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- HLA-DRB1 Chains/genetics
- HLA-DRB5 Chains/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Sarcoidosis/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Uveitis/complications, genetics, pathology"
- White People
- rab GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of genetic variants in RAB23 and ANXA11 with uveitis in sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Davoudi S, Chang VS, Navarro-Gomez D, Stanwyck LK, Sevgi DD, Papavasileiou E, Ren A, Uchiyama E, Sullivan L, Lobo AM, Papaliodis GN, Sobrin L
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2018)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2018 Jan 21;24:59-74. eCollection 2018.

Association of genetic variants in RAB23 and ANXA11 with uveitis in sarcoidosis.

Davoudi S(1), Chang VS(1), Navarro-Gomez D(1), Stanwyck LK(1), Sevgi DD(1), 
Papavasileiou E(1), Ren A(1), Uchiyama E(1), Sullivan L(1), Lobo AM(2), 
Papaliodis GN(1), Sobrin L(1).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL.

PURPOSE: Uveitis occurs in a subset of patients with sarcoidosis. The purpose of 
this study was to determine whether genetic variants that have been associated 
previously with overall sarcoidosis are associated with increased risk of 
developing uveitis.
METHODS: Seventy-seven subjects were enrolled, including 45 patients diagnosed 
with sarcoidosis-related uveitis as cases and 32 patients with systemic 
sarcoidosis without ocular involvement as controls. Thirty-eight single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously associated with sarcoidosis, 
sarcoidosis severity, or other organ-specific sarcoidosis involvement were 
identified. Allele frequencies in ocular sarcoidosis cases versus controls were 
compared using the chi-square test, and p values were corrected for multiple 
hypotheses testing using permutation. All analyses were conducted with PLINK.
RESULTS: SNPs rs1040461 and rs61860052, in ras-related protein RAS23 (RAB23) and 
annexin A11 (ANXA11) genes, respectively, were associated with 
sarcoidosis-associated uveitis. The T allele of rs1040461 and the A allele of 
rs61860052 were found to be more prevalent in ocular sarcoidosis cases. These 
associations remained after correction for the multiple hypotheses tested 
(p=0.01 and p=0.02). In a subanalysis of Caucasian Americans only, two 
additional variants within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes on 
chromosome 6, in HLA-DRB5 and HLA-DRB1, were associated with uveitis as well 
(p=0.009 and p=0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants in RAB23 and ANXA11 genes were associated with an 
increased risk of sarcoidosis-associated uveitis. These loci have previously 
been associated with overall sarcoidosis risk.

PMCID: PMC5783744
PMID: 29416296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]