---
reference_id: "PMID:36282542"
title: "Metabolic, fibrotic and splicing pathways are all altered in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy spectrum patients to differing degrees."
authors:
- de Las Heras JI
- Todorow V
- Krečinić-Balić L
- Hintze S
- Czapiewski R
- Webb S
- Schoser B
- Meinke P
- Schirmer EC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac264
keywords:
- Humans
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss/genetics"
- Mutation
- Fibrosis
- Biomarkers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metabolic, fibrotic and splicing pathways are all altered in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy spectrum patients to differing degrees.
**Authors:** de Las Heras JI, Todorow V, Krečinić-Balić L, Hintze S, Czapiewski R, Webb S, Schoser B, Meinke P, Schirmer EC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddac264](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddac264)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Mar 6;32(6):1010-1031. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac264.

Metabolic, fibrotic and splicing pathways are all altered in Emery-Dreifuss 
muscular dystrophy spectrum patients to differing degrees.

de Las Heras JI(1), Todorow V(2), Krečinić-Balić L(2), Hintze S(2), Czapiewski 
R(1), Webb S(3), Schoser B(2), Meinke P(2), Schirmer EC(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Department of Neurology, LMU Clinic, 
Ludwig-Maximillians-University, Munich, Germany.
(3)Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a genetically and clinically 
variable disorder. Previous attempts to use gene expression changes to find its 
pathomechanism were unavailing, so we engaged a functional pathway analysis. 
RNA-Seq was performed on cells from 10 patients diagnosed with an EDMD spectrum 
disease with different mutations in seven genes. Upon comparing to controls, the 
pathway analysis revealed that multiple genes involved in fibrosis, metabolism, 
myogenic signaling and splicing were affected in all patients. Splice variant 
analysis revealed alterations of muscle-specific variants for several important 
muscle genes. Deeper analysis of metabolic pathways revealed a reduction in 
glycolytic and oxidative metabolism and reduced numbers of mitochondria across a 
larger set of 14 EDMD spectrum patients and 7 controls. Intriguingly, the gene 
expression signatures segregated the patients into three subgroups whose 
distinctions could potentially relate to differences in clinical presentation. 
Finally, differential expression analysis of miRNAs changing in the patients 
similarly highlighted fibrosis, metabolism and myogenic signaling pathways. This 
pathway approach revealed a transcriptome profile that can both be used as a 
template for establishing a biomarker panel for EDMD and direct further 
investigation into its pathomechanism. Furthermore, the segregation of specific 
gene changes into distinct groups that appear to correlate with clinical 
presentation may template development of prognostic biomarkers, though this will 
first require their testing in a wider set of patients with more clinical 
information.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac264
PMCID: PMC9991002
PMID: 36282542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]