---
reference_id: PMID:37521109
title: "Diagnosis and augmentation therapy for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: current knowledge and future potential."
authors:
- Feitosa PH
journal: Drugs Context
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7573/dic.2023-3-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and augmentation therapy for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: current knowledge and future potential.
**Authors:** Feitosa PH
**Journal:** Drugs Context (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7573/dic.2023-3-1](https://doi.org/10.7573/dic.2023-3-1)

## Content

1. Drugs Context. 2023 Jul 20;12:2023-3-1. doi: 10.7573/dic.2023-3-1. eCollection
 2023.

Diagnosis and augmentation therapy for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: current 
knowledge and future potential.

Feitosa PH(1).

Author information:
(1)Pneumology Service, Hospital Regional da Asa Norte, Brasília, Brazil.

The underdiagnosis of alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency (AATD) has been 
recognized for many years, yet little progress has been made in treatment of the 
disease. In this review, we summarize the AATD disease process as well as its 
diagnosis and treatment by AAT augmentation therapy. AATD is a rare autosomal 
disease that primarily affects the lungs and liver. AATD is associated with an 
increased susceptibility to developing pulmonary emphysema. The specific 
pharmacological treatment for AATD is intravenous administration of exogenous 
AAT. Augmentation therapy with AAT increases serum and pulmonary epithelial AAT 
levels, restores anti-elastase capacity, and decreases inflammatory mediators in 
the lung. Augmentation therapy reduces the loss of lung density over time, thus 
slowing progression of the disease. The effects of augmentation therapy on 
outcomes, such as frequency/duration of flare-ups, quality of life, lung 
function decline and mortality, are assessed. Wider testing for AATD, 
potentially through primary care physicians, could result in earlier treatment 
and better outcomes for individuals with AATD-induced lung respiratory disease.

Copyright © 2023 Feitosa PH.

DOI: 10.7573/dic.2023-3-1
PMCID: PMC10379007
PMID: 37521109

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure and potential conflicts of interest: 
The author declares that he has no conflicts of interest relevant to this 
manuscript. The International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) 
Potential Conflicts of Interests form for the authors is available for download 
at: 
https://www.drugsincontext.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/dic.2023-3-1-COI.pdf