---
reference_id: "PMID:33453126"
title: "Kawasaki disease for the paediatric dermatologist: skin manifestations and new insights into the pathophysiology."
authors:
- Piram M
- Burns JC
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/ced.14558
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease for the paediatric dermatologist: skin manifestations and new insights into the pathophysiology.
**Authors:** Piram M, Burns JC
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ced.14558](https://doi.org/10.1111/ced.14558)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2021 Apr;46(3):503-509. doi: 10.1111/ced.14558.

Kawasaki disease for the paediatric dermatologist: skin manifestations and new 
insights into the pathophysiology.

Piram M(1)(2), Burns JC(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Dermatology, Department of Pediatrics, CHU Sainte 
Justine, University of Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(2)CéRéMAIA, CHU de Bicêtre, Université Paris-Saclay, University Paris-Sud, Le 
Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Rady Children's Hospital, University of California 
San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.

Early diagnosis of Kawasaki disease (KD) is critical to allow prompt initiation 
of treatment and avoid cardiac complications. All children with KD have fever 
accompanied by clinical signs, with four of the five classic criteria for 
complete KD being mucocutaneous, thus creating an important role for 
dermatologists. Moreover, dermatologists must be familiar with other 
dermatological findings that are not included in the American Heart Association 
classification criteria but can support the diagnosis, particularly in 
incomplete forms of the disease. We review the skin manifestations described for 
KD and perform an overview of pathophysiological advances and new treatments.

© 2021 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.14558
PMID: 33453126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]