---
reference_id: "PMID:20598274"
title: "Mutation of the mitochondrial tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase gene, YARS2, causes myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia--MLASA syndrome."
authors:
- Riley LG
- Cooper S
- Hickey P
- Rudinger-Thirion J
- McKenzie M
- Compton A
- Lim SC
- Thorburn D
- Ryan MT
- Giegé R
- Bahlo M
- Christodoulou J
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.06.001
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Anemia, Sideroblastic/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12/genetics"
- Consanguinity
- Electron Transport Complex I/physiology
- Electron Transport Complex III/physiology
- Electron Transport Complex IV/physiology
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Linkage
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscular Diseases/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Syndrome
- Tyrosine-tRNA Ligase/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of the mitochondrial tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase gene, YARS2, causes myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia--MLASA syndrome.
**Authors:** Riley LG, Cooper S, Hickey P, Rudinger-Thirion J, McKenzie M, Compton A, Lim SC, Thorburn D, Ryan MT, Giegé R, Bahlo M, Christodoulou J
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.06.001)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Jul 9;87(1):52-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.06.001.

Mutation of the mitochondrial tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase gene, YARS2, causes
myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia--MLASA syndrome.

Riley LG(1), Cooper S, Hickey P, Rudinger-Thirion J, McKenzie M, Compton A, Lim
SC, Thorburn D, Ryan MT, Giegé R, Bahlo M, Christodoulou J.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Metabolic Disorders Research Unit, Children's Hospital at Westmead,
Sydney 2145, Australia.

Mitochondrial respiratory chain disorders are a heterogeneous group of disorders
in which the underlying genetic defect is often unknown. We have identified a
pathogenic mutation (c.156C>G [p.F52L]) in YARS2, located at chromosome
12p11.21, by using genome-wide SNP-based homozygosity analysis of a family with
affected members displaying myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia
(MLASA). We subsequently identified the same mutation in another unrelated MLASA
patient. The YARS2 gene product, mitochondrial tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (YARS2),
was present at lower levels in skeletal muscle whereas fibroblasts were
relatively normal. Complex I, III, and IV were dysfunctional as indicated by
enzyme analysis, immunoblotting, and immunohistochemistry. A mitochondrial
protein-synthesis assay showed reduced levels of respiratory chain subunits in
myotubes generated from patient cell lines. A tRNA aminoacylation assay revealed
that mutant YARS2 was still active; however, enzyme kinetics were abnormal
compared to the wild-type protein. We propose that the reduced aminoacylation
activity of mutant YARS2 enzyme leads to decreased mitochondrial protein
synthesis, resulting in mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction. MLASA has
previously been associated with PUS1 mutations; hence, the YARS2 mutation
reported here is an alternative cause of MLASA.

Copyright 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.06.001
PMCID: PMC2896778
PMID: 20598274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
