---
reference_id: "PMID:21506742"
title: Ciliopathies.
authors:
- Hildebrandt F
- Benzing T
- Katsanis N
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1010172
keywords:
- Centrosome/diagnostic imaging
- Cilia/ultrastructure
- "Ciliary Motility Disorders/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Eye Diseases/genetics
- Genotype
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- Humans
- Kidney Diseases/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Signal Transduction
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Hildebrandt F, Benzing T, Katsanis N
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMra1010172](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1010172)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2011 Apr 21;364(16):1533-43. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1010172.

Ciliopathies.

Hildebrandt F(1), Benzing T, Katsanis N.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Michigan Health System, 8220C MSRB III, 1150 W. Medical Center Dr., Ann Arbor, 
MI 48109-5646, USA. fhilde@umich.edu

Diverse developmental and degenerative single-gene disorders such as polycystic 
kidney disease, nephronophthisis, retinitis pigmentosa, the Bardet–Biedl 
syndrome, the Joubert syndrome, and the Meckel syndrome may be categorized as 
ciliopathies — a recent concept that describes diseases characterized by 
dysfunction of a hairlike cellular organelle called the cilium. Most of the 
proteins that are altered in these single-gene disorders function at the level 
of the cilium–centrosome complex, which represents nature’s universal system for 
cellular detection and management of external signals. Cilia are 
microtubule-based structures found on almost all vertebrate cells. They 
originate from a basal body, a modified centrosome, which is the organelle that 
forms the spindle poles during mitosis. The important role that the 
cilium–centrosome complex plays in the normal function of most tissues appears 
to account for the involvement of multiple organ systems in ciliopathies. In 
this review, we consider the role of the cilium in disease.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMra1010172
PMCID: PMC3640822
PMID: 21506742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Benzing reports receiving lecture fees from 
Novartis, Amgen, and Shire; and Dr. Katsanis, lecture fees from the Beijing 
Genomics Institute. No other potential conflict of interest relevant to this 
article was reported.