---
reference_id: "PMID:39182841"
title: Loss of mitochondria long-chain fatty acid oxidation impairs skeletal muscle contractility by disrupting myofibril structure and calcium homeostasis.
authors:
- Pereyra AS
- Fernandez RF
- Amorese A
- Castro JN
- Lin CT
- Spangenburg EE
- Ellis JM
journal: Mol Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2024.102015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of mitochondria long-chain fatty acid oxidation impairs skeletal muscle contractility by disrupting myofibril structure and calcium homeostasis.
**Authors:** Pereyra AS, Fernandez RF, Amorese A, Castro JN, Lin CT, Spangenburg EE, Ellis JM
**Journal:** Mol Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmet.2024.102015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2024.102015)

## Content

1. Mol Metab. 2024 Nov;89:102015. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2024.102015. Epub 2024
Aug  28.

Loss of mitochondria long-chain fatty acid oxidation impairs skeletal muscle 
contractility by disrupting myofibril structure and calcium homeostasis.

Pereyra AS(1), Fernandez RF(2), Amorese A(2), Castro JN(2), Lin CT(2), 
Spangenburg EE(2), Ellis JM(3).

Author information:
(1)Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, Department of 
Physiology and East Carolina Diabetes and Obesity Institute, Greenville, NC, 
27834, USA. Electronic address: apereyr2@jh.edu.
(2)Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, Department of 
Physiology and East Carolina Diabetes and Obesity Institute, Greenville, NC, 
27834, USA.
(3)Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, Department of 
Physiology and East Carolina Diabetes and Obesity Institute, Greenville, NC, 
27834, USA. Electronic address: ellisje18@ecu.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Abnormal lipid metabolism in mammalian tissues can be highly 
deleterious, leading to organ failure. Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase 2 (CPT2) 
deficiency is an inherited metabolic disorder affecting the liver, heart, and 
skeletal muscle due to impaired mitochondrial oxidation of long-chain fatty 
acids (mLCFAO) for energy production.
METHODS: However, the basis of tissue damage in mLCFAO disorders is not fully 
understood. Mice lacking CPT2 in skeletal muscle (Cpt2Sk-/-) were generated to 
investigate the nexus between mFAO deficiency and myopathy.
RESULTS: Compared to controls, ex-vivo contractile force was reduced by 70% in 
Cpt2Sk-/- oxidative soleus muscle despite the preserved capacity to couple ATP 
synthesis to mitochondrial respiration on alternative substrates to long-chain 
fatty acids. Increased mitochondrial biogenesis, lipid accumulation, and the 
downregulation of 80% of dystrophin-related and contraction-related proteins 
severely compromised the structure and function of Cpt2Sk-/- soleus. CPT2 
deficiency affected oxidative muscles more than glycolytic ones. Exposing 
isolated sarcoplasmic reticulum to long-chain acylcarnitines (LCACs) inhibited 
calcium uptake. In agreement, Cpt2Sk-/- soleus had decreased calcium uptake and 
significant accumulation of palmitoyl-carnitine, suggesting that LCACs and 
calcium dyshomeostasis are linked in skeletal muscle.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that loss of CPT2 and mLCFAO compromise muscle 
structure and function due to excessive mitochondrial biogenesis, downregulation 
of the contractile proteome, and disruption of calcium homeostasis.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2024.102015
PMCID: PMC11408158
PMID: 39182841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.