---
reference_id: "PMID:16838342"
title: The molecular etiologies and associated phenotypes of amelogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Wright JT
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31358
keywords:
- "Amelogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, pathology"
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked"
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Kallikreins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Matrix Metalloproteinase 20/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Protein Sorting Signals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The molecular etiologies and associated phenotypes of amelogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Wright JT
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.31358](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.31358)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Dec 1;140(23):2547-55. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31358.

The molecular etiologies and associated phenotypes of amelogenesis imperfecta.

Wright JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry, The University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. 
tim_wright@dentistry.unc.edu

The amelogenesis imperfectas (AIs) are a clinically and genetically diverse 
group of conditions that are caused by mutations in a variety of genes that are 
critical for normal enamel formation. To date, mutations have been identified in 
four genes (AMELX, ENAM, KLK4, MMP20) known to be involved in enamel formation. 
Additional yet to be identified genes also are implicated in the etiology of AI 
based on linkage studies. The diverse and often unique phenotypes resulting from 
the different allelic and non-allelic mutations in these genes provide an 
opportunity to better understand the role of these genes and their related 
proteins in enamel formation. Understanding the AI phenotypes also provides an 
aid to clinicians in directing molecular studies aimed at delineating the 
genetic basis underlying these diverse clinical conditions. Our current 
knowledge of the known mutations and associated phenotypes of the different AI 
subtypes are reviewed.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31358
PMCID: PMC1847600
PMID: 16838342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]