---
reference_id: "PMID:23244011"
title: "Supportive psychodynamic psychotherapy versus treatment as usual for first-episode psychosis: two-year outcome."
authors:
- Rosenbaum B
- Harder S
- Knudsen P
- Køster A
- Lindhardt A
- Lajer M
- Valbak K
- Winther G
journal: Psychiatry
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1521/psyc.2012.75.4.331
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Supportive psychodynamic psychotherapy versus treatment as usual for first-episode psychosis: two-year outcome.
**Authors:** Rosenbaum B, Harder S, Knudsen P, Køster A, Lindhardt A, Lajer M, Valbak K, Winther G
**Journal:** Psychiatry (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1521/psyc.2012.75.4.331](https://doi.org/10.1521/psyc.2012.75.4.331)

## Content

1. Psychiatry. 2012 Winter;75(4):331-41. doi: 10.1521/psyc.2012.75.4.331.

Supportive psychodynamic psychotherapy versus treatment as usual for 
first-episode psychosis: two-year outcome.

Rosenbaum B(1), Harder S, Knudsen P, Køster A, Lindhardt A, Lajer M, Valbak K, 
Winther G.

Author information:
(1)Mental Health Services, Department of Psychology, University of Copenhagen, 
Frederiksberg, Denmark. bent.rosenbaum@dadlnet.dk

During recent decades, the field of treatment of schizophrenia has lacked 
empirical, systematic outcome studies that support psychodynamic psychotherapy 
as an evidence-based intervention for patients with schizophrenia. The Danish 
schizophrenia project (DNS) compared psychodynamic psychotherapy for psychosis 
with standard treatment in patients with a first-episode schizophrenia spectrum 
disorder. The study was designed as a prospective, comparative, longitudinal 
multi-site investigation of consecutively referred patients who were included 
during two years. The patients were treated with either manualized individual 
supportive psychodynamic psychotherapy (SPP) in addition to treatment as usual 
or with treatment as usual alone (TaU). Symptoms and functional outcomes were 
measured using the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) and the Global 
Assessment of Functioning scale (GAF). The study included 269 consecutively 
admitted patients, age 18-35, of whom 79% remained in the study after two years. 
The intervention group improved significantly on measures of both PANSS and GAF 
scores, with large effect sizes at two years follow-up after inclusion. Further, 
improvement on GAF(function) (p = 0.000) and GAF(symptom) (p = 0.010) 
significantly favored SPP in combination with TaU over TaU alone. In spite of 
limitations, this study speaks in favor of including supportive psychodynamic 
psychotherapy in the treatment for patients with schizophrenic first-episode 
psychoses.

DOI: 10.1521/psyc.2012.75.4.331
PMID: 23244011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]