---
reference_id: "PMID:37805343"
title: Adequacy of cytology and small biopsy samples obtained with rapid onsite evaluation (ROSE) for predictive biomarker testing in non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Hendry S
- Mamotte L
- Mesbah Ardakani N
- Leslie C
- Tesfai Y
- Grieu-Iacopetta F
- Izaac K
- Singh S
- Ardakani R
- Thomas M
- Giardina T
- Robinson C
- Frost F
- Amanuel B
journal: Pathology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.pathol.2023.08.002
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/pathology"
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- B7-H1 Antigen/metabolism
- Retrospective Studies
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins
- Endoscopic Ultrasound-Guided Fine Needle Aspiration
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- ErbB Receptors
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adequacy of cytology and small biopsy samples obtained with rapid onsite evaluation (ROSE) for predictive biomarker testing in non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Hendry S, Mamotte L, Mesbah Ardakani N, Leslie C, Tesfai Y, Grieu-Iacopetta F, Izaac K, Singh S, Ardakani R, Thomas M, Giardina T, Robinson C, Frost F, Amanuel B
**Journal:** Pathology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pathol.2023.08.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pathol.2023.08.002)

## Content

1. Pathology. 2023 Dec;55(7):917-921. doi: 10.1016/j.pathol.2023.08.002. Epub
2023  Sep 16.

Adequacy of cytology and small biopsy samples obtained with rapid onsite
evaluation (ROSE) for predictive biomarker testing in non-small cell lung
cancer.

Hendry S(1), Mamotte L(2), Mesbah Ardakani N(2), Leslie C(2), Tesfai Y(2),
Grieu-Iacopetta F(2), Izaac K(2), Singh S(2), Ardakani R(2), Thomas M(2),
Giardina T(2), Robinson C(3), Frost F(2), Amanuel B(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA, QEII
Medical Centre, Nedlands, WA, Australia. Electronic address:
shona.hendry@health.wa.gov.au.
(2)Department of Anatomical Pathology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA, QEII
Medical Centre, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(3)Department of Anatomical Pathology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA, QEII
Medical Centre, Nedlands, WA, Australia; Discipline of Pathology and Laboratory
Science, School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Western Australia,
Perth, WA, Australia.
(4)Department of Anatomical Pathology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA, QEII
Medical Centre, Nedlands, WA, Australia; School of Medical and Health Sciences,
Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, WA, Australia.

Complete biomarker workup of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) specimens is
essential for appropriate and timely clinical management decisions. This can be
challenging to achieve from small cytology and histology specimens, with
increasing numbers of molecular and immunohistochemical biomarkers required. We
conducted a 5 year retrospective audit of cases at our institution to assess the
diagnostic and biomarker testing adequacy rates, particularly those specimens
obtained with rapid onsite evaluation (ROSE), performed by a cytopathologist and
a cytology scientist or pathology trainee, including all endobronchial
ultrasound guided transbronchial needle aspirations (EBUS-TBNA), CT guided lung
fine needle aspirations (FNA) and CT guided lung core biopsies. A total of 5,354
cases were identified, of which 92.2% had sufficient material for diagnosis. Of
the 1506 cases identified with a recorded diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma or
NSCLC, not otherwise specified, 1001 (66.5%) had biomarker testing requested.
Sufficient material was available in 89.5% of cases for a complete biomarker
workup which included EGFR and KRAS mutational testing (all cases), ALK, ROS1
and PD-L1 immunohistochemistry (all cases), and ALK and ROS1 FISH (as required).
For EGFR and KRAS mutational testing across both cytology and histology
specimens, 99% of cases were sufficient. Of the samples in which a complete
biomarker workup was unable to be performed, approximately half were only
insufficient due to inadequate numbers of tumour cells for PD-L1
immunohistochemistry. Excluding PD-L1 IHC, 952 (95.1%) of samples obtained with
ROSE were sufficient for the remainder of the testing requirements. Next
generation sequencing using a 33 gene custom AmpliSeq panel was achieved in up
to 72% of cases. In conclusion, small cytology and histology specimens obtained
with ROSE are suitable for predictive biomarker testing in NSCLC, although
attention needs to be paid to obtaining sufficient cells (>100) for PD-L1
immunohistochemistry.

Copyright © 2023 Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pathol.2023.08.002
PMID: 37805343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
