---
reference_id: "PMID:40699151"
title: Genome integration of human DNA oncoviruses.
authors:
- Vojtechova Z
- Tachezy R
journal: J Virol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.00562-25
keywords:
- Humans
- Virus Integration
- "Genome, Viral"
- "Hepatitis B virus/genetics, physiology"
- "Herpesvirus 4, Human/genetics, physiology"
- Carcinogenesis
- "DNA Tumor Viruses/genetics, physiology"
- Neoplasms/virology
- "Merkel cell polyomavirus/genetics, physiology"
- "Oncogenic Viruses/genetics, physiology"
- "Papillomaviridae/genetics, physiology"
- "Genome, Human"
- "DNA, Viral/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome integration of human DNA oncoviruses.
**Authors:** Vojtechova Z, Tachezy R
**Journal:** J Virol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.00562-25](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.00562-25)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2025 Aug 19;99(8):e0056225. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00562-25. Epub 2025 Jul 
23.

Genome integration of human DNA oncoviruses.

Vojtechova Z(1), Tachezy R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Faculty of Science BIOCEV, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.

Tumors of infectious origin globally represent 13%. Oncogenic DNA viruses such 
as human papillomavirus (HPV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and Epstein-Barr virus 
(EBV) are responsible for approximately 60% of these tumors. These oncoviruses 
are extensively studied to understand their role in cancer development, 
particularly through viral genome integration into the host DNA. Retroviruses 
require integration mediated by viral integrase for persistence, whereas DNA 
oncoviruses do not need integration for replication; instead, integration occurs 
incidentally. This process often targets fragile sites in the human genome, 
causing structural rearrangements that disrupt genes, activate proto-oncogenes, 
and increase genomic instability, all contributing to tumorigenesis. Integration 
near promoter regions and active genes is closely linked to carcinogenesis, 
highlighting its importance in developing diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. 
This review summarizes viral integration's role in oncogenesis, mechanisms of 
integration, and methods to study this process, focusing on DNA tumor viruses 
such as HBV, EBV, HPV, and Merkel cell polyomavirus.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00562-25
PMCID: PMC12363244
PMID: 40699151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.