---
reference_id: "PMID:32039858"
title: Improved Criteria for the Classification of Titin Variants in Inherited Skeletal Myopathies.
authors:
- Savarese M
- Johari M
- Johnson K
- Arumilli M
- Torella A
- Töpf A
- Rubegni A
- Kuhn M
- Giugliano T
- Gläser D
- Fattori F
- Thompson R
- Penttilä S
- Lehtinen S
- Gibertini S
- Ruggieri A
- Mora M
- Maver A
- Peterlin B
- Mankodi A
- Lochmüller H
- Santorelli FM
- Schoser B
- Fajkusová L
- Straub V
- Nigro V
- Hackman P
- Udd B
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3233/JND-190423
keywords:
- "Cardiomyopathies/classification, congenital, genetics"
- Connectin/genetics
- Humans
- "Muscular Diseases/classification, congenital, genetics"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic/standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Improved Criteria for the Classification of Titin Variants in Inherited Skeletal Myopathies.
**Authors:** Savarese M, Johari M, Johnson K, Arumilli M, Torella A, Töpf A, Rubegni A, Kuhn M, Giugliano T, Gläser D, Fattori F, Thompson R, Penttilä S, Lehtinen S, Gibertini S, Ruggieri A, Mora M, Maver A, Peterlin B, Mankodi A, Lochmüller H, Santorelli FM, Schoser B, Fajkusová L, Straub V, Nigro V, Hackman P, Udd B
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-190423](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-190423)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2020;7(2):153-166. doi: 10.3233/JND-190423.

Improved Criteria for the Classification of Titin Variants in Inherited Skeletal
Myopathies.

Savarese M(1)(2), Johari M(1)(2), Johnson K(3), Arumilli M(1)(2), Torella
A(4)(5), Töpf A(3), Rubegni A(6), Kuhn M(7), Giugliano T(4)(5), Gläser D(7),
Fattori F(8), Thompson R(3), Penttilä S(9), Lehtinen S(9), Gibertini S(10),
Ruggieri A(10)(11), Mora M(10), Maver A(12), Peterlin B(12), Mankodi A(13),
Lochmüller H(14)(15)(16)(17), Santorelli FM(6), Schoser B(18), Fajkusová L(19),
Straub V(3), Nigro V(4)(5), Hackman P(1)(2), Udd B(1)(2)(20)(21).

Author information:
(1)Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Medicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
(3)The John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Institute of Genetic
Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(4)Dipartimento di Medicina di Precisione, Universitá degli Studi della Campania
"Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(5)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy.
(6)IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy.
(7)Genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany.
(8)Unit for Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Bambino Gesù
Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(9)Neuromuscular Research Center, Department of Genetics, Fimlab Laboratories,
Tampere, Finland.
(10)Neuromuscular Diseases and Neuroimmunology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy.
(11)Department of Molecular and Translation Medicine, Unit of Biology and
Genetics, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(12)Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(13)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, Unites States.
(14)Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Medical Center -
University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(15)Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG-CRG), Center for Genomic
Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona,
Spain.
(16)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
(17)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa,
Canada.
(18)Friedrich-Baur-Institut, Neurologische Klinik Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, Munich, Germany.
(19)Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital Brno and
Masaryk University Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
(20)Department of Neurology, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland.
(21)Neuromuscular Research Center, Tampere University and University Hospital,
Tampere, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Extensive genetic screening results in the identification of
thousands of rare variants that are difficult to interpret. Because of its sheer
size, rare variants in the titin gene (TTN) are detected frequently in any
individual. Unambiguous interpretation of molecular findings is almost
impossible in many patients with myopathies or cardiomyopathies.
OBJECTIVE: To refine the current classification framework for TTN-associated
skeletal muscle disorders and standardize the interpretation of TTN variants.
METHODS: We used the guidelines issued by the American College of Medical
Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) and the Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP)
to re-analyze TTN genetic findings from our patient cohort.
RESULTS: We identified in the classification guidelines three rules that are not
applicable to titin-related skeletal muscle disorders; six rules that require
disease-/gene-specific adjustments and four rules requiring quantitative
thresholds for a proper use. In three cases, the rule strength need to be
modified.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest adjustments are made to the guidelines. We provide
frequency thresholds to facilitate filtering of candidate causative variants and
guidance for the use and interpretation of functional data and co-segregation
evidence. We expect that the variant classification framework for TTN-related
skeletal muscle disorders will be further improved along with a better
understanding of these diseases.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-190423
PMID: 32039858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
