---
reference_id: "PMID:26953925"
title: A contemporary perspective on the molecular characteristics of mitochondrial autoantigens and diagnosis in primary biliary cholangitis.
authors:
- Leung PS
- Choi J
- Yang G
- Woo E
- Kenny TP
- Gershwin ME
journal: Expert Rev Mol Diagn
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1586/14737159.2016.1164038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A contemporary perspective on the molecular characteristics of mitochondrial autoantigens and diagnosis in primary biliary cholangitis.
**Authors:** Leung PS, Choi J, Yang G, Woo E, Kenny TP, Gershwin ME
**Journal:** Expert Rev Mol Diagn (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1586/14737159.2016.1164038](https://doi.org/10.1586/14737159.2016.1164038)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2016 Jun;16(6):697-705. doi: 
10.1586/14737159.2016.1164038. Epub 2016 Mar 30.

A contemporary perspective on the molecular characteristics of mitochondrial 
autoantigens and diagnosis in primary biliary cholangitis.

Leung PS(1), Choi J(1), Yang G(1), Woo E(1), Kenny TP(1), Gershwin ME(1).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology , University of 
California at Davis School of Medicine , Davis , CA , USA.

Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) is an autoimmune hepatobiliary disease 
characterized by immune mediated destruction of the intrahepatic small bile 
ducts and the presence of antimitochondrial antibodies (AMAs). The mitochondrial 
autoantigens have been identified as the E2 subunits of the 2-oxo-acid 
dehydrogenase complex, including the E2 subunits of pyruvate dehydrogenase, 
branched-chain 2-oxo acid dehydrogenase complex, oxoglutarate dehydrogenase 
complex, E3 binding protein and PDC E1 alpha subunit. The AMA epitope is mapped 
within the E2 lipoic acid binding domain, which is particularly important for 
oxidative phosphorylation. In addition, lipoic acid, which serves as a swinging 
arm to capture electrons, is particularly susceptible to an electrophilic attack 
and may provide clues to the etiology of PBC. This review emphasizes the 
molecular characteristics of AMAs, including detection, immunochemistry and the 
putative role in disease. These data have significance not only specifically for 
PBC, but generically for autoimmunity.

DOI: 10.1586/14737159.2016.1164038
PMCID: PMC4964877
PMID: 26953925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]