---
reference_id: "PMID:31643715"
title: Antifungal Agents.
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antifungal Agents.

## Content

1. Antifungal Agents.

LiverTox®: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury 
[Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases; 2012–.
2017 May 18.

Antifungal drugs are a diverse group of medications used to treat fungal 
infections ranging from ringworm and athletes foot to esophageal candidiasis, 
coccidiomycosis, and cryptococcal meningitis. The antifungals are classified 
into several groups based on their structure and mechanisms of action. These 
classes include the polyenes, imidazoles, triazoles, allylamines, and 
echinocandins, as well as miscellaneous agents. Polyene antifungals have an 
amphiphilic structure which binds to ergosterol, converting the fluid cell 
membrane of the fungal cell into a more crystalline state increasing 
permeability and precipitating cell lysis. Examples of polyenes (with date of 
approval and common brand names) include nystatin (1971: Mycostatin, Nystat) and 
amphotericin B (1971: Amphocin, Fungizone). Imidazole and triazole antifungal 
drugs inhibit cytochrome P450 14α-demethylase which is responsible for 
converting lanosterol to ergosterol, which blocks cell membrane synthesis in 
fungi. Examples of imidazoles include ketoconazole (1981: Nizoral) and 
clotrimazole (1975: Mycelex). Examples of triazoles include fluconazole (1990: 
Diflucan), itraconazole (1992: Sporanox), posaconazole (2006: Noxafil) and 
voriconazole (2002: Vfend). Isavuconazonium (Cresemba: 2016) is a prodrug of 
isavuconazole and is available in both intravenous and oral forms, its 
indications restricted for serious, invasive fungal infections such as 
aspergilosis and mucormycosis. The triazoles are perhaps the most commonly used 
antifungal agents having excellent oral absorption, tolerance and tissue 
penetration.

PMID: 31643715