---
reference_id: "PMID:28159476"
title: Treatment induced neuropathy of diabetes-Long term implications in type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Gibbons CH
journal: J Diabetes Complications
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2017.01.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment induced neuropathy of diabetes-Long term implications in type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Gibbons CH
**Journal:** J Diabetes Complications (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2017.01.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2017.01.010)

## Content

1. J Diabetes Complications. 2017 Apr;31(4):715-720. doi: 
10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2017.01.010. Epub 2017 Jan 21.

Treatment induced neuropathy of diabetes-Long term implications in type 1 
diabetes.

Gibbons CH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: cgibbons@bidmc.harvard.edu.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Aggressive glucose control can result in treatment induced 
neuropathy of diabetes (TIND) if glycemic control is achieved too quickly. The 
aim of the present study is to describe the 8-year follow-up data on a cohort of 
individuals with type 1 diabetes who developed TIND.
METHODS: Twenty-six individuals with type 1 diabetes and TIND were followed 
longitudinally for 8years with regular quantitative measurement of pain, 
neurological examinations and evaluation of microvascular complications. 
Comprehensive neurological testing was performed after TIND and 7-8years later.
RESULTS: Among the 26 individuals with TIND, 19/26 had stable glycemic control 
and 7/26 had unstable glycemic control in long-term follow up. Those 19/26 with 
stable glycemic control had improvement in neuropathy, pain and microvascular 
complications while the 7/26 with unstable glycemic control had significant 
worsening of neuropathy, pain and microvascular complications (P<0.01, all 
tests).
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: TIND is a poorly understood iatrogenic complication 
of aggressive glycemic control, although individuals with stable glycemic 
control tended to improve, while those with unstable glycemic control worsened. 
Additional studies of TIND are required to understand potential outcomes in an 
era of medical 'metrics' where physician reimbursement may be tied to 
achievement of excessively rapid glycemic control.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2017.01.010
PMID: 28159476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]