---
reference_id: "PMID:11400945"
title: A case of chondrodysplasia punctata with features of osteogenesis imperfecta type II.
authors:
- Sidden CR
- Filly RA
- Norton ME
- Kostiner DR
journal: J Ultrasound Med
year: '2001'
doi: 10.7863/jum.2001.20.6.699
keywords:
- Adult
- Chondrodysplasia Punctata/diagnostic imaging
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of chondrodysplasia punctata with features of osteogenesis imperfecta type II.
**Authors:** Sidden CR, Filly RA, Norton ME, Kostiner DR
**Journal:** J Ultrasound Med (2001)
**DOI:** [10.7863/jum.2001.20.6.699](https://doi.org/10.7863/jum.2001.20.6.699)

## Content

1. J Ultrasound Med. 2001 Jun;20(6):699-703. doi: 10.7863/jum.2001.20.6.699.

A case of chondrodysplasia punctata with features of osteogenesis imperfecta 
type II.

Sidden CR(1), Filly RA, Norton ME, Kostiner DR.

Author information:
(1)Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, USA.

The osteogenesis imperfecta syndromes constitute a group of heterogeneous, 
heritable skeletal dysplasias. Of the 4 types, type II is the most severe, with 
an incidence of 1 per 55,000. It is characterized by malformed bones secondary 
to abnormal collagen type I synthesis. Affected fetuses are divided into 3 
groups: A, B, and C. All groups have long bones described as "wrinkled" or 
"crumpled" secondary to repeated fractures. Many bones also show evidence of 
demineralization, which is especially evident in the bones of the face and 
calvaria. In groups A and C, the chest is generally small, with thickened and 
shortened ribs, and each rib has characteristic "beading" patterns secondary to 
repeated fracturing. Sonography has traditionally been successful in the 
diagnosis of osteogenesis imperfecta at an early gestational age. 
Chondrodysplasia punctata describes a heterogeneous group of skeletal disorders 
characterized by abnormal mineralization of bones during gestation. There are 
many different causes of it, but some of the specific subtypes include 
rhizomelic, X-linked dominant (also known as Conradi-Hünermann syndrome), 
X-linked recessive, and tibia-metacarpal. We report a case of severe X-linked 
dominant chondrodysplasia punctata, which sonographically had common features 
with osteogenesis imperfecta type II.

DOI: 10.7863/jum.2001.20.6.699
PMID: 11400945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]