---
reference_id: "PMID:40746769"
title: Myelodysplastic Syndrome in a Patient With Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome.
authors:
- Shim KG
- Khadarian K
- Samadder J
- Zhou J
- Yi CA
journal: Clin Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ccr3.70602
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myelodysplastic Syndrome in a Patient With Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome.
**Authors:** Shim KG, Khadarian K, Samadder J, Zhou J, Yi CA
**Journal:** Clin Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ccr3.70602](https://doi.org/10.1002/ccr3.70602)

## Content

1. Clin Case Rep. 2025 Jul 30;13(8):e70602. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.70602. eCollection 
2025 Aug.

Myelodysplastic Syndrome in a Patient With Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome.

Shim KG(1), Khadarian K(2), Samadder J(3), Zhou J(4), Yi CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine Mayo Clinic, Hematology and Medical Oncology Phoenix 
Arizona USA.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Mayo Clinic Scottsdale Arizona 
USA.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Mayo Clinic, Center of 
Individualized Medicine Scottsdale Arizona USA.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Mayo Clinic Phoenix Arizona 
USA.

Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome (CCS) is a rare non-hereditary gastroenterological 
polyposis syndrome without a clear etiology. Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are 
clonal hematological disorders. Immune dysregulation has been posited as a 
contributor to the development of both. A 70-year-old man developed chronic 
diarrhea, dysgeusia, and onycholysis. Endoscopic evaluation and testing to 
exclude hereditary polyposis syndromes resulted in a diagnosis of CCS. 
Approximately 1 year later, he was noted to have persistent anemia, which was 
ultimately diagnosed as MDS. He was evaluated with a myeloid disorder 
next-generation sequencing panel and found to have mutations in IDH2, SRSF2, and 
JAK2. This is the second reported case characterizing concomitant MDS and CCS. 
This is the first case to report the development of MDS after the diagnosis and 
treatment of CCS. A successful management strategy for both disorders is 
outlined within this case report.

© 2025 The Author(s). Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.70602
PMCID: PMC12311222
PMID: 40746769

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.