---
reference_id: "PMID:36010023"
title: "Low Copper Diet-A Therapeutic Option for Wilson Disease?"
authors:
- Teufel-Schäfer U
- Forster C
- Schaefer N
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/children9081132
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low Copper Diet-A Therapeutic Option for Wilson Disease?
**Authors:** Teufel-Schäfer U, Forster C, Schaefer N
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children9081132](https://doi.org/10.3390/children9081132)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2022 Jul 28;9(8):1132. doi: 10.3390/children9081132.

Low Copper Diet-A Therapeutic Option for Wilson Disease?

Teufel-Schäfer U(1), Forster C(1), Schaefer N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology,
Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Freiburg, Mathildenstr. 1, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Wilson's disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive inherited disease in which a
pathological storage of copper in various organs is the mean pathophysiological
mechanism. The therapy consists of drug therapy with chelating agents or zinc.
For patients, nutrition is always an important issue. The aim of this review was
to determine whether there are clear recommendations for a low copper diet for
WD patients, or whether the essential trace element zinc plays a role? We were
able to show that some of the foods with high copper content would have to be
consumed in such large quantities that this is regularly not the case.
Furthermore, there are also different absorption rates depending on the copper
content. A lower copper intake only prevents the re-accumulation of copper. In
summary, consistent adherence to drug therapy is more important than a strict
diet. Only two foods should be consistently avoided: Liver and Shellfish.

DOI: 10.3390/children9081132
PMCID: PMC9406399
PMID: 36010023

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
