---
reference_id: "PMID:19338053"
title: "GJA1 mutations, variants, and connexin 43 dysfunction as it relates to the oculodentodigital dysplasia phenotype."
authors:
- Paznekas WA
- Karczeski B
- Vermeer S
- Lowry RB
- Delatycki M
- Laurence F
- Koivisto PA
- Van Maldergem L
- Boyadjiev SA
- Bodurtha JN
- Jabs EW
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20958
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Connexin 43/chemistry, genetics"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GJA1 mutations, variants, and connexin 43 dysfunction as it relates to the oculodentodigital dysplasia phenotype.
**Authors:** Paznekas WA, Karczeski B, Vermeer S, Lowry RB, Delatycki M, Laurence F, Koivisto PA, Van Maldergem L, Boyadjiev SA, Bodurtha JN, Jabs EW
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20958](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20958)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2009 May;30(5):724-33. doi: 10.1002/humu.20958.

GJA1 mutations, variants, and connexin 43 dysfunction as it relates to the
oculodentodigital dysplasia phenotype.

Paznekas WA(1), Karczeski B, Vermeer S, Lowry RB, Delatycki M, Laurence F,
Koivisto PA, Van Maldergem L, Boyadjiev SA, Bodurtha JN, Jabs EW.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA.

The predominantly autosomal dominant disorder, oculodentodigital dysplasia
(ODDD) has high penetrance with intra- and interfamilial phenotypic variability.
Abnormalities observed in ODDD affect the eye, dentition, and digits of the
hands and feet. Patients present with a characteristic facial appearance, narrow
nose, and hypoplastic alae nasi. Neurological problems, including dysarthria,
neurogenic bladder disturbances, spastic paraparesis, ataxia, anterior tibial
muscle weakness, and seizures, are known to occur as well as conductive hearing
loss, cardiac defects, and anomalies of the skin, hair, and nails. In 2003, our
analysis of 17 ODDD families revealed that each had a different mutation within
the human gap junction alpha 1 (GJA1) gene which encodes the protein connexin 43
(Cx43). Since then at least 17 publications have identified an additional 26
GJA1 mutations and in this study, we present 28 new cases with 18 novel GJA1
mutations. We include tables summarizing the 62 known GJA1 nucleotide changes
leading to Cx43 protein alterations and the phenotypic information available on
177 affected individuals from 54 genotyped families. Mutations resulting in ODDD
occur in each of the nine domains of the Cx43 protein, and we review our
functional experiments and those in the literature, examining the effects of 13
different Cx43 mutations upon gap junction activity.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20958
PMID: 19338053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
