---
reference_id: "PMID:24000328"
title: "Role of Campylobacter jejuni infection in the pathogenesis of Guillain-Barré syndrome: an update."
authors:
- Nyati KK
- Nyati R
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1155/2013/852195
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Campylobacter jejuni infection in the pathogenesis of Guillain-Barré syndrome: an update.
**Authors:** Nyati KK, Nyati R
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2013/852195](https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/852195)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:852195. doi: 10.1155/2013/852195. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Role of Campylobacter jejuni infection in the pathogenesis of Guillain-Barré 
syndrome: an update.

Nyati KK(1), Nyati R.

Author information:
(1)Immune Regulation Laboratory, World Premier International-Immunology Frontier 
Research Center (WPI-IFReC), Osaka University, Osaka 865-0871, Japan. 
kishan.nyati@yahoo.com

Our current knowledge on Campylobacter jejuni infections in humans has 
progressively increased over the past few decades. Infection with C. jejuni is 
the most common cause of bacterial gastroenteritis, sometimes surpassing other 
infections due to Salmonella, Shigella, and Escherichia coli. Most infections 
are acquired due to consumption of raw or undercooked poultry, unpasteurized 
milk, and contaminated water. After developing the diagnostic methods to detect 
C. jejuni, the possibility to identify the association of its infection with new 
diseases has been increased. After the successful isolation of C. jejuni, 
reports have been published citing the occurrence of GBS following C. jejuni 
infection. Thus, C. jejuni is now considered as a major triggering agent of GBS. 
Molecular mimicry between sialylated lipooligosaccharide structures on the cell 
envelope of these bacteria and ganglioside epitopes on the human nerves that 
generates cross-reactive immune response results in autoimmune-driven nerve 
damage. Though C. jejuni is associated with several pathologic forms of GBS, 
axonal subtypes following C. jejuni infection may be more severe. Ample amount 
of existing data covers a large spectrum of GBS; however, the studies on C. 
jejuni-associated GBS are still inconclusive. Therefore, this review provides an 
update on the C. jejuni infections engaged in the pathogenesis of GBS.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/852195
PMCID: PMC3755430
PMID: 24000328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]