---
reference_id: PMID:39684805
title: "Understanding Vascular Calcification in Chronic Kidney Disease: Pathogenesis and Therapeutic Implications."
authors:
- Siracusa C
- Carabetta N
- Morano MB
- Manica M
- Strangio A
- Sabatino J
- Leo I
- Castagna A
- Cianflone E
- Torella D
- Andreucci M
- Zicarelli MT
- Musolino M
- Bolignano D
- Coppolino G
- De Rosa S
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms252313096
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vascular Calcification/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/metabolism, complications, pathology, etiology"
- Risk Factors
- Animals
- Osteoprotegerin/metabolism
- alpha-2-HS-Glycoprotein/metabolism
- Oxidative Stress
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding Vascular Calcification in Chronic Kidney Disease: Pathogenesis and Therapeutic Implications.
**Authors:** Siracusa C, Carabetta N, Morano MB, Manica M, Strangio A, Sabatino J, Leo I, Castagna A, Cianflone E, Torella D, Andreucci M, Zicarelli MT, Musolino M, Bolignano D, Coppolino G, De Rosa S
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms252313096](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms252313096)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Dec 5;25(23):13096. doi: 10.3390/ijms252313096.

Understanding Vascular Calcification in Chronic Kidney Disease: Pathogenesis and 
Therapeutic Implications.

Siracusa C(1), Carabetta N(1), Morano MB(1), Manica M(1), Strangio A(2), 
Sabatino J(2), Leo I(2), Castagna A(1), Cianflone E(1), Torella D(2), Andreucci 
M(3), Zicarelli MT(1), Musolino M(1), Bolignano D(1), Coppolino G(3), De Rosa 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, "Magna Grecia" University, 88100 
Catanzaro, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, "Magna Grecia" University, 
88100 Catanzaro, Italy.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, "Magna Grecia" University, 88100 Catanzaro, 
Italy.

Vascular calcification (VC) is a biological phenomenon characterized by an 
accumulation of calcium and phosphate deposits within the walls of blood vessels 
causing the loss of elasticity of the arterial walls. VC plays a crucial role in 
the incidence and progression of chronic kidney disease (CKD), leading to a 
significant increase in cardiovascular mortality in these patients. Different 
conditions such as age, sex, dyslipidemia, diabetes, and hypertension are the 
main risk factors in patients affected by chronic kidney disease. However, VC 
may occur earlier and faster in these patients if it is associated with new or 
non-traditional risk factors such as oxidative stress, anemia, and inflammation. 
In chronic kidney disease, several pathophysiological processes contribute to 
vascular calcifications, including osteochondrogenic differentiation of vascular 
cells, hyperphosphatemia and hypercalcemia, and the loss of specific vascular 
calcification inhibitors including pyrophosphate, fetuin-A, osteoprotegerin, and 
matrix GLA protein. In this review we discuss the main traditional and 
non-traditional risk factors that can promote VC in patients with kidney 
disease. In addition, we provide an overview of the main pathogenetic mechanisms 
responsible for VC that may be crucial to identify new prevention strategies and 
possible new therapeutic approaches to reduce cardiovascular risk in patients 
with kidney disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252313096
PMCID: PMC11642360
PMID: 39684805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.