---
reference_id: PMID:28290237
title: "Multiple Nutritional Factors and the Risk of Hashimoto's Thyroiditis."
authors:
- Hu S
- Rayman MP
journal: Thyroid
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1089/thy.2016.0635
keywords:
- Diet
- Dietary Supplements
- "Hashimoto Disease/etiology, immunology"
- Humans
- Iron/blood
- Nutritional Status
- Selenium/blood
- Vitamin D/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Nutritional Factors and the Risk of Hashimoto's Thyroiditis.
**Authors:** Hu S, Rayman MP
**Journal:** Thyroid (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.2016.0635](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.2016.0635)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2017 May;27(5):597-610. doi: 10.1089/thy.2016.0635. Epub 2017 Apr 6.

Multiple Nutritional Factors and the Risk of Hashimoto's Thyroiditis.

Hu S(1)(2), Rayman MP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Surrey , Guildford, United Kingdom .
(2)2 Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University , Xi'an, Shaanxi, China .

BACKGROUND: Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) is considered to be the most common 
autoimmune disease. It is currently accepted that genetic susceptibility, 
environmental factors, and immune disorders contribute to its development. With 
regard to nutritional factors, evidence implicates high iodine intake and 
deficiencies of selenium and iron with a potential relevance of vitamin D 
status. To elucidate the role of nutritional factors in the risk, pathogenesis, 
and treatment of HT, PubMed and the Cochrane Library were searched for 
publications on iodine, iron, selenium, and vitamin D and risk/treatment of HT.
SUMMARY: Chronic exposure to excess iodine intake induces autoimmune 
thyroiditis, partly because highly iodinated thyroglobulin (Tg) is more 
immunogenic. Recent introduction of universal salt iodization can have a 
similar, though transient, effect. Selenoproteins are essential to thyroid 
action. In particular, the glutathione peroxidases protect the thyroid by 
removing excessive hydrogen peroxide produced for Tg iodination. Genetic data 
implicate the anti-inflammatory selenoprotein S in HT risk. There is evidence 
from observational studies and randomized controlled trials that 
selenium/selenoproteins can reduce thyroid peroxidase (TPO)-antibody titers, 
hypothyroidism, and postpartum thyroiditis. Iron deficiency impairs thyroid 
metabolism. TPO, the enzyme responsible for the production of thyroid hormones, 
is a heme (iron-containing) enzyme which becomes active at the apical surface of 
thyrocytes only after binding heme. HT patients are frequently iron deficient, 
since autoimmune gastritis, which impairs iron absorption, is a common 
co-morbidity. Treatment of anemic women with impaired thyroid function with iron 
improves thyroid-hormone concentrations, while thyroxine and iron together are 
more effective in improving iron status. Lower vitamin D status has been found 
in HT patients than in controls, and inverse relationships of serum vitamin D 
with TPO/Tg antibodies have been reported. However, other data and the lack of 
trial evidence suggest that low vitamin D status is more likely the result of 
autoimmune disease processes that include vitamin D receptor dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians should check patients' iron (particularly in 
menstruating women) and vitamin D status to correct any deficiency. Adequate 
selenium intake is vital in areas of iodine deficiency/excess, and in regions of 
low selenium intake a supplement of 50-100 μg/day of selenium may be 
appropriate.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2016.0635
PMID: 28290237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]