---
reference_id: "PMID:35455940"
title: Pathophysiological Heterogeneity of the BBSOA Neurodevelopmental Syndrome.
authors:
- Bertacchi M
- Tocco C
- Schaaf CP
- Studer M
journal: Cells
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cells11081260
keywords:
- Animals
- COUP Transcription Factor I/metabolism
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Mice
- "Optic Atrophies, Hereditary/genetics, pathology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiological Heterogeneity of the BBSOA Neurodevelopmental Syndrome.
**Authors:** Bertacchi M, Tocco C, Schaaf CP, Studer M
**Journal:** Cells (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells11081260](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11081260)

## Content

1. Cells. 2022 Apr 8;11(8):1260. doi: 10.3390/cells11081260.

Pathophysiological Heterogeneity of the BBSOA Neurodevelopmental Syndrome.

Bertacchi M(1), Tocco C(1), Schaaf CP(2), Studer M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biology Valrose (IBV), University Côte d'Azur, 06108 Nice, 
France.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany.

The formation and maturation of the human brain is regulated by highly 
coordinated developmental events, such as neural cell proliferation, migration 
and differentiation. Any impairment of these interconnected multi-factorial 
processes can affect brain structure and function and lead to distinctive 
neurodevelopmental disorders. Here, we review the pathophysiology of the 
Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf Optic Atrophy Syndrome (BBSOAS; OMIM 615722; ORPHA 
401777), a recently described monogenic neurodevelopmental syndrome caused by 
the haploinsufficiency of NR2F1 gene, a key transcriptional regulator of brain 
development. Although intellectual disability, developmental delay and visual 
impairment are arguably the most common symptoms affecting BBSOAS patients, 
multiple additional features are often reported, including epilepsy, autistic 
traits and hypotonia. The presence of specific symptoms and their variable level 
of severity might depend on still poorly characterized genotype-phenotype 
correlations. We begin with an overview of the several mutations of NR2F1 
identified to date, then further focuses on the main pathological features of 
BBSOAS patients, providing evidence-whenever possible-for the existing 
genotype-phenotype correlations. On the clinical side, we lay out an up-to-date 
list of clinical examinations and therapeutic interventions recommended for 
children with BBSOAS. On the experimental side, we describe state-of-the-art in 
vivo and in vitro studies aiming at deciphering the role of mouse Nr2f1, in 
physiological conditions and in pathological contexts, underlying the BBSOAS 
features. Furthermore, by modeling distinct NR2F1 genetic alterations in terms 
of dimer formation and nuclear receptor binding efficiencies, we attempt to 
estimate the total amounts of functional NR2F1 acting in developing brain cells 
in normal and pathological conditions. Finally, using the NR2F1 gene and BBSOAS 
as a paradigm of monogenic rare neurodevelopmental disorder, we aim to set the 
path for future explorations of causative links between impaired brain 
development and the appearance of symptoms in human neurological syndromes.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11081260
PMCID: PMC9024734
PMID: 35455940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.