---
reference_id: "PMID:21877306"
title: "[Membranous glomerulonephritis: better therapy with autoantibody monitoring?]."
authors:
- Stahl RA
- Hoxha E
- Helmchen U
journal: Dtsch Med Wochenschr
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1286067
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived/therapeutic use"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Biopsy
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- Humans
- Immunologic Factors/therapeutic use
- Immunomodulation
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Kidney Glomerulus/drug effects, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- Prognosis
- "Receptors, Phospholipase A2/immunology"
- Rituximab
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Membranous glomerulonephritis: better therapy with autoantibody monitoring?].
**Authors:** Stahl RA, Hoxha E, Helmchen U
**Journal:** Dtsch Med Wochenschr (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0031-1286067](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0031-1286067)

## Content

1. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2011 Aug;136(34-35):1733-7. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1286067.
 Epub 2011 Aug 29.

[Membranous glomerulonephritis: better therapy with autoantibody monitoring?].

[Article in German]

Stahl RA(1), Hoxha E, Helmchen U.

Author information:
(1)Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, III. Medizinische Klinik, Hamburg.
rstahl@uke.de

Membranous nephropathy is the most common cause of nephrotic syndrome in adults.
Binding of circulating autoantibodies to the glomerular filtration barrier leads
to the development of this autoimmune disease. The clinical symptoms range from
small proteinuria to severe nephrotic syndrome with enormous oedema, not
controllable hyperlipidaemia and increased disposition for infection. One third
of patients reach complete or partial remission of proteinuria under symptomatic
treatment, which includes ACE-inhibitors and AT-I-blockers, loop diuretics and
statins. Untreated the disease leads to loss of renal function over 5-10 years
in 20-30% of patients. A risk score based on proteinuria and renal function is
used to guide the decision when to start with an immunosuppressive therapy. A
better adapted diagnostic and therapy of membranous nephropathy may be possible
through measurement of circulating autoantibodies directed against a podocytic
phospholipase-A(2) receptor.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0031-1286067
PMID: 21877306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
