---
reference_id: "PMID:36442838"
title: Clinical Manifestations and Outcomes of 20 Korean Hypochondroplasia Patients with the FGFR3 N540K variant.
authors:
- Kim HY
- Lee YA
- Shin CH
- Cho TJ
- Ko JM
journal: Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/a-1988-9734
keywords:
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- "Achondroplasia/drug therapy, genetics, diagnosis"
- Human Growth Hormone
- Child
- Republic of Korea
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Mutation
- Humans
- Dwarfism
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital"
- Lordosis
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Manifestations and Outcomes of 20 Korean Hypochondroplasia Patients with the FGFR3 N540K variant.
**Authors:** Kim HY, Lee YA, Shin CH, Cho TJ, Ko JM
**Journal:** Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-1988-9734](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-1988-9734)

## Content

1. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2023 Mar;131(3):123-131. doi:
10.1055/a-1988-9734.  Epub 2022 Nov 28.

Clinical Manifestations and Outcomes of 20 Korean Hypochondroplasia Patients 
with the FGFR3 N540K variant.

Kim HY(1)(2), Lee YA(2), Shin CH(2), Cho TJ(3), Ko JM(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Orthopaedics, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Rare Disease Center, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Hypochondroplasia is a skeletal dysplasia caused by activating 
pathologic variants of FGFR3. The N540K variant accounts for 60-70% of reported 
cases and is associated with severe manifestations. Here, we analyze the 
clinical manifestations and outcomes of Korean patients with hypochondroplasia 
harboring the FGFR3 N540K variant.
METHODS: Medical records of 20 unrelated patients with genetically confirmed 
N540K-related hypochondroplasia were retrospectively reviewed. All individuals 
were diagnosed with hypochondroplasia by Sanger sequencing for FGFR3, or 
target-panel sequencing for skeletal dysplasia. The effectiveness of growth 
hormone therapy was analyzed in 16 patients treated with growth hormones.
RESULTS: Among 20 patients (7 men, 13 women), the mean age at first visit was 
3.5±1.0 years, and the mean follow-up duration was 6.8±0.6 years. The patients 
presented with a short stature and/or short limbs. Genu varum, macrocephaly, and 
developmental delay were observed in 11 (55.0%), 9 (45.0%), and 5 (25.0%) 
patients, respectively. Of the 12 patients who underwent neuroimaging, five 
(41.7%) showed abnormal findings (one required operation for obstructive 
hydrocephalus). Among 16 growth-hormone-treated patients (two were 
growth-hormone deficient), the increase in height standard deviation scores was 
significant after a mean 5.4±0.7 years of treatment (+0.6 and+1.8 using growth 
references for healthy controls and achondroplasia children, respectively). Four 
patients underwent surgical limb lengthening at a mean age of 8.8±3.3 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Neurodevelopmental abnormalities are frequently observed in 
patients with N540K-related hypochondroplasia. Close monitoring of skeletal 
manifestations and neurodevelopmental status is necessary for hypochondroplasia.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1988-9734
PMID: 36442838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest associated with this research.