---
reference_id: "PMID:31472890"
title: "Hypertension Treatment in Diabetes: Focus on Heart Failure Prevention."
authors:
- Bensimhon HF
- Cavender MA
journal: Heart Fail Clin
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertension Treatment in Diabetes: Focus on Heart Failure Prevention.
**Authors:** Bensimhon HF, Cavender MA
**Journal:** Heart Fail Clin (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.008)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Clin. 2019 Oct;15(4):551-563. doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.008.

Hypertension Treatment in Diabetes: Focus on Heart Failure Prevention.

Bensimhon HF(1), Cavender MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina, 
Burnett-Womack Building, 160 Dental Circle, CB# 7075, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA. Electronic address: Hannah.Bensimhon@unchealth.unc.edu.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina, 
Burnett-Womack Building, 160 Dental Circle, CB# 7075, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA.

Diabetes is strongly associated with development of cardiovascular disease and 
poor cardiovascular outcomes. Management of hypertension reduces cardiovascular 
outcomes among patients with diabetes. Many studies have examined the benefits 
of various classes of antihypertensives among patients with diabetes. Based on 
these, the American Diabetes Association has advised that all patients 
(particularly those with microalbuminuria) be treated first with an 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or an aldosterone receptor blocker 
followed by a calcium channel blocker or diuretic. Recently, sodium glucose 
transporter 2 inhibitors have been identified for their benefit in blood 
pressure control and cardiovascular risk reduction in patients with diabetes.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hfc.2019.06.008
PMID: 31472890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]