---
reference_id: "PMID:34426850"
title: Left Ventricular Measurements and Strain in Pediatric Patients Evaluated for Systemic Hypertension and the Effect of Adequate Anti-hypertensive Treatment.
authors:
- Kaplinski M
- Griffis H
- Liu F
- Tinker C
- Laney NC
- Mendoza M
- Cohen MS
- Meyers K
- Natarajan SS
journal: Pediatr Cardiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00246-021-02706-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Left Ventricular Measurements and Strain in Pediatric Patients Evaluated for Systemic Hypertension and the Effect of Adequate Anti-hypertensive Treatment.
**Authors:** Kaplinski M, Griffis H, Liu F, Tinker C, Laney NC, Mendoza M, Cohen MS, Meyers K, Natarajan SS
**Journal:** Pediatr Cardiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00246-021-02706-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00246-021-02706-x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Cardiol. 2022 Jan;43(1):155-163. doi: 10.1007/s00246-021-02706-x. Epub
 2021 Aug 23.

Left Ventricular Measurements and Strain in Pediatric Patients Evaluated for 
Systemic Hypertension and the Effect of Adequate Anti-hypertensive Treatment.

Kaplinski M(1)(2), Griffis H(3), Liu F(4), Tinker C(4), Laney NC(4), Mendoza 
M(4), Cohen MS(4), Meyers K(4), Natarajan SS(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
mkaplinski@stanford.edu.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Lucile Packard Children's 
Hospital, Stanford University, 750 Welch Road, Suite 325, Palo Alto, CA, 94340, 
USA. mkaplinski@stanford.edu.
(3)Data Science and Biostatistics Unit, Department of Biomedical and Health 
Informatics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Pediatric hypertension (HTN) is an epidemic that is associated with HTN in 
adulthood and adverse cardiovascular outcomes. We hypothesized that children 
with HTN would have left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and abnormal LV global 
longitudinal strain (GLS) on echocardiogram and that these values would differ 
by weight, race, and HTN treatment. Data were collected from first visits to the 
HTN Program from 12/2011 to 9/2018, excluding patients with cardiac disease or 
heart transplantation. LV measurements including LV mass index (LVMI), LV GLS, 
and diastolic indices were compared between groups. Multivariable logistic 
regression was used to identify risk factors for an abnormal LVMI. There were 
212 patients with an interquartile age range of 13-18 years. On univariate 
analysis, LVMI was higher in hypertensive, obese, and African American patients. 
LV strain was less negative in obese and African American patients. Adequately 
treated patients with HTN had a higher LVMI and a higher E/e' ratio compared to 
patients with no HTN. On multivariate analysis, only obesity was associated with 
an LVMI ≥ 95th percentile (OR 2.9, 95% CI 1.4, 5.8). LVMI is higher in 
hypertensive, obese, and African American patients; however, in the multivariate 
analysis, obesity was the only independent risk factor for an abnormal LVMI. 
LVMI was still higher in those adequately treated for HTN compared to patients 
without HTN, possibly due to concomitant obesity. Future studies should focus on 
subclinical changes in LV performance seen in obese and hypertensive patients 
and the impact on long-term health.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00246-021-02706-x
PMID: 34426850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]