---
reference_id: "PMID:27853304"
title: Genetic Epidemiology of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency in the Arab World.
authors:
- Doss CG
- Alasmar DR
- Bux RI
- Sneha P
- Bakhsh FD
- Al-Azwani I
- Bekay RE
- Zayed H
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/srep37284
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Epidemiology of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency in the Arab World.
**Authors:** Doss CG, Alasmar DR, Bux RI, Sneha P, Bakhsh FD, Al-Azwani I, Bekay RE, Zayed H
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/srep37284](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep37284)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 17;6:37284. doi: 10.1038/srep37284.

Genetic Epidemiology of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency in the Arab 
World.

Doss CG(1), Alasmar DR(2), Bux RI(2), Sneha P(1), Bakhsh FD(2), Al-Azwani I(2), 
Bekay RE(3), Zayed H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, School of Biosciences and Technology, VIT 
University, Vellore, India.
(2)College of Health Sciences, Biomedical Sciences Department, Qatar University, 
Doha, Qatar.
(3)CIBER Pathophysiology of obesity and nutrition CB06/03, Carlos III Health 
Institute. Unidad de Gestion Clínica Intercentros de Endocrinología y Nutrición, 
Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Hospital Regional 
Universitario de Málaga/Universidad de Málaga, 29009, Málaga, Spain.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 03;7:39370. doi: 10.1038/srep39370.

A systematic search was implemented using four literature databases (PubMed, 
Embase, Science Direct and Web of Science) to capture all the causative 
mutations of Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency (G6PDD) in the 
22 Arab countries. Our search yielded 43 studies that captured 33 mutations (23 
missense, one silent, two deletions, and seven intronic mutations), in 3,430 
Arab patients with G6PDD. The 23 missense mutations were then subjected to 
phenotypic classification using in silico prediction tools, which were compared 
to the WHO pathogenicity scale as a reference. These in silico tools were tested 
for their predicting efficiency using rigorous statistical analyses. Of the 23 
missense mutations, p.S188F, p.I48T, p.N126D, and p.V68M, were identified as the 
most common mutations among Arab populations, but were not unique to the Arab 
world, interestingly, our search strategy found four other mutations (p.N135T, 
p.S179N, p.R246L, and p.Q307P) that are unique to Arabs. These mutations were 
exposed to structural analysis and molecular dynamics simulation analysis 
(MDSA), which predicting these mutant forms as potentially affect the enzyme 
function. The combination of the MDSA, structural analysis, and in silico 
predictions and statistical tools we used will provide a platform for future 
prediction accuracy for the pathogenicity of genetic mutations.

DOI: 10.1038/srep37284
PMCID: PMC5112515
PMID: 27853304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.