---
reference_id: "PMID:37999738"
title: "Selective vulnerability of motor neuron types and functional groups to degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: review of the neurobiological mechanisms and functional correlates."
authors:
- Ovsepian SV
- "O'Leary VB"
- Martinez S
journal: Brain Struct Funct
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00429-023-02728-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
- Motor Neurons
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selective vulnerability of motor neuron types and functional groups to degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: review of the neurobiological mechanisms and functional correlates.
**Authors:** Ovsepian SV, O'Leary VB, Martinez S
**Journal:** Brain Struct Funct (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00429-023-02728-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-023-02728-6)

## Content

1. Brain Struct Funct. 2024 Jan;229(1):1-14. doi: 10.1007/s00429-023-02728-6.
Epub  2023 Nov 24.

Selective vulnerability of motor neuron types and functional groups to
degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: review of the neurobiological
mechanisms and functional correlates.

Ovsepian SV(1), O'Leary VB(2), Martinez S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Engineering and Science, University of Greenwich London, Chatham
Maritime, Kent, ME4 4TB, UK. saak.ovsepian@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Ruská 87, 10000, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Instituto de Neurociencias UMH-CSIC, Avda. Ramon y Cajal, 03550, San Juan de
Alicante, Spain. smartinez@umh.es.
(4)Center of Biomedical Network Research on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), ISCIII,
Madrid, Spain. smartinez@umh.es.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative condition
characterised by a progressive loss of motor neurons controlling voluntary
muscle activity. The disease manifests through a variety of motor dysfunctions
related to the extent of damage and loss of neurons at different anatomical
locations. Despite extensive research, it remains unclear why some motor neurons
are especially susceptible to the disease, while others are affected less or
even spared. In this article, we review the neurobiological mechanisms,
neurochemical profiles, and morpho-functional characteristics of various motor
neuron groups and types of motor units implicated in their differential exposure
to degeneration. We discuss specific cell-autonomous (intrinsic) and extrinsic
factors influencing the vulnerability gradient of motor units and motor neuron
types to ALS, with their impact on disease manifestation, course, and prognosis,
as revealed in preclinical and clinical studies. We consider the outstanding
challenges and emerging opportunities for interpreting the phenotypic and
mechanistic variability of the disease to identify targets for clinical
interventions.

© 2023. Crown.

DOI: 10.1007/s00429-023-02728-6
PMCID: PMC10827929
PMID: 37999738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to
report.
