---
reference_id: "PMID:31697873"
title: Elexacaftor-Tezacaftor-Ivacaftor for Cystic Fibrosis with a Single Phe508del Allele.
authors:
- Middleton PG
- Mall MA
- Dřevínek P
- Lands LC
- McKone EF
- Polineni D
- Ramsey BW
- Taylor-Cousar JL
- Tullis E
- Vermeulen F
- Marigowda G
- McKee CM
- Moskowitz SM
- Nair N
- Savage J
- Simard C
- Tian S
- Waltz D
- Xuan F
- Rowe SM
- Jain R
- VX17-445-102 Study Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1908639
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elexacaftor-Tezacaftor-Ivacaftor for Cystic Fibrosis with a Single Phe508del Allele.
**Authors:** Middleton PG, Mall MA, Dřevínek P, Lands LC, McKone EF, Polineni D, Ramsey BW, Taylor-Cousar JL, Tullis E, Vermeulen F, Marigowda G, McKee CM, Moskowitz SM, Nair N, Savage J, Simard C, Tian S, Waltz D, Xuan F, Rowe SM, Jain R, VX17-445-102 Study Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1908639](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1908639)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2019 Nov 7;381(19):1809-1819. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1908639. Epub 
2019 Oct 31.

Elexacaftor-Tezacaftor-Ivacaftor for Cystic Fibrosis with a Single Phe508del 
Allele.

Middleton PG(1), Mall MA(1), Dřevínek P(1), Lands LC(1), McKone EF(1), Polineni 
D(1), Ramsey BW(1), Taylor-Cousar JL(1), Tullis E(1), Vermeulen F(1), Marigowda 
G(1), McKee CM(1), Moskowitz SM(1), Nair N(1), Savage J(1), Simard C(1), Tian 
S(1), Waltz D(1), Xuan F(1), Rowe SM(1), Jain R(1); VX17-445-102 Study Group.

Collaborators: McCoy K, Aitken M, Donaldson S, Walker S, Chmiel J, Rubenstein R, 
Linnemann R, Murphy PJ, Berdella M, Froh DK, Joseph P, Neuringer I, Jain M, 
Moffett K, Taylor-Cousar JL, Quick BD, Barnett B, Cairns AM, Fiel S, Mueller G, 
Flume P, Livingston F, Omlor G, Braun A, Mehdi N, Schmidt HJ, Teneback C, Scher 
H, McWilliams B, Polineni D, Morrissey B, Chittivelu S, Schaeffer D, Reddivalum 
S, Klingsberg RC, Biller J, Dehlink E, Sommerburg O, Leroy S, Salvatore D, 
Johnson LG, Marguet C, Macedo P, Forseen C, Ly N, Lysinger J, Ratjen F, Chilvers 
M, Quon B, Lands L, Parkins M, Maitra A, Daigneault P, Alexander W, Aboulhosn K, 
Diamantea F, McColley S, Grenet D, Ringshausen F, Griese M, Kiefer A, Drevinek 
P, Homola L, Hector A, Naehrlich L, Poplawska K, Downey D, Unger S, Carroll M, 
Nash E, Withers N, Lee T, Gray R, Fajac I, Bakker M, Heijerman H, Vermeulen F, 
Van Braeckel E, Knoop C, De Wachter E, Durieu I, Bui S, Dufeu N, van der Meer R, 
Merkus P, Majoor C, Selvadurai H, Robinson P, Burr L, Middleton P, Tai A, 
Taccetti G, Melotti P, Colombo C, Cipolli M, Casciaro R, Minicucci L, Eber E, 
Ellemunter H, Studnicka M, Hjelte L, Magazzu G.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Westmead Hospital and 
CF Research Group, Ludwig Engel Centre for Respiratory Research, Westmead 
Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW, Australia 
(P.G.M.); the Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Immunology, and Intensive 
Care Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, the Berlin Institute of 
Health, and the German Center for Lung Research, Berlin (M.A.M.); the Department 
of Medical Microbiology, Department of Pediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic (P.D.); 
the Pediatric Respiratory Medicine and Pediatric Cystic Fibrosis Clinic, McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal (L.C.L.); St. Vincent's University Hospital 
and University College Dublin School of Medicine, Dublin (E.F.M.); the 
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas 
City (D.P.); the Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, and Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle (B.W.R.); the 
Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver 
(J.L.T.-C.); the Division of Respirology, St. Michael's Hospital, University of 
Toronto, Toronto (E.T.); the Cystic Fibrosis Reference Center, Department of 
Pediatrics, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium (F.V.); Vertex 
Pharmaceuticals, Boston (G.M., C.M.M., S.M.M., N.N., J.S., C.S., S.T., D.W., 
F.X.); the Departments of Medicine, Pediatrics, and Cell, Developmental, and 
Integrative Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham (S.M.R.); 
and the Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas (R.J.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2020 Feb 13;382(7):684. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1916747.
    MMW Fortschr Med. 2021 Feb;163(3):82. doi: 10.1007/s15006-021-9622-3.

BACKGROUND: Cystic fibrosis is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein, and nearly 
90% of patients have at least one copy of the Phe508del CFTR mutation. In a 
phase 2 trial involving patients who were heterozygous for the Phe508del CFTR 
mutation and a minimal-function mutation (Phe508del-minimal function genotype), 
the next-generation CFTR corrector elexacaftor, in combination with tezacaftor 
and ivacaftor, improved Phe508del CFTR function and clinical outcomes.
METHODS: We conducted a phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial to confirm the efficacy and safety of elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor in 
patients 12 years of age or older with cystic fibrosis with Phe508del-minimal 
function genotypes. Patients were randomly assigned to receive 
elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor or placebo for 24 weeks. The primary end point 
was absolute change from baseline in percentage of predicted forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1) at week 4.
RESULTS: A total of 403 patients underwent randomization and received at least 
one dose of active treatment or placebo. Elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor, 
relative to placebo, resulted in a percentage of predicted FEV1 that was 13.8 
points higher at 4 weeks and 14.3 points higher through 24 weeks, a rate of 
pulmonary exacerbations that was 63% lower, a respiratory domain score on the 
Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised (range, 0 to 100, with higher scores 
indicating a higher patient-reported quality of life with regard to respiratory 
symptoms; minimum clinically important difference, 4 points) that was 20.2 
points higher, and a sweat chloride concentration that was 41.8 mmol per liter 
lower (P<0.001 for all comparisons). Elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor was 
generally safe and had an acceptable side-effect profile. Most patients had 
adverse events that were mild or moderate. Adverse events leading to 
discontinuation of the trial regimen occurred in 1% of the patients in the 
elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor group.
CONCLUSIONS: Elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor was efficacious in patients with 
cystic fibrosis with Phe508del-minimal function genotypes, in whom previous CFTR 
modulator regimens were ineffective. (Funded by Vertex Pharmaceuticals; 
VX17-445-102 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03525444.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1908639
PMCID: PMC7282384
PMID: 31697873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]