---
reference_id: "PMID:38141562"
title: Smartphone-based gait assessment for multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Regev K
- Eren N
- Yekutieli Z
- Karlinski K
- Massri A
- Vigiser I
- Kolb H
- Piura Y
- Karni A
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2023.105394
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smartphone-based gait assessment for multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Regev K, Eren N, Yekutieli Z, Karlinski K, Massri A, Vigiser I, Kolb H, Piura Y, Karni A
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2023.105394](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2023.105394)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2024 Feb;82:105394. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2023.105394.
 Epub 2023 Dec 20.

Smartphone-based gait assessment for multiple sclerosis.

Regev K(1), Eren N(2), Yekutieli Z(2), Karlinski K(2), Massri A(3), Vigiser 
I(1), Kolb H(1), Piura Y(4), Karni A(5).

Author information:
(1)Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Unit, Neurology Institute, Tel Aviv 
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)mon4t, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(4)Department of Neurology, Assuta Ashdod Medical Center, Ashdod, Israel.
(5)Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Unit, Neurology Institute, Tel Aviv 
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel; Faculty of Medicine and Sagol School 
of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic address: 
arnonk@tlvmc.gov.il.

INTRODUCTION: Multiple Sclerosis causes gait alteration, even in the early 
stages of the disease. Traditional methods to quantify gait impairment, such as 
performance-based measures, lab-based motion analyses, and self-report, have 
limited ecological relevance. The Mon4t® app is a digital tool that uses sensors 
embedded in standard smartphones to measure various gait parameters.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the use of Mon4t® technology in monitoring MS patients.
METHODS: 100 MS patients and age-matched healthy controls were evaluated using 
both a human rater and the Mon4t Clinic™ app. Three motor tasks were performed: 
3m Timed up and go test (TUG), 10m TUG, and tandem walk. The digital markers 
were used to compare MS vs. HC, MS with EDSS=0 vs. HC, and MS with EDSS=0 vs. MS 
with EDSS>0. Within the MS EDSS>0 group, correlations between digital gait 
markers and the EDSS score were calculated.
RESULTS: Significant differences were found between MS patients and HC in 
multiple gait parameters. When comparing MS patients with minimal disability 
(EDSS=0) and HC: On the 3m TUG task, MS patients took longer to complete the 
task (mean difference 0.167seconds, p =0.034), took more steps (mean difference 
1.32 steps, p =0.003), and had a weaker ML step-to-step correlation (mean 
difference 0.1, p = 0.001). The combination of features from the three motor 
tasks allowed distinguishing a nondisabled MS patient from a HC with high 
confidence (AUC of 85.65 on the ROC). When comparing MS patients with minimal 
disability (EDSS=0) to those with higher disability (EDSS>0): On the tandem walk 
task, patients with EDSS>0 took significantly longer to complete 10 steps than 
those with EDSS=0 (mean difference 4.63 seconds, p < 0.001), showed greater ML 
sway (mean difference 0.2, p < 0.001), and had larger angular velocity in the SI 
axis on average (mean difference 2.31 degrees/sec, p = 0.01). A classification 
model achieved 81.79 ROC AUC. In the subgroup of patients with EDSS>0, gait 
features significantly correlated with EDSS score in all three tasks.
CONCLUSION: The findings demonstrate the potential of digital gait assessment to 
augment traditional disease monitoring and support clinical decision making. The 
Mon4t® app provides a convenient and ecologically relevant tool for monitoring 
MS patients and detecting early changes in gait impairment.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2023.105394
PMID: 38141562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationshipsthat could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.