---
reference_id: "PMID:34935103"
title: "Clinical Impact of Pitolisant on Excessive Daytime Sleepiness and Cataplexy in Adults With Narcolepsy: An Analysis of Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trials."
authors:
- Meskill GJ
- Davis CW
- Zarycranski D
- Doliba M
- Schwartz JC
- Dayno JM
journal: CNS Drugs
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s40263-021-00886-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Impact of Pitolisant on Excessive Daytime Sleepiness and Cataplexy in Adults With Narcolepsy: An Analysis of Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trials.
**Authors:** Meskill GJ, Davis CW, Zarycranski D, Doliba M, Schwartz JC, Dayno JM
**Journal:** CNS Drugs (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40263-021-00886-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-021-00886-x)

## Content

1. CNS Drugs. 2022 Jan;36(1):61-69. doi: 10.1007/s40263-021-00886-x. Epub 2021
Dec  21.

Clinical Impact of Pitolisant on Excessive Daytime Sleepiness and Cataplexy in 
Adults With Narcolepsy: An Analysis of Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trials.

Meskill GJ(1), Davis CW(2), Zarycranski D(2), Doliba M(2), Schwartz JC(3), Dayno 
JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Tricoastal Narcolepsy and Sleep Disorders Center, Sugar Land, TX, USA. 
gmeskillmd@tricoastalsleep.com.
(2)Harmony Biosciences, LLC, Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA.
(3)Bioprojet Pharma, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Pitolisant, a selective histamine 3 receptor antagonist/inverse 
agonist, is indicated for the treatment of excessive daytime sleepiness or 
cataplexy in adults with narcolepsy. The efficacy and safety of pitolisant have 
been demonstrated in randomized placebo-controlled trials. When evaluating the 
results of randomized placebo-controlled trials, the clinical impact of a 
treatment can be assessed using effect size metrics that include Cohen's d (the 
standardized mean difference of an effect) and number needed to treat (NNT; 
number of patients that need to be treated to achieve a specific outcome for one 
person).
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to evaluate the clinical impact of 
pitolisant for the reduction in excessive daytime sleepiness or cataplexy in 
adults with narcolepsy.
METHODS: This post hoc analysis incorporated data from two 7-week or 8-week 
randomized placebo-controlled trials (HARMONY 1, HARMONY CTP). Study medication 
was individually titrated, with a maximum possible pitolisant dose of 
35.6 mg/day. Efficacy was assessed using the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) and 
weekly rate of cataplexy (HARMONY CTP only). Cohen's d was derived from the 
least-squares mean difference between treatment groups (pitolisant vs placebo), 
and NNTs were calculated from response rates. Treatment response was defined for 
excessive daytime sleepiness in two ways: (a) reduction in ESS score ≥ 3 or 
final ESS score ≤ 10 and (b) final ESS score ≤ 10. Treatment response was 
defined for cataplexy as a ≥ 25%, ≥ 50%, or ≥ 75% reduction in weekly rate of 
cataplexy.
RESULTS: The analysis population included 61 patients in HARMONY 1 (pitolisant, 
n = 31; placebo, n = 30) and 105 patients in HARMONY CTP (pitolisant, n = 54; 
placebo, n = 51). For pitolisant vs placebo, Cohen's d effect size values were 
0.61 (HARMONY 1) and 0.86 (HARMONY CTP) based on changes in ESS scores, and 0.86 
(HARMONY CTP) based on changes in weekly rate of cataplexy. NNTs for pitolisant 
were 3-5 for the treatment of excessive daytime sleepiness and 3-4 for the 
treatment of cataplexy.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this analysis demonstrate the robust efficacy of 
pitolisant for the reduction in both excessive daytime sleepiness and cataplexy. 
These large effect sizes and low NNTs provide further evidence supporting the 
strength of the clinical response to pitolisant in the treatment of adults with 
narcolepsy.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifiers: NCT01067222 
(February 2010), NCT01800045 (February 2013).

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40263-021-00886-x
PMCID: PMC8732895
PMID: 34935103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: GJM reports serving on advisory boards and on 
the speakers’ bureau for Harmony Biosciences and Jazz Pharmaceuticals. CWD, DZ, 
MD, and JMD are employees of Harmony Biosciences. JCS is a co-founder of 
Bioprojet Pharma.