---
reference_id: "PMID:37236713"
title: "Collagen Vascular Diseases: A Review of Cutaneous and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Dermatomyositis, and Distinguishing Features in Skin of Color."
authors:
- Lee V
- Sokumbi O
- Onajin O
journal: Dermatol Clin
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.det.2023.02.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Collagen Vascular Diseases: A Review of Cutaneous and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Dermatomyositis, and Distinguishing Features in Skin of Color.
**Authors:** Lee V, Sokumbi O, Onajin O
**Journal:** Dermatol Clin (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.det.2023.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.det.2023.02.009)

## Content

1. Dermatol Clin. 2023 Jul;41(3):435-454. doi: 10.1016/j.det.2023.02.009. Epub
2023  Apr 4.

Collagen Vascular Diseases: A Review of Cutaneous and Systemic Lupus 
Erythematosus, Dermatomyositis, and Distinguishing Features in Skin of Color.

Lee V(1), Sokumbi O(2), Onajin O(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Dermatology, University of Chicago, 5841 South Maryland Ave, MC 
5067, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Laboratory Medicine & Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 
4500 San Pablo South, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(3)Section of Dermatology, University of Chicago, 5841 South Maryland Ave, MC 
5067, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address: 
oonajin@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.

Collagen vascular diseases such as lupus erythematosus and dermatomyositis (DM) 
occur 2 to 3 times more often among patients with skin of color. In this 
article, the authors review DM and cutaneous lupus erythematosus, including 
acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus, subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus, and 
discoid lupus erythematosus. They discuss the distinguishing features between 
these entities and highlight distinct presentations and management 
considerations in patients with skin of color to aid in prompt and correct 
diagnoses in this patient population.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.det.2023.02.009
PMID: 37236713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]