---
reference_id: "PMID:29499165"
title: Ectopic GRHL2 Expression Due to Non-coding Mutations Promotes Cell State Transition and Causes Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophy 4.
authors:
- Liskova P
- Dudakova L
- Evans CJ
- Rojas Lopez KE
- Pontikos N
- Athanasiou D
- Jama H
- Sach J
- Skalicka P
- Stranecky V
- Kmoch S
- Thaung C
- Filipec M
- Cheetham ME
- Davidson AE
- Tuft SJ
- Hardcastle AJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.02.002
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/genetics"
- "DNA, Intergenic/genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Endothelium, Corneal/pathology"
- Family
- Female
- Genetic Loci
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Introns/genetics
- Male
- "Models, Genetic"
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Whole Genome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ectopic GRHL2 Expression Due to Non-coding Mutations Promotes Cell State Transition and Causes Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophy 4.
**Authors:** Liskova P, Dudakova L, Evans CJ, Rojas Lopez KE, Pontikos N, Athanasiou D, Jama H, Sach J, Skalicka P, Stranecky V, Kmoch S, Thaung C, Filipec M, Cheetham ME, Davidson AE, Tuft SJ, Hardcastle AJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.02.002)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2018 Mar 1;102(3):447-459. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.02.002.

Ectopic GRHL2 Expression Due to Non-coding Mutations Promotes Cell State 
Transition and Causes Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophy 4.

Liskova P(1), Dudakova L(2), Evans CJ(3), Rojas Lopez KE(3), Pontikos N(3), 
Athanasiou D(3), Jama H(3), Sach J(4), Skalicka P(5), Stranecky V(2), Kmoch 
S(2), Thaung C(6), Filipec M(7), Cheetham ME(3), Davidson AE(3), Tuft SJ(8), 
Hardcastle AJ(9).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University 
Hospital in Prague, Ke Karlovu 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic; Department of 
Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General 
University Hospital in Prague, U Nemocnice 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic; UCL 
Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, UK. 
Electronic address: petra.liskova@lf1.cuni.cz.
(2)Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University 
Hospital in Prague, Ke Karlovu 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic.
(3)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK.
(4)Institute of Pathology, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 
Faculty Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Srobarova 50, Prague 100 34, Czech 
Republic.
(5)Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University 
Hospital in Prague, Ke Karlovu 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic; Department of 
Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General 
University Hospital in Prague, U Nemocnice 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic.
(6)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK; Moorfields Eye Hospital, London EC1V 2PD, UK.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University 
and General University Hospital in Prague, U Nemocnice 2, Prague 128 08, Czech 
Republic.
(8)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London EC1V 2PD, UK.
(9)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK; Moorfields Eye Hospital, London EC1V 2PD, UK. Electronic address: 
a.hardcastle@ucl.ac.uk.

In a large family of Czech origin, we mapped a locus for an autosomal-dominant 
corneal endothelial dystrophy, posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy 4 
(PPCD4), to 8q22.3-q24.12. Whole-genome sequencing identified a unique variant 
(c.20+544G>T) in this locus, within an intronic regulatory region of GRHL2. 
Targeted sequencing identified the same variant in three additional previously 
unsolved PPCD-affected families, including a de novo occurrence that suggests 
this is a recurrent mutation. Two further unique variants were identified in 
intron 1 of GRHL2 (c.20+257delT and c.20+133delA) in unrelated PPCD-affected 
families. GRHL2 is a transcription factor that suppresses 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and is a direct transcriptional 
repressor of ZEB1. ZEB1 mutations leading to haploinsufficiency cause PPCD3. We 
previously identified promoter mutations in OVOL2, a gene not normally expressed 
in the corneal endothelium, as the cause of PPCD1. OVOL2 drives 
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) by directly inhibiting EMT-inducing 
transcription factors, such as ZEB1. Here, we demonstrate that the GRHL2 
regulatory variants identified in PPCD4-affected individuals induce increased 
transcriptional activity in vitro. Furthermore, although GRHL2 is not expressed 
in corneal endothelial cells in control tissue, we detected GRHL2 in the corneal 
"endothelium" in PPCD4 tissue. These cells were also positive for epithelial 
markers E-Cadherin and Cytokeratin 7, indicating they have transitioned to an 
epithelial-like cell type. We suggest that mutations inducing MET within the 
corneal endothelium are a convergent pathogenic mechanism leading to dysfunction 
of the endothelial barrier and disease.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.02.002
PMCID: PMC5985340
PMID: 29499165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]