---
reference_id: "PMID:23965844"
title: "The phenotype of TNF receptor-associated autoinflammatory syndrome (TRAPS) at presentation: a series of 158 cases from the Eurofever/EUROTRAPS international registry."
authors:
- Lachmann HJ
- Papa R
- Gerhold K
- Obici L
- Touitou I
- Cantarini L
- Frenkel J
- Anton J
- Kone-Paut I
- Cattalini M
- Bader-Meunier B
- Insalaco A
- Hentgen V
- Merino R
- Modesto C
- Toplak N
- Berendes R
- Ozen S
- Cimaz R
- Jansson A
- Brogan PA
- Hawkins PN
- Ruperto N
- Martini A
- Woo P
- Gattorno M
- "Paediatric Rheumatology International Trials Organisation (PRINTO), the EUROTRAPS and the Eurofever Project"
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204184
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Disease Progression
- Exanthema/etiology
- Female
- Fever/etiology
- Genotype
- "Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pain/etiology
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor, Type I/genetics"
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
- Time Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The phenotype of TNF receptor-associated autoinflammatory syndrome (TRAPS) at presentation: a series of 158 cases from the Eurofever/EUROTRAPS international registry.
**Authors:** Lachmann HJ, Papa R, Gerhold K, Obici L, Touitou I, Cantarini L, Frenkel J, Anton J, Kone-Paut I, Cattalini M, Bader-Meunier B, Insalaco A, Hentgen V, Merino R, Modesto C, Toplak N, Berendes R, Ozen S, Cimaz R, Jansson A, Brogan PA, Hawkins PN, Ruperto N, Martini A, Woo P, Gattorno M, Paediatric Rheumatology International Trials Organisation (PRINTO), the EUROTRAPS and the Eurofever Project
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204184](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204184)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Dec;73(12):2160-7. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204184. 
Epub 2013 Aug 21.

The phenotype of TNF receptor-associated autoinflammatory syndrome (TRAPS) at 
presentation: a series of 158 cases from the Eurofever/EUROTRAPS international 
registry.

Lachmann HJ(1), Papa R(2), Gerhold K(3), Obici L(4), Touitou I(5), Cantarini 
L(6), Frenkel J(7), Anton J(8), Kone-Paut I(9), Cattalini M(10), Bader-Meunier 
B(11), Insalaco A(12), Hentgen V(13), Merino R(14), Modesto C(15), Toplak N(16), 
Berendes R(17), Ozen S(18), Cimaz R(19), Jansson A(20), Brogan PA(21), Hawkins 
PN(1), Ruperto N(2), Martini A(22), Woo P(21), Gattorno M(2); Paediatric 
Rheumatology International Trials Organisation (PRINTO), the EUROTRAPS and the 
Eurofever Project.

Author information:
(1)National Amyloidosis Centre, Royal Free Campus, University College Medical 
School, London, UK.
(2)Pediatria II, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
(3)Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Biotechnology Research Laboratories, Amyloid Centre, Fondazione IRCCS 
Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Unit of Autoinflammatory Diseases, CHU Montpellier, UM1, INSERM U844, 
Montpellier, France.
(6)Rheumatology Unit, Policlinico le Scotte, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
(8)Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, Esplugues (Barcelona), 
Spain.
(9)Centre de référence national des maladies auto-inflammatoires, CEREMAI, 
rhumatologie pediatrique, CHU Le Kremlin Bicetre (University of Paris SUD, 
APHP), Le kremlin Bicetre (Paris), France.
(10)Dipartimento di Pediatria, Unità di Immunologia e Reumatologia Pediatrica, 
Clinica Pediatrica dell'Università di Brescia, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(11)Unité d'Immunologie, Hématologie et Rhumatologie Pediatrique, Université 
Paris-Descartes, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Centre de référence national 
pour les Arthrites Juveniles, APHP, IHU Imagine, Paris, France.
(12)Reumatologia, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambin Gesù, Roma, Italy.
(13)Service de pediatrie generale, Hopital A Mignot, Centre de référence 
national des maladies auto-inflammatoires, Le Chesnay (Paris), France.
(14)Unidad De Reumatologia Pediatrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, 
Spain.
(15)Reumatologia, Hospital Valle de Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(16)Department of Allergology, Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University 
Children's Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(17)Kinderkrankenhaus St. Marien, Landshut, Germany.
(18)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatology, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(19)Dept di Pediatria, Ospedale A Meyer, Firenze, Italy.
(20)Rheumatology & Immunology, Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.
(21)Center of Paediatric and Adolescent Rheumatology-UCL, Institute of Child 
Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(22)Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Pediatria II and Università degli Studi di 
Genova, Genova, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the genetic findings, demographic features and clinical 
presentation of tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated autoinflammatory 
syndrome (TRAPS) in patients from the Eurofever/EUROTRAPS international 
registry.
METHODS: A web-based registry collected retrospective data on patients with 
TNFRSF1A sequence variants and inflammatory symptoms. Participating hospitals 
included paediatric rheumatology centres and adult centres with a specific 
interest in autoinflammatory diseases. Cases were independently validated by 
experts in the disease.
RESULTS: Complete information on 158 validated patients was available. The most 
common TNFRSF1A variant was R92Q (34% of cases), followed by T50M (10%). 
Cysteine residues were disrupted in 27% of cases, accounting for 39% of sequence 
variants. A family history was present in 19% of patients with R92Q and 64% of 
those with other variants. The median age at which symptoms began was 4.3 years 
but 9.1% of patients presented after 30 years of age. Attacks were recurrent in 
88% and the commonest features associated with the pathogenic variants were 
fever (88%), limb pain (85%), abdominal pain (74%), rash (63%) and eye 
manifestations (45%). Disease associated with R92Q presented slightly later at a 
median of 5.7 years with significantly less rash or eye signs and more 
headaches. Children were more likely than adults to present with 
lymphadenopathy, periorbital oedema and abdominal pains. AA amyloidosis has 
developed in 16 (10%) patients at a median age of 43 years.
CONCLUSIONS: In this, the largest reported case series to date, the genetic 
heterogeneity of TRAPS is accompanied by a variable phenotype at presentation. 
Patients had a median 70 symptomatic days a year, with fever, limb and abdominal 
pain and rash the commonest symptoms. Overall, there is little evidence of a 
significant effect of age or genotype on disease features at presentation.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204184
PMCID: PMC4251160
PMID: 23965844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]