---
reference_id: "PMID:22875688"
title: Management of knee deformities in children with arthrogryposis.
authors:
- Lampasi M
- Antonioli D
- Donzelli O
journal: Musculoskelet Surg
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s12306-012-0218-z
keywords:
- "Arthrogryposis/surgery, therapy"
- Bone Lengthening/methods
- Braces
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cleft Lip/surgery
- Cleft Palate/surgery
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Eye Abnormalities/surgery
- Female
- "Fingers/abnormalities, surgery"
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/surgery"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Knee Joint/abnormalities, surgery"
- "Lower Extremity Deformities, Congenital/surgery"
- Male
- Physical Therapy Modalities
- Recurrence
- Syndactyly/surgery
- Tenotomy
- Urogenital Abnormalities/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of knee deformities in children with arthrogryposis.
**Authors:** Lampasi M, Antonioli D, Donzelli O
**Journal:** Musculoskelet Surg (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12306-012-0218-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12306-012-0218-z)

## Content

1. Musculoskelet Surg. 2012 Dec;96(3):161-9. doi: 10.1007/s12306-012-0218-z. Epub
 2012 Aug 9.

Management of knee deformities in children with arthrogryposis.

Lampasi M(1), Antonioli D, Donzelli O.

Author information:
(1)Divisione di Ortopedia e Traumatologia Pediatrica, Istituto Ortopedico 
Rizzoli, via Pupilli 1, 40136 Bologna, Italy. manuele.lampasi@ior.it

Arthrogryposis includes heterogeneous disorders, characterized by congenital 
contractures of multiple joints. Knee involvement is very common (38-90 % of 
patients with amyoplasia) ranging from soft-tissue contractures (in flexion or 
hyperextension) to subluxation and dislocation. Flexion contractures are more 
common and disabling and show significant resistance to treatment and rate of 
recurrence. Surgical procedures vary with severity of contracture and patient 
age and include soft-tissue release, femoral shortening-extension osteotomy, 
gradual correction with Ilizarov, and femoral anterior epiphysiodesis. The 
presence of pterygium greatly complicates treatment, given the high rate of 
complications reported. Hyperextension deformities (recurvatum, anterior 
subluxation, and dislocation) have better prognosis for walking ability. 
Surgical options include percutaneous (or mini-open) quadriceps tenotomy, open 
quadricepsplasty, and femoral shortening osteotomy with limited arthrotomy. Knee 
dislocations usually require surgery and should be reduced early.

DOI: 10.1007/s12306-012-0218-z
PMID: 22875688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]