---
reference_id: "PMID:37799488"
title: Preoperative Nasobiliary Drainage as a Predictor of Response Before Surgical Fistula Creation in Joubert Syndrome With Refractory Cholestatic Pruritis.
authors:
- Biermann M
- Sundar PR
- Veeramachaneni H
- Willingham F
journal: ACG Case Rep J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.14309/crj.0000000000001171
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preoperative Nasobiliary Drainage as a Predictor of Response Before Surgical Fistula Creation in Joubert Syndrome With Refractory Cholestatic Pruritis.
**Authors:** Biermann M, Sundar PR, Veeramachaneni H, Willingham F
**Journal:** ACG Case Rep J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.14309/crj.0000000000001171](https://doi.org/10.14309/crj.0000000000001171)

## Content

1. ACG Case Rep J. 2023 Oct 3;10(10):e01171. doi: 10.14309/crj.0000000000001171. 
eCollection 2023 Oct.

Preoperative Nasobiliary Drainage as a Predictor of Response Before Surgical 
Fistula Creation in Joubert Syndrome With Refractory Cholestatic Pruritis.

Biermann M(1), Sundar PR(2), Veeramachaneni H(2), Willingham F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.
(2)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.

Cholestatic pruritus is a debilitating symptom associated with many liver 
diseases and is often refractory to medical management. Nasobiliary drainage is 
a relatively safe and effective method for treating intractable cholestatic 
pruritus. It should be considered for patients with refractory cholestatic 
pruritus who have failed or have contraindications to medical therapy as a 
predictor of response before surgical fistula creation.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf of The 
American College of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.14309/crj.0000000000001171
PMCID: PMC10550019
PMID: 37799488