---
reference_id: "PMID:37237384"
title: "\"Evaluation of ROS1 expression and rearrangements in a large cohort of early-stage lung cancer\"."
authors:
- Dyrbekk APH
- Warsame AA
- Suhrke P
- Ludahl MO
- Moe JO
- Eide IJZ
- Lund-Iversen M
- Brustugun OT
journal: Diagn Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13000-023-01357-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence/methods"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/analysis
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/genetics"
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics"
- "Adenocarcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- Gene Rearrangement
content_type: abstract_only
---

# "Evaluation of ROS1 expression and rearrangements in a large cohort of early-stage lung cancer".
**Authors:** Dyrbekk APH, Warsame AA, Suhrke P, Ludahl MO, Moe JO, Eide IJZ, Lund-Iversen M, Brustugun OT
**Journal:** Diagn Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13000-023-01357-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13000-023-01357-1)

## Content

1. Diagn Pathol. 2023 May 27;18(1):70. doi: 10.1186/s13000-023-01357-1.

"Evaluation of ROS1 expression and rearrangements in a large cohort of
early-stage lung cancer".

Dyrbekk APH(1)(2)(3), Warsame AA(4), Suhrke P(5), Ludahl MO(6), Moe JO(7), Eide
IJZ(8)(9)(10), Lund-Iversen M(4), Brustugun OT(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)University of Oslo, NO-0316, Oslo, Norway. a.p.h.dyrbekk@studmed.uio.no.
(2)Department of Pathology, Vestfold Hospital Trust, NO-3103, Tonsberg, Norway.
a.p.h.dyrbekk@studmed.uio.no.
(3)Department of Cancer Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, NO-0310, Oslo, Norway. a.p.h.dyrbekk@studmed.uio.no.
(4)Department of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, The Norwegian Radium
Hospital, NO-0310, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Pathology, Vestfold Hospital Trust, NO-3103, Tonsberg, Norway.
(6)Department of Microbiology/ Division for Genetechnology, Vestfold Hospital
Trust, NO-3103, Tonsberg, Norway.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Vestfold Hospital Trust, NO-3103, Tonsberg,
Norway.
(8)University of Oslo, NO-0316, Oslo, Norway.
(9)Department of Cancer Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, NO-0310, Oslo, Norway.
(10)Department of Oncology, Vestre Viken Hospital Trust, NO-3004, Drammen,
Norway.

BACKGROUND: ROS1 fusion is an infrequent, but attractive target for therapy in
patients with metastatic non- small-cell lung cancer. In studies on mainly
late-stage disease, the prevalence of ROS1 fusions is about 1-3%. In early-stage
lung cancer ROS1 might also provide a fruitful target for neoadjuvant or
adjuvant therapy. In the present study, we investigated the prevalence of ROS1
fusion in a Norwegian cohort of early-stage lung cancer. We also explored
whether positive ROS1 immunohistochemical (IHC) stain was associated with
certain mutations, clinical characteristics and outcomes.
METHODS: The study was performed using biobank material from 921 lung cancer
patients including 542 patients with adenocarcinoma surgically resected during
2006-2018. Initially, we screened the samples with two different IHC clones
(D4D6 and SP384) targeting ROS1. All samples that showed more than weak or focal
staining, as well as a subgroup of negative samples, were analyzed with ROS1
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and next-generation sequencing (NGS)
with a comprehensive NGS DNA and RNA panel. Positive ROS1-fusion was defined as
those samples positive in at least two of the three methods (IHC, FISH, NGS).
RESULTS: Fifty cases were IHC positive. Of these, three samples were both NGS
and FISH-positive and considered positive for ROS1 fusion. Two more samples were
FISH positive only, and whilst IHC and NGS were negative. These were also
negative with Reverse Transcription quantitative real time Polymerase Chain
Reaction (RT-qPCR). The prevalence of ROS1 fusion in adenocarcinomas was 0.6%.
All cases with ROS1 fusion had TP53 mutations. IHC-positivity was associated
with adenocarcinoma. Among SP384-IHC positive cases we also found an association
with never smoking status. There was no association between positive IHC and
overall survival, time to relapse, age, stage, sex or pack-year of smoking.
CONCLUSIONS: ROS1 seems to be less frequent in early-stage disease than in
advanced stages. IHC is a sensitive, but less specific method and the results
need to be confirmed with another method like FISH or NGS.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13000-023-01357-1
PMCID: PMC10224579
PMID: 37237384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Roche diagnostics: Contracted/Support Research
Grant. Pfizer: Contracted/Support Research Grant.
