---
reference_id: "PMID:38941509"
title: "Roadmap for the next generation of Children's Oncology Group rhabdomyosarcoma trials."
authors:
- Metts JL
- Aye JM
- Crane JN
- Oberoi S
- Balis FM
- Bhatia S
- Bona K
- Carleton B
- Dasgupta R
- Dela Cruz FS
- Greenzang KA
- Kaufman JL
- Linardic CM
- Parsons SK
- Robertson-Tessi M
- Rudzinski ER
- Soragni A
- Stewart E
- Weigel BJ
- Wolden SL
- Weiss AR
- Venkatramani R
- Heske CM
journal: Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.35457
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Quality of Life
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/diagnosis, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Roadmap for the next generation of Children's Oncology Group rhabdomyosarcoma trials.
**Authors:** Metts JL, Aye JM, Crane JN, Oberoi S, Balis FM, Bhatia S, Bona K, Carleton B, Dasgupta R, Dela Cruz FS, Greenzang KA, Kaufman JL, Linardic CM, Parsons SK, Robertson-Tessi M, Rudzinski ER, Soragni A, Stewart E, Weigel BJ, Wolden SL, Weiss AR, Venkatramani R, Heske CM
**Journal:** Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.35457](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.35457)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2024 Nov 15;130(22):3785-3796. doi: 10.1002/cncr.35457. Epub 2024 Jun 
28.

Roadmap for the next generation of Children's Oncology Group rhabdomyosarcoma 
trials.

Metts JL(1)(2), Aye JM(3), Crane JN(4)(5), Oberoi S(6)(7), Balis FM(4), Bhatia 
S(8), Bona K(9)(10), Carleton B(11), Dasgupta R(12), Dela Cruz FS(13), Greenzang 
KA(9)(10), Kaufman JL(14)(15), Linardic CM(16)(17), Parsons SK(18), 
Robertson-Tessi M(19), Rudzinski ER(20), Soragni A(21)(22), Stewart E(23), 
Weigel BJ(24), Wolden SL(25), Weiss AR(26), Venkatramani R(27), Heske CM(28).

Author information:
(1)Sarcoma Department, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(2)Cancer and Blood Disorders Institute, Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital, 
St Petersburg, Florida, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
(4)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Cancer Care Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada.
(8)Institute for Cancer Outcomes and Survivorship, Heersink School of Medicine, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(10)Division of Population Sciences, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(11)Division of Translational Therapeutics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(12)Division of Pediatric General and Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York, USA.
(14)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(15)Patient Advocacy Committee, Children's Oncology Group, Monrovia, California, 
USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.
(17)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(18)Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy Studies and Division of 
Hematology/Oncology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(19)Integrated Mathematical Oncology Department, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center 
and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(20)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Seattle Children's Hospital 
and University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(21)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(22)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, California, USA.
(23)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee, USA.
(24)Division of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(25)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, New York, USA.
(26)Department of Pediatrics, Maine Medical Center, Portland, Maine, USA.
(27)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 
USA.
(28)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Clinical trials conducted by the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) Study Group 
and the Children's Oncology Group have been pivotal to establishing current 
standards for diagnosis and therapy for RMS. Recent advancements in 
understanding the biology and clinical behavior of RMS have led to more nuanced 
approaches to diagnosis, risk stratification, and treatment. The complexities 
introduced by these advancements, coupled with the rarity of RMS, pose 
challenges to conducting large-scale phase 3 clinical trials to evaluate new 
treatment strategies for RMS. Given these challenges, systematic planning of 
future clinical trials in RMS is paramount to address pertinent questions 
regarding the therapeutic efficacy of drugs, biomarkers of response, 
treatment-related toxicity, and patient quality of life. Herein, the authors 
outline the proposed strategic approach of the Children's Oncology Group Soft 
Tissue Sarcoma Committee to the next generation of RMS clinical trials, focusing 
on five themes: improved novel agent identification and preclinical to clinical 
translation, more efficient trial development and implementation, expanded 
opportunities for knowledge generation during trials, therapeutic toxicity 
reduction and quality of life, and patient engagement.

© 2024 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.35457
PMCID: PMC11511643
PMID: 38941509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES/CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: AS is a 
founder and owner of Icona BioDx. The remaining authors have no conflicts of 
interest related to this work.