---
reference_id: "PMID:38321198"
title: Gene therapy corrects the neurological deficits of mice with sialidosis.
authors:
- Hwu WL
- Chang K
- Liu YH
- Wang HC
- Lee NC
- Chien YH
journal: Gene Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41434-024-00443-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- "Neuraminidase/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Dependovirus/genetics
- "Mucolipidoses/therapy, genetics"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Genetic Vectors/administration & dosage, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Cathepsin A/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Brain/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene therapy corrects the neurological deficits of mice with sialidosis.
**Authors:** Hwu WL, Chang K, Liu YH, Wang HC, Lee NC, Chien YH
**Journal:** Gene Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41434-024-00443-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41434-024-00443-3)

## Content

1. Gene Ther. 2024 May;31(5-6):263-272. doi: 10.1038/s41434-024-00443-3. Epub
2024  Feb 7.

Gene therapy corrects the neurological deficits of mice with sialidosis.

Hwu WL(1)(2)(3), Chang K(4), Liu YH(5), Wang HC(4), Lee NC(4)(5), Chien
YH(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC. hwuwlntu@ntu.edu.tw.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC. hwuwlntu@ntu.edu.tw.
(3)Precision Medical Center, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung City,
Taiwan, ROC. hwuwlntu@ntu.edu.tw.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC.

Patients with sialidosis (mucolipidosis type I) type I typically present with
myoclonus, seizures, ataxia, cherry-red spots, and blindness because of
mutations in the neuraminidase 1 (NEU1) gene. Currently, there is no treatment
for sialidosis. In this study, we developed an adeno-associated virus
(AAV)-mediated gene therapy for a Neu1 knockout (Neu1-/-) mouse model of
sialidosis. The vector, AAV9-P3-NP, included the human NEU1 promoter, NEU1 cDNA,
IRES, and CTSA cDNA. Untreated Neu1-/- mice showed astrogliosis and microglial
LAMP1 accumulation in the nervous system, including brain, spinal cord, and
dorsal root ganglion, together with impaired motor function. Coexpression of
NEU1 and protective protein/cathepsin A (PPCA) in neonatal Neu1-/- mice by
intracerebroventricular injection, and less effective by facial vein injection,
decreased astrogliosis and LAMP1 accumulation in the nervous system and improved
rotarod performance of the treated mice. Facial vein injection also improved the
grip strength and survival of Neu1-/- mice. Therefore, cerebrospinal fluid
delivery of AAV9-P3-NP, which corrects the neurological deficits of mice with
sialidosis, could be a suitable treatment for patients with sialidosis type I.
After intracerebroventricular or facial vein injection of AAV vectors, NEU1 and
PPCA are expressed together. PPCA-protected NEU1 is then sent to lysosomes,
where β-Gal binds to this complex to form a multienzyme complex in order to
execute its function.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41434-024-00443-3
PMID: 38321198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
