---
reference_id: "PMID:33826897"
title: Arid1a-Plagl1-Hh signaling is indispensable for differentiation-associated cell cycle arrest of tooth root progenitors.
authors:
- Du J
- Jing J
- Yuan Y
- Feng J
- Han X
- Chen S
- Li X
- Peng W
- Xu J
- Ho TV
- Jiang X
- Chai Y
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108964
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Cycle Checkpoints
- Cell Cycle Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Lineage
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/deficiency, metabolism"
- Down-Regulation
- "Genes, Tumor Suppressor"
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Molar/metabolism
- "Odontoblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- Signal Transduction
- "Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "Tooth Root/cytology, growth & development"
- "Transcription Factors/deficiency, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Up-Regulation
- "Zinc Finger Protein GLI1/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arid1a-Plagl1-Hh signaling is indispensable for differentiation-associated cell cycle arrest of tooth root progenitors.
**Authors:** Du J, Jing J, Yuan Y, Feng J, Han X, Chen S, Li X, Peng W, Xu J, Ho TV, Jiang X, Chai Y
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108964](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108964)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2021 Apr 6;35(1):108964. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108964.

Arid1a-Plagl1-Hh signaling is indispensable for differentiation-associated cell 
cycle arrest of tooth root progenitors.

Du J(1), Jing J(2), Yuan Y(2), Feng J(2), Han X(2), Chen S(2), Li X(3), Peng 
W(3), Xu J(2), Ho TV(2), Jiang X(4), Chai Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA; Department of Prosthodontics, Shanghai Ninth 
People's Hospital, College of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, China.
(2)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.
(3)Department of Physics, George Washington University, Washington, DC 20052, 
USA.
(4)Department of Prosthodontics, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, College of 
Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, 
China.
(5)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. Electronic address: ychai@usc.edu.

Chromatin remodelers often show broad expression patterns in multiple cell types 
yet can elicit cell-specific effects in development and diseases. Arid1a binds 
DNA and regulates gene expression during tissue development and homeostasis. 
However, it is unclear how Arid1a achieves its functional specificity in 
regulating progenitor cells. Using the tooth root as a model, we show that loss 
of Arid1a impairs the differentiation-associated cell cycle arrest of tooth root 
progenitors through Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulation, leading to shortened 
roots. Our data suggest that Plagl1, as a co-factor, endows Arid1a with its 
cell-type/spatial functional specificity. Furthermore, we show that loss of 
Arid1a leads to increased expression of Arid1b, which is also indispensable for 
odontoblast differentiation but is not involved in regulation of Hh signaling. 
This study expands our knowledge of the intricate interactions among chromatin 
remodelers, transcription factors, and signaling molecules during progenitor 
cell fate determination and lineage commitment.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108964
PMCID: PMC8132592
PMID: 33826897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.