---
reference_id: PMID:40011987
title: Allergic comorbidities in fibromyalgia.
authors:
- Magen E
- Merzon E
- Green I
- Magen I
- Golan-Cohen A
- Vinker S
- Israel A
journal: Allergy Asthma Proc
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2500/aap.2025.46.240080
keywords:
- Humans
- Fibromyalgia/epidemiology
- Female
- Male
- Comorbidity
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Case-Control Studies
- Adult
- Retrospective Studies
- Hypersensitivity/epidemiology
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Allergic comorbidities in fibromyalgia.
**Authors:** Magen E, Merzon E, Green I, Magen I, Golan-Cohen A, Vinker S, Israel A
**Journal:** Allergy Asthma Proc (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2500/aap.2025.46.240080](https://doi.org/10.2500/aap.2025.46.240080)

## Content

1. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2025 Mar 1;46(2):e33-e42. doi:
10.2500/aap.2025.46.240080.

Allergic comorbidities in fibromyalgia.

Magen E(1), Merzon E(1), Green I(1), Magen I(2), Golan-Cohen A(1), Vinker S(1), 
Israel A(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Research and Innovation, Leumit Health Services, Tel 
Aviv, Israel.
(2)Medicine A Department, Assuta Ashdod University Medical Center, Ben Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.

Background: The relationship between fibromyalgia (FM) and allergic diseases 
remains poorly understood, despite emerging evidence that suggests a possible 
association. Objective: This study aimed to evaluate the prevalence of allergic 
comorbidities in patients with FM compared with a matched control group. 
Methods: We conducted a retrospective, population-based case-control study 
within Leumit Health Services, which caters to ∼750,000 members. Patients 
meeting the evolving criteria of the American College of Rheumatology from 
January 2002 to December 2023 were included. Control subjects were selected from 
the same population base but did not have a diagnosis of FM, were matched 5:1 on 
sex, age, and year of first membership. All diagnoses were identified by using 
International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9) codes up to 
March 2024. Results: The analysis included 15,869 patients diagnosed with FM and 
79,345 matched controls. There was a predominant female representation (82.1%) 
in both groups. The prevalence of bronchial asthma was higher in patients with 
FM compared with the controls, with an odds ratio (OR) of 1.91. The patients 
with FM also exhibited higher rates of both nonseasonal and seasonal allergic 
rhinitis, with ORs of 1.60 and 1.30, respectively, and chronic rhinosinusitis 
without nasal polyps demonstrated an OR of 2.46. Acute allergic conjunctivitis 
had an OR of 2.05. Skin-related allergies such as contact dermatitis and atopic 
dermatitis showed ORs of 1.48 and 1.41, respectively. Furthermore, the patients 
with FM displayed elevated rates of various forms of urticaria and chronic 
pruritus, alongside higher incidences of food allergies and specific drug 
allergies. Anaphylactic reactions to food were notably more common in patients 
with FM, who presented an OR of 2.50. Conclusion: FM is associated with a higher 
prevalence of allergic diseases compared with the controls. Analysis of these 
findings suggests the need for allergological assessments in FM management.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2025.46.240080
PMID: 40011987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]