---
reference_id: "PMID:39812846"
title: "Diagnosis of hereditary ataxias: a real-world single center experience."
authors:
- Meli A
- Montano V
- Palermo G
- Fogli A
- Rocchi A
- Gerfo AL
- Maltomini R
- Cori L
- Siniscalchi A
- Bernardini C
- Cecchi G
- Siciliano G
- Ceravolo R
- Caligo MA
- Mancuso M
- Lopriore P
journal: J Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12772-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Retrospective Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Genetic Testing
- Aged
- "Spinocerebellar Degenerations/diagnosis, genetics"
- Young Adult
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Adolescent
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of hereditary ataxias: a real-world single center experience.
**Authors:** Meli A, Montano V, Palermo G, Fogli A, Rocchi A, Gerfo AL, Maltomini R, Cori L, Siniscalchi A, Bernardini C, Cecchi G, Siciliano G, Ceravolo R, Caligo MA, Mancuso M, Lopriore P
**Journal:** J Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-024-12772-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-024-12772-9)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2025 Jan 15;272(2):111. doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12772-9.

Diagnosis of hereditary ataxias: a real-world single center experience.

Meli A(1), Montano V(1), Palermo G(1)(2), Fogli A(3), Rocchi A(1), Gerfo AL(3),
Maltomini R(3), Cori L(1)(2), Siniscalchi A(4), Bernardini C(1), Cecchi G(1),
Siciliano G(1), Ceravolo R(1)(2), Caligo MA(3), Mancuso M(5), Lopriore P(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurological Institute, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Parkinson's Disease and Movement
Disorders, Unit of Neurology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurology and Stroke Unit, Annunziata Hospital of Cosenza,
Cosenza, Italy.
(5)Neurological Institute, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. michelangelo.mancuso@unipi.it.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to evaluate our experience in the diagnosis of
hereditary ataxias (HAs), to analyze data from a real-world scenario.
STUDY DESIGN: This is a retrospective, cross-sectional, descriptive study
conducted at a single Italian adult neurogenetic outpatient clinic, in 147
patients affected by ataxia with a suspicion of hereditary forms, recruited from
November 1999 to February 2024. A stepwise approach for molecular diagnostics
was applied: targeted gene panel (TP) next-generation sequencing (NGS) and/or
clinical exome sequencing (CES) were performed in the case of inconclusive
first-line genetic testing, such as short tandem repeat expansions (TREs)
testing for most common spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA1-3, 6-8,12,17, DRPLA),
other forms [Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS), Friedreich
ataxia (FRDA) and mitochondrial DNA-related ataxia, RFC1-related ataxia/CANVAS]
or inconclusive phenotype-guided specific single gene sequencing.
RESULT: A definitive diagnosis was reached in 36.7% of the cases. TREs testing
was diagnostic in 30.4% of patients. The three most common TREs ataxias were
FRDA (36.1%), SCA2 (27.8%), and RFC1-related ataxia/CANVAS (11.1%). In five
patients, the molecular diagnosis was achieved by single gene sequencing and
causative mutations were identified in POLG (2), SACS (1), DARS2 (1), MT-ATP6
(1). Of 94 patients with a suspicion of HAs of indeterminate genetic origin, 68
underwent new molecular evaluation using the NGS approach. In 28 of these cases,
CES was performed after the TP sequencing resulted negative. In 13 patients, the
diagnosis was achieved by NGS approach. In 7 of these 13 patients, the diagnosis
was made by CES. Genes mutations identified as causative of HAs were found in
SPG7 (4), SACS (1), CACNA1A (1), CACNA1G (1), EEF2 (1), PRKCG (1), KCNC3 (1),
ADCK3 (1), SYNE1 (1), ITPR1 (1). A positive family history of ataxia and early
onset of symptoms were associated with a higher likelihood of obtaining a
definite diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: The molecular diagnosis of HAs remains a significant challenge for
neurologists. Our data indicate that, in most cases, a diagnosis of HA can be
established through first line genetic testing, particularly TREs testing.
However, for patients with a clinical diagnosis of HA who do not achieve a
molecular diagnosis through initial genetic tests, the use of NGS proves to be a
valuable tool, providing a definitive diagnosis in approximately 20% of cases.
Therefore, when feasible in clinical practice, integrating NGS testing,
especially exome sequencing, into the diagnostic decision-making process for
unsolved cases is crucial.

© 2024. Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-024-12772-9
PMID: 39812846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflicts of interest: The authors
declare no conflict of interest.
