---
reference_id: "PMID:28100644"
title: Multicellular hypothesis for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Goetzl EJ
- Miller BL
journal: FASEB J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1096/fj.201601221R
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multicellular hypothesis for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Goetzl EJ, Miller BL
**Journal:** FASEB J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.201601221R](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.201601221R)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2017 May;31(5):1792-1795. doi: 10.1096/fj.201601221R. Epub 2017 Jan
18.

Multicellular hypothesis for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.

Goetzl EJ(1)(2), Miller BL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA; edward.goetzl@ucsf.edu.
(2)Jewish Home of San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA; and.
(3)Department of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

Extensive abnormal interactions among microglia, astrocytes, and neurons of the 
CNS have been observed in proteinopathic neurodegenerative dementias of the 
elderly. These multicellular interactions are initiated by insoluble tangles of 
phosphorylated tau protein and plaques of amyloid peptides. Most research has 
focused on these neurotoxic proteins, but much less is known about the 
pathogenic roles of the responding resident and recruited neural cells. 
Principal interactions among the major 3 sets of CNS cells are herein considered 
at several levels in relation to cellular phenotypic alterations, mechanisms of 
cellular communication, and extent of involvement in the pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer's disease and related proteinopathic dementias. It remains to be 
determined which of these abnormal neurocellular phenomena are primary events 
and sufficiently contributory to neurodegeneration to be useful targets for 
therapy of senile dementias.-Goetzl, E. J., Miller, B. L. Multicellular 
hypothesis for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.

© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201601221R
PMID: 28100644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]