---
reference_id: "PMID:37673506"
title: Long-Term Outcome and Prognosis of Noninfectious Thoracic Aortitis.
authors:
- Espitia O
- Bruneval P
- Assaraf M
- Pouchot J
- Liozon E
- de Boysson H
- Gaudric J
- Chiche L
- Achouh P
- Roussel JC
- Miranda S
- Mirault T
- Boussouar S
- Redheuil A
- Serfaty JM
- Bénichou A
- Agard C
- Guédon AF
- Cacoub P
- Paraf F
- Fouret PJ
- Toquet C
- Biard L
- Saadoun D
- French Study Group for Large Vessel Vasculitides (GEFA)
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2023.06.031
keywords:
- Humans
- Aortitis/epidemiology
- Prognosis
- Aorta
- Inflammation
- "Aortic Dissection/diagnosis, epidemiology, surgery"
- Cardiovascular Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Outcome and Prognosis of Noninfectious Thoracic Aortitis.
**Authors:** Espitia O, Bruneval P, Assaraf M, Pouchot J, Liozon E, de Boysson H, Gaudric J, Chiche L, Achouh P, Roussel JC, Miranda S, Mirault T, Boussouar S, Redheuil A, Serfaty JM, Bénichou A, Agard C, Guédon AF, Cacoub P, Paraf F, Fouret PJ, Toquet C, Biard L, Saadoun D, French Study Group for Large Vessel Vasculitides (GEFA)
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2023.06.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2023.06.031)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 Sep 12;82(11):1053-1064. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2023.06.031.

Long-Term Outcome and Prognosis of Noninfectious Thoracic Aortitis.

Espitia O(1), Bruneval P(2), Assaraf M(3), Pouchot J(4), Liozon E(5), de Boysson
H(6), Gaudric J(7), Chiche L(7), Achouh P(8), Roussel JC(9), Miranda S(10),
Mirault T(11), Boussouar S(12), Redheuil A(12), Serfaty JM(13), Bénichou A(14),
Agard C(14), Guédon AF(14), Cacoub P(3), Paraf F(15), Fouret PJ(16), Toquet
C(17), Biard L(18), Saadoun D(19); French Study Group for Large Vessel
Vasculitides (GEFA).

Author information:
(1)Nantes Université, CHU Nantes, Department of Vascular Medicine, Nantes,
France; l'institut du thorax, INSERM UMR1087/CNRS UMR 6291, Team III Vascular &
Pulmonary diseases, Nantes, France. Electronic address:
olivier.espitia@chu-nantes.fr.
(2)Department of cardiology, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Universités, Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical
Immunology, Centre de Référence des Maladies Auto-Immunes Systémiques Rares,
Centre de Référence des Maladies Auto-Inflammatoires et de l'Amylose
inflammatoire (CEREMAIA), Paris, France; INSERM, UMR_S 959, Paris, France; DMU
3ID, AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris,
France.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, CHU Limoges, France.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, CHU Caen, Caen, France.
(7)Department of Vascular Surgery, AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière,
Paris, France.
(8)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou,
Paris, France.
(9)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Nantes Université, CHU Nantes,
Department of Internal and Vascular Medicine, Nantes, France.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, CHU Rouen, Rouen, France.
(11)Université Paris Cité, Department of Vascular Medicine, Hôpital Européen
Georges Pompidou, APHP, INSERM U970 PARCC, Paris, France.
(12)Sorbonne Universités, Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Department of
Cardiovascular Imaging, Paris, France.
(13)Nantes Université, CHU Nantes, Department of Cardiovascular Imaging, Nantes,
France.
(14)Nantes Université, CHU Nantes, Department of Vascular Medicine, Nantes,
France; l'institut du thorax, INSERM UMR1087/CNRS UMR 6291, Team III Vascular &
Pulmonary diseases, Nantes, France.
(15)Department of Pathology, CHU Limoges, Limoges, France.
(16)Sorbonne Universités, Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Service
d'anatomopathologie, UPMC-Paris VI, Paris, France.
(17)Nantes Université, CHU Nantes, Department of Pathology, Nantes, France.
(18)APHP Department of Biostatistics and Medical Information, Saint-Louis
Hospital, Paris, France; ECSTRRA Team, CRESS UMR 1153, INSERM, Paris Cité
University, Paris, France.
(19)Sorbonne Universités, Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical
Immunology, Centre de Référence des Maladies Auto-Immunes Systémiques Rares,
Centre de Référence des Maladies Auto-Inflammatoires et de l'Amylose
inflammatoire (CEREMAIA), Paris, France; INSERM, UMR_S 959, Paris, France; DMU
3ID, AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. Electronic
address: david.saadoun@aphp.fr.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 Sep 12;82(11):1065-1067. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2023.07.005.

BACKGROUND: Aortitis is a group of disorders characterized by the inflammation
of the aorta. The large-vessel vasculitides are the most common causes of
aortitis. Aortitis long-term outcomes are not well known.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to assess the long-term outcome and
prognosis of noninfectious surgical thoracic aortitis.
METHODS: This was a retrospective multicenter study of 5,666 patients with
thoracic aorta surgery including 217 (3.8%) with noninfectious thoracic aortitis
(118 clinically isolated aortitis, 57 giant cells arteritis, 21 Takayasu
arteritis, and 21 with various systemic autoimmune disorders). Factors
associated with vascular complications and a second vascular procedure were
assessed by multivariable analysis.
RESULTS: Indications for aortic surgery were asymptomatic aneurysm with a
critical size (n = 152 [70%]), aortic dissection (n = 28 [13%]), and symptomatic
aortic aneurysm (n = 30 [14%]). The 10-year cumulative incidence of vascular
complication and second vascular procedure was 82.1% (95% CI: 67.6%-90.6%), and
42.6% (95% CI: 28.4%-56.1%), respectively. Aortic arch aortitis (HR: 2.08;
95% CI: 1.26-3.44; P = 0.005) was independently associated with vascular
complications. Descending thoracic aortitis (HR: 2.35; 95% CI: 1.11-4.96; P =
0.031) and aortic dissection (HR: 3.08; 95% CI: 1.61-5.90; P = 0.002) were
independently associated with a second vascular procedure, while treatment with
statins after aortitis diagnosis (HR: 0.47; 95% CI: 0.24-0.90; P = 0.028)
decreased it. After a median follow-up of 3.9 years, 19 (16.1%) clinically
isolated aortitis patients developed features of a systemic inflammatory disease
and 35 (16%) patients had died.
CONCLUSIONS: This multicenter study shows that 82% of noninfectious surgical
thoracic aortitis patients will experience a vascular complication within 10
years. We pointed out specific characteristics that identified those at highest
risk for subsequent vascular complications and second vascular procedures.

Copyright © 2023 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2023.06.031
PMID: 37673506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures The
authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents
of this paper to disclose.
