---
reference_id: "PMID:35658624"
title: "Treatment of posterior circulation stroke: Acute management and secondary prevention."
authors:
- Markus HS
- Michel P
journal: Int J Stroke
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/17474930221107500
keywords:
- "Constriction, Pathologic"
- Endovascular Procedures/methods
- Humans
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Secondary Prevention
- Stents/adverse effects
- "Stroke/complications, prevention & control"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency/complications, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of posterior circulation stroke: Acute management and secondary prevention.
**Authors:** Markus HS, Michel P
**Journal:** Int J Stroke (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/17474930221107500](https://doi.org/10.1177/17474930221107500)

## Content

1. Int J Stroke. 2022 Aug;17(7):723-732. doi: 10.1177/17474930221107500. Epub
2022  Jun 28.

Treatment of posterior circulation stroke: Acute management and secondary 
prevention.

Markus HS(1), Michel P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Stroke Center, Neurology Service, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

One-fifth of strokes occur in the territory of the posterior circulation, but 
their management, particularly acute reperfusion therapy and neurointervention 
procedures for secondary prevention, has received much less attention than 
similar interventions for the anterior circulation. In this review, we overview 
the treatment of posterior circulation stroke, including both interventions in 
the acute setting and secondary prevention. We focus on areas in which the 
management of posterior circulation stroke differs from that of stroke in 
general and highlight recent advances.Effectiveness of acute revascularization 
of posterior circulation strokes remains in large parts unproven. Thrombolysis 
seems to have similar benefits and lower hemorrhage risks than in the anterior 
circulation. The recent ATTENTION and BAOCHE trials have demonstrated that 
thrombectomy benefits strokes with basilar artery occlusion, but its effect on 
other posterior occlusion sites remains uncertain. Ischemic and hemorrhagic 
space-occupying cerebellar strokes can benefit from decompressive 
craniectomy.Secondary prevention of posterior circulation strokes includes 
aggressive treatment of cerebrovascular risk factors with both drugs and 
lifestyle interventions and short-term dual anti-platelet therapy. Randomized 
controlled trial (RCT) data suggest basilar artery stenosis is better treated 
with medical therapy than stenting, which has a high peri-procedural risk. 
Limited data from RCTs in stenting for vertebral stenosis suggest that 
intracranial stenosis is currently best treated with medical therapy alone; the 
situation for extracranial stenosis is less clear where stenting for symptomatic 
stenosis is an option, particularly for recurrent symptoms; larger RCTs are 
required in this area.

DOI: 10.1177/17474930221107500
PMCID: PMC9358302
PMID: 35658624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: EIC IJS