---
reference_id: "PMID:28770635"
title: Natural history and treatment of cutaneous and systemic mastocytosis.
authors:
- Le M
- Miedzybrodzki B
- Olynych T
- Chapdelaine H
- Ben-Shoshan M
journal: Postgrad Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/00325481.2017.1364124
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Biological Products/therapeutic use
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Histamine Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Mastocytosis/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Mastocytosis, Cutaneous/physiopathology, therapy"
- "Mastocytosis, Systemic/physiopathology, therapy"
- Phototherapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history and treatment of cutaneous and systemic mastocytosis.
**Authors:** Le M, Miedzybrodzki B, Olynych T, Chapdelaine H, Ben-Shoshan M
**Journal:** Postgrad Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00325481.2017.1364124](https://doi.org/10.1080/00325481.2017.1364124)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med. 2017 Nov;129(8):896-901. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2017.1364124.
Epub  2017 Aug 21.

Natural history and treatment of cutaneous and systemic mastocytosis.

Le M(1), Miedzybrodzki B(1), Olynych T(2), Chapdelaine H(3), Ben-Shoshan M(1).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Allergy, Immunology and Dermatology, Department of Pediatrics , 
McGill University Health Centre, Montreal Children's Hospital , Montreal , 
Canada.
(2)b Department of Medicine , The Ottawa Hospital , Ottawa , Canada.
(3)c Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine , Centre 
Universitaire de Montréal, Cliniques de Montréal , Montreal , Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Mastocytosis, a heterogeneous group of disorders, is characterized 
by an abnormal increase in the number of mast cells that is limited to the skin 
(cutaneous mastocytosis), involving extracutaneous tissues (systemic 
mastocytosis), or presenting as solid tumours (mastocytoma and mast cell 
sarcoma). Recent studies estimate that 1 in 10,000 people are diagnosed with 
mastocytosis. Although prompt diagnosis and appropriate management are crucial, 
little is known about the natural history and currently there are no established 
management guidelines. We have conducted a systematic review to assess the 
natural history and management of different mastocytosis subtypes.
METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted using the PubMed 
and Ovid database of studies published in English and French over the last 
fifteen years, from January 2001 to December 2016. Keywords 'Cutaneous 
mastocytosis', 'Systemic mastocytosis', 'pathophysiology', 'clinical course', 
'prognosis', 'drug therapy', and 'therapy' were searched. Rate of complete 
resolution was subjected to pooled analysis for different mastocytosis subtypes. 
Meta-analysis was conducted using Stata version 12.0.
RESULTS: We reviewed 634 papers, of which 5 were included in the analysis of 
resolution, and 138 were included in the assessment of management. Pooled 
estimate for rate of complete resolution varied depending on the mastocytosis 
subtype. In cutaneous mastocytosis, the complete resolution rate for mastocytoma 
was 10% per year (95% CI: 4.8%, 15.1%) while the rate for urticaria pigmentosa 
was 1.9% per year (95% CI: -0.5%, 4.3%). Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis and 
systemic mastocytosis subtypes did not show evidence of complete resolution in 
the studies reviewed. Treatment of cutaneous and systemic mastocytosis is purely 
symptomatic with topical corticosteroids, antihistamines, omalizumab and 
imatinib being common choices.
CONCLUSION: Rate of resolution of mastocytosis is only shown in urticaria 
pigmentosa and mastocytoma. Better management guidelines are required to improve 
the health of these patients.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2017.1364124
PMID: 28770635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]