---
reference_id: "PMID:30197275"
title: The utility of EEG monitoring in neonates with hyperammonemia due to inborn errors of metabolism.
authors:
- Wiwattanadittakul N
- Prust M
- Gaillard WD
- Massaro A
- Vezina G
- Tsuchida TN
- Gropman AL
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.08.011
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Ammonia/blood
- Argininosuccinate Synthase/blood
- "Argininosuccinic Aciduria/blood, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Electroencephalography
- Female
- Glutamine/blood
- Humans
- "Hyperammonemia/blood, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Hypoxia-Ischemia, Brain/blood, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Ornithine Carbamoyltransferase Deficiency Disease/blood, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Seizures/blood, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The utility of EEG monitoring in neonates with hyperammonemia due to inborn errors of metabolism.
**Authors:** Wiwattanadittakul N, Prust M, Gaillard WD, Massaro A, Vezina G, Tsuchida TN, Gropman AL
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.08.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.08.011)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2018 Nov;125(3):235-240. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.08.011.
Epub  2018 Aug 24.

The utility of EEG monitoring in neonates with hyperammonemia due to inborn
errors of metabolism.

Wiwattanadittakul N(1), Prust M(2), Gaillard WD(3), Massaro A(3), Vezina G(3),
Tsuchida TN(3), Gropman AL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chiang Mai University Hospital, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand; Center for Neuroscience, Children
Neuroscience, Medical System, George Washington University, Washington, DC,
United States.
(2)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Center for Neuroscience, Children Neuroscience, Medical System, George
Washington University, Washington, DC, United States.
(4)Center for Neuroscience, Children Neuroscience, Medical System, George
Washington University, Washington, DC, United States. Electronic address:
agropman@childrensnational.org.

BACKGROUND: Continuous EEG studies demonstrate that neonates with seizures due
to cerebral pathology, such as hypoxia ischemia, exhibit predominantly
electrographic seizures (i.e. those only detected with EEG because they lack
clinical features). Previous small case series demonstrate EEG changes and
seizures during hyperammonemia associated with inborn errors of metabolism (IEM)
but there are no reports utilizing continuous EEG in these conditions.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize seizures and evaluate the utility of continuous EEG
recording during hyperammonemia due to inborn errors of metabolism.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed medical records and EEG tracings of
neonates who presented with hyperammonemia due to inborn errors of metabolism
who had continuous EEG and full medical records available for review, including
follow up.
RESULTS: Eight neonates with hyperammonemia were studied, 7 had urea cycle
defects: Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency [3], (ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency [3], carbomyl phosphate synthase deficiency [1] and one had an
organic acidemia: Methylmalonic acidemia [1]. Most common presentations were
lethargy and poor feeding at 12-72 h of life. The highest blood ammonia level
was 874 μmol/L (median); range 823-1647 μmol/L (normal value <50 μmol/L in term
neonates). Seven were treated with hemodialysis in addition to nitrogen
scavengers. Seven neonates had seizures; six had only electrographic seizures.
Seizures initially occurred within 24-36 h of clinical presentation, sometimes
with normal ammonia and glutamine levels. Neonates with seizures all lacked
state changes on EEG. Inter burst interval duration correlated with degree of
hyperammonemia. Two cases with normal plasma ammonia but increasing interburst
interval duration were proven to have stroke by MRI.
CONCLUSIONS: Seizures occur frequently in neonates with hyperammonemia; most can
be detected only with continuous EEG. Seizures may occur when ammonia and
glutamine levels are normal. Interburst interval duration is associated with
ammonia levels or cerebral dysfunction from other brain pathology. Continuous
EEG can be a useful tool for managing infants with hyperammonemia and may be
essential for seizure management especially for infants in deep metabolic coma.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.08.011
PMID: 30197275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
