---
reference_id: "PMID:12746322"
title: "Osteonectin-null mutation compromises osteoblast formation, maturation, and survival."
authors:
- Delany AM
- Kalajzic I
- Bradshaw AD
- Sage EH
- Canalis E
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1210/en.2002-221044
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Bone Marrow Cells/cytology
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- Cell Survival/physiology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Osteoblasts/cytology, physiology"
- "Osteonectin/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Skull/cytology
- Stromal Cells/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteonectin-null mutation compromises osteoblast formation, maturation, and survival.
**Authors:** Delany AM, Kalajzic I, Bradshaw AD, Sage EH, Canalis E
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1210/en.2002-221044](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2002-221044)

## Content

1. Endocrinology. 2003 Jun;144(6):2588-96. doi: 10.1210/en.2002-221044.

Osteonectin-null mutation compromises osteoblast formation, maturation, and 
survival.

Delany AM(1), Kalajzic I, Bradshaw AD, Sage EH, Canalis E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Research, Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center, Hartford, 
Connecticut 06105, USA. adelany@stfranciscare.org

Osteonectin, also known as SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine) 
or BM-40, is one of the most abundant noncollagenous proteins in bone. Analysis 
of osteonectin-null mice revealed that osteonectin is necessary for the 
maintenance of bone mass and normal remodeling, as osteonectin-null mice have 
decreased osteoblast number and bone formation rate. Cultures of bone marrow 
stromal cells and osteoblasts from control and osteonectin-null mice were used 
to determine the cellular basis for the mutant phenotype. We found that marrow 
stroma from osteonectin-null mice contains fewer osteoblastic precursors than 
that of control mice, and the osteonectin-null mutation did not affect the 
proliferation rate of stromal cells or osteoblasts. Whereas osteonectin-null 
cells could adopt an osteoblastic phenotype, a smaller proportion of these cells 
expressed markers of a fully differentiated osteoblast. Mutant cells exhibited 
decreased formation of mineralized nodules, as well as diminished expression of 
osteocalcin mRNA and response to PTH. Furthermore, osteonectin-null cells showed 
an increased tendency to form adipocytes, with enhanced expression of the 
adipocytic markers adipsin and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta. 
Osteonectin-null cells were also more susceptible to environmental stresses. 
These data indicate that osteonectin is important for osteoblast formation, 
maturation, and survival.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2002-221044
PMID: 12746322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]