---
reference_id: "PMID:36761493"
title: Guidelines for Newborn Screening of Congenital Hypothyroidism (2021 Revision).
authors:
- Nagasaki K
- Minamitani K
- Nakamura A
- Kobayashi H
- Numakura C
- Itoh M
- Mushimoto Y
- Fujikura K
- Fukushi M
- Tajima T
journal: Clin Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1297/cpe.2022-0063
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Guidelines for Newborn Screening of Congenital Hypothyroidism (2021 Revision).
**Authors:** Nagasaki K, Minamitani K, Nakamura A, Kobayashi H, Numakura C, Itoh M, Mushimoto Y, Fujikura K, Fukushi M, Tajima T
**Journal:** Clin Pediatr Endocrinol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1297/cpe.2022-0063](https://doi.org/10.1297/cpe.2022-0063)

## Content

1. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2023;32(1):26-51. doi: 10.1297/cpe.2022-0063. Epub
2022  Dec 4.

Guidelines for Newborn Screening of Congenital Hypothyroidism (2021 Revision).

Nagasaki K(1)(2)(3), Minamitani K(2)(4), Nakamura A(1)(5), Kobayashi H(1)(6), 
Numakura C(1)(7), Itoh M(2)(8), Mushimoto Y(2)(9), Fujikura K(10)(11), Fukushi 
M(10)(12), Tajima T(1)(13).

Author information:
(1)Mass Screening Committee, Japanese Society for Pediatric Endocrinology.
(2)Thyroid Committee, Japanese Society for Pediatric Endocrinology.
(3)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Teikyo University Chiba Medical Center, Chiba, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, 
Japan.
(6)Laboratories Division, Shimane University Hospital, Izumo, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata, 
Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Kanazawa Medical University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(10)Japanese Society for Neonatal Screening.
(11)Sapporo City Institute of Public Health, Sapporo, Japan.
(12)Sapporo Immuno Diagnostic Laboratory (IDL), Sapporo, Japan.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University Tochigi Children's 
Medical Center, Tochigi, Japan.

Purpose of developing the guidelines: Newborn screening (NBS) for congenital 
hypothyroidism (CH) was started in 1979 in Japan, and early diagnosis and 
treatment improved the intelligence prognosis of CH patients. The incidence of 
CH was once about one in 5,000-8,000 births, but has been increased with 
diagnosis of subclinical CH. The disease requires continuous treatment and 
specialized medical facilities should conduct differential diagnosis and 
treatment in patients who are positive by NBS to avoid unnecessary treatment. 
The Guidelines for Mass Screening of Congenital Hypothyroidism (1998 version) 
were developed by the Mass Screening Committee of the Japanese Society for 
Pediatric Endocrinology in 1998. Subsequently, the guidelines were revised in 
2014. Here, we have added minor revisions to the 2014 version to include the 
most recent findings. Target disease/conditions: Primary congenital 
hypothyroidism. Users of the Guidelines: Physician specialists in pediatric 
endocrinology, pediatric specialists, physicians referring pediatric 
practitioners, general physicians, laboratory technicians in charge of mass 
screening, and patients.

2023©The Japanese Society for Pediatric Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1297/cpe.2022-0063
PMCID: PMC9887297
PMID: 36761493

Conflict of interest statement: None of the committee members have a conflict of 
interest regarding development of the guidelines, based on the criteria for 
conflict of interest of the Japan Pediatric Society and in accordance with the 
rules of the Japanese Society for Pediatric Endocrinology.