---
reference_id: "PMID:28954602"
title: Role of Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor in Endometriosis Pain.
authors:
- Ding S
- Zhu T
- Tian Y
- Xu P
- Chen Z
- Huang X
- Zhang X
journal: Reprod Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1177/1933719117732161
keywords:
- Adult
- Ascitic Fluid/metabolism
- "Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor/blood, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Endometriosis/complications, metabolism"
- "Endometrium/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Infertility, Female/complications, metabolism"
- "Pain/complications, metabolism"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Stromal Cells/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor in Endometriosis Pain.
**Authors:** Ding S, Zhu T, Tian Y, Xu P, Chen Z, Huang X, Zhang X
**Journal:** Reprod Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1933719117732161](https://doi.org/10.1177/1933719117732161)

## Content

1. Reprod Sci. 2018 Jul;25(7):1045-1057. doi: 10.1177/1933719117732161. Epub 2017
 Sep 27.

Role of Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor in Endometriosis Pain.

Ding S(1), Zhu T(1), Tian Y(1), Xu P(1), Chen Z(1), Huang X(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Women's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a regulator for the formation and
maintenance of chronic pain in various chronic disorders and has been shown to
increase in the serum of women with endometriosis. However, BDNF expression in
the peritoneal fluid (PF) and ectopic lesions and its role in endometriosis pain
remain unclear. Thus, this study aims to determine the BDNF concentrations in
serum and PFs and BDNF expression levels in ectopic lesions and endometriotic
stromal cells (ESCs) of women with endometriosis (n = 60). The obtained results
were then compared with those of women without endometriosis (n = 38).
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor concentrations in serum and PF, as well as the
BDNF expression levels in ectopic lesions and endometriotic cells, were
evaluated through enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, immunohistochemical
staining, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, and Western blot
analysis. As a result, BDNF concentrations in serum and PF were significantly
higher in women with endometriosis with pain (2284.3 ± 51.5 pg/mL, n = 23; 58.8
± 6.4 pg/mL, n = 16) than in women with endometriosis without pain (1999.8 ±
61.1 pg/mL, n = 37; 31.7 ± 2.9 pg/mL, n = 25; P < .01). Moreover, BDNF messenger
RNA (mRNA) expression levels in ectopic lesions (8.97 ± 1.44, n = 29) were
significantly higher than eutopic (0.97 ± 0.14, n = 16; P < .01) and control
endometrium (1.23 ± 0.19, n = 18; P < .01) and were correlated with
endometriosis pain ( P < .05). Furthermore, increased BDNF mRNA and protein
expression levels in ESCs induced by estradiol or interleukin 1β were removed
using a phosphorylated extracellular-regulated protein kinase 1/2 inhibitor.
These results suggest that BDNF may play an important role in the pathogenesis
of endometriosis pain.

DOI: 10.1177/1933719117732161
PMID: 28954602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
