---
reference_id: "PMID:39110218"
title: Natural history of non-polyglutamine CACNA1A disease in Austria.
authors:
- Indelicato E
- Nachbauer W
- Amprosi MS
- Maier S
- Unterberger I
- Delazer M
- Kaltseis K
- Kiechl S
- Broessner G
- Baumann M
- Boesch S
journal: J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12602-y
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- Austria/epidemiology
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- Developmental Disabilities/drug therapy
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of non-polyglutamine CACNA1A disease in Austria.
**Authors:** Indelicato E, Nachbauer W, Amprosi MS, Maier S, Unterberger I, Delazer M, Kaltseis K, Kiechl S, Broessner G, Baumann M, Boesch S
**Journal:** J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-024-12602-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-024-12602-y)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2024 Oct;271(10):6618-6627. doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12602-y. Epub
2024  Aug 7.

Natural history of non-polyglutamine CACNA1A disease in Austria.

Indelicato E(1), Nachbauer W(1), Amprosi MS(1), Maier S(2), Unterberger I(3), 
Delazer M(4), Kaltseis K(5), Kiechl S(1)(6), Broessner G(5), Baumann M(7), 
Boesch S(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for Rare Movement Disorders Innsbruck, Department of Neurology, 
Medical University of Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, 6020, Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Public Health, Health Economics, Medical Statistics and Informatics, 
Institute of Clinical Epidemiology, Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Epilepsy Center, Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(4)Neuropsychology, Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Headache Outpatient Clinic, Department of Neurology, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(6)VASCage, Centre on Clinical Stroke Research, Innsbruck, Austria.
(7)Department of Pediatrics I, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria.
(8)Center for Rare Movement Disorders Innsbruck, Department of Neurology, 
Medical University of Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, 6020, Innsbruck, Austria. 
sylvia.boesch@i-med.ac.at.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Non-polyglutamine CACNA1A variants underlie an 
extremely variable phenotypic spectrum encompassing developmental delay, 
hemiplegic migraine, epilepsy, psychiatric symptoms, episodic and chronic 
cerebellar signs. We provide our experience with the long-term follow-up of 
CACNA1A patients and their response to interval therapy.
METHODS: Patients with genetically confirmed non-polyglutamine CACNA1A disease 
were prospectively followed at the Center for Rare Movement Disorders of the 
Medical University of Innsbruck from 2004 to 2024.
RESULTS: We recruited 41 subjects with non-polyglutamine CACNA1A disease, of 
which 38 (93%) familial cases. The mean age at the first examination was 
35 ± 22 years. Disease onset was in the childhood/adolescence in 31/41 patients 
(76%). Developmental delay and episodic symptoms were the first disease 
manifestation in 9/41 (22%) and 32/41 (78%) patients respectively. Chronic 
neurological signs encompassed a cerebellar syndrome in 35/41 (85%), which 
showed almost no progression during the observation period, as well as cognitive 
deficits in 9/20 (45%, MOCA test score < 26), psychiatric and behavioral 
symptoms in 11/41(27%). Seizures occurred in two patients concomitant to severe 
hemiplegic migraine. At the last visit, 27/41 patients (66%) required an 
interval prophylaxis (including acetazolamide, flunarizine, 4-aminopyridine, 
topiramate), which was efficacious in reducing the frequency and severity of 
episodic symptoms in all cases. In one patient in his 70ies with progressively 
therapy resistant hemiplegic migraine, treatment with the anti-CGRP antibody 
galcanezumab successfully reduced the frequency of migraine days from 4 to 
1/month.
CONCLUSIONS: Non-polyglutamine CACNA1A disease show an evolving age-dependent 
presentation. Interval prophylaxis is effective in reducing the burden of 
episodic symptoms.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-024-12602-y
PMCID: PMC11446988
PMID: 39110218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
report related to the present publication.