---
reference_id: "PMID:11720753"
title: Surgery for non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Van Schil PE
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s0169-5002(01)00354-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgery for non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Van Schil PE
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0169-5002(01)00354-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0169-5002(01)00354-3)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2001 Dec;34 Suppl 2:S127-32. doi: 10.1016/s0169-5002(01)00354-3.

Surgery for non-small cell lung cancer.

Van Schil PE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital of Antwerp, 
Wilrijkstraat 10, B-2650, Edegem, Belgium. paul.van.schil@uza.be

Although never proven to be superior in a randomized trial, surgical resection 
remains the treatment of choice for early stage non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). In stages IA, IB, IIA, IIB and selected stages IIIA surgical treatment 
offers the best long-term prognosis when a complete resection can be performed. 
Standard operations include lobectomy, bilobectomy and pneumonectomy. Whenever 
possible, lobectomy is the procedure of choice. Lesser resections like 
segmentectomy or wedge excision are not indicated in primary NSCLC due to a 
higher local recurrence rate and poorer long-term survival. Specific lung 
parenchyma saving operations include tracheo- and bronchoplastic procedures 
which are indicated in selected cases of centrally located NSCLC. Extended 
resections include removal of lung together with another organ or structure as 
thoracic wall, pericardium, diaphragm or superior sulcus. En bloc excision of 
the involved structure is advised. Technically more demanding is lung resection 
after induction therapy, especially after combined chemoradiotherapy. A dense 
fibrotic reaction may render operative staging and dissection difficult. The 
precise, necessary extent of resection after induction therapy has not been 
determined yet. Although combined modality treatment has an overall increased 
morbidity and mortality rate, it may improve survival in selected cases of 
locally advanced NSCLC. Its precise role, however, still remains to be defined 
in large randomized trials.

DOI: 10.1016/s0169-5002(01)00354-3
PMID: 11720753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]