---
reference_id: "PMID:25758222"
title: Vitamin K reduces hypermineralisation in zebrafish models of PXE and GACI.
authors:
- Mackay EW
- Apschner A
- Schulte-Merker S
journal: Development
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1242/dev.113811
keywords:
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Anthraquinones
- "Calcinosis/genetics, metabolism"
- "Chromosomes, Artificial, Bacterial"
- DNA Primers/genetics
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mutation/genetics
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/genetics, metabolism"
- Transgenes/genetics
- "Vascular Calcification/genetics, metabolism"
- "Vitamin K/genetics, metabolism"
- Warfarin
- Zebrafish/genetics
- "Zebrafish Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitamin K reduces hypermineralisation in zebrafish models of PXE and GACI.
**Authors:** Mackay EW, Apschner A, Schulte-Merker S
**Journal:** Development (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.113811](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.113811)

## Content

1. Development. 2015 Mar 15;142(6):1095-101. doi: 10.1242/dev.113811.

Vitamin K reduces hypermineralisation in zebrafish models of PXE and GACI.

Mackay EW(1), Apschner A(1), Schulte-Merker S(2).

Author information:
(1)Hubrecht Institute - KNAW & University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 3584
CT, The Netherlands.
(2)Hubrecht Institute - KNAW & University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 3584
CT, The Netherlands EZO, WUR, Wageningen 6709 PG, The Netherlands Institute of
Cardiovascular Organogenesis and Regeneration, University of Münster, Münster
48149, Germany Cells-in-Motion Cluster of Excellence (EXC 1003 - CiM),
University of Münster, Münster 48149, Germany schultes@ukmuenster.de.

The mineralisation disorder pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is associated with
mutations in the transporter protein ABCC6. Patients with PXE suffer from
calcified lesions in the skin, eyes and vasculature, and PXE is related to a
more severe vascular calcification syndrome called generalised arterial
calcification of infancy (GACI). Mutations in ABCC6 are linked to reduced levels
of circulating vitamin K. Here, we describe a mutation in the zebrafish (Danio
rerio) orthologue abcc6a, which results in extensive hypermineralisation of the
axial skeleton. Administration of vitamin K to embryos was sufficient to restore
normal levels of mineralisation. Vitamin K also reduced ectopic mineralisation
in a zebrafish model of GACI, and warfarin exacerbated the mineralisation
phenotype in both mutant lines. These data suggest that vitamin K could be a
beneficial treatment for human patients with PXE or GACI. Additionally, we found
that abcc6a is strongly expressed at the site of mineralisation rather than the
liver, as it is in mammals, which has significant implications for our
understanding of the function of ABCC6.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.113811
PMID: 25758222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
