---
reference_id: "PMID:397771"
title: Acute promyelocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Groopman J
- Ellman L
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '1979'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.2830070412
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Groopman J, Ellman L
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (1979)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.2830070412](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.2830070412)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 1979;7(4):395-408. doi: 10.1002/ajh.2830070412.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Groopman J, Ellman L.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by proliferation of 
morphologically abnormal promyelocytes and a severe bleeding diathesis. The 
abnormal promyelocyte is characterized by abundant, large granules, many of 
which are spindle-shaped. Electron microscopic appearance of the granules 
closely resembles that of Auer rods. The granules appear to possess tissue 
thromboplastin activity by both immunologic and clotting assays. Coagulation 
studies in APL are generally consistent with disseminated intravascular 
coagulation. Prolongation of the prothrombin time and elevation of fibrinogen 
degradation products are the tests that are most commonly abnormal. Although 
occasional reports indicate a favorable response of the coagulopathy to drugs 
that inhibit fibrinolysis, the use of prophylactic heparin appears to be the 
treatment of choice. The response rate of APL to chemotherapy regimens that 
contain an anthracycline is comparable to that of acute myelogenous leukemia. 
The recent description of the 15;17 chromosomal translocation which may be 
pathognomonic for APL is only the second example of a chromosomal marker of 
human neoplasia. Marked elevation of serum vitamin B12 and B12 binding proteins 
appears to be another characteristic feature of APL. An in vitro cell line of 
APL cells has been demonstrated to have the capacity to differentiate to 
functional polymorphonuclear leukocytes, but the cause for the maturation arrest 
is unknown.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.2830070412
PMID: 397771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]