---
reference_id: "PMID:35590300"
title: Surgical outcome of epicanthus and telecanthus correction by C-U medial canthoplasty with lateral canthoplasty in treatment of Blepharophimosis syndrome.
authors:
- Amer AA
- Abdellah MM
- Hassan NHF
- Mounir A
journal: BMC Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12886-022-02455-2
keywords:
- Blepharophimosis/surgery
- Blepharoptosis/surgery
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Skin Abnormalities
- Treatment Outcome
- Urogenital Abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical outcome of epicanthus and telecanthus correction by C-U medial canthoplasty with lateral canthoplasty in treatment of Blepharophimosis syndrome.
**Authors:** Amer AA, Abdellah MM, Hassan NHF, Mounir A
**Journal:** BMC Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12886-022-02455-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-022-02455-2)

## Content

1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2022 May 19;22(1):226. doi: 10.1186/s12886-022-02455-2.

Surgical outcome of epicanthus and telecanthus correction by C-U medial
canthoplasty with lateral canthoplasty in treatment of Blepharophimosis
syndrome.

Amer AA(1), Abdellah MM(2), Hassan NHF(3), Mounir A(4).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Department Qena Faculty of medicine, South Valley University,
Qena, Egypt.
(2)Sohag Faculty of Medicine, Ophthalmology Department, Sohag University, Sohag
City, Egypt.
(3)Benha Faculty of Medicine, Ophthalmology Department, Benha University, Benha,
Egypt.
(4)Sohag Faculty of Medicine, Ophthalmology Department, Sohag University, Sohag
City, Egypt. dramrmonir@yahoo.com.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the surgical outcome of epicanthus and telecanthus
correction by C-U medial canthoplasty with lateral canthoplasty in
Blepharophimosis Syndrome.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a retrospective single arm interventional study
including 18 eyes of 9 patients with Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus
syndrome who presented to oculoplastic clinic, ophthalmology department, Qena
university hospital in the period of between July 2020 to April 2021. All the
patients had BPES with epicanthus and telecanthus. All cases were subjected to
by C plasty with medial and lateral canthoplasty for correction of epicanthus
and telecanthus correction followed by frontalis suspension surgery to correct
the co-existing blepharoptosis.
RESULTS: The study included 9 cases of BPES, 6 boys and 3 girls, the mean age
was 5.4 ± 1.5 in the study group, all patients had a positive family history for
BPES. After surgery, the mean IICD decreased from 38.44 mm preoperatively to
32.8 mm postoperatively, with a mean difference of 6.2 mm (P <  0.001).
Likewise, the mean PFL increased from 20.78 mm preoperatively to 26.63 mm
postoperatively, with a mean difference of 5.8 mm (P <  0.001). Epicanthus skin
fold disappeared in all cases and medical canthus could be seen with well healed
difficulty seen scars.
CONCLUSION: C-U medial canthoplasty with lateral canthoplasty in
Blepharophimosis Syndrome was found to be an effective procedure in the
correction of epicanthus and telecanthus.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-022-02455-2
PMCID: PMC9118630
PMID: 35590300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
