---
reference_id: "PMID:30860704"
title: Transposition of the Great Arteries.
authors:
- Szymanski MW
- Sharma S
- Kritzmire SM
- Thomas A
- Goyal A
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transposition of the Great Arteries.
**Authors:** Szymanski MW, Sharma S, Kritzmire SM, Thomas A, Goyal A

## Content

1. Transposition of the Great Arteries.

Szymanski MW(1), Sharma S, Kritzmire SM(2), Thomas A(3), Goyal A(4).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2025 Mar 16.

Author information:
(1)Boston Medical Center
(2)Riley Hospital for Children
(3)University of Mississippi Medical Center
(4)University of Kansas Medical Center

Transposition of the great arteries (TGA) is a congenital cardiac defect caused 
by an embryological discordance between the aorta and pulmonary trunk or by both 
atrioventricular and ventriculoarterial discordance—a condition often termed 
"double discordance." Dextro-TGA (d-TGA) occurs during cardiac development when 
the conotruncal septum, which normally spirals toward the aortic sac, forms 
linearly. This anomaly interferes with the normal division of the truncus 
arteriosus into the pulmonary and aortic channels, which form the pulmonary 
arteries and aorta. As a result, the aorta arises from the right ventricle, and 
the pulmonary trunk emerges from the left ventricle. As the most common form of 
TGA, d-TGA is characterized by the right ventricle being positioned to the right 
of the left ventricle, with the aorta arising anterior and rightward to the 
pulmonary artery, creating 2 parallel circulatory circuits (see Image. 
Dextro-Transposition of the Great Arteries). In the systemic circuit of d-TGA, 
deoxygenated blood returns to the right atrium, flows through the tricuspid 
valve and is then pumped back into systemic circulation by the contraction of 
the right ventricle as it enters the abnormally formed aorta. The pulmonary 
circuit, on the other hand, involves oxygenated blood from the pulmonary veins 
draining into the left atrium, passing through the mitral valve, and then being 
pushed back into the lungs via the contraction of the left ventricle and the 
pulmonary arteries. Patients with d-TGA typically present with cyanosis within 
the first 30 days of life. Completely parallel circulatory circuits are 
incompatible with life and require a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) or an atrial 
(ASD) or ventricular septal defect (VSD) to allow the mixing of oxygenated and 
deoxygenated blood (see Image. Dextro-Transposition of the Great Arteries 
and Parallel Circulation). Congenitally corrected TGA (ccTGA) is a complex 
congenital heart defect (CHD) characterized by misalignment of the ventricles 
and transposition of the great arteries, resulting in ventricular discordance 
where the ventricles are not properly aligned with their corresponding atria. 
This condition is highly variable and can present with a range of anatomical 
features and clinical manifestations. CcTGA may be associated with other cardiac 
anomalies, including mirror-image atrial arrangement, atrial isomerism, 
dextrocardia, VSDs, an Ebstein-like tricuspid valve, pulmonary stenosis, and 
atresia (see Image. Congenitally Corrected Transposition of the Great Arteries). 
Symptomatic infants often have additional cardiac defects that require early 
intervention. In contrast, patients without significant intracardiac anomalies 
may remain asymptomatic during childhood and maintain good health well into 
adulthood. However, over time, the right ventricle and tricuspid valve, which 
support systemic circulation, can gradually deteriorate, leading to dysfunction 
and eventual failure.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30860704

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Michael Szymanski declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Sanjeev 
Sharma declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Stacy Kritzmire declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies. Disclosure: Aby Thomas declares no relevant financial 
relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Amandeep Goyal declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.