---
reference_id: "PMID:39581144"
title: "A new perspective on targeting pulmonary arterial hypertension: Programmed cell death pathways (Autophagy, Pyroptosis, Ferroptosis)."
authors:
- Ge Q
- Zhang T
- Yu J
- Lu X
- Xiao S
- Zhang T
- Qing T
- Xiao Z
- Zeng L
- Luo L
journal: Biomed Pharmacother
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2024.117706
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new perspective on targeting pulmonary arterial hypertension: Programmed cell death pathways (Autophagy, Pyroptosis, Ferroptosis).
**Authors:** Ge Q, Zhang T, Yu J, Lu X, Xiao S, Zhang T, Qing T, Xiao Z, Zeng L, Luo L
**Journal:** Biomed Pharmacother (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopha.2024.117706](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2024.117706)

## Content

1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2024 Dec;181:117706. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2024.117706. 
Epub 2024 Nov 23.

A new perspective on targeting pulmonary arterial hypertension: Programmed cell 
death pathways (Autophagy, Pyroptosis, Ferroptosis).

Ge Q(1), Zhang T(1), Yu J(1), Lu X(1), Xiao S(2), Zhang T(1), Qing T(1), Xiao 
Z(1), Zeng L(3), Luo L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Changde Hospital, Xiangya School of Medicine, 
Central South University (The first people's hospital of Changde city), Changde 
City, China.
(2)Department of Ultrasound, Changde Hospital, Xiangya School of Medicine, 
Central South University (The first people's hospital of Changde city), Changde 
City, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, 
China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Changde Hospital, Xiangya School of Medicine, 
Central South University (The first people's hospital of Changde city), Changde 
City, China. Electronic address: ilouldh@163.com.

Erratum in
    Biomed Pharmacother. 2024 Dec;181:117741. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2024.117741.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a severe cardiovascular disease 
characterized by elevated pulmonary vascular resistance, progressive increases 
in pulmonary artery pressures, ultimately leading to right-sided heart failure, 
and potentially mortality. Pulmonary vascular remodeling is pivotal in PAH onset 
and progression. While targeted drug therapies have notably ameliorated PAH 
prognosis, current medications primarily focus on vascular vasodilation, with 
limited ability to reverse pulmonary vascular remodeling fundamentally, 
resulting in suboptimal patient prognoses. Cellular death in pulmonary 
vasculature, once thought to be confined to apoptosis and necrosis, has evolved 
with the identification of pyroptosis, autophagy, and ferroptosis, revealing 
their association with vascular injury in PAH. These novel forms of regulated 
cellular death impact reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, calcium stress, 
and inflammatory cascades, leading to pulmonary vascular cell loss, exacerbating 
vascular injury, and mediating adverse remodeling, inflammation, immune 
anomalies, and current emerging mechanisms (such as endothelial-mesenchymal 
transition, abnormal energy metabolism, and epigenetic regulation) in the 
pathogenesis of PAH. This review comprehensively delineates the roles of 
autophagy, pyroptosis, and ferroptosis in PAH, elucidating recent advances in 
their involvement and regulation of vascular injury. It juxtaposes their 
distinct functions in PAH and discusses the interplay of these programmed cell 
deaths in pulmonary vascular injury, highlighting the benefits of combined 
targeted therapies in mitigating pulmonary arterial hypertension-induced 
vascular injury, providing novel insights into targeted treatments for pulmonary 
arterial hypertension.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2024.117706
PMID: 39581144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.