---
reference_id: "PMID:8732342"
title: "Rhabdoid tumour of the kidney: a clinicopathological study of 22 patients from the International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP) nephroblastoma file."
authors:
- Vujanić GM
- Sandstedt B
- Harms D
- Boccon-Gibod L
- Delemarre JF
journal: Histopathology
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2559.1996.d01-436.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Kidney Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
- Male
- Registries
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Wilms Tumor/diagnosis, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhabdoid tumour of the kidney: a clinicopathological study of 22 patients from the International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP) nephroblastoma file.
**Authors:** Vujanić GM, Sandstedt B, Harms D, Boccon-Gibod L, Delemarre JF
**Journal:** Histopathology (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2559.1996.d01-436.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2559.1996.d01-436.x)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 1996 Apr;28(4):333-40. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2559.1996.d01-436.x.

Rhabdoid tumour of the kidney: a clinicopathological study of 22 patients from 
the International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP) nephroblastoma file.

Vujanić GM(1), Sandstedt B, Harms D, Boccon-Gibod L, Delemarre JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff, 
UK.

We present 22 (0.9%) cases of rhabdoid tumour of the kidney diagnosed amongst 
2392 renal tumours in children. The patients ages ranged from 3 weeks to 94 
months (median 7 months) and the female:male ration was 1.2:1. Clinically, they 
presented with an abdominal mass but four (18%) children also had hypercalcaemia 
and one (4.5%) developed a brain tumour (primitive neuroectodermal tumour). None 
of the children presented with stage I disease, five (23%) had stage II, ten 
(46%) stage III, and five (23%) stage IV disease. Two (9%) patients had 
bilateral tumours. Histologically, the vast majority (20/22) of the tumours 
exhibited a classical pattern but other histological patterns were also noted. 
Immunohistochemical studies performed in 12 cases showed vimentin positivity in 
all cases, CAM 5.2 in eight, epithelial membrane antigen in six, neuron specific 
enolase in four, S-100 protein in eight, and desmin in one case. In only 12 of 
the 22 tumours was there agreement between the reporting pathologist and the 
panel on a diagnosis of rhabdoid tumour of the kidney. Eight tumours originally 
diagnosed as rhabdoid tumour of the kidney were found to be other renal tumours 
and in another ten cases the initial diagnosis was changed by the panel to 
rhabdoid tumour. Metastases developed in 18 (82%) of the children--in eight they 
were present at the time of diagnosis and in 10 they developed from 2 weeks to 9 
months after initial diagnosis. Metastases were found in the lung, abdomen, 
lymph nodes, liver, bone and brain. Of the 19 children with adequate follow-up, 
only two (10.5%) with stage II disease are alive, while 17 (89.5%) died 2 weeks 
to 20 months after the diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2559.1996.d01-436.x
PMID: 8732342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]