---
reference_id: "PMID:20301769"
title: DBA Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sieff C
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DBA Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sieff C

## Content

1. DBA Syndrome.

Sieff C(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2009 Jun 25 [updated 2025 Jul 31].

Author information:
(1)Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: DBA syndrome is characterized by a profound 
normochromic and usually macrocytic anemia with normal leukocytes and platelets, 
congenital malformations in up to 50% of affected individuals, and growth 
deficiency in 30% of affected individuals. The hematologic complications occur 
in 90% of affected individuals during the first year of life. The phenotypic 
spectrum ranges from a mild form (e.g., mild or no anemia with only subtle 
erythroid abnormalities and/or physical malformations without anemia) to a 
severe form of fetal anemia resulting in nonimmune hydrops fetalis. DBA syndrome 
is associated with an increased risk for acute myelogenous leukemia, 
myelodysplastic syndrome, and solid tumors including osteogenic sarcoma.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of DBA syndrome can be established in 
a proband with characteristic laboratory, histopathology, and clinical features. 
The molecular diagnosis of DBA syndrome can be established in a proband by 
identification of a heterozygous pathogenic variant in a gene associated with 
autosomal dominant DBA syndrome or biallelic pathogenic variants in HEATR 
associated with autosomal recessive DBA syndrome. Rarely, the molecular 
diagnosis can be established in a male proband by identification of a hemizygous 
pathogenic variant in GATA1 or TSR2 associated with X-linked DBA syndrome.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Corticosteroid treatment, recommended in children 
at age 12 months or older, improves the red blood cell count in approximately 
60%-80% of affected individuals. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, the 
only curative therapy for the hematologic manifestations of DBA syndrome, is 
often recommended for those who are transfusion dependent or develop other 
cytopenias. Treatment of manifestations: Chronic transfusion with packed red 
blood cells is necessary during the first year of life to avoid steroid-induced 
growth deficiency. At age 12 months start an initial trial of steroids. Toxicity 
in individuals unresponsive to corticosteroids and individuals who relapse 
include transfusion-related iron overload, which is the most common complication 
in transfusion-dependent individuals. Iron chelation therapy with deferasirox 
orally or desferrioxamine subcutaneously is recommended after ten to 12 
transfusions. Deferiprone is only used in individuals with severe cardiac iron 
overload due to side effects. Cleft lip/palate and ocular, skeletal, 
genitourinary, cardiac, and endocrine complications are best managed in 
collaboration with appropriate subspecialists. Treatment of malignancies should 
be coordinated by an oncologist. Chemotherapy must be given cautiously as it may 
lead to prolonged cytopenia and subsequent toxicities. Surveillance: Complete 
blood counts several times a year, then one to two times per year once 
hemoglobin is stable; bone marrow aspirate/biopsy to evaluate morphology and 
cellularity only in the event of another cytopenia or a change in response to 
treatment. In steroid-dependent individuals, assess growth throughout childhood 
and monitor blood pressure. Endocrine evaluation for those who are steroid 
dependent and those at risk for transfusion iron overload. Ophthalmology 
evaluation for glaucoma and cataracts. Assessment of liver iron for those on 
chronic red blood cell transfusions. Cancer surveillance includes history, 
physical examination, and blood counts every four to six months. If red blood 
cell, white blood cell, or platelet counts fall rapidly, bone marrow aspirate 
with biopsy and cytogenetic studies (including karyotype and FISH analysis) to 
look for acquired abnormalities in chromosomes 5, 7, and 8 that are associated 
with myelodysplastic syndrome or leukemia. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Deferiprone for the treatment of iron overload (which can cause neutropenia); 
infection (especially in individuals on corticosteroids). Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older 
and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual to allow early diagnosis 
and appropriate monitoring for bone marrow failure, physical abnormalities, and 
related cancers. Pregnancy management: Management by an obstetrician with 
expertise in high-risk pregnancies and hematologists with experience in bone 
marrow failure syndromes. During pregnancy the maternal hemoglobin level must be 
monitored. Use of low-dose aspirin up to 37 weeks' gestation may help prevent 
vasculoplacental complications in women with a history of a problematic 
pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Most often, DBA syndrome is inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. HEATR3-related DBA syndrome is inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner. GATA1- and TSR2-related DBA syndrome are inherited in an 
X-linked manner. Autosomal dominant DBA syndrome: Approximately 40%-45% of 
individuals diagnosed with autosomal dominant DBA syndrome inherited a DBA 
syndrome-causing variant from a parent; approximately 55%-60% have a de novo 
pathogenic variant. Each child of an individual with autosomal dominant DBA 
syndrome has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Autosomal 
recessive DBA syndrome: If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a 
HEATR3 pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception 
a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, 
and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for 
at-risk relatives requires prior identification of the HEATR3 pathogenic 
variants in the family. X-linked DBA syndrome: If the mother of an affected male 
has a GATA1 or TSR2 pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting it in each 
pregnancy is 50%: males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; 
females who inherit the pathogenic variant will be heterozygotes and will 
usually not be affected. Affected males transmit the GATA1 or TSR2 pathogenic 
variant to all of their daughters and none of their sons. Identification of 
female heterozygotes is possible once a GATA1 or TSR2 pathogenic variant has 
been identified in an affected family member. Once the DBA syndrome-causing 
variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301769