---
reference_id: "PMID:39165363"
title: Immune profiling and functional analysis of NK and T cells in ataxia telangiectasia.
authors:
- Graafen L
- Heinze A
- Albinger N
- Salzmann-Manrique E
- Ganß F
- Hünecke S
- Cappel C
- Wölke S
- Donath H
- Trischler J
- Theilen TM
- Heller C
- Königs C
- Ehl S
- Bader P
- Klingebiel T
- Klusmann JH
- Zielen S
- Schubert R
- Ullrich E
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1377955
keywords:
- Humans
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/immunology
- "Killer Cells, Natural/immunology, metabolism"
- Male
- Female
- Child
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Retrospective Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Young Adult
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Immunophenotyping
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune profiling and functional analysis of NK and T cells in ataxia telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Graafen L, Heinze A, Albinger N, Salzmann-Manrique E, Ganß F, Hünecke S, Cappel C, Wölke S, Donath H, Trischler J, Theilen TM, Heller C, Königs C, Ehl S, Bader P, Klingebiel T, Klusmann JH, Zielen S, Schubert R, Ullrich E
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1377955](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1377955)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Aug 6;15:1377955. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1377955.
eCollection 2024.

Immune profiling and functional analysis of NK and T cells in ataxia
telangiectasia.

Graafen L(1)(2), Heinze A(1)(2), Albinger N(1)(2), Salzmann-Manrique E(1), Ganß
F(1)(2)(3), Hünecke S(1), Cappel C(1), Wölke S(1)(4), Donath H(1)(4), Trischler
J(1)(4), Theilen TM(5), Heller C(1), Königs C(1), Ehl S(6), Bader P(1),
Klingebiel T(1), Klusmann JH(1)(3), Zielen S(1)(4), Schubert R(1)(4), Ullrich
E(1)(2)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Experimental Immnology and Cell Therapy, Goethe
University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(3)Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pneumology, Allergology, Infectious
Diseases and Gastroenterology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, Goethe University Frankfurt,
Frankfurt, Germany.
(6)Institute for Immunodeficiency, Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, Medical
Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.
(7)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) Partner Site Frankfurt/Mainz, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.

Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare autosomal-recessive disorder characterized
by profound neurodegeneration, combined immunodeficiency, and an increased risk
for malignant diseases. Treatment options for AT are limited, and the long-term
survival prognosis for patients remains grim, primarily due to the emergence of
chronic respiratory pathologies, malignancies, and neurological complications.
Understanding the dysregulation of the immune system in AT is fundamental for
the development of novel treatment strategies. In this context, we performed a
retrospective longitudinal immunemonitoring of lymphocyte subset distribution in
a cohort of AT patients (n = 65). Furthermore, we performed FACS analyses of
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from a subgroup of 12 AT patients to examine
NK and T cells for the expression of activating and functional markers. We
observed reduced levels of peripheral blood CD3+CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, CD3+CD4+
T helper cells, and CD19+ B cells, whereas the amount of CD3--CD56+ NK cells and
CD3+CD56+ NKT-like cells was similar compared with age-matched controls.
Notably, there was no association between the age-dependent kinetic of T-, B-,
or NK-cell counts and the occurrence of malignancy in AT patients. Additionally,
our results indicate an altered NK- and T-cell response to cytokine stimulation
in AT with increased levels of TRAIL, FasL, and CD16 expression in NK cells, as
well as an elevated activation level of T cells in AT with notably higher
expression levels of IFN-γ, CD107a, TRAIL, and FasL. Together, these findings
imply function alterations in AT lymphocytes, specifically in T and NK cells,
shedding light on potential pathways for innovative therapies.

Copyright © 2024 Graafen, Heinze, Albinger, Salzmann-Manrique, Ganß, Hünecke,
Cappel, Wölke, Donath, Trischler, Theilen, Heller, Königs, Ehl, Bader,
Klingebiel, Klusmann, Zielen, Schubert and Ullrich.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1377955
PMCID: PMC11333214
PMID: 39165363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EU has no COIs directly related to this
manuscript. EU has a sponsored research project with Gilead, BMS, and CRIION.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.
