---
reference_id: "PMID:37848532"
title: Hallmark discoveries in the biology of Wilms tumour.
authors:
- Perotti D
- Williams RD
- Wegert J
- Brzezinski J
- Maschietto M
- Ciceri S
- Gisselsson D
- Gadd S
- Walz AL
- Furtwaengler R
- Drost J
- Al-Saadi R
- Evageliou N
- Gooskens SL
- Hong AL
- Murphy AJ
- Ortiz MV
- "O'Sullivan MJ"
- Mullen EA
- van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM
- Fernandez CV
- Graf N
- Grundy PE
- Geller JI
- Dome JS
- Perlman EJ
- Gessler M
- Huff V
- Pritchard-Jones K
journal: Nat Rev Urol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41585-023-00824-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Kidney Neoplasms/therapy
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- Wilms Tumor/therapy
- Biomarkers
- Biology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hallmark discoveries in the biology of Wilms tumour.
**Authors:** Perotti D, Williams RD, Wegert J, Brzezinski J, Maschietto M, Ciceri S, Gisselsson D, Gadd S, Walz AL, Furtwaengler R, Drost J, Al-Saadi R, Evageliou N, Gooskens SL, Hong AL, Murphy AJ, Ortiz MV, O'Sullivan MJ, Mullen EA, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Fernandez CV, Graf N, Grundy PE, Geller JI, Dome JS, Perlman EJ, Gessler M, Huff V, Pritchard-Jones K
**Journal:** Nat Rev Urol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41585-023-00824-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41585-023-00824-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Urol. 2024 Mar;21(3):158-180. doi: 10.1038/s41585-023-00824-0. Epub
2023  Oct 17.

Hallmark discoveries in the biology of Wilms tumour.

Perotti D(#)(1), Williams RD(#)(2)(3), Wegert J(#)(4), Brzezinski J(#)(5)(6), 
Maschietto M(#)(7), Ciceri S(#)(8), Gisselsson D(#)(9)(10), Gadd S(#)(11), Walz 
AL(#)(12), Furtwaengler R(#)(13), Drost J(#)(14)(15), Al-Saadi R(#)(2)(16), 
Evageliou N(#)(17), Gooskens SL(#)(14), Hong AL(#)(18), Murphy AJ(#)(19), Ortiz 
MV(#)(20), O'Sullivan MJ(#)(21)(22), Mullen EA(#)(23), van den Heuvel-Eibrink 
MM(#)(14), Fernandez CV(#)(24), Graf N(#)(25), Grundy PE(#)(26), Geller 
JI(#)(27), Dome JS(#)(28), Perlman EJ(#)(11), Gessler M(#)(4)(29), Huff 
V(#)(30), Pritchard-Jones K(#)(2).

Author information:
(1)Predictive Medicine: Molecular Bases of Genetic Risk, Department of 
Experimental Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, 
Italy. Daniela.perotti@istitutotumori.mi.it.
(2)Developmental Biology and Cancer Research and Teaching Department, UCL Great 
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Section of Genetics and Genomics, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(4)Theodor-Boveri-Institute/Biocenter, Developmental Biochemistry, Wuerzburg 
University, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(5)Division of Haematology/Oncology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Research Center, Boldrini Children's Hospital, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Predictive Medicine: Molecular Bases of Genetic Risk, Department of 
Experimental Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, 
Italy.
(9)Cancer Cell Evolution Unit, Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(10)Clinical Genetics, Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Office of Medical 
Services, Skåne, Sweden.
(11)Department of Pathology, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(12)Division of Hematology,Oncology, Neuro-Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplant, 
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(13)Division of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Inselspital Bern University, Bern, Switzerland.
(14)Princess Máxima Center for Paediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(15)Oncode Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(16)Department of Histopathology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, 
London, UK.
(17)Divisions of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
CHOP Specialty Care Center, Vorhees, NJ, USA.
(18)Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Emory University and Children's 
Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(19)Department of Surgery, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.
(20)Department of Paediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(21)Histology Laboratory, Children's Health Ireland at Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland.
(22)Trinity Translational Medicine Institute, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.
(23)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(24)Division of Paediatric Hematology Oncology, IWK Health Centre and Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(25)Department of Paediatric Oncology and Hematology, Saarland University 
Hospital, Homburg, Germany.
(26)Department of Paediatrics Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(27)Division of Oncology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(28)Division of Oncology, Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's 
National Hospital and the Department of Paediatrics, George Washington 
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.
(29)Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(30)Department of Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

The modern study of Wilms tumour was prompted nearly 50 years ago, when Alfred 
Knudson proposed the 'two-hit' model of tumour development. Since then, the 
efforts of researchers worldwide have substantially expanded our knowledge of 
Wilms tumour biology, including major advances in genetics - from cloning the 
first Wilms tumour gene to high-throughput studies that have revealed the 
genetic landscape of this tumour. These discoveries improve understanding of the 
embryonal origin of Wilms tumour, familial occurrences and associated syndromic 
conditions. Many efforts have been made to find and clinically apply prognostic 
biomarkers to Wilms tumour, for which outcomes are generally favourable, but 
treatment of some affected individuals remains challenging. Challenges are also 
posed by the intratumoural heterogeneity of biomarkers. Furthermore, preclinical 
models of Wilms tumour, from cell lines to organoid cultures, have evolved. 
Despite these many achievements, much still remains to be discovered: further 
molecular understanding of relapse in Wilms tumour and of the multiple origins 
of bilateral Wilms tumour are two examples of areas under active investigation. 
International collaboration, especially when large tumour series are required to 
obtain robust data, will help to answer some of the remaining unresolved 
questions.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41585-023-00824-0
PMID: 37848532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]