---
reference_id: "PMID:20921390"
title: "In an early branching metazoan, bacterial colonization of the embryo is controlled by maternal antimicrobial peptides."
authors:
- Fraune S
- Augustin R
- Anton-Erxleben F
- Wittlieb J
- Gelhaus C
- Klimovich VB
- Samoilovich MP
- Bosch TC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1008573107
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In an early branching metazoan, bacterial colonization of the embryo is controlled by maternal antimicrobial peptides.
**Authors:** Fraune S, Augustin R, Anton-Erxleben F, Wittlieb J, Gelhaus C, Klimovich VB, Samoilovich MP, Bosch TC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1008573107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1008573107)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 19;107(42):18067-72. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1008573107. Epub 2010 Oct 4.

In an early branching metazoan, bacterial colonization of the embryo is 
controlled by maternal antimicrobial peptides.

Fraune S(1), Augustin R, Anton-Erxleben F, Wittlieb J, Gelhaus C, Klimovich VB, 
Samoilovich MP, Bosch TC.

Author information:
(1)Zoological Institute, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, 24098 Kiel, 
Germany.

Early embryos of many organisms develop outside the mother and are immediately 
confronted with myriads of potential colonizers. How these naive developmental 
stages control and shape the bacterial colonization is largely unknown. Here we 
show that early embryonic stages of the basal metazoan Hydra are able to control 
bacterial colonization by using maternal antimicrobial peptides. Antimicrobial 
peptides of the periculin family selecting for a specific bacterial colonization 
during embryogenesis are produced in the oocyte and in early embryos. If 
overexpressed in hydra ectodermal epithelial cells, periculin1a drastically 
reduces the bacterial load, indicating potent antimicrobial activity. 
Unexpectedly, transgenic polyps also revealed that periculin, in addition to 
bactericidal activity, changes the structure of the bacterial community. These 
findings delineate a role for antimicrobial peptides both in selecting 
particular bacterial partners during development and as important components of 
a "be prepared" strategy providing transgenerational protection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1008573107
PMCID: PMC2964230
PMID: 20921390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.