---
reference_id: "PMID:27638328"
title: "A novel missense mutation, p.(R102W) in WNT7A causes Al-Awadi Raas-Rothschild syndrome in a fetus."
authors:
- Mutlu MB
- Cetinkaya A
- Koc N
- Ceylaner G
- Erguner B
- Aydın H
- Karaman S
- Demirci O
- Goksu K
- Karaman A
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2016.09.009
keywords:
- "Amenorrhea/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Ectromelia/genetics, physiopathology"
- Extremities/physiopathology
- Female
- Fetus/physiopathology
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Pelvic Bones/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- "Polydactyly/genetics, physiopathology"
- Pregnancy
- "Synostosis/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Uterus/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel missense mutation, p.(R102W) in WNT7A causes Al-Awadi Raas-Rothschild syndrome in a fetus.
**Authors:** Mutlu MB, Cetinkaya A, Koc N, Ceylaner G, Erguner B, Aydın H, Karaman S, Demirci O, Goksu K, Karaman A
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2016.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2016.09.009)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2016 Nov;59(11):604-606. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2016.09.009.
Epub  2016 Sep 13.

A novel missense mutation, p.(R102W) in WNT7A causes Al-Awadi Raas-Rothschild 
syndrome in a fetus.

Mutlu MB(1), Cetinkaya A(1), Koc N(2), Ceylaner G(3), Erguner B(4), Aydın H(5), 
Karaman S(6), Demirci O(7), Goksu K(8), Karaman A(9).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Zeynep Kamil Women's and Children's Diseases Training 
and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Pathology Unit, Zeynep Kamil Women's and Children's Diseases Training and 
Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Intergen Genetic Center, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Advanced Genomics and Bioinformatics Research Center (IGBAM), BILGEM, 
TUBITAK, Kocaeli, Turkey.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Namık Kemal University, 
Tekirdag, Turkey.
(6)Department of Family Medicine, Dr. Lutfi Kırdar Kartal Training and Research 
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Zeynep Kamil Women's and Children's 
Diseases Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(8)Department of Radiology, Fatih Sultan Mehmet Training and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Zeynep Kamil Women and Children 
Training and Research Hospital, Turkey. Electronic address: 
alikaramandr@hotmail.com.

Al-Awadi-Raas-Rothschild syndrome (AARRS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
which consists of severe malformations of the upper and lower limbs, abnormal 
genitalia and underdeveloped pelvis. Here, we present a fetus with severe limbs 
defects, including bilateral humeroradial synostosis, bilateral oligodactyly in 
hands, underdeveloped pelvis, short femora and tibiae, absence of fibulae, 
severely small feet, and absence of uterus. An autosomal recessively inherited 
novel mutation in WNT7A found in the fetus, c.304C > T, affects an 
evolutionarily well-conserved amino acid, causing the p.(R102W) missense change 
at protein level. The findings presented in this fetus are compatible with 
diagnosis of AARRS, expanding the mutational spectrum of limb malformations 
arising from defects in WNT7A.

Crown Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2016.09.009
PMID: 27638328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]