---
reference_id: "PMID:27193038"
title: The Severity of Takayasu Arteritis Is Associated with the HLA-B52 Allele in Japanese Patients.
authors:
- Origuchi T
- Fukui S
- Umeda M
- Nishino A
- Nakashima Y
- Koga T
- Kawashiri SY
- Iwamoto N
- Ichinose K
- Tamai M
- Nakamura H
- Kawakami A
journal: Tohoku J Exp Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1620/tjem.239.67
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- HLA-B52 Antigen/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Takayasu Arteritis/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Severity of Takayasu Arteritis Is Associated with the HLA-B52 Allele in Japanese Patients.
**Authors:** Origuchi T, Fukui S, Umeda M, Nishino A, Nakashima Y, Koga T, Kawashiri SY, Iwamoto N, Ichinose K, Tamai M, Nakamura H, Kawakami A
**Journal:** Tohoku J Exp Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1620/tjem.239.67](https://doi.org/10.1620/tjem.239.67)

## Content

1. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2016 May;239(1):67-72. doi: 10.1620/tjem.239.67.

The Severity of Takayasu Arteritis Is Associated with the HLA-B52 Allele in
Japanese Patients.

Origuchi T(1), Fukui S, Umeda M, Nishino A, Nakashima Y, Koga T, Kawashiri SY,
Iwamoto N, Ichinose K, Tamai M, Nakamura H, Kawakami A.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Immunology and Rheumatology, Unit of Advanced Preventive
Medical Sciences, Division of Advanced Preventive Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences.

Takayasu arteritis (TA) is a type of vasculitis that affects the large elastic
arteries, specifically the aorta and its main branches. It has been reported
that TA occurred most frequently in Nagasaki Prefecture, the western area in
Japan. We retrospectively collected the information of 34 patients with TA,
diagnosed using the American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the
classification of TA, from the medical records of Nagasaki University Hospital
from 2003 to 2015, and we investigated the clinical characteristics of these TA
patients. Among the 35 patients, 25 patients were examined for the existence of
the HLA-B52 allele that has been reported to influence TA susceptibility.
Seventeen patients (68.0%) of the 25 patients were HLA-B52-allele-positive,
which was defined as the state of having at least one HLA-B52 allele. There was
a significant difference in the rate of smokers: HLA-B52-allele-positive: six
patients (35.3%) vs. HLA-B52-allele-negative: 0 (0.0%). The C-reactive protein
level in the HLA-B52-positive patients (9.0 ± 6.4 mg/dL) was significantly
higher than that in the HLA-B52-negative patients (3.2 ± 3.9 mg/dL). All
HLA-B52-allele-positive patients were found to be active according to Kerr's
criteria. The HLA-B52-positive patients' initial prednisolone dosage (37.7 ± 8.6
mg/day) was significantly higher than that of the HLA-B52-allele-negative
patients (23.1 ± 13.1 mg/day). Thus, the HLA-B52 allele is associated with the
disease activity and the steroid requirements of TA patients. Furthermore, our
present findings have revealed for the first time that the HLA-B52 allele and
smoking might be associated with the onset of TA.

DOI: 10.1620/tjem.239.67
PMID: 27193038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
