---
reference_id: "PMID:34680270"
title: "Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome and the Role of Imaging: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Associated Cancers."
authors:
- Klimkowski S
- Ibrahim M
- Ibarra Rovira JJ
- Elshikh M
- Javadi S
- Klekers AR
- Abusaif AA
- Moawad AW
- Ali K
- Elsayes KM
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cancers13205121
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome and the Role of Imaging: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Associated Cancers.
**Authors:** Klimkowski S, Ibrahim M, Ibarra Rovira JJ, Elshikh M, Javadi S, Klekers AR, Abusaif AA, Moawad AW, Ali K, Elsayes KM
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers13205121](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13205121)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Oct 13;13(20):5121. doi: 10.3390/cancers13205121.

Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome and the Role of Imaging: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and 
Associated Cancers.

Klimkowski S(1), Ibrahim M(2), Ibarra Rovira JJ(1), Elshikh M(3), Javadi S(1), 
Klekers AR(1), Abusaif AA(1), Moawad AW(4), Ali K(2), Elsayes KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Abdominal Imaging, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77555, USA.
(2)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University of 
Kansas-Wichita, Wichita, KS 67214, USA.
(3)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, The University of 
Texas Medica Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA.
(4)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Mercy Catholic Health 
System, Darby, PA 19023, USA.

The Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant neoplastic syndrome 
defined by hamartomatous polyps through the gastrointestinal tract, development 
of characteristic mucocutaneous pigmentations, and an elevated lifetime cancer 
risk. The majority of cases are due to a mutation in the STK11 gene located at 
19p13.3. The estimated incidence of PJS ranges from 1:50,000 to 1:200,000. PJS 
carries an elevated risk of malignancies including gastrointestinal, breast, 
lung, and genitourinary (GU) neoplasms. Patients with PJS are at a 15- to 
18-fold increased malignancy risk relative to the general population. 
Radiologists have an integral role in the diagnosis of these patients. Various 
imaging modalities are used to screen for malignancies and complications 
associated with PJS. Awareness of various PJS imaging patterns, associated 
malignancies, and their complications is crucial for accurate imaging 
interpretation and patient management. In this manuscript, we provide a 
comprehensive overview of PJS, associated malignancies, and surveillance 
protocols.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13205121
PMCID: PMC8533703
PMID: 34680270

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.