---
reference_id: "PMID:20194686"
title: "Abnormal activation of the primary somatosensory cortex in spasmodic dysphonia: an fMRI study."
authors:
- Simonyan K
- Ludlow CL
journal: Cereb Cortex
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhq023
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Dysphonia/pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nerve Net/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Somatosensory Cortex/pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal activation of the primary somatosensory cortex in spasmodic dysphonia: an fMRI study.
**Authors:** Simonyan K, Ludlow CL
**Journal:** Cereb Cortex (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cercor/bhq023](https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhq023)

## Content

1. Cereb Cortex. 2010 Nov;20(11):2749-59. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhq023. Epub 2010
Mar  1.

Abnormal activation of the primary somatosensory cortex in spasmodic dysphonia: 
an fMRI study.

Simonyan K(1), Ludlow CL.

Author information:
(1)Laryngeal and Speech Section, Medical Neurology Branch, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bathesda, MD 
20892, USA. kristina.simonyan@mssm.edu

Spasmodic dysphonia (SD) is a task-specific focal dystonia of unknown 
pathophysiology, characterized by involuntary spasms in the laryngeal muscles 
during speaking. Our aim was to identify symptom-specific functional brain 
activation abnormalities in adductor spasmodic dysphonia (ADSD) and abductor 
spasmodic dysphonia (ABSD). Both SD groups showed increased activation extent in 
the primary sensorimotor cortex, insula, and superior temporal gyrus during 
symptomatic and asymptomatic tasks and decreased activation extent in the basal 
ganglia, thalamus, and cerebellum during asymptomatic tasks. Increased 
activation intensity in SD patients was found only in the primary somatosensory 
cortex during symptomatic voice production, which showed a tendency for 
correlation with ADSD symptoms. Both SD groups had lower correlation of 
activation intensities between the primary motor and sensory cortices and 
additional correlations between the basal ganglia, thalamus, and cerebellum 
during symptomatic and asymptomatic tasks. Compared with ADSD patients, ABSD 
patients had larger activation extent in the primary sensorimotor cortex and 
ventral thalamus during symptomatic task and in the inferior temporal cortex and 
cerebellum during symptomatic and asymptomatic voice production. The primary 
somatosensory cortex shows consistent abnormalities in activation extent, 
intensity, correlation with other brain regions, and symptom severity in SD 
patients and, therefore, may be involved in the pathophysiology of SD.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhq023
PMCID: PMC2951850
PMID: 20194686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]