---
reference_id: "PMID:38021990"
title: "Enhancing Omphalocele Care: Navigating Complications and Innovative Treatment Approaches."
authors:
- Malhotra R
- Malhotra B
- Ramteke H
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.47638
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enhancing Omphalocele Care: Navigating Complications and Innovative Treatment Approaches.
**Authors:** Malhotra R, Malhotra B, Ramteke H
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.47638](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.47638)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Oct 25;15(10):e47638. doi: 10.7759/cureus.47638. eCollection 2023
 Oct.

Enhancing Omphalocele Care: Navigating Complications and Innovative Treatment 
Approaches.

Malhotra R(1), Malhotra B(2), Ramteke H(1).

Author information:
(1)Surgery, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institue of Higher 
Education and Research, Wardha, IND.
(2)Paediatrics, Deep Chand Bandhu Hospital, New Delhi, IND.

Congenital abdominal wall abnormalities in infants present an interesting and 
difficult management problem for surgeons. Congenital malformations of the 
ventral abdominal wall can be diagnosed by their distinctive anatomical 
presentations. Among them, omphalocele, gastroschisis and umbilical cord hernias 
are the most frequently observed clinically detected abdominal wall anomalies. 
Omphalocele refers to the herniation of abdominal contents through a defect in 
the abdominal wall at the umbilicus with or without the presence of a sac. This 
article gives an insight into the embryology, risk factors, treatment, 
investigations and complications of omphalocele, a common congenital abdominal 
wall defect. There is minimal proof that environmental factors contribute to the 
development of omphalocele. However, there is a considerable amount of evidence 
which points to the importance of genetic or familial risk factors. Newborns and 
infants with prenatal diagnoses are the most frequently presenting patients with 
omphalocele to paediatric surgeons. This article describes the problems and the 
steps of management for handling each circumstance, as well as any further 
complications. Omphalocele and gastroschisis are frequently described together 
in many research papers. However, it's crucial to consider that they are two 
different conditions which vary in anatomy, pathology and associated 
conditions which account for the difference in their treatments and noticeably 
varied outcomes. Additionally, there is evidence that each has a different set 
of factors associated with risk for occurrence. There are no known etiologic 
causes that cause these abnormalities to develop. The size of the baby, the 
extent of the lesion, and any other disorders all affect how individuals with 
these congenital abdominal wall anomalies are treated.

Copyright © 2023, Malhotra et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.47638
PMCID: PMC10667945
PMID: 38021990

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.