---
reference_id: PMID:21595497
title: Clinical utility of maraviroc.
authors:
- Parra J
- Portilla J
- Pulido F
- Sánchez-de la Rosa R
- Alonso-Villaverde C
- Berenguer J
- Blanco JL
- Domingo P
- Dronda F
- Galera C
- Gutiérrez F
- Kindelán JM
- Knobel H
- Leal M
- López-Aldeguer J
- Mariño A
- Miralles C
- Moltó J
- Ortega E
- Oteo JA
journal: Clin Drug Investig
year: '2011'
doi: 10.2165/11590700-000000000-00000
keywords:
- CCR5 Receptor Antagonists
- "Cyclohexanes/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- "HIV Fusion Inhibitors/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- "HIV Infections/drug therapy, immunology, virology"
- "HIV-1/drug effects, genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- Maraviroc
- "Receptors, CCR5/immunology"
- "Triazoles/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical utility of maraviroc.
**Authors:** Parra J, Portilla J, Pulido F, Sánchez-de la Rosa R, Alonso-Villaverde C, Berenguer J, Blanco JL, Domingo P, Dronda F, Galera C, Gutiérrez F, Kindelán JM, Knobel H, Leal M, López-Aldeguer J, Mariño A, Miralles C, Moltó J, Ortega E, Oteo JA
**Journal:** Clin Drug Investig (2011)
**DOI:** [10.2165/11590700-000000000-00000](https://doi.org/10.2165/11590700-000000000-00000)

## Content

1. Clin Drug Investig. 2011;31(8):527-542. doi: 10.2165/11590700-000000000-00000.

Clinical utility of maraviroc.

Parra J(1), Portilla J(2), Pulido F(3), Sánchez-de la Rosa R(4), 
Alonso-Villaverde C(5), Berenguer J(6), Blanco JL(7), Domingo P(8), Dronda F(9), 
Galera C(10), Gutiérrez F(11), Kindelán JM(12), Knobel H(13), Leal M(14), 
López-Aldeguer J(15), Mariño A(16), Miralles C(17), Moltó J(18), Ortega E(19), 
Oteo JA(20).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain.
(2)Hospital General de Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(3)Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain. federicopulido@med.ucm.es.
(4)Unidad Médica, Pfizer España, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Hospital Son Llàtzer de Palma de Mallorca (IUNICS-INM), Palma de Mallorca, 
Spain.
(6)Hospital Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Hospital CLINIC, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain.
(11)Hospital General Universitario de Elche, Alicante, Spain.
(12)Hospital Reina Sofía, Cordoba, Spain.
(13)Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.
(14)Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain.
(15)Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(16)Hospital Arquitecto Mancide, Ferrol, Spain.
(17)Complejo Universitario de Vigo, Pontevedra, Spain.
(18)Hospital Germans Trials i Pujol, Badalona, Spain.
(19)Hospital General del Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(20)Hospital San Pedro-CIBIR, La Rioja, Spain.

Maraviroc belongs to the family of chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 5 (CCR5) 
antagonists that prevent the entry of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) into 
host CD4+ T cells by blocking the CCR5 co-receptor R5. Maraviroc is currently 
the only CC5R co-receptor inhibitor that has been approved for clinical use in 
HIV-1-infected patients carrying the CCR5 tropism who are antiretroviral-naïve 
or have experienced therapeutic failure following traditional antiretroviral 
therapies. This article is a review of the main characteristics of maraviroc and 
the latest data regarding its clinical application. Maraviroc is effective and 
well tolerated in pre-treated and antiretroviral-naïve patients with HIV-1 
infections carrying the CCR5 tropism. Data from the phase III programme of 
maraviroc, which includes the MOTIVATE 1 and 2 studies and the MERIT study, 
indicate that maraviroc significantly (p < 0.001) increases CD4+ cell counts 
compared with placebo in pre-treated patients and to a similar extent as 
efavirenz in antiretroviral-naïve patients. Even in cases where viral load is 
not completely suppressed, maraviroc improves immunological response compared 
with placebo. In addition, promising research suggests that maraviroc has 
favourable pharmacokinetic and safety profiles in patients with high 
cardiovascular risk or those co-infected with tuberculosis or hepatitis and 
could be considered an option for treatment of HIV-infected patients with these 
co-morbidities. Resistance to maraviroc is low and mainly related to the 
presence of chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 4 (CXCR4) tropism HIV-1-infections 
or to mutations in the V3 region of glycoprotein (gp) 120; however, the exact 
mechanisms by which resistance is acquired and their genotypic and phenotypic 
pattern have not yet been established. It is recommended that a tropism test 
should be performed when considering maraviroc as an alternate drug in 
HIV-1-infected patients. Current tropism assays have increased sensitivity to 
reliably detect CXCR4 HIV with rapid turn-around and at a low cost. Improved 
detection together with positive data on the drug's efficacy and safety profiles 
should help physicians to identify more accurately the appropriate candidates 
for commencement of treatment with maraviroc. In summary, maraviroc improves 
immunological response and has shown favourable pharmacokinetic and safety 
profiles in patients with high cardiovascular risk or in those co-infected with 
tuberculosis or hepatitis. Long-term studies are needed to confirm whether 
therapeutic expectations resulting from clinical trials with maraviroc translate 
into a real benefit for HIV-1-infected patients for whom traditional 
antiretroviral therapies have failed or are not suitable.

DOI: 10.2165/11590700-000000000-00000
PMID: 21595497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]