---
reference_id: "PMID:37419105"
title: Generating high-fidelity cochlear organoids from human pluripotent stem cells.
authors:
- Moore ST
- Nakamura T
- Nie J
- Solivais AJ
- Aristizábal-Ramírez I
- Ueda Y
- Manikandan M
- Reddy VS
- Romano DR
- Hoffman JR
- Perrin BJ
- Nelson RF
- Frolenkov GI
- Chuva de Sousa Lopes SM
- Hashino E
journal: Cell Stem Cell
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2023.06.006
keywords:
- Humans
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- Cochlea
- "Hair Cells, Auditory, Inner"
- Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Organoids
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generating high-fidelity cochlear organoids from human pluripotent stem cells.
**Authors:** Moore ST, Nakamura T, Nie J, Solivais AJ, Aristizábal-Ramírez I, Ueda Y, Manikandan M, Reddy VS, Romano DR, Hoffman JR, Perrin BJ, Nelson RF, Frolenkov GI, Chuva de Sousa Lopes SM, Hashino E
**Journal:** Cell Stem Cell (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stem.2023.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2023.06.006)

## Content

1. Cell Stem Cell. 2023 Jul 6;30(7):950-961.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2023.06.006.

Generating high-fidelity cochlear organoids from human pluripotent stem cells.

Moore ST(1), Nakamura T(2), Nie J(1), Solivais AJ(1), Aristizábal-Ramírez I(3), 
Ueda Y(1), Manikandan M(1), Reddy VS(4), Romano DR(1), Hoffman JR(1), Perrin 
BJ(5), Nelson RF(1), Frolenkov GI(3), Chuva de Sousa Lopes SM(6), Hashino E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA; Department of Otolaryngology-Head & 
Neck Surgery, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA; Stark Neurosciences Research 
Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, Purdue School of Science, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA; Stark Neurosciences Research 
Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA; 
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. Electronic address: ehashino@iu.edu.

Mechanosensitive hair cells in the cochlea are responsible for hearing but are 
vulnerable to damage by genetic mutations and environmental insults. The paucity 
of human cochlear tissues makes it difficult to study cochlear hair cells. 
Organoids offer a compelling platform to study scarce tissues in vitro; however, 
derivation of cochlear cell types has proven non-trivial. Here, using 3D 
cultures of human pluripotent stem cells, we sought to replicate key 
differentiation cues of cochlear specification. We found that timed modulations 
of Sonic Hedgehog and WNT signaling promote ventral gene expression in otic 
progenitors. Ventralized otic progenitors subsequently give rise to elaborately 
patterned epithelia containing hair cells with morphology, marker expression, 
and functional properties consistent with both outer and inner hair cells in the 
cochlea. These results suggest that early morphogenic cues are sufficient to 
drive cochlear induction and establish an unprecedented system to model the 
human auditory organ.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2023.06.006
PMCID: PMC10695300
PMID: 37419105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests S.T.M. and E.H. are the 
inventors on a PCT patent application titled “Methods of generating human 
cochlear hair cells.” The other authors declare no competing interests.