---
reference_id: "PMID:35887648"
title: Surgical Strategy to Decrease the Revision Rate of Fassier-Duval Nailing in the Lower Limbs of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
authors:
- Hung YC
- Cheng KY
- Lin HY
- Lin SP
- Yang CY
- Liu SC
journal: J Pers Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jpm12071151
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical Strategy to Decrease the Revision Rate of Fassier-Duval Nailing in the Lower Limbs of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
**Authors:** Hung YC, Cheng KY, Lin HY, Lin SP, Yang CY, Liu SC
**Journal:** J Pers Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jpm12071151](https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm12071151)

## Content

1. J Pers Med. 2022 Jul 15;12(7):1151. doi: 10.3390/jpm12071151.

Surgical Strategy to Decrease the Revision Rate of Fassier-Duval Nailing in the 
Lower Limbs of Osteogenesis Imperfecta.

Hung YC(1), Cheng KY(1), Lin HY(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Lin SP(2)(3)(4)(7), Yang CY(1), 
Liu SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei 10449, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei 10449, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Rare Disease Center, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei 10449, 
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei City 25245, 
Taiwan.
(5)MacKay Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management, Taipei 11260, 
Taiwan.
(6)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China 
Medical University, Taichung 406040, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Infant and Child Care, National Taipei University of Nursing 
and Health Sciences, Taipei 10650, Taiwan.

(1) Background: The Fassier−Duval (FD) nail was developed for the treatment of 
osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). The aim of this study was to review the results of 
OI patients treated with the FD nail at our institution and discuss a surgical 
strategy to decrease the FD nail revision rate; (2) Methods: We retrospectively 
reviewed OI patients treated at our institution between 2015 and 2020. OI 
patients treated with FD nail insertion in the long bones of the lower 
extremities were included, and those with a follow-up duration <1 year or 
incomplete radiographs were excluded. Data on the type of OI, age, sex, use of 
bisphosphonate treatment, and nail failure were recorded; (3) Results: The final 
cohort consisted of seven patients (three females and four males) with ten 
femurs and ten tibiae involved. Six of the patients had type III OI, and one had 
type IV OI. An exchange of implant was required in 11 limbs. The average 
interval between previous FD nail insertion and revision surgery was 2.4 years; 
(4) Discussion: The main reasons for revision surgery were migration of the 
male/female component, refracture/nail bending, and delayed union. In the femur, 
migration of the female component or nail bending were common reasons for 
failure, while migration of the male component and delayed union were common in 
the tibia; (5) Conclusions: Surgery for OI patients is challenging, and 
physicians should aim to minimize complications and the need for revision. 
Sufficient depth of purchase, center−center nail position, and adequate 
osteotomy to correct bowing are the key factors when using the FD nail.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm12071151
PMCID: PMC9323302
PMID: 35887648

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.