---
reference_id: "PMID:36937435"
title: Survival analyses of different treatment modalities and clinical stage for hypopharyngeal carcinoma.
authors:
- Lin TY
- Lee TL
- Hsu YB
- Tai SK
- Wang LW
- Yang MH
- Chu PY
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1109417
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Survival analyses of different treatment modalities and clinical stage for hypopharyngeal carcinoma.
**Authors:** Lin TY, Lee TL, Hsu YB, Tai SK, Wang LW, Yang MH, Chu PY
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2023.1109417](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1109417)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2023 Mar 3;13:1109417. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1109417.
eCollection  2023.

Survival analyses of different treatment modalities and clinical stage for 
hypopharyngeal carcinoma.

Lin TY(1), Lee TL(2)(3), Hsu YB(2)(3), Tai SK(2)(3), Wang LW(3)(4), Yang 
MH(3)(5)(6), Chu PY(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Taichung Veterans General 
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans 
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao 
Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the effects of different treatment modalities and 
clinical stage for hypopharyngeal carcinoma (HPC) patients.
METHODS: Between February 2004 and December 2012, 167 HPC patients were 
reviewed. We calculated overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), 
local failure-free survival (LFFS), regional failure-free survival (RFFS), and 
distant metastasis failure-free survival (DMFFS) using the Kaplan-Meier method 
and compared various survival outcomes between definitive chemoradiotherapy 
(CRT) and surgery-based therapy (SBT).
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in baseline characteristics 
between SBT (n = 102) and definitive CRT (n = 65) groups. The 5-year rates of OS 
(59.7% vs. 24.0%, p < 0.0001) and PFS (49.9% vs. 22.6%, p = 0.0002) were 
significantly better in patients who received SBT than in those who received 
definitive CRT. The SBT group also obtained better LFFS (p < 0.0001), RFFS (p = 
0.0479), and DMFFS (p = 0.0110). We did similar analyses by different 
T-classification (T1-2, T3, and T4) and found that SBT had better OS (p < 0.0001 
and p = 0.0020), PFS (p < 0.0001 and p = 0.0513), LFFS (p = 0.0002 and p = 
0.0075), RFFS (p = 0.1949 and p = 0.0826), and DMFFS (p = 0.0248 and p = 0.0436) 
in the T4 and T1-2 subgroups but similar OS (p = 0.9598), PFS (p = 0.5052), RFFS 
(p = 0.9648), and DMFFS (p = 0.8239) in T3 patients. Analyses by different 
overall stages revealed no differences between definitive CRT and SBT for stage 
III patients but significantly better results for stage IV patients who received 
SBT.
CONCLUSIONS: SBT can obtain significant survival benefits when compared with 
definitive CRT for the whole cohort of patients. Definitive CRT has similar 
survival outcomes compared with SBT only for T3 tumors or overall stage III 
disease.

Copyright © 2023 Lin, Lee, Hsu, Tai, Wang, Yang and Chu.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1109417
PMCID: PMC10020644
PMID: 36937435

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.