---
reference_id: "PMID:31617914"
title: Genomic Analysis of Dysembryoplastic Neuroepithelial Tumor Spectrum Reveals a Diversity of Molecular Alterations Dysregulating the MAPK and PI3K/mTOR Pathways.
authors:
- Surrey LF
- Jain P
- Zhang B
- Straka J
- Zhao X
- Harding BN
- Resnick AC
- Storm PB
- Buccoliero AM
- Genitori L
- Li MM
- Waanders AJ
- Santi M
journal: J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/jnen/nlz101
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain/pathology
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genomics
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Male
- "Neoplasms, Neuroepithelial/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/metabolism
- Progression-Free Survival
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic Analysis of Dysembryoplastic Neuroepithelial Tumor Spectrum Reveals a Diversity of Molecular Alterations Dysregulating the MAPK and PI3K/mTOR Pathways.
**Authors:** Surrey LF, Jain P, Zhang B, Straka J, Zhao X, Harding BN, Resnick AC, Storm PB, Buccoliero AM, Genitori L, Li MM, Waanders AJ, Santi M
**Journal:** J Neuropathol Exp Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnen/nlz101](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnen/nlz101)

## Content

1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2019 Dec 1;78(12):1100-1111. doi:
10.1093/jnen/nlz101.

Genomic Analysis of Dysembryoplastic Neuroepithelial Tumor Spectrum Reveals a 
Diversity of Molecular Alterations Dysregulating the MAPK and PI3K/mTOR 
Pathways.

Surrey LF(1), Jain P(2), Zhang B(3), Straka J(4), Zhao X(5), Harding BN(5), 
Resnick AC(6), Storm PB(6), Buccoliero AM(7), Genitori L(1), Li MM(1), Waanders 
AJ(1), Santi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia.
(2)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania.
(3)Center for Data Driven Discovery in Biomedicine, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(5)Meyer Children's Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine Northwestern 
University.
(7)Division of Hematology, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplant, Ann & Robert H 
Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors (DNT) lacking key diagnostic criteria 
are challenging to diagnose and sometimes fall into the broader category of 
mixed neuronal-glial tumors (MNGT) or the recently described polymorphous 
low-grade neuroepithelial tumor of the young (PLNTY). We examined 41 patients 
with DNT, MNGT, or PLNTY for histologic features, genomic findings, and 
progression-free survival (PFS). Genomic analysis included sequence and copy 
number variants and RNA-sequencing. Classic DNT (n = 26) was compared with those 
with diffuse growth without cortical nodules (n = 15), 6 of which exhibited 
impressive CD34 staining classifying them as PLNTY. Genomic analysis was 
complete in 33, with sequence alterations recurrently identified in BRAF, FGFR1, 
NF1, and PDGFRA, as well as 7 fusion genes involving FGFR2, FGFR1, NTRK2, and 
BRAF. Genetic alterations did not distinguish between MNGTs, DNTs, or PLNTYs; 
however, FGFR1 alterations were confined to DNT, and PLNTYs contained BRAF V600E 
or FGFR2 fusion genes. Analysis of PFS showed no significant difference by 
histology or genetic alteration; however, numbers were small and follow-up time 
short. Further molecular characterization of a PLNTY-related gene fusion, 
FGFR2-CTNNA3, demonstrated oncogenic potential via MAPK/PI3K/mTOR pathway 
activation. Overall, DNT-MNGT spectrum tumors exhibit diverse genomic 
alterations, with more than half (19/33) leading to MAPK/PI3K pathway 
alterations.

© 2019 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/jnen/nlz101
PMID: 31617914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]