---
reference_id: "PMID:30183655"
title: Autoimmune Aspects of Kawasaki Disease.
authors:
- Sakurai Y
journal: J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.18176/jiaci.0300
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Aspects of Kawasaki Disease.
**Authors:** Sakurai Y
**Journal:** J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.18176/jiaci.0300](https://doi.org/10.18176/jiaci.0300)

## Content

1. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2019;29(4):251-261. doi:
10.18176/jiaci.0300.  Epub 2018 Sep 5.

Autoimmune Aspects of Kawasaki Disease.

Sakurai Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Matsubara Tokushukai Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

Kawasaki disease (KD) is a vasculitis that is part of systemic vasculitis 
syndrome. It affects medium-sized vessels and is characterized by 
hypercytokinemia. Although the etiology of KD remains unidentified, 
epidemiological features point to the role of infection and genetic 
predisposition. Recent studies on KD revealed endothelial damage and resultant 
thrombin generation, as well as B-cell activation during the acute phase. 
Several antiendothelial cell autoantibodies (AECAs) have been identified in KD 
patients. Analysis of this phenomenon together with the recently developed 
concept of immunothrombosis reveals a potential pathogenic mechanism for KD. 
First, polyclonal antibodies generated against invading microorganisms would 
exhibit cross-reactivity toward endothelial cell components and become dominant 
during affinity maturation. Binding of AECAs to endothelial cells would cause 
endothelial activation or damage, with proinflammatory cytokine release, thus 
fostering a hypercoagulable state resulting from leukocyte activation by 
proinflammatory cytokines. This, in turn, would lead to coronary artery lesions. 
KD vasculitis might be initiated upon binding of AECAs to the vasa vasorum and 
progress to panvasculitis and a vulnerable vessel wall, resulting in an 
aneurysm. The aneurysm would cause flow recirculation and alteration of wall 
shear stress. Consequently, platelets activated by shear stress, along with 
ultralarge von Willebrand factor (VWF) released by endothelial cells, would 
cause platelet-driven arterial thrombosis. Autoimmunity-associated thrombosis 
initiated by binding of AECAs to endothelial cells might play a major role in 
the pathogenesis of certain subtypes of KD. The notion of KD consisting of 
subtypes, the major one of which is AECA-associated vasculitis, will help 
improve our understanding of KD and further promote early and accurate 
diagnosis, which remains challenging.

DOI: 10.18176/jiaci.0300
PMID: 30183655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]