---
reference_id: "PMID:22889154"
title: "X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD): clinical presentation and guidelines for diagnosis, follow-up and management."
authors:
- Engelen M
- Kemp S
- de Visser M
- van Geel BM
- Wanders RJ
- Aubourg P
- Poll-The BT
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-51
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Adult
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Phenotype
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD): clinical presentation and guidelines for diagnosis, follow-up and management.
**Authors:** Engelen M, Kemp S, de Visser M, van Geel BM, Wanders RJ, Aubourg P, Poll-The BT
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-7-51](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-7-51)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Aug 13;7:51. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-51.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD): clinical presentation and guidelines for
diagnosis, follow-up and management.

Engelen M(1), Kemp S, de Visser M, van Geel BM, Wanders RJ, Aubourg P, Poll-The
BT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.engelen@amc.uva.nl

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is the most common peroxisomal disorder.
The disease is caused by mutations in the ABCD1 gene that encodes the
peroxisomal membrane protein ALDP which is involved in the transmembrane
transport of very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA; ≥ C22). A defect in ALDP
results in elevated levels of VLCFA in plasma and tissues. The clinical spectrum
in males with X-ALD ranges from isolated adrenocortical insufficiency and slowly
progressive myelopathy to devastating cerebral demyelination. The majority of
heterozygous females will develop symptoms by the age of 60 years. In individual
patients the disease course remains unpredictable. This review focuses on the
diagnosis and management of patients with X-ALD and provides a guideline for
clinicians that encounter patients with this highly complex disorder.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-51
PMCID: PMC3503704
PMID: 22889154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
