---
reference_id: "PMID:31513305"
title: Mutation update for the NR5A1 gene involved in DSD and infertility.
authors:
- Fabbri-Scallet H
- de Sousa LM
- Maciel-Guerra AT
- Guerra-Júnior G
- de Mello MP
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23916
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alleles
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Disorder of Sex Development, 46,XY/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Disorders of Sex Development/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infertility/diagnosis, genetics"
- Karyotype
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Steroidogenic Factor 1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation update for the NR5A1 gene involved in DSD and infertility.
**Authors:** Fabbri-Scallet H, de Sousa LM, Maciel-Guerra AT, Guerra-Júnior G, de Mello MP
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23916](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23916)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2020 Jan;41(1):58-68. doi: 10.1002/humu.23916. Epub 2019 Sep 27.

Mutation update for the NR5A1 gene involved in DSD and infertility.

Fabbri-Scallet H(1), de Sousa LM(1), Maciel-Guerra AT(2)(3), Guerra-Júnior 
G(3)(4), de Mello MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering-CBMEG, State University 
of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Medical 
Sciences, State University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Interdisciplinary Group for the Study of Sex Determination and 
Differentiation-GIEDDS, State University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, State University of 
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.

Nuclear receptor subfamily 5 group A member 1 (NR5A1), also named steroidogenic 
factor 1, is an essential transcription factor that regulates a number of target 
genes crucial for normal reproductive physiology and endocrine function. It is 
encoded by NR5A1 gene and is expressed in high doses mainly in steroidogenic 
tissues, where it controls several steps of adrenal and gonadal development. 
NR5A1 mutations are associated with a wide phenotypic spectrum of 
disorders/differences of sex development (DSD), a group of conditions in which 
development of chromosomal, gonadal, or anatomic sex is atypical. Here, we 
reviewed 188 NR5A1 mutations from 238 cases reported in literature so far. 
Additionally, we report the variations p.Ser4*, p.(Cys55Ser), p.(Met78Leu), and 
p.Met98Glyfs*45, which have not been annotated for NR5A1 before and were 
identified in some of the 205 46,XY patients of our own cohort. This is the 
first NR5A1 mutation review which includes both 46,XX and 46,XY karyotype, with 
the purpose of discussing the complexity of genotype-phenotype correlations 
among DSD and infertile male patients and also females with primary ovarian 
failure.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23916
PMID: 31513305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]