---
reference_id: "PMID:32186706"
title: "The vitamin B12 processing enzyme, mmachc, is essential for zebrafish survival, growth and retinal morphology."
authors:
- Sloan JL
- Achilly NP
- Arnold ML
- Catlett JL
- Blake T
- Bishop K
- Jones M
- Harper U
- English MA
- Anderson S
- Trivedi NS
- Elkahloun A
- Hoffmann V
- Brooks BP
- Sood R
- Venditti CP
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa044
keywords:
- Animals
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- "Homocystinuria/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mice
- Morphogenesis/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- "Optic Nerve/growth & development, pathology"
- Oxidoreductases/genetics
- "Retina/growth & development, metabolism"
- "Vitamin B 12/analogs & derivatives, genetics, metabolism"
- "Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Zebrafish/genetics, growth & development"
- Zebrafish Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The vitamin B12 processing enzyme, mmachc, is essential for zebrafish survival, growth and retinal morphology.
**Authors:** Sloan JL, Achilly NP, Arnold ML, Catlett JL, Blake T, Bishop K, Jones M, Harper U, English MA, Anderson S, Trivedi NS, Elkahloun A, Hoffmann V, Brooks BP, Sood R, Venditti CP
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddaa044](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddaa044)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 Aug 3;29(13):2109-2123. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa044.

The vitamin B12 processing enzyme, mmachc, is essential for zebrafish survival,
growth and retinal morphology.

Sloan JL(1), Achilly NP(1), Arnold ML(1), Catlett JL(1), Blake T(2), Bishop
K(2), Jones M(3), Harper U(3), English MA(4), Anderson S(5), Trivedi NS(6),
Elkahloun A(7), Hoffmann V(8), Brooks BP(9), Sood R(2), Venditti CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Organic Acid Research Section, Medical Genomics and Metabolic Genetics
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, 20892 USA.
(2)Zebrafish Core Facility, Translational and Functional Genomics Branch,
National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, 20892 USA.
(3)Genomics Core, Cancer Genetics and Comparative Genomics Branch, National
Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, 20892 USA.
(4)Neurobiology, Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, National Eye
Institute, Bethesda, MD, 20892 USA.
(5)Flow Cytometry, National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, 20892
USA.
(6)Social Behavioral Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
Bethesda, MD, 20892 USA.
(7)Microarray Core, National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD,
20892 USA.
(8)Diagnostic and Research Services Branch, Division of Veterinary Resources,
Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892 USA.
(9)Office of the Clinical Director, National Eye Institute, Bethesda, MD, 20892
USA.

Cobalamin C (cblC) deficiency, the most common inborn error of intracellular
cobalamin metabolism, is caused by mutations in MMACHC, a gene responsible for
the processing and intracellular trafficking of vitamin B12. This recessive
disorder is characterized by a failure to metabolize cobalamin into adenosyl-
and methylcobalamin, which results in the biochemical perturbations of
methylmalonic acidemia, hyperhomocysteinemia and hypomethioninemia caused by the
impaired activity of the downstream enzymes, methylmalonyl-CoA mutase and
methionine synthase. Cobalamin C deficiency can be accompanied by a wide
spectrum of clinical manifestations, including progressive blindness, and, in
mice, manifests with very early embryonic lethality. Because zebrafish harbor a
full complement of cobalamin metabolic enzymes, we used genome editing to study
the loss of mmachc function and to develop the first viable animal model of cblC
deficiency. mmachc mutants survived the embryonic period but perished in early
juvenile life. The mutants displayed the metabolic and clinical features of cblC
deficiency including methylmalonic acidemia, severe growth retardation and
lethality. Morphologic and metabolic parameters improved when the mutants were
raised in water supplemented with small molecules used to treat patients,
including hydroxocobalamin, methylcobalamin, methionine and betaine.
Furthermore, mmachc mutants bred to express rod and/or cone fluorescent
reporters, manifested a retinopathy and thin optic nerves (ON). Expression
analysis using whole eye mRNA revealed the dysregulation of genes involved in
phototransduction and cholesterol metabolism. Zebrafish with mmachc deficiency
recapitulate the several of the phenotypic and biochemical features of the human
disorder, including ocular pathology, and show a response to established
treatments.

Published by Oxford University Press 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa044
PMCID: PMC7399538
PMID: 32186706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
