---
reference_id: "PMID:30385359"
title: "Bilateral Superior Semicircular Canal Dehiscence Associated with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: A Report of 2 Cases."
authors:
- Preet K
- Udawatta M
- Duong C
- Gopen Q
- Yang I
journal: World Neurosurg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.10.126
keywords:
- Adult
- Craniotomy
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Female
- Humans
- "Labyrinth Diseases/complications, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Middle Aged
- Semicircular Canals
- "Temporal Bone/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bilateral Superior Semicircular Canal Dehiscence Associated with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: A Report of 2 Cases.
**Authors:** Preet K, Udawatta M, Duong C, Gopen Q, Yang I
**Journal:** World Neurosurg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.wneu.2018.10.126](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2018.10.126)

## Content

1. World Neurosurg. 2019 Feb;122:161-164. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.10.126. Epub 
2018 Oct 29.

Bilateral Superior Semicircular Canal Dehiscence Associated with Ehlers-Danlos 
Syndrome: A Report of 2 Cases.

Preet K(1), Udawatta M(1), Duong C(1), Gopen Q(2), Yang I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California, USA; Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, California, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, Ronald 
Reagan UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA; Office of the Patient 
Experience, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA; 
UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, Los 
Angeles, California, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, Harbor-UCLA Medical 
Center, Torrance, California, USA; Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute (LA 
BioMed), Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California, USA. Electronic 
address: iyang@mednet.ucla.edu.

BACKGROUND: Superior semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD) is a rare bony defect 
in the petrosal temporal bone, creating a new opening between the inner ear and 
middle cranial fossa. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is an inherited connective 
tissue disorder characterized by a defect in collagen synthesis. Patients with 
EDS are more likely to have bony abnormalities, which may predispose them to 
developing SSCD.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We report the cases of 2 women with history of EDS 
hypermobility type (HT). Both patients presented with bilateral auditory and 
vestibular symptoms, and computed tomography scan confirmed the presence of 
bilateral dehiscence in their superior semicircular canals. They underwent 
elective surgical repair via middle fossa craniotomy and report improvement in 
their symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: Because of the rarity of both diseases and their pathophysiology, a 
history of EDS may predispose an individual to developing SSCD. Although further 
research is necessary, this report aims to improve clinical screening of 
patients with EDS HT by suggesting an auditory and vestibular evaluation and 
assessment of pertinent bony abnormalities.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.10.126
PMID: 30385359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]