---
reference_id: "PMID:11567214"
title: "Infantile Alexander disease: spectrum of GFAP mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation."
authors:
- Rodriguez D
- Gauthier F
- Bertini E
- Bugiani M
- Brenner M
- "N'guyen S"
- Goizet C
- Gelot A
- Surtees R
- Pedespan JM
- Hernandorena X
- Troncoso M
- Uziel G
- Messing A
- Ponsot G
- Pham-Dinh D
- Dautigny A
- Boespflug-Tanguy O
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/323799
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Base Sequence
- "Brain/abnormalities, metabolism"
- "Brain Diseases/genetics, mortality, pathology, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exons/genetics
- Genotype
- "Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/chemistry, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Mosaicism/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Seizures/complications, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infantile Alexander disease: spectrum of GFAP mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Rodriguez D, Gauthier F, Bertini E, Bugiani M, Brenner M, N'guyen S, Goizet C, Gelot A, Surtees R, Pedespan JM, Hernandorena X, Troncoso M, Uziel G, Messing A, Ponsot G, Pham-Dinh D, Dautigny A, Boespflug-Tanguy O
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/323799](https://doi.org/10.1086/323799)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Nov;69(5):1134-40. doi: 10.1086/323799. Epub 2001 Sep 20.

Infantile Alexander disease: spectrum of GFAP mutations and genotype-phenotype 
correlation.

Rodriguez D(1), Gauthier F, Bertini E, Bugiani M, Brenner M, N'guyen S, Goizet 
C, Gelot A, Surtees R, Pedespan JM, Hernandorena X, Troncoso M, Uziel G, Messing 
A, Ponsot G, Pham-Dinh D, Dautigny A, Boespflug-Tanguy O.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurogénétique Moléculaire, INSERM U546, Université Paris VI, 
France. Diana.Rodriguez@snv.jussieu.fr

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet 2001 Dec;69(6):1413.

Heterozygous, de novo mutations in the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) 
gene have recently been reported in 12 patients affected by neuropathologically 
proved Alexander disease. We searched for GFAP mutations in a series of patients 
who had heterogeneous clinical symptoms but were candidates for Alexander 
disease on the basis of suggestive neuroimaging abnormalities. Missense, 
heterozygous, de novo GFAP mutations were found in exons 1 or 4 for 14 of the 15 
patients analyzed, including patients without macrocephaly. Nine patients 
carried arginine mutations (four had R79H; four had R239C; and one had R239H) 
that have been described elsewhere, whereas the other five had one of four novel 
mutations, of which two affect arginine (2R88C and 1R88S) and two affect 
nonarginine residues (1L76F and 1N77Y). All mutations were located in the rod 
domain of GFAP, and there is a correlation between clinical severity and the 
affected amino acid. These results confirm that GFAP mutations are a reliable 
molecular marker for the diagnosis of infantile Alexander disease, and they also 
form a basis for the recommendation of GFAP analysis for prenatal diagnosis to 
detect potential cases of germinal mosaicism.

DOI: 10.1086/323799
PMCID: PMC1274357
PMID: 11567214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]