---
reference_id: "PMID:21910238"
title: Partial agenesis of the corpus callosum, hippocampal atrophy, and stable intellectual disability associated with Roifman syndrome.
authors:
- Fairchild HR
- Fairchild G
- Tierney KM
- McCartney DL
- Cross JJ
- de Vries PJ
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34215
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Partial agenesis of the corpus callosum, hippocampal atrophy, and stable intellectual disability associated with Roifman syndrome.
**Authors:** Fairchild HR, Fairchild G, Tierney KM, McCartney DL, Cross JJ, de Vries PJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.34215](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.34215)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Oct;155A(10):2560-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34215. Epub
2011  Sep 9.

Partial agenesis of the corpus callosum, hippocampal atrophy, and stable 
intellectual disability associated with Roifman syndrome.

Fairchild HR(1), Fairchild G, Tierney KM, McCartney DL, Cross JJ, de Vries PJ.

Author information:
(1)Neurodevelopmental Service, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation 
Trust, UK.

In 2006, we reported the cognitive and behavioral phenotype of the seventh case 
of Roifman syndrome (OMIM 300258). Aged 11 years 6 months, the patient displayed 
significant intellectual disability with proportionate impairments in 
attentional-executive, memory, and visuo-spatial abilities despite appearing 
socially "able." This discrepancy may be explained by good social-emotional 
skills masking his intellectual disability, by decline in cognitive abilities 
over time, or by unusual neuroradiological abnormalities not previously examined 
in Roifman syndrome. Here, we present results from a structural MRI scan, 
neurocognitive evaluations repeated 2 and 5 years post-baseline and assessments 
of face and emotional processing. The MRI revealed partial agenesis of the 
corpus callosum, bilateral hypoplastic hippocampi but bilaterally intact 
amygdala. No evidence was found for decline in the patient's neurocognitive 
profile. Emotional processing data indicated an age-appropriate pattern of 
reactivity to emotional stimuli and preserved facial identity recognition 
abilities, but impairments in recognition of negative facial expressions. The 
results confirmed a stable pattern of intellectual disability, and indicated 
that Roifman syndrome may be associated with major structural neuro-anatomical 
abnormalities. We suggest that the relative strengths in emotion and face 
processing are consistent with the patient's apparently able social behavior, 
and with intact amygdalar function.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34215
PMID: 21910238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]