---
reference_id: "PMID:9647179"
title: Seasonal pattern of spontaneous cervical artery dissection.
authors:
- Schievink WI
- Wijdicks EF
- Kuiper JD
journal: J Neurosurg
year: '1998'
doi: 10.3171/jns.1998.89.1.0101
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aortic Dissection/epidemiology, etiology, genetics"
- Arteries
- Communicable Diseases/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Minnesota/epidemiology
- Neck/blood supply
- Periodicity
- Risk Factors
- Seasons
- Weather
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seasonal pattern of spontaneous cervical artery dissection.
**Authors:** Schievink WI, Wijdicks EF, Kuiper JD
**Journal:** J Neurosurg (1998)
**DOI:** [10.3171/jns.1998.89.1.0101](https://doi.org/10.3171/jns.1998.89.1.0101)

## Content

1. J Neurosurg. 1998 Jul;89(1):101-3. doi: 10.3171/jns.1998.89.1.0101.

Seasonal pattern of spontaneous cervical artery dissection.

Schievink WI(1), Wijdicks EF, Kuiper JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

OBJECT: The etiology of spontaneous cervical artery dissection is poorly
understood; however, it may involve genetic and environmental factors. The
purpose of this study was to determine whether seasonality of spontaneous
cervical artery dissection exists.
METHODS: The seasonal pattern of spontaneous cervical artery dissection was
analyzed in a group of 200 consecutive patients (104 females and 96 males with a
mean age of 44.9 years) who were evaluated using the Rayleigh test during the
period from 1970 to 1990. The majority of patients resided in the midwestern
section of the United States, where large seasonal fluctuations in climate
occur. A circannual periodicity was found in the frequency of spontaneous
cervical artery dissections with a peak occurring in October (p < 0.02). The
seasonal variation was substantial, with approximately 58% more patients
suffering a cervical artery dissection during autumn than during other seasons.
CONCLUSIONS: A seasonal pattern of spontaneous cervical artery dissection exists
with a peak occurring in October. The cause of the seasonality remains to be
explained; however, weather- or infectious disease-related factors may provide
etiological leads.

DOI: 10.3171/jns.1998.89.1.0101
PMID: 9647179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
