---
reference_id: "PMID:38573243"
title: New therapeutic perspectives for vascular and valvular calcifications in chronic kidney disease.
authors:
- Huish S
- Sinha S
journal: Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000985
keywords:
- Humans
- Vascular Calcification
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/complications, physiopathology"
- "Heart Valve Diseases/physiopathology, complications"
- Calcinosis/physiopathology
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New therapeutic perspectives for vascular and valvular calcifications in chronic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Huish S, Sinha S
**Journal:** Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MNH.0000000000000985](https://doi.org/10.1097/MNH.0000000000000985)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2024 Jul 1;33(4):391-397. doi: 
10.1097/MNH.0000000000000985. Epub 2024 Apr 4.

New therapeutic perspectives for vascular and valvular calcifications in chronic 
kidney disease.

Huish S(1), Sinha S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Renal Dietetics, Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS 
Foundation Trust, and University of Exeter.
(2)Department of Renal Medicine, Northern Care Alliance NHS Foundation Trust.
(3)Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Vascular and valvular calcification are associated with 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in people with chronic kidney disease 
(CKD). Uncertainty exists regarding therapeutic strategies to attenuate 
calcification. This review outlines the pathophysiological mechanisms 
contributing to vascular and valvular calcification, considers the mechanisms of 
action of therapeutic interventions, and reports the latest outcomes from 
interventional studies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Conventional therapies targeted at CKD-mineral and bone 
disorder (MBD) modulation have yielded conflicting or inconclusive results. 
Magnesium and vitamin K supplementation appear to offer attenuation of coronary 
artery calcification but inconsistent findings justify the need for further 
studies. Strategies targeting hydroxyapatite formation such as sodium 
thiosulphate and hexasodium fytate show promise and are worthy of further 
evaluation. The serum calcification propensity assay (T50) correlates with 
severity and progression; it holds promise as a potential future clinical tool 
for screening monitoring calcification risk.
SUMMARY: Whilst knowledge of the pathophysiology of vascular calcification has 
grown and therapeutic approaches appear promising, as yet no medication has been 
approved to treat vascular or valvular calcification, or calciphylaxis.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000985
PMID: 38573243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]