---
reference_id: "PMID:36358690"
title: Rosai-Dorfman Disease between Proliferation and Neoplasia.
authors:
- Elbaz Younes I
- Sokol L
- Zhang L
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cancers14215271
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rosai-Dorfman Disease between Proliferation and Neoplasia.
**Authors:** Elbaz Younes I, Sokol L, Zhang L
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers14215271](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers14215271)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Oct 27;14(21):5271. doi: 10.3390/cancers14215271.

Rosai-Dorfman Disease between Proliferation and Neoplasia.

Elbaz Younes I(1), Sokol L(2), Zhang L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(2)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 
33612, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Rosai-Dorfman disease (RDD) is a rare myeloproliferative disorder of histiocytes 
with a broad spectrum of clinical manifestations and peculiar morphologic 
features (accumulation of histiocytes with emperipolesis). Typically, the 
patient with RDD shows bilateral painless, massive cervical lymphadenopathy 
associated with B symptoms. Approximately 43% of patients presented with 
extranodal involvement. According to the 2016 revised histiocytosis 
classification, RDD belongs to the R group, including familial and sporadic form 
(classical nodal, extranodal, unclassified, or RDD associated with neoplasia or 
immune disease). Sporadic RDD is often self-limited. Most RDD needs only local 
therapies. Nevertheless, a small subpopulation of patients may be refractory to 
conventional therapy and die of the disease. Recent studies consider RDD a 
clonal neoplastic process, as approximately 1/3 of these patients harbor gene 
mutations involving the MAPK/ERK pathway, e.g., NRAS, KRAS, MAP2K1, and, rarely, 
the BRAF mutation. In addition to typical histiocytic markers 
(S100/fascin/CD68/CD163, etc.), recent studies show that the histiocytes in RDD 
also express BCL-1 and OCT2, which might be important in pathogenesis. 
Additionally, the heterozygous germline mutation involving the FAS gene TNFRSF6 
is identified in some RDD patients with an autoimmune lymphoproliferative 
syndrome type Ia. SLC29A3 germline mutation is associated with familial or 
Faisalabad histiocytosis and H syndrome.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14215271
PMCID: PMC9654168
PMID: 36358690

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.