---
reference_id: "PMID:39728742"
title: "PPP2R5D-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder and Multiple Haemangiomas: A Novel Phenotypic Trait?"
authors:
- Comisi F
- Soddu C
- Lai F
- Marica M
- Lorrai M
- Mancuso G
- Giglio S
- Savasta S
journal: Pediatr Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/pediatric16040101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PPP2R5D-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder and Multiple Haemangiomas: A Novel Phenotypic Trait?
**Authors:** Comisi F, Soddu C, Lai F, Marica M, Lorrai M, Mancuso G, Giglio S, Savasta S
**Journal:** Pediatr Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pediatric16040101](https://doi.org/10.3390/pediatric16040101)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rep. 2024 Dec 16;16(4):1200-1206. doi: 10.3390/pediatric16040101.

PPP2R5D-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder and Multiple Haemangiomas: A Novel 
Phenotypic Trait?

Comisi F(1), Soddu C(2), Lai F(2)(3), Marica M(2), Lorrai M(4), Mancuso G(4), 
Giglio S(4)(5)(6), Savasta S(7).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics Department, Microcitemico Hospital "A. Cao", University of 
Cagliari, 09124 Cagliari, Italy.
(2)Pediatric and Rare Diseases Clinic, Microcitemico Hospital "A. Cao", ASL 8 
Cagliari, 09121 Cagliari, Italy.
(3)Unit of Oncology and Molecular Pathology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Cagliari, 09124 Cagliari, Italy.
(4)Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, 
University of Cagliari, 09124 Cagliari, Italy.
(5)Centre for Research University Services, University of Cagliari, 09124 
Cagliari, Italy.
(6)Medical Genetics, "R. Binaghi" Hospital, ASL 8 Cagliari, 09126 Cagliari, 
Italy.
(7)Pediatric and Rare Diseases Clinic, Microcitemico Hospital "A. Cao", 
Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, University of Cagliari, 09124 
Cagliari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Houge-Janssens syndrome 1 is a condition with onset in early 
childhood caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the PPP2R5D gene, which 
encodes a B56 regulatory subunit of the serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A 
(PP2A). There is evidence that the PP2A-PPP2R5D complex is involved in 
regulating the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signalling pathway, 
which is crucial for several cellular processes, including the pathogenesis and 
progression of haemangiomas.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the first PPP2R5D-related neurodevelopmental 
disorder case from Sardinia, a child with transient hypoglycaemia, facial 
dysmorphisms, and multiple haemangiomas. Whole Exome Sequencing analysis 
confirmed the clinical suspicion, detecting the presence of the de novo missense 
variant c.592G>A in the PPP2R5D gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Haemangiomas have never been linked to the syndromic phenotype of 
the PPP2R5D-associated disorder. The close correlation between the PP2A enzyme 
and the PI3K/AKT signalling pathway suggests the possible correlation between 
its dysfunction and activation of haemangiogenesis. Our report highlights a 
possible link between the PPP2R5D-related disorder and altered angiogenesis, 
characterizing diffuse haemangiomas as a possible novel phenotypic trait of this 
condition.

DOI: 10.3390/pediatric16040101
PMCID: PMC11677636
PMID: 39728742

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.