---
reference_id: "PMID:39076179"
title: Current and Future Applications of Computational Fluid Dynamics in Coronary Artery Disease.
authors:
- Candreva A
- De Nisco G
- Lodi Rizzini M
- "D'Ascenzo F"
- De Ferrari GM
- Gallo D
- Morbiducci U
- Chiastra C
journal: Rev Cardiovasc Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.31083/j.rcm2311377
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current and Future Applications of Computational Fluid Dynamics in Coronary Artery Disease.
**Authors:** Candreva A, De Nisco G, Lodi Rizzini M, D'Ascenzo F, De Ferrari GM, Gallo D, Morbiducci U, Chiastra C
**Journal:** Rev Cardiovasc Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.31083/j.rcm2311377](https://doi.org/10.31083/j.rcm2311377)

## Content

1. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Nov 4;23(11):377. doi: 10.31083/j.rcm2311377. 
eCollection 2022 Nov.

Current and Future Applications of Computational Fluid Dynamics in Coronary 
Artery Disease.

Candreva A(1)(2), De Nisco G(1), Lodi Rizzini M(1), D'Ascenzo F(3), De Ferrari 
GM(3), Gallo D(1), Morbiducci U(1), Chiastra C(1).

Author information:
(1)PoliToMed Lab, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, 
Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Torino, Italy.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Zurich University Hospital, 8091 Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, Division of Cardiology, AOU Città Della 
Salute e Della Scienza, University of Turin, 10124 Turin, Italy.

Hemodynamics interacts with the cellular components of human vessels, 
influencing function and healthy status. Locally acting hemodynamic forces have 
been associated-by a steadily increasing amount of scientific evidence-with 
nucleation and evolution of atherosclerotic plaques in several vascular regions, 
resulting in the formulation of the 'hemodynamic risk hypothesis' of the 
atherogenesis. At the level of coronary arteries, however, the complexity of 
both anatomy and physiology made the study of this vascular region particularly 
difficult for researchers. Developments in computational fluid dynamics (CFD) 
have recently allowed an accurate modelling of the intracoronary hemodynamics, 
thus offering physicians a unique tool for the investigation of this crucial 
human system by means of advanced mathematical simulations. The present review 
of CFD applications in coronary artery disease was set to concisely offer the 
medical reader the theoretical foundations of quantitative intravascular 
hemodynamics-reasoned schematically in the text in its basic (i.e., pressure and 
velocity) and derived quantities (e.g., fractional flow reserve, wall shear 
stress and helicity)-along with its current implications in clinical research. 
Moreover, attention was paid in classifying computational modelling derived from 
invasive and non-invasive imaging modalities with unbiased remarks on the 
advantages and limitations of each procedure. Finally, an extensive 
description-aided by explanatory figures and cross references to recent clinical 
findings-was presented on the role of near-wall hemodynamics, in terms of shear 
stress, and of intravascular flow complexity, in terms of helical flow.

Copyright: © 2022 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/j.rcm2311377
PMCID: PMC11269074
PMID: 39076179

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest. 
Fabrizio D’Ascenzo is serving as one of the Editorial Board members of this 
journal. We declare that Fabrizio D’Ascenzo had no involvement in the peer 
review of this article and has no access to information regarding its peer 
review. Full responsibility for the editorial process for this article was 
delegated to Jerome L. Fleg.