---
reference_id: "PMID:23616163"
title: "Low-dose propranolol and exercise capacity in postural tachycardia syndrome: a randomized study."
authors:
- Arnold AC
- Okamoto LE
- Diedrich A
- Paranjape SY
- Raj SR
- Biaggioni I
- Gamboa A
journal: Neurology
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318293e310
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low-dose propranolol and exercise capacity in postural tachycardia syndrome: a randomized study.
**Authors:** Arnold AC, Okamoto LE, Diedrich A, Paranjape SY, Raj SR, Biaggioni I, Gamboa A
**Journal:** Neurology (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e318293e310](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e318293e310)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2013 May 21;80(21):1927-33. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318293e310. Epub
 2013 Apr 24.

Low-dose propranolol and exercise capacity in postural tachycardia syndrome: a 
randomized study.

Arnold AC(1), Okamoto LE, Diedrich A, Paranjape SY, Raj SR, Biaggioni I, Gamboa 
A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of low-dose propranolol on maximal exercise 
capacity in patients with postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS).
METHODS: We compared the effect of placebo vs a single low dose of propranolol 
(20 mg) on peak oxygen consumption (VO2max), an established measure of exercise 
capacity, in 11 patients with POTS and 7 healthy subjects in a randomized, 
double-blind study. Subjects exercised on a semirecumbent bicycle, with 
increasing intervals of resistance to maximal effort.
RESULTS: Maximal exercise capacity was similar between groups following placebo. 
Low-dose propranolol improved VO2max in patients with POTS (24.5 ± 0.7 placebo 
vs 27.6 ± 1.0 mL/min/kg propranolol; p = 0.024), but not healthy subjects. The 
increase in VO2max in POTS was associated with attenuated peak heart rate 
responses (142 ± 8 propranolol vs 165 ± 4 bpm placebo; p = 0.005) and improved 
stroke volume (81 ± 4 propranolol vs 67 ± 3 mL placebo; p = 0.013). In a 
separate cohort of POTS patients, neither high-dose propranolol (80 mg) nor 
metoprolol (100 mg) improved VO2max, despite similar lowering of heart rate.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that nonselective β-blockade with 
propranolol, when used at the low doses frequently used for treatment of POTS, 
may provide a modest beneficial effect to improve heart rate control and 
exercise capacity.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class II evidence that a single 
low dose of propranolol (20 mg) as compared with placebo is useful in increasing 
maximum exercise capacity measured 1 hour after medication.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318293e310
PMCID: PMC3716342
PMID: 23616163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]