---
reference_id: "PMID:26738982"
title: Ontogenetic explanation for tegmen tympani dehiscence and superior semicircular canal dehiscence association.
authors:
- Fraile Rodrigo JJ
- Cisneros AI
- Obón J
- Yus C
- Crovetto R
- Crovetto MA
- Whyte J
journal: Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.otorri.2015.09.006
keywords:
- "Ear, Middle/abnormalities, embryology"
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Labyrinth Diseases/embryology
- Osteogenesis
- "Periosteum/abnormalities, embryology"
- "Rupture, Spontaneous"
- "Semicircular Canals/abnormalities, embryology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ontogenetic explanation for tegmen tympani dehiscence and superior semicircular canal dehiscence association.
**Authors:** Fraile Rodrigo JJ, Cisneros AI, Obón J, Yus C, Crovetto R, Crovetto MA, Whyte J
**Journal:** Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.otorri.2015.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.otorri.2015.09.006)

## Content

1. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 2016 Jul-Aug;67(4):226-32. doi: 
10.1016/j.otorri.2015.09.006. Epub 2015 Dec 28.

Ontogenetic explanation for tegmen tympani dehiscence and superior semicircular 
canal dehiscence association.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Fraile Rodrigo JJ(1), Cisneros AI(2), Obón J(2), Yus C(3), Crovetto R(4), 
Crovetto MA(5), Whyte J(2).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, 
Zaragoza, España. Electronic address: jfraile@comz.org.
(2)Departamento de Anatomía e Histología Humanas, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, España.
(3)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, 
Zaragoza, España.
(4)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, España.
(5)Departamento de Estomatología, Universidad del País Vasco, Leioa, Vizcaya, 
España.

OBJECTIVES: To analyze the ontogeny of the superior semicircular canal and 
tegmen tympani and determine if there are common embryological factors 
explaining both associated dehiscence.
METHODS: We analyzed 77 human embryological series aged between 6 weeks and 
newborn. Preparations were serially cut and stained with Masson's trichrome 
technique.
RESULTS: The tegmental prolongation of tegmen tympani and superior semicircular 
canal originate from the same structure, the otic capsule, and have the same 
type of endochondral ossification; while the extension of the squamous 
prolongation of tegmen tympani runs from the temporal squama and ossification is 
directly of intramembranous type. The nuclei of ossification of the superior and 
external semicircular canals and accessory of tegmen collaborate in the 
ossification of the tegmental extension and by growth extend to the tegmental 
prolongation. This fact plus the fact that both structures share a common layer 
of external periosteum could explain the coexistence of lack of bone coverage in 
tegmen and superior semicircular canal.
CONCLUSION: The development of the semicircular canal and tegmen tympani could 
explain the causes of the association of both dehiscences.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier España, S.L.U. and Sociedad Española de 
Otorrinolaringología y Cirugía de Cabeza y Cuello. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.otorri.2015.09.006
PMID: 26738982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]