---
reference_id: "PMID:38218353"
title: MMP14(high) macrophages orchestrate progressive pulmonary fibrosis in SR-Ag-induced hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
authors:
- Peng D
- Li J
- Li Y
- Bai L
- Xiong A
- He X
- Li X
- Ran Q
- Zhang L
- Jiang M
- Wang J
- Leung EL
- Yang P
- Li G
journal: Pharmacol Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107070
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MMP14(high) macrophages orchestrate progressive pulmonary fibrosis in SR-Ag-induced hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Peng D, Li J, Li Y, Bai L, Xiong A, He X, Li X, Ran Q, Zhang L, Jiang M, Wang J, Leung EL, Yang P, Li G
**Journal:** Pharmacol Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107070](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107070)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Res. 2024 Feb;200:107070. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107070. Epub 2024
 Jan 11.

MMP14(high) macrophages orchestrate progressive pulmonary fibrosis in 
SR-Ag-induced hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Peng D(1), Li J(2), Li Y(3), Bai L(2), Xiong A(2), He X(2), Li X(2), Ran Q(2), 
Zhang L(2), Jiang M(2), Wang J(2), Leung EL(4), Yang P(5), Li G(6).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory for Biomedical Measurements and Ultrasound Imaging, 
National-Regional Key Technology Engineering Laboratory for Medical Ultrasound, 
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University Medical School, Shenzhen 
518060, China; Laboratory of Allergy and Precision Medicine, Chengdu Institute 
of Respiratory Health, the Third People's Hospital of Chengdu, Affiliated 
Hospital of Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610000, China; Department of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Chengdu Third People's Hospital Branch of 
National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, Affiliated Hospital 
of ChongQing Medical University, Chengdu 610000, China.
(2)Laboratory of Allergy and Precision Medicine, Chengdu Institute of 
Respiratory Health, the Third People's Hospital of Chengdu, Affiliated Hospital 
of Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610000, China; Department of Pulmonary 
and Critical Care Medicine, Chengdu Third People's Hospital Branch of National 
Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, Affiliated Hospital of 
ChongQing Medical University, Chengdu 610000, China.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200032, China.
(4)Cancer Center, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macau; MOE 
Frontiers Science Center for Precision Oncology, University of Macau, Macau. 
Electronic address: lhleung@um.edu.mo.
(5)Institute of Allergy & Immunology, Shenzhen University School of Medicine, 
State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease Allergy Division at Shenzhen 
University, Shenzhen 518060, China. Electronic address: pcy2356@szu.edu.cn.
(6)Laboratory of Allergy and Precision Medicine, Chengdu Institute of 
Respiratory Health, the Third People's Hospital of Chengdu, Affiliated Hospital 
of Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610000, China; Department of Pulmonary 
and Critical Care Medicine, Chengdu Third People's Hospital Branch of National 
Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, Affiliated Hospital of 
ChongQing Medical University, Chengdu 610000, China. Electronic address: 
liguoping@swjtu.edu.cn.

Fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (FHP) is a fatal interstitial pulmonary 
disease with limited treatment options. Lung macrophages are a heterogeneous 
cell population that exhibit distinct subsets with divergent functions, playing 
pivotal roles in the progression of pulmonary fibrosis. However, the specific 
macrophage subpopulations and underlying mechanisms involved in the disease 
remain largely unexplored. In this study, a decision tree model showed that 
matrix metalloproteinase-14 (MMP14) had higher scores for important features in 
the up-regulated genes in macrophages from mice exposed to the Saccharopolyspora 
rectivirgula antigen (SR-Ag). Using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) 
analysis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) mice profiles, we identified 
MMP14high macrophage subcluster with a predominant M2 phenotype that exhibited 
higher activity in promoting fibroblast-to myofibroblast transition (FMT). We 
demonstrated that suppressing toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and nuclear factor 
kappa-B (NF-κB) could attenuate MMP14 expression and exosome secretion in 
macrophages stimulation with SR-Ag. The exosomes derived from 
MMP14-overexpressing macrophages were found to be more effective in regulating 
the transition of fibroblasts through exosomal MMP14. Importantly, it was 
observed that the transfer of MMP14-overexpressing macrophages into mice 
promoted lung inflammation and fibrosis induced by SR-Ag. NSC-405020 binding to 
the hemopexin domain (PEX) of MMP-14 ameliorated lung inflammation and fibrosis 
induced by SR-Ag in mice. Thus, MMP14-overexpressing macrophages may be an 
important mechanism contributing to the exacerbation of allergic reactions. Our 
results indicated that MMP14 in macrophages has the potential to be a 
therapeutic target for HP.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107070
PMID: 38218353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.