---
reference_id: "PMID:40303293"
title: PPARG Activation of Fatty Acid Metabolism Drives Resistance to Anti-HER2 Therapies in HER2-Positive Breast Cancer.
authors:
- Xiong M
- Liu D
- Wang X
- Ren H
- Chi W
- Xiu B
- Zhang Q
- Zhang J
- Zhang L
- Wang Z
- Chen M
- Xue J
- Chi Y
- Wu J
journal: Int J Biol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7150/ijbs.99275
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PPARG Activation of Fatty Acid Metabolism Drives Resistance to Anti-HER2 Therapies in HER2-Positive Breast Cancer.
**Authors:** Xiong M, Liu D, Wang X, Ren H, Chi W, Xiu B, Zhang Q, Zhang J, Zhang L, Wang Z, Chen M, Xue J, Chi Y, Wu J
**Journal:** Int J Biol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7150/ijbs.99275](https://doi.org/10.7150/ijbs.99275)

## Content

1. Int J Biol Sci. 2025 Mar 10;21(6):2396-2414. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.99275. 
eCollection 2025.

PPARG Activation of Fatty Acid Metabolism Drives Resistance to Anti-HER2 
Therapies in HER2-Positive Breast Cancer.

Xiong M(1)(2), Liu D(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2), Ren H(1)(2), Chi W(1)(2), Xiu B(1)(2), 
Zhang Q(1)(2), Zhang J(3), Zhang L(1)(2), Wang Z(1)(2), Chen M(1)(2), Xue 
J(1)(2), Chi Y(1)(2)(4), Wu J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer in Shanghai, Department of Breast Surgery, 
Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, 200032, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
200032, China.
(3)Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, 300060, 
China.
(4)Pathology Center, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

HER2-positive breast cancer, which accounts for approximately 15-20% of all 
breast cancers, is characterized by its aggressive recurrence, metastasis and 
reduced survival. Despite advances in anti-HER2 therapies, many patients 
continue to face treatment resistance, either initially or after an initial 
positive response, resulting in relapse or disease progression. The primary 
focus of this research was to identify the peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor gamma (PPARG) as a contributing factor to decreased drug sensitivity by 
establishing anti-HER2 drug-resistant cell lines of HER2-positive breast cancer. 
We found that PPARG promotes fatty acid metabolism and activates the 
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway. Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis (FASN) after 
overexpression of PPARG, effectively blocking the activation of the 
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway and enhancing cellular anti-HER2 drug sensitivity. 
Co-administration of the PPARG inhibitor GW9662 has emerged as a promising 
strategy to augment the efficacy of anti-HER2 therapies, offering potential for 
clinical applications.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.99275
PMCID: PMC12035890
PMID: 40303293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.