---
reference_id: "PMID:29925508"
title: TLR4(+)CXCR4(+) plasma cells drive nephritis development in systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Ma K
- Li J
- Wang X
- Lin X
- Du W
- Yang X
- Mou F
- Fang Y
- Zhao Y
- Hong X
- Chan KW
- Zhang X
- Liu D
- Sun L
- Lu L
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-213615
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TLR4(+)CXCR4(+) plasma cells drive nephritis development in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Ma K, Li J, Wang X, Lin X, Du W, Yang X, Mou F, Fang Y, Zhao Y, Hong X, Chan KW, Zhang X, Liu D, Sun L, Lu L
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-213615](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-213615)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Oct;77(10):1498-1506. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-213615.  Epub 2018 Jun 20.

TLR4(+)CXCR4(+) plasma cells drive nephritis development in systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Ma K(#)(1), Li J(#)(2), Wang X(1), Lin X(1), Du W(1), Yang X(1), Mou F(2), Fang 
Y(2), Zhao Y(3), Hong X(3), Chan KW(1), Zhang X(4), Liu D(3), Sun L(5), Lu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Shenzhen Institute of Research and Innovation, 
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, The First Hospital Affiliated to 
Army Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Shenzhen People's Hospital, The 
Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, The 
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: In patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), immune 
tolerance breakdown leads to autoantibody production and immune-complex 
glomerulonephritis. This study aimed to identify pathogenic plasma cells (PC) in 
the development of lupus nephritis.
METHODS: PC subsets in peripheral blood and renal tissue of patients with SLE 
and lupus mice were examined by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy, 
respectively. Sorting-purified PCs from lupus mice were adoptively transferred 
into Rag2-deficient recipients, in which immune-complex deposition and renal 
pathology were investigated. In culture, PCs from lupus mice and patients with 
SLE were treated with a TLR4 inhibitor and examined for autoantibody secretion 
by enzyme-linked immunospot assay (ELISPOT). Moreover, lupus mice were treated 
with a TLR4 inhibitor, followed by the assessment of serum autoantibody levels 
and glomerulonephritis activity.
RESULTS: The frequencies of TLR4+CXCR4+ PCs in peripheral blood and renal tissue 
were found significantly increased with the potent production of anti-dsDNA IgG, 
which were associated with severe renal damages in patients with SLE and mice 
with experimental lupus. Adoptive transfer of TLR4+CXCR4+ PCs from lupus mice 
led to autoantibody production and glomerulonephritis development in 
Rag2-deficient recipients. In culture, TLR4+CXCR4+ PCs from both lupus mice and 
patients with SLE showed markedly reduced anti-dsDNA IgG secretion on TLR4 
blockade. Moreover, in vivo treatment with TLR4 inhibitor significantly 
attenuated autoantibody production and renal damages in lupus mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate a pathogenic role of TLR4+CXCR4+ PCs in 
the development of lupus nephritis and may provide new therapeutic strategies 
for the treatment of SLE.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2018. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-213615
PMID: 29925508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.