---
reference_id: "PMID:31411728"
title: "Meckel syndrome: Clinical and mutation profile in six fetuses."
authors:
- Radhakrishnan P
- Nayak SS
- Shukla A
- Lindstrand A
- Girisha KM
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13623
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meckel syndrome: Clinical and mutation profile in six fetuses.
**Authors:** Radhakrishnan P, Nayak SS, Shukla A, Lindstrand A, Girisha KM
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13623](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13623)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2019 Dec;96(6):560-565. doi: 10.1111/cge.13623. Epub 2019 Aug 21.

Meckel syndrome: Clinical and mutation profile in six fetuses.

Radhakrishnan P(1), Nayak SS(1), Shukla A(1), Lindstrand A(2), Girisha KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal 
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery and Center for Molecular 
Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Meckel syndrome (MKS) is a perinatally lethal, genetically heterogeneous, 
autosomal recessive condition caused by defective primary cilium formation 
leading to polydactyly, multiple cysts in kidneys and malformations of nervous 
system. We performed exome sequencing in six fetuses from six unrelated families 
with MKS. We identified seven novel variants in B9D2, TNXDC15, CC2D2A, CEP290 
and TMEM67. We describe the second family with MKS due to a homozygous variant 
in B9D2 and fifth family with bi-allelic variant in TXNDC15. Our data validates 
the causation of MKS by pathogenic variation in B9D2 and TXNDC15 and also adds 
novel variants in CC2D2A, CEP290 and TMEM67 to the literature.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13623
PMID: 31411728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]