---
reference_id: "PMID:31900257"
title: "Fifteen-minute consultation: Kawasaki disease: how to distinguish from other febrile illnesses: tricks and tips."
authors:
- Kelly A
- Sales K
- Fenton-Jones M
- Tulloh R
journal: Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2019-316834
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fifteen-minute consultation: Kawasaki disease: how to distinguish from other febrile illnesses: tricks and tips.
**Authors:** Kelly A, Sales K, Fenton-Jones M, Tulloh R
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2019-316834](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2019-316834)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2020 Jun;105(3):152-156. doi: 
10.1136/archdischild-2019-316834. Epub 2020 Jan 3.

Fifteen-minute consultation: Kawasaki disease: how to distinguish from other 
febrile illnesses: tricks and tips.

Kelly A(1), Sales K(2), Fenton-Jones M(2), Tulloh R(3).

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Rheumatology, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, UK 
Alison.Kelly@UHBristol.nhs.uk.
(2)Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, UK.
(3)Paediatric Cardiology, Bristol Royal Hospital For Children, Bristol, UK.

Kawasaki disease (KD) is challenging to diagnose because there is no specific 
laboratory test and the presentation is often similar to common childhood 
infections. We highlight some of those KD diagnostic challenges. KD, a 
self-limiting vasculitis, can cause coronary artery aneurysms. The aim is to 
optimise management during the acute febrile illness to try and prevent these 
because a giant coronary artery aneurysm is devastating enough without thinking 
that it might have been prevented. The conundrum for acute paediatricians is 
which clinical features best distinguish the febrile child with possible KD, 
needing intravenous immunoglobulin, from the many other children with febrile 
illnesses.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2019-316834
PMID: 31900257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.