---
reference_id: "PMID:28686854"
title: REST Final-Exon-Truncating Mutations Cause Hereditary Gingival Fibromatosis.
authors:
- Bayram Y
- White JJ
- Elcioglu N
- Cho MT
- Zadeh N
- Gedikbasi A
- Palanduz S
- Ozturk S
- Cefle K
- Kasapcopur O
- Coban Akdemir Z
- Pehlivan D
- Begtrup A
- Carvalho CMB
- Paine IS
- Mentes A
- Bektas-Kayhan K
- Karaca E
- Jhangiani SN
- Muzny DM
- Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics
- Gibbs RA
- Lupski JR
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.06.006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Segregation/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Family
- Female
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- RE1-Silencing Transcription Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# REST Final-Exon-Truncating Mutations Cause Hereditary Gingival Fibromatosis.
**Authors:** Bayram Y, White JJ, Elcioglu N, Cho MT, Zadeh N, Gedikbasi A, Palanduz S, Ozturk S, Cefle K, Kasapcopur O, Coban Akdemir Z, Pehlivan D, Begtrup A, Carvalho CMB, Paine IS, Mentes A, Bektas-Kayhan K, Karaca E, Jhangiani SN, Muzny DM, Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics, Gibbs RA, Lupski JR
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.06.006)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Jul 6;101(1):149-156. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.06.006.

REST Final-Exon-Truncating Mutations Cause Hereditary Gingival Fibromatosis.

Bayram Y(1), White JJ(1), Elcioglu N(2), Cho MT(3), Zadeh N(4), Gedikbasi A(5), 
Palanduz S(5), Ozturk S(5), Cefle K(5), Kasapcopur O(6), Coban Akdemir Z(1), 
Pehlivan D(7), Begtrup A(3), Carvalho CMB(1), Paine IS(1), Mentes A(8), 
Bektas-Kayhan K(9), Karaca E(1), Jhangiani SN(10), Muzny DM(10); Baylor-Hopkins 
Center for Mendelian Genomics; Gibbs RA(11), Lupski JR(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University School of Medicine, 
Istanbul 34899, Turkey; Eastern Mediterranean University School of Medicine, 
Cyprus, Mersin 10 99628, Turkey.
(3)GeneDx, 207 Perry Parkway, Gaithersburg, MD 20877, USA.
(4)Genetics Center, Orange, CA 92868, USA; Division of Medical Genetics, 
Children's Hospital of Orange County, Orange, CA 92868, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, Istanbul 
Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul 34093, Turkey.
(6)Department of Child Rheumatology, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul 34093, Turkey.
(7)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Marmara University, 
Istanbul 34854, Turkey.
(9)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul 34899, Turkey.
(10)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.
(11)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(12)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Human 
Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; 
Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
Electronic address: jlupski@bcm.edu.

Hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) is the most common genetic form of 
gingival fibromatosis that develops as a slowly progressive, benign, localized 
or generalized enlargement of keratinized gingiva. HGF is a genetically 
heterogeneous disorder and can be transmitted either as an autosomal-dominant or 
autosomal-recessive trait or appear sporadically. To date, four loci (2p22.1, 
2p23.3-p22.3, 5q13-q22, and 11p15) have been mapped to autosomes and one gene 
(SOS1) has been associated with the HGF trait observed to segregate in a 
dominant inheritance pattern. Here we report 11 individuals with HGF from three 
unrelated families. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) revealed three different 
truncating mutations including two frameshifts and one nonsense variant in 
RE1-silencing transcription factor (REST) in the probands from all families and 
further genetic and genomic analyses confirmed the WES-identified findings. REST 
is a transcriptional repressor that is expressed throughout the body; it has 
different roles in different cellular contexts, such as oncogenic and 
tumor-suppressor functions and hematopoietic and cardiac differentiation. Here 
we show the consequences of germline final-exon-truncating mutations in REST for 
organismal development and the association with the HGF phenotype.

Copyright © 2017 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.06.006
PMCID: PMC5501868
PMID: 28686854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]