---
reference_id: "PMID:8613526"
title: Nuclear retention of COL1A1 messenger RNA identifies null alleles causing mild osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Redford-Badwal DA
- Stover ML
- Valli M
- McKinstry MB
- Rowe DW
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1172/JCI118495
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nuclear retention of COL1A1 messenger RNA identifies null alleles causing mild osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Redford-Badwal DA, Stover ML, Valli M, McKinstry MB, Rowe DW
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI118495](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI118495)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1996 Feb 15;97(4):1035-40. doi: 10.1172/JCI118495.

Nuclear retention of COL1A1 messenger RNA identifies null alleles causing mild 
osteogenesis imperfecta.

Redford-Badwal DA(1), Stover ML, Valli M, McKinstry MB, Rowe DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Connecticut 
Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut 06030, USA.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable connective tissue disorder 
characterized by bone fragility. Most cases of severe OI result from mutations 
in the coding region of the COL1A1 or COL1A2 genes yielding an abnormal collagen 
alpha chain. In contrast, many patients with mild OI show evidence of a null 
allele due to a premature stop mutation in the mutant RNA transcript. We have 
previously described a null allele arising from a splice donor mutation where 
the transcript containing the included intron was sequestered in the nucleus. 
Here we demonstrate that transcripts from null alleles arising from premature 
stop mutations are also present in the nucleus and absent in the cytoplasm. 
Using reverse transcriptase-PCR and single-strand conformational polymorphism of 
COL1A1 mRNA from patients with mild OI, we describe three patients with distinct 
null producing mutations identified from the mutant transcript within the 
nuclear compartment. A fourth patient with a Gly--->Arg expressed point mutation 
exhibits the mutant transcript in both compartments. Defining the distribution 
of allelic variants of COL1A1 mRNA in the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments 
gives further insight into cell biology of OI and provides a strategy for 
investigating potential causes of a null allele.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI118495
PMCID: PMC507150
PMID: 8613526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]