---
reference_id: "PMID:23514180"
title: Four factors of impulsivity differentiate antisocial and borderline personality disorders.
authors:
- DeShong HL
- Kurtz JE
journal: J Pers Disord
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1521/pedi.2013.27.2.144
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antisocial Personality Disorder/diagnosis, psychology"
- "Borderline Personality Disorder/diagnosis, psychology"
- Comorbidity
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Factor Analysis, Statistical"
- Female
- Humans
- "Impulsive Behavior/diagnosis, psychology"
- Male
- "Personality Inventory/statistics & numerical data"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Four factors of impulsivity differentiate antisocial and borderline personality disorders.
**Authors:** DeShong HL, Kurtz JE
**Journal:** J Pers Disord (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1521/pedi.2013.27.2.144](https://doi.org/10.1521/pedi.2013.27.2.144)

## Content

1. J Pers Disord. 2013 Apr;27(2):144-56. doi: 10.1521/pedi.2013.27.2.144.

Four factors of impulsivity differentiate antisocial and borderline personality 
disorders.

DeShong HL(1), Kurtz JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 
74078-3060, USA hilary.deshong@okstate

Impulsivity is a shared criterion for the diagnosis of antisocial and borderline 
personality disorders, and this link may account for the high comorbidity rates 
between the two disorders. The current study aimed to differentiate between 
borderline and antisocial personality disorders using the four factors of 
impulsivity identified by Whiteside and Lynam (2001). Five hundred thirty-six 
undergraduate participants completed the personality assessment inventory (PAI; 
Morey, 1991) to assess borderline and antisocial personality features and the 
NEO personality inventory, third edition (NEO-PI-3; McCrae & Costa, 2010) to 
assess the four factors of impulsivity. Results indicate that negative urgency 
and lack of perseverance were significantly and uniquely related to borderline 
features, while sensation seeking and lack of premeditation were significantly 
and uniquely related to antisocial features. The implications of these results 
for improved differential diagnosis are discussed.

DOI: 10.1521/pedi.2013.27.2.144
PMID: 23514180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]