---
reference_id: "PMID:29788799"
title: Management of the left subclavian artery during TEVAR - complications and mid-term follow-up.
authors:
- Youssef A
- Ghazy T
- Kersting S
- Leip JL
- Hoffmann RT
- Kappert U
- Matschke K
- Weiss N
- Mahlmann A
journal: Vasa
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1024/0301-1526/a000713
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aorta, Thoracic/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, surgery"
- "Aortic Diseases/diagnostic imaging, mortality, physiopathology, surgery"
- Aortography/methods
- "Blood Vessel Prosthesis Implantation/adverse effects, mortality"
- Computed Tomography Angiography
- "Endovascular Procedures/adverse effects, mortality"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Postoperative Complications/etiology, physiopathology, surgery"
- Reoperation
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Subclavian Artery/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, surgery"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of the left subclavian artery during TEVAR - complications and mid-term follow-up.
**Authors:** Youssef A, Ghazy T, Kersting S, Leip JL, Hoffmann RT, Kappert U, Matschke K, Weiss N, Mahlmann A
**Journal:** Vasa (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1024/0301-1526/a000713](https://doi.org/10.1024/0301-1526/a000713)

## Content

1. Vasa. 2018 Aug;47(5):387-392. doi: 10.1024/0301-1526/a000713. Epub 2018 May
23.

Management of the left subclavian artery during TEVAR - complications and
mid-term follow-up.

Youssef A(1), Ghazy T(2), Kersting S(3), Leip JL(4), Hoffmann RT(5), Kappert
U(2), Matschke K(2), Weiss N(6), Mahlmann A(6).

Author information:
(1)1 Clinic of Internal Medicine and Cardiology, Dresden Heart Centre,
University Hospital, Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany.
(2)2 Department of Cardiac Surgery, Dresden Heart Centre - University Hospital,
Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany.
(3)3 University Centre for Vascular Medicine and Department of Vascular Sugery,
University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
(4)4 Northeastern University, Boston, USA.
(5)5 Institute and Policlinic of Diagnostic Radiology, University Hospital Carl
Gustav Carus, Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany.
(6)6 University Centre for Vascular Medicine and Department of Medicine III -
Section Angiology, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische
Universität, Dresden, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Numerous conditions that affect the boundary between the aortic arch
and descending aorta are treated with thoracic endovascular aortic repair
(TEVAR). In 40 % of cases, coverage of the left subclavian artery (LSA) cannot
be prevented. Subsequently, neurological complications such as stroke or
ischemia of the left upper extremity may develop. However, the actual risk of
these complications is subject to considerable controversy. The optimal
treatment approach, specifically the question whether primary revascularization
of the LSA should be performed in all cases, is unclear.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The present retrospective study analyzed the short- and
mid-term results of patients treated with TEVAR with complete coverage of the
LSA. The postoperative protocol consisted of clinical and noninvasive
examinations as well as morphological imaging. Survival, complication, and
reintervention rates were recorded.
RESULTS: A total of 40 patients, undergoing TEVAR with complete coverage of the
LSA between January 2010 and December 2014 were analyzed retrospectively. The
30-day survival rate was 95 %, the survival one year after performed TEVAR was
67.5 %. The average follow-up was 1.5 years. After TEVAR procedure with complete
coverage of the LSA, only one patient (2.5 %) developed critical ischemia of the
left arm immediately after aortic stent implantation, requiring
revascularization by transposition of the LSA. Anterior spinal artery syndrome
occurred in another patient (2.5 %) immediately following TEVAR. During
follow-up examinations, all patients showed a compensated arterial arm status.
None of the patients developed new neurological deficits during the follow-up
period.
CONCLUSIONS: The study shows that performing TEVAR without primary
revascularization of the LSA was justifiable in our cohort. An important risk
factor of developing cerebral ischemia seems to be insufficient
collateralization through the circle of Willis.

DOI: 10.1024/0301-1526/a000713
PMID: 29788799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
