---
reference_id: "PMID:28379372"
title: "The Microbiological Landscape of Anaerobic Infections in Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Prospective Metagenomic Study."
authors:
- Guet-Revillet H
- Jais JP
- Ungeheuer MN
- Coignard-Biehler H
- Duchatelet S
- Delage M
- Lam T
- Hovnanian A
- Lortholary O
- Nassif X
- Nassif A
- Join-Lambert O
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/cid/cix285
keywords:
- Adult
- "Bacteria, Anaerobic/genetics, isolation & purification, physiology"
- Female
- "Gram-Negative Bacteria/genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/microbiology, physiopathology"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
- Humans
- Male
- Metagenomics
- Microbiota
- "Prevotella/isolation & purification"
- Prospective Studies
- Quality of Life
- "Skin/microbiology, pathology"
- Soft Tissue Infections/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Microbiological Landscape of Anaerobic Infections in Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Prospective Metagenomic Study.
**Authors:** Guet-Revillet H, Jais JP, Ungeheuer MN, Coignard-Biehler H, Duchatelet S, Delage M, Lam T, Hovnanian A, Lortholary O, Nassif X, Nassif A, Join-Lambert O
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/cix285](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cix285)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2017 Jul 15;65(2):282-291. doi: 10.1093/cid/cix285.

The Microbiological Landscape of Anaerobic Infections in Hidradenitis
Suppurativa: A Prospective Metagenomic Study.

Guet-Revillet H(1)(2)(3)(4), Jais JP(1)(5), Ungeheuer MN(6), Coignard-Biehler
H(1)(4)(7), Duchatelet S(1)(8), Delage M(4)(9), Lam T(4)(7)(10), Hovnanian
A(1)(8), Lortholary O(1)(4)(7), Nassif X(1)(2)(3)(4), Nassif A(4)(7)(10),
Join-Lambert O(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Necker-Enfants malades Hospital,
Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris.
(3)INSERM U11151, Team 11.
(4)Centre d'Infectiologie Necker-Pasteur.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Necker-Enfants malades Hospital, Assistance
Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris.
(6)ICAReB platform of the Center for Translational Science, Institut Pasteur.
(7)Department of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Necker-Enfants
malades Hospital, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris.
(8)INSERM U1163, Imagine Institute, Department of Genetics.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Avicenne Hospital, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux
de Paris.
(10)Medical Center, Institut Pasteur.

BACKGROUND: Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a frequent and severe disease of
the skin, characterized by recurrent or chronic skinfold suppurative lesions
with a high impact on quality of life. Although considered inflammatory,
antimicrobial treatments can improve or lead to clinical remission of HS,
suggesting triggering microbial factors. Indeed, mixed anaerobic microbiota are
associated with a majority of HS lesions. Our aim in this study was to
characterize the landscape of anaerobic infections in HS using high-throughput
sequencing.
METHODS: We sampled and cultured 149 lesions and 175 unaffected control skinfold
areas from 65 adult HS patients. The microbiome of 80 anaerobic lesions was
compared to that of 88 control samples by 454 high-throughput sequencing after
construction of 16S ribosomal RNA gene libraries.
RESULTS: Bacterial cultures detected anaerobes in 83% of lesions vs 53% of
control samples, combined with milleri group streptococci and actinomycetes in
33% and 26% of cases, respectively. High-throughput sequencing identified 43
taxa associated with HS lesions. Two gram-negative anaerobic rod taxa,
Prevotella and Porphyromonas, predominated, contrasting with a reduced abundance
of aerobic commensals. These rare taxa of normal skinfold microbiota were
associated with lesions independently of gender, duration and familial history
of HS, body mass index, and location. Two main additional taxa, Fusobacterium
and Parvimonas, correlated with the clinical severity of HS.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study we reveal the high prevalence and particular
landscape of mixed anaerobic infection in HS, paving the way for rationale
targeted antimicrobial treatments.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/cix285
PMID: 28379372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
