---
reference_id: "PMID:32725379"
title: Consolidation Therapy in Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma.
authors:
- Kim P
- Omuro A
journal: Curr Treat Options Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s11864-020-00758-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consolidation Therapy in Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Kim P, Omuro A
**Journal:** Curr Treat Options Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11864-020-00758-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11864-020-00758-4)

## Content

1. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2020 Jul 28;21(9):74. doi:
10.1007/s11864-020-00758-4.

Consolidation Therapy in Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma.

Kim P(1), Omuro A(2).

Author information:
(1)Yale Brain Tumor Center, Yale Cancer Center and Department of Neurology, LLCI 
920, Yale School of Medicine, 15 York Street, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
(2)Yale Brain Tumor Center, Yale Cancer Center and Department of Neurology, LLCI 
920, Yale School of Medicine, 15 York Street, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. 
antonio.omuro@yale.edu.

Primary central nervous system lymphoma is a complex disease with no agreed-upon 
standard-of-care therapy. Induction therapy involves multiagent chemotherapy 
based on high-dose methotrexate, with several regimens available. We have a 
preference for a regimen using rituximab, methotrexate (3.5 g/m2), procarbazine, 
and vincristine (R-MPV) for initial induction therapy, given the favorable 
balance between toxicities and very high response rates (80-90%), which allow 
for decreasing disease burden and increasing the effectiveness of consolidation 
treatments. However, in the absence of consolidation therapies, R-MPV is not an 
effective regimen to achieve long-term remission.Based on high rates of 
long-term remission, our first choice for consolidation therapy is high-dose 
chemotherapy with autologous stem-cell transplant using thiotepa, busulfan, and 
cyclophosphamide as a myeloablative regimen, with a curative intent. This 
typically applies to patients with a favorable performance status at the end of 
induction, typically with ECOG performance status of 2 or better, adequate organ 
function, and age younger than 70. Patients with a high transplant-related 
mortality risk may still be considered for milder myeloablative regimens such as 
carmustine/thiotepa.For patients who are not transplant candidates, we typically 
offer consolidation with reduced dose whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) 
(23.4 Gy), which seems to be associated with lower risks of neurotoxicity as 
compared with higher doses of radiation. For patients who are not transplant 
candidates and that do not accept the risk of cognitive decline from the 
radiotherapy, we typically offer consolidation high-dose cytarabine, provided 
the patient understands the high risk of relapse. For these patients, a clinical 
trial is strongly recommended.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-020-00758-4
PMID: 32725379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]