---
reference_id: PMID:38660386
title: Current understanding of the molecular mechanisms of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy.
authors:
- Chen X
- Gan Y
- Au NPB
- Ma CHE
journal: Front Mol Neurosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2024.1345811
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current understanding of the molecular mechanisms of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy.
**Authors:** Chen X, Gan Y, Au NPB, Ma CHE
**Journal:** Front Mol Neurosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnmol.2024.1345811](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1345811)

## Content

1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2024 Apr 10;17:1345811. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2024.1345811. 
eCollection 2024.

Current understanding of the molecular mechanisms of chemotherapy-induced 
peripheral neuropathy.

Chen X(#)(1), Gan Y(#)(1), Au NPB(1)(2)(3), Ma CHE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR), 
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, University of Portsmouth, 
Portsmouth, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Life Sciences and Healthcare, University of Portsmouth, 
Portsmouth, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is the most common off-target 
adverse effects caused by various chemotherapeutic agents, such as cisplatin, 
oxaliplatin, paclitaxel, vincristine and bortezomib. CIPN is characterized by a 
substantial loss of primary afferent sensory axonal fibers leading to sensory 
disturbances in patients. An estimated of 19-85% of patients developed CIPN 
during the course of chemotherapy. The lack of preventive measures and limited 
treatment options often require a dose reduction or even early termination of 
life-saving chemotherapy, impacting treatment efficacy and patient survival. In 
this Review, we summarized the current understanding on the pathogenesis of 
CIPN. One prominent change induced by chemotherapeutic agents involves the 
disruption of neuronal cytoskeletal architecture and axonal transport dynamics 
largely influenced by the interference of microtubule stability in peripheral 
neurons. Due to an ineffective blood-nerve barrier in our peripheral nervous 
system, exposure to some chemotherapeutic agents causes mitochondrial swelling 
in peripheral nerves, which lead to the opening of mitochondrial permeability 
transition pore and cytochrome c release resulting in degeneration of primary 
afferent sensory fibers. The exacerbated nociceptive signaling and pain 
transmission in CIPN patients is often linked the increased neuronal 
excitability largely due to the elevated expression of various ion channels in 
the dorsal root ganglion neurons. Another important contributing factor of CIPN 
is the neuroinflammation caused by an increased infiltration of immune cells and 
production of inflammatory cytokines. In the central nervous system, 
chemotherapeutic agents also induce neuronal hyperexcitability in the spinal 
dorsal horn and anterior cingulate cortex leading to the development of central 
sensitization that causes CIPN. Emerging evidence suggests that the change in 
the composition and diversity of gut microbiota (dysbiosis) could have direct 
impact on the development and progression of CIPN. Collectively, all these 
aspects contribute to the pathogenesis of CIPN. Recent advances in 
RNA-sequencing offer solid platform for in silico drug screening which enable 
the identification of novel therapeutic agents or repurpose existing drugs to 
alleviate CIPN, holding immense promises for enhancing the quality of life for 
cancer patients who undergo chemotherapy and improve their overall treatment 
outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 Chen, Gan, Au and Ma.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2024.1345811
PMCID: PMC11039947
PMID: 38660386

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.