---
reference_id: "PMID:38702080"
title: "Acute watery diarrhoea cases during cholera outbreak in Syria: a cohort study."
authors:
- Arnaout AY
- Nerabani Y
- Sawas MN
- Alhejazi TJ
- Farho MA
- Arnaout K
- Alshaker H
- Shebli B
- Helou M
- Mobaied BB
- Mouti MB
- Kady F
- Aljarad Z
- Aleppo University Hospital Team
journal: BMJ Open
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-082385
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute watery diarrhoea cases during cholera outbreak in Syria: a cohort study.
**Authors:** Arnaout AY, Nerabani Y, Sawas MN, Alhejazi TJ, Farho MA, Arnaout K, Alshaker H, Shebli B, Helou M, Mobaied BB, Mouti MB, Kady F, Aljarad Z, Aleppo University Hospital Team
**Journal:** BMJ Open (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjopen-2023-082385](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2023-082385)

## Content

1. BMJ Open. 2024 May 3;14(5):e082385. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-082385.

Acute watery diarrhoea cases during cholera outbreak in Syria: a cohort study.

Arnaout AY(1), Nerabani Y(2), Sawas MN(2), Alhejazi TJ(2), Farho MA(2), Arnaout 
K(2), Alshaker H(2), Shebli B(2), Helou M(2), Mobaied BB(2), Mouti MB(2), Kady 
F(2), Aljarad Z(2); Aleppo University Hospital Team.

Collaborators: Shalabi AMNA, Dasouki AF, Breij A, Shheibar AR, Alabdullah A, 
Wais A, Atli AA, Breis AF, Jamal BR, Abduljalil BA, Mashhadi BM, Shyah B, Zitani 
B, Breim F, Maarawi G, Jafa H, Saleh HH, Bathish H, Mhawsh IA, Arnaout I, 
Khalili J, Markaby J, Damour JK, Kanaa L, Kitan LI, Jaber L, Tfnkjy L, Amaraya 
LZ, Zeno MM, Nayef MH, Mobaid MA, Alrawi MG, Jadid MM, Farho MA, Kreid MA, Sawas 
MN, Martini MN, Alkhalifa M, Al-Kurdi MA, Mahmoud MAH, Barakat MN, Keblawy M, 
Fjleh NMR, Arab NMR, Hamdan O, Alkhallouf OF, Sattout R, Ibrahim RYA, Aouir RAA, 
Modabbes R, Arian R, Haykal S, Faour S, Al-Wannous SY, Bourghol S, Alkurayem S, 
Masoud SA, Helou SMA, Rihawi SA, Radwan S, Sagheer SM, Adna T, Najeb W, Jawesh 
W, Hritani W, Dordi Y, Alali Y, Toffaha YS, Alsayed-Ahmad ZA, Badawi R, Ghannam 
GM, Alhasan MMM, Al-Nabbash AM, Kouli A, Bayaa T, Alhaji OA, Tabbaa IA, Alakkash 
M, Alothman SAA, Abazid F, Taleb RS, Rokia B, Aljarad AS, Tarabelsi D, Hamza A, 
Karaze AF, Ibrahim EA, Hamsho H, Ramadan O, Alzalek O, Masri N, Mano AAM, Kurdi 
W, Assi A, Abazid F, Bathish TZ.

Author information:
(1)University of Aleppo Faculty of Medicine, Aleppo, Aleppo Governorate, Syrian 
Arab Republic yamen.arnout@gmail.com.
(2)University of Aleppo Faculty of Medicine, Aleppo, Aleppo Governorate, Syrian 
Arab Republic.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study is a descriptive presentation of cases of 
acute watery diarrhoea (AWD) that were presented to Aleppo University Hospital 
(AUH) during the recent cholera outbreak in Syria.
DESIGN: Prospective, observational, cohort study.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: A total of 1061 patients with AWD were admitted to AUH 
during the timeframe of 20 September 2022 to 20 October 2022. The data 
collection was done through a structured questionnaire. This includes 
comprehensive clinical observation, laboratory analyses, therapeutic 
interventions and holistic case evaluations.
RESULTS: The analysis has revealed notable insights: a predominant proportion of 
patients (58.6%) were residents from urban areas and 40.3% were residents from 
rural areas. Intriguingly, a diverse range of potential infection sources 
emerged from patient data within our hospital, including uncontrolled well 
water, vegetables and faecal-oral transmission through contaminated street/fast 
food. At discharge, most patients were in good health (79.7%), followed by 
moderate health (17.6%) and poor health (2.3%), with a minimal percentage dying 
before discharge (0.4%). The most common complications reported at admission and 
during hospitalisation included electrolyte imbalance (28.2%), followed by 
severe dehydration (16.3%). In the follow-up period, the majority of patients 
exhibited good health (81.0%). Older patients (>60 years) had poorer outcomes, 
with 8.4% having poor health and 4.2% death rate.
CONCLUSIONS: The study found results consistent with previous AWD outbreaks in 
developing countries like Yemen, Nigeria and Lebanon. Preventative measures like 
improving water sanitation and hygiene practices are essential to prevent future 
outbreaks and ease the strain on healthcare systems. Therefore, future studies 
must investigate the risk factors that increase the spread and the severity of 
the disease and investigate the best management method.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-082385
PMCID: PMC11086290
PMID: 38702080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.