---
reference_id: "PMID:29179231"
title: "4H Leukodystrophy: Lessons from 3T Imaging."
authors:
- Cayami FK
- Bugiani M
- Pouwels PJW
- Bernard G
- van der Knaap MS
- Wolf NI
journal: Neuropediatrics
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1608780
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Hereditary Central Nervous System Demyelinating Diseases/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- Myelin Basic Protein/metabolism
- Myelin Proteolipid Protein/metabolism
- "Protein Subunits/genetics, metabolism"
- RNA Polymerase III/genetics
- Spinal Cord/diagnostic imaging
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 4H Leukodystrophy: Lessons from 3T Imaging.
**Authors:** Cayami FK, Bugiani M, Pouwels PJW, Bernard G, van der Knaap MS, Wolf NI
**Journal:** Neuropediatrics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0037-1608780](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0037-1608780)

## Content

1. Neuropediatrics. 2018 Apr;49(2):112-117. doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1608780. Epub
2017  Nov 27.

4H Leukodystrophy: Lessons from 3T Imaging.

Cayami FK(1)(2)(3), Bugiani M(2)(4)(5), Pouwels PJW(5)(6), Bernard 
G(7)(8)(9)(10), van der Knaap MS(2)(5)(11), Wolf NI(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Child Neurology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Center for Biomedical Research, Faculty of Medicine Diponegoro University, 
Semarang, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, 
Canada.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill 
University Health Center, Montreal, Canada.
(10)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Center, Montreal, Canada.
(11)Department of Functional Genomics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive 
Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU University and VU Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

4H leukodystrophy is characterized by hypomyelination, hypodontia, and 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. With its variability in clinical symptoms, 
application of pattern recognition to identify specific magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) features proved useful for the diagnosis. We collected 3T MR 
imaging data of 12 patients with mutations in POLR3A (n = 8), POLR3B (n = 3), 
and POLR1C (n = 1), all obtained at the same scanner. We assessed these images 
and compared them with previously obtained 1.5T images in 8 patients. Novel MRI 
findings were myelin islets, closed eye sign, and a cyst-like lesion in the 
splenium. Myelin islets were variable numbers of small T1 hyperintense and T2 
hypointense dots, mostly in the frontal and parietal white matter, and present 
in all patients. This interpretation was supported with perivascular staining of 
myelin protein in the hypomyelinated white matter of a deceased 4H patient. All 
patients had better myelination of the medial lemniscus with a relatively 
hypointense signal of this structure on axial T2-weighted (T2W) images ("closed 
eye sign"). Five patients had a small cyst-like lesion in the splenium. In 10 
patients with sagittal T2W images, we also found spinal cord hypomyelination. In 
conclusion, imaging at 3T identified additional features in 4H leukodystrophy, 
aiding the MRI diagnosis of this entity.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0037-1608780
PMID: 29179231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.