---
reference_id: "PMID:11839593"
title: Quantitative trait loci influence renal disease progression in a mouse model of Alport syndrome.
authors:
- Andrews KL
- Mudd JL
- Li C
- Miner JH
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64892-4
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Animals
- Blood Urea Nitrogen
- "Collagen Type IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Creatinine/blood
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- "Kidney/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Kidney Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Laminin/metabolism
- Lod Score
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Quantitative Trait, Heritable"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative trait loci influence renal disease progression in a mouse model of Alport syndrome.
**Authors:** Andrews KL, Mudd JL, Li C, Miner JH
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64892-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64892-4)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2002 Feb;160(2):721-30. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64892-4.

Quantitative trait loci influence renal disease progression in a mouse model of
Alport syndrome.

Andrews KL(1), Mudd JL, Li C, Miner JH.

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School
of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Alport syndrome is a human hereditary glomerulonephritis which results in
end-stage renal failure (ESRF) in most cases. It is caused by mutations in any
one of the collagen alpha3(IV), alpha4(IV), or alpha5(IV) chain genes
(COL4A3-COL4A5). Patients carrying identical mutations can exhibit very
different disease courses, suggesting that other genes or the environment
influence disease progression. We previously generated a knockout mouse model of
Alport syndrome by mutating Col4a3. Here, we show that genetic background
strongly influences the timing of onset of disease and rate of progression to
ESRF in these mice. On the 129X1/SvJ background, Col4a3 -/- mice reached ESRF at
approximately 66 days of age, while on the C57BL/6J background, the mean age at
ESRF was 194 days of age. This suggests the existence of modifier genes that
influence disease progression. A detailed histopathological analysis revealed
that glomerular basement membrane lesions typical of Alport syndrome were
significantly more frequent in homozygotes on the 129X1/SvJ background than on
the C57BL/6J background as early as two weeks of age, suggesting that modifier
genes act by influencing glomerular basement membrane structure. Additional data
indicated that differential physiological responses to basement membrane
splitting also underlie the differences in disease progression. We attempted to
map the modifier genes as quantitative trait loci (QTLs) using age at ESRF as
the quantitative trait. Genome scans were performed on mice at the two extremes
in a cohort of mutant F1 x C57BL/6J backcross mice. Analysis with Map Manager QT
revealed QTLs linked to markers on chromosomes 9 and 16. A more detailed
understanding of how these QTLs act could lead to new approaches for therapy in
diverse renal diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64892-4
PMCID: PMC1850644
PMID: 11839593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
