---
reference_id: "PMID:25282696"
title: Smoking cessation is associated with decreased mortality and improved amputation-free survival among patients with symptomatic peripheral artery disease.
authors:
- Armstrong EJ
- Wu J
- Singh GD
- Dawson DL
- Pevec WC
- Amsterdam EA
- Laird JR
journal: J Vasc Surg
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2014.08.064
keywords:
- Aged
- "Amputation, Surgical"
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Limb Salvage
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- "Peripheral Arterial Disease/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Risk Reduction Behavior
- "Smoking/adverse effects, mortality"
- Smoking Cessation
- Smoking Prevention
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smoking cessation is associated with decreased mortality and improved amputation-free survival among patients with symptomatic peripheral artery disease.
**Authors:** Armstrong EJ, Wu J, Singh GD, Dawson DL, Pevec WC, Amsterdam EA, Laird JR
**Journal:** J Vasc Surg (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jvs.2014.08.064](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2014.08.064)

## Content

1. J Vasc Surg. 2014 Dec;60(6):1565-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2014.08.064. Epub 2014
 Oct 3.

Smoking cessation is associated with decreased mortality and improved 
amputation-free survival among patients with symptomatic peripheral artery 
disease.

Armstrong EJ(1), Wu J(2), Singh GD(2), Dawson DL(3), Pevec WC(3), Amsterdam 
EA(2), Laird JR(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
Colo.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine and the Vascular Center, University of 
California, Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, Calif.
(3)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery and the Vascular Center, 
University of California, Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, Calif.
(4)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine and the Vascular Center, University of 
California, Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, Calif. Electronic address: 
john.laird@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Although smoking cessation is recommended for all patients with 
peripheral artery disease, there are little data regarding the prevalence of 
smoking among patients at the time of angiography or the effect of smoking 
cessation on clinical outcomes.
METHODS: Consecutive patients with claudication or critical limb ischemia who 
underwent peripheral angiography from 2006 to 2013 were included in an 
observational cohort analysis. Smoking status was assessed at the time of 
angiography and during follow-up clinic visits. Kaplan-Meier analysis was used 
to assess the relationship between smoking cessation, mortality, and 
amputation-free survival.
RESULTS: Among 739 patients (423 men and 316 women; mean age, 60 ± 12 years), 
204 (28%) remained active smokers at the time of lower extremity angiography. At 
the time of angiography, the mean number of cigarettes smoked per day was 16 ± 
10, and the mean pack-years was 40 ± 25. During the course of the subsequent 
year, 61 patients (30%) successfully quit smoking and maintained continued 
abstinence. Baseline medication use between groups did not differ significantly. 
The mean ankle-brachial index was also similar for quitters vs nonquitters (0.53 
± 24 vs 0.49 ± 0.22; P = .3). During follow-up to 5 years, patients who quit 
smoking had significantly lower all-cause mortality (14% vs 31%; hazard ratio, 
0.40; 95% confidence interval, 0.18-0.90) and improved amputation-free survival 
(81% vs 60%; hazard ratio, 0.43, 95% confidence interval, 0.22-0.86) compared 
with patients who continued smoking, with most of the difference driven by 
reduced mortality among patients who quit smoking. The findings remained 
significant on multivariable analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Approximately one-third of active smokers with peripheral artery 
disease successfully quit smoking ≤ 1 year after lower extremity angiography. 
Patients who quit smoking have lower mortality and improved amputation-free 
survival compared with patients who continue smoking.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2014.08.064
PMID: 25282696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]