---
reference_id: "PMID:8334752"
title: Effects of 17 months treatment using recombinant insulin-like growth factor-I in two children with growth hormone insensitivity (Laron) syndrome.
authors:
- Heinrichs C
- Vis HL
- Bergmann P
- Wilton P
- Bourguignon JP
journal: Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.1993.tb02149.x
keywords:
- Bone Density/drug effects
- Child
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Female
- "Growth Disorders/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Growth Hormone/metabolism
- Humans
- "Injections, Subcutaneous"
- "Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/administration & dosage"
- Male
- "Recombinant Proteins/administration & dosage"
- Syndrome
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of 17 months treatment using recombinant insulin-like growth factor-I in two children with growth hormone insensitivity (Laron) syndrome.
**Authors:** Heinrichs C, Vis HL, Bergmann P, Wilton P, Bourguignon JP
**Journal:** Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2265.1993.tb02149.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2265.1993.tb02149.x)

## Content

1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 1993 Jun;38(6):647-51. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2265.1993.tb02149.x.

Effects of 17 months treatment using recombinant insulin-like growth factor-I in 
two children with growth hormone insensitivity (Laron) syndrome.

Heinrichs C(1), Vis HL, Bergmann P, Wilton P, Bourguignon JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Reine Fabiola, 
University of Brussels, Belgium.

OBJECTIVE: With the availability of recombinant insulin-like growth factor-I 
(recIGF-I), it was possible to study whether this peptide could promote growth 
without noticeable side-effects in patients with growth hormone insensitivity 
syndrome (Laron syndrome). We report data obtained before and during 17 months 
treatment using recIGF-I, 40 micrograms/kg s.c. twice a day, in two Lebanese 
siblings.
PATIENTS: The boy and the girl showed very short stature (-6.8 and -6.1 SDS), 
high GH (79 and 147 IU/I), low plasma IGF-I (0.12 and 0.18 U/ml) and 
undetectable GH-binding protein. Height velocities were 4.3 and 3.8 cm/year 
before treatment which started at 8.4 and 6.8 years of age, respectively.
RESULTS: After 1-8 weeks of therapy, biological evidence of IGF-I effect was 
obtained from reduction in serum GH and increase in procollagen-I. During the 
first 6 months of treatment, height velocity increased to 7.8 and 8.4 cm/year 
without any clinical evidence of side-effects. Between 6 and 12 months, growth 
response decreased to 6.6 and 6.3 cm/year. Between 12 and 17 months, growth rate 
returned to pretreatment values. Changes in bone mineral density paralleled 
growth response and bone maturation increased by 1.5 and 2.0 years during the 
first 12 months of treatment. Daily assessment of blood sugar showed 
asymptomatic low values (< 2.8 mM/I) in 11/730 and 22/730 measurements in the 
boy and the girl, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of two patients with growth hormone insensitivity 
syndrome using 40 micrograms/kg of IGF-I twice a day resulted in increased 
linear bone growth and bone mineralization as well as increased bone maturation 
without remarkable adverse events. After 1 year of therapy, growth response 
could no longer be observed in these two patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.1993.tb02149.x
PMID: 8334752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]