---
reference_id: "PMID:21636552"
title: "BRAF activation induces transformation and then senescence in human neural stem cells: a pilocytic astrocytoma model."
authors:
- Raabe EH
- Lim KS
- Kim JM
- Meeker A
- Mao XG
- Nikkhah G
- Maciaczyk J
- Kahlert U
- Jain D
- Bar E
- Cohen KJ
- Eberhart CG
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-3349
keywords:
- "Astrocytoma/genetics, pathology"
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/metabolism"
- Cellular Senescence
- Enzyme Activation
- "Genes, p16"
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism
- Neural Stem Cells/enzymology
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, metabolism"
- "SOXB1 Transcription Factors/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- beta-Galactosidase/biosynthesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF activation induces transformation and then senescence in human neural stem cells: a pilocytic astrocytoma model.
**Authors:** Raabe EH, Lim KS, Kim JM, Meeker A, Mao XG, Nikkhah G, Maciaczyk J, Kahlert U, Jain D, Bar E, Cohen KJ, Eberhart CG
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-3349](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-3349)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 1;17(11):3590-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-3349.

BRAF activation induces transformation and then senescence in human neural stem
cells: a pilocytic astrocytoma model.

Raabe EH(1), Lim KS, Kim JM, Meeker A, Mao XG, Nikkhah G, Maciaczyk J, Kahlert
U, Jain D, Bar E, Cohen KJ, Eberhart CG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology and Departments of Pathology and Pediatrics
and Adolescent Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA. eraabe2@jhmi.edu

PURPOSE: BRAF is frequently activated by gene fusion or point mutation in
pilocytic astrocytoma, the most common pediatric brain tumor. We investigated
the functional effect of constitutive BRAF activation in normal human neural
stem and progenitor cells to determine its role in tumor induction in the brain.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The constitutively active BRAF(V600E) allele was introduced
into human neurospheres, and its effects on MAPK (mitogen-activated protein
kinase) signaling, proliferation, soft agarose colony formation, stem cell
phenotype, and induction of cellular senescence were assayed.
Immunohistochemistry was used to examine p16(INK4a) levels in pilocytic
astrocytoma.
RESULTS: BRAF(V600E) expression initially strongly promoted colony formation but
did not lead to significantly increased proliferation. BRAF(V600E)-expressing
cells subsequently stopped proliferating and induced markers of oncogene-induced
senescence including acidic β-galactosidase, PAI-1, and p16(INK4a) whereas
controls did not. Onset of senescence was associated with decreased expression
of neural stem cell markers including SOX2. Primary pilocytic astrocytoma
cultures also showed induction of acidic β-galactosidase activity.
Immunohistochemical examination of 66 pilocytic astrocytomas revealed p16(INK4a)
immunoreactivity in the majority of cases, but patients with tumors negative for
p16(INK4a) had significantly shorter overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: BRAF activation in human neural stem and progenitor cells initially
promotes clonogenic growth in soft agarose, suggesting partial cellular
transformation, but oncogene-induced senescence subsequently limits
proliferation. Induction of senescence by BRAF may help explain the low-grade
pathobiology of pilocytic astrocytoma, whereas worse clinical outcomes
associated with tumors lacking p16(INK4a) expression could reflect failure to
induce senescence or an escape from oncogene-induced senescence.

©2011 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-3349
PMCID: PMC4086658
PMID: 21636552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest No
potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.
