---
reference_id: "PMID:38927050"
title: "Schnitzler Syndrome: Insights into Its Pathogenesis, Clinical Manifestations, and Current Management."
authors:
- Braud A
- Lipsker D
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14060646
keywords:
- "Schnitzler Syndrome/drug therapy, diagnosis"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin M/immunology
- "Interleukin-1/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schnitzler Syndrome: Insights into Its Pathogenesis, Clinical Manifestations, and Current Management.
**Authors:** Braud A, Lipsker D
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14060646](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14060646)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 May 31;14(6):646. doi: 10.3390/biom14060646.

Schnitzler Syndrome: Insights into Its Pathogenesis, Clinical Manifestations, 
and Current Management.

Braud A(1), Lipsker D(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatologic Clinic, University Hospital of Strasbourg, 67091 Strasbourg, 
France.

Schnitzler syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by a chronic urticarial 
rash associated with immunoglobulin M (IgM) monoclonal gammopathy. Schnitzler 
syndrome shares strong clinicopathologic similarities with monogenic 
IL-1-mediated autoinflammatory disorders and is now considered an acquired 
adult-onset autoinflammatory disease. The spectacular effect of interleukin-1 
inhibitors demonstrates the key role of this cytokine in the pathogenesis of the 
disease. However, the physiopathology of Schnitzler syndrome remains elusive, 
and the main question regarding the relationship between autoinflammatory 
features and monoclonal gammopathy is still unanswered. The purpose of this 
narrative review is to describe what is currently known about the pathogenesis 
of this peculiar disease, as well as to address its diagnosis and management.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14060646
PMCID: PMC11202231
PMID: 38927050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.