---
reference_id: PMID:19275634
title: "Clearance of amyloid-beta peptide across the blood-brain barrier: implication for therapies in Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Deane R
- Bell RD
- Sagare A
- Zlokovic BV
journal: CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2174/187152709787601867
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/immunology, metabolism, therapy"
- "Amyloid beta-Peptides/immunology, metabolism"
- Animals
- Antibodies/metabolism
- "Blood-Brain Barrier/immunology, metabolism"
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class I/metabolism
- Humans
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-1/metabolism
- Receptor for Advanced Glycation End Products
- "Receptors, Fc/metabolism"
- "Receptors, Immunologic/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clearance of amyloid-beta peptide across the blood-brain barrier: implication for therapies in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Deane R, Bell RD, Sagare A, Zlokovic BV
**Journal:** CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2174/187152709787601867](https://doi.org/10.2174/187152709787601867)

## Content

1. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2009 Mar;8(1):16-30. doi: 
10.2174/187152709787601867.

Clearance of amyloid-beta peptide across the blood-brain barrier: implication 
for therapies in Alzheimer's disease.

Deane R(1), Bell RD, Sagare A, Zlokovic BV.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative and Vascular Brain Disorders, University of 
Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. 
Rashid_Deane@urmc.rochester.edu

The main receptors for amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta) transport across the 
blood-brain barrier (BBB) from brain to blood and blood to brain are low-density 
lipoprotein receptor related protein-1 (LRP1) and receptor for advanced 
glycation end products (RAGE), respectively. In normal human plasma a soluble 
form of LRP1 (sLRP1) is a major endogenous brain Abeta 'sinker' that sequesters 
some 70 to 90 % of plasma Abeta peptides. In Alzheimer's disease (AD), the 
levels of sLRP1 and its capacity to bind Abeta are reduced which increases free 
Abeta fraction in plasma. This in turn may increase brain Abeta burden through 
decreased Abeta efflux and/or increased Abeta influx across the BBB. In Abeta 
immunotherapy, anti-Abeta antibody sequestration of plasma Abeta enhances the 
peripheral Abeta 'sink action'. However, in contrast to endogenous sLRP1 which 
does not penetrate the BBB, some anti-Abeta antibodies may slowly enter the 
brain which reduces the effectiveness of their sink action and may contribute to 
neuroinflammation and intracerebral hemorrhage. Anti-Abeta antibody/Abeta immune 
complexes are rapidly cleared from brain to blood via FcRn (neonatal Fc 
receptor) across the BBB. In a mouse model of AD, restoring plasma sLRP1 with 
recombinant LRP-IV cluster reduces brain Abeta burden and improves functional 
changes in cerebral blood flow (CBF) and behavioral responses, without causing 
neuroinflammation and/or hemorrhage. The C-terminal sequence of Abeta is 
required for its direct interaction with sLRP and LRP-IV cluster which is 
completely blocked by the receptor-associated protein (RAP) that does not 
directly bind Abeta. Therapies to increase LRP1 expression or reduce RAGE 
activity at the BBB and/or restore the peripheral Abeta 'sink' action, hold 
potential to reduce brain Abeta and inflammation, and improve CBF and functional 
recovery in AD models, and by extension in AD patients.

DOI: 10.2174/187152709787601867
PMCID: PMC2872930
PMID: 19275634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]