---
reference_id: "PMID:36417581"
title: Recent therapeutic approaches to cystathionine beta-synthase-deficient homocystinuria.
authors:
- Majtan T
- Kožich V
- Kruger WD
journal: Br J Pharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/bph.15991
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent therapeutic approaches to cystathionine beta-synthase-deficient homocystinuria.
**Authors:** Majtan T, Kožich V, Kruger WD
**Journal:** Br J Pharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bph.15991](https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.15991)

## Content

1. Br J Pharmacol. 2023 Feb;180(3):264-278. doi: 10.1111/bph.15991. Epub 2022 Dec
 8.

Recent therapeutic approaches to cystathionine beta-synthase-deficient 
homocystinuria.

Majtan T(1), Kožich V(2)(3), Kruger WD(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Fribourg, Faculty of Science and 
Medicine, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles 
University-First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, General 
University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS)-deficient homocystinuria (HCU) is the most 
common inborn error of sulfur amino acid metabolism. The pyridoxine 
non-responsive form of the disease manifests itself by massively increasing 
plasma and tissue concentrations of homocysteine, a toxic intermediate of 
methionine metabolism that is thought to be the major cause of clinical 
complications including skeletal deformities, connective tissue defects, 
thromboembolism and cognitive impairment. The current standard of care involves 
significant dietary interventions that, despite being effective, often adversely 
affect quality of life of HCU patients, leading to poor adherence to therapy and 
inadequate biochemical control with clinical complications. In recent years, the 
unmet need for better therapeutic options has resulted in development of novel 
enzyme and gene therapies and exploration of pharmacological approaches to 
rescue CBS folding defects caused by missense pathogenic mutations. Here, we 
review scientific evidence and current state of affairs in development of recent 
approaches to treat HCU.

© 2022 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.15991
PMCID: PMC9822868
PMID: 36417581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement TM is inventor on 
patents related to pegtibatinase (e.g. US patents 9,034,318 and 9,243,239). TM 
provides ad hoc consulting services to Travere Therapeutics. VK declares that 
Charles University-First Faculty of Medicine received partial reimbursement from 
Orphan Technologies for the analysis of mouse tissues in 2014–2017. VK does not 
have any other conflict of interest. WDK is an inventor on a pending patent 
related to CBS gene therapy.