---
reference_id: "PMID:28501563"
title: Kindlin-1 protects cells from oxidative damage through activation of ERK signalling.
authors:
- Emmert H
- Patel H
- Brunton VG
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.05.013
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Blister/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/genetics"
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cytoprotection
- DNA Damage
- Epidermolysis Bullosa/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Neoplasms, Experimental"
- Oxidative Stress
- Periodontal Diseases/genetics
- Photosensitivity Disorders/genetics
- Skin/pathology
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kindlin-1 protects cells from oxidative damage through activation of ERK signalling.
**Authors:** Emmert H, Patel H, Brunton VG
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.05.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.05.013)

## Content

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2017 Jul;108:896-903. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.05.013. Epub 2017 May 10.

Kindlin-1 protects cells from oxidative damage through activation of ERK 
signalling.

Emmert H(1), Patel H(1), Brunton VG(2).

Author information:
(1)Edinburgh Cancer Research UK Centre, Institute of Genetics & Molecular 
Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, UK.
(2)Edinburgh Cancer Research UK Centre, Institute of Genetics & Molecular 
Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, UK. 
Electronic address: v.brunton@ed.ac.uk.

Kindlin-1 is a FERM domain containing adaptor protein that is found 
predominantly at cell-extracellular matrix adhesions where it binds to 
β-integrin subunits and is required for integrin activation. Loss of function 
mutations in the FERMT1 gene which encodes Kindlin-1 leads to the development of 
Kindler Syndrome (KS) an autosomal recessive skin disorder characterized by skin 
blistering, photosensitivity, and predisposition to aggressive squamous cell 
carcinoma (SCC). Here we show that loss of Kindlin-1 sensitizes both SCC cells 
and keratinocytes to oxidative stress: Kindlin-1 deficient cells have higher 
levels of reactive oxygen species, decreased viability and increased DNA damage 
after treatment with either hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) or irradiation with UVA. We 
show that Kindlin-1 is required to fully activate ERK signalling after oxidative 
damage, and that activation of ERK protects cells from DNA damage following 
oxidative stress: inhibition of ERK activation sensitizes Kindlin-1 expressing 
cells, but not Kindlin-1 deficient cells to oxidative stress. Finally we 
demonstrate that the Kindlin-1 dependent activation of ERK and protection from 
DNA damage following oxidative stress depends on the ability of Kindlin-1 to 
bind integrins. Thus loss of Kindlin-1 leads to an imbalance in the cellular 
oxidative state, which renders Kindlin-1 deficient cells more prone to the 
effects of ROS generated in response to oxidative stress. We propose that 
Kindlin-1 dependent activation of ERK signalling is a key molecular mechanism 
that renders KS keratinocytes more sensitive to oxidative damage and contributes 
to the increased photosensitivity in KS patients.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.05.013
PMID: 28501563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]