---
reference_id: "PMID:16794820"
title: Phenotypic characterization of Bbs4 null mice reveals age-dependent penetrance and variable expressivity.
authors:
- Eichers ER
- Abd-El-Barr MM
- Paylor R
- Lewis RA
- Bi W
- Lin X
- Meehan TP
- Stockton DW
- Wu SM
- Lindsay E
- Justice MJ
- Beales PL
- Katsanis N
- Lupski JR
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-006-0197-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic characterization of Bbs4 null mice reveals age-dependent penetrance and variable expressivity.
**Authors:** Eichers ER, Abd-El-Barr MM, Paylor R, Lewis RA, Bi W, Lin X, Meehan TP, Stockton DW, Wu SM, Lindsay E, Justice MJ, Beales PL, Katsanis N, Lupski JR
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-006-0197-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-006-0197-y)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2006 Sep;120(2):211-26. doi: 10.1007/s00439-006-0197-y. Epub 2006
Jun  23.

Phenotypic characterization of Bbs4 null mice reveals age-dependent penetrance 
and variable expressivity.

Eichers ER(1), Abd-El-Barr MM, Paylor R, Lewis RA, Bi W, Lin X, Meehan TP, 
Stockton DW, Wu SM, Lindsay E, Justice MJ, Beales PL, Katsanis N, Lupski JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza Room 604B, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare oligogenic disorder exhibiting both 
clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Although the BBS phenotype is variable both 
between and within families, the syndrome is characterized by the hallmarks of 
developmental and learning difficulties, post-axial polydactylia, obesity, 
hypogenitalism, renal abnormalities, retinal dystrophy, and several less 
frequently observed features. Eleven genes mutated in BBS patients have been 
identified, and more are expected to exist, since about 20-30% of all families 
cannot be explained by the known loci. To investigate the etiopathogenesis of 
BBS, we created a mouse null for one of the murine homologues, Bbs4, to assess 
the contribution of one gene to the pleiotropic murine Bbs phenotype. Bbs4 null 
mice, although initially runted compared to their littermates, ultimately become 
obese in a gender-dependent manner, females earlier and with more severity than 
males. Blood chemistry tests indicated abnormal lipid profiles, signs of liver 
dysfunction, and elevated insulin and leptin levels reminiscent of metabolic 
syndrome. As in patients with BBS, we found age-dependent retinal dystrophy. 
Behavioral assessment revealed that mutant mice displayed more anxiety-related 
responses and reduced social dominance. We noted the rare occurrence of birth 
defects, including neural tube defects and hydrometrocolpos, in the null mice. 
Evaluations of these null mice have uncovered phenotypic features with 
age-dependent penetrance and variable expressivity, partially recapitulating the 
human BBS phenotype.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-006-0197-y
PMID: 16794820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]