---
reference_id: "PMID:39269983"
title: Mechanisms underlying age-associated exacerbation of pulmonary veno-occlusive disease.
authors:
- Prabhakar A
- Wadhwa M
- Kumar R
- Ghatpande P
- Gandjeva A
- Tuder RM
- Graham BB
- Lagna G
- Hata A
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.181877
keywords:
- Animals
- Rats
- Pulmonary Veno-Occlusive Disease/pathology
- Male
- Protein Phosphatase 1/metabolism
- eIF-2 Kinase/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mitomycin/pharmacology
- Eukaryotic Initiation Factor-2/metabolism
- Vascular Remodeling/drug effects
- Phosphorylation
- Age Factors
- Aging/pathology
- "Hypertrophy, Right Ventricular/pathology, etiology"
- Humans
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms underlying age-associated exacerbation of pulmonary veno-occlusive disease.
**Authors:** Prabhakar A, Wadhwa M, Kumar R, Ghatpande P, Gandjeva A, Tuder RM, Graham BB, Lagna G, Hata A
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.181877](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.181877)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2024 Sep 5;9(19):e181877. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.181877.

Mechanisms underlying age-associated exacerbation of pulmonary veno-occlusive 
disease.

Prabhakar A(1), Wadhwa M(2)(3), Kumar R(4), Ghatpande P(1), Gandjeva A(5), Tuder 
RM(5), Graham BB(4), Lagna G(1), Hata A(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute.
(2)Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, and.
(3)Department of Radiology, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Lung Biology Center, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Zuckerberg San 
Francisco General Hospital, California, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
Colorado, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) is a rare but severe form of pulmonary 
hypertension characterized by the obstruction of pulmonary arteries and veins, 
causing increased pulmonary artery pressure and leading to right ventricular 
(RV) heart failure. PVOD is often resistant to conventional pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH) treatments and has a poor prognosis, with a median survival 
time of 2-3 years after diagnosis. We previously showed that the administration 
of a chemotherapy agent mitomycin C (MMC) in rats mediates PVOD through the 
activation of the eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) kinase protein kinase R 
(PKR) and the integrated stress response (ISR), resulting in the impairment of 
vascular endothelial junctional structure and barrier function. Here, we 
demonstrate that aged rats over 1 year exhibit more severe vascular remodeling 
and RV hypertrophy than young adult rats following MMC treatment. This is 
attributed to an age-associated elevation of basal ISR activity and depletion of 
protein phosphatase 1, leading to prolonged eIF2 phosphorylation and sustained 
ISR activation. Pharmacological blockade of PKR or ISR mitigates PVOD phenotypes 
in both age groups, suggesting that targeting the PKR/ISR axis could be a 
potential therapeutic strategy for PVOD.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.181877
PMCID: PMC11466196
PMID: 39269983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.