---
reference_id: "PMID:20466616"
title: "Lymphoma of the testis as primary location: tumour review."
authors:
- Koukourakis G
- Kouloulias V
journal: Clin Transl Oncol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s12094-010-0513-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lymphoma of the testis as primary location: tumour review.
**Authors:** Koukourakis G, Kouloulias V
**Journal:** Clin Transl Oncol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12094-010-0513-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12094-010-0513-9)

## Content

1. Clin Transl Oncol. 2010 May;12(5):321-5. doi: 10.1007/s12094-010-0513-9.

Lymphoma of the testis as primary location: tumour review.

Koukourakis G(1), Kouloulias V.

Author information:
(1)Saint Savvas Anticancer Institute of Athens, Athens Greece. 
gkoyokoyrakis@yahoo.gr

Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma as a primary testicular neoplasm accounts approximately 
9% of all testicular malignant tumours and about 1-2% of all non-Hodgkin's 
lymphoma. This neoplasm is the most common malignant tumour of the testis in the 
elderly. The most common histotype in primary forms is the diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma, whereas more aggressive histologies such as Burkitt's lymphoma are 
principal founded in cases of secondary involvement of the testis. Regarding 
clinical presentation, the most common sign is a unilateral painless scrotal 
swelling, sometimes with sharp scrotal pain or hydrocele. In patients with 
advanced stage, the systematic B symptoms are present in 25-41% of all cases. In 
35% of patients, bilateral testicular involvement is detected. In more advanced 
stages with para-aortic lymph-node involvement, ascites and abdominal pain is 
evident. Despite the fact that responses to doxorubicin- containing 
chemotherapy, especially in early stages, show good results, relapses are often 
seen, and the prognosis of this tumour is very poor. Testicular lymphoma often 
disseminates to other extranodal organs, such as contralateral testis, central 
nervous system (CNS), lung, pleura, Waldeyer's ring and soft tissue. For 
patients with limited disease, the recommended first-line treatment is 
orchiectomy followed by rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, 
and prednisone (R-CHOP) combination chemotherapy, with central nervous system 
(CNS) prophylaxis and prophylactic irradiation of the contralateral testis. In 
more advanced or relapsed disease, management should follow the worldwide 
recommendations for nodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Here we present 
a review of this tumour.

DOI: 10.1007/s12094-010-0513-9
PMID: 20466616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]