---
reference_id: "PMID:22247356"
title: Morbidity, mortality, and organ damage in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Grika EP
- Ziakas PD
- Zintzaras E
- Moutsopoulos HM
- Vlachoyiannopoulos PG
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.110800
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Morbidity, mortality, and organ damage in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Grika EP, Ziakas PD, Zintzaras E, Moutsopoulos HM, Vlachoyiannopoulos PG
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.3899/jrheum.110800](https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.110800)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2012 Mar;39(3):516-23. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.110800. Epub 2012 Jan 
15.

Morbidity, mortality, and organ damage in patients with antiphospholipid 
syndrome.

Grika EP(1), Ziakas PD, Zintzaras E, Moutsopoulos HM, Vlachoyiannopoulos PG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, School of Medicine, National University of 
Athens, Athens, Greece.

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 2013 Jan;40(1):89. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.120873.
    J Rheumatol. 2013 Jan;40(1):90. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.120976.

OBJECTIVE: To describe morbidity, organ damage, mortality, and cause of death in 
patients with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS).
METHODS: Descriptive analysis of 135 patients. Patients were clustered according 
to initial event: arterial thrombosis including stroke (AT; n = 46), venous 
thrombosis including pulmonary emboli (VT; n = 53), or pregnancy morbidity (PM; 
n = 36). Disease progression according to initial event and prevalence of organ 
damage was observed.
RESULTS: APS occurs among young individuals (mean age 33.3 ± 11.9 yrs). 
One-third of the patients have APS secondary to systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) or SLE-like disease. A broad spectrum of clinical manifestations mark the 
disease onset even before diagnosis. The pattern of initial presentation is 
preserved with regard to second event; VT is followed by VT (84%), AT is 
followed by AT (95%), and PM is followed by PM (88.9%). The highest morbidity is 
attributed to neurologic damage. PM is more likely to be followed by a second 
event, yet is associated with less organ damage than AT and VT. After a mean 
followup of 7.55 years, 29% of patients experienced organ damage and 5 died, 
with Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics score associated with 
increased mortality (HR 1.31, 95% CI 1.07-1.60, p = 0.01, per 1-unit increase); 
hematological malignancies occurred in 2 patients after a cumulative followup of 
1020 person-years. Coexistent SLE adds significant damage in patients with APS.
CONCLUSION: APS is a disease of young individuals, who experience increased 
morbidity. Neurologic damage is the most common cause of morbidity. AT at 
presentation as well as coexistent SLE are associated with poor outcome.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.110800
PMID: 22247356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]