---
reference_id: "PMID:37968750"
title: "Sex-specific association between carotid atherosclerosis and fundus arteriosclerosis in a Chinese population: a retrospective cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Liu C
- Yang X
- Ji M
- Zhang X
- Bian X
- Chen T
- Li Y
- Qi X
- Wu J
- Wang J
- Tang Z
journal: Eur J Med Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s40001-023-01508-6
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- Retrospective Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Arteriosclerosis/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, complications"
- "Carotid Artery Diseases/complications, diagnostic imaging, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex-specific association between carotid atherosclerosis and fundus arteriosclerosis in a Chinese population: a retrospective cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Liu C, Yang X, Ji M, Zhang X, Bian X, Chen T, Li Y, Qi X, Wu J, Wang J, Tang Z
**Journal:** Eur J Med Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40001-023-01508-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40001-023-01508-6)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Res. 2023 Nov 15;28(1):518. doi: 10.1186/s40001-023-01508-6.

Sex-specific association between carotid atherosclerosis and fundus 
arteriosclerosis in a Chinese population: a retrospective cross-sectional study.

Liu C(#)(1), Yang X(#)(2), Ji M(#)(1), Zhang X(3), Bian X(2), Chen T(2), Li 
Y(4), Qi X(4), Wu J(1), Wang J(5), Tang Z(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory, Hua Dong Sanatorium, Wuxi, 214065, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Hua Dong Sanatorium, Wuxi, 214065, China.
(3)Department of Nursing, Hua Dong Sanatorium, Wuxi, 214065, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Hua Dong Sanatorium, Wuxi, 214065, China.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Hua Dong Sanatorium, Wuxi, 214065, China. 
wangjing2034@126.com.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Suzhou Medical College 
of Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, China. tangzx@suda.edu.cn.
(7)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric 
Diseases, Suzhou Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, China. 
tangzx@suda.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Vascular stiffening is highly predictive of major adverse 
cardiovascular events. It is not clear whether microangiopathy, such as fundus 
arteriosclerosis, is related to carotid atherosclerosis. Hence, this study was 
designed to investigate the relationship between carotid atherosclerosis and 
fundus arteriosclerosis among individuals of different sexes in the Chinese 
health-examination population.
METHODS: This retrospective cross-sectional study involved 20,836 participants, 
including 13050 males and 7786 females. All participants underwent a detailed 
health examination, including medical history assessment, physical examination, 
assessment of lifestyle factors, fundus photography, Doppler ultrasound 
examination of the neck, and laboratory examinations. Two trained 
ophthalmologists analysed fundus arteriosclerosis based on fundus photographs, 
while carotid atherosclerosis was diagnosed using colour Doppler sonography of 
the neck. Binary logistic regression was used to analyse the relationship 
between carotid atherosclerosis and fundus arteriosclerosis.
RESULTS: In participants with fundus arteriosclerosis, the incidence of carotid 
atherosclerosis was higher than that of participants without fundus 
arteriosclerosis (52.94% vs. 47.06%). After adjustments for potential 
confounding factors, fundus arteriosclerosis was significantly associated with 
the risk of carotid atherosclerosis. The OR with 95% CI for fundus 
arteriosclerosis was 1.17 (1.02, 1.34) with p = 0.0262, and individuals who did 
not have fundus arteriosclerosis were used as a reference in the total 
population. Fundus arteriosclerosis was associated with the incidence of carotid 
atherosclerosis in males (p = 0.0005) but not in females (p = 0.0746).
CONCLUSIONS: Fundus arteriosclerosis was closely associated with carotid 
atherosclerosis in the Chinese population. This association was found in males 
but not in females.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40001-023-01508-6
PMCID: PMC10648731
PMID: 37968750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.