---
reference_id: "PMID:39225018"
title: "Evaluation of the clinical, biochemical, and molecular spectrum of Cobalamin C (CblC) defect in 33 patients from Pakistan."
authors:
- Ahmed S
- Cai L
- Akbar F
- Siddiqui A
- DeBerardinis RJ
- Ni M
- Vu H
- Afroze B
journal: Scand J Clin Lab Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/00365513.2024.2394983
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Pakistan
- Vitamin B 12/blood
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- Oxidoreductases/genetics
- Child
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/genetics, diagnosis"
- Homocysteine/blood
- Adolescent
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of the clinical, biochemical, and molecular spectrum of Cobalamin C (CblC) defect in 33 patients from Pakistan.
**Authors:** Ahmed S, Cai L, Akbar F, Siddiqui A, DeBerardinis RJ, Ni M, Vu H, Afroze B
**Journal:** Scand J Clin Lab Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00365513.2024.2394983](https://doi.org/10.1080/00365513.2024.2394983)

## Content

1. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2024 Oct;84(6):391-397. doi:
10.1080/00365513.2024.2394983. Epub 2024 Sep 3.

Evaluation of the clinical, biochemical, and molecular spectrum of Cobalamin C
(CblC) defect in 33 patients from Pakistan.

Ahmed S(1), Cai L(2), Akbar F(3), Siddiqui A(4), DeBerardinis RJ(5)(6), Ni M(5),
Vu H(5), Afroze B(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Chemical Pathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Aga Khan University.
(2)Quantitative Biomedical Research Center, Peter O'Donnell School of Public
Health, UT Southwestern, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Paediatrics & Child Health, Aga Khan University Hospital,
Karachi.
(4)Medical College, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi.
(5)Children's Medical Center Research Institute at UT Southwestern, Texas, USA.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UT Southwestern, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cobalamin C is the most common inborn error of intracellular
cobalamin metabolism caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in the MMACHC gene,
leading to impaired conversion of dietary vitamin B12 into its two metabolically
active forms, methylcobalamin and adenosylcobalamin. Biochemical hallmarks are
elevated plasma total homocysteine (HCYs) and low methionine accompanied by
methylmalonic aciduria. This study aimed to evaluate the clinical, biochemical,
and molecular analysis of Pakistani patients with CblC defect.
METHODS: Medical charts, urine organic acid (UOA) chromatograms, plasma amino
acid levels, plasma tHcy and MMACHC gene results of patients presenting at the
Biochemical Genetics Clinic, AKUH from 2013-2021 were reviewed. Details were
collected on a pre-structured questionnaire. SPSS 22 was used for data analysis.
RESULTS: CblC was found in 33 cases (Male:Female 19:14). The median age of
symptoms onset and diagnosis were 300 (IQR:135-1800) and 1380 (IQR: 240-2730)
days. The most common clinical features were cognitive impairment (n = 29),
seizures (n = 23), motor developmental delay (n = 20), hypotonia (n = 17), and
sparse/hypopigmented scalp hair (n = 16). The MMACHC gene sequencing revealed
homozygous pathogenic variant c.394C > T, (p.Arg132*) in 32 patients, whereas
c.609G > A, (p.TRP203*) in one patient whose ancestors had settled in Pakistan
from China decades ago. The median age of treatment initiation was 1530 (IQR:
240-2790). The median pre-treatment HCYs levels were 134 (IQR:87.2-155.5)
compared to post-treatment levels of 33.3 (IQR: 27.3-44.95) umol/L.
CONCLUSIONS: Thirty-three cases of CblC defect from a single center underscores
a significant number of the disorder within Pakistan. Late diagnosis emphasizes
the need for increased clinical awareness and adequate diagnostic facilities.

DOI: 10.1080/00365513.2024.2394983
PMID: 39225018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
