---
reference_id: "PMID:35743335"
title: Multiple Arterial Dissections and Connective Tissue Abnormalities.
authors:
- Erhart P
- Körfer D
- Dihlmann S
- Qiao JL
- Hausser I
- Ringleb P
- Männer J
- Dikow N
- Schaaf CP
- Grond-Ginsbach C
- Böckler D
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jcm11123264
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Arterial Dissections and Connective Tissue Abnormalities.
**Authors:** Erhart P, Körfer D, Dihlmann S, Qiao JL, Hausser I, Ringleb P, Männer J, Dikow N, Schaaf CP, Grond-Ginsbach C, Böckler D
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm11123264](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm11123264)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2022 Jun 7;11(12):3264. doi: 10.3390/jcm11123264.

Multiple Arterial Dissections and Connective Tissue Abnormalities.

Erhart P(1), Körfer D(1), Dihlmann S(1), Qiao JL(1), Hausser I(2), Ringleb P(3),
Männer J(4), Dikow N(5), Schaaf CP(5), Grond-Ginsbach C(1), Böckler D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, University Hospital of
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany.
(4)Institute of Anatomy and Embryology, UMG, University of Göttingen, 37075
Göttingen, Germany.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Although patients with multiple arterial dissections in distinct
arterial regions rarely present with known connective tissue syndromes, we
hypothesized that mild connective tissue abnormalities are common findings in
these patients.
METHODS: From a consecutive register of 322 patients with cervical artery
dissection (CeAD), we identified and analyzed 4 patients with a history of
additional dissections in other vascular beds. In three patients, dermal
connective tissue was examined by electron microscopy. DNA from all four
patients was studied by whole-exome sequencing and copy number variation (CNV)
analysis.
RESULTS: The collagen fibers of dermal biopsies were pathologic in all three
analyzed patients. One patient carried a CNV disrupting the COL3A1 and COL5A2
genes (vascular or hypermobility type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome), and another
patient a CNV in MYH11 (familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections). The
third patient carried a missense substitution in COL5A2.
CONCLUSION: Three patients showed morphologic alterations of the dermal
connective tissue, and two patients carried pathogenic variants in genes
associated with arterial connective tissue dysfunction. The findings suggest
that genetic testing should be recommended after recurrent arterial dissections,
independently of apparent phenotypical signs of connective tissue disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11123264
PMCID: PMC9224905
PMID: 35743335

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
