---
reference_id: "PMID:27903991"
title: Role of Oxidative Stress and Inflammatory Factors in Diabetic Kidney Disease.
authors:
- Aghadavod E
- Khodadadi S
- Baradaran A
- Nasri P
- Bahmani M
- Rafieian-Kopaei M
journal: Iran J Kidney Dis
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Oxidative Stress and Inflammatory Factors in Diabetic Kidney Disease.
**Authors:** Aghadavod E, Khodadadi S, Baradaran A, Nasri P, Bahmani M, Rafieian-Kopaei M
**Journal:** Iran J Kidney Dis (2016)

## Content

1. Iran J Kidney Dis. 2016 Nov;10(6):337-343.

Role of Oxidative Stress and Inflammatory Factors in Diabetic Kidney Disease.

Aghadavod E, Khodadadi S, Baradaran A, Nasri P, Bahmani M, Rafieian-Kopaei M(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Plants Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, 
Shahrekord, Iran. rafieian@gmail.com.

Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a serious complication of diabetes mellitus, and 
its prevalence has been increasing in developed countries. Diabetic nephropathy 
has become the most common single cause of end-stage renal disease worldwide. 
Oxidative stress and inflammation factors are hypothesized to play a role in the 
development of late diabetes complications. Chronic hyperglycemia increases 
oxidative stress, significantly modifies the structure and function of proteins 
and lipids, and induces glycoxidation and peroxidation. Therefore, hyperglycemia 
causes auto-oxidation of glucose, glycation of proteins, and activation of 
polyol mechanism. Overproduction of intracellular reactive oxygen species 
contributes to several microvascular and macrovascular complications of DN. On 
the other hand, reactive oxygen species modulates signaling cascade of immune 
factors. An increase in reactive oxygen species can increase the production of 
inflammatory cytokines, and likewise, an increase in inflammatory cytokines can 
stimulate the production of free radicals. Some studies have shown that kidney 
inflammation is serious in promoting the development and progression of DN. 
Inflammatory factors which are activated by the metabolic, biochemical, and 
hemodynamic derangements are known to exist in the diabetic kidney. This review 
discusses facts for oxidative stress and inflammatory factors in DN and 
encompasses the role of immune and inflammatory cells, inflammatory cytokines, 
and stress oxidative factors.

PMID: 27903991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]