---
reference_id: "PMID:35532649"
title: "Biotin-Responsive Basal Ganglia Disease: Treatable Metabolic Disorder with SLC19A3 Mutation Presenting as Rapidly Progressive Dementia."
authors:
- Oommen AT
- Polavarapu K
- Christopher R
- Netravathi M
journal: Neurol India
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.344659
keywords:
- "Basal Ganglia Diseases/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Biotin/genetics, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dementia/drug therapy, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Metabolic Diseases
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Thiamine/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biotin-Responsive Basal Ganglia Disease: Treatable Metabolic Disorder with SLC19A3 Mutation Presenting as Rapidly Progressive Dementia.
**Authors:** Oommen AT, Polavarapu K, Christopher R, Netravathi M
**Journal:** Neurol India (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0028-3886.344659](https://doi.org/10.4103/0028-3886.344659)

## Content

1. Neurol India. 2022 Mar-Apr;70(2):733-736. doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.344659.

Biotin-Responsive Basal Ganglia Disease: Treatable Metabolic Disorder with
SLC19A3 Mutation Presenting as Rapidly Progressive Dementia.

Oommen AT(1), Polavarapu K(1), Christopher R(1), Netravathi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore, India.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease (BTBGD) is
an autosomal recessive disorder due to mutations in the SLC19A3-gene, typically
seen in early childhood.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We report a 49-year-old lady presenting with rapidly
progressive cognitive impairment, seizures, hypersomnolence, ataxia, and
generalized dystonia of 3 weeks duration. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
of the brain revealed T2-hyperintensities in the basal ganglia, thalamus,
cortical, subcortical regions with striatal necrosis suggestive of BTBGD that
was confirmed by genetic analysis. She was treated with thiamine and biotin
following which there was significant clinical and MRI improvement.
CONCLUSIONS: BTBGD requires a high index of suspicion in any patient presenting
with unexplained rapidly progressive dementia. High doses of biotin and thiamine
are the mainstay of the treatment to achieve a favorable outcome.

DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.344659
PMID: 35532649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None
