---
reference_id: "PMID:31072576"
title: Modeling Reentry in the Short QT Syndrome With Human-Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiac Cell Sheets.
authors:
- Shinnawi R
- Shaheen N
- Huber I
- Shiti A
- Arbel G
- Gepstein A
- Ballan N
- Setter N
- Tijsen AJ
- Borggrefe M
- Gepstein L
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2019.02.055
keywords:
- Action Potentials
- Anti-Arrhythmia Agents/pharmacology
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, prevention & control"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- ERG1 Potassium Channel/genetics
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Mutation
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- Patient-Specific Modeling
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling Reentry in the Short QT Syndrome With Human-Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Cardiac Cell Sheets.
**Authors:** Shinnawi R, Shaheen N, Huber I, Shiti A, Arbel G, Gepstein A, Ballan N, Setter N, Tijsen AJ, Borggrefe M, Gepstein L
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2019.02.055](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2019.02.055)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019 May 14;73(18):2310-2324. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2019.02.055.

Modeling Reentry in the Short QT Syndrome With Human-Induced Pluripotent Stem
Cell-Derived Cardiac Cell Sheets.

Shinnawi R(1), Shaheen N(1), Huber I(1), Shiti A(1), Arbel G(1), Gepstein A(1),
Ballan N(1), Setter N(1), Tijsen AJ(1), Borggrefe M(2), Gepstein L(3).

Author information:
(1)Sohnis Research Laboratory for Cardiac Electrophysiology and Regenerative
Medicine, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research Institute, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(2)First Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University Medical Centre
Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany; DZHK (German Center for
Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site, Heidelberg-Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany.
(3)Sohnis Research Laboratory for Cardiac Electrophysiology and Regenerative
Medicine, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research Institute, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel; Cardiolology Department of Rambam
Medical Center, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel. Electronic address: mdlior@technion.ac.il.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019 May 14;73(18):2325-2327. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2019.01.076.

BACKGROUND: The short QT syndrome (SQTS) is an inherited arrhythmogenic syndrome
characterized by abnormal ion channel function, life-threatening arrhythmias,
and sudden cardiac death.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to establish a patient-specific
human-induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) model of the SQTS, and to provide
mechanistic insights into its pathophysiology and therapy.
METHODS: Patient-specific hiPSCs were generated from a symptomatic SQTS patient
carrying the N588K mutation in the KCNH2 gene, differentiated into
cardiomyocytes, and compared with healthy and isogenic (established by
CRISPR/Cas9-based mutation correction) control hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes
(hiPSC-CMs). Patch-clamp was used to evaluate action-potential (AP) and IKr
current properties at the cellular level. Conduction and arrhythmogenesis were
studied at the tissue level using confluent 2-dimensional hiPSC-derived cardiac
cell sheets (hiPSC-CCSs) and optical mapping.
RESULTS: Intracellular recordings demonstrated shortened action-potential
duration (APD) and abbreviated refractory period in the SQTS-hiPSC-CMs.
Similarly, voltage- and AP-clamp recordings revealed increased IKr current
density due to attenuated inactivation, primarily in the AP plateau phase.
Optical mapping of the SQTS-hiPSC-CCSs revealed shortened APD, impaired APD-rate
adaptation, abbreviated wavelength of excitation, and increased inducibility of
sustained spiral waves. Phase-mapping analysis revealed accelerated and
stabilized rotors manifested by increased rotor rotation frequency, increased
rotor curvature, decreased core meandering, and increased rotor
complexity. Application of quinidine and disopyramide, but not sotalol,
normalized APD and suppressed arrhythmia induction.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel hiPSC-based model of the SQTS was established at both the
cellular and tissue levels. This model recapitulated the disease phenotype in
the culture dish and provided important mechanistic insights into arrhythmia
mechanisms in the SQTS and its treatment.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2019.02.055
PMID: 31072576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
