---
reference_id: "PMID:38365009"
title: "SARS-CoV-2 and spinal cord ischemia: a systematic review on clinical presentations, diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes."
authors:
- Sourani A
- Vahdat N
- Bowers CA
- Rezvani M
- Foroughi M
- Sourani A
- Mirza R
- Baradaran Mahdavi S
journal: Spine J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.spinee.2024.02.011
keywords:
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- COVID-19/complications
- SARS-CoV-2
- Spinal Cord Ischemia
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SARS-CoV-2 and spinal cord ischemia: a systematic review on clinical presentations, diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes.
**Authors:** Sourani A, Vahdat N, Bowers CA, Rezvani M, Foroughi M, Sourani A, Mirza R, Baradaran Mahdavi S
**Journal:** Spine J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.spinee.2024.02.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2024.02.011)

## Content

1. Spine J. 2024 Jun;24(6):979-988. doi: 10.1016/j.spinee.2024.02.011. Epub 2024
Feb 15.

SARS-CoV-2 and spinal cord ischemia: a systematic review on clinical
presentations, diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes.

Sourani A(1), Vahdat N(2), Bowers CA(3), Rezvani M(4), Foroughi M(5), Sourani
A(6), Mirza R(7), Baradaran Mahdavi S(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan,
Iran; Environment Research Center, Research Institute for Primordial Prevention
of Non-Communicable Disease, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan,
Iran.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of California San Diego (UCSD), San
Diego, CA, USA; Department of Radiology, Veterans Administration Healthcare
System, San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of New Mexico Hospital (UNMH),
Albuquerque, NM, USA; Bowers Neurosurgical Frailty and Outcomes Data Science
Lab, Albuquerque, NM, 87131, USA.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan,
Iran.
(5)Student Research Committee, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan,
Iran. Electronic address: mina.f1994@gmail.com.
(6)Student Research Committee, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan,
Iran.
(7)Department of Radiology, University of California San Diego (UCSD), San
Diego, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, School of Medicine,
Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran; Child Growth and
Development Research Center, Research Institute for Primordial Prevention of
Non-Communicable Disease, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
Electronic address: sadegh.b.mahdavi@resident.mui.ac.ir.

BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Spinal cord ischemia is a rare but ominous clinical
situation with high levels of disability. There are emerging reports on COVID-19
and spinal cord ischemic events.
PURPOSE: To investigate the cardinal manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 associated
spinal cord ischemia, review treatment paradigms, and follow outcomes.
STUDY DESIGN: A systematic review.
METHODS: The current study was conducted under Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) guidelines. The authors searched
PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar for studies published up to
February 12, 2023, on spinal cord ischemia and SARS-CoV-2 infection. Data on
patient demographics, study methods, medical records, interventions, and
outcomes were extracted from eligible articles. For each data set, the authors
performed pooled estimates examining 3 factors of interest, which were (1)
predisposing factors (2) treatment regimens, and (3) neurological rehabilitation
outcomes. Neurological status was reported as the American Spinal Injury
Association (ASIA) impairment scale reported by data sets.
RESULTS: Six data sets were identified. The mean age of the study population was
50 years old, with 66.6% male predominance. Sixty-six percent of the patients
had severe COVID-19. Five data sets reported preexisting coagulopathy. ASIA A
and B were the most prevalent primary neurological status (80%). The mean
interval between COVID-19 and the first neurological deficit was 13 days.
Anterior spinal artery lesions were the most prevalent ischemic pattern. The
most common treatment regimens were heparin and steroid therapy. Physical
rehabilitation showed poor functional outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: SARS-CoV-2 is associated with spinal cord ischemia through multiple
neuropathological mechanisms. Proper coagulation profile control and aggressive
rehabilitation may play a promising role in the prevention and recovery of
spinal cord infarction in SARS-CoV-2 patients.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2024.02.011
PMID: 38365009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
