---
reference_id: "PMID:22386973"
title: "Developmental progress and creatine restoration upon long-term creatine supplementation of a patient with arginine:glycine amidinotransferase deficiency."
authors:
- Ndika JD
- Johnston K
- Barkovich JA
- Wirt MD
- "O'Neill P"
- Betsalel OT
- Jakobs C
- Salomons GS
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.01.017
keywords:
- "Amidinotransferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Child
- "Creatine/administration & dosage, blood"
- "Developmental Disabilities/blood, diet therapy"
- Dietary Supplements
- Female
- "Glycine/analogs & derivatives, blood, urine"
- Humans
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developmental progress and creatine restoration upon long-term creatine supplementation of a patient with arginine:glycine amidinotransferase deficiency.
**Authors:** Ndika JD, Johnston K, Barkovich JA, Wirt MD, O'Neill P, Betsalel OT, Jakobs C, Salomons GS
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.01.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.01.017)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2012 May;106(1):48-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.01.017. Epub
 2012 Jan 27.

Developmental progress and creatine restoration upon long-term creatine
supplementation of a patient with arginine:glycine amidinotransferase
deficiency.

Ndika JD(1), Johnston K, Barkovich JA, Wirt MD, O'Neill P, Betsalel OT, Jakobs
C, Salomons GS.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Unit, Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Arginine:glycineamidinotransferase (AGAT/GATM) deficiency has been
described in 9 patients across 4 families. Here we describe the clinical outcome
and response to creatine supplementation in a patient of the second family
affected with AGAT deficiency-a 9-year-old girl.
PATIENT AND METHODS: Delayed motor milestones were noticed from 4 months of age
and at 14 months moderate hypotonia, developmental delay and failure to thrive.
Laboratory studies revealed low plasma creatine as well as extremely low levels
of guanidinoacetic acid in urine and plasma. Proton magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS) of the brain showed absence of creatine. DNA sequence
analysis revealed a homozygous mutation (c.484+1G>T) in the AGAT/GATM gene. AGAT
activity was not detectable in lymphoblasts and RNA analysis revealed a
truncated mRNA (r.289_484del196) that is degraded via Nonsense Mediated Decay.
At 16 months, Bayley's Infant Development Scale (BIDS) showed functioning at 43%
of chronologic age. Oral creatine supplementation (up to 800 mg/kg/day) was
begun.
RESULTS: At age 9 years she demonstrated advanced academic performance. Partial
recovery of cerebral creatine levels was demonstrated on MRS at 25 months of
age. Brain MRS at 40 months of age revealed a creatine/NAA ratio of about 80% of
that in age-matched controls.
CONCLUSIONS: 8 years post initiation of oral creatine supplementation, patient
demonstrates superior nonverbal and academic abilities, with average verbal
skills. We emphasize that early diagnosis combined with early treatment onset of
AGAT deficiency may lead to improvement of developmental outcome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.01.017
PMID: 22386973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
