---
reference_id: "PMID:10525055"
title: The Tangier disease gene product ABC1 controls the cellular apolipoprotein-mediated lipid removal pathway.
authors:
- Lawn RM
- Wade DP
- Garvin MR
- Wang X
- Schwartz K
- Porter JG
- Seilhamer JJ
- Vaughan AM
- Oram JF
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1172/JCI8119
keywords:
- ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics, physiology"
- Adolescent
- Animals
- Apolipoproteins/physiology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Glycoproteins/genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- Lipid Metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Tangier Disease/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Tangier disease gene product ABC1 controls the cellular apolipoprotein-mediated lipid removal pathway.
**Authors:** Lawn RM, Wade DP, Garvin MR, Wang X, Schwartz K, Porter JG, Seilhamer JJ, Vaughan AM, Oram JF
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI8119](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI8119)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1999 Oct;104(8):R25-31. doi: 10.1172/JCI8119.

The Tangier disease gene product ABC1 controls the cellular
apolipoprotein-mediated lipid removal pathway.

Lawn RM(1), Wade DP, Garvin MR, Wang X, Schwartz K, Porter JG, Seilhamer JJ,
Vaughan AM, Oram JF.

Author information:
(1)CV Therapeutics Inc., Palo Alto, California 94304, USA. lawn@cvt.com

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 1999 Oct;104(8):1015-7. doi: 10.1172/JCI8509.

The ABC1 transporter was identified as the defect in Tangier disease by a
combined strategy of gene expression microarray analysis, genetic mapping, and
biochemical studies. Patients with Tangier disease have a defect in cellular
cholesterol removal, which results in near zero plasma levels of HDL and in
massive tissue deposition of cholesteryl esters. Blocking the expression or
activity of ABC1 reduces apolipoprotein-mediated lipid efflux from cultured
cells, and increasing expression of ABC1 enhances it. ABC1 expression is induced
by cholesterol loading and cAMP treatment and is reduced upon subsequent
cholesterol removal by apolipoproteins. The protein is incorporated into the
plasma membrane in proportion to its level of expression. Different mutations
were detected in the ABC1 gene of 3 unrelated patients. Thus, ABC1 has the
properties of a key protein in the cellular lipid removal pathway, as emphasized
by the consequences of its defect in patients with Tangier disease.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI8119
PMCID: PMC481052
PMID: 10525055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
