---
reference_id: "PMID:34789726"
title: "TRAIL/DR5 pathway promotes AKT phosphorylation, skeletal muscle differentiation, and glucose uptake."
authors:
- Toffoli B
- Tonon F
- Tisato V
- Zauli G
- Secchiero P
- Fabris B
- Bernardi S
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-021-04383-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Glucose/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- Phosphorylation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism
- "TNF-Related Apoptosis-Inducing Ligand/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRAIL/DR5 pathway promotes AKT phosphorylation, skeletal muscle differentiation, and glucose uptake.
**Authors:** Toffoli B, Tonon F, Tisato V, Zauli G, Secchiero P, Fabris B, Bernardi S
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-021-04383-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-021-04383-3)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2021 Nov 16;12(12):1089. doi: 10.1038/s41419-021-04383-3.

TRAIL/DR5 pathway promotes AKT phosphorylation, skeletal muscle differentiation, 
and glucose uptake.

Toffoli B(1)(2), Tonon F(3), Tisato V(4), Zauli G(5), Secchiero P(4), Fabris 
B(3), Bernardi S(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", via 
dell'Istria 65/1, 34137, Trieste, Italy. barbaratoffoli.ts@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Cattinara Teaching Hospital, Strada di Fiume 447, 34149, Trieste, Italy. 
barbaratoffoli.ts@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Cattinara Teaching Hospital, Strada di Fiume 447, 34149, Trieste, Italy.
(4)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara, Via Fossato di 
Mortara 70, 44121, Ferrara, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Scienze dell'Ambiente e della Prevenzione, University of 
Ferrara, Via Corso Ercole I d'Este 32, 44121, Ferrara, Italy.

TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a protein that induces 
apoptosis in cancer cells but not in normal ones, where its effects remain to be 
fully understood. Previous studies have shown that in high-fat diet (HFD)-fed 
mice, TRAIL treatment reduced body weight gain, insulin resistance, and 
inflammation. TRAIL was also able to increase skeletal muscle free fatty acid 
oxidation. The aim of the present work was to evaluate TRAIL actions on skeletal 
muscle. Our in vitro data on C2C12 cells showed that TRAIL treatment 
significantly increased myogenin and MyHC and other hallmarks of myogenic 
differentiation, which were reduced by Dr5 (TRAIL receptor) silencing. In 
addition, TRAIL treatment significantly increased AKT phosphorylation, which was 
reduced by Dr5 silencing, as well as glucose uptake (alone and in combination 
with insulin). Our in vivo data showed that TRAIL increased myofiber size in 
HFD-fed mice as well as in db/db mice. This was associated with increased 
myogenin and PCG1α expression. In conclusion, TRAIL/DR5 pathway promotes AKT 
phosphorylation, skeletal muscle differentiation, and glucose uptake. These data 
shed light onto a pathway that might hold therapeutic potential not only for the 
metabolic disturbances but also for the muscle mass loss that are associated 
with diabetes.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-021-04383-3
PMCID: PMC8599458
PMID: 34789726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.