---
reference_id: "PMID:21430231"
title: "Role of isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and short branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase in the metabolism of valproic acid: implications for the branched-chain amino acid oxidation pathway."
authors:
- Luís PB
- Ruiter JP
- Ijlst L
- Tavares de Almeida I
- Duran M
- Mohsen AW
- Vockley J
- Wanders RJ
- Silva MF
journal: Drug Metab Dispos
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1124/dmd.110.037606
keywords:
- "Amino Acids, Branched-Chain/metabolism"
- Butyryl-CoA Dehydrogenase/metabolism
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- Isovaleryl-CoA Dehydrogenase/metabolism
- Oxidation-Reduction
- "Spectrometry, Mass, Electrospray Ionization"
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
- Valproic Acid/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and short branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase in the metabolism of valproic acid: implications for the branched-chain amino acid oxidation pathway.
**Authors:** Luís PB, Ruiter JP, Ijlst L, Tavares de Almeida I, Duran M, Mohsen AW, Vockley J, Wanders RJ, Silva MF
**Journal:** Drug Metab Dispos (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1124/dmd.110.037606](https://doi.org/10.1124/dmd.110.037606)

## Content

1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2011 Jul;39(7):1155-60. doi: 10.1124/dmd.110.037606. Epub
2011 Mar 23.

Role of isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and short branched-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase in the metabolism of valproic acid: implications for the
branched-chain amino acid oxidation pathway.

Luís PB(1), Ruiter JP, Ijlst L, Tavares de Almeida I, Duran M, Mohsen AW,
Vockley J, Wanders RJ, Silva MF.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Medicines and Pharmaceutical Sciences-iMED.UL,
Faculdade de Farmácia da Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Prof. Gama Pinto, 1649-003
Lisboa, Portugal.

Many biological systems including the oxidative catabolic pathway for
branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) are affected in vivo by valproate therapy. In
this study, we investigated the potential effect of valproic acid (VPA) and some
of its metabolites on the metabolism of BCAAs. In vitro studies were performed
using isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase (IVD), isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (IBD),
and short branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SBCAD), enzymes involved in the
degradation pathway of leucine, valine, and isoleucine. The enzymatic activities
of the three purified human enzymes were measured using optimized
high-performance liquid chromatography procedures, and the respective kinetic
parameters were determined in the absence and presence of VPA and the
corresponding CoA and dephosphoCoA conjugates. Valproyl-CoA and
valproyl-dephosphoCoA inhibited IVD activity significantly by a purely
competitive mechanism with K(i) values of 74 ± 4 and 170 ± 12 μM, respectively.
IBD activity was not affected by any of the tested VPA esters. However,
valproyl-CoA did inhibit SBCAD activity by a purely competitive mechanism with a
K(i) of 249 ± 29 μM. In addition, valproyl-dephosphoCoA inhibited SBCAD activity
via a distinct mechanism (K(i) = 511 ± 96 μM) that appeared to be of the mixed
type. Furthermore, we show that both SBCAD and IVD are active, using
valproyl-CoA as a substrate. The catalytic efficiency of SBCAD turned out to be
much higher than that of IVD, demonstrating that SBCAD is the most probable
candidate for the first dehydrogenation step of VPA β-oxidation. Our data
explain some of the effects of valproate on the branched-chain amino acid
metabolism and shed new light on the biotransformation pathway of valproate.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.110.037606
PMCID: PMC3127238
PMID: 21430231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
