---
reference_id: "PMID:34423300"
title: Identification of LAMA1 mutations ends diagnostic odyssey and has prognostic implications for patients with presumed Joubert syndrome.
authors:
- Powell L
- Olinger E
- Wedderburn S
- Ramakumaran VS
- Kini U
- Clayton-Smith J
- Ramsden SC
- Rice SJ
- Barroso-Gil M
- Wilson I
- Cowley L
- Johnson S
- Harris E
- Montgomery T
- Bertoli M
- Genomics England Research Consortium
- Boltshauser E
- Sayer JA
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of LAMA1 mutations ends diagnostic odyssey and has prognostic implications for patients with presumed Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Powell L, Olinger E, Wedderburn S, Ramakumaran VS, Kini U, Clayton-Smith J, Ramsden SC, Rice SJ, Barroso-Gil M, Wilson I, Cowley L, Johnson S, Harris E, Montgomery T, Bertoli M, Genomics England Research Consortium, Boltshauser E, Sayer JA
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcab163](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcab163)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2021 Jul 16;3(3):fcab163. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab163. 
eCollection 2021.

Identification of LAMA1 mutations ends diagnostic odyssey and has prognostic 
implications for patients with presumed Joubert syndrome.

Powell L(1), Olinger E(1), Wedderburn S(2), Ramakumaran VS(3), Kini U(3), 
Clayton-Smith J(4), Ramsden SC(4), Rice SJ(5), Barroso-Gil M(1), Wilson I(5), 
Cowley L(6), Johnson S(1), Harris E(6), Montgomery T(6), Bertoli M(6); Genomics 
England Research Consortium; Boltshauser E(7), Sayer JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
Newcastle University, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.
(2)Clinical Genetics, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Clinical Genetics, Oxford University Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(4)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester M13 9WL, UK.
(5)Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, 
Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.
(6)Clinical Genetics, Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.
(7)Paediatric Neurology (Emeritus), Children's University Hospital, Zürich, 
Switzerland.

Paediatric neurology syndromes are a broad and complex group of conditions with 
a large spectrum of clinical phenotypes. Joubert syndrome is a genetically 
heterogeneous neurological ciliopathy syndrome with molar tooth sign as the 
neuroimaging hallmark. We reviewed the clinical, radiological and genetic data 
for several families with a clinical diagnosis of Joubert syndrome but negative 
genetic analysis. We detected biallelic pathogenic variants in LAMA1, including 
novel alleles, in each of the four cases we report, thereby establishing a firm 
diagnosis of Poretti-Boltshauser syndrome. Analysis of brain MRI revealed 
cerebellar dysplasia and cerebellar cysts, associated with Poretti-Boltshauser 
syndrome and the absence of typical molar tooth signs. Using large UK patient 
cohorts, the relative prevalence of Joubert syndrome as a cause of intellectual 
disability was 0.2% and of Poretti-Boltshauser syndrome was 0.02%. We conclude 
that children with congenital brain disorders that mimic Joubert syndrome may 
have a delayed diagnosis due to poor recognition of key features on brain 
imaging and the lack of inclusion of LAMA1 on molecular genetic gene panels. We 
advocate the inclusion of LAMA1 genetic analysis on all intellectual disability 
and Joubert syndrome gene panels and promote a wider awareness of the clinical 
and radiological features of these syndromes.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab163
PMCID: PMC8374969
PMID: 34423300