---
reference_id: "PMID:16926354"
title: "Clinical, biochemical, and genetic heterogeneity in short-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency."
authors:
- van Maldegem BT
- Duran M
- Wanders RJ
- Niezen-Koning KE
- Hogeveen M
- Ijlst L
- Waterham HR
- Wijburg FA
journal: JAMA
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1001/jama.296.8.943
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- Adolescent
- "Carnitine/analogs & derivatives, blood"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Malonates/urine
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation
- Neonatal Screening
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- Phenotype
- Retrospective Studies
- Riboflavin/therapeutic use
- Vitamin B Complex/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Clinical, biochemical, and genetic heterogeneity in short-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** van Maldegem BT, Duran M, Wanders RJ, Niezen-Koning KE, Hogeveen M, Ijlst L, Waterham HR, Wijburg FA
**Journal:** JAMA (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.296.8.943](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.296.8.943)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2006 Aug 23;296(8):943-52. doi: 10.1001/jama.296.8.943.

Clinical, biochemical, and genetic heterogeneity in short-chain acyl-coenzyme A 
dehydrogenase deficiency.

van Maldegem BT(1), Duran M, Wanders RJ, Niezen-Koning KE, Hogeveen M, Ijlst L, 
Waterham HR, Wijburg FA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. b.t.vanmaldegem@amc.uva.nl

Comment in
    JAMA. 2006 Aug 23;296(8):993-5. doi: 10.1001/jama.296.8.993.

Republished in
    Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2008 Jul 26;152(30):1678-85.

CONTEXT: Short-chain acyl-coenzyme A (CoA) dehydrogenase (SCAD) deficiency 
(SCADD) is an autosomal recessive, clinically heterogeneous disorder with only 
22 case reports published so far. Screening for SCADD is included in expanded 
newborn screening programs in most US and Australian states.
OBJECTIVES: To describe the genetic, biochemical, and clinical characteristics 
of SCADD patients in the Netherlands and their SCADD relatives and to explore 
the genotype to phenotype relation.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Retrospective study involving 31 Dutch SCADD 
patients diagnosed between January 1987 and January 2006 and 8 SCADD relatives. 
SCADD was defined by the presence of (1) increased butyrylcarnitine (C4-C) 
levels in plasma and/or increased ethylmalonic acid (EMA) levels in urine under 
nonstressed conditions on at least 2 occasions, in combination with (2) a 
mutation and/or the c.511C>T or c.625G>A susceptibility variants on each 
SCAD-encoding (ACADS) allele. Patients were included only if the SCAD-encoding 
(ACADS) was fully sequenced and if current clinical information could be 
obtained. Relatives were included when they carried the same ACADS genotype as 
the proband, and had increased C4-C and/or EMA.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Prevalence, genotype (mutation/mutation, 
mutation/variant, variant/variant), C4-C and EMA levels, clinical signs and 
symptoms, and clinical course.
RESULTS: A birth-prevalence of at least 1:50,000 was calculated. Most patients 
presented before the age of 3 years, with nonspecific, generally uncomplicated, 
and often transient symptoms. Developmental delay, epilepsy, behavioral 
disturbances, and hypoglycemia were the most frequently reported symptoms. The 
ACADS genotype showed a statistically significant association with EMA and C4-C 
levels, but not with clinical characteristics. Seven out of 8 SCADD relatives 
were free of symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: SCADD is far more common than assumed previously, and clinical 
symptoms in SCADD are nonspecific, generally uncomplicated, often transient, and 
not correlated with specific ACADS genotypes. Because SCADD does not meet major 
newborn screening criteria, including a lack of clinical significance in many 
patients and that it is not possible to differentiate diseased and nondiseased 
individuals, it is not suited for inclusion in newborn screening programs at the 
present time.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.296.8.943
PMID: 16926354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]