---
reference_id: "PMID:22863441"
title: "Kayser-Fleischer ring in Wilson's disease: a cohort study."
authors:
- Fenu M
- Liggi M
- Demelia E
- Sorbello O
- Civolani A
- Demelia L
journal: Eur J Intern Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2012.04.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kayser-Fleischer ring in Wilson's disease: a cohort study.
**Authors:** Fenu M, Liggi M, Demelia E, Sorbello O, Civolani A, Demelia L
**Journal:** Eur J Intern Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejim.2012.04.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2012.04.005)

## Content

1. Eur J Intern Med. 2012 Sep;23(6):e150-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2012.04.005. Epub
 2012 May 14.

Kayser-Fleischer ring in Wilson's disease: a cohort study.

Fenu M(1), Liggi M, Demelia E, Sorbello O, Civolani A, Demelia L.

Author information:
(1)UOC of Gastroenterology, Azienda Ospedaliero - Universitaria, Cagliari, 
Italy.

AIMS: To evaluate Wilson's disease (WD) features in Sardinian patients with 
Kayser-Fleischer (KF) ring and to evaluate correlations between modifications in 
KF and anti-copper therapy and systemic WD evolution.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Sixty-seven WD patients (35 m/32 f; mean age 41 years) 
were retrospectively studied. At diagnosis and during follow up comprehensive 
ophthalmologic and neurologic examinations, brain RMN and ECD SPECT, detailed 
objective laboratory studies and hepatic histological examination were performed 
on all patients for analysis. All patients were given anti-copper therapy with 
d-Penicillamine in mono-therapy or in combination with Zinc Salts.
RESULTS: At diagnosis, KF was observed in 27% of patients with equal 
distribution in all age groups. Significant correlations between KF at 
diagnosis, neuro-psychiatric manifestations and pathologic features in brain RMN 
and in brain ECD SPECT were found at diagnosis. During follow up, a decrease in, 
or regression of KF was seen in 14% of patients. Anti-copper therapy leads to KF 
regression and prevents the appearance of KF. No significant correlations were 
observed between KF regression and clinical neurological or neuro-imaging 
improvement nor between KF modifications and clinical hepatic improvement.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study highlights the peculiar features of Sardinian WD 
patients: low representation of KF, its equal distribution in all age groups, 
significant correlation between KF at diagnosis and clinical neurological 
manifestations, pathologic brain RMN and brain ECD-SPECT are highlighted by our 
study. Anti-copper therapy induces KF regression and prevents its onset. 
Therefore, KF ring does appear to be a predictive factor in the neurological and 
hepatic evolution of WD.

Copyright © 2012 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2012.04.005
PMID: 22863441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]