---
reference_id: "PMID:28674962"
title: Fabry disease.
authors:
- Yuasa T
- Takenaka T
- Higuchi K
- Uchiyama N
- Horizoe Y
- Cyaen H
- Mizukami N
- Takasaki K
- Kisanuki A
- Miyata M
- Ohishi M
journal: J Echocardiogr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s12574-017-0340-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Yuasa T, Takenaka T, Higuchi K, Uchiyama N, Horizoe Y, Cyaen H, Mizukami N, Takasaki K, Kisanuki A, Miyata M, Ohishi M
**Journal:** J Echocardiogr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12574-017-0340-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12574-017-0340-x)

## Content

1. J Echocardiogr. 2017 Dec;15(4):151-157. doi: 10.1007/s12574-017-0340-x. Epub 
2017 Jul 3.

Fabry disease.

Yuasa T(1), Takenaka T(2), Higuchi K(3), Uchiyama N(3), Horizoe Y(3), Cyaen 
H(3), Mizukami N(4), Takasaki K(3), Kisanuki A(5), Miyata M(3), Ohishi M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and Hypertension, Graduate School of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, 
Kagoshima, Kagoshima, Japan. yuasan@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Tarumizu Chuo Hospital, Tarumizu, Japan.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and Hypertension, Graduate School of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, 
Kagoshima, Kagoshima, Japan.
(4)Clinical Laboratory, Kagosima University Hospital, Kagoshima, Japan.
(5)Department of Health Science, Kagoshima University Faculty of Medicine, 
Kagoshima, Japan.

Fabry disease resulting from a deficiency of α-galactosidase A leads to the 
accumulation of globotriaosylceramide in various organs. Because the disease is 
an X-linked recessive disorder, males tend to develop more symptoms and more 
severe symptoms than females. There are also some variants of Fabry disease, and 
cardiac variant (cardiac Fabry disease) has the dysfunctions only in heart. 
Cardiac manifestations in Fabry disease are initially symmetrical and concentric 
left ventricular hypertrophy, and later progressive cardiac dysfunction with 
localized thinning of the basal posterior wall. In recent years, enzyme 
replacement therapy has been performed as a treatment for Fabry disease, and the 
initiation of this therapy is expected before the cardiac fibrosis develops. 
Therefore, early diagnosis of Fabry disease is essential, and echocardiography 
is an indispensable tool for clinical practice of this disease. Then, it is 
necessary to remember this disease as a differential diagnosis when encountering 
unexplained left ventricular hypertrophy.

DOI: 10.1007/s12574-017-0340-x
PMID: 28674962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]