---
reference_id: "PMID:35164810"
title: "Modified Delphi procedure-based expert consensus on endpoints for an international disease registry for Metachromatic Leukodystrophy: The European Metachromatic Leukodystrophy initiative (MLDi)."
authors:
- Schoenmakers DH
- Beerepoot S
- van den Berg S
- Adang L
- Bley A
- Boelens JJ
- Fumagalli F
- Goettsch WG
- Grønborg S
- Groeschel S
- van Hasselt PM
- Hollak CEM
- Lindemans C
- Mochel F
- Mol PGM
- Sevin C
- Zerem A
- Schöls L
- Wolf NI
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02189-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukodystrophy, Metachromatic/genetics"
- Quality of Life
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modified Delphi procedure-based expert consensus on endpoints for an international disease registry for Metachromatic Leukodystrophy: The European Metachromatic Leukodystrophy initiative (MLDi).
**Authors:** Schoenmakers DH, Beerepoot S, van den Berg S, Adang L, Bley A, Boelens JJ, Fumagalli F, Goettsch WG, Grønborg S, Groeschel S, van Hasselt PM, Hollak CEM, Lindemans C, Mochel F, Mol PGM, Sevin C, Zerem A, Schöls L, Wolf NI
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02189-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02189-w)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Feb 14;17(1):48. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02189-w.

Modified Delphi procedure-based expert consensus on endpoints for an 
international disease registry for Metachromatic Leukodystrophy: The European 
Metachromatic Leukodystrophy initiative (MLDi).

Schoenmakers DH(1)(2)(3), Beerepoot S(1)(4)(5), van den Berg S(2)(3), Adang 
L(6), Bley A(7), Boelens JJ(8), Fumagalli F(9), Goettsch WG(10)(11), Grønborg 
S(12), Groeschel S(13), van Hasselt PM(14), Hollak CEM(2)(3), Lindemans 
C(5)(15), Mochel F(16)(17), Mol PGM(18)(19), Sevin C(20)(21), Zerem A(22)(23), 
Schöls L(24)(25), Wolf NI(26).

Author information:
(1)Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Department of Child Neurology, Emma 
Children's Hospital, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Medicine for Society, Platform at Amsterdam University Medical Centers, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Center for Translational Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Nierkens and Lindemans group, Princess Máxima Center for pediatric oncology, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(7)University Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapies Program, Department of 
Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
(9)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget); IRCCS, San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(10)Zorginstituut Nederland (Dutch Health Care Institute), Diemen, The 
Netherlands.
(11)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(12)Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital 
(Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark.
(13)Department of Paediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine, University 
Children's Hospital, Tübingen, Germany.
(14)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(16)INSERM U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S 
1127, Institut du Cerveau Et de La Moelle Épinière, ICM, 75013, Paris, France.
(17)Department of Genetics, Center for Neurometabolic Diseases, AP-HP, La 
Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, 47 Boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75013, Paris, 
France.
(18)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(19)Dutch Medicines Evaluation Board, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(20)NeuroGenCell, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière, ICM, Inserm U 
1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(21)Bicêtre Hospital, Neuropediatrics Unit, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, Paris, France.
(22)Pediatric Neurology Institute, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, 
Israel.
(23)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(24)Department of Neurology and Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
University of Tübingen, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.
(25)German Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.
(26)Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Department of Child Neurology, Emma 
Children's Hospital, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
n.wolf@amsterdamumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Metachromatic Leukodystrophy (MLD) is a rare lysosomal disorder. 
Patients suffer from relentless neurological deterioration leading to premature 
death. Recently, new treatment modalities, including gene therapy and enzyme 
replacement therapy, have been developed. Those advances increase the need for 
high-quality research infrastructure to adequately compare treatments, execute 
post-marketing surveillance, and perform health technology assessments (HTA). To 
facilitate this, a group of MLD experts started the MLD initiative (MLDi) and 
initiated an academia-led European MLD registry: the MLDi. An expert-based 
consensus procedure, namely a modified Delphi procedure, was used to determine 
the data elements required to answer academic, regulatory, and HTA research 
questions.
RESULTS: Three distinct sets of data elements were defined by the 13-member 
expert panel. The minimal set (n = 13) contained demographics and basic disease 
characteristics. The core set (n = 55) included functional status scores in 
terms of motor, manual, speech and eating abilities, and causal and supportive 
treatment characteristics. Health-related quality of life scores were included 
that were also deemed necessary for HTA. The optional set (n = 31) contained 
additional clinical aspects, such as findings at neurological examination, 
detailed motor function, presence of peripheral neuropathy, gall bladder 
involvement and micturition.
CONCLUSION: Using a modified Delphi procedure with physicians from the main 
expert centers, consensus was reached on a core set of data that can be 
collected retrospectively and prospectively. With this consensus-based approach, 
an important step towards harmonization was made. This unique dataset will 
support knowledge about the disease and facilitate regulatory requirements 
related to the launch of new treatments.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02189-w
PMCID: PMC8842918
PMID: 35164810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LA is consultant for Orchard, co-investigator 
for the Metachromatic leukodystrophy trial of Takeda, MEGMA. AB is 
coinvestigator for a trial in MLD (Shire/Takeda) but receives no personal 
payment related to this role. JB received honorarium for consulting / ad boards 
from Omeros, Avrobio, Advanced Clinical, BlueRock, Sanofi, Race Oncology and 
Medexus (all not related to this topic). FF is an investigator of gene therapy 
clinical trials for MLD sponsored by Orchard Therapeutics, the license holder of 
investigational medicinal product arsa-cel. FF has acted as ad hoc consultant 
for an Orchard Therapeutics and Takeda advisory boards. SabG is speaker 
honoraria from PTC Therapeutics; advisory boards for Takeda Pharma A/S, bluebird 
bio GmbH, PTC Therapeutics, Orchard Therapeutics; travel grants from Sanofi 
Genzyme A/S; Principal Investigator in CT-ORZY-NPC-002 (Orphazyme). SamG 
received institutional research support from Shire/Takeda. He is advisor and 
coinvestigator for trials in MLD (Shire/Takeda, Orchard) but receives no 
personal payment related to this role. Funded by DFG grant GR 4688/2-1. CH is 
involved in premarketing studies with Idorsia, Sanofi and Protalix, outside the 
scope of this manuscript. LS is consultant for VICO Therapeutics and receives 
funding of the German Ministry of Health (BMG grant ZMVI1-2520DAT94E) to 
LeukoExpert, of the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF grant 
01GM1907A to Treat-ION and grant 01GM1905A to TreatHSP) and of the European 
Commission (grant 947588 to the ERN-RND registry). NW is consultant for Passage 
Bio, Ionis, Orchard, co-investigator for the Metachromatic leukodystrophy trial 
of Shire/Takeda. She receives research support from Metakids and ZonMW. She is 
in the scientific advisory board of European Leukodystrophy Association (ELA), 
Mission Massimo, Yaya foundation. She is editor of Neuropediatrics, member of 
the editorial boards of Neurology and European Journal of Pediatric Neurology.