---
reference_id: "PMID:2996395"
title: The epidemiology and prevention of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
authors:
- Curran JW
journal: Ann Intern Med
year: '1985'
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-103-5-657
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The epidemiology and prevention of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
**Authors:** Curran JW
**Journal:** Ann Intern Med (1985)
**DOI:** [10.7326/0003-4819-103-5-657](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-103-5-657)

## Content

1. Ann Intern Med. 1985 Nov;103(5):657-62. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-103-5-657.

The epidemiology and prevention of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.

Curran JW.

The incidence of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) has continued to 
increase worldwide. From June 1981 to September 1985, 12 932 cases have been 
diagnosed and reported in the United States; this number is expected to double 
during the next year. The incubation period is long and few persons infected 
with human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus 
(HTLV-III/LAV) have AIDS diagnosed within 2 to 5 years of infection. The 
widespread use of HTLV-III/LAV serologic tests to screen donated blood and 
plasma, the continued deferral of donors from groups with an increased incidence 
of AIDS, and the use of heat-treated clotting factor concentrates should help 
prevent HTLV-III/LAV transmission through blood and blood products. Preventing 
transmission among sexual partners, among intravenous drug users, and from 
infected mothers to newborns will continue to be difficult without a vaccine, 
specific antiviral therapy, or both. Risk reduction strategies should involve 
community groups to provide accurate information and influence behaviors that 
lead to transmission of the virus.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-103-5-657
PMID: 2996395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]