---
reference_id: "PMID:32890433"
title: Evidence of ongoing complement activation on adipose tissue from an 11-year-old girl with Barraquer-Simons syndrome.
authors:
- Corvillo F
- Nozal P
- López-Lera A
- De Miguel MP
- Piñero-Fernández JA
- De Lucas R
- García-Concepción MD
- Beato MJ
- Araújo-Vilar D
- López-Trascasa M
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.15570
keywords:
- Adipose Tissue
- Child
- Complement Activation
- Complement C3 Nephritic Factor
- Female
- Humans
- Lipodystrophy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence of ongoing complement activation on adipose tissue from an 11-year-old girl with Barraquer-Simons syndrome.
**Authors:** Corvillo F, Nozal P, López-Lera A, De Miguel MP, Piñero-Fernández JA, De Lucas R, García-Concepción MD, Beato MJ, Araújo-Vilar D, López-Trascasa M
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.15570](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.15570)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2020 Dec;47(12):1439-1444. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.15570. Epub 2020
 Sep 5.

Evidence of ongoing complement activation on adipose tissue from an 11-year-old 
girl with Barraquer-Simons syndrome.

Corvillo F(1)(2), Nozal P(1)(2)(3), López-Lera A(1)(2), De Miguel MP(4), 
Piñero-Fernández JA(5), De Lucas R(6), García-Concepción MD(7), Beato MJ(7), 
Araújo-Vilar D(8), López-Trascasa M(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Complement Research Group, Hospital La Paz Institute for Health Research 
(IdiPAZ), La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER U754), 
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Unit of Immunology, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Cell Engineering Laboratory, La Paz University Hospital Research Institute, 
IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, 
Murcia, Spain.
(6)Departments of, Department of, Dermatology, La Paz University Hospital 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of, Pathology, La Paz University Hospital Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Thyroid and Metabolic Diseases Unit (U.E.T.eM.), Centre for Research in 
Molecular Medicine and Chronic Diseases (CIMUS)-IDIS, University of Santiago de 
Compostela School of Medicine, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain.
(9)Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Barraquer-Simons syndrome (BSS), a form of acquired partial lipodystrophy, is a 
rare condition characterized by gradual loss of adipose tissue from the upper 
body, keeping intact the white adipose tissue of the lower extremities. The 
etiology of BSS is not well understood, and clinical follow-up studies have not 
been assessed in these patients. Moreover, no histological studies have been 
conducted during the active phase of the disease, and complement system 
activation products have not been sought in the affected areas. The objective of 
this work was to analyze the clinical, immunological and histological events in 
an 11-year-old girl with BSS over a 5-year follow-up period. Clinical data were 
collected during six regular visits for a time period of 5 years. The 
circulating levels of C3, C3adesArg (a product released upon C3 activation), C4 
and immunoglobulins (Ig) were quantified in serum while fat tissue from 
lipoatrophic areas was examined by immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence 
approaches. In her regular visits, no clinical or laboratory abnormalities had 
been observed in the patient, except for the progression of lipoatrophy linked 
to the C3 hypocomplementemia and the occurrence of C3 nephritic factor. Adipose 
tissue from the patient showed atrophied and dead adipocytes, an abnormal 
production of extracellular matrix, and a remarkable accumulation of 
infiltrating CD68 macrophages and adipocyte precursors (marked by c-Kit 
positiveness). Simultaneous detection of IgG, C3, C5a and C5b-9 proved the 
ongoing complement activity and complement-directed injury within the adipose 
tissue. Our results showed the first evidence that the complement system 
hyperactivation occurs within the adipose tissue and is linked with fat loss in 
patients with BSS.

© 2020 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.15570
PMID: 32890433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]