---
reference_id: "PMID:18349144"
title: "Rifamycin antibiotic resistance by ADP-ribosylation: Structure and diversity of Arr."
authors:
- Baysarowich J
- Koteva K
- Hughes DW
- Ejim L
- Griffiths E
- Zhang K
- Junop M
- Wright GD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0711939105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rifamycin antibiotic resistance by ADP-ribosylation: Structure and diversity of Arr.
**Authors:** Baysarowich J, Koteva K, Hughes DW, Ejim L, Griffiths E, Zhang K, Junop M, Wright GD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0711939105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0711939105)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 25;105(12):4886-91. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0711939105. Epub 2008 Mar 18.

Rifamycin antibiotic resistance by ADP-ribosylation: Structure and diversity of 
Arr.

Baysarowich J(1), Koteva K, Hughes DW, Ejim L, Griffiths E, Zhang K, Junop M, 
Wright GD.

Author information:
(1)M.G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research, Department of 
Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada 
L8N 3Z5.

The rifamycin antibiotic rifampin is important for the treatment of tuberculosis 
and infections caused by multidrug-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Recent 
iterations of the rifampin core structure have resulted in new drugs and drug 
candidates for the treatment of a much broader range of infectious diseases. 
This expanded use of rifamycin antibiotics has the potential to select for 
increased resistance. One poorly characterized mechanism of resistance is 
through Arr enzymes that catalyze ADP-ribosylation of rifamycins. We find that 
genes encoding predicted Arr enzymes are widely distributed in the genomes of 
pathogenic and nonpathogenic bacteria. Biochemical analysis of three 
representative Arr enzymes from environmental and pathogenic bacterial sources 
shows that these have equally efficient drug resistance capacity in vitro and in 
vivo. The 3D structure of one of these orthologues from Mycobacterium smegmatis 
was determined and reveals structural homology with ADP-ribosyltransferases 
important in eukaryotic biology, including poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs) 
and bacterial toxins, despite no significant amino acid sequence homology with 
these proteins. This work highlights the extent of the rifamycin resistome in 
microbial genera with the potential to negatively impact the expanded use of 
this class of antibiotic.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0711939105
PMCID: PMC2290778
PMID: 18349144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.