---
reference_id: "PMID:21325943"
title: Genetics of occupational asthma.
authors:
- Bernstein DI
journal: Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283449fc9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of occupational asthma.
**Authors:** Bernstein DI
**Journal:** Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283449fc9](https://doi.org/10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283449fc9)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Apr;11(2):86-9. doi: 
10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283449fc9.

Genetics of occupational asthma.

Bernstein DI(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology, Allergy and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. 
bernstdd@ucmail.uc.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To discuss gene association studies conducted in workers 
diagnosed with occupational asthma.
RECENT FINDINGS: Human leukocyte antigen studies conducted in European workers 
have defined major histocompatibility complex class II alleles and haplotypes 
associated with diisocyanate asthma. Recently, certain glutathione S-transferase 
genotypes (e.g. the GSTM1 null genotype) and N-acetyltransferase genotypes 
associated with slow acetylation phenotypes have been reported to be associated 
with diisocyanate asthma. Genotype combinations of IL-4 receptor-α and CD14 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were significantly associated with 
diisocyanate asthma, but only in workers exposed to hexamethylene diisocyanate. 
A recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) conducted in Korea identified 
several SNPs of the α-T-catenin gene that were significantly associated with 
diisocyanate asthma.
SUMMARY: Although candidate gene association studies have yet to identify 
reliable predictors of occupational asthma, future investigations including GWAS 
studies may identify high-risk genotypes allowing identification of workers at 
risk.

DOI: 10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283449fc9
PMID: 21325943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]