---
reference_id: "PMID:27226234"
title: Tuberous sclerosis complex.
authors:
- Henske EP
- Jóźwiak S
- Kingswood JC
- Sampson JR
- Thiele EA
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.35
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberous sclerosis complex.
**Authors:** Henske EP, Jóźwiak S, Kingswood JC, Sampson JR, Thiele EA
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2016.35](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2016.35)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 May 26;2:16035. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.35.

Tuberous sclerosis complex.

Henske EP(1), Jóźwiak S(2)(3), Kingswood JC(4), Sampson JR(5), Thiele EA(6).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, 15 Francis Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(3)Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Sussex Kidney Unit, Royal Sussex County Hospital, Brighton, UK.
(5)Institute of Medical Genetics, Division of Cancer and Genetics, Cardiff 
University School of Medicine, Cardiff, UK.
(6)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant disorder that affects 
multiple organ systems and is caused by loss-of-function mutations in one of two 
genes: TSC1 or TSC2. The disorder can affect both adults and children. First 
described in depth by Bourneville in 1880, it is now estimated that nearly 2 
million people are affected by the disease worldwide. The clinical features of 
TSC are distinctive and can vary widely between individuals, even within one 
family. Major features of the disease include tumours of the brain, skin, heart, 
lungs and kidneys, seizures and TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorders, which 
can include autism spectrum disorder and cognitive disability. TSC1 (also known 
as hamartin) and TSC2 (also known as tuberin) form the TSC protein complex that 
acts as an inhibitor of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling 
pathway, which in turn plays a pivotal part in regulating cell growth, 
proliferation, autophagy and protein and lipid synthesis. Remarkable progress in 
basic and translational research, in addition to several randomized controlled 
trials worldwide, has led to regulatory approval of the use of mTOR inhibitors 
for the treatment of renal angiomyolipomas, brain subependymal giant cell 
astrocytomas and pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis, but further research is 
needed to establish full indications of therapeutic treatment. In this Primer, 
we review the state-of-the-art knowledge in the TSC field, including the 
molecular and cellular basis of the disease, medical management, major knowledge 
gaps and ongoing research towards a cure.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.35
PMID: 27226234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]