---
reference_id: "PMID:6993166"
title: Mitral valve prolapse.
authors:
- Schlant RC
- Felner JM
- Miklozek CL
- Lutz JF
- Hurst JW
journal: Dis Mon
year: '1980'
doi: 10.1016/s0011-5029(80)80006-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitral valve prolapse.
**Authors:** Schlant RC, Felner JM, Miklozek CL, Lutz JF, Hurst JW
**Journal:** Dis Mon (1980)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0011-5029(80)80006-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0011-5029(80)80006-x)

## Content

1. Dis Mon. 1980 Jul;26(10):1-51. doi: 10.1016/s0011-5029(80)80006-x.

Mitral valve prolapse.

Schlant RC, Felner JM, Miklozek CL, Lutz JF, Hurst JW.

Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) now is a commonly recognized syndrome with an 
apparent prevalence of approximately 4-6%. It appears to occur more frequently 
in females and occasionally it is familial. In most instances, the syndrome is 
idiopathic, although it occurs in association with many other conditions, 
particularly Marfan's syndrome, rheumatic heart disease, coronary heart disease, 
congestive cardiomyopathy, ostium secundum atrial septal defect, Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome or abnormalities of the thoracic cage. The majority of patients with 
the syndrome have minimal, if any, symptoms and have a benign course. When 
symptoms do occur, more frequently they are palpitations, chest pain, dyspnea on 
exertion or fatigue. Neuropsychiatric symptoms or even transient ischemic 
episodes may occur rarely. Very rarely, complications such as severe mitral 
regurgitation, arrhythmias or infective endocarditis may occur. 
Characteristically, patients have a midsystolic click, occasionally followed by 
a systolic murmur. The timing of the click and the onset of the murmur usually 
is variable, depending on the ventricular volume. The electrocardiogram 
frequently shows ST-T wave changes. The diagnosis usually can be confirmed by 
echocardiography or left ventricular angiography. Most patients with MVP require 
no treatment other than reassurance. If a systolic murmur is present, 
prophylaxis against infective endocarditis during dental work probably is 
useful. Patients with palpitations or chest pain usually respond well to 
treatment with propranolol. Patients with progressive severe mitral 
regurgitation require mitral valve replacement.

DOI: 10.1016/s0011-5029(80)80006-x
PMID: 6993166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]