---
reference_id: "PMID:23859346"
title: "Clinical features of Friedreich's ataxia: classical and atypical phenotypes."
authors:
- Parkinson MH
- Boesch S
- Nachbauer W
- Mariotti C
- Giunti P
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/jnc.12317
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features of Friedreich's ataxia: classical and atypical phenotypes.
**Authors:** Parkinson MH, Boesch S, Nachbauer W, Mariotti C, Giunti P
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jnc.12317](https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.12317)

## Content

1. J Neurochem. 2013 Aug;126 Suppl 1:103-17. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12317.

Clinical features of Friedreich's ataxia: classical and atypical phenotypes.

Parkinson MH(1), Boesch S, Nachbauer W, Mariotti C, Giunti P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

One hundred and fifty years since Nikolaus Friedreich's first description of the 
degenerative ataxic syndrome which bears his name, his description remains at 
the core of the classical clinical phenotype of gait and limb ataxia, poor 
balance and coordination, leg weakness, sensory loss, areflexia, impaired 
walking, dysarthria, dysphagia, eye movement abnormalities, scoliosis, foot 
deformities, cardiomyopathy and diabetes. Onset is typically around puberty with 
slow progression and shortened life-span often related to cardiac complications. 
Inheritance is autosomal recessive with the vast majority of cases showing an 
unstable intronic GAA expansion in both alleles of the frataxin gene on 
chromosome 9q13. A small number of cases are caused by a compound heterozygous 
expansion with a point mutation or deletion. Understanding of the underlying 
molecular biology has enabled identification of atypical phenotypes with late 
onset, or atypical features such as retained reflexes. Late-onset cases tend to 
have slower progression and are associated with smaller GAA expansions. 
Early-onset cases tend to have more rapid progression and a higher frequency of 
non-neurological features such as diabetes, cardiomyopathy, scoliosis and pes 
cavus. Compound heterozygotes, including those with large deletions, often have 
atypical features. In this paper, we review the classical and atypical clinical 
phenotypes of Friedreich's ataxia.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.12317
PMID: 23859346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]