---
reference_id: "PMID:8301430"
title: Pancreatitis in patients with organic acidemias.
authors:
- Kahler SG
- Sherwood WG
- Woolf D
- Lawless ST
- Zaritsky A
- Bonham J
- Taylor CJ
- Clarke JT
- Durie P
- Leonard JV
journal: J Pediatr
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(94)70311-6
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chronic Disease
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Isovaleryl-CoA Dehydrogenase
- Male
- Maple Syrup Urine Disease/complications
- Methylmalonic Acid/urine
- Oxidoreductases/deficiency
- Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors
- Pancreatitis/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pancreatitis in patients with organic acidemias.
**Authors:** Kahler SG, Sherwood WG, Woolf D, Lawless ST, Zaritsky A, Bonham J, Taylor CJ, Clarke JT, Durie P, Leonard JV
**Journal:** J Pediatr (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(94)70311-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(94)70311-6)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 1994 Feb;124(2):239-43. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(94)70311-6.

Pancreatitis in patients with organic acidemias.

Kahler SG(1), Sherwood WG, Woolf D, Lawless ST, Zaritsky A, Bonham J, Taylor CJ,
Clarke JT, Durie P, Leonard JV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 1995 May;126(5 Pt 1):852. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(95)70444-2.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: The discovery of pancreatitis in two children with
methylmalonic acidemia led us to review the experience with pancreatitis in a
large number of patients with organic acidemias to determine whether
pancreatitis is an important complication of these disorders.
DESIGN: Case series.
SETTING: Pediatric metabolism services at five tertiary care centers.
PATIENTS: Records of all patients with organic acidemias followed at the five
institutions during the past 10 years were reviewed. Pancreatitis was recognized
by symptoms and laboratory findings and confirmed by imaging studies, surgery,
or autopsy. At three institutions all cases of pancreatitis in children younger
than 10 years were reviewed.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Nine children with pancreatitis (seven with acute and
two with chronic cases) were identified among 108 children with branched-chain
organic acidemias. They ranged in age from 13 months to 9 years. Five had
methylmalonic acidemia, three had isovaleric acidemia, and one had maple syrup
urine disease. There were three deaths; acute hemorrhagic pancreatitis occurred
in two children, and chronic pancreatitis was found at autopsy in a third. All
three patients with isovaleric acidemia and pancreatitis were identified after
the occurrence of pancreatitis. The survey of pancreatitis at three institutions
found 57 other patients (none with an inborn error) in addition to three
patients with inborn errors included in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute or chronic pancreatitis may complicate branched-chain organic
acidemias and must be considered in the assessment of patients with these
disorders who have acute clinical deterioration and vomiting, abdominal pain,
encephalopathy or shock, or milder symptoms. Conversely, an inborn error of
organic acid metabolism should be considered in children with pancreatitis of
unknown origin.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(94)70311-6
PMID: 8301430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
