---
reference_id: "PMID:16719839"
title: In vivo contribution of amino acid sulfur to cartilage proteoglycan sulfation.
authors:
- Pecora F
- Gualeni B
- Forlino A
- Superti-Furga A
- Tenni R
- Cetta G
- Rossi A
journal: Biochem J
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1042/BJ20060566
keywords:
- Acetylcysteine
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Amino Acids/metabolism
- Animals
- Anion Transport Proteins
- CHO Cells
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cartilage/chemistry
- Cricetinae
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- "Proteoglycans/chemistry, metabolism"
- Sulfate Transporters
- Sulfates/metabolism
- Sulfhydryl Compounds/metabolism
- Sulfur/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vivo contribution of amino acid sulfur to cartilage proteoglycan sulfation.
**Authors:** Pecora F, Gualeni B, Forlino A, Superti-Furga A, Tenni R, Cetta G, Rossi A
**Journal:** Biochem J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20060566](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20060566)

## Content

1. Biochem J. 2006 Sep 15;398(3):509-14. doi: 10.1042/BJ20060566.

In vivo contribution of amino acid sulfur to cartilage proteoglycan sulfation.

Pecora F(1), Gualeni B, Forlino A, Superti-Furga A, Tenni R, Cetta G, Rossi A.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica Alessandro Castellani, Università di Pavia, via 
Taramelli 3/B, I-27100 Pavia, Italy.

Cytoplasmic sulfate for sulfation reactions may be derived either from 
extracellular fluids or from catabolism of sulfur-containing amino acids and 
other thiols. In vitro studies have pointed out the potential relevance of 
sulfur-containing amino acids as sources for sulfation when extracellular 
sulfate concentration is low or when its transport is impaired such as in DTDST 
[DTD (diastrophic dysplasia) sulfate transporter] chondrodysplasias. In the 
present study, we have considered the contribution of cysteine and cysteine 
derivatives to in vivo macromolecular sulfation of cartilage by using the mouse 
model of DTD we have recently generated [Forlino, Piazza, Tiveron, Della Torre, 
Tatangelo, Bonafe, Gualeni, Romano, Pecora, Superti-Furga et al. (2005) Hum. 
Mol. Genet. 14, 859-871]. By intraperitoneal injection of [35S]cysteine in 
wild-type and mutant mice and determination of the specific activity of the 
chondroitin 4-sulfated disaccharide in cartilage, we demonstrated that the 
pathway by which sulfate is recruited from the intracellular oxidation of thiols 
is active in vivo. To check whether cysteine derivatives play a role, sulfation 
of cartilage proteoglycans was measured after treatment for 1 week of newborn 
mutant and wild-type mice with hypodermic NAC (N-acetyl-L-cysteine). The 
relative amount of sulfated disaccharides increased in mutant mice treated with 
NAC compared with the placebo group, indicating an increase in proteoglycan 
sulfation due to NAC catabolism, although pharmacokinetic studies demonstrated 
that the drug was rapidly removed from the bloodstream. In conclusion, cysteine 
contribution to cartilage proteoglycan sulfation in vivo is minimal under 
physiological conditions even if extracellular sulfate availability is low; 
however, the contribution of thiols to sulfation becomes significant by 
increasing their plasma concentration.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20060566
PMCID: PMC1559448
PMID: 16719839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]