---
reference_id: "PMID:30866656"
title: Lysosomal Acid Lipase in Lipid Metabolism and Beyond.
authors:
- Li F
- Zhang H
journal: Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.312136
keywords:
- Animals
- "Coronary Artery Disease/genetics, physiopathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Lipid Metabolism/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Sterol Esterase/genetics
- "Wolman Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lysosomal Acid Lipase in Lipid Metabolism and Beyond.
**Authors:** Li F, Zhang H
**Journal:** Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.312136](https://doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.312136)

## Content

1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2019 May;39(5):850-856. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.312136.

Lysosomal Acid Lipase in Lipid Metabolism and Beyond.

Li F(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Cardiometabolic Genomics Program, Division of Cardiology, Department
of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York.

Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL), encoded by the lipase A ( LIPA) gene, hydrolyzes
cholesteryl esters and triglycerides to generate free fatty acids and
cholesterol in the cell. The essential role of LAL in lipid metabolism has been
confirmed in mice and human with LAL deficiency. In humans, loss-of-function
mutations of LIPA cause rare lysosomal disorders, Wolman disease and cholesteryl
ester storage disease, in which LAL enzyme-replacement therapy has shown
significant benefits in a phase 3 clinical trial. Recent studies have revealed
the regulatory role of lipolytic products of lysosomal lipid hydrolysis in
catabolic, anabolic, and signaling pathways. In vivo studies in mice with
knockout of Lipa highlight the systemic impact of Lipa deficiency on metabolic
homeostasis and immune cell function. Genome-wide association studies and
functional genomic studies have identified LIPA as a risk locus for coronary
heart disease, but the causal variants and mechanisms remain to be determined.
Future studies will continue to focus on the role of LAL in the crosstalk
between lipid metabolism and cellular function in health and diseases including
coronary heart disease.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.312136
PMCID: PMC6482091
PMID: 30866656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
