---
reference_id: "PMID:34105177"
title: "Safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of casimersen in patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy amenable to exon 45 skipping: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-titration trial."
authors:
- Wagner KR
- Kuntz NL
- Koenig E
- East L
- Upadhyay S
- Han B
- Shieh PB
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/mus.27347
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Double-Blind Method
- Dystrophin/genetics
- Exons
- Humans
- Male
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne/genetics"
- Mutation
- "Oligonucleotides/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacokinetics"
- Young Adult
- Morpholinos
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of casimersen in patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy amenable to exon 45 skipping: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-titration trial.
**Authors:** Wagner KR, Kuntz NL, Koenig E, East L, Upadhyay S, Han B, Shieh PB
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.27347](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.27347)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2021 Sep;64(3):285-292. doi: 10.1002/mus.27347. Epub 2021 Jun
29.

Safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of casimersen in patients with 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy amenable to exon 45 skipping: A randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-titration trial.

Wagner KR(1)(2), Kuntz NL(3), Koenig E(4), East L(5), Upadhyay S(6), Han B(7), 
Shieh PB(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genetic Muscle Disorders, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(2)Departments of Neurology and Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(4)Clinical Development, Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(5)Clinical Pharmacology, Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(6)Pharmacovigilance, Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Biostatistics, Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, California, 
USA.

INTRODUCTION/AIMS: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is caused by mutations in 
the DMD gene resulting in the absence of dystrophin. Casimersen is a 
phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomer designed to bypass frameshift DMD 
mutations and produce internally truncated, yet functional, dystrophin protein 
in patients amenable to exon 45 skipping. Our primary study objective was to 
evaluate safety and tolerability of casimersen; the secondary objective was to 
characterize the plasma pharmacokinetics.
METHODS: This multicenter, phase 1/2 trial enrolled 12 participants (aged 
7-21 years, who had limited ambulation or were nonambulatory) and comprised a 
12-week, double-blind dose titration, then an open-label extension for up to 
132 weeks. During dose titration, participants were randomized 2:1 to weekly 
casimersen infusions at escalating doses of 4, 10, 20, and 30 mg/kg (≥2 weeks 
per dose), or placebo.
RESULTS: Participants received casimersen for a mean 139.6 weeks. 
Treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) occurred in all casimersen- and 
placebo-treated participants and were mostly mild (over 91.4%) and unrelated to 
casimersen or its dose. There were no deaths, dose reductions, abnormalities in 
laboratory parameters or vital signs, or casimersen-related serious AEs. 
Casimersen plasma concentration increased with dose and declined similarly for 
all dose levels over 24 hours postinfusion. All pharmacokinetic parameters were 
similar at weeks 7 and 60.
DISCUSSION: Casimersen was well tolerated in participants with DMD amenable to 
exon 45 skipping. Most TEAEs were mild, nonserious, and unrelated to casimersen. 
Plasma exposure was dose proportional with no suggestion of plasma accumulation. 
These results support further studies of casimersen in this population.

© 2021 The Authors. Muscle & Nerve published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.27347
PMCID: PMC9290993
PMID: 34105177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K.R.W. has served as a paid consultant for 
Asklepios BioPharmaceutical, Inc, Dynacure, Dyne Therapeutics, PTC Therapeutics, 
F. Hoffmann‐LaRoche, Ltd, Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc, and Vita Therapeutics. 
N.L.K. has served as a paid consultant on advisory boards for Audentes, AveXis, 
Biogen, Cytokinetics, PTC Therapeutics, Roche, and Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc. 
E.K., L.E., S.U., and B.H. are employees of Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc, and may 
own stock/options in the company. P.B.S. has served as a paid consultant on ad 
hoc advisory boards for Alexion, AveXis, Biogen, and Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc, 
and has served on speakers’ bureaus for Alexion, AveXis, Biogen, CSL Behring, 
Genentech, and Grifols.