---
reference_id: "PMID:10652843"
title: Comparison of deterministic and stochastic SIS and SIR models in discrete time.
authors:
- Allen LJ
- Burgin AM
journal: Math Biosci
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0025-5564(99)00047-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of deterministic and stochastic SIS and SIR models in discrete time.
**Authors:** Allen LJ, Burgin AM
**Journal:** Math Biosci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0025-5564(99)00047-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0025-5564(99)00047-4)

## Content

1. Math Biosci. 2000 Jan;163(1):1-33. doi: 10.1016/s0025-5564(99)00047-4.

Comparison of deterministic and stochastic SIS and SIR models in discrete time.

Allen LJ(1), Burgin AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock 
79409-1042, USA. jallen@math.ttu.edu

The dynamics of deterministic and stochastic discrete-time epidemic models are 
analyzed and compared. The discrete-time stochastic models are Markov chains, 
approximations to the continuous-time models. Models of SIS and SIR type with 
constant population size and general force of infection are analyzed, then a 
more general SIS model with variable population size is analyzed. In the 
deterministic models, the value of the basic reproductive number R0 determines 
persistence or extinction of the disease. If R0 < 1, the disease is eliminated, 
whereas if R0 > 1, the disease persists in the population. Since all stochastic 
models considered in this paper have finite state spaces with at least one 
absorbing state, ultimate disease extinction is certain regardless of the value 
of R0. However, in some cases, the time until disease extinction may be very 
long. In these cases, if the probability distribution is conditioned on 
non-extinction, then when R0 > 1, there exists a quasi-stationary probability 
distribution whose mean agrees with deterministic endemic equilibrium. The 
expected duration of the epidemic is investigated numerically.

DOI: 10.1016/s0025-5564(99)00047-4
PMID: 10652843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]