---
reference_id: "PMID:36817957"
title: "The glycine N-acyltransferases, GLYAT and GLYATL1, contribute to the detoxification of isovaleryl-CoA - an in-silico and in vitro validation."
authors:
- Kühn S
- Williams ME
- Dercksen M
- Sass JO
- van der Sluis R
journal: Comput Struct Biotechnol J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.csbj.2023.01.041
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The glycine N-acyltransferases, GLYAT and GLYATL1, contribute to the detoxification of isovaleryl-CoA - an in-silico and in vitro validation.
**Authors:** Kühn S, Williams ME, Dercksen M, Sass JO, van der Sluis R
**Journal:** Comput Struct Biotechnol J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.csbj.2023.01.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2023.01.041)

## Content

1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2023 Jan 31;21:1236-1248. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2023.01.041. eCollection 2023.

The glycine N-acyltransferases, GLYAT and GLYATL1, contribute to the 
detoxification of isovaleryl-CoA - an in-silico and in vitro validation.

Kühn S(1), Williams ME(1), Dercksen M(1), Sass JO(2), van der Sluis R(1).

Author information:
(1)Focus Area for Human Metabolomics, North-West University, Private Bag X6001, 
Potchefstroom 2520, South Africa.
(2)Research Group Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Institute for Functional Gene 
Analytics, Department of Natural Sciences, Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University of Applied 
Sciences, von-Liebig-Str. 20, 53359 Rheinbach, Germany.

Isovaleric acidemia (IVA), due to isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase (IVD) deficiency, 
results in the accumulation of isovaleryl-CoA, isovaleric acid and secondary 
metabolites. The increase in these metabolites decreases mitochondrial energy 
production and increases oxidative stress. This contributes to the 
neuropathological features of IVA. A general assumption in the literature exists 
that glycine N-acyltransferase (GLYAT) plays a role in alleviating the symptoms 
experienced by IVA patients through the formation of N-isovalerylglycine. GLYAT 
forms part of the phase II glycine conjugation pathway in the liver and 
detoxifies excess acyl-CoA's namely benzoyl-CoA. However, very few studies 
support GLYAT as the enzyme that conjugates isovaleryl-CoA to glycine. 
Furthermore, GLYATL1, a paralogue of GLYAT, conjugates phenylacetyl-CoA to 
glutamine. Therefore, GLYATL1 might also be a candidate for the formation of 
N-isovalerylglycine. Based on the findings from the literature review, we 
proposed that GLYAT or GLYATL1 can form N-isovalerylglycine in IVA patients. To 
test this hypothesis, we performed an in-silico analysis to determine which 
enzyme is more likely to conjugate isovaleryl-CoA with glycine using AutoDock 
Vina. Thereafter, we performed in vitro validation using purified enzyme 
preparations. The in-silico and in vitro findings suggested that both enzymes 
could form N-isovaleryglycine albeit at lower affinities than their preferred 
substrates. Furthermore, an increase in glycine concentration does not result in 
an increase in N-isovalerylglycine formation. The results from the critical 
literature appraisal, in-silico, and in vitro validation, suggest the importance 
of further investigating the reaction kinetics and binding behaviors between 
these substrates and enzymes in understanding the pathophysiology of IVA.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2023.01.041
PMCID: PMC9932296
PMID: 36817957

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflict 
of interest.