---
reference_id: "PMID:36936922"
title: "Abnormally primed CD8 T cells: The Achilles' heel of CHB."
authors:
- Chen X
- Liu X
- Jiang Y
- Xia N
- Liu C
- Luo W
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1106700
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormally primed CD8 T cells: The Achilles' heel of CHB.
**Authors:** Chen X, Liu X, Jiang Y, Xia N, Liu C, Luo W
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1106700](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1106700)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Mar 1;14:1106700. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1106700. 
eCollection 2023.

Abnormally primed CD8 T cells: The Achilles' heel of CHB.

Chen X(1), Liu X(1), Jiang Y(1), Xia N(1)(2)(3), Liu C(1)(4), Luo W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics, 
National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious 
Diseases, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(2)Xiang An Biomedicine Laboratory, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(3)The Research Unit of Frontier Technology of Structural Vaccinology, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection continues to be a significant public 
health challenge, and more than 250 million people around world are infected 
with HBV. The clearance of HBV with virus-specific CD8 T cells is critical for a 
functional cure. However, naïve HBV-specific CD8 T cells are heavily hindered 
during the priming process, and this phenomenon is closely related to abnormal 
cell and signal interactions in the complex immune microenvironment. Here, we 
briefly summarize the recent progress in understanding the abnormal priming of 
HBV-specific CD8 T cells and some corresponding immunotherapies to facilitate 
their functional recovery, which provides a novel perspective for the design and 
development of immunotherapy for chronic HBV infection (CHB). Finally, we also 
highlight the balance between viral clearance and pathological liver injury 
induced by CD8 T-cell activation that should be carefully considered during drug 
development.

Copyright © 2023 Chen, Liu, Jiang, Xia, Liu and Luo.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1106700
PMCID: PMC10014547
PMID: 36936922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.