---
reference_id: "PMID:26476224"
title: Etiology and Pathogenesis of Psoriatic Arthritis.
authors:
- Barnas JL
- Ritchlin CT
journal: Rheum Dis Clin North Am
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.rdc.2015.07.006
keywords:
- "Arthritis, Psoriatic/etiology, genetics, immunology"
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etiology and Pathogenesis of Psoriatic Arthritis.
**Authors:** Barnas JL, Ritchlin CT
**Journal:** Rheum Dis Clin North Am (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rdc.2015.07.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rdc.2015.07.006)

## Content

1. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2015 Nov;41(4):643-63. doi:
10.1016/j.rdc.2015.07.006.  Epub 2015 Aug 30.

Etiology and Pathogenesis of Psoriatic Arthritis.

Barnas JL(1), Ritchlin CT(2).

Author information:
(1)Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, University of Rochester Medical Center,
601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 695, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
(2)Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, University of Rochester Medical Center,
601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 695, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. Electronic address:
Christopher_Ritchlin@urmc.rochester.edu.

The current model of psoriatic arthritis implicates both the IL-23/IL-17 axis
and the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) pathways in disease pathogenesis. Although
specific major histocompatibility complex class I molecules are associated with
the psoriatic disease phenotype, no specific antigen or autoantibody has been
identified. Instead, an array of genes may code for an autoinflammatory loop,
potentially activated by mechanical stress and dysbiosis in the skin or gut.
Danger signals released by innate immune cells activate a Th1 and Th17 response
that leads to synovitis, enthesitis, axial inflammation, and altered bone
homeostasis characterized by pathologic bone resorption and new bone formation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rdc.2015.07.006
PMID: 26476224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
