---
reference_id: "PMID:10399933"
title: Doublecortin is a microtubule-associated protein and is expressed widely by migrating neurons.
authors:
- Gleeson JG
- Lin PT
- Flanagan LA
- Walsh CA
journal: Neuron
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80778-3
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Cell Movement/drug effects, physiology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Cerebral Cortex/cytology, growth & development, metabolism"
- Colchicine/pharmacology
- Doublecortin Domain Proteins
- Doublecortin Protein
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mice
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/biosynthesis
- "Microtubules/drug effects, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Mitosis
- "Neurons/drug effects, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Neuropeptides/biosynthesis
- Phosphoproteins/biosynthesis
- "Purkinje Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "RNA, Messenger/biosynthesis"
- Rats
- "Rats, Long-Evans"
- "Tubulin/isolation & purification, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Doublecortin is a microtubule-associated protein and is expressed widely by migrating neurons.
**Authors:** Gleeson JG, Lin PT, Flanagan LA, Walsh CA
**Journal:** Neuron (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80778-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80778-3)

## Content

1. Neuron. 1999 Jun;23(2):257-71. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80778-3.

Doublecortin is a microtubule-associated protein and is expressed widely by
migrating neurons.

Gleeson JG(1), Lin PT, Flanagan LA, Walsh CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Institutes of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Doublecortin (DCX) is required for normal migration of neurons into the cerebral
cortex, since mutations in the human gene cause a disruption of cortical
neuronal migration. To date, little is known about the distribution of DCX
protein or its function. Here, we demonstrate that DCX is expressed in migrating
neurons throughout the central and peripheral nervous system during embryonic
and postnatal development. DCX protein localization overlaps with microtubules
in cultured primary cortical neurons, and this overlapping expression is
disrupted by microtubule depolymerization. DCX coassembles with brain
microtubules, and recombinant DCX stimulates the polymerization of purified
tubulin. Finally, overexpression of DCX in heterologous cells leads to a
dramatic microtubule phenotype that is resistant to depolymerization. Therefore,
DCX likely directs neuronal migration by regulating the organization and
stability of microtubules.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80778-3
PMID: 10399933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
