---
reference_id: "PMID:36716982"
title: "Monkeypox-Induced Myocarditis: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Jaiswal V
- Sultana Q
- Lahori S
- Mukherjee D
- Agrawal V
- Doshi N
- Shrestha AB
- Huang H
- Nasir YM
- Naz S
journal: Curr Probl Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2023.101611
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox-Induced Myocarditis: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Jaiswal V, Sultana Q, Lahori S, Mukherjee D, Agrawal V, Doshi N, Shrestha AB, Huang H, Nasir YM, Naz S
**Journal:** Curr Probl Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2023.101611](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2023.101611)

## Content

1. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2023 May;48(5):101611. doi:
10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2023.101611.  Epub 2023 Jan 28.

Monkeypox-Induced Myocarditis: A Systematic Review.

Jaiswal V(1), Sultana Q(2), Lahori S(3), Mukherjee D(4), Agrawal V(5), Doshi 
N(6), Shrestha AB(7), Huang H(8), Nasir YM(9), Naz S(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology Research, Larkin Community Hospital, South Miami, 
Fl, USA; JCCR Cardiology Research, Varanasi, India. Electronic address: 
vikash29jaxy@gmail.com.
(2)Deccan College of Medical Science, Telangana, India.
(3)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Raiganj Government Medical College and Hospital, Raiganj, Uttar Dinajpur, 
India.
(5)King George's Medical University, Lucknow, India.
(6)Pravara Institute of Medical Science, MH, India.
(7)Department of Medicine, M Abdur Rahim Medical College, Dinajpur, Bangladesh.
(8)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, University of Medicine and Health 
Science, Dublin, Ireland.
(9)Division of Internal Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, NY, USA.
(10)The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Texas, USA.

Monkeypox virus has emerged in different parts of the world with varying 
clinical symptoms and outcomes. To date, only a few studies have reported 
cardiac manifestations among monkeypox-infected patients. We aim to 
systematically evaluate the symptoms, imaging findings, management, and outcomes 
among monkeypox-induced myocarditis patients. We conducted a systematic 
literature search in PubMed, Embase, and Scopus from inception till 5th January 
2023 by using predefined MESH terms and "AND" and "OR." The following search 
terms were used: "monkeypox virus" AND "myocarditis." A total of 6 studies with 
9 monkeypox-induced myocarditis patients were included in this analysis. The 
mean age of patients was 33.6 years, with all being male patients. The most 
common symptoms were fever (89%) and chest pain (100%). Electrocardiogram 
findings showed 44% of patients had ST-elevation, and 22% had sinus tachycardia. 
The echocardiographic findings show a mean ejection fraction of 52.14%, while 
57% of patients had preserved ejection fraction, and 67% had normal wall motion. 
Cardiac magnetic resonance findings show 40% of patients had late gadolinium 
enhancement, and 40% had edema. Management of patients was primarily supportive 
(33%), and 33% of patients were administered Beta blockers and ACE inhibitors. 
Overall all patients survived with a good prognosis. Our study's findings show 
that all cases were reported among male patients with the most common symptoms 
of chest pain. The overall prognosis was good, with no mortality reported. 
Infected patients complaining of chest pain should not be ignored, and proper 
investigation of myocarditis must be considered.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2023.101611
PMCID: PMC9883211
PMID: 36716982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]