---
reference_id: "PMID:12113648"
title: "Pustular skin disorders: diagnosis and treatment."
authors:
- Mengesha YM
- Bennett ML
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.2165/00128071-200203060-00003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pustular skin disorders: diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Mengesha YM, Bennett ML
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00128071-200203060-00003](https://doi.org/10.2165/00128071-200203060-00003)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2002;3(6):389-400. doi: 10.2165/00128071-200203060-00003.

Pustular skin disorders: diagnosis and treatment.

Mengesha YM(1), Bennett ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

The differential diagnosis for pustular skin disorders is extensive. The 
distribution of the lesions and the age of the patient are characteristics that 
may provide strong clues to the etiology of cutaneous pustular eruptions. In 
adults, generalized pustular dermatoses include pustular psoriasis, Reiter's 
disease and subcorneal pustular dermatosis. Medications can cause generalized 
pustular eruptions, such as in the case of acute generalized exanthematous 
pustulosis; or more localized reactions, such as acneiform drug eruptions, which 
usually involve the face, chest and back. Localized pustular eruptions are seen 
on the hands and feet in adults with pustulosis palmaris et plantaris and 
acrodermatitis continua (both of which may be variants of psoriasis); on the 
face in patients with acne vulgaris, rosacea, and perioral dermatitis; and on 
the trunk and/or extremities in patients with folliculitis. A separate condition 
known as eosinophilic folliculitis occurs in individuals with advanced human 
immunodeficiency disease. Severely pruritic, sterile, eosinophilic pustules are 
found on the chest, proximal extremities, head and neck. Elevated serum 
immunoglobulin E and eosinophilia are often concurrently found. In neonates, it 
is especially important to make the correct diagnosis with respect to pustular 
skin disorders, since pustules can be a manifestation of sepsis or other serious 
infectious diseases. Generalized pustular eruptions in neonates include erythema 
toxicum neonatorum and transient neonatal pustular melanosis, both of which are 
non-infectious. Pustules are seen in infants with congenital cutaneous 
candidiasis, which may or may not involve disseminated disease. Ofuji's syndrome 
is an uncommon generalized pustular dermatosis of infancy with associated 
eosinophilia. As in adults, neonates and infants may develop acne or scabies 
infestations. In this article, we review the most common pustular dermatoses and 
offer a systematic approach to making a diagnosis. We also report the most 
up-to-date information on the treatment of these various cutaneous pustular 
conditions.

DOI: 10.2165/00128071-200203060-00003
PMID: 12113648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]