---
reference_id: "PMID:18239181"
title: "Cerebral proliferative angiopathy: clinical and angiographic description of an entity different from cerebral AVMs."
authors:
- Lasjaunias PL
- Landrieu P
- Rodesch G
- Alvarez H
- Ozanne A
- Holmin S
- Zhao WY
- Geibprasert S
- Ducreux D
- Krings T
journal: Stroke
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.493080
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Central Nervous System Diseases/etiology
- Cerebral Angiography
- Child
- "Databases, Factual"
- Female
- Headache/etiology
- Humans
- "Intracranial Arteriovenous Malformations/classification, complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/etiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebral proliferative angiopathy: clinical and angiographic description of an entity different from cerebral AVMs.
**Authors:** Lasjaunias PL, Landrieu P, Rodesch G, Alvarez H, Ozanne A, Holmin S, Zhao WY, Geibprasert S, Ducreux D, Krings T
**Journal:** Stroke (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.493080](https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.493080)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2008 Mar;39(3):878-85. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.493080. Epub 2008
Jan  31.

Cerebral proliferative angiopathy: clinical and angiographic description of an 
entity different from cerebral AVMs.

Lasjaunias PL(1), Landrieu P, Rodesch G, Alvarez H, Ozanne A, Holmin S, Zhao WY, 
Geibprasert S, Ducreux D, Krings T.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neuroradiologie Diagnostique et Thérapeutique, Hôpital de Bicêtre, 
78, rue du Général Leclerc, 94275 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. 
pierre.lasjaunias@bct.ap-hop-paris.fr

Comment in
    Stroke. 2008 Mar;39(3):741-2. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.500975.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The purpose of this article is to describe "cerebral 
proliferative angiopathy" (CPA) as a clinical entity, which may be regarded as 
separate from "classical" brain AVMs in angioarchitecture, natural history, 
clinical presentation, and, therefore, treatment and which can be discerned from 
other cerebral AVMs by characteristic imaging features.
METHODS: In a prospectively entered databank encompassing 1434 patients with 
brain AVMs, a subgroup of 49 patients harboring specific angiographic 
characteristics were identified. Their charts and imaging films were 
retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: We found a preponderance of CPA in young (mean age: 22) females (67%). 
Clinical symptoms were seizures, disabling headaches, and stroke-like symptoms; 
hemorrhagic presentations were exceptional. On cross-sectional imaging, CPA 
demonstrated as a diffuse network of densely enhancing vascular spaces with 
intermingled normal brain parenchyma. The discrepancy between the large size of 
the nidus and the small shunting volume, the absence of flow-related aneurysms, 
the presence of diffuse angiogenesis (eg, transdural supply, progressive 
arterial occlusion), and the small calibre of a multitude of feeding arteries 
and draining veins were the angiographic hallmarks of this disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The diffuse angiogenetic activity is presumably related to reduced 
perinidal perfusion and subsequent chronic cortical ischemia. Natural history 
demonstrates a low risk of hemorrhage. CPA may be regarded as a separate 
clinical entity different to "classical" cerebral AVMs, because normal brain is 
interspersed with the abnormal vascular channels increasing the risk of 
neurological deficit in aggressive treatments, which in the light of the natural 
history does not seem to be indicated.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.493080
PMID: 18239181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]