---
reference_id: "PMID:11689434"
title: "Cystinosin, the protein defective in cystinosis, is a H(+)-driven lysosomal cystine transporter."
authors:
- Kalatzis V
- Cherqui S
- Antignac C
- Gasnier B
journal: EMBO J
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.21.5940
keywords:
- Amino Acid Motifs/physiology
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Neutral"
- Animals
- "Biological Transport, Active/physiology"
- COS Cells
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- "Cystine/metabolism, pharmacokinetics"
- "Cystinosis/genetics, metabolism"
- Glycoproteins
- Hydrogen-Ion Concentration
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Membrane Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Membrane Transport Proteins
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Point Mutation
- Protons
- "Recombinant Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
- Substrate Specificity
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystinosin, the protein defective in cystinosis, is a H(+)-driven lysosomal cystine transporter.
**Authors:** Kalatzis V, Cherqui S, Antignac C, Gasnier B
**Journal:** EMBO J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/20.21.5940](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/20.21.5940)

## Content

1. EMBO J. 2001 Nov 1;20(21):5940-9. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.21.5940.

Cystinosin, the protein defective in cystinosis, is a H(+)-driven lysosomal 
cystine transporter.

Kalatzis V(1), Cherqui S, Antignac C, Gasnier B.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U423, Université René Descartes, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 149 
rue de Sèvres, 75015 Paris, France.

Cystinosis is an inherited lysosomal storage disease characterized by defective 
transport of cystine out of lysosomes. However, the causative gene, CTNS, 
encodes a seven transmembrane domain lysosomal protein, cystinosin, unrelated to 
known transporters. To investigate the molecular function of cystinosin, the 
protein was redirected from lysosomes to the plasma membrane by deletion of its 
C-terminal GYDQL sorting motif (cystinosin-DeltaGYDQL), thereby exposing the 
intralysosomal side of cystinosin to the extracellular medium. COS cells 
expressing cystinosin-DeltaGYDQL selectively take up L-cystine from the 
extracellular medium at acidic pH. Disruption of the transmembrane pH gradient 
or incubation of the cells at neutral pH strongly inhibits the uptake. 
Cystinosin-DeltaGYDQL is directly involved in the observed cystine transport, 
since this activity is highly reduced when the GYDQL motif is restored and is 
abolished upon introduction of a point mutation inducing early-onset cystinosis. 
We conclude that cystinosin represents a novel H(+)-driven transporter that is 
responsible for cystine export from lysosomes, and propose that cystinosin 
homologues, such as mammalian SL15/Lec35 and Saccharomyces cerevisiae ERS1, may 
perform similar transport processes at other cellular membranes.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.21.5940
PMCID: PMC125690
PMID: 11689434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]