---
reference_id: "PMID:34530847"
title: "Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders: from pathophysiology to therapeutic strategies."
authors:
- Carnero Contentti E
- Correale J
journal: J Neuroinflammation
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12974-021-02249-1
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Aquaporin 4/immunology, metabolism"
- "Astrocytes/drug effects, immunology, metabolism"
- "Autoantibodies/drug effects, immunology, metabolism"
- "Azathioprine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Clinical Trials, Phase III as Topic/methods"
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/drug therapy, immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders: from pathophysiology to therapeutic strategies.
**Authors:** Carnero Contentti E, Correale J
**Journal:** J Neuroinflammation (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12974-021-02249-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-021-02249-1)

## Content

1. J Neuroinflammation. 2021 Sep 16;18(1):208. doi: 10.1186/s12974-021-02249-1.

Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders: from pathophysiology to therapeutic
strategies.

Carnero Contentti E(1), Correale J(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroimmunology Unit, Department of Neuroscience, Hospital Aleman, Buenos
Aires, Argentina. junior.carnero@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Fleni, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease of the
central nervous system (CNS) characterized by acute optic neuritis (ON) and
transverse myelitis (TM). NMO is caused by a pathogenic serum IgG antibody
against the water channel aquoporin 4 (AQP4) in the majority of patients.
AQP4-antibody (AQP4-ab) presence is highly specific, and differentiates NMO from
multiple sclerosis. It binds to AQP4 channels on astrocytes, triggering
activation of the classical complement cascade, causing granulocyte, eosinophil,
and lymphocyte infiltration, culminating in injury first to astrocyte, then
oligodendrocytes followed by demyelination and neuronal loss. NMO spectrum
disorder (NMOSD) has recently been defined and stratified based on AQP4-ab
serology status. Most NMOSD patients experience severe relapses leading to
permanent neurologic disability, making suppression of relapse frequency and
severity, the primary objective in disease management. The most common
treatments used for relapses are steroids and plasma exchange.Currently,
long-term NMOSD relapse prevention includes off-label use of immunosuppressants,
particularly rituximab. In the last 2 years however, three pivotal clinical
trials have expanded the spectrum of drugs available for NMOSD patients. Phase
III studies have shown significant relapse reduction compared to placebo in
AQP4-ab-positive patients treated with satralizumab, an interleukin-6 receptor
(IL-6R) inhibitor, inebilizumab, an antibody against CD19+ B cells; and
eculizumab, an antibody blocking the C5 component of complement. In light of the
new evidence on NMOSD pathophysiology and of preliminary results from ongoing
trials with new drugs, we present this descriptive review, highlighting
promising treatment modalities as well as auspicious preclinical and clinical
studies.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-021-02249-1
PMCID: PMC8444436
PMID: 34530847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Edgar Carnero Contentti has received
reimbursement for developing educational presentations, educational and research
grants, consultation fees, and/or travel stipends from Biogen, Bayer, Genzyme,
Merck, Novartis, Roche, Raffo, and Teva. ECC has also received grants from
LACTRIMS and Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation. Jorge Correale is a board
member of Merck-Serono Argentina, Novartis Argentina, Genzyme LATAM, Genzyme
global, Biogen-Idec LATAM and Merck-Serono LATAM. He is part of the Steering
Committee for the clinical trials of Ofatumumab (Novartis Global). JC has
received reimbursement for developing educational presentations for Merck-Serono
Argentina, Merck-Serono LATAM, Biogen-Idec Argentina, Genzyme Argentina,
Novartis Argentina, Novartis LATAM, Novartis Global and Roche Argentina, as well
as professional travel/accommodation stipends.
