---
reference_id: "PMID:38724705"
title: Single-cell transcriptomic analyses reveal distinct immune cell contributions to epithelial barrier dysfunction in checkpoint inhibitor colitis.
authors:
- Thomas MF
- Slowikowski K
- Manakongtreecheep K
- Sen P
- Samanta N
- Tantivit J
- Nasrallah M
- Zubiri L
- Smith NP
- Tirard A
- Ramesh S
- Arnold BY
- Nieman LT
- Chen JH
- Eisenhaure T
- Pelka K
- Song Y
- Xu KH
- Jorgji V
- Pinto CJ
- Sharova T
- Glasser R
- Chan P
- Sullivan RJ
- Khalili H
- Juric D
- Boland GM
- Dougan M
- Hacohen N
- Li B
- Reynolds KL
- Villani AC
journal: Nat Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-024-02895-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell transcriptomic analyses reveal distinct immune cell contributions to epithelial barrier dysfunction in checkpoint inhibitor colitis.
**Authors:** Thomas MF, Slowikowski K, Manakongtreecheep K, Sen P, Samanta N, Tantivit J, Nasrallah M, Zubiri L, Smith NP, Tirard A, Ramesh S, Arnold BY, Nieman LT, Chen JH, Eisenhaure T, Pelka K, Song Y, Xu KH, Jorgji V, Pinto CJ, Sharova T, Glasser R, Chan P, Sullivan RJ, Khalili H, Juric D, Boland GM, Dougan M, Hacohen N, Li B, Reynolds KL, Villani AC
**Journal:** Nat Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-024-02895-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-024-02895-x)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2024 May;30(5):1349-1362. doi: 10.1038/s41591-024-02895-x. Epub 2024 
May 9.

Single-cell transcriptomic analyses reveal distinct immune cell contributions to 
epithelial barrier dysfunction in checkpoint inhibitor colitis.

Thomas MF(#)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Slowikowski K(#)(8)(9)(10)(11), 
Manakongtreecheep K(12)(13)(14), Sen P(12)(14)(15)(16), Samanta N(12)(13)(14), 
Tantivit J(12)(13)(14), Nasrallah M(12)(14)(15)(17), Zubiri L(13)(15)(18), Smith 
NP(12)(13)(14), Tirard A(12)(13)(14), Ramesh S(12)(13)(14), Arnold 
BY(12)(13)(14), Nieman LT(13)(15), Chen JH(13)(14)(15)(19), Eisenhaure T(14), 
Pelka K(13)(14)(15)(20), Song Y(13), Xu KH(13), Jorgji V(13)(19), Pinto CJ(21), 
Sharova T(22), Glasser R(23), Chan P(15)(21), Sullivan RJ(15)(18), Khalili 
H(14)(15)(23), Juric D(14)(15)(18), Boland GM(13)(14)(15)(22), Dougan M(15)(23), 
Hacohen N(13)(14)(15), Li B(12)(14)(15)(24), Reynolds KL(15)(18), Villani 
AC(25)(26)(27)(28).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. thomamol@ohsu.edu.
(2)Krantz Family Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA. thomamol@ohsu.edu.
(3)Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA. thomamol@ohsu.edu.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. thomamol@ohsu.edu.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. thomamol@ohsu.edu.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and 
Sciences University, Portland, OR, USA. thomamol@ohsu.edu.
(7)Department of Cell, Developmental, and Cancer Biology, Oregon Health and 
Sciences University, Portland, OR, USA. thomamol@ohsu.edu.
(8)Department of Medicine, Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. kslowikowski@mgh.harvard.edu.
(9)Krantz Family Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA. kslowikowski@mgh.harvard.edu.
(10)Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA. kslowikowski@mgh.harvard.edu.
(11)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. kslowikowski@mgh.harvard.edu.
(12)Department of Medicine, Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Krantz Family Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(15)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(16)Transplant, Oncology, and Immunocompromised Host Group, Division of 
Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(17)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, North Shore Physicians 
Group, Mass General Brigham Healthcare Center, Lynn, MA, USA.
(18)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(19)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(20)Gladstone-UCSF Institute of Genomic Immunology, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(21)Clinical Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(22)Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(23)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(24)Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(25)Department of Medicine, Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. avillani@mgh.harvard.edu.
(26)Krantz Family Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA. avillani@mgh.harvard.edu.
(27)Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA. avillani@mgh.harvard.edu.
(28)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. avillani@mgh.harvard.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapy has revolutionized oncology, but 
treatments are limited by immune-related adverse events, including checkpoint 
inhibitor colitis (irColitis). Little is understood about the pathogenic 
mechanisms driving irColitis, which does not readily occur in model organisms, 
such as mice. To define molecular drivers of irColitis, we used single-cell 
multi-omics to profile approximately 300,000 cells from the colon mucosa and 
blood of 13 patients with cancer who developed irColitis (nine on anti-PD-1 or 
anti-CTLA-4 monotherapy and four on dual ICI therapy; most patients had skin or 
lung cancer), eight controls on ICI therapy and eight healthy controls. Patients 
with irColitis showed expanded mucosal Tregs, ITGAEHi CD8 tissue-resident memory 
T cells expressing CXCL13 and Th17 gene programs and recirculating ITGB2Hi CD8 T 
cells. Cytotoxic GNLYHi CD4 T cells, recirculating ITGB2Hi CD8 T cells and 
endothelial cells expressing hypoxia gene programs were further expanded in 
colitis associated with anti-PD-1/CTLA-4 therapy compared to anti-PD-1 therapy. 
Luminal epithelial cells in patients with irColitis expressed PCSK9, PD-L1 and 
interferon-induced signatures associated with apoptosis, increased cell turnover 
and malabsorption. Together, these data suggest roles for circulating T cells 
and epithelial-immune crosstalk critical to PD-1/CTLA-4-dependent tolerance and 
barrier function and identify potential therapeutic targets for irColitis.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-024-02895-x
PMCID: PMC11673812
PMID: 38724705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: From August 9, 2021, B.L. is an employee of 
Genentech. M.D. has received consulting fees from Genentech, Partner 
Therapeutics, SQZ Biotech, AzurRx, Eli Lilly, Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, 
Aditum, Foghorn Therapeutics, Palleon, Sorriso Pharmaceuticals, Generate 
Biomedicines, Asher Bio, Neoleukin Therapeutics, Moderna, Alloy Therapeutics, 
Third Rock Ventures, DE Shaw Research, Agenus, and Curie Bio; he is a member of 
the Scientific Advisory Board for Veravas, Monod Bio, Axxis Bio, and Cerberus 
Therapeutics. R.J.S. is a consultant to BMS, Marengo, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, 
and Replimune. H.K. received research funding from Pfizer and Takeda. H.J. 
received consulting fees from Aditium Bio, Abbvie, and Takeda. H.J. serves on 
scientific advisory board of Vivante Health. D.J. reports grants and personal 
fees from Novartis, Genentech, Syros, Eisai. D.J. reports personal fees from 
Vibliome, PIC Therapeutics, Mapkure, Relay Therapeutics. D.J. reports grants 
from Pfizer, Amgen, InventisBio, Arvinas, Takeda, Blueprint, AstraZeneca, Ribon 
Therapeutics, Infinity that are outside the submitted work. G.M.B. has sponsored 
research agreements through her institution with: Olink Proteomics, Teiko Bio, 
InterVenn Biosciences, Palleon Pharmaceuticals. G.M.B. served on advisory boards 
for: Iovance, Merck, Nektar Therapeutics, Novartis, and Ankyra Therapeutics. 
G.M.B. consults for: Merck, InterVenn Biosciences, Iovance, and Ankyra 
Therapeutics. She holds equity in Ankyra Therapeutics. KP is a consultant to 
Santa Ana Bio. N.H. holds equity in and advises Danger Bio/Related Sciences, is 
on the scientific advisory board of Repertoire Immune Medicines and CytoReason, 
owns equity and has licensed patents to BioNtech, and receives research funding 
from Bristol Myers Squibb and Calico Life Sciences. KLR has received advisory 
board fees from SAGA diagnostics and institutional research support from BMS. 
A.C.V. received consulting fees from Merck and BMS. A.C.V. has a financial 
interest in 10X Genomics. The company designs and manufactures gene sequencing 
technology for use in research, and such technology is being used in this 
research. Dr. Villani’s interests were reviewed by The Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Mass General Brigham in accordance with their institutional 
policies. M.F.T., K.S., K.M., P.S., N.S., J.T., M.N., L.Z., N.P.S., A.T., S.R., 
B.Y.A., L.T.N., J.H.C., T.E., Y.S., K.H.X., V.J., C.J.P., T.S., R.G., P.Y.C., do 
not have competing interest to declare.