---
reference_id: "PMID:38674434"
title: Biallelic NDUFA4 Deletion Causes Mitochondrial Complex IV Deficiency in a Patient with Leigh Syndrome.
authors:
- Misceo D
- Strømme P
- Bitarafan F
- Chawla MS
- Sheng Y
- Bach de Courtade SM
- Eide L
- Frengen E
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15040500
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leigh Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Sequence Deletion
- Electron Transport Complex I
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic NDUFA4 Deletion Causes Mitochondrial Complex IV Deficiency in a Patient with Leigh Syndrome.
**Authors:** Misceo D, Strømme P, Bitarafan F, Chawla MS, Sheng Y, Bach de Courtade SM, Eide L, Frengen E
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15040500](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15040500)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Apr 17;15(4):500. doi: 10.3390/genes15040500.

Biallelic NDUFA4 Deletion Causes Mitochondrial Complex IV Deficiency in a 
Patient with Leigh Syndrome.

Misceo D(1), Strømme P(2), Bitarafan F(1), Chawla MS(3), Sheng Y(1), Bach de 
Courtade SM(4), Eide L(4), Frengen E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and University of 
Oslo, 0450 Oslo, Norway.
(2)Division of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital and 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 0450 Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Neuroradiology, Oslo University Hospital, 0450 Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, 
0450 Oslo, Norway.

Oxidative phosphorylation involves a complex multi-enzymatic mitochondrial 
machinery critical for proper functioning of the cell, and defects herein cause 
a wide range of diseases called "primary mitochondrial disorders" (PMDs). 
Mutations in about 400 nuclear and 37 mitochondrial genes have been documented 
to cause PMDs, which have an estimated birth prevalence of 1:5000. Here, we 
describe a 4-year-old female presenting from early childhood with psychomotor 
delay and white matter signal changes affecting several brain regions, including 
the brainstem, in addition to lactic and phytanic acidosis, compatible with 
Leigh syndrome, a genetically heterogeneous subgroup of PMDs. Whole genome 
sequencing of the family trio identified a homozygous 12.9 Kb deletion, entirely 
overlapping the NDUFA4 gene. Sanger sequencing of the breakpoints revealed that 
the genomic rearrangement was likely triggered by Alu elements flanking the 
gene. NDUFA4 encodes for a subunit of the respiratory chain Complex IV, whose 
activity was significantly reduced in the patient's fibroblasts. In one family, 
dysfunction of NDUFA4 was previously documented as causing mitochondrial Complex 
IV deficiency nuclear type 21 (MC4DN21, OMIM 619065), a relatively mild form of 
Leigh syndrome. Our finding confirms the loss of NDUFA4 function as an 
ultra-rare cause of Complex IV defect, clinically presenting as Leigh syndrome.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15040500
PMCID: PMC11050323
PMID: 38674434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.