---
reference_id: "PMID:17982687"
title: Six cases of citrin deficiency in Korea.
authors:
- Ko JM
- Kim GH
- Kim JH
- Kim JY
- Choi JH
- Ushikai M
- Saheki T
- Kobayashi K
- Yoo HW
journal: Int J Mol Med
year: '2007'
keywords:
- Adult
- Base Sequence
- "Cholestasis, Intrahepatic/genetics, physiopathology"
- Citrullinemia/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Korea
- Male
- "Membrane Transport Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Mitochondrial Membrane Transport Proteins
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Six cases of citrin deficiency in Korea.
**Authors:** Ko JM, Kim GH, Kim JH, Kim JY, Choi JH, Ushikai M, Saheki T, Kobayashi K, Yoo HW
**Journal:** Int J Mol Med (2007)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Dec;20(6):809-15.

Six cases of citrin deficiency in Korea.

Ko JM(1), Kim GH, Kim JH, Kim JY, Choi JH, Ushikai M, Saheki T, Kobayashi K, Yoo
HW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Songpa-gu, Seoul 138-736, Korea.

Citrin deficiency resulting from mutations of the SLC25A13 gene is associated
with two major clinical phenotypes; neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by
citrin deficiency (NICCD) and adult-onset type 2 citrullinemia (CTLN2). In
Korea, 6 cases of citrin deficiency were diagnosed based on biochemical and
molecular findings. Four NICCD patients (2 boys and 2 girls) presented high
citrulline levels on a newborn screening test or neonatal cholestasis. They were
associated with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, elevated liver enzymes,
hypoalbuminemia, mild hyperammonemia, elevated citrulline, methionine and
threonine. All of the hepatic manifestations were resolved spontaneously at the
age of 5-9 months. Mutation analysis identified them as compound heterozygotes
carrying each of the c.851del4, IVS11+1G>A, IVS13+1G>A, G393S, and IVS16ins3kb
mutant alleles. Two adult male CTLN2 patients were identified. They were aged 24
and 37 years, and presented sudden loss of consciousness, hyperammonemia and
citrullinemia. They were compound heterozygotes with IVS13+1G>A and IVS16ins3kb,
and with c.851del4 and IVS11+1G>A mutant alleles. This report describes the
clinical characteristics, biochemical findings and molecular analysis of the
SLC25A13 gene of patients with citrin deficiency in Korea.

PMID: 17982687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
