---
reference_id: "PMID:39518763"
title: "Molecular Diagnostics for Group A Streptococcal Pharyngitis: Clinical and Economic Benefits in the Belgian Healthcare Context."
authors:
- Panahandeh MH
- Soleimani R
- Nezzar Y
- Rodriguez-Villalobos H
- Kabamba-Mukadi B
- Grimmelprez A
- Schatt P
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13216627
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Diagnostics for Group A Streptococcal Pharyngitis: Clinical and Economic Benefits in the Belgian Healthcare Context.
**Authors:** Panahandeh MH, Soleimani R, Nezzar Y, Rodriguez-Villalobos H, Kabamba-Mukadi B, Grimmelprez A, Schatt P
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13216627](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13216627)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Nov 4;13(21):6627. doi: 10.3390/jcm13216627.

Molecular Diagnostics for Group A Streptococcal Pharyngitis: Clinical and 
Economic Benefits in the Belgian Healthcare Context.

Panahandeh MH(1), Soleimani R(2), Nezzar Y(1), Rodriguez-Villalobos H(3), 
Kabamba-Mukadi B(3), Grimmelprez A(1), Schatt P(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinique 
Notre-Dame De Grâce, 6041 Gosselies, Belgium.
(2)Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire Ambroise Paré (HELORA-Site Kennedy), 7000 Mons, 
Belgium.
(3)Microbiology Laboratory, Departement of Laboratory Medicine, Cliniques 
Universitaires Saint-Luc, 1200 Brussels, Belgium.

(1) Background: Group A Streptococcal (GAS) pharyngitis is common, resulting in 
numerous ambulatory visits. Accurate diagnosis is challenging. This study 
evaluated the clinical utility, cost, and performance of a nucleic acid 
amplification test (NAAT) for GAS detection, comparing it to a rapid antigen 
detection test (RADT) and throat culture. Additionally, we assessed the 
diagnostic stewardship related to these testing methods to ensure appropriate 
antibiotic use in clinical practice.
METHODS: Between November 2022 and February 2023, 82 throat swabs were analyzed, 
with McIsaac clinical scores calculated for each. The Abbott ID NOW STREP A 2 
NAAT and Sekisui Diagnostics' OSOM® STREP A RADT were performed, followed by 
bacterial culture. Diagnostic performance was compared using culture as the gold 
standard.
RESULTS: Of the 82 samples, 28 (34.14%) tested positive for pathogenic germs, 
primarily Streptococcus pyogenes (92.85%). RADTs showed a sensitivity of 80.76% 
and a specificity of 100%, while NAATs demonstrated a sensitivity of 100% and 
specificity of 96.42%. Cost analysis indicated the need for reimbursement 
adjustments to optimize NAAT's economic benefits. Clinical data indicated that 
symptoms alone were insufficient for reliable diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirmed the superior sensitivity of Abbott's Strep A2 
NAAT over RADT. Given the Belgian guidelines against routine antibiotic 
treatment for pharyngitis and considering local treatment recommendations and 
cost, implementing NAAT for GAS detection in Belgian laboratories is less 
beneficial. However, the role of NAAT in supporting antimicrobial stewardship by 
ensuring appropriate antibiotic use remains significant.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13216627
PMCID: PMC11546146
PMID: 39518763

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.