---
reference_id: "PMID:33328328"
title: "Mutant huntingtin and neurofilament light have distinct longitudinal dynamics in Huntington's disease."
authors:
- Rodrigues FB
- Byrne LM
- Tortelli R
- Johnson EB
- Wijeratne PA
- Arridge M
- De Vita E
- Ghazaleh N
- Houghton R
- Furby H
- Alexander DC
- Tabrizi SJ
- Schobel S
- Scahill RI
- Heslegrave A
- Zetterberg H
- Wild EJ
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abc2888
keywords:
- Atrophy
- Cohort Studies
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein/genetics
- Huntington Disease/genetics
- Intermediate Filaments
- Neurofilament Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant huntingtin and neurofilament light have distinct longitudinal dynamics in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Rodrigues FB, Byrne LM, Tortelli R, Johnson EB, Wijeratne PA, Arridge M, De Vita E, Ghazaleh N, Houghton R, Furby H, Alexander DC, Tabrizi SJ, Schobel S, Scahill RI, Heslegrave A, Zetterberg H, Wild EJ
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.abc2888](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.abc2888)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2020 Dec 16;12(574):eabc2888. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.abc2888.

Mutant huntingtin and neurofilament light have distinct longitudinal dynamics in 
Huntington's disease.

Rodrigues FB(1), Byrne LM(1), Tortelli R(1), Johnson EB(1), Wijeratne PA(2), 
Arridge M(3)(4), De Vita E(3)(4)(5), Ghazaleh N(6), Houghton R(6), Furby H(6), 
Alexander DC(2), Tabrizi SJ(1)(7), Schobel S(8), Scahill RI(1), Heslegrave 
A(7)(9), Zetterberg H(7)(9)(10)(11), Wild EJ(12).

Author information:
(1)UCL Huntington's Disease Centre, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 
University College London, London WC1B 5EH, UK.
(2)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, 
University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(3)Lysholm Department of Neuroradiology, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(4)Neuroradiological Academic Unit, Department of Brain Repair and 
Rehabilitation, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College 
London, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(5)Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Biomedical Engineering and 
Imaging Sciences, King's College London, London SE1 7EH, UK.
(6)PD Personalised Healthcare, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., 4070 Basel, 
Switzerland.
(7)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(8)Product Development Neuroscience, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., 4070 Basel, 
Switzerland.
(9)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, University College London, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(10)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 431 80 
Mölndal, Sweden.
(11)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, 431 80 Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(12)UCL Huntington's Disease Centre, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 
University College London, London WC1B 5EH, UK. e.wild@ucl.ac.uk.

The longitudinal dynamics of the most promising biofluid biomarker candidates 
for Huntington's disease (HD)-mutant huntingtin (mHTT) and neurofilament light 
(NfL)-are incompletely defined. Characterizing changes in these candidates 
during disease progression could increase our understanding of disease 
pathophysiology and help the identification of effective therapies. In an 
80-participant cohort over 24 months, mHTT in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), as well 
as NfL in CSF and blood, had distinct longitudinal trajectories in HD mutation 
carriers compared with controls. Baseline analyte values predicted clinical 
disease status, subsequent clinical progression, and brain atrophy, better than 
did the rate of change in analytes. Overall, NfL was a stronger monitoring and 
prognostic biomarker for HD than mHTT. Nonetheless, mHTT has prognostic value 
and might be a valuable pharmacodynamic marker for huntingtin-lowering trials.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abc2888
PMCID: PMC7611886
PMID: 33328328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: F.B.R., L.M.B., R.T., 
E.B.J., P.A.W., D.C.A., S.J.T., R.I.S., A.H., H.Z., and E.J.W. are University 
College London employees. M.A. is a University College London Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Thrust employee. E.D.V. is a King’s College London employee. N.G., 
R.H., H.F., and S.S. are full-time employees of F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd. F.B.R. 
has provided consultancy services to GLG and F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd. L.M.R. 
has provided consultancy services to GLG, F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd., Genentech, 
and Annexon Inc. R.I.S. has undertaken consultancy services for Ixitech Ltd. 
S.J.T. receives grant funding for her research from the Medical Research Council 
UK, the Wellcome Trust, the Rosetrees Trust, Takeda Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Vertex 
Pharmaceuticals, Cantervale Limited, NIHR North Thames Local Clinical Research 
Network, U.K. Dementia Research Institute, and the CHDI Foundation. In the past 
2 years, S.J.T. has undertaken consultancy services, including advisory boards, 
with Alnylam Pharmaceuticals Inc., Annexon Inc., DDF Discovery Ltd., F. 
Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd., Genentech, PTC Bio, Novartis Pharma, Takeda 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Triplet Theraputics, UCB Pharma S.A., University College 
Irvine, and Vertex Pharmaceuticals. All honoraria for these consultancies were 
paid through the offices of UCL Consultants Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of 
University College London. H.Z. has served at scientific advisory boards for 
Roche Diagnostics, Wave, Samumed, and CogRx; has given lectures in symposia 
sponsored by Biogen and Alzecure; and is a cofounder of Brain Biomarker 
Solutions in Gothenburg AB, a GU Ventures-based platform company at the 
University of Gothenburg. E.J.W. reports grants from Medical Research Council 
UK, CHDI Foundation, and F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd. during the conduct of the 
study and personal fees from F. Hoffman-La Roche Ltd., Triplet Therapeutics, PTC 
Therapeutics, Shire Therapeutics, Wave Life Sciences, Mitoconix, Takeda 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., and Loqus23. All honoraria for these consultancies were 
paid through the offices of UCL Consultants Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of 
University College London. University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust has received funds as compensation for conducting clinical trials for 
Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, and Teva Pharmaceuticals.