---
reference_id: "PMID:40102890"
title: "Clinical features and current management experience in Gorham-Stout disease: a systematic review."
authors:
- Zhou Z
- Qiu T
- Zhou J
- Zhang Z
- Gong X
- Zhang X
- Lan Y
- Yang C
- Zhang Y
- Xiang S
- Ji Y
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03649-9
keywords:
- Humans
- "Osteolysis, Essential/diagnosis, therapy, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Infant
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and current management experience in Gorham-Stout disease: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Zhou Z, Qiu T, Zhou J, Zhang Z, Gong X, Zhang X, Lan Y, Yang C, Zhang Y, Xiang S, Ji Y
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-025-03649-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-025-03649-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2025 Mar 19;20(1):134. doi: 10.1186/s13023-025-03649-9.

Clinical features and current management experience in Gorham-Stout disease: a 
systematic review.

Zhou Z(#)(1), Qiu T(#)(1), Zhou J(#)(1), Zhang Z(1), Gong X(1), Zhang X(2), Lan 
Y(1), Yang C(1), Zhang Y(1), Xiang S(1), Ji Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Pediatric Surgery, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Department of Critical Care Medicine, West 
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Division of Oncology, Department of Pediatric Surgery, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. jijiyuanyuan@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Gorham-Stout disease (GSD) is a rare complex lymphatic malformation. 
Since its initial description in 1838, only approximately 400 patients have been 
documented. There is currently no consensus on the diagnostic criteria or 
treatment options for GSD. The objective of this study was to review the 
clinical characteristics of patients with GSD and determine the current 
diagnostic and treatment models.
METHODS: A comprehensive search of the PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, and 
Cochrane Library databases was conducted to identify all relevant literature on 
GSD published over the decade from 2013 to 2023. The clinical information 
extracted from these publications was analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 206 patients with GSD were included in the study, comprising 
119 males, 81 females and 6 patients with unknown sex. The age of onset of 
patients was widely distributed, ranging from 0 to 77 years old. However, the 
majority of cases occurred in childhood (50.7%). Fifteen patients (10.3%) 
exhibited an onset age of less than 1 year. The average time from the onset of 
symptoms to diagnosis was 3.5 years. The number of patients with osteolysis in 
the axial bone was greater than that in the appendiceal bone (P < 0.05), and the 
number of patients with multiple osteolytic lesions was greater than that with 
single osteolytic lesions (77.2% vs. 22.8%). In general, GSD was more likely to 
occur in the spine (46.1%), ribs (28.6%), hip (23.3%), femur (18.4%), mandible 
(15.5%) and humerus (15.0%). Pain was the most common symptom, with 68.4% of 
patients reporting pain in the lesion area. Surgery (66.9%) and bisphosphonates 
(56.9%) are still the mainstream treatment methods, with a total of 33 (18.2%) 
patients receiving sirolimus. Pleural effusion was identified as a risk factor 
for patient mortality (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: GSD is most commonly observed in children, with a slight male 
predisposition. It commonly manifests as multiple osteolysis of the axial bone, 
with pain being the most common symptom. The presence of pleural effusion 
indicates a serious condition that requires close monitoring to prevent 
mortality. Despite the advent of novel therapeutic modalities, the management of 
GSD remains an area in need of further investigation.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-025-03649-9
PMCID: PMC11921740
PMID: 40102890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests.