---
reference_id: "PMID:27816444"
title: Use of Mycophenolate Mofetil or Azathioprine for the Management of Chronic Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis.
authors:
- Morisset J
- Johannson KA
- Vittinghoff E
- Aravena C
- Elicker BM
- Jones KD
- Fell CD
- Manganas H
- Dubé BP
- Wolters PJ
- Collard HR
- Ryerson CJ
- Ley B
journal: Chest
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.10.029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of Mycophenolate Mofetil or Azathioprine for the Management of Chronic Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Morisset J, Johannson KA, Vittinghoff E, Aravena C, Elicker BM, Jones KD, Fell CD, Manganas H, Dubé BP, Wolters PJ, Collard HR, Ryerson CJ, Ley B
**Journal:** Chest (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2016.10.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2016.10.029)

## Content

1. Chest. 2017 Mar;151(3):619-625. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.10.029. Epub 2016
Nov  3.

Use of Mycophenolate Mofetil or Azathioprine for the Management of Chronic 
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis.

Morisset J(1), Johannson KA(2), Vittinghoff E(3), Aravena C(4), Elicker BM(5), 
Jones KD(6), Fell CD(2), Manganas H(7), Dubé BP(7), Wolters PJ(8), Collard 
HR(8), Ryerson CJ(9), Ley B(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA; Department of Medicine, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de 
Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. Electronic address: julie.morisset@umontreal.ca.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(4)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, 
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA.
(9)Department of Medicine and Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The treatment of chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (cHP) often 
includes systemic oral corticosteroids, but the optimal pharmacologic management 
remains unclear. The morbidity associated with prednisone has motivated the 
search for alternative therapies. We aimed to determine the effect of treatment 
with mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) or azathioprine (AZA) on lung function in 
patients with cHP.
METHODS: Patients with cHP treated with either MMF or AZA were retrospectively 
identified from four interstitial lung disease centers. Change in lung function 
before and after treatment initiation was analyzed using linear mixed-effects 
modeling (LMM), adjusting for age, sex, smoking history, and prednisone use.
RESULTS: Seventy patients were included: 51 were treated with MMF and 19 with 
AZA. Median follow-up after treatment initiation was 11 months. Prior to 
treatment initiation, FVC and diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide 
(Dlco) % predicted were declining at a mean rate of 0.12% (P < .001) and 
0.10% (P < .001) per month, respectively. Treatment with either MMF or AZA was 
not associated with improved FVC (0.5% at 1 year; P = .46) but was associated 
with a statistically significant improvement in Dlco of 4.2% (P < .001) after 1 
year of treatment. Results were similar in the subgroup of patients treated with 
MMF for 1 year; the FVC increased nonsignificantly by 1.3% (P = .103) and Dlco 
increased by 3.9% (P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with MMF or AZA is associated with improvements in Dlco 
in patients with cHP. Prospective randomized trials are needed to validate their 
effectiveness for cHP.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.10.029
PMCID: PMC6026221
PMID: 27816444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]