---
reference_id: "PMID:35352826"
title: Expanding genotypic and phenotypic spectrums of LTBP3 variants in dental anomalies and short stature syndrome.
authors:
- Kantaputra P
- Guven Y
- Kalayci T
- Özer PK
- Panyarak W
- Intachai W
- Olsen B
- Carlson BM
- Praditsap O
- Tongsima S
- Ngamphiw C
- Jatooratthawichot P
- Tucker AS
- Ketudat Cairns JR
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14134
keywords:
- Amelogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Humans
- Latent TGF-beta Binding Proteins/genetics
- Male
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- Phenotype
- Tooth Abnormalities/genetics
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding genotypic and phenotypic spectrums of LTBP3 variants in dental anomalies and short stature syndrome.
**Authors:** Kantaputra P, Guven Y, Kalayci T, Özer PK, Panyarak W, Intachai W, Olsen B, Carlson BM, Praditsap O, Tongsima S, Ngamphiw C, Jatooratthawichot P, Tucker AS, Ketudat Cairns JR
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14134](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14134)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2022 Jul;102(1):66-71. doi: 10.1111/cge.14134. Epub 2022 Mar 31.

Expanding genotypic and phenotypic spectrums of LTBP3 variants in dental 
anomalies and short stature syndrome.

Kantaputra P(1)(2), Guven Y(3), Kalayci T(4), Özer PK(5), Panyarak W(6), 
Intachai W(1), Olsen B(7), Carlson BM(8), Praditsap O(9), Tongsima S(10), 
Ngamphiw C(10), Jatooratthawichot P(11), Tucker AS(12), Ketudat Cairns JR(11).

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence in Medical Genetics Research, Chiang Mai University, 
Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(2)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric 
Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(3)Department of Pedodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Cardiology, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology, Faculty of Dentistry, Chiang 
Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(7)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, 
Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(9)Siriraj Genomics, Office of the Dean, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(10)National Biobank of Thailand, National Science and Technology Development 
Agency, Pathum Thani, Thailand.
(11)School of Chemistry, Institute of Science, Suranaree University of 
Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand.
(12)Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, King's College London, 
Guy's Hospital, London, UK.

Mutations in LTBP3 are associated with Dental Anomalies and Short Stature 
syndrome (DASS; MIM 601216), which is characterized by hypoplastic type 
amelogenesis imperfecta, hypodontia, underdeveloped maxilla, short stature, 
brachyolmia, aneurysm and dissection of the thoracic aorta. Here we report a 
novel (p.Arg545ProfsTer22) and a recurrent (c.3107-2A > G) LTBP3 variants, in a 
Turkish family affected with DASS. The proband, who carried compound 
heterozygous variant c.3107-2A > G, p.Arg545ProfsTer22, was most severely 
affected with DASS. The proband's father, who carried the heterozygous variant 
c.3107-2A > G had short stature and prognathic mandible. The mother and brother 
of the proband carried the heterozygous variant p.Arg545ProfsTer22, but only the 
mother showed any DASS characteristics. The c.3107-2A > G and the 
p.Arg545ProfsTer22 variants are expected to result in abnormal LTPB3 protein, 
failure of TGFβ-LAP-LTBP3 complex formation, and subsequent disruption of TGFβ 
secretion and activation. This is the first report of heterozygous carriers of 
LTBP3 variants showing phenotypes. The new findings of DASS found in this family 
include taurodontism, single-rooted molars, abnormal dentin, calcified dental 
pulp blood vessels, prognathic mandible, failure of mandibular tooth eruption, 
interatrial septal aneurysm, secundum atrial septal defect, tricuspid valve 
prolapse, and a recurrent glenohumeral joint dislocation.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14134
PMID: 35352826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]