---
reference_id: "PMID:23165795"
title: Neuroimaging and neurological findings in patients with hypochondroplasia and FGFR3 N540K mutation.
authors:
- Linnankivi T
- Mäkitie O
- Valanne L
- Toiviainen-Salo S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35642
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- "Bone and Bones/abnormalities, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dwarfism/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Finland
- Humans
- Infant
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Lordosis/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- Neuroimaging/methods
- "Psychomotor Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Temporal Lobe/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroimaging and neurological findings in patients with hypochondroplasia and FGFR3 N540K mutation.
**Authors:** Linnankivi T, Mäkitie O, Valanne L, Toiviainen-Salo S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.35642](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.35642)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Dec;158A(12):3119-25. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35642. Epub 
2012 Nov 19.

Neuroimaging and neurological findings in patients with hypochondroplasia and 
FGFR3 N540K mutation.

Linnankivi T(1), Mäkitie O, Valanne L, Toiviainen-Salo S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Hospital, Helsinki University 
Central Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. 
tarja.linnankivi@hus.fi

Hypochondroplasia (HCH), an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia caused by 
mutations in the FGFR3 gene, has not been commonly associated with neurological 
problems. Temporal lobe dysgenesis associated with epilepsy was recently 
described in single patients. In this retrospective study, we assessed 
neurological and neuroimaging aspects of 13 FGFR3 (N540K) mutation verified HCH 
patients in Finland. Eight patients had neurocognitive difficulties, ranging 
from specific learning disorder (2/13) to mild intellectual disability (5/13) or 
global developmental delay (1/13). Six of 13 patients had a history of seizures 
or epilepsy. Eight patients had undergone MRI. They all had structural 
abnormalities consistent with temporal lobe dysgenesis. Six patients had 
peritrigonal white matter reduction, and 4 had abnormally shaped lateral 
ventricles. We recommend a close follow-up of development in patients with HCH 
and a low threshold for neuroimaging.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35642
PMID: 23165795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]