---
reference_id: "PMID:22854512"
title: "How can cobalamin injections be spaced in long-term therapy for inborn errors of vitamin B(12) absorption?"
authors:
- Boina Abdallah A
- Ogier de Baulny H
- Kozyraki R
- Passemard S
- Fenneteau O
- Lebon S
- Rigal O
- Mesples B
- Yacouben K
- Giraudier S
- Benoist JF
- Schiff M
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.07.007
keywords:
- "Anemia, Megaloblastic"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- Injections
- "Malabsorption Syndromes/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins
- Mutation
- Proteins/genetics
- "Proteinuria/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vitamin B 12/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Vitamin B 12 Deficiency/diagnosis, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How can cobalamin injections be spaced in long-term therapy for inborn errors of vitamin B(12) absorption?
**Authors:** Boina Abdallah A, Ogier de Baulny H, Kozyraki R, Passemard S, Fenneteau O, Lebon S, Rigal O, Mesples B, Yacouben K, Giraudier S, Benoist JF, Schiff M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.07.007)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2012 Sep;107(1-2):66-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.07.007.
Epub  2012 Jul 20.

How can cobalamin injections be spaced in long-term therapy for inborn errors of 
vitamin B(12) absorption?

Boina Abdallah A(1), Ogier de Baulny H, Kozyraki R, Passemard S, Fenneteau O, 
Lebon S, Rigal O, Mesples B, Yacouben K, Giraudier S, Benoist JF, Schiff M.

Author information:
(1)APHP, Reference Center for Inherited Metabolic Disease, Hôpital Robert Debré, 
F-75019 Paris, France.

Inborn errors of cobalamin (Cbl, vitamin B(12)) absorption include hereditary 
intrinsic factor deficiency (HIFD) and Imerslund-Gräsbeck disease (IGD). HIFD is 
secondary to mutations in the HIF gene while IGD is due to mutations in one of 
the 2 subunits of the intrinsic factor receptor that is cubilin (CUBN) or 
amnionless (AMN). These disorders lead to intracellular Cbl depletion which in 
turn causes megaloblastic bone marrow failure, accumulation of homocysteine and 
methylmalonic acid (MMA), and methionine depletion. The clinical presentation 
reflects Cbl deficiency, with gastrointestinal symptoms, pancytopenia, and 
megaloblastic anemia. Mixed proteinuria, when it is present is strongly 
suggestive of IGD. Accurate diagnosis is always an emergency because early 
detection and treatment with life-long parenteral pharmacological doses of 
hydroxocobalamin are life saving and prevent further deterioration. However, the 
optimal frequency for cobalamin injections as a maintenance therapy is poorly 
reported. In order to evaluate the optimal maintenance schedule of cobalamin 
injections, we retrospectively collected clinical, biological, molecular and 
treatment data on 7 patients affected with congenital Cbl malabsorption. Unlike 
previous recommendations, we showed that a maintenance dosage of 1 mg cobalamin 
twice a year was enough to ensure a normal clinical status and keep the 
hematological and metabolic parameters in the normal range. These data suggest 
that patients affected with inborn errors of cobalamin absorption may be safely 
long-term treated with cobalamin injections every 6 months with careful 
follow-up of hematological and metabolic parameters. This maintenance regime is 
beneficial because the patients' quality of life improves.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.07.007
PMID: 22854512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]