---
reference_id: "PMID:15262991"
title: Ankyrin-B targets beta2-spectrin to an intracellular compartment in neonatal cardiomyocytes.
authors:
- Mohler PJ
- Yoon W
- Bennett V
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M406018200
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Ankyrins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Binding Sites
- Calcium Channels/metabolism
- Cell Compartmentation/physiology
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- "Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptors"
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutagenesis
- Myocardial Contraction/physiology
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/cytology, metabolism"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/metabolism"
- Spectrin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ankyrin-B targets beta2-spectrin to an intracellular compartment in neonatal cardiomyocytes.
**Authors:** Mohler PJ, Yoon W, Bennett V
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M406018200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M406018200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 17;279(38):40185-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M406018200. Epub
2004 Jul 19.

Ankyrin-B targets beta2-spectrin to an intracellular compartment in neonatal
cardiomyocytes.

Mohler PJ(1), Yoon W, Bennett V.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina 27710, USA. p.mohler@cellbio.duke.edu

Ankyrin-B is a spectrin-binding protein that is required for localization of
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor and ryanodine receptor in neonatal
cardiomyocytes. This work addresses the interaction between ankyrin-B and
beta(2)-spectrin in these cells. Ankyrin-B and beta(2)-spectrin are colocalized
in an intracellular striated compartment overlying the M-line and distinct from
T-tubules, sarcoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, endoplasmic reticulum, lysosomes, and
endosomes. Beta(2)-Spectrin is absent in ankyrin-B-null cardiomyocytes and is
restored to a normal striated pattern by rescue with green fluorescent
protein-220-kDa ankyrin-B. We identified two mutants (A1000P and DAR976AAA)
located in the ZU5 domain which eliminate spectrin binding activity of
ankyrin-B. Ankyrin-B mutants lacking spectrin binding activity are normally
targeted but do not reestablish beta(2)-spectrin in ankyrin-B(+/-)
cardiomyocytes. However, both mutant forms of ankyrin-B are still capable of
restoring inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor localization and normal
contraction frequency of cardiomyocytes. Therefore, direct binding of
beta(2)-spectrin to ankyrin-B is required for the normal targeting of
beta(2)-spectrin in neonatal cardiomyocytes. In contrast, ankyrin-B localization
and function are independent of beta(2)-spectrin. In summary, this work
demonstrates that interaction between members of the ankyrin and beta-spectrin
families previously established in erythrocytes and axon initial segments also
occurs in neonatal cardiomyocytes with ankyrin-B and beta(2)-spectrin. This work
also establishes a functional hierarchy in which ankyrin-B determines the
localization of beta(2)-spectrin and operates independently of beta(2)-spectrin
in its role in organizing membrane-spanning proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M406018200
PMID: 15262991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
