---
reference_id: "PMID:36872366"
title: Erianin suppresses constitutive activation of MAPK signaling pathway by inhibition of CRAF and MEK1/2.
authors:
- Wang P
- Jia X
- Lu B
- Huang H
- Liu J
- Liu X
- Wu Q
- Hu Y
- Li P
- Wei H
- Liu T
- Zhao D
- Zhang L
- Tian X
- Jiang Y
- Qiao Y
- Nie W
- Ma X
- Bai R
- Peng C
- Dong Z
- Liu K
journal: Signal Transduct Target Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41392-023-01329-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Signal Transduction
- Melanoma
- Colorectal Neoplasms
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases
- Bibenzyls
- Phenol
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erianin suppresses constitutive activation of MAPK signaling pathway by inhibition of CRAF and MEK1/2.
**Authors:** Wang P, Jia X, Lu B, Huang H, Liu J, Liu X, Wu Q, Hu Y, Li P, Wei H, Liu T, Zhao D, Zhang L, Tian X, Jiang Y, Qiao Y, Nie W, Ma X, Bai R, Peng C, Dong Z, Liu K
**Journal:** Signal Transduct Target Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41392-023-01329-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-023-01329-3)

## Content

1. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2023 Mar 6;8(1):96. doi:
10.1038/s41392-023-01329-3.

Erianin suppresses constitutive activation of MAPK signaling pathway by
inhibition of CRAF and MEK1/2.

Wang P(#)(1)(2), Jia X(#)(1)(2), Lu B(#)(1)(2), Huang H(1)(2), Liu J(1)(2), Liu
X(1)(2), Wu Q(1)(2), Hu Y(1)(2), Li P(2), Wei H(1)(2), Liu T(1)(2), Zhao
D(1)(2), Zhang L(1)(2), Tian X(1)(2), Jiang Y(1), Qiao Y(1), Nie W(2), Ma X(2),
Bai R(3), Peng C(4), Dong Z(5)(6)(7)(8)(9), Liu K(10)(11)(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Basic Medicine Research Center, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, AMS, Zhengzhou University, 450000, Zhengzhou, China.
(2)China-US (Henan) Hormel Cancer Institute, 450000, Zhengzhou, China.
(3)The Department of Pathology, Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, 450000, Zhengzhou, China.
(4)The Department of Dermatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
410078, Changsha, China.
(5)Department of Pathophysiology, Basic Medicine Research Center, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, AMS, Zhengzhou University, 450000, Zhengzhou, China.
dongzg@zzu.edu.cn.
(6)China-US (Henan) Hormel Cancer Institute, 450000, Zhengzhou, China.
dongzg@zzu.edu.cn.
(7)The Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Province for Cancer
Chemoprevention, 450000, Zhengzhou, China. dongzg@zzu.edu.cn.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Esophageal Cancer Prevention and Treatment, Zhengzhou
University, 450000, Zhengzhou, China. dongzg@zzu.edu.cn.
(9)Provincial Cooperative Innovation Center for Cancer Chemoprevention,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China. dongzg@zzu.edu.cn.
(10)Department of Pathophysiology, Basic Medicine Research Center, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, AMS, Zhengzhou University, 450000, Zhengzhou, China.
kdliu@zzu.edu.cn.
(11)China-US (Henan) Hormel Cancer Institute, 450000, Zhengzhou, China.
kdliu@zzu.edu.cn.
(12)The Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Province for Cancer
Chemoprevention, 450000, Zhengzhou, China. kdliu@zzu.edu.cn.
(13)State Key Laboratory of Esophageal Cancer Prevention and Treatment,
Zhengzhou University, 450000, Zhengzhou, China. kdliu@zzu.edu.cn.
(14)Provincial Cooperative Innovation Center for Cancer Chemoprevention,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China. kdliu@zzu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Constitutive activation of RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway (MAPK pathway)
frequently occurs in many cancers harboring RAS or RAF oncogenic mutations.
Because of the paradoxical activation induced by a single use of BRAF or MEK
inhibitors, dual-target RAF and MEK treatment is thought to be a promising
strategy. In this work, we evaluated erianin is a novel inhibitor of CRAF and
MEK1/2 kinases, thus suppressing constitutive activation of the MAPK signaling
pathway induced by BRAF V600E or RAS mutations. KinaseProfiler enzyme profiling,
surface plasmon resonance (SPR), isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC),
cellular thermal shift assay, computational docking, and molecular dynamics
simulations were utilized to screen and identify erianin binding to CRAF and
MEK1/2. Kinase assay, luminescent ADP detection assay, and enzyme kinetics assay
were investigated to identify the efficiency of erianin in CRAF and MEK1/2
kinase activity. Notably, erianin suppressed BRAF V600E or RAS mutant melanoma
and colorectal cancer cell by inhibiting MEK1/2 and CRAF but not BRAF kinase
activity. Moreover, erianin attenuated melanoma and colorectal cancer in vivo.
Overall, we provide a promising leading compound for BRAF V600E or RAS mutant
melanoma and colorectal cancer through dual targeting of CRAF and MEK1/2.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41392-023-01329-3
PMCID: PMC9986241
PMID: 36872366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
