---
reference_id: "PMID:28832564"
title: Haplotype-based stratification of Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Chao MJ
- Gillis T
- Atwal RS
- Mysore JS
- Arjomand J
- Harold D
- Holmans P
- Jones L
- Orth M
- Myers RH
- Kwak S
- Wheeler VC
- MacDonald ME
- Gusella JF
- Lee JM
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2017.125
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haplotype-based stratification of Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Chao MJ, Gillis T, Atwal RS, Mysore JS, Arjomand J, Harold D, Holmans P, Jones L, Orth M, Myers RH, Kwak S, Wheeler VC, MacDonald ME, Gusella JF, Lee JM
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2017.125](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2017.125)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2017 Nov;25(11):1202-1209. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2017.125. Epub 
2017 Aug 23.

Haplotype-based stratification of Huntington's disease.

Chao MJ(1)(2), Gillis T(1), Atwal RS(1)(2), Mysore JS(1), Arjomand J(3), Harold 
D(4), Holmans P(4), Jones L(4), Orth M(5), Myers RH(6), Kwak S(7), Wheeler 
VC(1)(2), MacDonald ME(1)(2)(8), Gusella JF(1)(8)(9), Lee JM(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Genea Biocells, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Medical Research Council Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, 
Department of Psychological Medicine and Neurology, School of Medicine, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, UK.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology and Genome Science Institute, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)CHDI Foundation, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(8)Medical and Population Genetics Program, the Broad Institute of M.I.T. and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease 
caused by expansion of a CAG trinucleotide repeat in HTT, resulting in an 
extended polyglutamine tract in huntingtin. We and others have previously 
determined that the HD-causing expansion occurs on multiple different haplotype 
backbones, reflecting more than one ancestral origin of the same type of 
mutation. In view of the therapeutic potential of mutant allele-specific gene 
silencing, we have compared and integrated two major systems of HTT haplotype 
definition, combining data from 74 sequence variants to identify the most 
frequent disease-associated and control chromosome backbones and revealing that 
there is potential for additional resolution of HD haplotypes. We have used the 
large collection of 4078 heterozygous HD subjects analyzed in our recent 
genome-wide association study of HD age at onset to estimate the frequency of 
these haplotypes in European subjects, finding that common genetic variation at 
HTT can distinguish the normal and CAG-expanded chromosomes for more than 95% of 
European HD individuals. As a resource for the HD research community, we have 
also determined the haplotypes present in a series of publicly available HD 
subject-derived fibroblasts, induced pluripotent cells, and embryonic stem cells 
in order to facilitate efforts to develop inclusive methods of allele-specific 
HTT silencing applicable to most HD patients. Our data providing genetic 
guidance for therapeutic gene-based targeting will significantly contribute to 
the developments of rational treatments and implementation of precision medicine 
in HD.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2017.125
PMCID: PMC5643960
PMID: 28832564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.