---
reference_id: "PMID:20301567"
title: FLNA-Related Otopalatodigital Spectrum Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Robertson S
- Wade E
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FLNA-Related Otopalatodigital Spectrum Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Robertson S, Wade E

## Content

1. FLNA-Related Otopalatodigital Spectrum Disorders.

Robertson S(1), Wade E(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Nov 30 [updated 2025 Jun 26].

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, 
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Women's Health, Dunedin School of 
Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The FLNA-related otopalatodigital (FLNA-OPD) spectrum 
disorders, characterized primarily by skeletal dysplasia, include the following 
allelic conditions: otopalatodigital syndrome type 1 (FLNA-OPD1), 
otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 (FLNA-OPD2), frontometaphyseal dysplasia 
(FLNA-FMD), Melnick-Needles syndrome (FLNA-MNS), and terminal osseous dysplasia 
(FLNA-TOD). In FLNA-OPD1, most manifestations are present at birth; females can 
present with severity similar to affected males, although some have only mild 
manifestations. In FLNA-OPD2, females are less severely affected than related 
affected males. Most males with FLNA-OPD2 die during the first year of life, 
usually from thoracic hypoplasia resulting in pulmonary insufficiency. Males who 
live beyond the first year of life are usually developmentally delayed and 
require respiratory support and assistance with feeding. In FLNA-FMD, females 
are less severely affected than related affected males who are hemizygous for 
the same allele. Males usually, but not always, demonstrate a skeletal dysplasia 
in association with hearing loss and, variably, joint contractures and hand and 
foot malformations. Progressive scoliosis is observed in both affected males and 
females. In females with FLNA-MNS, wide phenotypic variability is observed; some 
individuals are diagnosed in adulthood, while others require respiratory support 
and have reduced longevity. FLNA-MNS in males results in perinatal lethality in 
all known individuals. FLNA-TOD, seen only in females, is characterized by a 
skeletal dysplasia that is most prominent in the hand and feet, pigmentary 
defects of the skin, and recurrent digital fibromata.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of an FLNA-OPD spectrum disorder is established 
in a male proband with characteristic clinical and radiographic features and a 
family history consistent with X-linked inheritance. Identification of a 
hemizygous pathogenic variant in FLNA by molecular genetic testing can confirm 
the diagnosis if clinical features, radiographic features, and/or family history 
are inconclusive. The diagnosis of an FLNA-OPD spectrum disorder is usually 
established in a female proband with characteristic clinical and radiographic 
features and a family history consistent with X-linked inheritance. 
Identification of a heterozygous pathogenic variant in FLNA by molecular genetic 
testing can confirm the diagnosis if clinical features, radiographic features, 
and/or family history are inconclusive.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgical treatment may be required for 
hand and foot malformations. Monitoring, bracing, and surgical intervention as 
needed for scoliosis; physical therapy for contractures; cosmetic surgery may 
correct the fronto-orbital deformity; surgical correction for orthognathic 
deformities as needed; chest expansion surgery has been used to treat thoracic 
hypoplasia; continuous positive airway pressure and mandibular distraction can 
improve airway complications related to micrognathia; hearing aids for deafness; 
treatment of cardiac anomalies and cardiomyopathy per cardiologist and cardiac 
surgeon; treatment of oligohypodontia per orthodontist and/or dental surgeon; 
treatment of genitourinary anomalies per urologist; evaluation with 
anesthesiologist if intubation and ventilation are required due to laryngeal 
stenosis. Surveillance: Annual clinical evaluation for orthopedic complications 
including contractures and scoliosis; evaluation of bone mineral density in 
those with FLNA-FMD; monitor head size and shape with each clinical evaluation 
in infancy for craniosynostosis; annual clinical evaluation for apnea with 
polysomnography studies as indicated; annual audiology evaluation; dental 
evaluations every six to 12 months beginning with eruption of primary teeth. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: Consider molecular genetic testing for the 
family-specific pathogenic variant in at-risk female relatives.
GENETIC COUNSELING: FLNA-OPD spectrum disorders are inherited in an X-linked 
manner. If the mother of the proband has an FLNA pathogenic variant, the chance 
of transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the pathogenic 
variant will be affected. Penetrance in males with an FLNA pathogenic variant 
leading to an FLNA-OPD spectrum disorder is complete (male sibs of a proband 
with FLNA-MNS or FLNA-TOD who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected 
and generally die prenatally or perinatally). Females who inherit the pathogenic 
variant will be heterozygotes and have a range of clinical manifestations. If 
the father of the proband has an FLNA pathogenic variant, he will transmit it to 
all his daughters and none of his sons. Once the FLNA pathogenic variant has 
been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing for FLNA-OPD spectrum disorders are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301567