---
reference_id: "PMID:39702264"
title: "The clinical and biochemical effectiveness and safety of cholic acid treatment for bile acid synthesis defects: a systematic review."
authors:
- Polak Y
- van Dussen L
- Kemper EM
- Vaz FM
- Klouwer FCC
- Engelen M
- Hollak CEM
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03449-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cholic Acid/therapeutic use, metabolism, adverse effects"
- Bile Acids and Salts/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical and biochemical effectiveness and safety of cholic acid treatment for bile acid synthesis defects: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Polak Y, van Dussen L, Kemper EM, Vaz FM, Klouwer FCC, Engelen M, Hollak CEM
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03449-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03449-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Dec 19;19(1):466. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03449-7.

The clinical and biochemical effectiveness and safety of cholic acid treatment 
for bile acid synthesis defects: a systematic review.

Polak Y(1)(2), van Dussen L(2), Kemper EM(1)(2), Vaz FM(3)(4)(5)(6), Klouwer 
FCC(7), Engelen M(7), Hollak CEM(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Clinical Pharmacology, Amsterdam UMC, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Medicines for Society, Platform at Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pediatrics, Laboratory Genetic 
Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam UMC, Emma Children's Hospital, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Amsterdam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, Inborn Errors of 
Metabolism, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Core Facility Metabolomics, Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)United for Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Amsterdam UMC, University of 
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, 1105 AZ, The Netherlands. 
c.e.hollak@amsterdamumc.nl.
(9)Medicines for Society, Platform at Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. c.e.hollak@amsterdamumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Bile acid synthesis defects (BASDs) can be severely disabling 
involving the liver and nervous system, potentially due to elevated levels of 
toxic C27-bile acid intermediates. Cholic acid (CA) supplementation is 
hypothesized to decrease bile acid production, stimulate bile secretion and 
-flow, and slowing down disease progression. This systematic review assesses the 
clinical and biochemical effectiveness, and safety of CA in BASDs patients.
METHODS: A systematic review of MEDLINE, Embase and clinical trial registries 
(ClinicalTrials.gov, ICTRP registry) using controlled MeSH- and Emtree terms.
RESULTS: From 526 articles 70 publications were deemed eligible for inclusion 
based on title and abstract. 14 publications were included after full-text 
assessment comprising case reports and -series with 1-35 patients (162 patients 
in total) receiving 1 week to 16,5 years of CA treatment. All presented data on 
effectiveness, 8 studies also presented data on safety. The included population 
concerned patients with Zellweger spectrum disorders (n = 73), 
3β-Hydroxy-Δ5-C27-steroid oxidoreductase deficiency (n = 62), cerebrotendinous 
xanthomatosis (n = 22), Δ4-3-oxosteroid 5β-reductase deficiency (n = 13), and 
α-methylacyl-CoA racemase deficiency (n = 3). Main outcomes concerned liver 
disease (12 studies), general physical examinations, biochemical outcomes, and 
safety (9 studies), and fat-soluble vitamin absorption (7 studies). The overall 
risk of bias score was considered to be critical (1 study), serious (4 studies), 
and moderate (9 studies). Major issues were missing data (10 studies), 
generalized data (8 studies), and no wash-out between treatments (4 studies).
CONCLUSION: More controlled studies are required as the available data is 
insufficient to draw definite conclusions on the effectiveness and safety of CA 
treatment in BASD patients. Establishing an independent international disease 
registry could better utilize existing real-world data.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03449-7
PMCID: PMC11657003
PMID: 39702264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Conflict 
of interest: EK: Board member of the Dutch Hospital Pharmacist Association for 
which no personal fees are received. The association has no involvement in the 
preparation of this manuscript or interest in the product or patients described. 
FV: Consulting for Scenic Biotech, board member of the European Metabolic Group 
(EMG), secretary of the SSIEM Education and Training Advisory Committee (ETAC), 
inventor of a patent for a screening method of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis 
(PCT/EP2018/055236). CH: Received grants from Sanofi, Idorsia and Protalix to 
perform clinical studies in the field of lysosomal storage disorders, these 
clinical studies are outside the scope of this manuscript and CH received no 
personal fees. All other authors declare no conflict of interest.