---
reference_id: "PMID:36077798"
title: BRAF and MEK Targeted Therapies in Pediatric Central Nervous System Tumors.
authors:
- Talloa D
- Triarico S
- Agresti P
- Mastrangelo S
- Attinà G
- Romano A
- Maurizi P
- Ruggiero A
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cancers14174264
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF and MEK Targeted Therapies in Pediatric Central Nervous System Tumors.
**Authors:** Talloa D, Triarico S, Agresti P, Mastrangelo S, Attinà G, Romano A, Maurizi P, Ruggiero A
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers14174264](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers14174264)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Aug 31;14(17):4264. doi: 10.3390/cancers14174264.

BRAF and MEK Targeted Therapies in Pediatric Central Nervous System Tumors.

Talloa D(1), Triarico S(2), Agresti P(1), Mastrangelo S(2)(3), Attinà G(2), 
Romano A(2), Maurizi P(2)(3), Ruggiero A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Scuola di Specializzazione in Pediatria, Università Cattolica del Sacro 
Cuore, Largo F.sco Vito 1, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(2)UOSD di Oncologia Pediatrica, Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute della 
Donna, del Bambino e di Sanità Pubblica, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. 
Gemelli IRCCS, Argo A. Gemelli 8, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita e Sanità Pubblica, Università Cattolica 
del Sacro Cuore, Largo F.sco Vito 1, 00168 Rome, Italy.

BRAF is a component of the MAPK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways that play a crucial 
role in cellular proliferation, differentiation, migration, and angiogenesis. 
Pediatric central nervous system tumors very often show mutations of the MAPK 
pathway, as demonstrated by next-generation sequencing (NGS), which now has an 
increasing role in cancer diagnostics. The MAPK mutated pathway in pediatric CNS 
tumors is the target of numerous drugs, approved or under investigation in 
ongoing clinical trials. In this review, we describe the main aspects of MAPK 
and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathways, with a focus on the alterations commonly 
involved in tumorigenesis. Furthermore, we reported the main available data 
about current BRAF and MEK targeted therapies used in pediatric low-grade 
gliomas (pLLGs), pediatric high-grade gliomas (pHGGs), and other CNS tumors that 
often present BRAF or MEK mutations. Further molecular stratification and 
clinical trial design are required for the treatment of pediatric CNS tumors 
with BRAF and MEK inhibitors.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14174264
PMCID: PMC9454417
PMID: 36077798

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.