---
reference_id: "PMID:36945975"
title: Factors affecting patient-acceptable symptom states and treatment decision in familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Yıldırım D
- Vasi İ
- Tahta E
- Kardaş RC
- Özkızıltaş B
- Küçük H
- Öztürk MA
- Haznedaroğlu Ş
- Göker B
- Tufan A
journal: Turk J Med Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.55730/1300-0144.5547
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors affecting patient-acceptable symptom states and treatment decision in familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Yıldırım D, Vasi İ, Tahta E, Kardaş RC, Özkızıltaş B, Küçük H, Öztürk MA, Haznedaroğlu Ş, Göker B, Tufan A
**Journal:** Turk J Med Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.55730/1300-0144.5547](https://doi.org/10.55730/1300-0144.5547)

## Content

1. Turk J Med Sci. 2022 Dec;52(6):1991-1996. doi: 10.55730/1300-0144.5547. Epub 
2022 Dec 21.

Factors affecting patient-acceptable symptom states and treatment decision in 
familial Mediterranean fever.

Yıldırım D(1), Vasi İ(1), Tahta E(2), Kardaş RC(1), Özkızıltaş B(1), Küçük H(1), 
Öztürk MA(1), Haznedaroğlu Ş(1), Göker B(1), Tufan A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Abdurrahman Yurtaslan Education and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Familial Mediterranean fever [FMF] is the most common 
autoinflammatory disease characterized by inflammatory attacks of fever and 
polyserositis. Patients' quality of life is significantly affected due to 
recurrent excruciating pain attacks and complications. This study is performed 
to evaluate the parameters most affecting patients' satisfaction from treatment.
METHODS: : Three hundred and forty-six consecutive patients diagnosed with FMF 
were enrolled in this study. Current treatment, acute phase proteins, number, 
type, and severity of predominant attacks, absenteeism from work/school in the 
last three months were recorded, and the participants were asked whether they 
needed additional treatment to evaluate Patient Acceptable Symptom State (PASS) 
status.
RESULTS: Mean age of the overall group was 38.2 ± 11.7 years (62.4% female, 
37.6% male). Two hundred and twenty-seven patients were treated with colchicine, 
97 patients with colchicine plus Interleukin-1 (IL-1) antagonist, and 22 only 
with IL-1 antagonist (67.1%, 26.3%, 6.64% in order). Of the overall group, 33.8% 
(n = 117) believed to need additional treatment options. Additional treatment 
need of patients was significantly affected by work impairment due to attacks, 
absent days from work, disease activity, the discomfort of patients during 
attacks, the number of attacks, and treatment options; but not by the level of 
acute-phase proteins between attacks.
DISCUSSION: PASS score is significantly related to clinical parameters and 
quality of life. Patients' PASS scores and treatment choices are notably 
affected by the severity and frequency of attacks and absenteeism from 
work/school. Clinical activity and quality of life should be evaluated at every 
visit to provide patients' satisfaction with treatment.

DOI: 10.55730/1300-0144.5547
PMCID: PMC10390155
PMID: 36945975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None of the authors has 
any conflicts of interest.