---
reference_id: "PMID:39062571"
title: Towards a Treatment for Leukodystrophy Using Cell-Based Interception and Precision Medicine.
authors:
- Coulombe B
- Chapleau A
- Macintosh J
- Durcan TM
- Poitras C
- Moursli YA
- Faubert D
- Pinard M
- Bernard G
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14070857
keywords:
- Humans
- Precision Medicine/methods
- Single-Cell Analysis/methods
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Towards a Treatment for Leukodystrophy Using Cell-Based Interception and Precision Medicine.
**Authors:** Coulombe B, Chapleau A, Macintosh J, Durcan TM, Poitras C, Moursli YA, Faubert D, Pinard M, Bernard G
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14070857](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14070857)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 Jul 17;14(7):857. doi: 10.3390/biom14070857.

Towards a Treatment for Leukodystrophy Using Cell-Based Interception and 
Precision Medicine.

Coulombe B(1)(2), Chapleau A(3)(4)(5), Macintosh J(3)(4), Durcan TM(5), Poitras 
C(1), Moursli YA(1), Faubert D(6), Pinard M(1), Bernard G(3)(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Translational Proteomics Laboratory, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de 
Montréal, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, QC H3T 1A8, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Pediatrics and Human Genetics, 
McGill University, Montréal, QC H9X 3V9, Canada.
(4)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, Montréal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada.
(5)The Neuro's Early Drug Discovery Unit (EDDU), McGill University, Montréal, QC 
H9X 3V9, Canada.
(6)Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Platform, Institut de Recherches Cliniques 
de Montréal, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
(7)Department Specialized Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, McGill 
University Health Centre, Montréal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada.

Cell-based interception and precision medicine is a novel approach aimed at 
improving healthcare through the early detection and treatment of diseased 
cells. Here, we describe our recent progress towards developing cell-based 
interception and precision medicine to detect, understand, and advance the 
development of novel therapeutic approaches through a single-cell omics and drug 
screening platform, as part of a multi-laboratory collaborative effort, for a 
group of neurodegenerative disorders named leukodystrophies. Our strategy aims 
at the identification of diseased cells as early as possible to intercept 
progression of the disease prior to severe clinical impairment and irreversible 
tissue damage.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14070857
PMCID: PMC11274857
PMID: 39062571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Bernard is/was a consultant for Calico 
(2023–present), Orchard Therapeutics (2023-present), Passage Bio Inc 
(2020–2022), and Ionis (2019). She is/was a site investigator for the 
Alexander’s disease trial of Ionis (2021–present), the metachromatic 
leukodystrophy trial of Shire/Takeda (2020–2021) and Krabbe (2021–2023), the GM1 
gene therapy trials of Passage Bio (2021–present), the GM1 natural history study 
from the University of Pennsylvania sponsored by Passage Bio (2021–present), and 
the adrenoleukodystrophy/hematopoietic stem cell transplantation natural history 
study of Bluebird Bio (2019), as well as a site sub-investigator for the MPS II 
gene therapy trial of Regenxbio (2021–present) and the MPS II clinical trial of 
Denali (2022–present). She has received an unrestricted educational grant from 
Takeda (2021–2022).