---
reference_id: "PMID:22896851"
title: "The spectrum of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency: clinical, biochemical and genetic features in 371 patients."
authors:
- Patel KP
- "O'Brien TW"
- Subramony SH
- Shuster J
- Stacpoole PW
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.017
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- PubMed
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The spectrum of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency: clinical, biochemical and genetic features in 371 patients.
**Authors:** Patel KP, O'Brien TW, Subramony SH, Shuster J, Stacpoole PW
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.017)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2012 Jul;106(3):385-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.017.

The spectrum of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency: clinical, biochemical
and genetic features in 371 patients.

Patel KP(1), O'Brien TW, Subramony SH, Shuster J, Stacpoole PW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes),
College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

Corrected and republished from
    Mol Genet Metab. 2012 Jan;105(1):34-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2011.09.032.

CONTEXT: Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) deficiency is a genetic
mitochondrial disorder commonly associated with lactic acidosis, progressive
neurological and neuromuscular degeneration and, usually, death during
childhood. There has been no recent comprehensive analysis of the natural
history and clinical course of this disease.
OBJECTIVE: We reviewed 371 cases of PDC deficiency, published between 1970 and
2010, that involved defects in subunits E1α and E1β and components E1, E2, E3
and the E3 binding protein of the complex.
DATA SOURCES AND EXTRACTION: English language peer-reviewed publications were
identified, primarily by using PubMed and Google Scholar search engines.
RESULTS: Neurodevelopmental delay and hypotonia were the commonest clinical
signs of PDC deficiency. Structural brain abnormalities frequently included
ventriculomegaly, dysgenesis of the corpus callosum and neuroimaging findings
typical of Leigh syndrome. Neither gender nor any clinical or neuroimaging
feature differentiated the various biochemical etiologies of the disease.
Patients who died were younger, presented clinically earlier and had higher
blood lactate levels and lower residual enzyme activities than subjects who were
still alive at the time of reporting. Survival bore no relationship to the
underlying biochemical or genetic abnormality or to gender.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the clinical spectrum of PDC deficiency is broad, the
dominant clinical phenotype includes presentation during the first year of life;
neurological and neuromuscular degeneration; structural lesions revealed by
neuroimaging; lactic acidosis and a blood lactate:pyruvate ratio ≤ 20.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.017
PMCID: PMC4003492
PMID: 22896851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
