---
reference_id: "PMID:28433113"
title: "Wilson disease: brain pathology."
authors:
- Poujois A
- Mikol J
- Woimant F
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00008-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilson disease: brain pathology.
**Authors:** Poujois A, Mikol J, Woimant F
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00008-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00008-2)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2017;142:77-89. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00008-2.

Wilson disease: brain pathology.

Poujois A(1), Mikol J(2), Woimant F(3).

Author information:
(1)French National Reference Centre for Wilson Disease, Neurology Department, 
Lariboisière Hospital, Paris, France.
(2)Pathology Department, Paris Diderot University, Paris, France.
(3)French National Reference Centre for Wilson Disease, Neurology Department, 
Lariboisière Hospital, Paris, France. Electronic address: 
france.woimant@aphp.fr.

In Wilson disease (WD), brain cellular damage is thought to be due to copper 
deposition. Striatal lesions are the most characteristic lesions found in the 
brain of patients with neurologic symptoms, as emphasized in the initial reports 
of S.A.K. Wilson. WD brain lesions can be more diffuse, including in the pons, 
midbrain, thalamus, dentate nucleus, and, less frequently, corpus callosum and 
cortex. In rare cases, extensive cortical-subcortical lesions have been 
reported. Increased cellularity is noted in the lesions due to the proliferation 
of modified astrocytes named Alzheimer types of glia and specific cells, called 
Opalski cells, that are characteristic of WD. Although abnormalities in the 
putamen predominate in patients with dystonic syndrome, clinicopathologic 
correlations are scarce. Furthermore, the cerebral copper content is not 
correlated with the severity of the neuropathologic abnormalities or with the 
neuropsychiatric symptomatology. This fact raises the question of factors other 
than copper toxicity that may contribute to the pathogenesis of WD neurologic 
disturbances.

© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63625-6.00008-2
PMID: 28433113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]