---
reference_id: "PMID:38873093"
title: Regional and cellular organization of the autism-associated protein UBE3A/E6AP and its antisense transcript in the brain of the developing rhesus monkey.
authors:
- Gonzalez Ramirez C
- Salvador SG
- Patel RKR
- Clark S
- Miller NW
- James LM
- Ringelberg NW
- Simon JM
- Bennett J
- Amaral DG
- Burette AC
- Philpot BD
journal: Front Neuroanat
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fnana.2024.1410791
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regional and cellular organization of the autism-associated protein UBE3A/E6AP and its antisense transcript in the brain of the developing rhesus monkey.
**Authors:** Gonzalez Ramirez C, Salvador SG, Patel RKR, Clark S, Miller NW, James LM, Ringelberg NW, Simon JM, Bennett J, Amaral DG, Burette AC, Philpot BD
**Journal:** Front Neuroanat (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnana.2024.1410791](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnana.2024.1410791)

## Content

1. Front Neuroanat. 2024 May 30;18:1410791. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2024.1410791. 
eCollection 2024.

Regional and cellular organization of the autism-associated protein UBE3A/E6AP 
and its antisense transcript in the brain of the developing rhesus monkey.

Gonzalez Ramirez C(#)(1)(2), Salvador SG(#)(1)(2), Patel RKR(1)(2), Clark 
S(1)(2), Miller NW(1)(2), James LM(1)(2), Ringelberg NW(1)(2), Simon JM(3)(4), 
Bennett J(5)(6), Amaral DG(5)(6), Burette AC(1)(2), Philpot BD(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, United States.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, United States.
(4)Department of Data Science, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, MIND Institute, Davis, CA, 
United States.
(6)California National Primate Research Center, University of California, Davis, 
CA, United States.
(7)Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurogenetic disorder caused by mutations or 
deletions in the maternally-inherited UBE3A allele, leading to a loss of UBE3A 
protein expression in neurons. The paternally-inherited UBE3A allele is 
epigenetically silenced in neurons during development by a noncoding transcript 
(UBE3A-ATS). The absence of neuronal UBE3A results in severe neurological 
symptoms, including speech and language impairments, intellectual disability, 
and seizures. While no cure exists, therapies aiming to restore UBE3A 
function-either by gene addition or by targeting UBE3A-ATS-are under 
development. Progress in developing these treatments relies heavily on 
inferences drawn from mouse studies about the function of UBE3A in the human 
brain. To aid translational efforts and to gain an understanding of UBE3A and 
UBE3A-ATS biology with greater relevance to human neurodevelopmental contexts, 
we investigated UBE3A and UBE3A-ATS expression in the developing brain of the 
rhesus macaque, a species that exhibits complex social behaviors, resembling 
aspects of human behavior to a greater degree than mice. Combining 
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization, we mapped UBE3A and UBE3A-ATS 
regional and cellular expression in normal prenatal, neonatal, and adolescent 
rhesus macaque brains. We show that key hallmarks of UBE3A biology, well-known 
in rodents, are also present in macaques, and suggest paternal UBE3A silencing 
in neurons-but not glial cells-in the macaque brain, with onset between 
gestational day 48 and 100. These findings support proposals that early-life, 
perhaps even prenatal, intervention is optimal for overcoming the maternal 
allele loss of UBE3A linked to AS.

Copyright © 2024 Gonzalez Ramirez, Salvador, Patel, Clark, Miller, James, 
Ringelberg, Simon, Bennett, Amaral, Burette and Philpot.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2024.1410791
PMCID: PMC11169893
PMID: 38873093

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.