---
reference_id: "PMID:18651971"
title: Alpha-mannosidosis.
authors:
- Malm D
- Nilssen Ø
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-21
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Genetic Counseling
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Protein Conformation
- "alpha-Mannosidase/chemistry, genetics"
- "alpha-Mannosidosis/genetics, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-mannosidosis.
**Authors:** Malm D, Nilssen Ø
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-3-21](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-3-21)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2008 Jul 23;3:21. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-21.

Alpha-mannosidosis.

Malm D(1), Nilssen Ø.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of North Norway, NO-9038,
Norway. dag.malm@unn.no

Alpha-mannosidosis is an inherited lysosomal storage disorder characterized by
immune deficiency, facial and skeletal abnormalities, hearing impairment, and
intellectual disability. It occurs in approximately 1 of 500,000 live births.
The children are often born apparently normal, and their condition worsens
progressively. Some children are born with ankle equinus or develop
hydrocephalus in the first year of life. Main features are immune deficiency
(manifested by recurrent infections, especially in the first decade of life),
skeletal abnormalities (mild-to-moderate dysostosis multiplex, scoliosis and
deformation of the sternum), hearing impairment (moderate-to-severe
sensorineural hearing loss), gradual impairment of mental functions and speech,
and often, periods of psychosis. Associated motor function disturbances include
muscular weakness, joint abnormalities and ataxia. The facial trait include
large head with prominent forehead, rounded eyebrows, flattened nasal bridge,
macroglossia, widely spaced teeth, and prognathism. Slight strabismus is common.
The clinical variability is significant, representing a continuum in severity.
The disorder is caused by lysosomal alpha-mannosidase deficiency.
Alpha-mannosidosis is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and is caused
by mutations in the MAN2B1 gene located on chromosome 19 (19 p13.2-q12).
Diagnosis is made by measuring acid alpha-mannosidase activity in leukocytes or
other nucleated cells and can be confirmed by genetic testing. Elevated urinary
secretion of mannose-rich oligosaccharides is suggestive, but not diagnostic.
Differential diagnoses are mainly the other lysosomal storage diseases like the
mucopolysaccharidoses. Genetic counseling should be given to explain the nature
of the disease and to detect carriers. Antenatal diagnosis is possible, based on
both biochemical and genetic methods. The management should be pro-active,
preventing complications and treating manifestations. Infections must be treated
frequently. Otolaryngological treatment of fluid in the middle ear is often
required and use of hearing aids is invariably required. Early educational
intervention for development of social skills is needed and physiotherapy is
important to improve bodily function. Orthopedic surgery may be necessary. The
long-term prognosis is poor. There is an insidiously slow progression of
neuromuscular and skeletal deterioration over several decades, making most
patients wheel-chair dependent. No patients manage to be completely socially
independent. Many patients are over 50 years of age.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-21
PMCID: PMC2515294
PMID: 18651971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
