---
reference_id: "PMID:37625619"
title: Lobectomy versus proton therapy for stage I non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Sakane T
- Nakajima K
- Iwata H
- Nakano T
- Hagui E
- Oguri M
- Nomura K
- Hattori Y
- Ogino H
- Haneda H
journal: J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2023.08.030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lobectomy versus proton therapy for stage I non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Sakane T, Nakajima K, Iwata H, Nakano T, Hagui E, Oguri M, Nomura K, Hattori Y, Ogino H, Haneda H
**Journal:** J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtcvs.2023.08.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtcvs.2023.08.030)

## Content

1. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2023 Dec;166(6):1490-1501.e2. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2023.08.030. Epub 2023 Aug 23.

Lobectomy versus proton therapy for stage I non-small cell lung cancer.

Sakane T(1), Nakajima K(2), Iwata H(2), Nakano T(3), Hagui E(3), Oguri M(2), 
Nomura K(2), Hattori Y(2), Ogino H(2), Haneda H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Nagoya City University West Medical Center, 
Nagoya, Japan. Electronic address: t.sakane@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Nagoya Proton Therapy Center, Nagoya City 
University West Medical Center, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Nagoya City University West Medical Center, 
Nagoya, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Lobectomy is the standard treatment for patients with early-stage 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In recent years, an increasing number of 
patients with lung cancer have been treated using proton therapy (PT). We 
conducted a propensity score-matched analysis to compare the treatment outcomes 
of these 2 modalities.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed data from 275 patients with histologically 
confirmed clinical stage I NSCLC who underwent lobectomy (n = 206) or PT 
(n = 69) at our institution from July 2013 to December 2020. The end points were 
overall survival (OS), cause-specific survival, recurrence-free survival (RFS), 
local control, regional lymph node control, and distant control. Propensity 
score matching was performed to reduce selection bias in the 2 groups.
RESULTS: The matched cohort consisted of 59 patients who underwent lobectomy and 
59 patients who underwent PT with a median follow-up period of 50 months. There 
were no significant differences in OS (P = .26), cause-specific survival 
(P = .33), RFS (P = .53), local control (P = .41), regional lymph node control 
(P = .98), and distant control (P = .31). In the lobectomy and PT groups, the 
5-year OS rate was 85.8% and 79.1%, respectively, the RFS rate was 82.3% and 
77.8%, and the local control rate was 92.1% and 96.6%.
CONCLUSIONS: We found no difference in survival or disease control between 
lobectomy and PT in patients with histologically confirmed clinical stage I 
NSCLC. Despite these findings, the potential for unmeasured confounding factors 
remains, and randomized control trials are needed to better compare these 
treatment modalities.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2023.08.030
PMID: 37625619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors 
reported no conflicts of interest. The Journal policy requires editors and 
reviewers to disclose conflicts of interest and to decline handling or reviewing 
manuscripts for which they may have a conflict of interest. The editors and 
reviewers of this article have no conflicts of interest.