---
reference_id: "PMID:37476587"
title: "Glycogen storage diseases: An update."
authors:
- Gümüş E
- Özen H
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i25.3932
keywords:
- Humans
- "Glycogen Storage Disease/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Liver/metabolism
- Glycogen/metabolism
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- Genetic Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycogen storage diseases: An update.
**Authors:** Gümüş E, Özen H
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v29.i25.3932](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v29.i25.3932)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2023 Jul 7;29(25):3932-3963. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v29.i25.3932.

Glycogen storage diseases: An update.

Gümüş E(1), Özen H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Hacettepe 
University Faculty of Medicine, Ihsan Dogramaci Children's Hospital, Ankara 
06230, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Hacettepe 
University Faculty of Medicine, Ihsan Dogramaci Children's Hospital, Ankara 
06230, Turkey. haozen@hacettepe.edu.tr.

Glycogen storage diseases (GSDs), also referred to as glycogenoses, are 
inherited metabolic disorders of glycogen metabolism caused by deficiency of 
enzymes or transporters involved in the synthesis or degradation of glycogen 
leading to aberrant storage and/or utilization. The overall estimated GSD 
incidence is 1 case per 20000-43000 live births. There are over 20 types of GSD 
including the subtypes. This heterogeneous group of rare diseases represents 
inborn errors of carbohydrate metabolism and are classified based on the 
deficient enzyme and affected tissues. GSDs primarily affect liver or muscle or 
both as glycogen is particularly abundant in these tissues. However, besides 
liver and skeletal muscle, depending on the affected enzyme and its expression 
in various tissues, multiorgan involvement including heart, kidney and/or brain 
may be seen. Although GSDs share similar clinical features to some extent, there 
is a wide spectrum of clinical phenotypes. Currently, the goal of treatment is 
to maintain glucose homeostasis by dietary management and the use of uncooked 
cornstarch. In addition to nutritional interventions, pharmacological treatment, 
physical and supportive therapies, enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) and organ 
transplantation are other treatment approaches for both disease manifestations 
and long-term complications. The lack of a specific therapy for GSDs has 
prompted efforts to develop new treatment strategies like gene therapy. Since 
early diagnosis and aggressive treatment are related to better prognosis, 
physicians should be aware of these conditions and include GSDs in the 
differential diagnosis of patients with relevant manifestations including 
fasting hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, hypertransaminasemia, hyperlipidemia, 
exercise intolerance, muscle cramps/pain, rhabdomyolysis, and muscle weakness. 
Here, we aim to provide a comprehensive review of GSDs. This review provides 
general characteristics of all types of GSDs with a focus on those with liver 
involvement.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i25.3932
PMCID: PMC10354582
PMID: 37476587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.