---
reference_id: "PMID:35071044"
title: Vaccine Protection of Mice With Primary Immunodeficiencies Against Disseminated Coccidioidomycosis.
authors:
- Powell DA
- Hsu AP
- Butkiewicz CD
- Trinh HT
- Frelinger JA
- Holland SM
- Galgiani JN
- Shubitz LF
journal: Front Cell Infect Microbiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.790488
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vaccine Protection of Mice With Primary Immunodeficiencies Against Disseminated Coccidioidomycosis.
**Authors:** Powell DA, Hsu AP, Butkiewicz CD, Trinh HT, Frelinger JA, Holland SM, Galgiani JN, Shubitz LF
**Journal:** Front Cell Infect Microbiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcimb.2021.790488](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2021.790488)

## Content

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Jan 7;11:790488. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2021.790488. eCollection 2021.

Vaccine Protection of Mice With Primary Immunodeficiencies Against Disseminated 
Coccidioidomycosis.

Powell DA(1)(2), Hsu AP(3), Butkiewicz CD(1), Trinh HT(1), Frelinger JA(1), 
Holland SM(3), Galgiani JN(1)(4), Shubitz LF(1).

Author information:
(1)Valley Fever Center for Excellence, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United 
States.
(2)Department of Immunobiology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United 
States.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Allergy and Infectious Disease, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United States.

Disseminated coccidioidomycosis (DCM), often a severe and refractory disease 
leading to poor outcomes, is a risk for people with certain primary 
immunodeficiencies (PID). Several DCM-associated PID (STAT4, STAT3, IFNγ, and 
Dectin-1) are modeled in mice. To determine if vaccination could provide these 
mice protection, mice with mutations in Stat4, Stat3, Ifngr1, Clec7a (Dectin-1), 
and Rag-1 (T- and B-cell deficient) knockout (KO) mice were vaccinated with the 
live, avirulent, Δcps1 vaccine strain and subsequently challenged intranasally 
with pathogenic Coccidioides posadasii Silveira strain. Two weeks 
post-infection, vaccinated mice of all strains except Rag-1 KO had significantly 
reduced lung and spleen fungal burdens (p<0.05) compared to unvaccinated control 
mice. Splenic dissemination was prevented in most vaccinated immunodeficient 
mice while all unvaccinated B6 mice and the Rag-1 KO mice displayed disseminated 
disease. The mitigation of DCM by Δcps1 vaccination in these mice suggests that 
it could also benefit humans with immunogenetic risks of severe disease.

Copyright © 2022 Powell, Hsu, Butkiewicz, Trinh, Frelinger, Holland, Galgiani 
and Shubitz.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.790488
PMCID: PMC8777018
PMID: 35071044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.