---
reference_id: "PMID:9038345"
title: Revertant mosaicism in epidermolysis bullosa caused by mitotic gene conversion.
authors:
- Jonkman MF
- Scheffer H
- Stulp R
- Pas HH
- Nijenhuis M
- Heeres K
- Owaribe K
- Pulkkinen L
- Uitto J
journal: Cell
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81894-2
keywords:
- Adult
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Chromosome Disorders
- Collagen/genetics
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, physiology"
- Gene Conversion
- Genotype
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Keratinocytes/cytology, physiology"
- Mitosis/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mosaicism
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revertant mosaicism in epidermolysis bullosa caused by mitotic gene conversion.
**Authors:** Jonkman MF, Scheffer H, Stulp R, Pas HH, Nijenhuis M, Heeres K, Owaribe K, Pulkkinen L, Uitto J
**Journal:** Cell (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81894-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81894-2)

## Content

1. Cell. 1997 Feb 21;88(4):543-51. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81894-2.

Revertant mosaicism in epidermolysis bullosa caused by mitotic gene conversion.

Jonkman MF(1), Scheffer H, Stulp R, Pas HH, Nijenhuis M, Heeres K, Owaribe K, 
Pulkkinen L, Uitto J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Groningen, The Netherlands.

Mitotic gene conversion acting as reverse mutation has not been previously 
demonstrated in human. We report here that the revertant mosaicism of a compound 
heterozygous proband with an autosomal recessive genodermatosis, generalized 
atrophic benign epidermolysis bullosa, is caused by mitotic gene conversion of 
one of the two mutated COL17A1 alleles. Specifically, the maternal allele 
surrounding the mutation site on COL17A1 (1706delA) showed reversion of the 
mutation and loss of heterozygosity along a tract of at least 381 bp in 
revertant keratinocytes derived from clinically unaffected skin patches; the 
paternal mutation (R1226X) remained present in all cell samples. Revertant 
mosaicism represents a way of natural gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81894-2
PMID: 9038345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]