---
reference_id: "PMID:36558984"
title: HIV-1 Integrase Strand Transfer Inhibitors and Neurodevelopment.
authors:
- Foster EG
- Gendelman HE
- Bade AN
journal: Pharmaceuticals (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ph15121533
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HIV-1 Integrase Strand Transfer Inhibitors and Neurodevelopment.
**Authors:** Foster EG, Gendelman HE, Bade AN
**Journal:** Pharmaceuticals (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ph15121533](https://doi.org/10.3390/ph15121533)

## Content

1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2022 Dec 9;15(12):1533. doi: 10.3390/ph15121533.

HIV-1 Integrase Strand Transfer Inhibitors and Neurodevelopment.

Foster EG(1), Gendelman HE(1)(2), Bade AN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

Children born to mothers, with or at risk, of human immunodeficiency virus 
type-1 (HIV-1) infection are on the rise due to affordable access of 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) to pregnant women or those of childbearing age. 
Each year, up to 1.3 million HIV-1-infected women on ART have given birth with 
recorded mother-to-child HIV-1 transmission rates of less than 1%. Despite this 
benefit, the outcomes of children exposed to antiretroviral drugs during 
pregnancy, especially pre- and post- natal neurodevelopment remain incompletely 
understood. This is due, in part, to the fact that pregnant women are 
underrepresented in clinical trials. This is underscored by any potential risks 
of neural tube defects (NTDs) linked, in measure, to periconceptional usage of 
dolutegravir (DTG). A potential association between DTG and NTDs was first 
described in Botswana in 2018. Incidence studies of neurodevelopmental outcomes 
associated with DTG, and other integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs) are 
limited as widespread use of INSTIs has begun only recently in pregnant women. 
Therefore, any associations between INSTI use during pregnancy, and 
neurodevelopmental abnormalities remain to be explored. Herein, United States 
Food and Drug Administration approved ARVs and their use during pregnancy are 
discussed. We provide updates on INSTI pharmacokinetics and adverse events 
during pregnancy together with underlying mechanisms which could affect fetal 
neurodevelopment. Overall, this review seeks to educate both clinical and basic 
scientists on potential consequences of INSTIs on fetal outcomes as a foundation 
for future scientific investigations.

DOI: 10.3390/ph15121533
PMCID: PMC9783753
PMID: 36558984

Conflict of interest statement: Howard E. Gendelman is a Co-founder of Exavir 
Therapeutics, Inc., a biotechnology company focused on the development of 
long-acting antiretroviral medicines and HIV-1 cure strategies. The remaining 
authors declare that they have no competing interests.