---
reference_id: "PMID:29286567"
title: Crizotinib in ALK(+) inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors-Current experience and future perspectives.
authors:
- Theilen TM
- Soerensen J
- Bochennek K
- Becker M
- Schwabe D
- Rolle U
- Klingebiel T
- Lehrnbecher T
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.26920
keywords:
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Crizotinib/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- "Inflammation/drug therapy, enzymology"
- Male
- "Neoplasm Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Neoplasms, Muscle Tissue/drug therapy, enzymology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crizotinib in ALK(+) inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors-Current experience and future perspectives.
**Authors:** Theilen TM, Soerensen J, Bochennek K, Becker M, Schwabe D, Rolle U, Klingebiel T, Lehrnbecher T
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.26920](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.26920)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2018 Apr;65(4). doi: 10.1002/pbc.26920. Epub 2017 Dec
29.

Crizotinib in ALK(+) inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors-Current experience and 
future perspectives.

Theilen TM(1), Soerensen J(2), Bochennek K(3), Becker M(3), Schwabe D(3), Rolle 
U(1), Klingebiel T(2)(3), Lehrnbecher T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Pediatric Urology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe 
University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Division of Pediatric Stem Cell Transplantation and Immunology, Hospital for 
Children and Adolescents*, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(3)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hospital for Children and 
Adolescents, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.

Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) and its subtype epithelioid 
inflammatory myofibroblastic sarcoma (EIMS) are rare soft-tissue tumors. As 
about 50% of IMT and 100% of EIMS contain activating rearrangements of the 
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene, targeted kinase inhibition of ALK by 
compounds such as crizotinib is a potential treatment option. We performed a 
literature review and analyzed a total of 30 patients with IMT/EIMS treated with 
crizotinib. A total of 12 patients achieved complete or partial remission. As 
preliminary data are promising, a prospective study evaluating crizotinib 
treatment in patients with unresectable/multifocal ALK+ IMT/EIMS is warranted.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.26920
PMID: 29286567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]