---
reference_id: "PMID:21800005"
title: Malignant transformation in melanocytes is associated with increased production of procoagulant microvesicles.
authors:
- Lima LG
- Oliveira AS
- Campos LC
- Bonamino M
- Chammas R
- Werneck C
- Vicente CP
- Barcinski MA
- Petersen LC
- Monteiro RQ
journal: Thromb Haemost
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1160/TH11-03-0143
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant transformation in melanocytes is associated with increased production of procoagulant microvesicles.
**Authors:** Lima LG, Oliveira AS, Campos LC, Bonamino M, Chammas R, Werneck C, Vicente CP, Barcinski MA, Petersen LC, Monteiro RQ
**Journal:** Thromb Haemost (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1160/TH11-03-0143](https://doi.org/10.1160/TH11-03-0143)

## Content

1. Thromb Haemost. 2011 Oct;106(4):712-23. doi: 10.1160/TH11-03-0143. Epub 2011
Jul  28.

Malignant transformation in melanocytes is associated with increased production 
of procoagulant microvesicles.

Lima LG(1), Oliveira AS, Campos LC, Bonamino M, Chammas R, Werneck C, Vicente 
CP, Barcinski MA, Petersen LC, Monteiro RQ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil.

Shedding of microvesicles (MVs) by cancer cells is implicated in a variety of 
biological effects, including the establishment of cancer-associated 
hypercoagulable states. However, the mechanisms underlying malignant 
transformation and the acquisition of procoagulant properties by tumour-derived 
MVs are poorly understood. Here we investigated the procoagulant and 
prothrombotic properties of MVs produced by a melanocyte-derived cell line 
(melan-a) as compared to its tumourigenic melanoma counterpart Tm1. Tumour cells 
exhibit a two-fold higher rate of MVs production as compared to melan-a. 
Melanoma MVs display greater procoagulant activity and elevated levels of the 
clotting initiator protein tissue factor (TF). On the other hand, tumour- and 
melanocyte-derived MVs expose similar levels of the procoagulant lipid 
phosphatidylserine, displaying identical abilities to support thrombin 
generation by the prothrombinase complex. By using an arterial thrombosis model, 
we observed that melanoma- but not melanocyte-derived MVs strongly accelerate 
thrombus formation in a TF-dependent manner, and accumulate at the site of 
vascular injury. Analysis of plasma obtained from melanoma-bearing mice showed 
the presence of MVs with a similar procoagulant pattern as compared to Tm1 MVs 
produced in vitro. Remarkably, flow-cytometric analysis demonstrated that 60% of 
ex vivo MVs are TF-positive and carry the melanoma-associated antigen, 
demonstrating its tumour origin. Altogether our data suggest that malignant 
transformation in melanocytes increases the production of procoagulant MVs, 
which may contribute for a variety of coagulation-related protumoural responses.

DOI: 10.1160/TH11-03-0143
PMID: 21800005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]