---
reference_id: "PMID:38607006"
title: Advancing Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Diagnosis through High-Speed Video Microscopy Analysis.
authors:
- De Jesús-Rojas W
- Demetriou ZJ
- Muñiz-Hernández J
- Rosario-Ortiz G
- Quiñones FM
- Ramos-Benitez MJ
- Mosquera RA
journal: Cells
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cells13070567
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advancing Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Diagnosis through High-Speed Video Microscopy Analysis.
**Authors:** De Jesús-Rojas W, Demetriou ZJ, Muñiz-Hernández J, Rosario-Ortiz G, Quiñones FM, Ramos-Benitez MJ, Mosquera RA
**Journal:** Cells (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells13070567](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13070567)

## Content

1. Cells. 2024 Mar 24;13(7):567. doi: 10.3390/cells13070567.

Advancing Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Diagnosis through High-Speed Video 
Microscopy Analysis.

De Jesús-Rojas W(1), Demetriou ZJ(1), Muñiz-Hernández J(2), Rosario-Ortiz G(1), 
Quiñones FM(1), Ramos-Benitez MJ(1), Mosquera RA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Basic Science, Ponce Health Sciences University, 
Ponce, PR 00716, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, San Juan Bautista School of Medicine, Caguas, PR 
00725, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, McGovern Medical School, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is an inherited disorder that impairs motile 
cilia, essential for respiratory health, with a reported prevalence of 1 in 
16,309 within Hispanic populations. Despite 70% of Puerto Rican patients having 
the RSPH4A [c.921+3_921+6del (intronic)] founder mutation, the characterization 
of the ciliary dysfunction remains unidentified due to the unavailability of 
advanced diagnostic modalities like High-Speed Video Microscopy Analysis (HSVA). 
Our study implemented HSVA for the first time on the island as a tool to better 
diagnose and characterize the RSPH4A [c.921+3_921+6del (intronic)] founder 
mutation in Puerto Rican patients. By applying HSVA, we analyzed the ciliary 
beat frequency (CBF) and pattern (CBP) in native Puerto Rican patients with PCD. 
Our results showed decreased CBF and a rotational CBP linked to the RSPH4A 
founder mutation in Puerto Ricans, presenting a novel diagnostic marker that 
could be implemented as an axillary test into the PCD diagnosis algorithm in 
Puerto Rico. The integration of HSVA technology in Puerto Rico substantially 
enhances the PCD evaluation and diagnosis framework, facilitating prompt 
detection and early intervention for improved disease management. This 
initiative, demonstrating the potential of HSVA as an adjunctive test within the 
PCD diagnostic algorithm, could serve as a blueprint for analogous developments 
throughout Latin America.

DOI: 10.3390/cells13070567
PMCID: PMC11011699
PMID: 38607006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.