---
reference_id: "PMID:14991065"
title: TGF-beta1 induces bone marrow reticulin fibrosis in hairy cell leukemia.
authors:
- Shehata M
- Schwarzmeier JD
- Hilgarth M
- Hubmann R
- Duechler M
- Gisslinger H
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1172/JCI19540
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Bone Marrow/metabolism
- Bone Marrow Cells
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Collagen/metabolism
- Collagen Type III/chemistry
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Fibrosis
- "Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Indirect"
- Humans
- Immunoassay
- "Leukemia, Hairy Cell/metabolism"
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear/metabolism"
- Male
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- Middle Aged
- Peptides/chemistry
- Primary Myelofibrosis/pathology
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- Radioimmunoassay
- Reticulin/metabolism
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Time Factors
- "Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism, physiology"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TGF-beta1 induces bone marrow reticulin fibrosis in hairy cell leukemia.
**Authors:** Shehata M, Schwarzmeier JD, Hilgarth M, Hubmann R, Duechler M, Gisslinger H
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI19540](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI19540)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2004 Mar;113(5):676-85. doi: 10.1172/JCI19540.

TGF-beta1 induces bone marrow reticulin fibrosis in hairy cell leukemia.

Shehata M(1), Schwarzmeier JD, Hilgarth M, Hubmann R, Duechler M, Gisslinger H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Clinic of Internal Medicine I, Vienna, Austria.

The mechanisms that lead to reticulin fibrosis of bone marrow (BM) in hairy cell
leukemia (HCL) are not fully understood. We therefore investigated the
involvement of TGF-beta1, a potent fibrogenic cytokine, in this process.
Immunoassays revealed that TGF-beta1 is present at higher concentrations in BM,
serum, and plasma of HCL patients in comparison with healthy donors (P < 0.001).
RT-PCR and immunofluorescence studies showed that TGF-beta1 is overexpressed at
the mRNA and protein levels in peripheral blood, spleen, and BM mononuclear
cells and that hairy cells (HCs) are the main source of TGF-beta1. Active
TGF-beta1 correlated significantly with grades of BM fibrosis, infiltration with
HCs, and serum procollagen type III aminoterminal propeptide (PIIINP). Ex vivo
studies demonstrated that TGF-beta1 significantly enhances the production and
deposition of reticulin and collagen fibers by BM fibroblasts. In addition, BM
plasma of HCL patients increased the synthesis of type I and type III
procollagens, the main components of reticulin fibers, at the mRNA and protein
levels. This fibrogenic activity of BM plasma was abolished by neutralizing
anti-TGF-beta1 antibodies. These results show, for the first time to our
knowledge, that TGF-beta1 is highly expressed in HCs and is directly involved in
the pathogenesis of BM reticulin fibrosis in HCL.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI19540
PMCID: PMC351317
PMID: 14991065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
