---
reference_id: "PMID:11567139"
title: "Triallelic inheritance in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, a Mendelian recessive disorder."
authors:
- Katsanis N
- Ansley SJ
- Badano JL
- Eichers ER
- Lewis RA
- Hoskins BE
- Scambler PJ
- Davidson WS
- Beales PL
- Lupski JR
journal: Science
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1126/science.1063525
keywords:
- Alleles
- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Multifactorial Inheritance
- Mutation
- Open Reading Frames
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Triallelic inheritance in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, a Mendelian recessive disorder.
**Authors:** Katsanis N, Ansley SJ, Badano JL, Eichers ER, Lewis RA, Hoskins BE, Scambler PJ, Davidson WS, Beales PL, Lupski JR
**Journal:** Science (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1063525](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1063525)

## Content

1. Science. 2001 Sep 21;293(5538):2256-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1063525.

Triallelic inheritance in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, a Mendelian recessive disorder.

Katsanis N(1), Ansley SJ, Badano JL, Eichers ER, Lewis RA, Hoskins BE, Scambler 
PJ, Davidson WS, Beales PL, Lupski JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, The Texas Children's Hospital, 
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2001 Sep 21;293(5538):2213-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1065930.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder 
characterized by multiple clinical features that include pigmentary retinal 
dystrophy, polydactyly, obesity, developmental delay, and renal defects. BBS is 
considered an autosomal recessive disorder, and recent positional cloning 
efforts have identified two BBS genes (BBS2 and BBS6). We screened our cohort of 
163 BBS families for mutations in both BBS2 and BBS6 and report the presence of 
three mutant alleles in affected individuals in four pedigrees. In addition, we 
detected unaffected individuals in two pedigrees who carry two BBS2 mutations 
but not a BBS6 mutation. We therefore propose that BBS may not be a single-gene 
recessive disease but a complex trait requiring three mutant alleles to manifest 
the phenotype. This triallelic model of disease transmission may be important in 
the study of both Mendelian and multifactorial disorders.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1063525
PMID: 11567139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]