---
reference_id: "PMID:9783683"
title: Immunoreactivation of Epstein-Barr virus due to cytomegalovirus primary infection.
authors:
- Aalto SM
- Linnavuori K
- Peltola H
- Vuori E
- Weissbrich B
- Schubert J
- Hedman L
- Hedman K
journal: J Med Virol
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunoreactivation of Epstein-Barr virus due to cytomegalovirus primary infection.
**Authors:** Aalto SM, Linnavuori K, Peltola H, Vuori E, Weissbrich B, Schubert J, Hedman L, Hedman K
**Journal:** J Med Virol (1998)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 1998 Nov;56(3):186-91.

Immunoreactivation of Epstein-Barr virus due to cytomegalovirus primary 
infection.

Aalto SM(1), Linnavuori K, Peltola H, Vuori E, Weissbrich B, Schubert J, Hedman 
L, Hedman K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Finland. 
sanna.aalto@helsinki.fi

Serological diagnosis of herpes virus infections is hampered by concurrent 
expression of IgM for heterologous members of this virus family. To assess the 
frequency of such multiple diagnostic findings and to understand their etiology, 
we sought by using IgG, IgM, and IgG avidity test serodiagnoses for Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV) among immunocompetent or immune-suppressed patients with 
well-documented cytomegalovirus (CMV) primary infection. Controls had primary 
infection by EBV or had acute septic or severe respiratory infection. Among 
EBV-seropositive patients with CMV primary infection, a large proportion (13/56, 
23%) showed antibody profiles of EBV reactivation: seroconversion of VCA IgM 
and/or > or = fourfold rise of VCA IgG, together with high or intermediate 
avidity of VCA IgG. Most of the CMV patients with EBV serodiagnosis showed also 
diagnostic HHV-6 antibody rises. In contrast to the frequently occurring 
CMV-induced EBV immunoreactivation, EBV primary infections did not appear to 
induce immunoreactivations of CMV (0/22). Only one (2%) CMV patient had a 
significant varicella zoster virus (VZV) antibody rise. The studies show that 
CMV is a particularly active inducer of some, but not all, members of the herpes 
virus family and suggest that the in vivo interplay between CMV and EBV occurs 
unidirectionally. The high frequency of heterologous herpes virus 
immunoreactivations poses demands on laboratory diagnosis.

PMID: 9783683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]