---
reference_id: "PMID:39332429"
title: "Global age-stratified seroprevalence of enterovirus D68: a systematic literature review."
authors:
- Jorgensen D
- Grassly NC
- Pons-Salort M
journal: Lancet Microbe
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.lanmic.2024.07.001
keywords:
- Humans
- Seroepidemiologic Studies
- "Enterovirus Infections/epidemiology, virology, immunology"
- "Enterovirus D, Human/immunology, isolation & purification"
- "Antibodies, Viral/blood"
- Adult
- Child
- Global Health
- Age Factors
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/epidemiology, virology"
- Infant
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global age-stratified seroprevalence of enterovirus D68: a systematic literature review.
**Authors:** Jorgensen D, Grassly NC, Pons-Salort M
**Journal:** Lancet Microbe (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lanmic.2024.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanmic.2024.07.001)

## Content

1. Lancet Microbe. 2025 Jan;6(1):100938. doi: 10.1016/j.lanmic.2024.07.001. Epub
2024 Sep 24.

Global age-stratified seroprevalence of enterovirus D68: a systematic literature
review.

Jorgensen D(1), Grassly NC(2), Pons-Salort M(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis,
Imperial College London, London, UK. Electronic address:
david.jorgensen13@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Medical Research Council (MRC) Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis,
Imperial College London, London, UK.

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68), first isolated in 1962, emerged in 2014, causing
outbreaks of severe respiratory infections and acute flaccid myelitis. In this
systematic review, we have compiled all available literature on age-stratified
seroprevalence estimates of EV-D68. Ten studies from six countries were
retained, all conducted using microneutralisation assays, despite wide
variations in protocols and challenge viruses. The age profiles of
seroprevalence were similar across time and regions; seroprevalence increased
quickly with age, reaching roughly 100% by the age of 20 years and with no sign
of decline throughout adulthood. This suggests continuous or frequent exposure
of the populations to the virus, or possible cross-reactivity with other
viruses. Studies with two or more cross-sectional surveys reported consistently
higher seroprevalence at later timepoints, suggesting a global increase in
transmission over time. This systematic review concludes that standardising
serological protocols, understanding the contribution of cross-reactivity with
other pathogens to the high reported seroprevalence, and quantifying individual
exposure to EV-D68 over time are the main research priorities for the future.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lanmic.2024.07.001
PMID: 39332429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests We declare no competing
interests.
