---
reference_id: "PMID:36996746"
title: Long-term study of the cognitive profile of Moyamoya Disease in adults.
authors:
- Chan E
- Gal AM
- Van Harskamp N
- Adams ME
- Brown MM
- Werring DJ
- Cipolotti L
- Simister R
journal: J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107064
keywords:
- Humans
- Adult
- "Moyamoya Disease/complications, diagnostic imaging, psychology"
- Cognition
- Executive Function
- "Stroke/diagnosis, etiology"
- Neuropsychological Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term study of the cognitive profile of Moyamoya Disease in adults.
**Authors:** Chan E, Gal AM, Van Harskamp N, Adams ME, Brown MM, Werring DJ, Cipolotti L, Simister R
**Journal:** J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107064](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107064)

## Content

1. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2023 Jun;32(6):107064. doi: 
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107064. Epub 2023 Mar 28.

Long-term study of the cognitive profile of Moyamoya Disease in adults.

Chan E(1), Gal AM(2), Van Harskamp N(2), Adams ME(3), Brown MM(4), Werring 
DJ(4), Cipolotti L(5), Simister R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychology, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Box 37, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, United Kingdom; Stroke 
Research Centre, Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Russell Square 
House, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: edgar.chan1@nhs.net.
(2)Department of Neuropsychology, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Box 37, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, United Kingdom.
(3)Lysholm Department of Neuroradiology, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Stroke Research Centre, Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
Russell Square House, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Neuropsychology, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Box 37, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, United Kingdom; Stroke 
Research Centre, Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Russell Square 
House, London, United Kingdom.

Moyamoya Disease (MMD) is a rare cerebrovascular disorder which can have 
significant cognitive consequences. The aim of the current study was to describe 
comprehensively the domain-specific cognitive profile of adult patients with MMD 
and to assess whether this changes in the absence of recurrent stroke over 
long-term follow-up. Comprehensive neuropsychological assessment covering seven 
cognitive domains was conducted on 61 adult patients with MMD at baseline and 
then at up to 3 further time points during follow up (median=2.31, 4.87 and 7.12 
years). Although 27 patients had had prior surgical revasculariation, none had 
surgery between neuropsychological assessments. Cognitive impairment was common. 
At baseline, impairment in executive functions was most frequent (57%), followed 
by performance IQ (36%), speed of information processing (31%) and visual memory 
(30%). We found that the neuropsychological profile remains broadly stable over 
long-term follow-up with no clear indication of improvement or significant 
decline. The pattern of impairment also did not differ depending on age of onset 
or whether there was a history of either prior stroke at presentation or 
revascularisation surgery at presentation.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107064
PMID: 36996746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest none