---
reference_id: "PMID:37889468"
title: "Vestibular Migraine Pathophysiology and Treatment: a Narrative Review."
authors:
- Ceriani CEJ
journal: Curr Pain Headache Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11916-023-01182-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vestibular Migraine Pathophysiology and Treatment: a Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Ceriani CEJ
**Journal:** Curr Pain Headache Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11916-023-01182-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11916-023-01182-7)

## Content

1. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2024 Feb;28(2):47-54. doi: 10.1007/s11916-023-01182-7.
 Epub 2023 Oct 27.

Vestibular Migraine Pathophysiology and Treatment: a Narrative Review.

Ceriani CEJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Jefferson Headache Center, Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson 
University, 900 Walnut St., Ste 200, Philadelphia, PA, 19107, USA. 
Claire.ceriani@jefferson.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review the diagnosis of vestibular migraine (VM) and 
update the clinician on the most recent developments in our understanding of its 
pathophysiology and treatment.
RECENT FINDINGS: Functional imaging studies have identified multiple regions of 
the brain with abnormal activity and connectivity in VM. There is evidence of 
abnormal sensory processing and integration in VM patients. Calcitonin 
gene-related peptide (CGRP) has also been found to play a role in trigeminal and 
vestibular nucleus pathways. Research into treatment modalities has identified 
several neuromodulation devices that may be effective in VM. There are a growing 
number of evidence-based preventive options for VM, including medications that 
target CGRP. VM is best understood as a sensory processing disorder. CGRP 
appears to play a role, and further research is needed to fully understand its 
effects. Treatment options are expanding, but there is still a need for more 
randomly controlled trials in this area.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11916-023-01182-7
PMID: 37889468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]