---
reference_id: PMID:19336831
title: "Maraviroc: a coreceptor CCR5 antagonist for management of HIV infection."
authors:
- Yost R
- Pasquale TR
- Sahloff EG
journal: Am J Health Syst Pharm
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2146/ajhp080206
keywords:
- Animals
- CCR5 Receptor Antagonists
- "Cyclohexanes/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Disease Management
- "HIV Fusion Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "HIV Infections/drug therapy, metabolism"
- HIV-1/drug effects
- Humans
- Maraviroc
- "Receptors, CCR5/physiology"
- "Triazoles/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maraviroc: a coreceptor CCR5 antagonist for management of HIV infection.
**Authors:** Yost R, Pasquale TR, Sahloff EG
**Journal:** Am J Health Syst Pharm (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2146/ajhp080206](https://doi.org/10.2146/ajhp080206)

## Content

1. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2009 Apr 15;66(8):715-26. doi: 10.2146/ajhp080206.

Maraviroc: a coreceptor CCR5 antagonist for management of HIV infection.

Yost R(1), Pasquale TR, Sahloff EG.

Author information:
(1)Summa Health System, Akron, Ohio, USA.

PURPOSE: The mechanism of action, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical 
efficacy, drug interactions, adverse effects, dosage and administration, cost, 
and role in therapy of maraviroc are reviewed.
SUMMARY: Maraviroc is the first CCR5 coreceptor antagonist to receive marketing 
approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of 
CCR5-tropic human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection as part of an optimized 
antiretroviral regimen in treatment-experienced patients. As 50% or more of 
treatment-experienced patients may be infected with CXCR4-tropic virus, a 
tropism assay should be performed before initiating maraviroc therapy. The 
majority of evidence supporting maraviroc's use comes from two studies of 
HIV-infected, treatment-experienced patients. Pooled analysis from these two 
studies revealed that twice-daily maraviroc decreased HIV-1 RNA by 1.84 log 
copies/mL, compared with 0.78 log copy/mL with placebo. Forty-six percent of 
subjects attained an HIV-1 RNA concentration of <50 copies/mL, compared with 
only 17% with placebo. In a trial of treatment-naive HIV-infected individuals, 
maraviroc failed to show noninferiority to efavirenz. Maraviroc is metabolized 
by cytochrome P-450 isoenzyme 3A4 and is subject to interactions with inhibitors 
and inducers of that isoenzyme, such as the protease inhibitors (except 
tipranavir), efavirenz, and rifampin. Resistance has been reported with 
maraviroc, but specific mechanisms are still poorly understood. The most common 
adverse effects reported with maraviroc were diarrhea, nausea, fatigue, and 
headache.
CONCLUSION: Available data support the use of maraviroc, the first CCR5 
antagonist to receive FDA marketing approval, as part of an optimized 
antiretroviral regimen in treatment-experienced patients infected with 
CCR5-tropic HIV.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp080206
PMID: 19336831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]