---
reference_id: "PMID:34363075"
title: Prevalence of Familial Mediterranean Fever in Children with Cryptogenic Cirrhosis.
authors:
- Varol Fİ
- Tabel Y
- Yoloğlu S
- Yeşilada E
journal: J Trop Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmab019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of Familial Mediterranean Fever in Children with Cryptogenic Cirrhosis.
**Authors:** Varol Fİ, Tabel Y, Yoloğlu S, Yeşilada E
**Journal:** J Trop Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/tropej/fmab019](https://doi.org/10.1093/tropej/fmab019)

## Content

1. J Trop Pediatr. 2021 Jul 2;67(3):fmab019. doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmab019.

Prevalence of Familial Mediterranean Fever in Children with Cryptogenic 
Cirrhosis.

Varol Fİ(1), Tabel Y(2), Yoloğlu S(3), Yeşilada E(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Faculty 
of Medicine, Inonu University, Malatya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu University, 
Malatya, Turkey.
(3)Department of Biostatistic, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu University, Malatya, 
Turkey.
(4)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu 
University, Malatya, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autoinflammatory disease 
characterized by abdominal and chest pain and recurrent fever due to 
inflammation in the serosal membranes such as peritoneum, pleura and synovia. In 
FMF, recurrent inflammatory cytokine production may lead to cirrhosis. The aim 
of this study was to determine the prevalence of FMF in children with 
cryptogenic cirrhosis and it was found to be high, to add FMF among the 
etiological causes of cirrhosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This prospective cohort study conducted at the Hospital 
of İnönü University, Malatya, Turkey. In this study, 44 patients diagnosed with 
cryptogenic cirrhosis by biopsy, in the Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology 
and Nutrition Clinic, were included, after the other reasons that may cause 
chronic liver disease were excluded. MEVF gene analysis was performed for all 
patients with cryptogenic cirrhosis.
RESULTS: FMF genetic mutation was detected in 9 (20%) of 44 patients. M694V 
mutation was detected in one patient (2.27%) and E148Q homozygous mutation was 
detected in one patient (2.27%). Various other heterozygous mutations were 
detected in seven other patients. Homozygous and heterozygous R202Q mutations 
were detected in one patient.
CONCLUSION: We suggest that FMF plays a role in the etiologic differential 
diagnosis of cryptogenic cirrhosis.

© The Author(s) [2021]. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights 
reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/tropej/fmab019
PMID: 34363075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]