---
reference_id: "PMID:36171348"
title: Rectal suction biopsy versus incisional rectal biopsy in the diagnosis of Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Green N
- Smith CA
- Bradford MC
- Ambartsumyan L
- Kapur RP
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-022-05246-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rectal suction biopsy versus incisional rectal biopsy in the diagnosis of Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Green N, Smith CA, Bradford MC, Ambartsumyan L, Kapur RP
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-022-05246-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-022-05246-4)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2022 Dec;38(12):1989-1996. doi: 10.1007/s00383-022-05246-4. 
Epub 2022 Sep 28.

Rectal suction biopsy versus incisional rectal biopsy in the diagnosis of 
Hirschsprung disease.

Green N(1), Smith CA(2), Bradford MC(3), Ambartsumyan L(4), Kapur RP(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Seattle Children's Hospital and the 
University of Washington, 4800 Sand Point Way NE, OB. 9.620, PO Box 5371, 
Seattle, WA, 98145-5005, USA. Nicole.green@seattlechildrens.org.
(2)Department of Surgery, Seattle Children's Hospital and the University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Core for Biostatistics Epidemiology and Analytics in Research, Seattle 
Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Seattle Children's Hospital and the 
University of Washington, 4800 Sand Point Way NE, OB. 9.620, PO Box 5371, 
Seattle, WA, 98145-5005, USA.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Seattle Children's Hospital 
and the University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hirschsprung disease is one of the most common congenital anomalies 
that affect colorectal function. Rectal biopsy demonstrating the absence of 
ganglion cells in the affected bowel is the gold standard for diagnosis. Suction 
and incisional rectal biopsies are appropriate methods for obtaining diagnostic 
tissue. The goal of this study is to determine if any differences in adequacy 
exist between suction and incisional rectal biopsies at our institution.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective review of suction and incisional rectal 
biopsies for inadequacy per procedure at a tertiary pediatric hospital. Each 
procedure for rectal biopsy was also evaluated by a number of biopsies per 
procedure. We used a two-sample test of proportions to compare the inadequacy of 
suction vs. incisional biopsies.
RESULTS: 133 rectal suction biopsy procedures (227 biopsies) and 125 incisional 
biopsy procedures (140 biopsies) were analyzed. In patients 6 months of age and 
older, the percentage of inadequate procedures was substantially higher in the 
suction biopsy group (24.1% vs 0.9%, p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: A substantially higher proportion of inadequacy was found in the 
suction rectal biopsy group compared to the incisional cohort among the older 
patient cohort, suggesting incisional biopsies should be strongly considered as 
the primary rectal biopsy method in patients older than 6 months.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-022-05246-4
PMID: 36171348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]