---
reference_id: "PMID:28671137"
title: What do we know about Late Onset Huntington's Disease?
authors:
- Chaganti SS
- McCusker EA
- Loy CT
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-170247
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What do we know about Late Onset Huntington's Disease?
**Authors:** Chaganti SS, McCusker EA, Loy CT
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-170247](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-170247)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2017;6(2):95-103. doi: 10.3233/JHD-170247.

What do we know about Late Onset Huntington's Disease?

Chaganti SS(1)(2), McCusker EA(1)(2), Loy CT(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Huntington Disease Service, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(2)Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(3)School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(4)The Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Although the typical age of onset for Huntington's disease (HD) is 
in the fourth decade, between 4.4-11.5% of individuals with HD have a late onset 
(over 60 years of age). Diagnosis of Late onset HD (LoHD) can be missed, due to 
the perceived low likelihood of HD in the over 60-year-olds.
OBJECTIVE: To review the epidemiology, genotype and phenotype of LoHD.
METHODS: We systematically searched MEDLINE, EMBASE and Web of Science 
(inception-November 2016). Web of Science was then used to search for papers 
citing identified studies. Content experts were consulted for any additional 
studies. We included all studies reporting the clinical phenotype of LoHD for 
more than one participant.
RESULTS: 20 studies were identified from a potential list of 1243. Among 
Caucasian HD cohorts, 4.4-11.5% of individuals have LoHD, and this proportion 
may be increasing. Proportion of LoHD without a positive family history ranges 
from 3-68%. 94.4% of reported cases of LoHD had CAG repeat lengths of ≤44. Motor 
manifestations are the commonest initial presentation, although 29.2% presented 
with non-motor manifestations as the first clinical feature in one case series. 
Individuals with LoHD may have slower progression of illness. Cognitive 
impairment rather than chorea may be the major source of disability in this 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: LoHD represents a substantial proportion of new diagnoses of HD and 
has some unique features. Further characterization of this population will aid 
clinicians in diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-170247
PMCID: PMC5502838
PMID: 28671137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]