---
reference_id: "PMID:28434995"
title: An SIR-Dengue transmission model with seasonal effects and impulsive control.
authors:
- Páez Chávez J
- Götz T
- Siegmund S
- Wijaya KP
journal: Math Biosci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2017.04.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An SIR-Dengue transmission model with seasonal effects and impulsive control.
**Authors:** Páez Chávez J, Götz T, Siegmund S, Wijaya KP
**Journal:** Math Biosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mbs.2017.04.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mbs.2017.04.005)

## Content

1. Math Biosci. 2017 Jul;289:29-39. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2017.04.005. Epub 2017 Apr
 20.

An SIR-Dengue transmission model with seasonal effects and impulsive control.

Páez Chávez J(1), Götz T(2), Siegmund S(3), Wijaya KP(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Dynamics, Department of Mathematics, TU Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, 
Germany; Center for Applied Dynamical Systems and Computational Methods 
(CADSCOM), Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Escuela Superior 
Politécnica del Litoral, P.O. Box 09-01-5863, Guayaquil, Ecuador. Electronic 
address: jpaez@espol.edu.ec.
(2)Mathematical Institute, University of Koblenz-Landau, Universitätstr. 1, 
D-56070 Koblenz, Germany. Electronic address: goetz@uni-koblenz.de.
(3)Center for Dynamics, Department of Mathematics, TU Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, 
Germany. Electronic address: stefan.siegmund@tu-dresden.de.
(4)Mathematical Institute, University of Koblenz-Landau, Universitätstr. 1, 
D-56070 Koblenz, Germany. Electronic address: karuniaputra@uni-koblenz.de.

In recent decades, Dengue fever and its deadly complications, such as Dengue 
hemorrhagic fever, have become one of the major mosquito-transmitted diseases, 
with an estimate of 390 million cases occurring annually in over 100 tropical 
and subtropical countries, most of which belonging to the developing world. 
Empirical evidence indicates that the most effective mechanism to reduce Dengue 
infections is to combat the disease-carrying vector, which is often implemented 
via chemical pesticides to destroy mosquitoes in their adult or larval stages. 
The present paper considers an SIR epidemiological model describing the 
vector-to-host and host-to-vector transmission dynamics. The model includes 
pesticide control represented in terms of periodic impulsive perturbations, as 
well as seasonal fluctuations of the vector growth and transmission rates of the 
disease. The effectiveness of the control strategy is studied numerically in 
detail by means of path-following techniques for non-smooth dynamical systems. 
Special attention is given to determining the optimal timing of the pesticide 
applications, in such a way that the number of infections and the required 
amount of pesticide are minimized.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mbs.2017.04.005
PMID: 28434995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]