---
reference_id: "PMID:17164308"
title: "Autosomal dominant osteopetrosis: clinical severity and natural history of 94 subjects with a chloride channel 7 gene mutation."
authors:
- Waguespack SG
- Hui SL
- Dimeglio LA
- Econs MJ
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2006-1986
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant osteopetrosis: clinical severity and natural history of 94 subjects with a chloride channel 7 gene mutation.
**Authors:** Waguespack SG, Hui SL, Dimeglio LA, Econs MJ
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2006-1986](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2006-1986)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Mar;92(3):771-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2006-1986. Epub
 2006 Dec 12.

Autosomal dominant osteopetrosis: clinical severity and natural history of 94 
subjects with a chloride channel 7 gene mutation.

Waguespack SG(1), Hui SL, Dimeglio LA, Econs MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrine Neoplasia and Hormonal Disorders, The University of 
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1400 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 435, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA. swagues@mdanderson.org

CONTEXT: Autosomal dominant osteopetrosis (ADO) is a sclerosing bone disorder 
caused by heterozygous mutations in the chloride channel 7 (ClCN7) gene. The 
clinical manifestations of this disease have not been well characterized since 
the discovery of the genetic basis of ADO.
OBJECTIVES: The primary objectives were to improve our understanding of ADO 
clinical characteristics and to study the natural history of the disease in the 
largest series of patients reported to date.
DESIGN AND SETTING: This study was primarily a retrospective cross-sectional 
analysis of individuals with a ClCN7 mutation that was conducted over a 4-yr 
period at a tertiary referral center and through family reunions. Longitudinal 
data on a subset of subjects were also studied.
PATIENTS AND INTERVENTIONS: We studied 311 subjects from 11 ADO families, 
including 62 individuals with ADO (patients with the classic clinical phenotype 
based on radiographs and/or biochemistry), 32 unaffected gene carriers (subjects 
with the gene mutation but no radiographic and/or biochemical phenotype), and 
217 controls who did not harbor a ClCN7 gene mutation. Clinical data were 
collected through patient interviews and examinations, medical records, and/or 
self-reported responses on a questionnaire that was completed by all subjects.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The prevalence of fracture, osteomyelitis, visual loss, 
and bone marrow failure was determined. Differences in clinical manifestations 
were analyzed according to affected vs. carrier status, age, and underlying 
genotype.
RESULTS: Ninety-two percent of ADO subjects had at least one sequela of the 
disease. Gene carriers did not have an increased risk of disease manifestations, 
although they were found to have significant increases in bone mineral density 
(P < 0.05). Compared with controls, subjects with ADO had a significantly 
increased prevalence of fracture (84 vs. 36%; P < 0.0001) and osteomyelitis (16 
vs. 0.9%; P < 0.0001). Severe fractures (defined as > or =10 fractures of any 
type and/or greater than one hip/femur fracture) were identified only in ADO 
subjects, and osteomyelitis typically occurred in the maxilla or mandible in 
older adults. Visual loss, which typically had its onset in childhood, and bone 
marrow failure occurred in 19 and 3% of ADO subjects, respectively. Adults were 
more likely to manifest an ADO clinical characteristic, but no definitive 
genotype-phenotype relationship could be concluded. Longitudinal data suggest 
that the ADO clinical phenotype worsens over time.
CONCLUSIONS: ADO caused by mutations in the CLCN7 gene is a frequently 
symptomatic disease manifested by a high rate of fracture, osteomyelitis, visual 
loss, and occasional bone marrow failure. The sequelae of ADO, which can be 
identified as early as infancy, appear to worsen over time. Fracture is the most 
prevalent consequence of ADO, although other more severe manifestations of 
disease can occur and should not be confused with recessive forms of 
osteopetrosis, particularly when identified in early childhood.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2006-1986
PMID: 17164308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]