---
reference_id: "PMID:37975355"
title: "Ophthalmic manifestations and treatments of proteus syndrome: a case report and systematic review."
authors:
- Jia RB
- Wang YF
- Jia RB
journal: Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.26355/eurrev_202311_34306
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ophthalmic manifestations and treatments of proteus syndrome: a case report and systematic review.
**Authors:** Jia RB, Wang YF, Jia RB
**Journal:** Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.26355/eurrev_202311_34306](https://doi.org/10.26355/eurrev_202311_34306)

## Content

1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2023 Nov;27(21):10313-10321. doi: 
10.26355/eurrev_202311_34306.

Ophthalmic manifestations and treatments of proteus syndrome: a case report and 
systematic review.

Jia RB(1), Wang YF, Jia RB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. paper34@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Proteus syndrome (PS) is an extremely rare disorder with ocular 
manifestations. In this study, we aimed to describe the ophthalmic 
characteristics and the clinical course of an unusual PS patient to acquire a 
comprehensive and intensive understanding of ocular PS and highlight the 
importance of collaborative treatment by ophthalmologists.
CASE PRESENTATION: A case of PS with atypical ocular features and syndromes was 
observed in a Chinese female. Her proptosis and vision impairment were relieved 
after Endoscope-Navigation system (ENS)-aided optic canal decompression. A 
1.5-year follow-up showed that the treatment was temporarily effective, but the 
disease continued to develop. A review of the literature was conducted: 
forty-eight patients met the inclusion criteria. Although ocular manifestations 
play important roles in PS diagnosis, only a limited number of cases have been 
reported to have ocular abnormalities. And to date, almost none of these reports 
have described the treatment in detail. Therefore, PS patients with ocular 
manifestations were reviewed.
CONCLUSIONS: PS is a complex disorder with variable characteristics and 
progressive imbalances. In this paper, the clinical symptoms, molecular 
characteristics, and differential diagnosis of PS are introduced. More 
importantly, the ocular manifestations, treatment, and prognosis of PS cases to 
date are summarized and discussed. This study aimed to acquire a comprehensive 
and intensive understanding of ocular PS and to reveal the importance of 
collaborative treatment by ophthalmologists.

DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202311_34306
PMID: 37975355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]