---
reference_id: "PMID:32039553"
title: "Assessing the adherence to guidelines in Lynch syndrome patients: a pilot study."
authors:
- Goh LH
- Spigelman AD
journal: ANZ J Surg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/ans.15690
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessing the adherence to guidelines in Lynch syndrome patients: a pilot study.
**Authors:** Goh LH, Spigelman AD
**Journal:** ANZ J Surg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ans.15690](https://doi.org/10.1111/ans.15690)

## Content

1. ANZ J Surg. 2020 Jun;90(6):1130-1135. doi: 10.1111/ans.15690. Epub 2020 Feb
10.

Assessing the adherence to guidelines in Lynch syndrome patients: a pilot study.

Goh LH(1)(2), Spigelman AD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, St Vincent's Clinical School, The University of New 
South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Cancer Genetics Unit, The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, St Vincent's Hospital, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Cancer surveillance is important in the management of Lynch 
syndrome. In New South Wales, management guidelines for Lynch syndrome are 
published on the eviQ website. Benefits of cancer surveillance are maximized 
through adherence to guidelines. This has yet to be investigated in Sydney. 
Hence, this study aimed to determine the adherence rate of patients to these 
guidelines, assess their knowledge of the guidelines and determine potential 
factors hindering regular colonoscopies in these patients.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted among Lynch syndrome patients 
from the St Vincent's Hospital Cancer Genetics Unit, Sydney. Patients who 
appropriately fulfilled our inclusion criteria were mailed a questionnaire. The 
questionnaire was mailed twice to increase the response rate. Demographic and 
medical information were collected from patient medical records. Patient 
responses were analysed to determine adherence to the guidelines.
RESULTS: Sixty-two individuals were invited to participate in this study. Among 
them, 47 responded (76%) with two being excluded, due to potential confounding 
factors. Thirty (67%) had their colonoscopies at recommended intervals, while 15 
(33%) had delays. Within these two groups, many were ultimately deemed 
non-adherent to the guidelines due to over-screening with other tests. In total, 
31 (69%) participants were considered over-screening for cancer, leaving only 
seven (16%) participants fully adherent to the guidelines. Only three (7%) had 
knowledge of the eviQ guidelines.
CONCLUSIONS: Adherence to the eviQ guidelines was poor. The majority of 
participants were being over-screened for cancer. Knowledge of the guidelines 
needs to be improved.

© 2020 Royal Australasian College of Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/ans.15690
PMID: 32039553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]