---
reference_id: "PMID:9357498"
title: Superficial congenital compound melanocytic nevus. Another pitfall in the diagnosis of malignant melanoma.
authors:
- Hurwitz RM
- Buckel LJ
journal: Dermatol Surg
year: '1997'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Superficial congenital compound melanocytic nevus. Another pitfall in the diagnosis of malignant melanoma.
**Authors:** Hurwitz RM, Buckel LJ
**Journal:** Dermatol Surg (1997)

## Content

1. Dermatol Surg. 1997 Oct;23(10):897-900.

Superficial congenital compound melanocytic nevus. Another pitfall in the 
diagnosis of malignant melanoma.

Hurwitz RM(1), Buckel LJ.

Author information:
(1)Dermatopathology Laboratory, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana 46260, USA.

METHODS: We reviewed the histology of 42 superficial congenital compound 
melanocytic nevi and found features that simulate malignant melanoma. In some, 
there were asymmetry and poor circumscription, an increased number of single 
melanocytes, which predominated over nests of melanocytes in some high power 
fields, single melanocytes were not equidistant from one another, scatter of 
single melanocytes was above the dermoepidermal junction, and there was 
confluence of nests of melanocytes, which are features in common with a 
malignant melanoma.
RESULTS: Fifty-six percent of the cases had three to four criteria present, and 
92% of the cases had three to six criteria present. The mean age of the patients 
at the time of biopsy was 20 years, and the mean size of the nevus at time of 
biopsy was 1.7 cm.
CONCLUSIONS: Appreciation that simulation of a melanoma in situ by the epidermal 
component of a superficial congenital compound melanocytic nevus in older 
children and adults is an expected finding and may be similar to congenital nevi 
biopsied shortly after birth has not been emphasized. Awareness of these 
simulants may prevent misinterpretation of a benign superficial congenital 
compound melanocytic nevus as a malignant melanoma.

PMID: 9357498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]