---
reference_id: "PMID:26765082"
title: "Thunderstorm-related asthma: what happens and why."
authors:
- "D'Amato G"
- Vitale C
- "D'Amato M"
- Cecchi L
- Liccardi G
- Molino A
- Vatrella A
- Sanduzzi A
- Maesano C
- Annesi-Maesano I
journal: Clin Exp Allergy
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/cea.12709
keywords:
- "Asthma/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Disease Progression
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Humans
- Weather
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thunderstorm-related asthma: what happens and why.
**Authors:** D'Amato G, Vitale C, D'Amato M, Cecchi L, Liccardi G, Molino A, Vatrella A, Sanduzzi A, Maesano C, Annesi-Maesano I
**Journal:** Clin Exp Allergy (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cea.12709](https://doi.org/10.1111/cea.12709)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Allergy. 2016 Mar;46(3):390-6. doi: 10.1111/cea.12709.

Thunderstorm-related asthma: what happens and why.

D'Amato G(1), Vitale C(2), D'Amato M(2), Cecchi L(3)(4), Liccardi G(1), Molino 
A(2), Vatrella A(5), Sanduzzi A(2), Maesano C(6), Annesi-Maesano I(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases, Department of Chest Diseases, 
High Speciality A. Cardarelli Hospital, Napoli, Italy.
(2)First Division of Pneumology, High Speciality Hospital 'V. Monaldi' and 
University 'Federico II' Medical School Naples, Napoli, Italy.
(3)University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(4)Allergy and Clinical Immunology Section, Azienda Sanitaria di Prato, Prato, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.
(6)Epidemiology of Allergic and Respiratory Diseases Department (EPAR), Pierre 
Louis Institute of Epidemiology and Public Health (IPLESP UMRS 1136), UPMC Univ 
Paris 06, INSERM, Saint-Antoine Medical School, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, 
France.

The fifth report issued by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
forecasts that greenhouse gases will increase the global temperature as well as 
the frequency of extreme weather phenomena. An increasing body of evidence shows 
the occurrence of severe asthma epidemics during thunderstorms in the pollen 
season, in various geographical zones. The main hypotheses explaining 
association between thunderstorms and asthma claim that thunderstorms can 
concentrate pollen grains at ground level which may then release allergenic 
particles of respirable size in the atmosphere after their rupture by osmotic 
shock. During the first 20-30 min of a thunderstorm, patients suffering from 
pollen allergies may inhale a high concentration of the allergenic material that 
is dispersed into the atmosphere, which in turn can induce asthmatic reactions, 
often severe. Subjects without asthma symptoms, but affected by seasonal 
rhinitis can also experience an asthma attack. All subjects affected by pollen 
allergy should be alerted to the danger of being outdoors during a thunderstorm 
in the pollen season, as such events may be an important cause of severe 
exacerbations. In light of these observations, it is useful to predict 
thunderstorms and thus minimize thunderstorm-related events.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cea.12709
PMID: 26765082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]