---
reference_id: "PMID:35470382"
title: Aflatoxin M1 in milk does not contribute substantially to global liver cancer incidence.
authors:
- Saha Turna N
- Havelaar A
- Adesogan A
- Wu F
journal: Am J Clin Nutr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac033
keywords:
- "Aflatoxin B1/analysis, toxicity"
- Aflatoxin M1/analysis
- Animal Feed/analysis
- Animals
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/epidemiology, etiology"
- Food Contamination/analysis
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Liver Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology"
- Milk/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aflatoxin M1 in milk does not contribute substantially to global liver cancer incidence.
**Authors:** Saha Turna N, Havelaar A, Adesogan A, Wu F
**Journal:** Am J Clin Nutr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ajcn/nqac033](https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/nqac033)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2022 Jun 7;115(6):1473-1480. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac033.

Aflatoxin M1 in milk does not contribute substantially to global liver cancer
incidence.

Saha Turna N(1)(2), Havelaar A(3)(4)(5), Adesogan A(3)(4), Wu F(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science & Human Nutrition, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI, USA.
(2)British Columbia Centre for Disease Control, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)Food Systems Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(6)Department of Agricultural, Food, and Resource Economics, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, MI, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 2022 Jun 7;115(6):1451-1452. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac071.

BACKGROUND: For 60 y, it has been known that aflatoxin B1 (AFB1), a mycotoxin
produced by Aspergillus fungi in certain food and feed crops, causes
hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer; HCC) in humans. The annual global burden
of AFB1-related HCC has been estimated. However, much less is known about the
potential carcinogenic impact of a metabolite of AFB1 called aflatoxin M1
(AFM1), which is secreted in milk when dairy animals consume AFB1-contaminated
feed. The cancer risk of AFM1 to humans from milk consumption has not yet been
evaluated.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to estimate the global risk of AFM1-related liver cancer
through liquid milk consumption, accounting for possible synergies between AFM1
and chronic infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) in increasing cancer risk.
METHODS: We conducted a quantitative cancer risk assessment by analyzing
extensive datasets of national population sizes, dairy consumption patterns,
AFM1 concentrations in milk in 40 nations, and chronic HBV prevalence. Two
separate cancer risk assessments were conducted: assuming a possible synergy
between AFM1 and HBV in increasing cancer risk in a manner similar to that of
AFB1 and HBV, and assuming no such synergy.
RESULTS: If there is no synergy between AFM1 and HBV, AFM1 may contribute
∼0.001% of total annual HCC cases globally. If there is synergy between AFM1 and
HBV infection, AFM1 may contribute ∼0.003% of all HCC cases worldwide. In each
case, the total expected AFM1-attributable cancer cases are ∼13-32 worldwide.
CONCLUSION: AFM1 exposure through liquid milk consumption does not substantially
increase liver cancer risk in humans. Policymakers should consider this low risk
against the nutritional benefits of milk consumption, particularly to children,
in a current global situation of milk being discarded because of AFM1
concentrations exceeding regulatory standards.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Society for Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac033
PMID: 35470382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
