---
reference_id: "PMID:24984327"
title: "[Recent developments in serologic and molecular diagnosis of hepatitis B and C]."
authors:
- Poljak M
- Lepej SZ
- Rode OD
journal: Acta Med Croatica
year: '2013'
keywords:
- Biomarkers/analysis
- Carrier State/diagnosis
- Croatia/epidemiology
- "DNA, Viral/blood"
- "Hepatitis B/blood, diagnosis"
- Hepatitis B Antibodies/analysis
- Hepatitis B Surface Antigens/analysis
- "Hepatitis C/blood, diagnosis"
- Hepatitis C Antibodies/analysis
- Humans
- Serologic Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Recent developments in serologic and molecular diagnosis of hepatitis B and C].
**Authors:** Poljak M, Lepej SZ, Rode OD
**Journal:** Acta Med Croatica (2013)

## Content

1. Acta Med Croatica. 2013 Oct;67(4):281-90.

[Recent developments in serologic and molecular diagnosis of hepatitis B and C].

[Article in Croatian]

Poljak M, Lepej SZ, Rode OD.

The 2013 Update of the Croatian Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of
Viral Hepatitis summarizes recent developments in the diagnosis of hepatitis B
and C. Determination of HBsAg, anti-HBc and anti-HBs is the initial step in the
diagnostic workup of acute and chronic hepatitis B. Other hepatitis B serologic
markers should be analyzed in the second stage of the diagnostic workup in HBsAg
and/or anti-HBc positive patients. A positive anti-HBc finding should be
followed by HBV DNA quantification. HBsAg quantification is complimentary to the
HBV DNA quantification and is used: (i) to differentiate between inactive HBsAg
carriers and active chronic HBeAg-negative hepatitis B in patients with HBV DNA
< 2000 IU/mL; and (ii) for treatment monitoring in patients with chronic
hepatitis B receiving pegylated interferon-alpha. Real-time PCR remains the
method of choice for detection and quantification of HBV DNA. The first step in
HCV testing is determination of specific antibodies via screening assays, enzyme
immunoassays or point-of-care assays. All persons with positive results of
anti-HCV screening assays should be additionally tested for HCV RNA or presence
of HCV viral capsid antigen. Confirmatory anti-HCV assays should be used as
additional assays for confirmation of reactive results obtained by screening
enzyme immunoassays in HCV RNA-negative persons only. Molecular assays with
identical lower limit of detection (LLOD) and lower limit of quantification are
recommended for monitoring of viral kinetics during chronic hepatitis C triple
therapy. HCV resistance testing to protease inhibitors is not part of the
recommended diagnostic monitoring of patients receiving triple therapy. HCV
subtyping is currently not recommended as part of pretreatment diagnostic
algorithm due to currently insufficient evidence on its clinical usefulness.
IL-28 genotype is an important predictor of SVR in patients treated with a
combination of interferon-alpha and ribavirin as well as in patients with HCV
genotype 1 receiving triple therapy. IL-28B genotyping is recommended as part of
pretreatment diagnostic workup in patients with chronic hepatitis C and is a
particularly important parameter for recommending double versus triple therapy
in treatment-naïve patients with chronic hepatitis C.

PMID: 24984327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
