---
reference_id: "PMID:19565516"
title: Relationship between elevated cerebrospinal fluid levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 and neuronal destruction in patients with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Kwieciński J
- Kłak M
- Trysberg E
- Blennow K
- Tarkowski A
- Jin T
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/art.24603
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Case-Control Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Fibrin Fibrinogen Degradation Products/cerebrospinal fluid
- Humans
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/cerebrospinal fluid, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nerve Degeneration/pathology
- Neurons/pathology
- Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor 1/cerebrospinal fluid
- Tissue Polypeptide Antigen/cerebrospinal fluid
- Urokinase-Type Plasminogen Activator/cerebrospinal fluid
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between elevated cerebrospinal fluid levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 and neuronal destruction in patients with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Kwieciński J, Kłak M, Trysberg E, Blennow K, Tarkowski A, Jin T
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.24603](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.24603)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Jul;60(7):2094-101. doi: 10.1002/art.24603.

Relationship between elevated cerebrospinal fluid levels of plasminogen
activator inhibitor 1 and neuronal destruction in patients with neuropsychiatric
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Kwieciński J(1), Kłak M, Trysberg E, Blennow K, Tarkowski A, Jin T.

Author information:
(1)Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: A homeostatic imbalance between coagulation and fibrinolysis might
occur intrathecally in neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE).
However, there are no published data on levels of fibrinolytic factors in the
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with NPSLE. The present study was
undertaken to assess CSF levels of fibrinolytic molecules, including urokinase
plasminogen activator (uPA), tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), D-dimer, and
plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), in SLE patients with clinically
verified neuropsychiatric involvement and to compare these levels with those in
SLE patients without neuropsychiatric involvement and in healthy subjects.
METHODS: Levels of uPA, tPA, and PAI-1 were assessed in CSF from 94 patients
with SLE (33 who had NPSLE, 56 who did not have NPSLE, and 5 who were positive
for antiphospholipid antibody [not included in the NPSLE or non-NPSLE group])
and from 53 age-matched controls. Patients were evaluated clinically, with
magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, analyses of neuronal/glial degradation
products in CSF, and neuropsychiatric testing.
RESULTS: In the group of patients with NPSLE, intrathecal PAI-1 levels were
significantly elevated compared with levels in SLE patients without overt
neuropsychiatric involvement (P < 0.05) and in healthy controls (P < 0.001). In
contrast, intrathecal levels of uPA did not differ significantly. Intrathecal
levels of PAI-1 correlated significantly with CSF levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6)
(r = 0.34, P < 0.001) and IL-8 (r = 0.33, P < 0.001). Importantly, increased
PAI-1 and D-dimer levels were observed in SLE patients who had pathologically
elevated levels of glial fibrillary acidic protein, neurofilament triplet
protein, and tau protein in CSF.
CONCLUSION: Intrathecal release of PAI-1 is increased in patients with NPSLE.
This results in impaired fibrinolysis, which might contribute to neuronal and
astrocytic damage in NPSLE.

DOI: 10.1002/art.24603
PMID: 19565516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
