---
reference_id: "PMID:38728608"
title: Racial and Ethnic Disparities in the Incidence of Anti-NMDA Receptor Encephalitis.
authors:
- Alsalek S
- Schwarzmann KB
- Budhathoki S
- Hernandez-Lopez V
- Smith JB
- Li BH
- Langer-Gould A
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200255
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Young Adult
- "Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis/ethnology, epidemiology"
- Black or African American/ethnology
- California/epidemiology
- Ethnicity
- Health Status Disparities
- "Hispanic or Latino/statistics & numerical data"
- Incidence
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/ethnology, epidemiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Teratoma/epidemiology, ethnology"
- White People/ethnology
- White
- Asian American Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Racial and Ethnic Disparities in the Incidence of Anti-NMDA Receptor Encephalitis.
**Authors:** Alsalek S, Schwarzmann KB, Budhathoki S, Hernandez-Lopez V, Smith JB, Li BH, Langer-Gould A
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000200255](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000200255)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2024 Jul;11(4):e200255. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000200255. Epub 2024 May 10.

Racial and Ethnic Disparities in the Incidence of Anti-NMDA Receptor 
Encephalitis.

Alsalek S(1), Schwarzmann KB(1), Budhathoki S(1), Hernandez-Lopez V(1), Smith 
JB(1), Li BH(1), Langer-Gould A(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine (S.A., K.B.S., 
S.B., V.H.-L.); Department of Research and Evaluation (J.B.S., B.H.L.); 
Department of Neurology (A.L.-G.), Los Angeles Medical Center, Southern 
California Permanente Medical Group; and Department of Clinical Science 
(A.L.-G.), Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine, Pasadena, CA.

OBJECTIVES: To estimate the incidence of anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor 
(NMDAR) encephalitis.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study of >10 million person-years 
of observation from members of Kaiser Permanente Southern California, 2011-2022. 
The electronic health record of individuals with text-string mention of NMDA and 
encephalitis were reviewed to identify persons who met diagnostic criteria for 
anti-NMDAR encephalitis. Age-standardized and sex-standardized incidences 
stratified by race and ethnicity were estimated according to the 2020 US Census 
population.
RESULTS: We identified 70 patients who met diagnostic criteria for anti-NMDAR 
encephalitis. The median age at onset was 23.7 years (IQR = 14.2-31.0 years), 
and 45 (64%) were female patients. The age-standardized and sex-standardized 
incidence of anti-NMDAR encephalitis per 1 million person-years was 
significantly higher in Black (2.94, 95% CI 1.27-4.61), Hispanic (2.17, 95% CI 
1.51-2.83), and Asian/Pacific Island persons (2.02, 95% CI 0.77-3.28) compared 
with White persons (0.40, 95% CI 0.08-0.72). Ovarian teratomas were found in 
58.3% of Black female individuals and 10%-28.6% in other groups.
DISCUSSION: Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis disproportionately affected Black, 
Hispanic, or Asian/Pacific Island persons. Ovarian teratomas were a particularly 
common trigger in Black female individuals. Future research should seek to 
identify environmental and biological risk factors that disproportionately 
affect minoritized individuals residing in the United States.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200255
PMCID: PMC11089538
PMID: 38728608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A. Langer-Gould has received grant support and 
awards from the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, the National MS 
Society, and Atara Biotherapeutics. She currently serves as a voting member on 
the California Technology Assessment Forum, a core program of the Institute for 
Clinical and Economic Review (ICER). S. Alsalek, K.B. Schwarzmann, S. 
Budhathoki, V. Hernandez-Lopez, J.B. Smith, and B.H. Li report no disclosures 
relevant to the manuscript. Go to Neurology.org/NN for full disclosures.