---
reference_id: "PMID:26401053"
title: Expanded GAA repeats impede transcription elongation through the FXN gene and induce transcriptional silencing that is restricted to the FXN locus.
authors:
- Li Y
- Lu Y
- Polak U
- Lin K
- Shen J
- Farmer J
- Seyer L
- Bhalla AD
- Rozwadowska N
- Lynch DR
- Butler JS
- Napierala M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv397
keywords:
- Adenine
- Friedreich Ataxia/genetics
- Gene Silencing
- Genetic Loci
- Guanine
- Histones/metabolism
- Iron-Binding Proteins
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- "Transcription Elongation, Genetic"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
- Frataxin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanded GAA repeats impede transcription elongation through the FXN gene and induce transcriptional silencing that is restricted to the FXN locus.
**Authors:** Li Y, Lu Y, Polak U, Lin K, Shen J, Farmer J, Seyer L, Bhalla AD, Rozwadowska N, Lynch DR, Butler JS, Napierala M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv397](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv397)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Dec 15;24(24):6932-43. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv397. Epub 2015
Sep 23.

Expanded GAA repeats impede transcription elongation through the FXN gene and
induce transcriptional silencing that is restricted to the FXN locus.

Li Y(1), Lu Y(2), Polak U(3), Lin K(2), Shen J(2), Farmer J(4), Seyer L(4),
Bhalla AD(1), Rozwadowska N(5), Lynch DR(4), Butler JS(6), Napierala M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, UAB Stem Cell Institute,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University Blvd., Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.
(2)Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.
(3)Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park, Smithville, TX 78957, USA, Department
of Cell Biology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Rokietnicka 5D, Poznan
60-806, Poland.
(4)Division of Neurology and Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Abramson Research Center Room 502, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, UAB Stem Cell Institute,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University Blvd., Birmingham, AL
35294, USA, Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Science, Strzeszynska
32, Poznan 60-479, Poland.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, UAB Stem Cell Institute,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University Blvd., Birmingham, AL
35294, USA, mnapiera@uab.edu jsbutler@uab.edu.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, UAB Stem Cell Institute,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University Blvd., Birmingham, AL
35294, USA, Department of Molecular Biomedicine, Institute of Bioorganic
Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan 61-704, Poland and
mnapiera@uab.edu jsbutler@uab.edu.

Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is a severe neurodegenerative disease caused by
homozygous expansion of the guanine-adenine-adenine (GAA) repeats in intron 1 of
the FXN gene leading to transcriptional repression of frataxin expression.
Post-translational histone modifications that typify heterochromatin are
enriched in the vicinity of the repeats, whereas active chromatin marks in this
region are underrepresented in FRDA samples. Yet, the immediate effect of the
expanded repeats on transcription progression through FXN and their long-range
effect on the surrounding genomic context are two critical questions that remain
unanswered in the molecular pathogenesis of FRDA. To address these questions, we
conducted next-generation RNA sequencing of a large cohort of FRDA and control
primary fibroblasts. This comprehensive analysis revealed that the GAA-induced
silencing effect does not influence expression of neighboring genes upstream or
downstream of FXN. Furthermore, no long-range silencing effects were detected
across a large portion of chromosome 9. Additionally, results of chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies confirmed that histone modifications associated with
repressed transcription are confined to the FXN locus. Finally, deep sequencing
of FXN pre-mRNA molecules revealed a pronounced defect in the transcription
elongation rate in FRDA cells when compared with controls. These results
indicate that approaches aimed to reactivate frataxin expression should
simultaneously address deficits in transcription initiation and elongation at
the FXN locus.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv397
PMCID: PMC4654050
PMID: 26401053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
