---
reference_id: "PMID:9645981"
title: Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency in spontaneous intracranial arterial dissections.
authors:
- Schievink WI
- Katzmann JA
- Piepgras DG
journal: Cerebrovasc Dis
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1159/000015814
keywords:
- Aortic Dissection/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Intracranial Aneurysm/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Risk Factors
- Subarachnoid Hemorrhage/genetics
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency in spontaneous intracranial arterial dissections.
**Authors:** Schievink WI, Katzmann JA, Piepgras DG
**Journal:** Cerebrovasc Dis (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000015814](https://doi.org/10.1159/000015814)

## Content

1. Cerebrovasc Dis. 1998 Jan-Feb;8(1):42-4. doi: 10.1159/000015814.

Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency in spontaneous intracranial arterial dissections.

Schievink WI(1), Katzmann JA, Piepgras DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn., USA.

alpha 1-Antitrypsin deficiency has been associated with a variety of vascular
disorders including arterial aneurysms, spontaneous extracranial arterial
dissections, and arterial fibromuscular dysplasia. We determined the
distribution of alpha 1-antitrypsin phenotypes in patients with intracranial
arterial dissections, a rare cause of subarachnoid hemorrhage. The study
population consisted of 4 consecutive patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage due
to spontaneous intracranial arterial dissections. The vertebral artery was
involved in 3 patients and the posterior inferior cerebellar artery in 1
patient. Three of these 4 patients were found to have a heterozygous alpha
1-antitrypsin deficiency (PiMZ or PiMS phenotypes). These data support previous
studies suggesting that patients with alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency may be at
an increased risk of developing spontaneous arterial dissections.

DOI: 10.1159/000015814
PMID: 9645981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
