---
reference_id: "PMID:29720485"
title: Consensus recommendations for the diagnosis and clinical management of Rosai-Dorfman-Destombes disease.
authors:
- Abla O
- Jacobsen E
- Picarsic J
- Krenova Z
- Jaffe R
- Emile JF
- Durham BH
- Braier J
- Charlotte F
- Donadieu J
- Cohen-Aubart F
- Rodriguez-Galindo C
- Allen C
- Whitlock JA
- Weitzman S
- McClain KL
- Haroche J
- Diamond EL
journal: Blood
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-03-839753
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Biopsy
- Disease Management
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Histiocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Histiocytosis, Sinus/diagnosis, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Immunotherapy
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Radiotherapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consensus recommendations for the diagnosis and clinical management of Rosai-Dorfman-Destombes disease.
**Authors:** Abla O, Jacobsen E, Picarsic J, Krenova Z, Jaffe R, Emile JF, Durham BH, Braier J, Charlotte F, Donadieu J, Cohen-Aubart F, Rodriguez-Galindo C, Allen C, Whitlock JA, Weitzman S, McClain KL, Haroche J, Diamond EL
**Journal:** Blood (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2018-03-839753](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2018-03-839753)

## Content

1. Blood. 2018 Jun 28;131(26):2877-2890. doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-03-839753. Epub 
2018 May 2.

Consensus recommendations for the diagnosis and clinical management of 
Rosai-Dorfman-Destombes disease.

Abla O(1), Jacobsen E(2), Picarsic J(3), Krenova Z(4)(5), Jaffe R(6), Emile 
JF(7)(8), Durham BH(9), Braier J(10), Charlotte F(11)(12), Donadieu J(13), 
Cohen-Aubart F(12)(14), Rodriguez-Galindo C(15), Allen C(16)(17)(18), Whitlock 
JA(1), Weitzman S(1), McClain KL(16), Haroche J(12)(14), Diamond EL(19)(20).

Author information:
(1)Division of Haematology/Oncology, Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA.
(4)Pediatric Oncology Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, 
Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Pathology, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Pathology, Magee Women's Hospital of UPMC, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA.
(7)Pathology Department, Ambroise Paré Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris (AP-HP), Boulogne, France.
(8)Research Unit EA4340, Versailles SQY University, Paris-Saclay University, 
Boulogne, France.
(9)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY.
(10)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Hospital de Pediatría JP Garrahan, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(11)Department of Pathology, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Paris VI University, Université Pierre et 
Marie Curie, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France.
(13)Department of Haematology, AP-HP, Trousseau Hospital, Paris, France.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine 2, French National Centre for Rare Systemic 
Diseases, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(15)St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.
(16)Section of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX.
(17)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX.
(18)Program in Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX.
(19)Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY; and.
(20)Department of Neurology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY.

Rosai-Dorfman-Destombes disease (RDD) is a rare non-Langerhans cell 
histiocytosis characterized by accumulation of activated histiocytes within 
affected tissues. RDD, which now belongs to the R group of the 2016 revised 
histiocytosis classification, is a widely heterogeneous entity with a range of 
clinical phenotypes occurring in isolation or in association with autoimmune or 
malignant diseases. Recent studies have found NRAS, KRAS, MAP2K1, and ARAF 
mutations in lesional tissues, raising the possibility of a clonal origin in 
some forms of RDD. More than 1000 reports have been published in the English 
literature; however, there is a lack of consensus regarding approach for the 
clinical management of RDD. Although in most cases RDD can be observed or 
treated with local therapies, some patients with refractory or multifocal 
disease experience morbidity and mortality. Here we provide the first consensus 
multidisciplinary recommendations for the diagnosis and management of RDD. These 
recommendations were discussed at the 32nd Histiocyte Society Meeting by an 
international group of academic clinicians and pathologists with expertise in 
RDD. We include guidelines for clinical, laboratory, pathologic, and 
radiographic evaluation of patients with RDD together with treatment 
recommendations based on clinical experience and review of the literature.

© 2018 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2018-03-839753
PMCID: PMC6024636
PMID: 29720485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.