---
reference_id: "PMID:11053071"
title: A survey of phenotype II in familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Melikoğlu M
- Ozdoğan H
- Korkmaz C
- Kasapçopur O
- Arisoy N
- Akkuş S
- Fresko Z
- Yazici H
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1136/ard.59.11.910
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A survey of phenotype II in familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Melikoğlu M, Ozdoğan H, Korkmaz C, Kasapçopur O, Arisoy N, Akkuş S, Fresko Z, Yazici H
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard.59.11.910](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard.59.11.910)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2000 Nov;59(11):910-3. doi: 10.1136/ard.59.11.910.

A survey of phenotype II in familial Mediterranean fever.

Melikoğlu M(1), Ozdoğan H, Korkmaz C, Kasapçopur O, Arisoy N, Akkuş S, Fresko Z, 
Yazici H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Cerrahpaşa Medical School, University of 
Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Phenotype II in familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the onset of 
amyloidosis before the onset of FMF with its typical attacks, or as an isolated 
finding in a member of an FMF family. Its presence was investigated by looking 
for proteinuria among the asymptomatic relatives of patients with FMF 
complicated by amyloidosis and among the asymptomatic relatives of patients with 
juvenile chronic arthritis (JCA) complicated by amyloidosis, used as controls.
METHODS: The relatives of the index patients (13 with FMF and amyloidosis) and 
controls (6 with JCA and amyloidosis) were screened for proteinuria. Rectal 
biopsies were performed when proteinuria was significant (>/=300 mg/d).
RESULTS: 461 relatives were screened in the FMF group and 269 among the 
controls. Two of the FMF relatives and one JCA relative had no symptoms of FMF 
but had significant proteinuria. Rectal biopsy for amyloidosis was negative in 
all instances of significant proteinuria.
CONCLUSION: Phenotype II is uncommon among the relatives of patients with FMF 
and amyloidosis.

DOI: 10.1136/ard.59.11.910
PMCID: PMC1753025
PMID: 11053071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]