---
reference_id: "PMID:34884926"
title: Genomic Features and Clinical Implications of Intraductal Carcinoma of the Prostate.
authors:
- Kang M
- Lee H
- Byeon SJ
- Kwon GY
- Jeon SS
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms222313125
keywords:
- Animals
- DNA Repair/genetics
- Genomic Instability
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Precision Medicine
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic Features and Clinical Implications of Intraductal Carcinoma of the Prostate.
**Authors:** Kang M, Lee H, Byeon SJ, Kwon GY, Jeon SS
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms222313125](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222313125)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Dec 4;22(23):13125. doi: 10.3390/ijms222313125.

Genomic Features and Clinical Implications of Intraductal Carcinoma of the
Prostate.

Kang M(1)(2)(3)(4), Lee H(5), Byeon SJ(6), Kwon GY(5), Jeon SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul 06351, Korea.
(2)Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul 06351, Korea.
(3)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, SAIHST, Sungkyunkwan
University, Seoul 06351, Korea.
(4)Department of Digital Health, SAIHST, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul 06351,
Korea.
(5)Department of Pathology and Translational Genomics, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul 06351, Korea.
(6)Department of Pathology, Hallym University Dongtan Sacred Heart Hospital,
Hwaseong-si 18450, Korea.

Intraductal carcinoma of the prostate (IDC-P) is a rare and unique form of
aggressive prostate carcinoma, which is characterized by an expansile
proliferation of malignant prostatic epithelial cells within prostatic ducts or
acini and the preservation of basal cell layers around the involved glands. The
vast majority of IDC-P tumors result from adjacent high-grade invasive cancer
via the retrograde spreading of tumor cells into normal prostatic ducts or
acini. A subset of IDC-P tumors is rarely derived from the de novo intraductal
proliferation of premalignant cells. The presence of IDC-P in biopsy or surgical
specimens is significantly associated with aggressive pathologic features, such
as high Gleason grade, large tumor volume, and advanced tumor stage, and with
poor clinical courses, including earlier biochemical recurrence, distant
metastasis, and worse survival outcomes. These architectural and behavioral
features of IDC-P may be driven by specific molecular properties. Notably, IDC-P
possesses distinct genomic profiles, including higher rates of TMPRSS2-ERG gene
fusions and PTEN loss, increased percentage of genomic instability, and higher
prevalence of germline BRCA2 mutations. Considering that IDC-P tumors are
usually resistant to conventional therapies for prostate cancer, further studies
should be performed to develop optimal therapeutic strategies based on distinct
genomic features, such as treatment with immune checkpoint blockades or poly
(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase inhibitors for patients harboring
increased genomic instability or BRCA2 mutations, as well as genetic counseling
with genetic testing. Patient-derived xenografts and tumor organoid models can
be the promising in vitro platforms for investigating the molecular features of
IDC-P tumor.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222313125
PMCID: PMC8658449
PMID: 34884926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
