---
reference_id: "PMID:36889543"
title: Schwann Cell Remyelination in the Multiple Sclerosis Central Nervous System.
authors:
- Ghezzi L
- Bollman B
- De Feo L
- Piccio L
- Trapp BD
- Schmidt RE
- Cross AH
journal: Lab Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.labinv.2023.100128
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schwann Cell Remyelination in the Multiple Sclerosis Central Nervous System.
**Authors:** Ghezzi L, Bollman B, De Feo L, Piccio L, Trapp BD, Schmidt RE, Cross AH
**Journal:** Lab Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.labinv.2023.100128](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.labinv.2023.100128)

## Content

1. Lab Invest. 2023 Jun;103(6):100128. doi: 10.1016/j.labinv.2023.100128. Epub
2023  Mar 6.

Schwann Cell Remyelination in the Multiple Sclerosis Central Nervous System.

Ghezzi L(1), Bollman B(2), De Feo L(2), Piccio L(3), Trapp BD(4), Schmidt RE(5), 
Cross AH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri. Electronic address: lghezzi@wustl.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri.
(3)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri; Brain and Mind Centre and Charles Perkins Centre, School of Medical 
Sciences, Neuroscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Neurosciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(5)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a central nervous system (CNS) demyelinating disease. 
Failure to remyelinate successfully is common in MS lesions, often with 
consequent neuronal/axonal damage. CNS myelin is normally produced by 
oligodendroglial cells. Remyelination by Schwann cells (SchC) has been reported 
in spinal cord demyelination, in which SchCs are in close proximity to CNS 
myelin. We identified an MS cerebral lesion that was remyelinated by SchCs. This 
prompted us to query the extent of SchC remyelination in the brain and spinal 
cords of additional autopsied MS specimens. CNS tissues were obtained from the 
autopsies of 14 MS cases. Remyelinated lesions were identified by Luxol fast 
blue-periodic-acid Schiff and solochrome cyanine staining. Deparaffinized 
sections containing remyelinated lesions were stained with anti-glial fibrillary 
acid protein to identify reactive astrocytes. Glycoprotein P zero (P0) is a 
protein exclusive to peripheral but not CNS myelin. Areas of SchC remyelination 
were identified by staining with anti-P0. Myelinated regions in the index case 
cerebral lesion were confirmed to be of SchC origin using anti-P0 staining. 
Subsequently, 64 MS lesions from 14 autopsied MS cases were examined, and 23 
lesions in 6 cases showed remyelination by SchCs. Lesions from the cerebrum, 
brainstem, and spinal cord were examined in each case. When present, SchC 
remyelination was most commonly located adjacent to the venules and associated 
with a lower surrounding density of glial fibrillary acid protein+ reactive 
astrocytes than areas of only oligodendroglial cell remyelination. The 
difference was significant only for spinal cord and brainstem lesions but not 
for lesions located in the brain. In conclusion, we demonstrated SchC 
remyelination in the cerebrum, brainstem, and spinal cord of 6 autopsied MS 
cases. To our knowledge, this is the first report of supratentorial SchC 
remyelination in MS.

Copyright © 2023 United States & Canadian Academy of Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.labinv.2023.100128
PMCID: PMC10330052
PMID: 36889543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LP receives support from Alector. AHC has 
received fees for consulting or participating in advisory boards for: Biogen, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, EMD Serono (affiliate of Merck KgaA), Genentech (Roche), 
Horizon Pharmaceuticals, Janssen (J&J), Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, Octave, 
and TG Therapeutics and AHC serves on scientific advisory boards for EMD Serono, 
Novartis and Genentech. AHC was supported by The Manny & Rosalyn Rosenthal - Dr. 
John L. Trotter MS Center Chair in Neuroimmunology of The Foundation for 
Barnes-Jewish Hospital. BDT was supported by the NIH grant R35NS09730; LG was 
supported by the NMSS post-doctoral fellowship FG-1907-34474.