---
reference_id: "PMID:38575259"
title: The Pseudotumor Cerebri Syndrome.
authors:
- Friedman DI
journal: Neurol Clin
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2024.02.001
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pseudotumor Cerebri/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Intracranial Hypertension/complications
- "Headache/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Vision Disorders/therapy
- Syndrome
- "Papilledema/complications, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Pseudotumor Cerebri Syndrome.
**Authors:** Friedman DI
**Journal:** Neurol Clin (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ncl.2024.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ncl.2024.02.001)

## Content

1. Neurol Clin. 2024 May;42(2):433-471. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2024.02.001.

The Pseudotumor Cerebri Syndrome.

Friedman DI(1).

Author information:
(1)Yellow Rose Headache and Neuro-Ophthalmology. Electronic address: 
DeborahFriedman@tx.rr.com.

Pseudotumor cerebri syndrome is a syndrome of increased cerebrospinal fluid 
pressure without ventriculomegaly, mass lesion, or meningeal abnormality. It is 
either primary (idiopathic intracranial hypertension, IIH) or secondary. A 
secondary cause is unlikely when adhering to the diagnostic criteria. Permanent 
visual loss occurs if undetected or untreated, and the associated headaches may 
be debilitating. Fulminant disease may result in blindness despite aggressive 
treatment. This study addresses the diagnosis and management of IIH including 
new insights into the pathobiology of IIH, updates in therapeutics and causes of 
overdiagnosis.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ncl.2024.02.001
PMID: 38575259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr D.I. Friedman served on advisory 
boards for Abbvie, Collegium, Eli Lilly, Impel NeuroPharma, Lundbeck, Pfizer, 
and Zosano Pharmaand and as a speaker for Abbvie and Impel Neuropharma. She is a 
consultant for Pfizer. She is on the editorial board of Neurology Reviews and 
the Journal of Neuro-Ophthalmology, medical advisor to the Spinal CSF Leak 
Foundation and HealthyWomen, and on the Board of Directors of the Southern 
Headache Society.