---
reference_id: "PMID:33197783"
title: Proteomic profile differentiating between mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with and without hippocampal sclerosis.
authors:
- Furukawa A
- Kakita A
- Chiba Y
- Kitaura H
- Fujii Y
- Fukuda M
- Kameyama S
- Shimada A
journal: Epilepsy Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2020.106502
keywords:
- Adult
- Drug Resistant Epilepsy/pathology
- "Epilepsy/complications, pathology"
- "Epilepsy, Temporal Lobe/pathology"
- Female
- Hippocampus/pathology
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neurons/pathology
- Proteomics
- Sclerosis/pathology
- Status Epilepticus/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteomic profile differentiating between mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with and without hippocampal sclerosis.
**Authors:** Furukawa A, Kakita A, Chiba Y, Kitaura H, Fujii Y, Fukuda M, Kameyama S, Shimada A
**Journal:** Epilepsy Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2020.106502](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2020.106502)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Res. 2020 Dec;168:106502. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2020.106502. Epub
 2020 Nov 6.

Proteomic profile differentiating between mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with and
without hippocampal sclerosis.

Furukawa A(1), Kakita A(2), Chiba Y(3), Kitaura H(2), Fujii Y(4), Fukuda M(5),
Kameyama S(4), Shimada A(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Suzuka University of Medical Science,
Japan; Department of Pathology, Aichi Developmental Disability Center, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Aichi Developmental Disability Center, Japan;
Department of Pathology, and Host Defense, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa
University, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University,
Japan.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery and Epilepsy Center, Nishi-Niigata Chuo National
Hospital, Japan.
(6)Department of Pathology, Aichi Developmental Disability Center, Japan;
Pathology Research Team, Faculty of Health Sciences, Kyorin University, Japan.
Electronic address: ats7@ks.kyorin-u.ac.jp.

Hippocampal sclerosis (HS) is the most common neuropathological condition in
adults with drug-resistant epilepsy and represents a critical feature in mesial
temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) syndrome. Although epileptogenic brain tissue is
associated with glutamate excitotoxicity leading to oxidative stress, the
proteins that are targets of oxidative damage remain to be determined. In the
present study we designed comprehensive analyses of changes in protein
expression level and protein oxidation status in the hippocampus or neocortex to
highlight proteins associated with excitotoxicity by comparing MTLE patients
with relatively mild excitotoxicity (MTLE patients without HS, MTLE-non-HS) and
those with severe excitotoxicity (MTLE patients with HS, MTLE-HS). We performed
2-dimensional fluorescence difference gel electrophoresis, 2D-oxyblot analysis,
and mass spectrometric amino acid sequencing. We identified 16 proteins at 18
spots in which the protein expression levels differed between sclerotic and
non-sclerotic hippocampi. In the sclerotic hippocampus, the expression levels of
several synaptic proteins were decreased, and those of some glia-associated
proteins increased. We confirmed histologically that all MTLE-HS cases examined
exhibited severe neuronal cell loss and remarkable astrocytic gliosis in the
hippocampi. In all MTLE-non-HS cases examined, neurons were spared and gliosis
was unremarkable. Therefore, we consider that decreased synaptic proteins are a
manifestation of loss of neuronal cell bodies and dendrites, whereas increased
glia-associated proteins are a manifestation of proliferation and hypertrophy of
astrocytes. These are considered to be the result of hippocampal sclerosis. In
contrast, the expression level of d-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH), an
l-serine synthetic enzyme expressed exclusively by astrocytes, was decreased,
and that of stathmin 1, a neurite extension-related protein expressed by
neurons, was increased in the sclerotic hippocampus. These findings cannot be
explained solely as the result of hippocampal sclerosis. Rather, these changes
can be involved in the continuation of seizure disorders in MTLE-HS. In
addition, the protein carbonylation detection, an indicator of protein oxidation
caused by excitotoxicity of multiple seizures and/or status epilepticus,
revealed that the carbonyl level of collapsin response mediator protein 2
(CRMP2) increased significantly in the sclerotic hippocampus. In conclusion,
protein identification following profiling of protein expression levels and
detection of oxidative proteins indicated potential pathognomonic protein
changes. The decreased expression of PHGDH, increased expression of stathmin 1,
and carbonylation of CRMP2 differentiate between MTLE with and without HS.
Therefore, further investigations of PHGDH, stathmin 1 and CRMP2 are promising
to study more detailed effects of excitotoxicity on epileptogenic hippocampal
tissue.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2020.106502
PMID: 33197783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
