---
reference_id: "PMID:39889898"
title: Diagnosis and Treatment of Hemochromatosis.
authors:
- Adams PC
- Ryan JD
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2024.10.041
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Treatment of Hemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Adams PC, Ryan JD
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cgh.2024.10.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2024.10.041)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2025 Aug;23(9):1477-1485. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2024.10.041. Epub 2025 Jan 30.

Diagnosis and Treatment of Hemochromatosis.

Adams PC(1), Ryan JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada. 
Electronic address: padams@uwo.ca.
(2)Hepatology Unit, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

Hemochromatosis is not a new disease, and genetic variants for hemochromatosis 
have been identified in human fossils that are over 4000 years old in North 
Western Europe.1 These variants were postulated to promote iron absorption as a 
survival benefit. In contrast, excess iron absorption can lead to serious 
complications, including arthritis, liver fibrosis, cirrhosis, primary liver 
cancer, and diabetes. In this review, the emphasis is on recent developments in 
the diagnosis and treatment of hemochromatosis, focusing on those homozygous for 
the C282Y variant in the HFE gene. In this condition, there is a clear need for 
earlier diagnosis, leading to earlier treatment, to prevent morbidity and 
mortality from iron overload.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2024.10.041
PMID: 39889898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]