---
reference_id: "PMID:23054245"
title: Study of autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta in Arabia reveals a novel locus defined by TMEM38B mutation.
authors:
- Shaheen R
- Alazami AM
- Alshammari MJ
- Faqeih E
- Alhashmi N
- Mousa N
- Alsinani A
- Ansari S
- Alzahrani F
- Al-Owain M
- Alzayed ZS
- Alkuraya FS
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101142
keywords:
- Arabia
- Base Sequence
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- Consanguinity
- Exons
- Female
- Gene Order
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Ion Channels/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Study of autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta in Arabia reveals a novel locus defined by TMEM38B mutation.
**Authors:** Shaheen R, Alazami AM, Alshammari MJ, Faqeih E, Alhashmi N, Mousa N, Alsinani A, Ansari S, Alzahrani F, Al-Owain M, Alzayed ZS, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101142](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101142)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2012 Oct;49(10):630-5. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101142.

Study of autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta in Arabia reveals a novel 
locus defined by TMEM38B mutation.

Shaheen R(1), Alazami AM, Alshammari MJ, Faqeih E, Alhashmi N, Mousa N, Alsinani 
A, Ansari S, Alzahrani F, Al-Owain M, Alzayed ZS, Alkuraya FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is an hereditary bone disease in which 
increased bone fragility leads to frequent fractures and other complications, 
usually in an autosomal dominant fashion. An expanding list of genes that encode 
proteins related to collagen metabolism are now recognised as important causes 
of autosomal recessive (AR) OI. Our aim was to study the contribution of known 
genes to AR OI in order to identify novel loci in mutation-negative cases.
METHODS: We enrolled multiplex consanguineous families and simplex cases (also 
consanguineous) in which mutations in COL1A1 and COL1A2 had been excluded. We 
used autozygome guided mutation analysis of AR OI (AR OI) genes followed by 
exome sequencing when such analysis failed to identify the causative mutation.
RESULTS: Two simplex and 11 multiplex families were enrolled, encompassing 27 
cases. In three multiplex families, autozygosity and linkage analysis revealed a 
novel recessive OI locus on chromosome 9q31.1-31.3, and a novel truncating 
deletion of exon 4 of TMEM38B was identified within that interval. In addition, 
gonadal or gonadal/somatic mosaic mutations in COL1A1 or COL1A2 and homozygous 
mutations in recently described AR OI genes were identified in all remaining 
families.
CONCLUSIONS: TMEM38B is a novel candidate gene for AR OI. Future studies are 
needed to explore fully the contribution of this gene to AR OI in other 
populations.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101142
PMID: 23054245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]