---
reference_id: "PMID:37164630"
title: Drug-induced hyperammonaemia.
authors:
- Shakerdi L
- Ryan A
journal: J Clin Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/jcp-2022-208644
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug-induced hyperammonaemia.
**Authors:** Shakerdi L, Ryan A
**Journal:** J Clin Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jcp-2022-208644](https://doi.org/10.1136/jcp-2022-208644)

## Content

1. J Clin Pathol. 2023 Aug;76(8):501-509. doi: 10.1136/jcp-2022-208644. Epub 2023
 May 10.

Drug-induced hyperammonaemia.

Shakerdi L(1), Ryan A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Mater Misericordiae 
University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Chemical Pathology, Cork University Hospital Biochemistry Laboratory, Cork, 
Ireland aidan.ryan1@hse.ie.
(3)Pathology, University College Cork College of Medicine and Health, Cork, 
Ireland.

Hyperammonaemia (HA) as a consequence of numerous primary or secondary causes, 
gives rise to clinical manifestations due to its toxic effects on the brain. The 
neurological consequences broadly reflect the ammonia level, duration and age, 
with paediatric patients being more susceptible. Drug-induced HA may arise due 
to either decreased ammonia elimination or increased production. This is 
associated most frequently with use of valproate and presents a dilemma between 
ongoing therapeutic need, toxicity and the possibility of an alternative cause. 
As there is no specific test for drug-induced HA, prompt discussion with a 
metabolic physician is recommended, as the neurotoxic effects are 
time-dependent. Specific guidelines for managing drug-induced HA have yet to be 
published and hence the treatment approach outlined in this review reflects that 
outlined in relevant urea cycle disorder guidelines.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jcp-2022-208644
PMID: 37164630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.