---
reference_id: "PMID:40572309"
title: Genome Analysis of the Multidrug-Resistant Campylobacter coli BCT3 of the Sequence Type (ST) 872 Isolated from a Pediatric Diarrhea Case.
authors:
- Papadimitriou K
- Ioannidis A
- Slavko A
- Chronopoulou G
- Marmaras N
- Pangalis A
- Olntasi E
- Vassilaki N
- Koufogeorgou EI
- Kolida I
- Theodoridis D
- Chatzipanagiotou S
journal: Microorganisms
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/microorganisms13061420
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome Analysis of the Multidrug-Resistant Campylobacter coli BCT3 of the Sequence Type (ST) 872 Isolated from a Pediatric Diarrhea Case.
**Authors:** Papadimitriou K, Ioannidis A, Slavko A, Chronopoulou G, Marmaras N, Pangalis A, Olntasi E, Vassilaki N, Koufogeorgou EI, Kolida I, Theodoridis D, Chatzipanagiotou S
**Journal:** Microorganisms (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/microorganisms13061420](https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms13061420)

## Content

1. Microorganisms. 2025 Jun 18;13(6):1420. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms13061420.

Genome Analysis of the Multidrug-Resistant Campylobacter coli BCT3 of the 
Sequence Type (ST) 872 Isolated from a Pediatric Diarrhea Case.

Papadimitriou K(1), Ioannidis A(2), Slavko A(3), Chronopoulou G(4), Marmaras 
N(4), Pangalis A(4), Olntasi E(1), Vassilaki N(5), Koufogeorgou EI(5), Kolida 
I(5), Theodoridis D(6), Chatzipanagiotou S(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Food Quality Control and Hygiene, Department of Food Science 
and Human Nutrition, Agricultural University of Athens, Iera Odos 75, 11855 
Athens, Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology, School of Medicine, Attikon University 
Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Rimini 1, 12462 
Chaidari, Greece.
(3)Department of Food Science and Technology, School of Agriculture and Food, 
University of the Peloponnese, 24100 Kalamata, Greece.
(4)Central Laboratory, Athens Medical Center, Distomou 5-7, 15125 Marousi, 
Greece.
(5)Molecular Virology Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Hellenic Pasteur 
Institute, Vasilissis Sofias 127, 11521 Athens, Greece.
(6)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Athens Medical School, Aeginition 
Hospital, 11528 Athens, Greece.

Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli are the two main campylobacter 
species that cause foodborne campylobacteriosis. Recent studies have reported 
that Campylobacter spp. are prone to developing resistance to antibiotics 
commonly used for their treatment, with many C. coli strains identified as 
multidrug-resistant. This study presents the results of the whole-genome 
sequencing analysis of the multidrug-resistant C. coli strain BCT3 isolated in 
Greece from a stool specimen of a pediatric patient presenting with diarrhea. 
The strain was isolated using selective culture media and, based on 
antimicrobial susceptibility tests, was found to be resistant to ciprofloxacin, 
tetracycline, erythromycin, azithromycin, clarithromycin, and doxycycline. To 
further characterize it, we performed whole-genome sequencing, which identified 
strain BCT3 as C. coli. Moreover, multilocus sequence typing assigned the BCT3 
to the sequence type (ST) 872, belonging to clonal complex ST-828. The presence 
of multiple virulence genes revealed its pathogenic potential. The detection of 
antimicrobial resistance genes and mutated alleles was indicative of its 
resistance to fluoroquinolones, macrolides, and tetracyclines, supporting the 
observed phenotype. To our knowledge, this is the first reported clinical case 
of such a multidrug-resistant C. coli strain in Greece.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms13061420
PMCID: PMC12196353
PMID: 40572309

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.