---
reference_id: "PMID:34384631"
title: Migraine with aura.
authors:
- Lucas C
journal: Rev Neurol (Paris)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2021.07.010
keywords:
- Epilepsy
- Female
- Headache
- Humans
- "Ischemic Attack, Transient"
- Migraine Disorders
- "Migraine with Aura/diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Migraine with aura.
**Authors:** Lucas C
**Journal:** Rev Neurol (Paris) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurol.2021.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2021.07.010)

## Content

1. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2021 Sep;177(7):779-784. doi:
10.1016/j.neurol.2021.07.010.  Epub 2021 Aug 9.

Migraine with aura.

Lucas C(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre d'evaluation et de traitement de la douleur, service de 
neurochirurgie, hôpital Salengro, CHU de Lille, 59037 Lille Cedex, France. 
Electronic address: christian.lucas@chru-lille.fr.

Around 15% to one-third of migraineurs experience aura. Aura is a fully 
reversible focal neurological phenomenon involving visual, sensory, speech, 
and/or motor symptoms that develops gradually and usually precedes the headache 
phase. The pivotal role of cortical spreading depression (CSD) as a mechanism 
underlying aura has been widely supported by a large body of studies. The 
diagnosis is based on the International Headache Classification Disorders III 
edition criteria. Aura is characterized by gradual development, duration of each 
symptom no longer than one hour, a mix of positive and negative features, and 
complete reversibility. Visual aura is the most common type of aura, occurring 
in over 90% of patients. When aura symptoms are multiple, they usually follow 
one another in succession, beginning with visual, then sensory, then aphasic; 
but the reverse and other orders have been noted. The accepted duration for most 
aura symptoms is one hour, but motor symptoms, which are rare, are often longer 
lasting. When a patient experiences for the first time a possible aura phase 
it's sometimes difficult to know if there was gradual or brutal onset of the 
symptoms. If the patient has no visual aura symptoms or simultaneous 
neurological symptoms, or presents neurological symptoms corresponding to a 
cerebral vascular territory, emergency exploration of a possible transient 
ischemic attack is necessary. Long duration (greater than one hour) of what may 
or may not be an aura phase, late onset of aura, or a dramatic increase in aura 
attacks should also be explored. The relative risk of ischemic stroke is 
significantly increased in migraine with aura. Combined hormonal contraception 
with estrogens significantly increases the risk of stroke in women with migraine 
with aura. It is recommended to start non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) or aspirin as soon as possible during the aura phase, not to treat the 
aura, but to avoid or to diminish the headache phase. In case of failure of 
NSAIDs or aspirin it is recommended to use a triptan when the headache begins. 
The prophylactic treatments for migraine with aura are those used in migraine 
without aura based on very few randomized clinical trials specifically dedicated 
to migraine with aura.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2021.07.010
PMID: 34384631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]