---
reference_id: "PMID:25695122"
authors:
- Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
- Board on the Health of Select Populations
- Institute of Medicine
year: '2015'
doi: 10.17226/19012
content_type: abstract_only
---

1. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an 
Illness.

Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome; Board on the Health of Select Populations; Institute of 
Medicine.

Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2015 Feb 10.
The National Academies Collection: Reports funded by National Institutes of 
Health.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) and chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) are serious, 
debilitating conditions that affect millions of people in the United States and 
around the world. ME/CFS can cause significant impairment and disability. 
Despite substantial efforts by researchers to better understand ME/CFS, there is 
no known cause or effective treatment. Diagnosing the disease remains a 
challenge, and patients often struggle with their illness for years before an 
identification is made. Some health care providers have been skeptical about the 
serious physiological — rather than psychological — nature of the illness. Once 
diagnosed, patients often complain of receiving hostility from their health care 
provider as well as being subjected to treatment strategies that exacerbate 
their symptoms. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome 
proposes new diagnostic clinical criteria for ME/CFS and a new term for the 
illness — systemic exertion intolerance disease(SEID). According to this report, 
the term myalgic encephalomyelitis does not accurately describe this illness, 
and the term chronic fatigue syndrome can result in trivialization and 
stigmatization for patients afflicted with this illness. Beyond Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome stresses that SEID is a medical — not 
a psychiatric or psychological — illness. This report lists the major symptoms 
of SEID and recommends a diagnostic process.One of the report's most important 
conclusions is that a thorough history, physical examination, and targeted 
work-up are necessary and often sufficient for diagnosis. The new criteria will 
allow a large percentage of undiagnosed patients to receive an accurate 
diagnosis and appropriate care. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome will be a valuable resource to promote the prompt diagnosis of patients 
with this complex, multisystem, and often devastating disorder; enhance public 
understanding; and provide a firm foundation for future improvements in 
diagnosis and treatment.

Copyright 2015 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.17226/19012
PMID: 25695122