---
reference_id: "PMID:32013982"
title: Evaluating prevalence of depression, anxiety and hopelessness in patients with Vitiligo on an Iranian population.
authors:
- Hamidizadeh N
- Ranjbar S
- Ghanizadeh A
- Parvizi MM
- Jafari P
- Handjani F
journal: Health Qual Life Outcomes
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12955-020-1278-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating prevalence of depression, anxiety and hopelessness in patients with Vitiligo on an Iranian population.
**Authors:** Hamidizadeh N, Ranjbar S, Ghanizadeh A, Parvizi MM, Jafari P, Handjani F
**Journal:** Health Qual Life Outcomes (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12955-020-1278-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12955-020-1278-7)

## Content

1. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2020 Feb 3;18(1):20. doi:
10.1186/s12955-020-1278-7.

Evaluating prevalence of depression, anxiety and hopelessness in patients with 
Vitiligo on an Iranian population.

Hamidizadeh N(1), Ranjbar S(2), Ghanizadeh A(3)(4), Parvizi MM(2), Jafari P(5), 
Handjani F(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Dermatology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
P.O. Box: 7134844119, Zand Avenue, Shiraz, Iran. n.hamidizadeh.mdrc@gmail.com.
(2)Molecular Dermatology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
P.O. Box: 7134844119, Zand Avenue, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Research Center for Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Department of 
Psychiatry, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, UCLA-Kern Psychiatry Residency Program, Kern 
Medical, Kern Behavioral Health and Recovery Services, Bakersfield, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran.

INTRODUCTION: Vitiligo is caused by partial or complete destruction of 
melanocytes in the affected skin area and influences the patient's quality of 
life. Besides physical involvement, vitiligo patients experience a high level of 
stress. Depression and Anxiety are common psychiatric disorders in vitiligo 
patients.
AIM: This study, as the first study, evaluates hopelessness, anxiety, depression 
and general health of vitiligo patients in comparison with normal controls in an 
Iranian population.
METHOD: Hundred patients with vitiligo and hundred healthy controls were 
examined. General health, depression, hopelessness and anxiety were evaluated 
based on general health questionnaire. Anxiety, depression and hopelessness 
levels were analyzed using Chi-Square, and the mean value of general health was 
evaluated through t-test.
RESULTS: The results showed that anxiety and hopelessness levels were 
significantly higher in vitiligo patients than those who are in healthy 
controls. This significant difference refers to high levels of anxiety and 
hopelessness among women with vitiligo. It was also found that the single 
patients were more anxious, hopeless and depressive, while the married patients 
were only more anxious and hopeless than those who are in the control group, 
respectively. General health of patients was significantly worse than in healthy 
controls. The low level of general health in patients was related to poorer 
level of general health among women with vitiligo.
CONCLUSION: It seems that women with vitiligo are more mentally stressed than 
men with vitiligo. Both singles and married vitiligo patients suffer from 
anxiety and hopelessness.

DOI: 10.1186/s12955-020-1278-7
PMCID: PMC6998062
PMID: 32013982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.