---
reference_id: "PMID:28163052"
title: Airway and serum biochemical correlates of refractory neutrophilic asthma.
authors:
- Alam R
- Good J
- Rollins D
- Verma M
- Chu H
- Pham TH
- Martin RJ
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.12.963
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Airway and serum biochemical correlates of refractory neutrophilic asthma.
**Authors:** Alam R, Good J, Rollins D, Verma M, Chu H, Pham TH, Martin RJ
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2016.12.963](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.12.963)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017 Oct;140(4):1004-1014.e13. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2016.12.963. Epub 2017 Feb 3.

Airway and serum biochemical correlates of refractory neutrophilic asthma.

Alam R(1), Good J(2), Rollins D(2), Verma M(2), Chu H(2), Pham TH(3), Martin 
RJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo. Electronic 
address: alamr@njhealth.org.
(2)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo.
(3)MedImmune, Gaithersburg, Md.

BACKGROUND: Despite progress in the diagnosis and management of asthma, many 
patients have poorly controlled or refractory asthma (RA). The mechanism of this 
RA is not well understood.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to explore the relationship between neutrophils and other 
biomarkers of RA.
METHOD: Sixty patients with RA, 30 patients with nonrefractory asthma (NRA), and 
20 healthy subjects were enrolled. We performed a comprehensive characterization 
of these study subjects, which included laboratory and pulmonary function 
studies, chest computed tomography, and bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage 
(BAL). We analyzed BAL fluid and serum for a total of 244 biomolecules using a 
multiplex assay and correlated them with clinical and other laboratory 
parameters.
RESULTS: RA was significantly different from NRA with regard to pulmonary 
function indices, bronchial basement membrane thickness, and BAL fluid 
neutrophil and lymphocyte counts but not eosinophil counts. BAL fluid neutrophil 
counts negatively and positively correlated with forced vital capacity and age, 
respectively. Of the 244 biomolecules studied, 52 and 14 biomolecules from BAL 
fluid and serum, respectively, were significantly different among the study 
groups. Thirteen of these 52 molecules correlated with BAL fluid neutrophil 
counts. BAL fluid from 40% of patients with RA was positive for a pathogenic 
microbe. Infection-negative neutrophilic RA was associated with an increase in 
levels of select biomarkers of inflammation in the serum, suggesting the 
presence of systemic inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: RA was associated with increased numbers of neutrophils and 
proneutrophilic biomolecules in the airways. Subclinical infection was present 
in 40% of patients with RA, which likely contributed to neutrophilic 
inflammation. A subgroup of patients with noninfected neutrophilic RA was 
associated with systemic inflammation.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.12.963
PMCID: PMC5540819
PMID: 28163052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]