---
reference_id: "PMID:24302887"
title: "Wdpcp, a PCP protein required for ciliogenesis, regulates directional cell migration and cell polarity by direct modulation of the actin cytoskeleton."
authors:
- Cui C
- Chatterjee B
- Lozito TP
- Zhang Z
- Francis RJ
- Yagi H
- Swanhart LM
- Sanker S
- Francis D
- Yu Q
- San Agustin JT
- Puligilla C
- Chatterjee T
- Tansey T
- Liu X
- Kelley MW
- Spiliotis ET
- Kwiatkowski AV
- Tuan R
- Pazour GJ
- Hukriede NA
- Lo CW
journal: PLoS Biol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001720
keywords:
- Actin Cytoskeleton/metabolism
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cell Movement
- Cell Polarity
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cilia/physiology
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/physiology
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Focal Adhesions/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C3H"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Transport
- Septins/metabolism
- Time-Lapse Imaging
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- Zebrafish
- Membrane Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wdpcp, a PCP protein required for ciliogenesis, regulates directional cell migration and cell polarity by direct modulation of the actin cytoskeleton.
**Authors:** Cui C, Chatterjee B, Lozito TP, Zhang Z, Francis RJ, Yagi H, Swanhart LM, Sanker S, Francis D, Yu Q, San Agustin JT, Puligilla C, Chatterjee T, Tansey T, Liu X, Kelley MW, Spiliotis ET, Kwiatkowski AV, Tuan R, Pazour GJ, Hukriede NA, Lo CW
**Journal:** PLoS Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pbio.1001720](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001720)

## Content

1. PLoS Biol. 2013 Nov;11(11):e1001720. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001720. Epub 
2013 Nov 26.

Wdpcp, a PCP protein required for ciliogenesis, regulates directional cell 
migration and cell polarity by direct modulation of the actin cytoskeleton.

Cui C(1), Chatterjee B, Lozito TP, Zhang Z, Francis RJ, Yagi H, Swanhart LM, 
Sanker S, Francis D, Yu Q, San Agustin JT, Puligilla C, Chatterjee T, Tansey T, 
Liu X, Kelley MW, Spiliotis ET, Kwiatkowski AV, Tuan R, Pazour GJ, Hukriede NA, 
Lo CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America ; Laboratory of 
Developmental Biology, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Planar cell polarity (PCP) regulates cell alignment required for collective cell 
movement during embryonic development. This requires PCP/PCP effector proteins, 
some of which also play essential roles in ciliogenesis, highlighting the 
long-standing question of the role of the cilium in PCP. Wdpcp, a PCP effector, 
was recently shown to regulate both ciliogenesis and collective cell movement, 
but the underlying mechanism is unknown. Here we show Wdpcp can regulate PCP by 
direct modulation of the actin cytoskeleton. These studies were made possible by 
recovery of a Wdpcp mutant mouse model. Wdpcp-deficient mice exhibit phenotypes 
reminiscent of Bardet-Biedl/Meckel-Gruber ciliopathy syndromes, including 
cardiac outflow tract and cochlea defects associated with PCP perturbation. We 
observed Wdpcp is localized to the transition zone, and in Wdpcp-deficient 
cells, Sept2, Nphp1, and Mks1 were lost from the transition zone, indicating 
Wdpcp is required for recruitment of proteins essential for ciliogenesis. Wdpcp 
is also found in the cytoplasm, where it is localized in the actin cytoskeleton 
and in focal adhesions. Wdpcp interacts with Sept2 and is colocalized with Sept2 
in actin filaments, but in Wdpcp-deficient cells, Sept2 was lost from the actin 
cytoskeleton, suggesting Wdpcp is required for Sept2 recruitment to actin 
filaments. Significantly, organization of the actin filaments and focal contacts 
were markedly changed in Wdpcp-deficient cells. This was associated with 
decreased membrane ruffling, failure to establish cell polarity, and loss of 
directional cell migration. These results suggest the PCP defects in Wdpcp 
mutants are not caused by loss of cilia, but by direct disruption of the actin 
cytoskeleton. Consistent with this, Wdpcp mutant cochlea has normal kinocilia 
and yet exhibits PCP defects. Together, these findings provide the first 
evidence, to our knowledge, that a PCP component required for ciliogenesis can 
directly modulate the actin cytoskeleton to regulate cell polarity and 
directional cell migration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001720
PMCID: PMC3841097
PMID: 24302887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.