---
reference_id: "PMID:9513217"
title: "Kawasaki disease: a dangerous acute childhood illness."
authors:
- Rubin B
- Cotton DM
journal: Nurse Pract
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease: a dangerous acute childhood illness.
**Authors:** Rubin B, Cotton DM
**Journal:** Nurse Pract (1998)

## Content

1. Nurse Pract. 1998 Feb;23(2):34, 37-8, 44-8.

Kawasaki disease: a dangerous acute childhood illness.

Rubin B(1), Cotton DM.

Author information:
(1)Husson College, Bangor, Maine, USA.

Kawasaki disease is an acute febrile illness most commonly seen in children 
under the age of 5. It is characterized by fever, rash, cervical 
lymphadenopathy, bilateral nonexudative conjunctivitis, oropharyngeal mucosal 
changes, and erythema of the hands and feet followed by desquamation. However, a 
child with Kawasaki disease may not exhibit all of these symptoms. The disease 
resembles many other childhood illnesses, such as measles and scarlet fever, and 
misdiagnosis is common. Left untreated, Kawasaki disease has potential 
life-threatening consequences; 20% to 25% of children develop coronary artery 
aneurysms as a result. Although no specific laboratory tests exist that identify 
Kawasaki disease definitively, there are clinical and laboratory findings that 
guide diagnosis and treatment. Treatment includes the hospitalization of the 
child and subsequent administration of high doses of aspirin and intravenous 
immunoglobulin. With recovery, aspirin doses are reduced and the child may be 
monitored at home with outpatient follow-up. It is imperative that the health 
care provider be aware of the symptoms of Kawasaki disease in order to make the 
diagnosis and treat the child before cardiac sequelae ensue.

PMID: 9513217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]