---
reference_id: "PMID:40054904"
title: Managing Complex Coronary Revascularization of Acute Coronary Syndrome During Cogan Syndrome.
authors:
- Giovacchini J
- Cappelli F
- Tomberli B
- Caniato F
- Agostini C
- Nicolaci L
- Giurlani L
- Bernardo P
- Di Mario C
journal: JACC Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103080
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Managing Complex Coronary Revascularization of Acute Coronary Syndrome During Cogan Syndrome.
**Authors:** Giovacchini J, Cappelli F, Tomberli B, Caniato F, Agostini C, Nicolaci L, Giurlani L, Bernardo P, Di Mario C
**Journal:** JACC Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103080](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103080)

## Content

1. JACC Case Rep. 2025 Mar 5;30(5):103080. doi: 10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103080.

Managing Complex Coronary Revascularization of Acute Coronary Syndrome During 
Cogan Syndrome.

Giovacchini J(1), Cappelli F(2), Tomberli B(3), Caniato F(4), Agostini C(4), 
Nicolaci L(4), Giurlani L(4), Bernardo P(4), Di Mario C(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy. Electronic address: jacopo.giovacchini95@gmail.com.
(2)Cardiomyopathy Unit, Cardiothoracovascular Department, Careggi University 
Hospital, Florence, Italy; Cardiac Intensive Care Unit, Careggi University 
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Division of General Cardiology, Cardiothoracovascular Department, Careggi 
University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(4)Cardiac Intensive Care Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy; Division of Structural Interventional Cardiology, 
Cardiothoracovascular Department, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.

Cogan syndrome, a rare multisystemic autoimmune vasculitis, can result in 
coronaritis and precipitate acute coronary syndrome. This paper reports a case 
of a young woman affected by Cogan syndrome with acute coronary syndrome due to 
a left main lesion and the complexities in selecting the revascularization 
strategy for concomitant active vasculitis.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103080
PMCID: PMC11911851
PMID: 40054904

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures The 
authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents 
of this paper to disclose.