---
reference_id: "PMID:31017643"
title: Association of PDGFRB Mutations With Pediatric Myofibroma and Myofibromatosis.
authors:
- Dachy G
- de Krijger RR
- Fraitag S
- Théate I
- Brichard B
- Hoffman SB
- Libbrecht L
- Arts FA
- Brouillard P
- Vikkula M
- Limaye N
- Demoulin JB
journal: JAMA Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2019.0114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of PDGFRB Mutations With Pediatric Myofibroma and Myofibromatosis.
**Authors:** Dachy G, de Krijger RR, Fraitag S, Théate I, Brichard B, Hoffman SB, Libbrecht L, Arts FA, Brouillard P, Vikkula M, Limaye N, Demoulin JB
**Journal:** JAMA Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamadermatol.2019.0114](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2019.0114)

## Content

1. JAMA Dermatol. 2019 Aug 1;155(8):946-950. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2019.0114.

Association of PDGFRB Mutations With Pediatric Myofibroma and Myofibromatosis.

Dachy G(1), de Krijger RR(2), Fraitag S(3), Théate I(4), Brichard B(5), Hoffman 
SB(6), Libbrecht L(7), Arts FA(1), Brouillard P(8), Vikkula M(8)(9), Limaye 
N(10), Demoulin JB(1).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Medicine Unit, de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de 
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Department of Pathology, Princess Maxima Centre for Pediatric Oncology and 
University Medical Centre, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Pathology, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies, 
Belgium.
(5)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Cliniques Universitaires 
Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore.
(7)Department of Pathology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université 
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(8)Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de 
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(9)Walloon Excellence in Lifesciences and Biotechnology, Wallonia, Belgium.
(10)Genetics of Autoimmune Disease and Cancer, de Duve Institute, Université 
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

IMPORTANCE: Myofibroma is the most frequent fibrous tumor in children. 
Multicentric myofibroma (referred to as infantile myofibromatosis) is a 
life-threatening disease.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the frequency, spectrum, and clinical implications of 
mutations in the PDGFRB receptor tyrosine kinase found in sporadic myofibroma 
and myofibromatosis.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this retrospective study of 69 patients 
with sporadic myofibroma or myofibromatosis, 85 tumor samples were obtained and 
analyzed by targeted deep sequencing of PDGFRB. Mutations were confirmed by an 
alternative method of sequencing and were experimentally characterized to 
confirm gain of function and sensitivity to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
imatinib.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Frequency of gain-of-function PDGFRB mutations in 
sporadic myofibroma and myofibromatosis. Sensitivity to imatinib, as assessed 
experimentally.
RESULTS: Of the 69 patients with tumor samples (mean [SD] age, 7.8 [12.7] 
years), 60 were children (87%; 29 girls [48%]) and 9 were adults (13%; 4 women 
[44%]). Gain-of-function PDGFRB mutations were found in samples from 25 
children, with no mutation found in samples from adults. Mutations were 
particularly associated with severe multicentric disease (13 of 19 
myofibromatosis cases [68%]). Although patients had no familial history, 3 of 25 
mutations (12%) were likely to be germline, suggesting de novo heritable 
alterations. All of the PDGFRB mutations were associated with ligand-independent 
receptor activation, and all but one were sensitive to imatinib at clinically 
relevant concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Gain-of-function mutations of PDGFRB in myofibromas 
may affect only children and be more frequent in the multicentric form of 
disease, albeit present in solitary pediatric myofibromas. These alterations may 
be sensitive to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The PDGFRB sequencing appears to 
have a high value for diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy of soft-tissue tumors in 
children.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2019.0114
PMCID: PMC6487901
PMID: 31017643

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Dachy 
reported receiving grants and being a recipient of Aspirant fellowship from 
Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique during the conduct of the study. Dr Arts 
reported receiving grants and being supported by a Télévie fellowship from Fonds 
de la Recherche Scientifique during conduct of the study and serving as 
consultant for UCB outside the submitted work. Dr Limaye reported being a 
research associate at Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique. Dr Demoulin reported 
receiving grants from the King Baudouin Foundation, Fonds de la Recherche 
Scientifique, and Académie Royale de Médecine de Belgique during the conduct of 
the study. No other disclosures were reported.