---
reference_id: "PMID:7726385"
title: "Comparative frequency and severity of hypoglycemia in selected organic acidemias, branched chain amino acidemia, and disorders of fructose metabolism."
authors:
- Worthen HG
- al Ashwal A
- Ozand PT
- Garawi S
- Rahbeeni Z
- al Odaib A
- Subramanyam SB
- Rashed M
journal: Brain Dev
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1016/0387-7604(94)90100-7
keywords:
- Acidosis/urine
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/epidemiology, physiopathology"
- "Amino Acids, Branched-Chain/metabolism"
- Blood Glucose/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Fructose Metabolism, Inborn Errors/epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
- Humans
- "Hypoglycemia/epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Saudi Arabia/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative frequency and severity of hypoglycemia in selected organic acidemias, branched chain amino acidemia, and disorders of fructose metabolism.
**Authors:** Worthen HG, al Ashwal A, Ozand PT, Garawi S, Rahbeeni Z, al Odaib A, Subramanyam SB, Rashed M
**Journal:** Brain Dev (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0387-7604(94)90100-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/0387-7604(94)90100-7)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 1994 Nov;16 Suppl:81-5. doi: 10.1016/0387-7604(94)90100-7.

Comparative frequency and severity of hypoglycemia in selected organic
acidemias, branched chain amino acidemia, and disorders of fructose metabolism.

Worthen HG(1), al Ashwal A, Ozand PT, Garawi S, Rahbeeni Z, al Odaib A,
Subramanyam SB, Rashed M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

The Institution's experience with hypoglycemia in different types of organic
acidemias, branched chain amino acidemia (MSUD), and disorders of fructose
metabolism was reviewed retrospectively. The charts of 144 patients who were
followed for 1-5 years were studied for the severity and frequency of
hypoglycemia. The patients were mainly Saudi; however, 10-25% were from
neighboring countries. Therefore, the observations pertain to the genetic groups
in the Arabian peninsula. Organic acidemias which primarily manifest with
neurologic signs, such as 4-hydroxybutyric aciduria, infantile onset
3-methylglutaconic aciduria, and glutaric aciduria type 1 never showed
hypoglycemia. Patients with beta-ketothiolase deficiency, biotinidase
deficiency, or intermittent or intermediate MSUD, also did not have hypoglycemia
during metabolic crisis. Hypoglycemia was rare and mild among neonates with
classic MSUD, ethylmalonic aciduria, and isovaleric acidemia. Less than 50% of
the patients with MSUD older than 8 months, pyruvate carboxylase deficiency,
methylmalonic acidemia, or propionic acidemia had hypoglycemia during metabolic
crisis. On the other hand, patients with 3-hydroxy-3-methyl glutaryl-CoA lyase
deficiency, holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency, medium or long-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency, neonatal onset 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, glutaric
aciduria type 2, and disorders of fructose metabolism invariably had
moderate-to-severe hypoglycemia associated with metabolic crisis. The purpose of
this report is to provide the pediatrician, particularly in the Middle East,
with a diagnostic guideline to the identification and management of different
types of organic acidemias, based on co-existing hypoglycemia.

DOI: 10.1016/0387-7604(94)90100-7
PMID: 7726385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
