---
reference_id: "PMID:8749891"
title: Vocational rehabilitation in schizophrenia.
authors:
- Lehman AF
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/21.4.645
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vocational rehabilitation in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Lehman AF
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/21.4.645](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/21.4.645)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 1995;21(4):645-56. doi: 10.1093/schbul/21.4.645.

Vocational rehabilitation in schizophrenia.

Lehman AF(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Psychiatry, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore 
21201, USA.

Schizophrenia exacts a heavy toll on a person's capacity to work, and a variety 
of vocational rehabilitation interventions have been developed over the past few 
decades to enhance the vocational capacities of persons with this disorder. The 
research literature on outcomes of vocational rehabilitation during the era of 
deinstitutionalization for persons with schizophrenia is reviewed. Most 
vocational rehabilitation programs have a positive influence on work-related 
activities, but most have failed to show substantial and enduring impacts on 
independent, competitive employment. Recent advances in supported employment 
suggest that vocational rehabilitation offers greater promise than do 
transitional and sheltered employment approaches. Vocational rehabilitation 
intervention may also exert positive influences on such clinical outcomes as 
medication compliance, symptom reduction, and relapse.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/21.4.645
PMID: 8749891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]