---
reference_id: "PMID:28637195"
title: Social Disconnection in Schizophrenia and the General Community.
authors:
- Green MF
- Horan WP
- Lee J
- McCleery A
- Reddy LF
- Wynn JK
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbx082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Social Disconnection in Schizophrenia and the General Community.
**Authors:** Green MF, Horan WP, Lee J, McCleery A, Reddy LF, Wynn JK
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/sbx082](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbx082)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 2018 Feb 15;44(2):242-249. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbx082.

Social Disconnection in Schizophrenia and the General Community.

Green MF(1)(2), Horan WP(1)(2), Lee J(1)(2), McCleery A(1)(2), Reddy LF(1)(2), 
Wynn JK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Semel Institute for 
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs, Desert Pacific Mental Illness Research, 
Education, and Clinical Center, Los Angeles, CA.

Social disability is a defining characteristic of schizophrenia and a 
substantial public health problem. It has several components that are difficult 
to disentangle. One component, social disconnection, occurs extensively in the 
general community among nonhelp-seeking individuals. Social disconnection is an 
objective, long-standing lack of social/family relationships and minimal 
participation in social activities. It is associated with negative health 
effects, including early mortality, and is distinct from subjective loneliness. 
These 2 topics, social disability in schizophrenia and social disconnection in 
the general community, have generated entirely distinct research literatures 
that differ in their respective knowledge gaps and emphases. Specifically, the 
consequences of social disability in schizophrenia are unknown but its 
determinants (ie, nonsocial cognition, social cognition, and social motivation) 
have been well-examined. Conversely, the health consequences of social 
disconnection in the general community are well-established, but the 
determinants are largely unknown. Social disconnection is a condition that 
presents substantial public health concerns, exists within and outside of 
current psychiatric diagnostic boundaries, and may be related to the 
schizophrenia spectrum. A comparison of these 2 literatures is mutually 
informative and it generates intriguing research questions that can be 
critically evaluated.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbx082
PMCID: PMC5814840
PMID: 28637195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]