---
reference_id: "PMID:15255957"
title: Interactions between FGF and Wnt signals and Tbx3 gene expression in mammary gland initiation in mouse embryos.
authors:
- Eblaghie MC
- Song SJ
- Kim JY
- Akita K
- Tickle C
- Jung HS
journal: J Anat
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.0021-8782.2004.00309.x
keywords:
- Animals
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Dual Specificity Phosphatase 6
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 4
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 8
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 9
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/drug effects, genetics"
- In Situ Hybridization/methods
- Lymphoid Enhancer-Binding Factor 1
- Male
- "Mammary Glands, Animal/embryology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- Organ Culture Techniques
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 1"
- Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases/genetics
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Pyrroles/pharmacology
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Wnt Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interactions between FGF and Wnt signals and Tbx3 gene expression in mammary gland initiation in mouse embryos.
**Authors:** Eblaghie MC, Song SJ, Kim JY, Akita K, Tickle C, Jung HS
**Journal:** J Anat (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.0021-8782.2004.00309.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0021-8782.2004.00309.x)

## Content

1. J Anat. 2004 Jul;205(1):1-13. doi: 10.1111/j.0021-8782.2004.00309.x.

Interactions between FGF and Wnt signals and Tbx3 gene expression in mammary 
gland initiation in mouse embryos.

Eblaghie MC(1), Song SJ, Kim JY, Akita K, Tickle C, Jung HS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
Wellcome Trust Biocentre, University of Dundee, Scotland, UK.

Interactions between Wnts, Fgfs and Tbx genes are involved in limb initiation 
and the same gene families have been implicated in mammary gland development. 
Here we explore how these genes act together in mammary gland initiation. We 
compared expression of Tbx3, the gene associated with the human condition 
ulnar-mammary syndrome, expression of the gene encoding the dual-specificity 
MAPK phosphatase Pyst1/MKP3, which is an early response to FGFR1 signalling (as 
judged by sensitivity to the SU5402 inhibitor), and expression of Lef1, encoding 
a transcription factor mediating Wnt signalling and the earliest gene so far 
known to be expressed in mammary gland development. We found that Tbx3 is 
expressed earlier than Lef1 and that Pyst1 is also expressed early but only 
transiently. Patterns of expression of Tbx3, Pyst1 and Lef1 in different glands 
suggest that the order of mammary gland initiation is 3, 4, 1, 2 and 5. 
Consistent with expression of Pyst1 in the mammary gland, we detected expression 
of Fgfr1b, Fgf8 and Fgf9 in both surface ectoderm and mammary bud epithelium, 
and Fgf4 and Fgf17 in mammary bud epithelium. Beads soaked in FGF-8 applied to 
the flank of mouse embryos, at a stage just prior to mammary bud initiation, 
induce expression of Pyst1 and Lef1 and maintain Tbx3 expression in flank tissue 
surrounding the bead. Grafting beads soaked in the FGFR1 inhibitor, SU5402, 
abolishes Tbx3, Pyst1 and Lef1 expression, supporting the idea that FGFR1 
signalling is required for early mammary gland initiation. We also showed that 
blocking Wnt signalling abolishes Tbx3 expression but not Pyst1 expression. 
These data, taken together with previous findings, suggest a model in which Tbx3 
expression is induced and maintained in early gland initiation by both Wnt and 
Fgf signalling through FGFR1.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0021-8782.2004.00309.x
PMCID: PMC1571327
PMID: 15255957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]