---
reference_id: "PMID:30429139"
title: Cutaneous Mycobacterial Infections.
authors:
- Franco-Paredes C
- Marcos LA
- Henao-Martínez AF
- Rodríguez-Morales AJ
- Villamil-Gómez WE
- Gotuzzo E
- Bonifaz A
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00069-18
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous Mycobacterial Infections.
**Authors:** Franco-Paredes C, Marcos LA, Henao-Martínez AF, Rodríguez-Morales AJ, Villamil-Gómez WE, Gotuzzo E, Bonifaz A
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00069-18](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00069-18)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2018 Nov 14;32(1):e00069-18. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00069-18. 
Print 2018 Jan.

Cutaneous Mycobacterial Infections.

Franco-Paredes C(1)(2), Marcos LA(3), Henao-Martínez AF(2), Rodríguez-Morales 
AJ(4)(5), Villamil-Gómez WE(6), Gotuzzo E(7), Bonifaz A(8).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, Mexico City, Mexico 
carlos.franco-paredes@ucdenver.edu.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Colorado Denver Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine and Department of 
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, and Global Health Institute, Stony Brook 
University, Stony Brook, New York, USA.
(4)Public Health and Infection Research Group, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Universidad Tecnologica de Pereira, Pereira, Risaralda, Colombia.
(5)Universidad Privada Franz Tamayo, Cochabamba, Bolivia.
(6)Departamento de Infectología, Hospital Universitario de Sincelejo, Sucre, 
Colombia.
(7)Instituto de Medicina Tropical Alexander von Humboldt, University Cayetano 
Heredia, Lima, Peru.
(8)Servicio de Dermatología y Departamento de Micología, Hospital General de 
México, Mexico City, Mexico.

Humans encounter mycobacterial species due to their ubiquity in different 
environmental niches. In many individuals, pathogenic mycobacterial species may 
breach our first-line barrier defenses of the innate immune system and modulate 
the activation of phagocytes to cause disease of the respiratory tract or the 
skin and soft tissues, sometimes resulting in disseminated infection. Cutaneous 
mycobacterial infections may cause a wide range of clinical manifestations, 
which are divided into four main disease categories: (i) cutaneous 
manifestations of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, (ii) Buruli ulcer caused 
by Mycobacterium ulcerans and other related slowly growing mycobacteria, (iii) 
leprosy caused by Mycobacterium leprae and Mycobacterium lepromatosis, and (iv) 
cutaneous infections caused by rapidly growing mycobacteria. Clinically, 
cutaneous mycobacterial infections present with widely different clinical 
presentations, including cellulitis, nonhealing ulcers, subacute or chronic 
nodular lesions, abscesses, superficial lymphadenitis, verrucous lesions, and 
other types of findings. Mycobacterial infections of the skin and subcutaneous 
tissue are associated with important stigma, deformity, and disability. 
Geography-based environmental exposures influence the epidemiology of cutaneous 
mycobacterial infections. Cutaneous tuberculosis exhibits different clinical 
phenotypes acquired through different routes, including via extrinsic 
inoculation of the tuberculous bacilli and dissemination to the skin from other 
sites, or represents hypersensitivity reactions to M. tuberculosis infection. In 
many settings, leprosy remains an important cause of neurological impairment, 
deformity, limb loss, and stigma. Mycobacterium lepromatosis, a mycobacterial 
species related to M. leprae, is linked to diffuse lepromatous leprosy of Lucio 
and Latapí. Mycobacterium ulcerans produces a mycolactone toxin that leads to 
subcutaneous tissue destruction and immunosuppression, resulting in deep 
ulcerations that often produce substantial disfigurement and disability. 
Mycobacterium marinum, a close relative of M. ulcerans, is an important cause of 
cutaneous sporotrichoid nodular lymphangitic lesions. Among patients with 
advanced immunosuppression, Mycobacterium kansasii, the Mycobacterium 
avium-intracellulare complex, and Mycobacterium haemophilum may cause cutaneous 
or disseminated disease. Rapidly growing mycobacteria, including the 
Mycobacterium abscessus group, Mycobacterium chelonei, and Mycobacterium 
fortuitum, are increasingly recognized pathogens in cutaneous infections 
associated particularly with plastic surgery and cosmetic procedures. Skin 
biopsies of cutaneous lesions to identify acid-fast staining bacilli and 
cultures represent the cornerstone of diagnosis. Additionally, histopathological 
evaluation of skin biopsy specimens may be useful in identifying leprosy, Buruli 
ulcer, and cutaneous tuberculosis. Molecular assays are useful in some cases. 
The treatment for cutaneous mycobacterial infections depends on the specific 
pathogen and therefore requires a careful consideration of antimicrobial choices 
based on official treatment guidelines.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00069-18
PMCID: PMC6302357
PMID: 30429139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]