---
reference_id: "PMID:15809371"
title: "Mouse model of SCN5A-linked hereditary Lenègre's disease: age-related conduction slowing and myocardial fibrosis."
authors:
- Royer A
- van Veen TA
- Le Bouter S
- Marionneau C
- Griol-Charhbili V
- Léoni AL
- Steenman M
- van Rijen HV
- Demolombe S
- Goddard CA
- Richer C
- Escoubet B
- Jarry-Guichard T
- Colledge WH
- Gros D
- de Bakker JM
- Grace AA
- Escande D
- Charpentier F
journal: Circulation
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000160853.19867.61
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Animals
- Cardiomegaly
- Connexins/analysis
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electrocardiography
- Fibrosis/genetics
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn"
- "Heart Block/etiology, genetics"
- Heart Conduction System/physiopathology
- Heart Ventricles/pathology
- Heterozygote
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- Sodium Channels/genetics
- Transcription Factors/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mouse model of SCN5A-linked hereditary Lenègre's disease: age-related conduction slowing and myocardial fibrosis.
**Authors:** Royer A, van Veen TA, Le Bouter S, Marionneau C, Griol-Charhbili V, Léoni AL, Steenman M, van Rijen HV, Demolombe S, Goddard CA, Richer C, Escoubet B, Jarry-Guichard T, Colledge WH, Gros D, de Bakker JM, Grace AA, Escande D, Charpentier F
**Journal:** Circulation (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.CIR.0000160853.19867.61](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000160853.19867.61)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2005 Apr 12;111(14):1738-46. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000160853.19867.61. Epub 2005 Apr 4.

Mouse model of SCN5A-linked hereditary Lenègre's disease: age-related conduction 
slowing and myocardial fibrosis.

Royer A(1), van Veen TA, Le Bouter S, Marionneau C, Griol-Charhbili V, Léoni AL, 
Steenman M, van Rijen HV, Demolombe S, Goddard CA, Richer C, Escoubet B, 
Jarry-Guichard T, Colledge WH, Gros D, de Bakker JM, Grace AA, Escande D, 
Charpentier F.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U533, Institut du Thorax, Faculté de Médecine, Nantes, France.

BACKGROUND: We have previously linked hereditary progressive cardiac conduction 
defect (hereditary Lenègre's disease) to a loss-of-function mutation in the gene 
encoding the main cardiac Na+ channel, SCN5A. In the present study, we 
investigated heterozygous Scn5a-knockout mice (Scn5a+/- mice) as a model for 
hereditary Lenègre's disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In Scn5a+/- mice, surface ECG recordings showed age-related 
lengthening of the P-wave and PR- and QRS-interval duration, coinciding with 
previous observations in patients with Lenègre's disease. Old but not young 
Scn5a+/- mice showed extensive fibrosis of their ventricular myocardium, a 
feature not seen in wild-type animals. In old Scn5a+/- mice, fibrosis was 
accompanied by heterogeneous expression of connexin 43 and upregulation of 
hypertrophic markers, including beta-MHC and skeletal alpha-actin. Global 
connexin 43 expression as assessed with Western blots was similar to wild-type 
mice. Decreased connexin 40 expression was seen in the atria. Using pangenomic 
microarrays and real-time PCR, we identified in Scn5a+/- mice an age-related 
upregulation of genes encoding Atf3 and Egr1 transcription factors. 
Echocardiography and hemodynamic investigations demonstrated conserved cardiac 
function with aging and lack of ventricular hypertrophy.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that Scn5a+/- mice convincingly recapitulate the 
Lenègre's disease phenotype, including progressive impairment with aging of 
atrial and ventricular conduction associated with myocardial rearrangements and 
fibrosis. Our work provides the first demonstration that a monogenic ion channel 
defect can progressively lead to myocardial structural anomalies.

DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000160853.19867.61
PMID: 15809371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]