---
reference_id: "PMID:30372565"
title: "Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome: clinical presentation, aetiology and management."
authors:
- Fedorowski A
journal: J Intern Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/joim.12852
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome: clinical presentation, aetiology and management.
**Authors:** Fedorowski A
**Journal:** J Intern Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/joim.12852](https://doi.org/10.1111/joim.12852)

## Content

1. J Intern Med. 2019 Apr;285(4):352-366. doi: 10.1111/joim.12852. Epub 2018 Nov 
23.

Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome: clinical presentation, aetiology and 
management.

Fedorowski A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a variant of cardiovascular 
autonomic disorder characterized by an excessive heart rate increase on standing 
and orthostatic intolerance. POTS affects younger individuals 15-45 years old 
with a distinct female predominance (≈80%). The prevalence ranges between 0.2% 
and 1.0% in developed countries. The onset of POTS is typically precipitated by 
immunological stressors such as viral infection, vaccination, trauma, pregnancy, 
surgery or psychosocial stress. The most common complaints are dizziness, 
weakness, rapid heartbeat and palpitation on standing. Moreover, patients often 
report physical deconditioning and reduced exercise capacity as well as 
headache, 'brain fog', dyspnoea, gastrointestinal disorders and musculoskeletal 
pain. The aetiology of POTS is largely unknown and three main hypotheses include 
an autoimmune disorder, abnormally increased sympathetic activity and 
catecholamine excess, and sympathetic denervation leading to central 
hypovolaemia and reflex tachycardia. The golden standard for POTS diagnosis is 
head-up tilt test with a non-invasive beat-to-beat haemodynamic monitoring. 
Although long-term prognosis of POTS is poorly explored, around 50% of patients 
spontaneously recover within 1-3 years. After the diagnosis has been 
established, patient should be thoroughly educated about non-pharmacological 
measures alleviating the symptoms. Exercise training may be very effective and 
counteract deconditioning. In more symptomatic patients, different drugs 
directed at controlling heart rate, increasing peripheral vasoconstriction and 
intravascular volume can be tested. However, the overall effects of 
pharmacological therapy are modest and the most affected patients remain 
handicapped. Future efforts should focus on better understanding of POTS 
pathophysiology and designing randomized controlled trials for selection of more 
effective therapy.

© 2018 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.12852
PMID: 30372565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]