---
reference_id: "PMID:15615615"
title: A limit on the energy transfer rate from the human fat store in hypophagia.
authors:
- Alpert SS
journal: J Theor Biol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2004.08.029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A limit on the energy transfer rate from the human fat store in hypophagia.
**Authors:** Alpert SS
**Journal:** J Theor Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtbi.2004.08.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2004.08.029)

## Content

1. J Theor Biol. 2005 Mar 7;233(1):1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2004.08.029. Epub
2004  Dec 8.

A limit on the energy transfer rate from the human fat store in hypophagia.

Alpert SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 
NM 87131-1156, USA. sialpert1@juno.com

A limit on the maximum energy transfer rate from the human fat store in 
hypophagia is deduced from experimental data of underfed subjects maintaining 
moderate activity levels and is found to have a value of (290+/-25) kJ/kgd. A 
dietary restriction which exceeds the limited capability of the fat store to 
compensate for the energy deficiency results in an immediate decrease in the fat 
free mass (FFM). In cases of a less severe dietary deficiency, the FFM will not 
be depleted. The transition between these two dietary regions is developed and a 
criterion to distinguish the regions is defined. An exact mathematical solution 
for the decrease of the FFM is derived for the case where the fat mass (FM) is 
in its limited energy transfer mode. The solution shows a steady-state term 
which is in agreement with conventional ideas, a term indicating a slow decrease 
of much of the FFM moderated by the limited energy transferred from the fat 
store, and a final term showing an unprotected rapid decrease of the remaining 
part of the FFM. The average resting metabolic rate of subjects undergoing 
hypophagia is shown to decrease linearly as a function of the FFM with a slope 
of (249+/-25) kJ/kgd. This value disagrees with the results of other observers 
who have measured metabolic rates of diverse groups. The disagreement is 
explained in terms of individual metabolic properties as opposed to those of the 
larger population.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2004.08.029
PMID: 15615615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]