---
reference_id: "PMID:34286667"
title: Imbalanced autophagy causes synaptic deficits in a human model for neurodevelopmental disorders.
authors:
- Linda K
- Lewerissa EI
- Verboven AHA
- Gabriele M
- Frega M
- Klein Gunnewiek TM
- Devilee L
- Ulferts E
- Hommersom M
- Oudakker A
- Schoenmaker C
- van Bokhoven H
- Schubert D
- Testa G
- Koolen DA
- de Vries BBA
- Nadif Kasri N
journal: Autophagy
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1936777
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Autophagosomes/metabolism
- Autophagy/physiology
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/metabolism
- Lysine/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Sirolimus/pharmacology
- Superoxide Dismutase-1
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imbalanced autophagy causes synaptic deficits in a human model for neurodevelopmental disorders.
**Authors:** Linda K, Lewerissa EI, Verboven AHA, Gabriele M, Frega M, Klein Gunnewiek TM, Devilee L, Ulferts E, Hommersom M, Oudakker A, Schoenmaker C, van Bokhoven H, Schubert D, Testa G, Koolen DA, de Vries BBA, Nadif Kasri N
**Journal:** Autophagy (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15548627.2021.1936777](https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2021.1936777)

## Content

1. Autophagy. 2022 Feb;18(2):423-442. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1936777. Epub
2021  Jul 21.

Imbalanced autophagy causes synaptic deficits in a human model for 
neurodevelopmental disorders.

Linda K(1), Lewerissa EI(1), Verboven AHA(1), Gabriele M(2)(3)(4), Frega 
M(1)(5), Klein Gunnewiek TM(1)(6), Devilee L(1), Ulferts E(1), Hommersom M(1), 
Oudakker A(1), Schoenmaker C(1), van Bokhoven H(1)(7), Schubert D(7), Testa 
G(2)(3), Koolen DA(1), de Vries BBA(1), Nadif Kasri N(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition, and Behavior, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Oncology and Haemato-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology 
IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, University of Twente, Enschede, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Anatomy, Radboudumc, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, 
and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboudumc, Donders Institute for 
Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) is a finely tuned process of 
programmed degradation and recycling of proteins and cellular components, which 
is crucial in neuronal function and synaptic integrity. Mounting evidence 
implicates chromatin remodeling in fine-tuning autophagy pathways. However, this 
epigenetic regulation is poorly understood in neurons. Here, we investigate the 
role in autophagy of KANSL1, a member of the nonspecific lethal complex, which 
acetylates histone H4 on lysine 16 (H4K16ac) to facilitate transcriptional 
activation. Loss-of-function of KANSL1 is strongly associated with the 
neurodevelopmental disorder Koolen-de Vries Syndrome (KdVS). Starting from 
KANSL1-deficient human induced-pluripotent stem cells, both from KdVS patients 
and genome-edited lines, we identified SOD1 (superoxide dismutase 1), an 
antioxidant enzyme, to be significantly decreased, leading to a subsequent 
increase in oxidative stress and autophagosome accumulation. In KANSL1-deficient 
neurons, autophagosome accumulation at excitatory synapses resulted in reduced 
synaptic density, reduced GRIA/AMPA receptor-mediated transmission and impaired 
neuronal network activity. Furthermore, we found that increased oxidative 
stress-mediated autophagosome accumulation leads to increased MTOR activation 
and decreased lysosome function, further preventing the clearing of 
autophagosomes. Finally, by pharmacologically reducing oxidative stress, we 
could rescue the aberrant autophagosome formation as well as synaptic and 
neuronal network activity in KANSL1-deficient neurons. Our findings thus point 
toward an important relation between oxidative stress-induced autophagy and 
synapse function, and demonstrate the importance of H4K16ac-mediated changes in 
chromatin structure to balance reactive oxygen species- and MTOR-dependent 
autophagy.Abbreviations: APO: apocynin; ATG: autophagy related; BAF: bafilomycin 
A1; BSO: buthionine sulfoximine; CV: coefficient of variation; DIV: days in 
vitro; H4K16ac: histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation; iPSC: induced-pluripotent stem 
cell; KANSL1: KAT8 regulatory NSL complex subunit 1; KdVS: Koolen-de Vries 
Syndrome; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; MAP1LC3/LC3: 
microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MEA: micro-electrode array; 
MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; NSL complex: nonspecific lethal 
complex; 8-oxo-dG: 8-hydroxydesoxyguanosine; RAP: rapamycin; ROS: reactive 
oxygen species; sEPSCs: spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents; SOD1: 
superoxide dismutase 1; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; SYN: synapsin; WRT: 
wortmannin.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1936777
PMCID: PMC8942553
PMID: 34286667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).