---
reference_id: "PMID:21071598"
title: Alström Syndrome protein ALMS1 localizes to basal bodies of cochlear hair cells and regulates cilium-dependent planar cell polarity.
authors:
- Jagger D
- Collin G
- Kelly J
- Towers E
- Nevill G
- Longo-Guess C
- Benson J
- Halsey K
- Dolan D
- Marshall J
- Naggert J
- Forge A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq493
keywords:
- "Alstrom Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Polarity
- Centrioles
- Cilia/ultrastructure
- Cochlea/ultrastructure
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- "Hair Cells, Auditory/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Hearing Loss/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Organ of Corti/ultrastructure
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Signal Transduction
- Stria Vascularis/ultrastructure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alström Syndrome protein ALMS1 localizes to basal bodies of cochlear hair cells and regulates cilium-dependent planar cell polarity.
**Authors:** Jagger D, Collin G, Kelly J, Towers E, Nevill G, Longo-Guess C, Benson J, Halsey K, Dolan D, Marshall J, Naggert J, Forge A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddq493](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq493)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Feb 1;20(3):466-81. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq493. Epub 2010 Nov
 11.

Alström Syndrome protein ALMS1 localizes to basal bodies of cochlear hair cells
and regulates cilium-dependent planar cell polarity.

Jagger D(1), Collin G, Kelly J, Towers E, Nevill G, Longo-Guess C, Benson J,
Halsey K, Dolan D, Marshall J, Naggert J, Forge A.

Author information:
(1)UCL Ear Institute, University College London, 332 Gray’s Inn Road, London
WC1X 8EE, UK. d.jagger@ucl.ac.uk

Alström Syndrome is a life-threatening disease characterized primarily by
numerous metabolic abnormalities, retinal degeneration, cardiomyopathy, kidney
and liver disease, and sensorineural hearing loss. The cellular localization of
the affected protein, ALMS1, has suggested roles in ciliary function and/or
ciliogenesis. We have investigated the role of ALMS1 in the cochlea and the
pathogenesis of hearing loss in Alström Syndrome. In neonatal rat organ of
Corti, ALMS1 was localized to the basal bodies of hair cells and supporting
cells. ALMS1 was also evident at the basal bodies of differentiating fibrocytes
and marginal cells in the lateral wall. Centriolar ALMS1 expression was retained
into maturity. In Alms1-disrupted mice, which recapitulate the neurosensory
deficits of human Alström Syndrome, cochleae displayed several
cyto-architectural defects including abnormalities in the shape and orientation
of hair cell stereociliary bundles. Developing hair cells were ciliated,
suggesting that ciliogenesis was largely normal. In adult mice, in addition to
bundle abnormalities, there was an accelerated loss of outer hair cells and the
progressive appearance of large lesions in stria vascularis. Although the mice
progressively lost distortion product otoacoustic emissions, suggesting defects
in outer hair cell amplification, their endocochlear potentials were normal,
indicating the strial atrophy did not affect its function. These results
identify previously unrecognized cochlear histopathologies associated with this
ciliopathy that (i) implicate ALMS1 in planar cell polarity signaling and (ii)
suggest that the loss of outer hair cells causes the majority of the hearing
loss in Alström Syndrome.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq493
PMCID: PMC3016908
PMID: 21071598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
