---
reference_id: "PMID:31228950"
title: "Schnitzler's syndrome - a novel hypothesis of a shared pathophysiologic mechanism with Waldenström's disease."
authors:
- van Leersum FS
- Potjewijd J
- van Geel M
- Steijlen PM
- Vreeburg M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1117-2
keywords:
- Animals
- "Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Interleukin-1/metabolism
- Myeloid Differentiation Factor 88/metabolism
- "NLR Family, Pyrin Domain-Containing 3 Protein/metabolism"
- "Schnitzler Syndrome/metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schnitzler's syndrome - a novel hypothesis of a shared pathophysiologic mechanism with Waldenström's disease.
**Authors:** van Leersum FS, Potjewijd J, van Geel M, Steijlen PM, Vreeburg M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1117-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1117-2)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Jun 22;14(1):151. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1117-2.

Schnitzler's syndrome - a novel hypothesis of a shared pathophysiologic 
mechanism with Waldenström's disease.

van Leersum FS(1), Potjewijd J(2), van Geel M(3)(4)(5), Steijlen PM(3)(5), 
Vreeburg M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, P. Debyelaan 
25, 6229, HX, Maastricht, The Netherlands. frank.van.leersum@mumc.nl.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Clinical and Experimental 
Immunology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, P. Debyelaan 
25, 6229, HX, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Grow Research School for Oncology And Developmental Biology, Maastricht 
University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Schnitzler's syndrome is an auto-inflammatory disorder which is characterized by 
two mandatory features: an urticarial rash and a monoclonal gammopathy. Although 
the pathophysiology of this syndrome is not yet fully understood, a role for 
interleukin-1 seems apparent. While this presumed link between interleukin-1 and 
the monoclonal gammopathy is not yet elucidated, a mutual factor in 
pathophysiology however seems likely. Here we present a novel hypothesis of a 
shared pathophysiologic mechanism between Schitzler's syndrome and monoclonal 
gammopathy.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1117-2
PMCID: PMC6589170
PMID: 31228950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.