---
reference_id: "PMID:33039432"
title: "Ciliopathies and the Kidney: A Review."
authors:
- McConnachie DJ
- Stow JL
- Mallett AJ
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.08.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ciliopathies and the Kidney: A Review.
**Authors:** McConnachie DJ, Stow JL, Mallett AJ
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.08.012](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.08.012)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2021 Mar;77(3):410-419. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.08.012. Epub
 2020 Oct 9.

Ciliopathies and the Kidney: A Review.

McConnachie DJ(1), Stow JL(2), Mallett AJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience (IMB) and IMB Centre for Inflammation 
Disease and Research, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)Kidney Health Service, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia.
(3)Institute for Molecular Bioscience (IMB) and IMB Centre for Inflammation 
Disease and Research, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia; 
Kidney Health Service, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia; Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia; KidGen Collaborative, Australian Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia. Electronic address: andrew.mallett@health.qld.gov.au.

Primary cilia are specialized sensory organelles that protrude from the apical 
surface of most cell types. During the past 2 decades, they have been found to 
play important roles in tissue development and signal transduction, with 
mutations in ciliary-associated proteins resulting in a group of diseases 
collectively known as ciliopathies. Many of these mutations manifest as renal 
ciliopathies, characterized by kidney dysfunction resulting from aberrant cilia 
or ciliary functions. This group of overlapping and genetically heterogeneous 
diseases includes polycystic kidney disease, nephronophthisis, and Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome as the main focus of this review. Renal ciliopathies are characterized 
by the presence of kidney cysts that develop due to uncontrolled epithelial cell 
proliferation, growth, and polarity, downstream of dysregulated 
ciliary-dependent signaling. Due to cystic-associated kidney injury and systemic 
inflammation, cases result in kidney failure requiring dialysis and 
transplantation. Of the handful of pharmacologic treatments available, none are 
curative. It is important to determine the molecular mechanisms that underlie 
the involvement of the primary cilium in cyst initiation, expansion, and 
progression for the development of novel and efficacious treatments. This review 
updates research progress in defining key genes and molecules central to 
ciliogenesis and renal ciliopathies.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.08.012
PMID: 33039432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]