---
reference_id: "PMID:36941075"
title: Phenotypes Associated With the Val122Ile, Leu58His, and Late-Onset Val30Met Variants in Patients With Hereditary Transthyretin Amyloidosis.
authors:
- Zampino S
- Sheikh FH
- Vaishnav J
- Judge D
- Pan B
- Daniel A
- Brown E
- Ebenezer G
- Polydefkis M
journal: Neurology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207158
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypes Associated With the Val122Ile, Leu58His, and Late-Onset Val30Met Variants in Patients With Hereditary Transthyretin Amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Zampino S, Sheikh FH, Vaishnav J, Judge D, Pan B, Daniel A, Brown E, Ebenezer G, Polydefkis M
**Journal:** Neurology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000207158](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000207158)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2023 May 9;100(19):e2036-e2044. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207158. 
Epub 2023 Mar 20.

Phenotypes Associated With the Val122Ile, Leu58His, and Late-Onset Val30Met 
Variants in Patients With Hereditary Transthyretin Amyloidosis.

Zampino S(1), Sheikh FH(1), Vaishnav J(1), Judge D(1), Pan B(1), Daniel A(1), 
Brown E(1), Ebenezer G(1), Polydefkis M(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (S.Z., B.P., A.D., G.E., M.P.), Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; Cardiology (F.H.S.), 
MedStar Medical Group, Washington, DC; Division of Cardiology (J.V., D.J., 
E.B.), Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; and 
Department of Cardiology (D.J.), Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston.
(2)From the Department of Neurology (S.Z., B.P., A.D., G.E., M.P.), Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; Cardiology (F.H.S.), 
MedStar Medical Group, Washington, DC; Division of Cardiology (J.V., D.J., 
E.B.), Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; and 
Department of Cardiology (D.J.), Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston. mpolyde@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (hATTR) is a 
rare autosomal dominant systemic disease with variable penetrance and 
heterogeneous clinical presentation. Several effective treatments can reduce 
mortality and disability, though diagnosis remains challenging, especially in 
the United States where disease is nonendemic. Our aim is to describe the 
neurologic and cardiac characteristics of common US ATTR variants V122I, L58H, 
and late-onset V30M at presentation.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective case series of patients with a new 
diagnosis of ATTRv between January 2008 and January 2020 to characterize 
features of prominent US variants. The neurologic (examination, EMG, and skin 
biopsy), cardiac (echo), and laboratory assessments (pro b-type natriuretic 
peptide [proBNP] and reversible neuropathy screens) are described.
RESULTS: A total of 56 patients with treatment-naïve ATTRv with symptoms/signs 
of peripheral neuropathy (PN) or cardiomyopathy and confirmatory genetic testing 
presenting with Val122Ile (N = 31), late-onset Val30Met (N = 12), and Leu58His 
ATTRv (N = 13) were included. The age at onset and sex distributions were 
similar (V122I: 71.5 ± 8.0, V30M: 64.8 ± 2.6, and L58H: 62.4 ± 9.8 years; 26, 
25, 31% female). Only 10% of patients with V122I and 17% of patients with V30M 
were aware of an ATTRv family history, while 69% of patients with L58H were 
aware. PN was present in all 3 variants at diagnosis (90%, 100%, and 100%), 
though neurologic impairment scores differed: V122I: 22 ± 16, V30M: 61 ± 31, and 
L58H: 57 ± 25. Most points (deficits) were attributed to loss of strength. 
Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) and a positive Romberg sign were common across all 
groups (V122I: 97%, 39%; V30M: 58%, 58%; and L58H: 77%, 77%). ProBNP levels and 
interventricular septum thickness were highest among patients with V122I (5,939 
± 962 pg/mL, 1.70 ± 0.29 cm), followed by V30M (796 ± 970 pg/mL, 1.42 ± 0.38 cm) 
and L58H (404 ± 677 pg/mL, 1.23 ± 0.36 cm). Atrial fibrillation was present 
among 39% of cases with V122I and only 8% of cases with V30M and L58H. 
Gastrointestinal symptoms were rare (6%) among patients with V122I and common in 
patients with V30M (42%) and L58H (54%).
DISCUSSION: Important clinical differences exist between ATTRv genotypes. While 
V122I is perceived to be a cardiac disease, PN is common and clinically 
relevant. Most patients with V30M and V122I were diagnosed de novo and therefore 
require clinical suspicion for diagnosis. A history of CTS and a positive 
Romberg sign are helpful diagnostic clues.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207158
PMCID: PMC10186220
PMID: 36941075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors report no disclosures relevant to 
the manuscript. Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.