---
reference_id: "PMID:26044725"
title: "[Parvovirus B19 infection and pregnancy]."
authors:
- Subtil D
- Garabedian C
- Chauvet A
journal: Presse Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2015.04.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Parvovirus B19 infection and pregnancy].
**Authors:** Subtil D, Garabedian C, Chauvet A
**Journal:** Presse Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lpm.2015.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lpm.2015.04.013)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 2015 Jun;44(6 Pt 1):647-53. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2015.04.013. Epub 
2015 Jun 1.

[Parvovirus B19 infection and pregnancy].

[Article in French]

Subtil D(1), Garabedian C(1), Chauvet A(2).

Author information:
(1)Université Lille II, hôpital Jeanne-de-Flandre, pôle d'obstétrique, 59000 
Lille, France.
(2)Université Lille II, hôpital Jeanne-de-Flandre, pôle d'obstétrique, 59000 
Lille, France. Electronic address: agathe.chauvet@chru-lille.fr.

"Small virus" contagious during spring, parvovirus B19 is responsible for fifth 
disease of children. The prevalence of infection is very high before 10 years 
old and children are especially responsible for transmission to pregnant women. 
Approximately 50% of women old enough to procreate have stigmas serologic of old 
infection. Acquired immunity is long hasting and solid. During pregnancy, this 
virus is responsible for abortion, fetal anemia. Severe anemia can cause hydrops 
fetalis or fetal mortality in utero or neurologic damage. We are going to start 
again point by point of the contage has the care the situations with which the 
doctor can be confronted during the pregnancy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2015.04.013
PMID: 26044725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]