---
reference_id: "PMID:37794029"
title: Disease pathology signatures in a mouse model of Mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIB.
authors:
- Petrova R
- Patil AR
- Trinh V
- McElroy KE
- Bhakta M
- Tien J
- Wilson DS
- Warren L
- Stratton JR
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-42431-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Child
- Mucopolysaccharidosis III/genetics
- Acetylglucosaminidase/genetics
- Proteomics
- Heparan Sulfate
- Hydrolases
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease pathology signatures in a mouse model of Mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIB.
**Authors:** Petrova R, Patil AR, Trinh V, McElroy KE, Bhakta M, Tien J, Wilson DS, Warren L, Stratton JR
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-42431-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-42431-4)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Oct 4;13(1):16699. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-42431-4.

Disease pathology signatures in a mouse model of Mucopolysaccharidosis type
IIIB.

Petrova R(1), Patil AR(2), Trinh V(3), McElroy KE(3), Bhakta M(3), Tien J(3),
Wilson DS(3), Warren L(2), Stratton JR(4).

Author information:
(1)Biologics Discovery Science, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, Redwood
City, CA, USA. ralitsaip@gmail.com.
(2)Genomics and Computational Biology, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, West
Chester, PA, USA.
(3)Biologics Discovery Science, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, Redwood
City, CA, USA.
(4)Biologics Discovery Science, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, Redwood
City, CA, USA. Jennifer.Stratton@tevapharm.com.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIB (MPS IIIB) is a rare and devastating
childhood-onset lysosomal storage disease caused by complete loss of function of
the lysosomal hydrolase α-N-acetylglucosaminidase. The lack of functional enzyme
in MPS IIIB patients leads to the progressive accumulation of heparan sulfate
throughout the body and triggers a cascade of neuroinflammatory and other
biochemical processes ultimately resulting in severe mental impairment and early
death in adolescence or young adulthood. The low prevalence and severity of the
disease has necessitated the use of animal models to improve our knowledge of
the pathophysiology and for the development of therapeutic treatments. In this
study, we took a systematic approach to characterizing a classical mouse model
of MPS IIIB. Using a series of histological, biochemical, proteomic and
behavioral assays, we tested MPS IIIB mice at two stages: during the
pre-symptomatic and early symptomatic phases of disease development, in order to
validate previously described phenotypes, explore new mechanisms of disease
pathology and uncover biomarkers for MPS IIIB. Along with previous findings,
this study helps provide a deeper understanding of the pathology landscape of
this rare disease with high unmet medical need and serves as an important
resource to the scientific community.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-42431-4
PMCID: PMC10550979
PMID: 37794029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
