---
reference_id: "PMID:27072777"
title: "Precipitation of free fatty acids generated by Malassezia - a possible explanation for the positive effects of lithium succinate in seborrhoeic dermatitis"
authors:
- Mayser P
- Schulz S
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.13620
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Precipitation of free fatty acids generated by Malassezia - a possible explanation for the positive effects of lithium succinate in seborrhoeic dermatitis
**Authors:** Mayser P, Schulz S
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.13620](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.13620)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2016 Aug;30(8):1384-9. doi: 10.1111/jdv.13620.
Epub 2016 Apr 13.

Precipitation of free fatty acids generated by Malassezia - a possible
explanation for the positive effects of lithium succinate in seborrhoeic
dermatitis.

Mayser P, Schulz S.

Background: Lithium succinate and gluconate are effective alternative options
licensed for the topical treatment of seborrhoeic dermatitis (SD). Objective:
Their mode of action is not fully elucidated. Minimal inhibitory concentrations
against Malassezia (M.) yeasts, which play an important role in SD, are very
high. Methods: An assay based on the hydrolysis of ethyl octanoate enables us to
test the hydrolytic activity of reference strains of the species M. globosa, M.
sympodialis and M. furfur solely without interference by fungal growth as the
free octanoic acid generated has antifungal activity. Results: In this assay
the presence of alkali salts (lithium, sodium and potassium succinate resp.) in
concentrations of 2%, 4% and 8% does not influence hydrolytic activity but the
availability of the generated free fatty acid in a dose-dependent manner which
was analysed by means of high-performance thin layer chromatography and
densitometry. This was best effected with the lithium, followed by the sodium
and only to a low degree by the potassium salt. As shown by attenuated total
reflection Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy the free fatty acid reacted
to the respective alkali soap and precipitate from solution. The alkali soaps
could not be utilized by the M. spp. as shown in a modified Tween auxanogram and
in lack of fungal growth by ethyl oleate in the presence of 8% lithium
succinate. Conclusion: The effect of lithium succinate on growth of M. yeasts
and presumably in SD can be explained by a precipitation of free fatty acids as
alkali soaps limiting their availability for the growth of these lipid-dependent
yeasts.

PMID: 27072777
