---
reference_id: "PMID:7477195"
title: Medication use and the risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis.
authors:
- Roujeau JC
- Kelly JP
- Naldi L
- Rzany B
- Stern RS
- Anderson T
- Auquier A
- Bastuji-Garin S
- Correia O
- Locati F
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1056/NEJM199512143332404
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/adverse effects
- Allopurinol/adverse effects
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/adverse effects
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/adverse effects"
- Anticonvulsants/adverse effects
- Case-Control Studies
- Chlormezanone/adverse effects
- Humans
- Multivariate Analysis
- Risk
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/chemically induced, etiology"
- Sulfonamides/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medication use and the risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis.
**Authors:** Roujeau JC, Kelly JP, Naldi L, Rzany B, Stern RS, Anderson T, Auquier A, Bastuji-Garin S, Correia O, Locati F
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJM199512143332404](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199512143332404)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 1995 Dec 14;333(24):1600-7. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199512143332404.

Medication use and the risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal 
necrolysis.

Roujeau JC(1), Kelly JP, Naldi L, Rzany B, Stern RS, Anderson T, Auquier A, 
Bastuji-Garin S, Correia O, Locati F, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Université Paris XII, Créteil, France.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 1996 Apr 4;334(14):922; author reply 923. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM199604043341414.
    N Engl J Med. 1996 Apr 4;334(14):922; author reply 923.

BACKGROUND: Toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson syndrome are rare, 
life-threatening, drug-induced cutaneous reactions. We conducted a case-control 
study to quantify the risks associated with the use of specific drugs.
METHODS: Data were obtained through surveillance networks in France, Germany, 
Italy, and Portugal. Drug use before the onset of disease was compared in 245 
people who were hospitalized because of toxic epidermal necrolysis or 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and 1147 patients hospitalized for other reasons 
(controls). Crude relative risks were calculated and adjusted for confounding by 
multivariate methods when numbers were large enough.
RESULTS: Among drugs usually used for short periods, the risks were increased 
for trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and other sulfonamide antibiotics (crude 
relative risk, 172; 95 percent confidence interval, 75 to 396), chlormezanone 
(crude relative risk, 62; 21 to 188), aminopenicillins (multivariate relative 
risk, 6.7; 2.5 to 18), quinolones (multivariate relative risk, 10; 2.6 to 38), 
and cephalosporins (multivariate relative risk, 14; 3.2 to 59). For 
acetaminophen, the multivariate relative risk was 0.6 (95 percent confidence 
interval, 0.2 to 1.3) in France but 9.3 (3.9 to 22) in the other countries. 
Among drugs usually used for months or years, the increased risk was confined 
largely to the first two months of treatment, when crude relative risks were as 
follows: carbamazepine, 90 (95 percent confidence interval, 19 to infinity); 
phenobarbital, 45 (19 to 108); phenytoin, 53 (11 to infinity); valproic acid, 25 
(4.3 to infinity); oxicam nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 72 (25 
to 209); allopurinol, 52 (16 to 167); and corticosteroids, 54 (23 to 124). For 
many drugs, including thiazide diuretics and oral hypoglycemic agents, there was 
no significant increase in risk.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of antibacterial sulfonamides, anticonvulsant agents, 
oxicam NSAIDs, allopurinol, chlormezanone, and corticosteroids is associated 
with large increases in the risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal 
necrolysis. But for none of the drugs does the excess risk exceed five cases per 
million users per week.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM199512143332404
PMID: 7477195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]