---
reference_id: "PMID:33420020"
title: Disease risk scores for skin cancers.
authors:
- Fontanillas P
- Alipanahi B
- Furlotte NA
- Johnson M
- Wilson CH
- 23andMe Research Team
- Pitts SJ
- Gentleman R
- Auton A
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-20246-5
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/epidemiology, etiology"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Datasets as Topic
- "Direct-To-Consumer Screening and Testing/statistics & numerical data"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Incidence
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Medical History Taking
- "Melanoma/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- "Models, Statistical"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Odds Ratio
- Prospective Studies
- Risk Assessment/methods
- Risk Factors
- "Skin/pathology, radiation effects"
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- "Surveys and Questionnaires/statistics & numerical data"
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease risk scores for skin cancers.
**Authors:** Fontanillas P, Alipanahi B, Furlotte NA, Johnson M, Wilson CH, 23andMe Research Team, Pitts SJ, Gentleman R, Auton A
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-020-20246-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-20246-5)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2021 Jan 8;12(1):160. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-20246-5.

Disease risk scores for skin cancers.

Fontanillas P(1), Alipanahi B(2), Furlotte NA(2), Johnson M(2), Wilson CH(2);
23andMe Research Team; Pitts SJ(2), Gentleman R(2), Auton A(2).

Collaborators: Agee M, Bell RK, Bryc K, Elson SL, Hinds DA, Huber KE, Kleinman
A, Litterman NK, McCreight JC, McIntyre MH, Mountain JL, Noblin ES, Northover
CAM, Sathirapongsasuti JF, Sazonova OV, Shelton JF, Shringarpure S, Tian C, Tung
JY, Vacic V.

Author information:
(1)23andMe Inc., 223N Mathilda Ave, Sunnyvale, CA, 94086, USA.
pfontanillas@23andme.com.
(2)23andMe Inc., 223N Mathilda Ave, Sunnyvale, CA, 94086, USA.

We trained and validated risk prediction models for the three major types of
skin cancer- basal cell carcinoma (BCC), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and
melanoma-on a cross-sectional and longitudinal dataset of 210,000 consented
research participants who responded to an online survey covering personal and
family history of skin cancer, skin susceptibility, and UV exposure. We
developed a primary disease risk score (DRS) that combined all 32 identified
genetic and non-genetic risk factors. Top percentile DRS was associated with an
up to 13-fold increase (odds ratio per standard deviation increase >2.5) in the
risk of developing skin cancer relative to the middle DRS percentile. To derive
lifetime risk trajectories for the three skin cancers, we developed a second and
age independent disease score, called DRSA. Using incident cases, we
demonstrated that DRSA could be used in early detection programs for identifying
high risk asymptotic individuals, and predicting when they are likely to develop
skin cancer. High DRSA scores were not only associated with earlier disease
diagnosis (by up to 14 years), but also with more severe and recurrent forms of
skin cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-20246-5
PMCID: PMC7794415
PMID: 33420020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are current or former employees of
23andMe, Inc., and hold stock or stock options in 23andMe.
