---
reference_id: "PMID:25760457"
title: Distinct Cutaneous Manifestations and Cold-Induced Leukocyte Activation Associated With PLCG2 Mutations.
authors:
- Aderibigbe OM
- Priel DL
- Lee CC
- Ombrello MJ
- Prajapati VH
- Liang MG
- Lyons JJ
- Kuhns DB
- Cowen EW
- Milner JD
journal: JAMA Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2014.5641
keywords:
- Cold Temperature
- Female
- Humans
- Leukocytes/metabolism
- Male
- Mutation
- Phospholipase C gamma/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- "Skin Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Urticaria/etiology
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Distinct Cutaneous Manifestations and Cold-Induced Leukocyte Activation Associated With PLCG2 Mutations.
**Authors:** Aderibigbe OM, Priel DL, Lee CC, Ombrello MJ, Prajapati VH, Liang MG, Lyons JJ, Kuhns DB, Cowen EW, Milner JD
**Journal:** JAMA Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamadermatol.2014.5641](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2014.5641)

## Content

1. JAMA Dermatol. 2015 Jun;151(6):627-34. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2014.5641.

Distinct Cutaneous Manifestations and Cold-Induced Leukocyte Activation 
Associated With PLCG2 Mutations.

Aderibigbe OM(1), Priel DL(1), Lee CC(2), Ombrello MJ(3), Prajapati VH(4), Liang 
MG(4), Lyons JJ(1), Kuhns DB(1), Cowen EW(5), Milner JD(1).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(3)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Pediatric Dermatology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Dermatology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland.

IMPORTANCE: PLCG2-associated antibody deficiency and immune dysregulation 
(PLAID) is a newly characterized immunodeficiency syndrome associated with 
distinct cutaneous features. Awareness of the cutaneous skin findings associated 
with PLAID may facilitate diagnosis and improve patient care.
OBJECTIVES: To characterize the cutaneous manifestations of PLAID and identify 
potential cellular mechanisms of the disease.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this retrospective analysis of patients 
with PLAID and PLAID-like disease evaluated at the National Institutes of Health 
from January 1, 2005, through December 31, 2014, patients with deletions in 
PLCG2 leading to PLAID and patients with PLAID-like disease for whom a PLAID 
mutation was not identified were studied.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Characterization of cutaneous manifestations of 
PLAID and PLAID-like disease and analysis of PLAID immune cell activation.
RESULTS: Among 36 patients with PLAID and PLAID-like phenotypes, all of whom had 
evaporative cold urticaria, 8 patients had a history of unique neonatal-onset 
ulcerative and cutaneous lesions in cold-sensitive regions of the body. 
Granulomatous skin lesions sparing warm regions (eg, flexural surfaces and 
skinfolds) were identified in 4 patients. Neutrophils and monocytes from 
patients with PLAID exhibited enhanced baseline activation in vitro, which was 
potentiated by ambient temperature exposure.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Collectively, these findings suggest that early 
identification of neonatal lesions may help in the diagnosis of PLAID and that 
leukocyte hyperactivation may underlie cutaneous lesions in patients with PLAID. 
Further characterization of mechanisms underlying leukocyte hyperactivation may 
contribute to the fundamental understanding of granuloma formation.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2014.5641
PMCID: PMC5664155
PMID: 25760457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.

Although the most common cutaneous manifestation of primary immunodeficiency (PID) is
infection, a variety of noninfectious dermatologic findings may occur.1 Noninfectious cutaneous granulomas, for instance, are
relatively frequent in patients with certain PIDs, including common variable immunodeficiency
(CVID), severe combined immunodeficiency, chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), and
ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T).2,3 Although not completely understood, cutaneous granulomas in
PID may be a consequence of abnormal antigen processing, aberrant cytokine production,
enhanced cell-mediated immune activity in the presence of a defective humoral system, abnormal
neutrophil activation, or impaired macrophage regulation.2,4–6

Cutaneous granulomas are also a feature of a newly described PID,
PLCG2-associated antibody deficiency and immune dysregulation (PLAID),
caused by genomic deletions in PLCG2. PLAID is characterized by cold
urticaria, autoimmunity, atopy, and humoral immune deficiency, resulting in recurrent
sinopulmonary infections.7 PLAID-associated
deletions of PLCG2 cause diminished receptor mediated activity at physiologic
temperatures in B cells and natural killer cells with enhanced spontaneous signaling in mast
cells and B cells at subphysiologic temperatures. The cold-induced signaling in mast cells
leads to the characteristic cold urticaria observed in all patients with PLAID. Cutaneous
granulomas have also been identified in 2 additional patients with missense mutations in
PLCG2, leading to a related syndrome that lacks cold urticaria but has some
other features of PLAID and striking autoinflammation termed APLAID.8 Studying these skin findings in the context of these
molecular lesions can provide substantial insight into the pathogenesis of cutaneous
granulomas.

We fully characterize the clinical and histologic spectrum of cutaneous disease in 27
patients with PLAID and 9 patients with a PLAID-like clinical phenotype who lack an
identifiable PLCG2 mutation and contrast this cohort with patients with
APLAID. In addition, we investigate an expanded subset of leukocytes and their responses to
cold to gain insight into the pathologic mechanism underlying dermatologic disease in patients
with PLAID and related disorders.

Thirty-six patients were referred to the National Institutes of Health for
evaluation from January 1, 2005, through December 31, 2014. The National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases institutional review board approved the clinical research
protocol. The study was conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of
Helsinki, and all patients provided written informed consent.

Patients included 27 individuals with PLAID from 3 different families and 9
individuals from 4 additional families with a similar clinical presentation to patients
with PLAID (cold urticaria, immunoglobulin abnormalities, and recurrent infections) but in
whom PLCG2 mutations were not identified (defined as a PLAID-like
disease) (eMethods and eTable in the
Supplement). Medical histories, physical examination findings, and laboratory and
skin biopsy results that confirmed the presence of cutaneous disease were obtained.
Cutaneous manifestations of the patients with PLAID were compared with those of 2
previously described patients with APLAID, a syndrome associated with a missense mutation
in PLCG2 characterized by systemic autoinflammation, immune
abnormalities, and bullous and granulomatous skin disease.

To promote neutrophil adherence, the wells of a 96-well plate (Primaria; BD
Biosciences)were coated with fibrinogen by incubating 1 hour at 37°C with 32
μL of 2.5 mg/mL of fibrinogen (EMD Millipore). The wells were then washed 3 times
with phosphate-buffered saline. Neutrophils (2 × 105/200 μL in
0.2% fetal calf serum in Hanks balanced salt solution with divalent cations, 10mM
HEPES) and cytochrome C (100μM)were added to the wells in duplicate and
preincubated at 20°C, 30°C, or 37°C for 5 minutes. An additional
identical well that contained superoxide dismutase (100 μg/mL) served as a blank
to validate superoxide production. The cells were then treated with buffer alone, tumor
necrosis factor α (TNF-α) (50 ng/mL), or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(100 ng/mL). The optical density at 549.5 nm(OD549.5 nm) of each well was
determined at 5-minute intervals for 60 minutes using a thermally regulated Spectromax
Plus 384 plate reader (Molecular Devices LLC) with shaking. The superoxide dismutase blank
was subtracted from the duplicate experimental wells, and the relative change in
OD549.5 nm vs time was plotted. Data were collected from 4 healthy controls
and 8 patients with PLAID at 20°C; 11 controls, 8 patients with PLAID, and 2
patients with APLAID at 30°C; and 16 healthy controls, 13 patients with PLAID, and
2 patients with APLAID at 37°C. The variation in the number of healthy control and
patient samples used in each experiment was a result of the limited availability of
isolated cells on the day of analysis.

Whole blood samples from 4 healthy controls and 8 patients with PLAID were
collected into EDTA tubes (Vacutainer; BD Biosciences). One sample from each study
participant was maintained at ambient temperature and the other maintained on warm sand
(33°C–37°C during transport). Aliquots (100 μL) of whole
blood were incubated for 15 minutes at ambient (room) temperature with the following
antibodies: CD11b (eBioscience), CD16, CD18, CD45, or CD62L (BD Biosciences). The tubes
were treated with OptiLyse C (Beckman Coulter Inc) for 10 minutes at room temperature to
lyse the erythrocytes, washed twice, and then analyzed on the BD FACSCanto II cytometer
(BD Biosciences). Expression, as measured by mean fluorescence intensity (MFI), was
measured for each surface antigen.

Neutrophils isolated from 32 healthy controls or 7 patients with PLAID (1.0
μL of 5 × 106/mL)were added to the cell well of the EZ-TAXIS
can (ECI Inc), and 1.0 μL of buffer or formyl-methionyl-leucyl phenylalanine (5
× 10−8M) was added to the opposing chemoattractant well. Images
of cellular migration were captured every 30 seconds for 60 minutes at 37°C, and
individual cells were tracked digitally. Images were converted to stacks (similar to
video) using the ImageJ software, version 1.46r (National Institutes of Health). Ten
randomly selected cells were electronically traced using the ImageJ plug-in MTrackJ. The
paths of the migrating cells were plotted with the position of each cell at
t = 0 anchored at the origin. With use of the coordinates
obtained at each time point, the migratory path of each cell was resolved into a random
migrational vector (orthogonal to the direction of the chemoattractant, along the x-axis)
and a directed migrational vector (parallel to the direction of the chemoattractant, along
the y-axis). In the absence of chemoattractant, the directed migrational vector should be
equivalent to the random migrational vector.

Differences in chemotaxis activity during 60 minutes and mean superoxide
production by the samples from controls and patients with PLAID after 60 minutes were
compared using unpaired 2-tailed t tests. The Wilcoxon signed rank test
was applied to analyze mean MFI and temperature normalized MFI
(MFIambient/MFIwarm) of surface antigens in patients compared with
controls.

Cold urticaria manifested in early childhood among all 36 patients with PLAID
and PLAID-like disease and many details regarding the manifestations have been previously
reported.7,9 Briefly, in all patients, signs and symptoms of cold urticaria
developed within the first year after birth. Urticarial reactions were noted as early as
the first day after birth in some patients when warming of the neonate was delayed
immediately after delivery. The rash that developed tended to lack the wheals observed in
more typical, later-onset cold urticaria. Almost universally, evaporative cooling or
immersion in coldwater led to the development of a blotchy, pruritic, erythematous rash,
and in some cases cold ingested items led to an esophageal burning sensation. Of interest,
contact with cold objects rarely prompted a rash. Syncopal episodes occurred only with
failure to leave the coldwater or other prolonged generalized cold insult and initiate
rewarming at the onset of symptoms. Antihistamines were effective in limiting the severity
of the cold reactions; however, all patients reported that cold avoidance and/or rapid
rewarming were the management solutions of choice. Although the severity of the cold
urticaria reactions did not change as patients got older, the frequency of reactions was
markedly reduced as patients learned to avoid cold triggers.

Eight patients (22%; 7 with PLAID and 1 with a PLAID-like phenotype)
with a history of cold urticaria also had a history of cutaneous lesions during the
neonatal period (Table). These patients reported
spontaneous ulceration of the nasal tip at approximately the third day after birth. Nasal
lesions had a hemorrhagic appearance with varying degrees of scale and crusting,
ultimately producing a characteristic red-brown to black, escharlike plaque (Figure 1A). In 6 (75%) of 8 patients, nasal
lesions resolved without intervention (range, 2–52 weeks) (Table and Figure 1B). The
remaining 2 patients continued to have progressive, localized tissue destruction,
resulting in erosion of the nasal cartilage during several years.

Four patients with nasal ulceration also developed small papules and erosions on
the fingers and toes in the neonatal period. Unlike the nasal lesions, there was no
evidence of hemorrhage or ulceration, and acral lesions resolved without scar formation.
Six of the 8 patients with neonatal skin lesions ultimately developed other cutaneous
manifestations later in life. One patient developed vitiligo during adolescence, and one
experienced recurrent red papules and patches on the head and upper trunk, which left
residual brown patches during early childhood. Four patients developed granulomatous
inflammation of the skin (Table).

The age at onset, distribution, and severity of cutaneous lesions differed among
the 4 patients with biopsy-confirmed granulomatous dermatitis. Patient 1 had a history of
neonatal nasal ulceration that ultimately led to complete erosion of his nasal cartilage.
Unlike other patients, he developed additional facial lesions within the first few weeks
of life. Granulomatous plaques first appeared on his cheeks, forehead, ears, and chin,
sparing the scalp, nasolabial folds, and periorbital regions. These plaques began as firm,
tender, red-brown plaques and nodules and evolved into scaly, red-brown and yellow- tan
plaques with telangiectasia. Significant hypertrichosis was also noted during infancy.
Throughout infancy and childhood, new plaques continued to emerge, eventually leading to
widespread involvement of the face, trunk, and upper and lower extremities (Figure 1C). Areas of friction or pressure (eg, belt line),
flexural surfaces (antecubital and popliteal fossae), skinfolds, and the skin overlying
the vertebral column were spared. Progression of his disease resulted in extensive,
disfiguring, coalescing, red-brown plaques and nodules and skin atrophy. In addition to
complete erosion of the nasal cartilage, the patient had partial scarring of the tympanic
membranes.

The results of skin biopsies of patient 1 performed at several time points
revealed noninfectious, non–foreign-body granulomatous inflammation with nodular
foci of CD68+ epithelial histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells
surrounded by a mild CD4/CD8+ lymphocytic infiltrate and scattered
eosinophils. Perineural granulomatous inflammation without nerve infiltration was also
present. Findings of several biopsies revealed well-delineated, nonnecrotizing,
sarcoid-type granulomas, whereas others revealed diffuse, poorly defined granulomatous
inflammation, particularly in the superficial dermis (Figure
2A). Lymph node biopsy findings revealed well-circumscribed, sarcoid-type
granulomatous inflammation with noncaseating necrosis and sclerotic stroma entirely
replacing lymph node architecture. The results of stains for acid-fast organisms,
bacteria, fungus, and spirochetes in all biopsy specimens were negative. Significant
atypia or histologic features diagnostic of malignant tumors were not observed.

Patient 2, a second-degree relative of patient 1, was born with a nasal lesion
in infancy that led to partial erosion of his nasal cartilage. However, unlike patient 1,
he did not develop granulomatous skin disease until he was in his 20s. At that time,
numerous discrete, indurated, scaly, erythematous plaques developed on the trunk and
extremities (Figure 1D). Spontaneous ulceration
eventually led to hypopigmented, atrophic scarring. Results of a skin biopsy performed
when the patient was in his 30s revealed sarcoid-type, granulomatous inflammation.
According to the patient, new lesions stopped arising after he moved from the Northeastern
United States to a warmer Southern climate.

Patients 3 and 4 developed granulomatous lesions limited to their lower
extremities. Patient 3 developed a single small, tender, pruritic, and scaly plaque before
the age of 10 years, which evolved into a chronic, nontender, scaly plaque. Histologic
analysis revealed granulomatous dermatitis. Patient 4 developed 2 small, pruritic, pink
papules on the medial aspect of each lower leg in her 50s. The lesions grew during several
years, becoming indurated with raised borders, superficial ulceration, and an overlying
layer of yellow fibrinoid material. The results of a skin biopsy revealed granulomatous
inflammation, characterized by nonnecrotizing granulomas in the dermis. The granulomas
were composed of a central core of histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells and were
partially surrounded by a rim of lymphocytes. Scattered eosinophils were also present in
the dermis (Figure 2B).

Patient 1 was treated with numerous topical and systemic therapies, including
topical tacrolimus, topical nitrogen mustard, topical corticosteroids, methotrexate with
mercaptopurine, cyclosporine, interferon alfa, thalidomide, etoposide phosphate,
cis-retinoic acid, vinblastine sulfate, imatinib mesylate, and
psoralen–UV-A(photochemotherapy);none of these altered the course of his skin
disease. Systemic corticosteroid therapy was instituted in early infancy and remained the
main-stay of treatment, often used in combination with other immunosuppressive agents.
Although oral corticosteroids did not result in lesion resolution, withdrawal invariably
led to disease exacerbation. Patient 2 was treated with phototherapy and topical and oral
corticosteroids. Similar to patient 1, oral corticosteroids provided only short-term
improvement. Patients 3 and 4 did not receive treatment for their limited skin
involvement.

The skin granulomas in patients with PLAID and APLAID recapitulate other
diseases of deficient immunity or increased inflammation, including CGD, severe combined
immunodeficiency, CVID, A-T, and sarcoidosis.2,3 Proposed theories for
granuloma formation in such diseases include increased or unregulated inflammatory
activity of neutrophils and macrophages.2,5,6,10 Of note, 3 patients in the originally
described PLAID cohort also had a concomitant diagnosis of CVID on the basis of present B
cells, low IgG levels, and recurrent infections that required intravenous immunoglobulin
replacement therapy. Given the association of PLAID with CVID and the presence of
activated macrophages in PLAID granulomas, we hypothesized that alterations in
PLCG2 result in abnormal neutrophil and monocyte and/or macrophage
activation. Furthermore, a previous study11 suggested that recruitment of neutrophils (which attract macrophages)
to granulomas is associated with mast cell activity. On the basis of the established in
vitro findings of increased PLAID mast cell activity in cold temperatures, we also
predicted that abnormal neutrophil or monocyte and/or macrophage activity associated with
PLCG2 mutations may be enhanced in colder temperatures.

Expression of CD11b, an integrin that mediates leukocyte adhesion and migration,
is increased in the setting of neutrophil or monocyte activation.12,13 Unstimulated
PLAID neutrophils and monocytes maintained at ambient (subphysiologic) temperature
consistently demonstrated a significant increase in spontaneous activation, as determined
by CD11b MFI, compared with unstimulated PLAID cells maintained at warm (physiologic)
temperature or unstimulated control cells maintained at both temperatures (Figure 3A–F). As expected, PLAID lymphocytes did not
demonstrate increased expression of surface antigens. The increased expression of surface
activation markers in subphysiologic conditions in the absence of chemical stimulation
suggests that compared with healthy controls, PLAID neutrophils and monocytes are
abnormally activated in subphysiologic temperature settings.

Normal neutrophil activation results from a carefully coordinated sequence of
events that involves phagocytosis and clearance of antigenic stimuli through an oxidative
burst. Defects in this process, as observed in CGD, can result in granulomatous disease.
Superoxide production in neutrophils from patients with PLAID and healthy controls under
different stimulatory and temperature conditions were assayed. At all tested temperatures
(20°C, 30°C, and 37°C), neutrophils from patients with PLAID
produced significantly greater basal levels of superoxide than did neutrophils from
healthy controls at 60 minutes (Figure 3G).
Differences were most notable between the 2 groups at subphysiologic temperatures
(20°C and 30°C). Although superoxide production in neutrophils from
healthy controls was enhanced by TNF-α at both 30°C and 37°C,
neutrophils from patients with PLAID failed to respond further to TNF-α activation
at subphysiologic temperatures (Figure 3H; eFigure 1A in the Supplement).

Similar to cells from patients with PLAID, neutrophils from patients with APLAID
produced significantly higher basal superoxide levels than neutrophils from healthy
controls at 30°C and 37°C (eFigure 1B in the Supplement). However, in
contrast to patients with PLAID, TNF-α stimulation of neutrophils from patients
with APLAID at 37°C produced only a minimal increase in superoxide production,
whereas stimulation at 30°C induced a significant increase in superoxide
production (eFigure 1C in the
Supplement).Taken together, these findings suggest that neutrophils from patients
with PLAID and those with APLAID have increased basal activity that is further enhanced in
cold settings, but neutrophils from patients with PLAID have a more significant defect in
ligand-mediated superoxide production.

Previous studies14–16 of neutrophils in the setting of
granulomatous diseases, such as necrobiosis lipoidica, granuloma annulare, and
sarcoidosis, found impaired neutrophil chemotaxis in vivo with normal migration in vitro,
suggesting that neutrophil chemotactic defects may stimulate granuloma formation through
over activation of macrophages. Compared with cells from healthy controls, neutrophils
from patients with PLAID displayed reduced random migration under basal conditions and
reduced directed migration to the chemoattractant formyl-methionyl-leucyl phenylalanine
(eFigure 2 in the Supplement).
The neutrophils from patients with PLAID had appropriate directionality but failed to
attain the same increased velocity (distance divided by time) associated with directed
migration in neutrophils from healthy controls (eFigure 2 in the Supplement).

The present study highlights the unique cutaneous manifestations in patients with
PLAID, APLAID, and PLAID-like phenotypes and temperature-sensitive cellular activation in
patients with PLAID. Striking neonatal nasal and acral skin manifestations occurred in
22% of patients and provided the earliest signs of PLAID or PLAID-like disease. To
our knowledge, the neonatal-onset ulcerative and self-resolving lesions in cold-sensitive
regions of the skin have not been previously described as part of another syndrome. Although
the histologic nature of the neonatal lesions remains unclear because of the lack of biopsy
material, their self-limiting nature in most patients argues against an infectious
process.

Given the associated observation that lower temperatures result in abnormal
activation of PLAID monocytes and neutrophils under basal conditions, the acral location of
neonatal lesions and sparing of warmer skin folds of granuloma is intriguing. It is possible
that enhanced leukocyte activation caused by temperature variation in the skin (which can
approach 26.8°C under normal conditions) may generate or perpetuate the cutaneous
neonatal lesions and granulomata associated with PLAID and PLAID-like phenotypes.17 In our cohort, severity of granulomatous
disease did not appear to correlate with genetic mutations, cellular responses, or familial
clustering. Environmental factors and/or other background genetic differences may account
for the heterogeneity.

In addition to cold-induced cellular activation, abnormal chemotaxis and impaired
TNF-α–mediated activation observed in neutrophils from PLAID patients may
also contribute to granuloma formation. Impaired neutrophil functioning could stimulate
increased cell signaling and activation, potentially leading to the generation of
granulomas. However, the TNF-α–mediated activation and chemotaxis data must
be interpreted with caution because it is possible that cold induced activation of cells
from patients with PLAID during processing (not performed at 37°C)may have led to
abnormal activation of neutrophils before assay performance.

PLAID-associated granulomas may contribute to our understanding of granulomatous
disease in other settings. Noncaseating cutaneous granulomas in patients with PLAID are
histopathologically similar to those observed in patients with sarcoidosis and CVID. Like
PLAID, granulomas in sarcoidosis and CVID may be caused by leukocyte hyperactivation.
Inappropriate macrophage activation, similar to that seen in PLAID, has been proposed as a
potential mechanism for granuloma formation in CVID and A-T.2,5 Tonic activation
of neutrophils has also been implicated in the formation of CGD granulomas.6 Given that neutrophils and monocytes from
patients with PLAID have spontaneous cold activation and that PLAID granulomas occur
predominantly on cold skin surfaces, we hypothesize that innate immune leukocyte
hyperactivation may underlie cutaneous granuloma formation in PLAID. This raises the
possibility that leukocyte hyperactivation may provide a unique and direct pathway for
cutaneous granuloma formation.

Testing for PLCG2 mutations should be considered in patients with
a lifelong history of cold urticaria and a history of recurrent sinopulmonary infections or
abnormalities on tests of immune cell functioning. A high index of suspicion should be
maintained for patients with a strong family history of cold urticaria and recurrent
infections in addition to their personal history. Patients with cold urticaria who have
additional findings of granulomatous skin disease or a history of hemorrhagic lesions at
acral sites in the early neonatal period are excellent candidates for genetic testing.

The identification of PLAID-like phenotypes among patients without identifiable
PLCG2 mutations suggests that additional genetic defects may exist within
this pathway, which also led to skin lesions and immune dysfunction. Future efforts will
focus on identifying the genetic mutations responsible for PLAID-like phenotypes in these
patients. Identification of patients using characteristic cutaneous manifestations that may
precede immunodeficiency symptoms may help in early identification and improved care of
patients with PLAID and PLAID-like phenotypes. Although direct correlations between patient
phenotype and in vitro data have yet to be identified, the present study not only provides a
laboratory and clinical model and an approach to study the basic mechanisms of PLAID, but
also contributes to our understanding of the broader category of granulomatous
disorders.