---
reference_id: "PMID:30048710"
title: Generation of Fabry cardiomyopathy model for drug screening using induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes from a female Fabry patient.
authors:
- Kuramoto Y
- Naito AT
- Tojo H
- Sakai T
- Ito M
- Shibamoto M
- Nakagawa A
- Higo T
- Okada K
- Yamaguchi T
- Lee JK
- Miyagawa S
- Sawa Y
- Sakata Y
- Komuro I
journal: J Mol Cell Cardiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2018.07.246
keywords:
- "Cardiomyopathies/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Drug Evaluation, Preclinical"
- "Fabry Disease/drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/drug effects
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/drug effects"
- Patients
- Trihexosylceramides/genetics
- X Chromosome Inactivation/genetics
- alpha-Galactosidase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation of Fabry cardiomyopathy model for drug screening using induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes from a female Fabry patient.
**Authors:** Kuramoto Y, Naito AT, Tojo H, Sakai T, Ito M, Shibamoto M, Nakagawa A, Higo T, Okada K, Yamaguchi T, Lee JK, Miyagawa S, Sawa Y, Sakata Y, Komuro I
**Journal:** J Mol Cell Cardiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yjmcc.2018.07.246](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2018.07.246)

## Content

1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2018 Aug;121:256-265. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2018.07.246.
Epub  2018 Jul 23.

Generation of Fabry cardiomyopathy model for drug screening using induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes from a female Fabry patient.

Kuramoto Y(1), Naito AT(2), Tojo H(3), Sakai T(1), Ito M(4), Shibamoto M(1),
Nakagawa A(1), Higo T(1), Okada K(1), Yamaguchi T(4), Lee JK(5), Miyagawa S(6),
Sawa Y(6), Sakata Y(1), Komuro I(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Toho University, 5-21-16
Omori-nishi, Ohta-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address:
atsuhiko.naito@med.toho-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate School
of Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, the University of Tokyo Graduate
School of Medicine, 7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan; Department of Advanced
Cardiovascular Regenerative Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Fabry disease is an X-linked disease caused by mutations in
α-galactosidase A (GLA); these mutations result in the accumulation of its
substrates, mainly globotriaosylceramide (Gb3). The accumulation of
glycosphingolipids induces pathogenic changes in various organs, including the
heart, and Fabry cardiomyopathy is the most frequent cause of death in patients
with Fabry disease. Existing therapies to treat Fabry disease have limited
efficacy, and new approaches to improve the prognosis of patients with Fabry
cardiomyopathy are required.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We generated induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines
from a female patient and her son. Each iPSC clone from the female patient
showed either deficient or normal GLA activity, which could be used as a Fabry
disease model or its isogenic control, respectively. Erosion of the inactivated
X chromosome developed heterogeneously among clones, and mono-allelic expression
of the GLA gene was maintained for a substantial period in a subset of iPSC
clones. Gb3 accumulation was observed in iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (iPS-CMs)
from GLA activity-deficient iPSCs by mass-spectrometry and immunofluorescent
staining. The expression of ANP was increased, but the cell surface area was
decreased in iPS-CMs from the Fabry model, suggesting that cardiomyopathic
change is ongoing at the molecular level in Fabry iPS-CMs. We also established
an algorithm for selecting proper Gb3 staining that could be used for
high-content analysis-based drug screening.
CONCLUSIONS: We generated a Fabry cardiomyopathy model and a drug screening
system by using iPS-CMs from a female Fabry patient. Drug screening using our
system may help discover new drugs that would improve the prognosis of patients
with Fabry cardiomyopathy.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2018.07.246
PMID: 30048710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
