---
reference_id: "PMID:38320129"
title: Avapritinib versus Placebo in Indolent Systemic Mastocytosis.
authors:
- Gotlib J
- Castells M
- Elberink HO
- Siebenhaar F
- Hartmann K
- Broesby-Olsen S
- George TI
- Panse J
- Alvarez-Twose I
- Radia DH
- Tashi T
- Bulai Livideanu C
- Sabato V
- Heaney M
- Van Daele P
- Cerquozzi S
- Dybedal I
- Reiter A
- Pongdee T
- Barete S
- Ustun C
- Schwartz L
- Ward BR
- Schafhausen P
- Vadas P
- Bose P
- DeAngelo DJ
- Rein L
- Vachhani P
- Triggiani M
- Bonadonna P
- Rafferty M
- Butt NM
- Oh ST
- Wortmann F
- Ungerstedt J
- Guilarte M
- Taparia M
- Kuykendall AT
- Arana Yi C
- Ogbogu P
- Gaudy-Marqueste C
- Mattsson M
- Shomali W
- Giannetti MP
- Bidollari I
- Lin HM
- Sulllivan E
- Mar B
- Scherber R
- Roche M
- Akin C
- Maurer M
journal: NEJM Evid
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1056/EVIDoa2200339
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mastocytosis, Systemic/diagnosis"
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Pyrroles/therapeutic use
- Triazines/therapeutic use
- Avapritinib
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Avapritinib versus Placebo in Indolent Systemic Mastocytosis.
**Authors:** Gotlib J, Castells M, Elberink HO, Siebenhaar F, Hartmann K, Broesby-Olsen S, George TI, Panse J, Alvarez-Twose I, Radia DH, Tashi T, Bulai Livideanu C, Sabato V, Heaney M, Van Daele P, Cerquozzi S, Dybedal I, Reiter A, Pongdee T, Barete S, Ustun C, Schwartz L, Ward BR, Schafhausen P, Vadas P, Bose P, DeAngelo DJ, Rein L, Vachhani P, Triggiani M, Bonadonna P, Rafferty M, Butt NM, Oh ST, Wortmann F, Ungerstedt J, Guilarte M, Taparia M, Kuykendall AT, Arana Yi C, Ogbogu P, Gaudy-Marqueste C, Mattsson M, Shomali W, Giannetti MP, Bidollari I, Lin HM, Sulllivan E, Mar B, Scherber R, Roche M, Akin C, Maurer M
**Journal:** NEJM Evid (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1056/EVIDoa2200339](https://doi.org/10.1056/EVIDoa2200339)

## Content

1. NEJM Evid. 2023 Jun;2(6):EVIDoa2200339. doi: 10.1056/EVIDoa2200339. Epub 2023 
May 23.

Avapritinib versus Placebo in Indolent Systemic Mastocytosis.

Gotlib J(1), Castells M(2), Elberink HO(3), Siebenhaar F(4)(5), Hartmann 
K(6)(7), Broesby-Olsen S(8), George TI(9), Panse J(10)(11), Alvarez-Twose I(12), 
Radia DH(13), Tashi T(14), Bulai Livideanu C(15), Sabato V(16), Heaney M(17), 
Van Daele P(18), Cerquozzi S(19), Dybedal I(20), Reiter A(21), Pongdee T(22), 
Barete S(23), Ustun C(24), Schwartz L(25), Ward BR(25), Schafhausen P(26), Vadas 
P(27), Bose P(28), DeAngelo DJ(29), Rein L(30), Vachhani P(31), Triggiani M(32), 
Bonadonna P(33), Rafferty M(34), Butt NM(35), Oh ST(36), Wortmann F(37), 
Ungerstedt J(38), Guilarte M(39), Taparia M(40), Kuykendall AT(41), Arana Yi 
C(42), Ogbogu P(43), Gaudy-Marqueste C(44), Mattsson M(45), Shomali W(1), 
Giannetti MP(46), Bidollari I(47), Lin HM(47), Sulllivan E(47), Mar B(47), 
Scherber R(47), Roche M(47), Akin C(48), Maurer M(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston.
(3)Department of Allergology, University Medical Center, Groningen Research 
Institute Asthma and COPD, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(4)Institute of Allergology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate 
Member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin.
(5)Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology, Allergology 
and Immunology, Berlin.
(6)Division of Allergy, Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Basel and 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital Basel and University of Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(9)Associated Regional and University Pathologists, Inc. Laboratories, 
Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City.
(10)Department of Oncology, Hematology, Hemostaseology, and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, University Hospital Aachen, Medical Faculty, 
Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(11)Center for Integrated Oncology, Aachen, Bonn, Cologne, Düsseldorf (ABCD), 
Aachen, Germany.
(12)Institute of Mastocytosis Studies of Castilla-La Mancha, Virgen del Valle 
Hospital, Toledo, Spain.
(13)Guy's & St. Thomas' National Health Service Foundation Trust, London.
(14)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.
(15)Department of Dermatology, Centre of Reference for Mastocytosis, Toulouse 
University Hospital, Toulouse, France.
(16)Department of Immunology, Allergology and Rheumatology, University of 
Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(17)Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York.
(18)Department of Internal Medicine and Immunology, Erasmus Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(19)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(20)Department of Hematology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo.
(21)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim, 
Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.
(22)Division of Allergic Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(23)Unit of Dermatology, Centre of Reference for Mastocytosis, Pitié-Salpêtrière 
Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Sorbonne Université, Paris.
(24)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, Oncology and Cell 
Therapy, Section of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, Rush 
Medical College, Chicago.
(25)Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA.
(26)Department of Oncology, Hematology, and Bone Marrow Transplantation with 
Section of Pneumology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, 
Germany.
(27)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, St. 
Michael's Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto.
(28)Department of Leukemia, Division of Cancer Medicine, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston.
(29)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston.
(30)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
(31)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(32)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Salerno, Salerno, 
Italy.
(33)Allergy Unit and Asthma Center, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata 
di Verona, Verona, Italy.
(34)The Beatson West of Scotland Cancer Centre, Glasgow, Scotland.
(35)The Clatterbridge Cancer Centre, Bebington, Wirral, United Kingdom.
(36)Siteman Cancer Center at Barnes-Jewish Hospital and Washington University 
School of Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis.
(37)Oberärztin Hämatologie/Onkologie bei Uksh Campus Lübeck, 
Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, 
Schleswig-Holstein, Germany.
(38)Department of Medicine, Huddinge (H7), Karolinska University Hospitale, 
Stockholm.
(39)Hospital UniversitariVall d'Hebron, Institut de Recerca Vall d'Hebron 
(VHIR), Barcelona.
(40)University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(41)Department of Malignant Hematology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL.
(42)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, AZ.
(43)Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of 
Pediatrics, University Hospitals Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, Case 
Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland.
(44)Service de Dermatologie et de cancérologie cutanée, Assistance 
Publique-Hopitaux de Marseille, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
(45)Department of Hematology, Uppsala University Hospital and Department of 
Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden.
(46)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston.
(47)Blueprint Medicines Corporation, Cambridge, MA.
(48)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

Comment in
    NEJM Evid. 2023 Jun;2(6):EVIDe2300089. doi: 10.1056/EVIDe2300089.

BACKGROUND: Indolent systemic mastocytosis (ISM) is a clonal mast-cell disease 
driven by the KIT D816V mutation. We assessed the efficacy and safety of 
avapritinib versus placebo, both with best supportive care, in patients with 
ISM. METHODS: We randomized patients with moderate to severe ISM (total symptom 
score [TSS] of ≥28; scores range from 0 to 110, with higher numbers indicating 
more severe symptoms) two to one to avapritinib 25 mg once daily (n=141) or 
placebo (n=71). The primary end point was mean change in TSS based on the 14-day 
average of patient-reported severity of 11 symptoms. Secondary end points 
included reductions in serum tryptase and blood KIT D816V variant allele 
fraction (≥50%), reductions in TSS (≥50% and ≥30%), reduction in bone marrow 
mast cells (≥50%), and quality of life measures. RESULTS: From baseline to week 
24, avapritinib-treated patients had a decrease of 15.6 points (95% CI, −18.6 to 
−12.6) in TSS compared to a decrease of 9.2 points (−13.1 to −5.2) in the 
placebo group; P<0.003. From baseline to Week 24, 76/141 patients (54%; 45% to 
62%) in the avapritinib group compared to 0/71 patients in the placebo group 
achieved a ≥50% reduction in serum tryptase level; P<0.001. Edema and increases 
in alkaline phosphatase were more common with avapritinib than placebo; there 
were few treatment discontinuations because of adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: In 
this trial, avapritinib was superior to placebo in reducing uncontrolled 
symptoms and mast-cell burden in patients with ISM. The long-term safety and 
efficacy of this approach for patients with ISM remain the focus of the ongoing 
trial. (Funded by Blueprint Medicines Corporation; ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT03731260.)

DOI: 10.1056/EVIDoa2200339
PMID: 38320129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]