---
reference_id: "PMID:39535676"
title: "Solitary Peutz-Jeghers polyp harboring a focus of high-grade dysplasia in the colon: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Maeda T
- Yoshizawa T
- Oyama T
- Nakagawa S
- Murai Y
- Machida R
- Ishidoya N
- Sakamoto J
- Iwamura H
- Sakuraba H
journal: Clin J Gastroenterol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12328-024-02059-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Solitary Peutz-Jeghers polyp harboring a focus of high-grade dysplasia in the colon: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Maeda T, Yoshizawa T, Oyama T, Nakagawa S, Murai Y, Machida R, Ishidoya N, Sakamoto J, Iwamura H, Sakuraba H
**Journal:** Clin J Gastroenterol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12328-024-02059-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12328-024-02059-x)

## Content

1. Clin J Gastroenterol. 2025 Feb;18(1):89-94. doi: 10.1007/s12328-024-02059-x. 
Epub 2024 Nov 13.

Solitary Peutz-Jeghers polyp harboring a focus of high-grade dysplasia in the 
colon: a case report and literature review.

Maeda T(1)(2)(3), Yoshizawa T(4), Oyama T(5), Nakagawa S(5), Murai Y(5), Machida 
R(5), Ishidoya N(5), Sakamoto J(5), Iwamura H(5), Sakuraba H(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tsugaru General Hospital, Aomori, 037-0074, 
Japan. maeda.t@hirosaki-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hematology, Hirosaki University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Aomori, 036-8562, Japan. maeda.t@hirosaki-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Aomori Prefectural Central Hospital, Aomori, 
030-8553, Japan. maeda.t@hirosaki-u.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Pathology and Bioscience, Hirosaki University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Aomori, 036-8562, Japan.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Tsugaru General Hospital, Aomori, 037-0074, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hematology, Hirosaki University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Aomori, 036-8562, Japan.

A solitary Peutz-Jeghers (PJ) polyp is a rare hamartomatous lesion without an 
associated PJ syndrome. However, little is known regarding malignancy arising in 
solitary PJ polyps. Here, we report a case of a solitary colonic PJ polyp with 
focal dysplasia. A 45-year-old asymptomatic man underwent total colonoscopy 
following a positive fecal occult blood test. The patient had no history of 
mucocutaneous pigmentation or family history of PJ syndrome. A 20 mm 
erythematous pedunculated polyp was observed in the sigmoid colon. Magnified 
endoscopy revealed a tubular or branch-like pit pattern with localized areas of 
irregular pits. These findings were suggestive of colorectal adenoma with 
high-grade dysplasia, and endoscopic mucosal resection was performed. 
Histopathological examination revealed arborizing proliferation of hyperplastic 
epithelia with smooth muscle bundles. In addition, a small number of irregular 
crypts with high-grade dysplasia were observed in the hyperplastic epithelium. 
Based on these histological findings, we finally diagnosed the patient with a 
solitary colonic PJ polyp with high-grade dysplasia. The present case suggests 
that solitary colonic PJ polyps may harbor dysplastic changes and require 
pathological evaluation with en bloc resection of the polyps.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12328-024-02059-x
PMCID: PMC11785670
PMID: 39535676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest. Human/animal rights: All 
procedures were performed in accordance with the ethical standards of the 1964 
Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments. Informed consent: Informed 
consent was obtained from the patient in the case report.