---
reference_id: "PMID:35257062"
title: Randomized Clinical Trial on the Long-Term Efficacy and Safety of Lumasiran in Patients With Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1.
authors:
- Hulton SA
- Groothoff JW
- Frishberg Y
- Koren MJ
- Overcash JS
- Sellier-Leclerc AL
- Shasha-Lavsky H
- Saland JM
- Hayes W
- Magen D
- Moochhala SH
- Coenen M
- Simkova E
- Garrelfs SF
- Sas DJ
- Meliambro KA
- Ngo T
- Sweetser MT
- Habtemariam BA
- Gansner JM
- McGregor TL
- Lieske JC
journal: Kidney Int Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2021.12.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized Clinical Trial on the Long-Term Efficacy and Safety of Lumasiran in Patients With Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1.
**Authors:** Hulton SA, Groothoff JW, Frishberg Y, Koren MJ, Overcash JS, Sellier-Leclerc AL, Shasha-Lavsky H, Saland JM, Hayes W, Magen D, Moochhala SH, Coenen M, Simkova E, Garrelfs SF, Sas DJ, Meliambro KA, Ngo T, Sweetser MT, Habtemariam BA, Gansner JM, McGregor TL, Lieske JC
**Journal:** Kidney Int Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ekir.2021.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ekir.2021.12.001)

## Content

1. Kidney Int Rep. 2021 Dec 11;7(3):494-506. doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2021.12.001.
eCollection 2022 Mar.

Randomized Clinical Trial on the Long-Term Efficacy and Safety of Lumasiran in
Patients With Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1.

Hulton SA(1), Groothoff JW(2), Frishberg Y(3), Koren MJ(4), Overcash JS(5),
Sellier-Leclerc AL(6), Shasha-Lavsky H(7), Saland JM(8), Hayes W(9), Magen
D(10), Moochhala SH(11), Coenen M(12), Simkova E(13), Garrelfs SF(2), Sas
DJ(14), Meliambro KA(8), Ngo T(15), Sweetser MT(15), Habtemariam BA(15), Gansner
JM(15), McGregor TL(15), Lieske JC(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Birmingham Women's and Children's Hospital,
Birmingham, UK.
(2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center and Faculty of
Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Jacksonville Center for Clinical Research, Jacksonville, Florida, USA.
(5)Velocity Clinical Research, San Diego, California, USA.
(6)Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant and Centre d'Investigation Clinique Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Hospices Civils de Lyon,
ERKnet, Bron, France.
(7)Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Galilee Medical Center and Azrieli Faculty of
Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, Nahariya, Israel.
(8)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
(10)Pediatric Nephrology Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(11)UCL Department of Renal Medicine, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(12)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University
Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(13)Al Jalila Children's Hospital, Dubai, United Arabs Emirates.
(14)Division of Pediatric Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.
(15)Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(16)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota,
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1) is a rare genetic disease
caused by hepatic overproduction of oxalate, leading to kidney stones,
nephrocalcinosis, kidney failure, and systemic oxalosis. In the 6-month
double-blind period (DBP) of ILLUMINATE-A, a phase 3, randomized,
placebo-controlled trial in patients with PH1 ≥6 years old, treatment with
lumasiran, an RNA interference therapeutic, led to substantial reductions in
urinary oxalate (UOx) levels.
METHODS: We report data to month 12 in the extension period (EP) of
ILLUMINATE-A, including patients who continued lumasiran (lumasiran/lumasiran)
or crossed over from placebo to lumasiran (placebo/lumasiran).
RESULTS: In the lumasiran/lumasiran group (n = 24), the reduction in 24-hour UOx
level was sustained to month 12 (mean reduction from baseline, 66.9% at month 6;
64.1% at month 12). The placebo/lumasiran group (n = 13) had a similar time
course and magnitude of 24-hour UOx reduction (mean reduction, 57.3%) after 6
months of lumasiran. Kidney stone event rates seemed to be lower after 6 months
of lumasiran in both groups compared with the 12 months before consent, and this
reduction was maintained at month 12 in the lumasiran/lumasiran group. At study
start, 71% of patients in the lumasiran/lumasiran group and 92% in the
placebo/lumasiran group had nephrocalcinosis. Nephrocalcinosis grade improved
after 6 months of lumasiran in the lumasiran/lumasiran and placebo/lumasiran
groups (13% and 8% of patients, respectively). After an additional 6 months of
lumasiran, 46% of patients had improvement in nephrocalcinosis grade within the
lumasiran/lumasiran group. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) remained
stable during the course of lumasiran treatment. The most common adverse events
(AEs) related to lumasiran were mild, transient injection-site reactions (ISRs).
CONCLUSION: Long-term lumasiran treatment enabled sustained lowering of UOx
levels with acceptable safety and encouraging results on clinical outcomes.

© 2022 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ekir.2021.12.001
PMCID: PMC8897294
PMID: 35257062
