---
reference_id: "PMID:27054228"
title: ADNP-Related Helsmoortel-Van der Aa Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Harutyunyan L
- Kooy RF
- "D'Incal CP"
- Van Dijck A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADNP-Related Helsmoortel-Van der Aa Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Harutyunyan L, Kooy RF, D'Incal CP, Van Dijck A

## Content

1. ADNP-Related Helsmoortel-Van der Aa Syndrome.

Harutyunyan L(1), Kooy RF(2), D'Incal CP(3), Van Dijck A(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2016 Apr 7 [updated 2025 Aug 21].

Author information:
(1)Doctoral researcher, Disability Studies, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, 
Belgium
(2)Professor, Cognitive Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics, University of 
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
(3)Doctoral researcher, Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, 
Antwerp, Belgium
(4)Postdoctoral Research Assistant, Disability studies University of Antwerp, 
Antwerp, Belgium

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: ADNP-related Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome (also 
referred to as Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome [HVDAS]) is characterized by 
hypotonia, speech and motor delay, mild-to-severe intellectual disability, and 
characteristic facial features (prominent forehead, high anterior hairline, wide 
and depressed nasal bridge, and short nose with full, upturned nasal tip). 
Features of autism spectrum disorder are common (stereotypic behavior, impaired 
social interaction). Other common findings include additional behavioral 
problems, sleep disturbance, structural brain abnormalities, feeding issues, 
gastrointestinal problems, visual dysfunction (hypermetropia, strabismus, 
cortical visual impairment), musculoskeletal anomalies, recurrent infections, 
endocrine issues including short stature and thyroid and/or growth hormone 
deficiencies, cardiac anomalies, hearing loss, seizures, and urinary tract 
anomalies.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ADNP-related HVDAS is established by 
identification of a heterozygous ADNP pathogenic variant by molecular genetic 
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is symptomatic and can 
include: speech, occupational, and physical therapy; specialized learning 
programs depending on individual needs; treatment of neuropsychiatric features; 
nutritional support as needed; standard treatment of gastrointestinal, 
ophthalmologic, and musculoskeletal issues, recurrent infections, endocrine and 
cardiac findings, hearing loss, seizures, and urinary tract anomalies; family 
and social support. Surveillance: At each visit monitor developmental progress, 
educational needs, behavioral issues, occupational and physical therapy needs, 
growth and nutrition, gastrointestinal issues, infection frequency, endocrine 
issues, seizures, urinary tract infections, and family needs; annual vision and 
hearing assessment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ADNP-related HVDAS is an autosomal dominant disorder. Most 
probands whose parents have undergone molecular genetic testing have the 
disorder as the result of a de novo ADNP pathogenic variant. In two families 
reported to date, probands diagnosed with ADNP-related HVDAS inherited a 
pathogenic variant from an unaffected parent. Once the ADNP pathogenic variant 
has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 27054228