---
reference_id: "PMID:16241971"
title: "Human photosensitivity: from pathophysiology to treatment."
authors:
- Verrotti A
- Tocco AM
- Salladini C
- Latini G
- Chiarelli F
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2005.01085.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human photosensitivity: from pathophysiology to treatment.
**Authors:** Verrotti A, Tocco AM, Salladini C, Latini G, Chiarelli F
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-1331.2005.01085.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-1331.2005.01085.x)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2005 Nov;12(11):828-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2005.01085.x.

Human photosensitivity: from pathophysiology to treatment.

Verrotti A(1), Tocco AM, Salladini C, Latini G, Chiarelli F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Pediatrics, University of Chieti, Chieti, 
Italy. averrott@unich.it

Photosensitivity is a condition detected on the electroencephalography (EEG) as 
a paroxysmal reaction to Intermittent Photic Stimulation (IPS). This EEG 
response, elicited by IPS or by other visual stimuli of daily life, is called 
Photo Paroxysmal Response (PPR). PPRs are well documented in epileptic and 
non-epileptic subjects. Photosensitivity rarely in normal individuals evolves 
into epilepsy. Photosensitive epilepsy is a rare refex epilepsy characterized by 
seizures in photosensitive individuals. The development of modern technology has 
increased the exposition to potential seizure precipitants in people of all 
ages, but especially in children and adolescents. Actually, videogames, 
computers and televisions are the most common triggers in daily life of 
susceptible persons. The mechanisms of generation of PPR are poorly understood, 
but genetic factors play an important rule. The control of visually induced 
seizures has, generally a good prognosis. In patients known to be visually 
sensitive, avoidance of obvious source and stimulus modifications are very 
important and useful to seizure prevention, but in the large majority of 
patients with epilepsy and photosensitivity antiepileptic drugs are needed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2005.01085.x
PMID: 16241971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]