---
reference_id: "PMID:29681092"
title: "LIPT1 deficiency presenting as early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, Leigh disease, and secondary pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency."
authors:
- Stowe RC
- Sun Q
- Elsea SH
- Scaglia F
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38654
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LIPT1 deficiency presenting as early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, Leigh disease, and secondary pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency.
**Authors:** Stowe RC, Sun Q, Elsea SH, Scaglia F
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38654](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38654)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 May;176(5):1184-1189. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38654.

LIPT1 deficiency presenting as early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, Leigh 
disease, and secondary pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency.

Stowe RC(1), Sun Q(2), Elsea SH(2), Scaglia F(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Neurology and Developmental 
Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas.
(3)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.

Lipoic acid is an essential cofactor for the mitochondrial 2-ketoacid 
dehydrogenase complexes and the glycine cleavage system. Lipoyltransferase 1 
catalyzes the covalent attachment of lipoate to these enzyme systems. Pathogenic 
variants in LIPT1 gene have recently been described in four patients from three 
families, commonly presenting with severe lactic acidosis resulting in neonatal 
death and/or poor neurocognitive outcomes. We report a 2-month-old male with 
severe lactic acidosis, refractory status epilepticus, and brain imaging 
suggestive of Leigh disease. Exome sequencing implicated compound heterozygous 
LIPT1 pathogenic variants. We describe the fifth case of LIPT1 deficiency, whose 
phenotype progressed to that of an early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, 
which is novel compared to previously described patients whom we will review. 
Due to the significant biochemical and phenotypic overlap that LIPT1 deficiency 
and mitochondrial energy cofactor disorders have with pyruvate dehydrogenase 
deficiency and/or nonketotic hyperglycinemia, they are and have been 
presumptively under-diagnosed without exome sequencing.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38654
PMID: 29681092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]