---
reference_id: "PMID:27631335"
title: "Pegvisomant: a growth hormone receptor antagonist used in the treatment of acromegaly."
authors:
- Tritos NA
- Biller BM
journal: Pituitary
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s11102-016-0753-y
keywords:
- "Acromegaly/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Human Growth Hormone/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Somatotropin/antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pegvisomant: a growth hormone receptor antagonist used in the treatment of acromegaly.
**Authors:** Tritos NA, Biller BM
**Journal:** Pituitary (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11102-016-0753-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11102-016-0753-y)

## Content

1. Pituitary. 2017 Feb;20(1):129-135. doi: 10.1007/s11102-016-0753-y.

Pegvisomant: a growth hormone receptor antagonist used in the treatment of
acromegaly.

Tritos NA(1)(2), Biller BM(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Neuroendocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Zero Emerson Place #
112, Boston, MA, 02114, USA. ntritos@partners.org.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. ntritos@partners.org.
(3)Neuroendocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Zero Emerson Place #
112, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

PURPOSE: To review published data on pegvisomant and its therapeutic role in
acromegaly.
METHODS: Electronic searches of the published literature were conducted using
the keywords: acromegaly, growth hormone (GH) receptor (antagonist),
pegvisomant, therapy. Relevant articles (n = 141) were retrieved and considered
for inclusion in this manuscript.
RESULTS: Pegvisomant is a genetically engineered, recombinant growth hormone
receptor antagonist, which is effective in normalizing serum insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1) levels in the majority of patients with acromegaly and
ameliorating symptoms and signs associated with GH excess. Pegvisomant does not
have direct antiproliferative effects on the underlying somatotroph pituitary
adenoma, which is the etiology of GH excess in the vast majority of patients
with acromegaly. Therefore, patients receiving pegvisomant monotherapy require
regular pituitary imaging in order to monitor for possible increase in tumor
size. Adverse events in patients on pegvisomant therapy include skin rashes,
lipohypertrophy at injection sites, and idiosyncratic liver toxicity (generally
asymptomatic transaminitis that is reversible upon drug discontinuation), thus
necessitating regular patient monitoring.
CONCLUSIONS: Pegvisomant is an effective therapeutic agent in patients with
acromegaly who are not in remission after undergoing pituitary surgery. It
mitigates excess GH action, as demonstrated by IGF-1 normalization, but has no
direct effects on pituitary tumors causing acromegaly. Regular surveillance for
possible tumor growth and adverse effects (hepatotoxicity, skin manifestations)
is warranted.

DOI: 10.1007/s11102-016-0753-y
PMID: 27631335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
