---
reference_id: "PMID:26857709"
title: Accentuated hyperparathyroidism in type II Bartter syndrome.
authors:
- Landau D
- Gurevich E
- Sinai-Treiman L
- Shalev H
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-016-3337-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Bartter Syndrome/complications
- Child
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Female
- Humans
- Hyperparathyroidism/etiology
- Male
- Parathyroid Hormone/blood
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Accentuated hyperparathyroidism in type II Bartter syndrome.
**Authors:** Landau D, Gurevich E, Sinai-Treiman L, Shalev H
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-016-3337-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-016-3337-1)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2016 Jul;31(7):1085-90. doi: 10.1007/s00467-016-3337-1. Epub
2016 Feb 8.

Accentuated hyperparathyroidism in type II Bartter syndrome.

Landau D(1)(2), Gurevich E(3)(4), Sinai-Treiman L(5), Shalev H(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics B, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, 14
Kaplan Street, Petach Tikva, 49202, Israel. ldaniel@bgu.ac.il.
(2)Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. ldaniel@bgu.ac.il.
(3)Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(4)Division of Pediatrics, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Kaplan Medical Center, Rehovot, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Bartter syndrome (BS) may be associated with different degrees of
hypercalciuria, but marked parathyroid hormone (PTH) abnormalities have not been
described.
METHODS: We compared clinical and laboratory data of patients with either
ROMK-deficient type II BS (n = 14) or Barttin-deficient type IV BS (n = 20).
RESULTS: Only BS-IV patients remained mildly hypokalemic in spite of a higher
need for potassium supplementation. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)
was mildly decreased in only four BS-IV patients. Average PTH values were
significantly higher in BS-II (160.6 ± 85.8 vs. 92.5 ± 48 pg/ml in BS-IV,
p = 0.006). In both groups, there was a positive correlation between age and
log(PTH). Levels of 25(OH) vitamin D were not different. Total serum calcium was
lower (within normal limits) and age-related serum phosphate (Pi)-SDS was
increased in BS-II (1.19 ± 0.71 vs. 0.01 ± 1.04 in BS-IV, p < 0.001). The GFR
threshold for Pi reabsorption was higher in BS-II (5.63 ± 1.25 vs. 4.36 ± 0.98,
p = 0.002). Spot urine calcium/creatinine ratio and nephrocalcinosis rate (100
vs. 16 %) were higher in the BS-II group.
CONCLUSIONS: PTH, serum Pi levels, and urinary threshold for Pi reabsorption are
significantly elevated in type II vs. type IV BS, suggesting a PTH resistance
state. This may be a response to more severe long-standing hypercalciuria,
leading to a higher rate of nephrocalcinosis in BS-II.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-016-3337-1
PMID: 26857709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
