---
reference_id: "PMID:38321404"
title: "The global prevalence of depression, anxiety, and sleep disorder among patients coping with Post COVID-19 syndrome (long COVID): a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Seighali N
- Abdollahi A
- Shafiee A
- Amini MJ
- Teymouri Athar MM
- Safari O
- Faghfouri P
- Eskandari A
- Rostaii O
- Salehi AH
- Soltani H
- Hosseini M
- Abhari FS
- Maghsoudi MR
- Jahanbakhshi B
- Bakhtiyari M
journal: BMC Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12888-023-05481-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The global prevalence of depression, anxiety, and sleep disorder among patients coping with Post COVID-19 syndrome (long COVID): a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Seighali N, Abdollahi A, Shafiee A, Amini MJ, Teymouri Athar MM, Safari O, Faghfouri P, Eskandari A, Rostaii O, Salehi AH, Soltani H, Hosseini M, Abhari FS, Maghsoudi MR, Jahanbakhshi B, Bakhtiyari M
**Journal:** BMC Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12888-023-05481-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-023-05481-6)

## Content

1. BMC Psychiatry. 2024 Feb 6;24(1):105. doi: 10.1186/s12888-023-05481-6.

The global prevalence of depression, anxiety, and sleep disorder among patients 
coping with Post COVID-19 syndrome (long COVID): a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Seighali N(1)(2), Abdollahi A(2), Shafiee A(3)(4), Amini MJ(2), Teymouri Athar 
MM(5), Safari O(6), Faghfouri P(2), Eskandari A(2), Rostaii O(2), Salehi AH(5), 
Soltani H(2), Hosseini M(7), Abhari FS(1), Maghsoudi MR(1), Jahanbakhshi B(2), 
Bakhtiyari M(8).

Author information:
(1)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Center, Alborz University of Medical 
Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, School of Medicine, Alborz University of Medical 
Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(3)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Center, Alborz University of Medical 
Sciences, Karaj, Iran. armanshafieemd@gmail.com.
(4)Student Research Committee, School of Medicine, Alborz University of Medical 
Sciences, Karaj, Iran. armanshafieemd@gmail.com.
(5)School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(6)Department of Community Medicine, School of Community Medicine, Alborz 
University of Medical Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(7)Student research committee, Arak University of Medical Sciences, Arak, Iran.
(8)Department of Community Medicine, School of Community Medicine, Alborz 
University of Medical Sciences, Karaj, Iran. mahmood.bakhtiyari@ymail.com.

BACKGROUND: Post COVID-19 syndrome, also known as "Long COVID," is a complex and 
multifaceted condition that affects individuals who have recovered from 
SARS-CoV-2 infection. This systematic review and meta-analysis aim to 
comprehensively assess the global prevalence of depression, anxiety, and sleep 
disorder in individuals coping with Post COVID-19 syndrome.
METHODS: A rigorous search of electronic databases was conducted to identify 
original studies until 24 January 2023. The inclusion criteria comprised studies 
employing previously validated assessment tools for depression, anxiety, and 
sleep disorders, reporting prevalence rates, and encompassing patients of all 
age groups and geographical regions for subgroup analysis Random effects model 
was utilized for the meta-analysis. Meta-regression analysis was done.
RESULTS: The pooled prevalence of depression and anxiety among patients coping 
with Post COVID-19 syndrome was estimated to be 23% (95% CI: 20%-26%; 
I2 = 99.9%) based on data from 143 studies with 7,782,124 participants and 132 
studies with 9,320,687 participants, respectively. The pooled prevalence of 
sleep disorder among these patients, derived from 27 studies with 15,362 
participants, was estimated to be 45% (95% CI: 37%-53%; I2 = 98.7%). Subgroup 
analyses based on geographical regions and assessment scales revealed 
significant variations in prevalence rates. Meta-regression analysis showed 
significant correlations between the prevalence and total sample size of 
studies, the age of participants, and the percentage of male participants. 
Publication bias was assessed using Doi plot visualization and the Peters test, 
revealing a potential source of publication bias for depression (p = 0.0085) and 
sleep disorder (p = 0.02). However, no evidence of publication bias was found 
for anxiety (p = 0.11).
CONCLUSION: This systematic review and meta-analysis demonstrate a considerable 
burden of mental health issues, including depression, anxiety, and sleep 
disorders, among individuals recovering from COVID-19. The findings emphasize 
the need for comprehensive mental health support and tailored interventions for 
patients experiencing persistent symptoms after COVID-19 recovery.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-023-05481-6
PMCID: PMC10848453
PMID: 38321404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.