---
reference_id: "PMID:20301788"
title: Glycogen Storage Disease Type III.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Schreuder AB
- Rossi A
- Grünert SC
- Derks TGJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycogen Storage Disease Type III.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Schreuder AB, Rossi A, Grünert SC, Derks TGJ

## Content

1. Glycogen Storage Disease Type III.

Schreuder AB(1), Rossi A(2), Grünert SC(3), Derks TGJ(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2010 Mar 9 [updated 2022 Jan 6].

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolic Diseases Beatrix Children's Hospital University of
Groningen University Medical Center Groningen Groningen, the Netherlands
(2)Department of Translational Medicine Section of Paediatrics University of
Naples "Federico II" Naples, Italy
(3)Department of General Pediatrics Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology Faculty
of Medicine Medical Center - University of Freiburg Freiburg, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Glycogen storage disease type III (GSD III) is
characterized by variable liver, cardiac muscle, and skeletal muscle
involvement. GSD IIIa is the most common subtype, present in about 85% of
affected individuals; it manifests with liver and muscle involvement. GSD IIIb,
with liver involvement only, comprises about 15% of all affected individuals. In
infancy and early childhood, liver involvement presents as hepatomegaly and
failure to thrive, with fasting ketotic hypoglycemia, hyperlipidemia, and
elevated hepatic transaminases. In adolescence and adulthood, liver disease
becomes less prominent. Most individuals develop cardiac involvement with
cardiac hypertrophy and/or cardiomyopathy. Skeletal myopathy manifesting as
weakness may be evident in childhood and slowly progresses, typically becoming
prominent in the third to fourth decade. The overall prognosis is favorable but
cannot be predicted on an individual basis. Long-term complications such as
muscular and cardiac symptoms as well as liver fibrosis/cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma may have a severe impact on prognosis and quality of
life. To date, it is unknown if long-term complications can be alleviated and/or
avoided by dietary interventions.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of GSD III is established in a proband by
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in AGL. If molecular genetic
testing is inconclusive, debranching enzyme activity can be measured in either
blood cells (leukocytes or erythrocytes), skin fibroblasts, or liver or muscle
biopsy.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Dietary management tailored to the
individual patient remains the primary therapy. Frequent feeds (every 3-4 hours)
are needed to maintain euglycemia in infancy. Toward the end of the first year
of life, several doses per day (~1 g/kg) of cornstarch may be required to avoid
hypoglycemia. Protein intake of 3 g/kg is recommended; extra protein
supplementation may be needed. For those with night-time hypoglycemia,
Glycosade® extended-release cornstarch or continuous nocturnal drip-feeding can
be used. Titration of dietary protein and cornstarch is based on self-monitored
capillary blood glucose and ketone concentrations, to maintain euglycemia and to
prevent ketosis, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertriglyceridemia. Maltodextrin or
rapidly absorbable carbohydrates prior to exercise to prevent hypoglycemia
during physical activity; oral fructose and sucrose ingestion to improve
exercise tolerance. High-fat diet to reduce cardiomyopathy can be considered.
Up-to-date individualized emergency letters; perioperative glucose infusion for
surgeries to prevent hypoglycemia. Liver transplantation is reserved for those
with severe hepatic cirrhosis, liver dysfunction, and/or hepatocellular
carcinoma. Liver transplantation may exacerbate myopathy and cardiomyopathy.
Vitamin D and calcium supplementation to prevent osteoporosis. Surveillance:
Aspartate aminotransferase, alanine transaminase, liver function as needed
(e.g., albumin, bilirubin, ammonia, and clotting studies), creatine kinase (CK),
lipid profile every six to 12 months, liver ultrasound every six to 12 months in
children and every 12 to 24 months in adults, liver MRI as needed. To identify
periods of suboptimal metabolic control, measured preprandial blood glucose and
blood ketones or urine ketones on waking. Neurologic, physical therapy, and
musculoskeletal assessments; NT-proBNP, CK-MB, electrocardiogram, and
echocardiogram every 12 to 24 months in those with GSD IIIa, and every five
years in those with GSD IIIb; measurement of height, weight, body mass index,
head circumference, and assessment of diet and exercise as needed based on age;
serum calcium and 25(OH)-vitamin D annually; regular bone density measurement is
recommended. Agents/circumstances to avoid: High carbohydrate intake,
steroid-based drugs, growth hormone replacement therapy, medications that can
cause rhabdomyolysis. Use with caution: hormonal contraceptives, statins for
control of hyperlipidemia, and beta blockers. Evaluation of relatives at risk:
Diagnosis of at-risk sibs at birth allows for early dietary intervention to
prevent hypoglycemia. Pregnancy management: Increased monitoring and support
during pregnancy of women with GSD III because of increased glucose needs during
pregnancy. Although gestational diabetes can occur, oral glucose tests are not
indicated. Glucose infusion and regular monitoring of blood glucose, ketones,
blood gases, and CK is necessary during labor and perinatally to prevent
ketonuria and risk of hyperketosis, metabolic acidosis, and acute
rhabdomyolysis. Glucose management requires balancing undertreatment against the
risks assocated with overtreatment (e.g., fetal hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia).
GENETIC COUNSELING: GSD III is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If
both parents are known to be heterozygous for an AGL pathogenic variant, each
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected
with GSD III, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of
inheriting neither of the familial AGL pathogenic variants. Once the AGL
pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier
testing for at-risk family members and prenatal and preimplantation genetic
testing for a pregnancy at increased risk are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20301788
