---
reference_id: "PMID:36873887"
title: "Objective response to immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy in NRAS-mutant melanoma: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Jaeger ZJ
- Raval NS
- Maverakis NKA
- Chen DY
- Ansstas G
- Hardi A
- Cornelius LA
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1090737
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Objective response to immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy in NRAS-mutant melanoma: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Jaeger ZJ, Raval NS, Maverakis NKA, Chen DY, Ansstas G, Hardi A, Cornelius LA
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1090737](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1090737)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Feb 16;10:1090737. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1090737.
eCollection 2023.

Objective response to immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy in NRAS-mutant
melanoma: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Jaeger ZJ(1), Raval NS(1), Maverakis NKA(2), Chen DY(3)(4), Ansstas G(3), Hardi
A(1), Cornelius LA(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Office of Medical Student Education, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.
(2)San Juan Bautista School of Medicine, Caguas, PR, United States.
(3)Alvin J. Siteman Comprehensive Cancer Center, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.
(4)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.

INTRODUCTION: NRAS mutations are common in melanoma and confer a worse
prognosis. Although most patients with metastatic melanoma receive immune
checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), the impact of NRAS mutational status on their
efficacy remains under debate.
METHODS: We performed a comprehensive literature search across several large
databases. Inclusion criteria were trials, cohorts, and large case series that
analyzed the primary outcome of objective response rate by NRAS mutational
status in patients with melanoma treated with any line of ICI. At least two
reviewers independently screened studies using Covidence software, extracted
data, and assessed risk of bias. Standard meta-analysis was performed in R with
sensitivity analysis and tests for bias.
RESULTS: Data on 1770 patients from ten articles were pooled for meta-analysis,
and the objective response rate to ICIs was calculated to compare NRAS-mutant
and NRAS-wildtype melanoma. The objective response rate was 1.28 (95% confidence
interval: 1.01-1.64). Sensitivity analysis identified the study by Dupuis et al.
with influential impact on the pooled effect size and heterogeneity, favoring
NRAS-mutant melanoma.
DISCUSSION: In this meta-analysis evaluating the impact of NRAS mutational
status on objective response to ICIs in metastatic melanoma, NRAS-mutant
cutaneous melanoma demonstrated an increased likelihood of partial or complete
tumor response, relative to NRAS-wildtype cutaneous melanoma. Genomic screening
for NRAS mutations in patients with metastatic melanoma may improve predictive
ability when initiating ICIs.

Copyright © 2023 Jaeger, Raval, Maverakis, Chen, Ansstas, Hardi and Cornelius.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1090737
PMCID: PMC9979544
PMID: 36873887

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
