---
reference_id: "PMID:32611794"
title: Gold Standard Cholera Diagnostics Are Tarnished by Lytic Bacteriophage and Antibiotics.
authors:
- Nelson EJ
- Grembi JA
- Chao DL
- Andrews JR
- Alexandrova L
- Rodriguez PH
- Ramachandran VV
- Sayeed MA
- Wamala JF
- Debes AK
- Sack DA
- Hryckowian AJ
- Haque F
- Khatun S
- Rahman M
- Chien A
- Spormann AM
- Schoolnik GK
journal: J Clin Microbiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1128/JCM.00412-20
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gold Standard Cholera Diagnostics Are Tarnished by Lytic Bacteriophage and Antibiotics.
**Authors:** Nelson EJ, Grembi JA, Chao DL, Andrews JR, Alexandrova L, Rodriguez PH, Ramachandran VV, Sayeed MA, Wamala JF, Debes AK, Sack DA, Hryckowian AJ, Haque F, Khatun S, Rahman M, Chien A, Spormann AM, Schoolnik GK
**Journal:** J Clin Microbiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JCM.00412-20](https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.00412-20)

## Content

1. J Clin Microbiol. 2020 Aug 24;58(9):e00412-20. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00412-20.
Print  2020 Aug 24.

Gold Standard Cholera Diagnostics Are Tarnished by Lytic Bacteriophage and 
Antibiotics.

Nelson EJ(1)(2), Grembi JA(3), Chao DL(4), Andrews JR(5), Alexandrova L(6), 
Rodriguez PH(7), Ramachandran VV(2), Sayeed MA(7), Wamala JF(8), Debes AK(9), 
Sack DA(9), Hryckowian AJ(10), Haque F(11), Khatun S(11), Rahman M(11), Chien 
A(6), Spormann AM(3), Schoolnik GK(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Environmental and Global Health, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA eric.nelson@ufl.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, USA.
(3)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(4)Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, Washington, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, USA.
(6)Vincent Coates Foundation Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(7)Departments of Pediatrics and Environmental and Global Health, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(8)Country Preparedness and IHR (CPI), World Health Organization (South Sudan), 
Juba, South Sudan.
(9)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(10)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(11)Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research, Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, Government of Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

A fundamental, clinical, and scientific concern is how lytic bacteriophage, as 
well as antibiotics, impact diagnostic positivity. Cholera was chosen as a model 
disease to investigate this important question, because cholera outbreaks enable 
large enrollment, field methods are well established, and the predatory 
relationship between lytic bacteriophage and the etiologic agent Vibrio cholerae 
share commonalities across bacterial taxa. Patients with diarrheal disease were 
enrolled at two remote hospitals in Bangladesh. Diagnostic performance was 
assessed as a function of lytic bacteriophage detection and exposure to the 
first-line antibiotic azithromycin, detected in stool samples by mass 
spectrometry. Among diarrheal samples positive by nanoliter quantitative PCR 
(qPCR) for V. cholerae (n = 78/849), the odds that a rapid diagnostic test (RDT) 
or qPCR was positive was reduced by 89% (odds ratio [OR], 0.108; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.002 to 0.872) and 87% (OR, 0.130; 95% CI, 0.022 to 0.649), 
respectively, when lytic bacteriophage were detected. The odds that an RDT or 
qPCR was positive was reduced by more than 99% (OR, 0.00; 95% CI, 0.00 to 0.28) 
and 89% (OR, 0.11; 95% CI, 0.03 to 0.44), respectively, when azithromycin was 
detected. Analysis of additional samples from South Sudan found similar phage 
effects on RDTs; antibiotics were not assayed. Cholera burden estimates may 
improve by accommodating for the negative effects of lytic bacteriophage and 
antibiotic exposure on diagnostic positivity. One accommodation is using 
bacteriophage detection as a proxy for pathogen detection. These findings have 
relevance for other diagnostic settings where bacterial pathogens are vulnerable 
to lytic bacteriophage predation.

Copyright © 2020 Nelson et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00412-20
PMCID: PMC7448619
PMID: 32611794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]