---
reference_id: "PMID:24642661"
title: "KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA status in squamous cell anal carcinoma (SCAC)."
authors:
- Casadei Gardini A
- Capelli L
- Ulivi P
- Giannini M
- Freier E
- Tamberi S
- Scarpi E
- Passardi A
- Zoli W
- Ragazzini A
- Amadori D
- Frassineti GL
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092071
keywords:
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Anus Neoplasms/complications, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Axons
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/complications, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Fluorouracil/therapeutic use
- Gamma Rays
- "Human papillomavirus 16/isolation & purification"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mitomycin/therapeutic use
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Papillomavirus Infections/complications, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)
- Retrospective Studies
- ras Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA status in squamous cell anal carcinoma (SCAC).
**Authors:** Casadei Gardini A, Capelli L, Ulivi P, Giannini M, Freier E, Tamberi S, Scarpi E, Passardi A, Zoli W, Ragazzini A, Amadori D, Frassineti GL
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0092071](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0092071)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 18;9(3):e92071. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092071. 
eCollection 2014.

KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA status in squamous cell anal carcinoma (SCAC).

Casadei Gardini A(1), Capelli L(1), Ulivi P(1), Giannini M(2), Freier E(3), 
Tamberi S(3), Scarpi E(1), Passardi A(1), Zoli W(1), Ragazzini A(1), Amadori 
D(1), Frassineti GL(1).

Author information:
(1)Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori (IRST) 
IRCCS, Meldola, Italy.
(2)Radiotherapy Unit, Macerata Hospital, Macerata, Italy.
(3)Oncology Unit, Degli Infermi Hospital, Faenza, Italy.

Anti-EGFR therapy appears to be a potential treatment option for squamous cell 
anal carcinoma (SCAC). KRAS mutation is a rare event in SCAC, indicating the 
absence of the principal mechanism of resistance to this type of therapy. 
However, no information is available from the literature regarding the status of 
BRAF or PIK3CA in this cancer type. We analysed KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA status in 
SCAC patients in relation to the clinical-pathological characteristics of 
patients and to the presence of the human papilloma virus (HPV). One hundred and 
three patients were treated with the Nigro scheme for anal cancer from March 
2001 to August 2012. Fifty patients were considered for the study as there was 
insufficient paraffin-embedded tumour tissue to perform molecular analysis the 
remaining 53. DNA was extracted from paraffin-embedded sections. KRAS, BRAF and 
PIK3CA gene status and HPV genotype were evaluated by pyrosequencing. KRAS and 
BRAF genes were wild-type in all cases. Conversely, PIK3CA gene was found to be 
mutated in 11 (22%) cases. In particular, 8 mutations occurred in exon 9 and 3 
in exon 20 of the PIK3CA gene. These findings suggest that SCAC could 
potentially respond to an anti-EGFR drug. PIK3CA mutation may be involved in the 
process of carcinogenesis in some cases of SCAC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092071
PMCID: PMC3958420
PMID: 24642661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.