---
reference_id: "PMID:20844548"
title: "The novel and independent association between single-point SNP of NPHP4 gene and renal function in non-diabetic Japanese population: the Takahata study."
authors:
- Konta T
- Takasaki S
- Ichikawa K
- Emi M
- Toriyama S
- Satoh H
- Ikeda A
- Suzuki K
- Mashima Y
- Shibata Y
- Watanabe T
- Kato T
- Kawata S
- Kubota I
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2010.113
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The novel and independent association between single-point SNP of NPHP4 gene and renal function in non-diabetic Japanese population: the Takahata study.
**Authors:** Konta T, Takasaki S, Ichikawa K, Emi M, Toriyama S, Satoh H, Ikeda A, Suzuki K, Mashima Y, Shibata Y, Watanabe T, Kato T, Kawata S, Kubota I
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jhg.2010.113](https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2010.113)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2010 Dec;55(12):791-5. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2010.113. Epub 2010 Sep
16.

The novel and independent association between single-point SNP of NPHP4 gene and 
renal function in non-diabetic Japanese population: the Takahata study.

Konta T(1), Takasaki S, Ichikawa K, Emi M, Toriyama S, Satoh H, Ikeda A, Suzuki 
K, Mashima Y, Shibata Y, Watanabe T, Kato T, Kawata S, Kubota I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Pulmonology, and Nephrology, Yamagata University 
School of Medicine, 2-2-2, Iida-Nishi, Yamagata, Japan. 
kkonta@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp

Nephronophthisis (NPHP) 4 gene coding nephrocystin-4 is involved in the 
development of renal tubules and its congenital mutations cause juvenile 
end-stage renal disease, NPHP. To investigate the association between 
single-point single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of NPHP4 gene and renal 
function, we conducted a cross-sectional study in Japanese population. The 
subjects of this study were non-diabetic general population consisting of 2604 
individuals >40 years in Takahata town, Japan. We genotyped 11 SNPs within NPHP4 
gene that displayed frequent minor allele frequencies (>0.1) in Japanese general 
population. Among 11 SNPs in NPHP4 gene, only rs1287637 that induces amino acid 
substitution (A (Gln)/T (Leu)), located in the acceptor site of exon 21, showed 
a significant association with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR; T/T: 
81.3±15.6 (n=1886), A/T: 82.0±15.5 (n=652) and A/A: 87.4±21.4 ml min(-1) per 
1.73m(2) (n=66); mean±s.d., P=0.006). This SNP was not in linkage disequilibrium 
with the surrounding SNPs. The multivariate analysis adjusted with possible 
confounders showed that the A/T+T/T genotype of rs1287637 was independently 
associated with reduced renal function (eGFR <90 ml min(-1) per 1.73m(2); odds 
ratio (OR) 1.75, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.05-2.94, P=0.033). These results 
indicate the novel and independent association between single-point SNP 
rs1287637 in NPHP4 gene and renal function in non-diabetic Japanese population.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2010.113
PMID: 20844548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]