---
reference_id: "PMID:28334876"
title: PDGFRB gain-of-function mutations in sporadic infantile myofibromatosis.
authors:
- Arts FA
- Sciot R
- Brichard B
- Renard M
- de Rocca Serra A
- Dachy G
- Noël LA
- Velghe AI
- Galant C
- Debiec-Rychter M
- Van Damme A
- Vikkula M
- Helaers R
- Limaye N
- Poirel HA
- Demoulin JB
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx081
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Myofibromatosis/congenital, genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptor, TIE-2/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PDGFRB gain-of-function mutations in sporadic infantile myofibromatosis.
**Authors:** Arts FA, Sciot R, Brichard B, Renard M, de Rocca Serra A, Dachy G, Noël LA, Velghe AI, Galant C, Debiec-Rychter M, Van Damme A, Vikkula M, Helaers R, Limaye N, Poirel HA, Demoulin JB
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddx081](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddx081)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2017 May 15;26(10):1801-1810. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx081.

PDGFRB gain-of-function mutations in sporadic infantile myofibromatosis.

Arts FA(1), Sciot R(2), Brichard B(3), Renard M(4), de Rocca Serra A(1), Dachy 
G(1), Noël LA(1), Velghe AI(1), Galant C(5), Debiec-Rychter M(6), Van Damme 
A(3), Vikkula M(7)(8), Helaers R(7), Limaye N(7), Poirel HA(7)(9), Demoulin 
JB(1).

Author information:
(1)de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels BE-1200, 
Belgium.
(2)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Leuven and KU Leuven, Leuven 
BE-3000, Belgium.
(3)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Cliniques Universitaires 
Saint-Luc, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels BE-1200, Belgium.
(4)Department of Pediatric Hemato-oncology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven 
BE-3000, Belgium.
(5)Department of Pathology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels 
BE-1200, Belgium.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven and University Hospitals, Leuven 
BE-3000, Belgium.
(7)Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de 
Louvain, Brussels BE-1200, Belgium.
(8)Walloon Excellence in Life sciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO).
(9)Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université 
Catholique de Louvain, Brussels BE-1200, Belgium.

Infantile myofibromatosis is one of the most prevalent soft tissue tumors of 
infancy and childhood. Multifocal nodules with visceral lesions are associated 
with a poor prognosis. A few familial cases have been linked to mutations in 
various genes including PDGFRB. In this study, we sequenced PDGFRB, which 
encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, in 16 cases of myofibromatosis or solitary 
myofibroma. Mutations in the coding sequence of PDGFRB were identified in 6 out 
of 8 patients with the sporadic multicentric form of the disease and in 1 out of 
8 patients with isolated myofibroma. Two patients had the same mutation in 
multiple separated lesions. By contrast, a third patient had three different 
PDGFRB mutations in the three nodules analyzed. Mutations were located in the 
transmembrane, juxtamembrane and kinase domains of the receptor. We showed that 
these mutations activated receptor signaling in the absence of ligand and 
transformed fibroblasts. In one case, a weakly-activating germline variant was 
associated with a stronger somatic mutation, suggesting a two-hit model for 
familial myofibromatosis. Furthermore, the mutant receptors were sensitive to 
the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib, except D850V, which was inhibited by 
dasatinib and ponatinib, suggesting a targeted therapy for severe 
myofibromatosis. In conclusion, we identified gain-of-function PDGFRB mutations 
in the majority of multifocal infantile myofibromatosis cases, shedding light on 
the mechanism of disease development, which is reminiscent of multifocal venous 
malformations induced by TIE2 mutations. Our results provide a genetic test to 
facilitate diagnosis, and preclinical data for development of molecular 
therapies.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddx081
PMID: 28334876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]