---
reference_id: "PMID:31971679"
title: Teprotumumab for the Treatment of Active Thyroid Eye Disease.
authors:
- Douglas RS
- Kahaly GJ
- Patel A
- Sile S
- Thompson EHZ
- Perdok R
- Fleming JC
- Fowler BT
- Marcocci C
- Marinò M
- Antonelli A
- Dailey R
- Harris GJ
- Eckstein A
- Schiffman J
- Tang R
- Nelson C
- Salvi M
- Wester S
- Sherman JW
- Vescio T
- Holt RJ
- Smith TJ
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1910434
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Diplopia/drug therapy
- Double-Blind Method
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Exophthalmos/drug therapy
- "Graves Ophthalmopathy/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Intention to Treat Analysis
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Middle Aged
- Orbit/diagnostic imaging
- "Receptor, IGF Type 1/antagonists & inhibitors, immunology"
- Self Report
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Teprotumumab for the Treatment of Active Thyroid Eye Disease.
**Authors:** Douglas RS, Kahaly GJ, Patel A, Sile S, Thompson EHZ, Perdok R, Fleming JC, Fowler BT, Marcocci C, Marinò M, Antonelli A, Dailey R, Harris GJ, Eckstein A, Schiffman J, Tang R, Nelson C, Salvi M, Wester S, Sherman JW, Vescio T, Holt RJ, Smith TJ
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1910434](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1910434)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2020 Jan 23;382(4):341-352. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1910434.

Teprotumumab for the Treatment of Active Thyroid Eye Disease.

Douglas RS(1), Kahaly GJ(1), Patel A(1), Sile S(1), Thompson EHZ(1), Perdok 
R(1), Fleming JC(1), Fowler BT(1), Marcocci C(1), Marinò M(1), Antonelli A(1), 
Dailey R(1), Harris GJ(1), Eckstein A(1), Schiffman J(1), Tang R(1), Nelson 
C(1), Salvi M(1), Wester S(1), Sherman JW(1), Vescio T(1), Holt RJ(1), Smith 
TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)From Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles (R.S.D., A.P.); Johannes 
Gutenberg University Medical Center, Mainz (G.J.K.), and University Hospital 
Essen, Essen (A.E.) - both in Germany; Horizon Therapeutics, Lake Forest, IL 
(S.S., E.H.Z.T., R.P., J.W.S., T.V., R.J.H.); University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis (J.C.F., B.T.F.); University of Pisa, Pisa (C.M., M.M., 
A.A.), and Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan 
(M.S.) - both in Italy; Oregon Health and Sciences University, Portland (R.D.); 
Medical College of Wisconsin Eye Institute, Milwaukee (G.J.H.); Eye Wellness 
Center-Neuro-Eye Clinical Trials, Houston (J.S., R.T.); Kellogg Eye 
Center-Michigan Medicine (C.N., T.J.S.) and University of Michigan Medical 
School (T.J.S.) - both in Ann Arbor; and Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Miami 
(S.W.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2020 May;16(5):259-260. doi: 10.1038/s41574-020-0340-1.
    J Endocrinol Invest. 2020 Oct;43(10):1523-1525. doi: 
10.1007/s40618-020-01223-7.
    N Engl J Med. 2020 May 14;382(20):1958-1959. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2002754.
    N Engl J Med. 2020 May 14;382(20):1959. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2002754.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid eye disease is a debilitating, disfiguring, and potentially 
blinding periocular condition for which no Food and Drug Administration-approved 
medical therapy is available. Strong evidence has implicated the insulin-like 
growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) in the pathogenesis of this disease.
METHODS: In a randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled, phase 3 multicenter 
trial, we assigned patients with active thyroid eye disease in a 1:1 ratio to 
receive intravenous infusions of the IGF-IR inhibitor teprotumumab (10 mg per 
kilogram of body weight for the first infusion and 20 mg per kilogram for 
subsequent infusions) or placebo once every 3 weeks for 21 weeks; the last trial 
visit for this analysis was at week 24. The primary outcome was a proptosis 
response (a reduction in proptosis of ≥2 mm) at week 24. Prespecified secondary 
outcomes at week 24 were an overall response (a reduction of ≥2 points in the 
Clinical Activity Score plus a reduction in proptosis of ≥2 mm), a Clinical 
Activity Score of 0 or 1 (indicating no or minimal inflammation), the mean 
change in proptosis across trial visits (from baseline through week 24), a 
diplopia response (a reduction in diplopia of ≥1 grade), and the mean change in 
overall score on the Graves' ophthalmopathy-specific quality-of-life (GO-QOL) 
questionnaire across trial visits (from baseline through week 24; a mean change 
of ≥6 points is considered clinically meaningful).
RESULTS: A total of 41 patients were assigned to the teprotumumab group and 42 
to the placebo group. At week 24, the percentage of patients with a proptosis 
response was higher with teprotumumab than with placebo (83% [34 patients] vs. 
10% [4 patients], P<0.001), with a number needed to treat of 1.36. All secondary 
outcomes were significantly better with teprotumumab than with placebo, 
including overall response (78% of patients [32] vs. 7% [3]), Clinical Activity 
Score of 0 or 1 (59% [24] vs. 21% [9]), the mean change in proptosis (-2.82 mm 
vs. -0.54 mm), diplopia response (68% [19 of 28] vs. 29% [8 of 28]), and the 
mean change in GO-QOL overall score (13.79 points vs. 4.43 points) (P≤0.001 for 
all). Reductions in extraocular muscle, orbital fat volume, or both were 
observed in 6 patients in the teprotumumab group who underwent orbital imaging. 
Most adverse events were mild or moderate in severity; two serious events 
occurred in the teprotumumab group, of which one (an infusion reaction) led to 
treatment discontinuation.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with active thyroid eye disease, teprotumumab 
resulted in better outcomes with respect to proptosis, Clinical Activity Score, 
diplopia, and quality of life than placebo; serious adverse events were 
uncommon. (Funded by Horizon Therapeutics; OPTIC ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT03298867, and EudraCT number, 2017-002763-18.).

Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1910434
PMID: 31971679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]