---
reference_id: "PMID:38715675"
title: Characterization of the malignant cells and microenvironment of infantile fibrosarcoma via single-cell RNA sequencing.
authors:
- Li Y
- Zhang Q
- Yang R
- Zhan Y
- Li Z
- Dai S
- Chen D
- Chen L
- Ruggiero A
- Ye C
- Lu Y
- Zhou E
- Dong R
- Dong K
journal: Transl Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.21037/tp-24-66
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of the malignant cells and microenvironment of infantile fibrosarcoma via single-cell RNA sequencing.
**Authors:** Li Y, Zhang Q, Yang R, Zhan Y, Li Z, Dai S, Chen D, Chen L, Ruggiero A, Ye C, Lu Y, Zhou E, Dong R, Dong K
**Journal:** Transl Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tp-24-66](https://doi.org/10.21037/tp-24-66)

## Content

1. Transl Pediatr. 2024 Apr 30;13(4):596-609. doi: 10.21037/tp-24-66. Epub 2024
Apr  29.

Characterization of the malignant cells and microenvironment of infantile
fibrosarcoma via single-cell RNA sequencing.

Li Y(#)(1), Zhang Q(#)(2), Yang R(#)(1), Zhan Y(1), Li Z(1), Dai S(1), Chen
D(1), Chen L, Ruggiero A, Ye C(1), Lu Y(1), Zhou E(1), Dong R(1), Dong K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Children's Hospital of Fudan University,
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Birth Defects, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Xiamen Children's Hospital, Xiamen Key
Laboratory of Pediatric General Surgery Diseases, Xiamen, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Infantile fibrosarcoma (IFS) is the most prevalent soft tissue
sarcoma in children under 1 year old and is known for its rapid growth. The
tumor lacks specific immunohistochemical tumor marker and a general view of
tumor microenvironment (TME). Its primary therapeutic intervention places
patients at a risk of disability or mutilation. This study aimed to elucidate
the universal transcriptional characteristics of IFS and explore novel targets
for diagnosis and therapy using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq).
METHODS: Fresh tissue samples of IFS for scRNA-seq were collected from four
patients before other treatments were administered. We conducted cell
clustering, inferring copy number variation from scRNA-seq (InferCNV) analysis,
gene differential expression analysis, cell function evaluation, Pearson
correlation analysis, and cell-cell and ligand-receptor interaction analysis to
investigate the distinct ecosystem of IFS.
RESULTS: According to the single-cell resolution data, we depicted the cell
atlas of IFS, which comprised 14 cell populations. Through comparison with
normal cells, the malignant cells were distinguished, and potential novel
markers (POSTN, IGFBP2 and CTHRC1) were identified. We also found four various
functional malignant cell subtypes, three of which exhibited cancer stem cells
(CSCs) phenotypes, and investigated the interplay between these subtypes and
nonmalignant cells in the TME of IFS. Endothelial cells and macrophages were
found to dominate the cell-cell communication landscape within the
microenvironment, promoting tumorigenesis via multiple receptor-ligand
interactions.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a comprehensive characterization of the tumor
transcriptome and TME of IFS at the cellular level, offering valuable insights
for clinically significant advancements in the immunohistochemical diagnosis and
treatment of IFS.

2024 Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-24-66
PMCID: PMC11071021
PMID: 38715675

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://tp.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tp-24-66/coif). All authors
report that this work was funded by Genertec Guozhong Healthcare (No.
GZKJ-KJXX-QTHT-20220016), which is a for-profit company but has no conflicts of
interest associated with this study. The authors have no other conflicts of
interest to declare.