---
reference_id: "PMID:10680863"
title: Dehiscence or thinning of bone overlying the superior semicircular canal in a temporal bone survey.
authors:
- Carey JP
- Minor LB
- Nager GT
journal: Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1001/archotol.126.2.137
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Semicircular Canals/pathology
- Temporal Bone/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dehiscence or thinning of bone overlying the superior semicircular canal in a temporal bone survey.
**Authors:** Carey JP, Minor LB, Nager GT
**Journal:** Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archotol.126.2.137](https://doi.org/10.1001/archotol.126.2.137)

## Content

1. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2000 Feb;126(2):137-47. doi: 
10.1001/archotol.126.2.137.

Dehiscence or thinning of bone overlying the superior semicircular canal in a 
temporal bone survey.

Carey JP(1), Minor LB, Nager GT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence and etiology of dehiscences of bone 
overlying the superior semicircular canal in a temporal bone archive.
DESIGN: A microscopic study was performed of 1000 temporal bones from 596 adults 
in a university hospital registry. Specimens were sectioned vertically in the 
plane of the superior semicircular canal. Measurements of minimum bone thickness 
over the superior canal were made in a subset of 108 randomly chosen specimens. 
All bones were examined for thinning or dehiscence relative to these norms. 
Clinical histories, when available, were reviewed.
RESULTS: Complete dehiscence of the superior canal was identified in 5 specimens 
(0.5%), at the middle fossa floor (n = 1) and where the superior petrosal sinus 
was in contact with the canal (n = 4). In 14 other specimens (1.4%), the bone at 
the middle fossa floor (n = 8) or superior petrosal sinus (n = 6) was no thicker 
than 0.1 mm, significantly less than values measured in the control specimens 
(P<.001). Abnormalities were typically bilateral. Specimens from infants 
demonstrated uniformly thin bone over the superior canal in the middle fossa at 
birth, with gradual thickening until 3 years of age.
CONCLUSIONS: Dehiscence of bone overlying the superior canal occurred in 
approximately 0.5% of temporal bone specimens (0.7% of individuals). In an 
additional 1.4% of specimens (1.3% of individuals), the bone was markedly thin 
(< or =0.1 mm), such that it might appear dehiscent even on 
ultra-high-resolution computed tomography of the temporal bone. Sites affected 
were in the middle fossa floor or a deep groove for the superior petrosal sinus, 
often bilaterally. These abnormalities may arise from failure of postnatal bone 
development. Thin areas of bone over the superior canal may be predisposed to 
disruption by trauma.

DOI: 10.1001/archotol.126.2.137
PMID: 10680863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]