---
reference_id: "PMID:11929858"
title: Hyperekplexia associated with compound heterozygote mutations in the beta-subunit of the human inhibitory glycine receptor (GLRB).
authors:
- Rees MI
- Lewis TM
- Kwok JB
- Mortier GR
- Govaert P
- Snell RG
- Schofield PR
- Owen MJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.7.853
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Nervous System Diseases/genetics
- RNA Splice Sites
- "Receptors, Glycine/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperekplexia associated with compound heterozygote mutations in the beta-subunit of the human inhibitory glycine receptor (GLRB).
**Authors:** Rees MI, Lewis TM, Kwok JB, Mortier GR, Govaert P, Snell RG, Schofield PR, Owen MJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/11.7.853](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/11.7.853)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Apr 1;11(7):853-60. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.7.853.

Hyperekplexia associated with compound heterozygote mutations in the
beta-subunit of the human inhibitory glycine receptor (GLRB).

Rees MI(1), Lewis TM, Kwok JB, Mortier GR, Govaert P, Snell RG, Schofield PR,
Owen MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine and Department of Medical Genetics,
University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

Hyperekplexia (MIM: 149400) is a neurological disorder characterized by an
excessive startle response which can be caused by mutations in the
alpha1-subunit (GLRA1) of the heteropentameric human inhibitory glycine receptor
(hGlyR). These receptors facilitate fast-response, inhibitory glycinergic
neurotransmission in the brainstem and spinal cord leading to a rapid
modification and reduction of the excitatory startle response. Mutations in the
beta-subunit of GlyR (glrb) occur in a murine model of hyperekplexia (spastic),
but have not been detected in human hyperekplexia. Following mutation analysis
of the human beta-subunit of hGlyR (GLRB) in a cohort of 22 hyperekplexia
patients, we provide evidence to confirm that GLRB mutations can cause human
hyperekplexia. A missense (G920A resulting in G229D) and a splice site mutation
(IVS5+5G-->A) occurred together in a compound heterozygote with a transient
hyperekplexia phenotype. Exon trap analysis revealed that IVS5+5G-->A results in
the exclusion of exon 5 from GLRB transcripts. Electrophysiological studies
showed reduced sensitivity to agonist mediated activation of the alpha1beta
(G229D) GlyR suggesting that GlyR beta-subunits are not restricted to conferring
modulatory influences and maintaining structural integrity, but may also play a
functional role in hGlyR ligand binding.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/11.7.853
PMID: 11929858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
