---
reference_id: "PMID:20301341"
title: Mucopolysaccharidosis Type I.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Clarke LA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucopolysaccharidosis Type I.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Clarke LA

## Content

1. Mucopolysaccharidosis Type I.

Clarke LA(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2002 Oct 31 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)Professor, Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I) is a progressive
multisystem disorder with features ranging over a continuum of severity. While
affected individuals have traditionally been classified as having one of three
MPS I syndromes (Hurler syndrome, Hurler-Scheie syndrome, or Scheie syndrome),
no easily measurable biochemical differences have been identified and the
clinical findings overlap. Affected individuals are best described as having
either a phenotype consistent with either severe (Hurler syndrome) or attenuated
MPS I, a distinction that influences therapeutic options. Severe MPS I: Infants
appear normal at birth. Typical early manifestations are nonspecific (e.g.,
umbilical or inguinal hernia, frequent upper respiratory tract infections before
age 1 year). Coarsening of the facial features may not become apparent until
after age one year. Gibbus deformity of the lower spine is common and often
noted within the first year. Progressive skeletal dysplasia (dysostosis
multiplex) involving all bones is universal, as is progressive arthropathy
involving most joints. By age three years, linear growth decreases. Intellectual
disability is progressive and profound but may not be readily apparent in the
first year of life. Progressive cardiorespiratory involvement, hearing loss, and
corneal clouding are common. Without treatment, death (typically from
cardiorespiratory failure) usually occurs within the first ten years of life.
Attenuated MPS I: Clinical onset is usually between ages three and ten years.
The severity and rate of disease progression range from serious life-threatening
complications leading to death in the second to third decade, to a normal life
span complicated by significant disability from progressive joint manifestations
and cardiorespiratory disease. While some individuals have no neurologic
involvement and psychomotor development may be normal in early childhood,
learning disabilities and psychiatric manifestations can be present later in
life. Hearing loss, cardiac valvular disease, respiratory involvement, and
corneal clouding are common.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MPS I is established in a proband with
suggestive clinical and laboratory findings by: detection of deficient activity
of the lysosomal enzyme α-L-iduronidase (IDUA) in combination with elevation of
glycosaminoglycan levels; and/or identification of biallelic pathogenic variants
in IDUA on molecular genetic testing. Identification of the causative IDUA
variants plays an important role in the determination of phenotype.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: An essential component of management is
the determination of whether the proband has severe or attenuated MPS I. This
requires detailed clinical and laboratory assessment and can be challenging in
very young individuals. Targeted therapies: Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) is considered the standard of care for children with
severe MPS I. Outcome is significantly influenced by disease burden at the time
of diagnosis (and thus, by the age of the individual). HSCT can improve
cognitive outcomes, increase survival, improve growth, reduce facial coarseness
and hepatosplenomegaly, improve hearing, prevent hydrocephalus, and alter the
natural history of cardiac and respiratory symptomatology. HSCT has lesser
effects on the skeletal and joint manifestations, corneal clouding, and cardiac
involvement. HSCT alters the course of cognitive decline in children with severe
MPS I; cognitive outcome is greatly influenced by the degree of cognitive
impairment at the time of transplantation. Due to the morbidity and mortality
associated with HSCT, it is currently recommended primarily for children with
severe MPS I. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with laronidase (Aldurazyme®),
licensed for treatment of the non-CNS manifestations of MPS I, improves liver
size, linear growth, and mobility and joint range of motion; slows progression
of respiratory disease; and improves sleep apnea in persons with attenuated
disease. The age of initiation of ERT influences the outcome. Supportive care:
Infant learning programs/special education for developmental delay; physical
therapy, orthopedic surgery as needed, joint replacement for progressive
arthropathy, atlanto-occipital stabilization; spinal cord decompression for
cervical myelopathy; cerebrospinal fluid shunting for hydrocephalus; early
median nerve decompression for carpal tunnel syndrome based on nerve conduction
studies before clinical manifestations develop; special attention to anesthetic
risks; hats with visors/sunglasses to reduce glare, corneal transplantation for
ophthalmologic involvement; cardiac valve replacement as needed and bacterial
endocarditis prophylaxis for those with cardiac involvement; tonsillectomy and
adenoidectomy for eustachian tube dysfunction and/or upper airway obstruction;
ventilating tubes; hearing aids as needed; CPAP for sleep apnea;
gastrointestinal management for diarrhea and constipation. Surveillance: Annual
assessment by a team of physicians with knowledge of the multisystem nature of
MPS I. Specialists and assessments: orthopedic surgery including annual
assessment of median nerve conduction velocity; ophthalmology, cardiology
(including echocardiography), respiratory with assessment of pulmonary function
and sleep studies, audiology, and otolaryngology. Assessment for constipation
and/or hernias as needed. Early and continuous monitoring of head growth in
infants and children with imaging as needed; assessment for evidence of spinal
cord compression by neurologic examination; developmental assessment annually;
and psycho-educational assessment of children with attenuated disease prior to
primary school entry. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Early diagnosis prior to
significant disease manifestations is warranted in relatives at risk in order to
initiate therapy as early in the course of disease as possible.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MPS I is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At
conception, each child of a couple in which both parents are heterozygous for a
IDUA pathogenic variant has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of
being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a
carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing for
pregnancies at increased risk are possible if both disease-causing IDUA variants
have been identified in the family.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301341
