---
reference_id: "PMID:22939636"
title: RTTN mutations link primary cilia function to organization of the human cerebral cortex.
authors:
- Kheradmand Kia S
- Verbeek E
- Engelen E
- Schot R
- Poot RA
- de Coo IF
- Lequin MH
- Poulton CJ
- Pourfarzad F
- Grosveld FG
- Brehm A
- de Wit MC
- Oegema R
- Dobyns WB
- Verheijen FW
- Mancini GM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Cell Line
- "Cerebral Cortex/embryology, physiology"
- Child
- Cilia/physiology
- Female
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RTTN mutations link primary cilia function to organization of the human cerebral cortex.
**Authors:** Kheradmand Kia S, Verbeek E, Engelen E, Schot R, Poot RA, de Coo IF, Lequin MH, Poulton CJ, Pourfarzad F, Grosveld FG, Brehm A, de Wit MC, Oegema R, Dobyns WB, Verheijen FW, Mancini GM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.008)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Sep 7;91(3):533-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.008. Epub
 2012 Aug 30.

RTTN mutations link primary cilia function to organization of the human cerebral 
cortex.

Kheradmand Kia S(1), Verbeek E, Engelen E, Schot R, Poot RA, de Coo IF, Lequin 
MH, Poulton CJ, Pourfarzad F, Grosveld FG, Brehm A, de Wit MC, Oegema R, Dobyns 
WB, Verheijen FW, Mancini GM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center (Erasmus 
MC), P.O. Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Polymicrogyria is a malformation of the developing cerebral cortex caused by 
abnormal organization and characterized by many small gyri and fusion of the 
outer molecular layer. We have identified autosomal-recessive mutations in RTTN, 
encoding Rotatin, in individuals with bilateral diffuse polymicrogyria from two 
separate families. Rotatin determines early embryonic axial rotation, as well as 
anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning in the mouse. Human Rotatin has 
recently been identified as a centrosome-associated protein. The Drosophila 
melanogaster homolog of Rotatin, Ana3, is needed for structural integrity of 
centrioles and basal bodies and maintenance of sensory neurons. We show that 
Rotatin colocalizes with the basal bodies at the primary cilium. Cultured 
fibroblasts from affected individuals have structural abnormalities of the cilia 
and exhibit downregulation of BMP4, WNT5A, and WNT2B, which are key regulators 
of cortical patterning and are expressed at the cortical hem, the 
cortex-organizing center that gives rise to Cajal-Retzius (CR) neurons. 
Interestingly, we have shown that in mouse embryos, Rotatin colocalizes with CR 
neurons at the subpial marginal zone. Knockdown experiments in human fibroblasts 
and neural stem cells confirm a role for RTTN in cilia structure and function. 
RTTN mutations therefore link aberrant ciliary function to abnormal development 
and organization of the cortex in human individuals.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.008
PMCID: PMC3511998
PMID: 22939636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]