---
reference_id: "PMID:33479910"
title: Regulatory and IgE(+) B Cells in Allergic Asthma.
authors:
- Oliveria JP
- Agayby R
- Gauvreau GM
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1237-8_21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulatory and IgE(+) B Cells in Allergic Asthma.
**Authors:** Oliveria JP, Agayby R, Gauvreau GM
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-0716-1237-8_21](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-1237-8_21)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2021;2270:375-418. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1237-8_21.

Regulatory and IgE(+) B Cells in Allergic Asthma.

Oliveria JP(1)(2), Agayby R(2), Gauvreau GM(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Respirology, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Respirology, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada. gauvreau@mcmaster.ca.

Allergic asthma is triggered by inhalation of environmental allergens resulting 
in bronchial constriction and inflammation, which leads to clinical symptoms 
such as wheezing, coughing, and difficulty breathing. Asthmatic airway 
inflammation is initiated by inflammatory mediators released by granulocytic 
cells. However, the immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibody is necessary for the 
initiation of the allergic cascade, and IgE is produced and released exclusively 
by memory B cells and plasma cells. Acute allergen exposure has also been shown 
to increase IgE levels in the airways of patients diagnosed with allergic 
asthma; however, more studies are needed to understand local airway 
inflammation. Additionally, regulatory B cells (Bregs) have been shown to 
modulate IgE-mediated inflammatory processes in allergic asthma pathogenesis, 
particularly in mouse models of allergic airway disease. However, the levels and 
function of these IgE+ B cells and Bregs remain to be elucidated in human models 
of asthma. The overall objective for this chapter is to provide detailed 
methodological, and insightful technological advances to study the biology of B 
cells in allergic asthma pathogenesis. Specifically, we will describe how to 
investigate the frequency and function of IgE+ B cells and Bregs in allergic 
asthma, and the kinetics of these cells after allergen exposure in a human 
asthma model.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1237-8_21
PMID: 33479910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]