---
reference_id: "PMID:26154786"
title: Lung-Function Trajectories Leading to Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
authors:
- Lange P
- Celli B
- Agustí A
- Boje Jensen G
- Divo M
- Faner R
- Guerra S
- Marott JL
- Martinez FD
- Martinez-Camblor P
- Meek P
- Owen CA
- Petersen H
- Pinto-Plata V
- Schnohr P
- Sood A
- Soriano JB
- Tesfaigzi Y
- Vestbo J
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1411532
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung-Function Trajectories Leading to Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
**Authors:** Lange P, Celli B, Agustí A, Boje Jensen G, Divo M, Faner R, Guerra S, Marott JL, Martinez FD, Martinez-Camblor P, Meek P, Owen CA, Petersen H, Pinto-Plata V, Schnohr P, Sood A, Soriano JB, Tesfaigzi Y, Vestbo J
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1411532](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1411532)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2015 Jul 9;373(2):111-22. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1411532.

Lung-Function Trajectories Leading to Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Lange P(1), Celli B, Agustí A, Boje Jensen G, Divo M, Faner R, Guerra S, Marott 
JL, Martinez FD, Martinez-Camblor P, Meek P, Owen CA, Petersen H, Pinto-Plata V, 
Schnohr P, Sood A, Soriano JB, Tesfaigzi Y, Vestbo J.

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Public Health, Section of Social Medicine (P.L.), 
Respiratory Section, Hvidovre Hospital (P.L.), Copenhagen City Heart Study, 
Frederiksberg Hospital (P.L., G.B.J., J.L.M., P.S.), and the Department of 
Respiratory Medicine, Gentofte Hospital (J.V.), Copenhagen University, 
Copenhagen, and University of Southern Denmark, Odense (G.B.J.) - all in 
Denmark; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston (B.C., 
M.D., C.A.O., V.P.-P.); Servei de Pneumologia, Thorax Institute, Hospital 
Clinic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, University of 
Barcelona (A.A.), and Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomèdica (R.F.) - both 
in Barcelona; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 
Respiratorias (A.A., R.F.) and Instituto de Investigación Hospital Universitario 
de la Princesa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Cátedra UAM-Linde (J.B.S.) 
- both in Madrid; Arizona Respiratory Center, University of Arizona, Tucson 
(S.G., F.D.M.); Universidad Autónoma de Chile, Santiago, Chile (P.M.-C.); 
University of Colorado, Denver, Denver (P.M.); Lovelace Respiratory Research 
Institute (H.P., Y.T.) and University of New Mexico (A.S.) - both in 
Albuquerque; and the Respiratory and Allergy Research Group, Manchester Academic 
Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom 
(J.V.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Jul 9;373(2):185-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1503888.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2015 Sep;3(9):675. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00329-X.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Oct 15;373(16):1575. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1510089.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Oct 15;373(16):1574-5. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1510089.

BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is thought to result 
from an accelerated decline in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) over 
time. Yet it is possible that a normal decline in FEV1 could also lead to COPD 
in persons whose maximally attained FEV1 is less than population norms.
METHODS: We stratified participants in three independent cohorts (the Framingham 
Offspring Cohort, the Copenhagen City Heart Study, and the Lovelace Smokers 
Cohort) according to lung function (FEV1 ≥80% or <80% of the predicted value) at 
cohort inception (mean age of patients, approximately 40 years) and the presence 
or absence of COPD at the last study visit. We then determined the rate of 
decline in FEV1 over time among the participants according to their FEV1 at 
cohort inception and COPD status at study end.
RESULTS: Among 657 persons who had an FEV1 of less than 80% of the predicted 
value before 40 years of age, 174 (26%) had COPD after 22 years of observation, 
whereas among 2207 persons who had a baseline FEV1 of at least 80% of the 
predicted value before 40 years of age, 158 (7%) had COPD after 22 years of 
observation (P<0.001). Approximately half the 332 persons with COPD at the end 
of the observation period had had a normal FEV1 before 40 years of age and had a 
rapid decline in FEV1 thereafter, with a mean (±SD) decline of 53±21 ml per 
year. The remaining half had had a low FEV1 in early adulthood and a subsequent 
mean decline in FEV1 of 27±18 ml per year (P<0.001), despite similar smoking 
exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that low FEV1 in early adulthood is important in 
the genesis of COPD and that accelerated decline in FEV1 is not an obligate 
feature of COPD. (Funded by an unrestricted grant from GlaxoSmithKline and 
others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1411532
PMID: 26154786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]