---
reference_id: "PMID:31914354"
title: Epithelial Wnt10a Is Essential for Tooth Root Furcation Morphogenesis.
authors:
- Yu M
- Liu Y
- Wang Y
- Wong SW
- Wu J
- Liu H
- Feng H
- Han D
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1177/0022034519897607
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epithelial Wnt10a Is Essential for Tooth Root Furcation Morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Yu M, Liu Y, Wang Y, Wong SW, Wu J, Liu H, Feng H, Han D
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0022034519897607](https://doi.org/10.1177/0022034519897607)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2020 Mar;99(3):311-319. doi: 10.1177/0022034519897607. Epub 2020
Jan  8.

Epithelial Wnt10a Is Essential for Tooth Root Furcation Morphogenesis.

Yu M(1), Liu Y(1), Wang Y(1), Wong SW(2), Wu J(1), Liu H(1), Feng H(1), Han 
D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of 
Stomatology & National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases & National 
Engineering Laboratory for Digital and Material Technology of Stomatology & 
Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital Stomatology, Beijing, China.
(2)Division of Comprehensive Oral Care-Periodontology, Adams School of 
Dentistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

WNT10A (Wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 10A) plays a crucial 
role in tooth development, and patients with biallelic WNT10A mutation and mice 
lacking Wnt10a show taurodontism. However, whether epithelial or mesenchymal 
WNT10A controls the initiation of the root furcation formation remains unclear, 
and the functional significance of WNT10A in regulating root morphogenesis has 
not been clarified. Here, we investigated how Wnt10a affects tooth root 
development by generating different tissue-specific Wnt10a conditional knockout 
mice. Wnt10a knockout in the whole tissue (EIIa-Cre;Wnt10aflox/flox) and in 
dental epithelium (K14-Cre;Wnt10aflox/flox) led to an absence of or apically 
located root furcation in molars of mice, a phenotype that resembled 
taurodontism. An RNAscope analysis showed that the dynamic epithelial and 
mesenchymal Wnt10a expression pattern occurred during root development. 
Immunofluorescent staining of E-cadherin and EdU revealed decreased epithelial 
cell proliferation at the cervical region of the molar in 
K14-Cre;Wnt10aflox/flox mice at postnatal day 0 (PN0), just before the 
initiation of root morphogenesis. Interestingly, we found increased pulpal 
mesenchymal cell proliferation in the presumptive root furcating region of the 
molar in K14-Cre;Wnt10aflox/flox mice at PN4 and PN7. RNA-seq indicated that 
among the Wnt ligands with high endogenous expression levels in molars, Wnt4 was 
increased after epithelial knockout of Wnt10a. The RNAscope assay confirmed that 
the expression of Wnt4 and Axin2 in the dental papilla of the presumptive root 
furcating region, where dental pulp overgrowth occurred, was increased in 
K14-Cre;Wnt10aflox/flox molars. Furthermore, after suppression of the elevated 
Wnt4 level in K14-Cre;Wnt10aflox/flox molars by Wnt4 shRNA adenovirus and kidney 
capsule grafts, the root furcation defect was partially rescued. Taken together, 
our study provides the first in vivo evidence that epithelial Wnt10a guides root 
furcation formation and plays a crucial role in controlling the organized 
proliferation of adjacent mesenchymal cells by regulating proper Wnt4 expression 
during root furcation morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1177/0022034519897607
PMID: 31914354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]