---
reference_id: "PMID:37759476"
title: "NAP (Davunetide): The Neuroprotective ADNP Drug Candidate Penetrates Cell Nuclei Explaining Pleiotropic Mechanisms."
authors:
- Ganaiem M
- Gildor ND
- Shazman S
- Karmon G
- Ivashko-Pachima Y
- Gozes I
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12182251
keywords:
- "Neuroprotective Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Ketamine
- tau Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Nucleus/metabolism
- Oligopeptides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NAP (Davunetide): The Neuroprotective ADNP Drug Candidate Penetrates Cell Nuclei Explaining Pleiotropic Mechanisms.
**Authors:** Ganaiem M, Gildor ND, Shazman S, Karmon G, Ivashko-Pachima Y, Gozes I
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12182251](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12182251)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Sep 11;12(18):2251. doi: 10.3390/cells12182251.

NAP (Davunetide): The Neuroprotective ADNP Drug Candidate Penetrates Cell Nuclei 
Explaining Pleiotropic Mechanisms.

Ganaiem M(1), Gildor ND(1), Shazman S(2)(3), Karmon G(1), Ivashko-Pachima Y(1), 
Gozes I(1).

Author information:
(1)The Elton Laboratory for Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Department of Human 
Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Sagol School of 
Neuroscience and Adams Super Center for Brain Studies, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv 6997801, Israel.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, The Open University of 
Israel, Raanana 4353107, Israel.
(3)Department of Information Systems, The Max Stern Yezreel Valley College, 
Yezreel Valley, Afula 1930600, Israel.

(1) Background: Recently, we showed aberrant nuclear/cytoplasmic 
boundaries/activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) distribution in 
ADNP-mutated cells. This malformation was corrected upon neuronal 
differentiation by the ADNP-derived fragment drug candidate NAP (davunetide). 
Here, we investigated the mechanism of NAP nuclear protection. (2) Methods: 
CRISPR/Cas9 DNA-editing established N1E-115 neuroblastoma cell lines that 
express two different green fluorescent proteins (GFPs)-labeled mutated ADNP 
variants (p.Tyr718* and p.Ser403*). Cells were exposed to NAP conjugated to Cy5, 
followed by live imaging. Cells were further characterized using quantitative 
morphology/immunocytochemistry/RNA and protein quantifications. (3) Results: NAP 
rapidly distributed in the cytoplasm and was also seen in the nucleus. 
Furthermore, reduced microtubule content was observed in the ADNP-mutated cell 
lines. In parallel, disrupting microtubules by zinc or nocodazole intoxication 
mimicked ADNP mutation phenotypes and resulted in aberrant nuclear-cytoplasmic 
boundaries, which were rapidly corrected by NAP treatment. No NAP effects were 
noted on ADNP levels. Ketamine, used as a control, was ineffective, but both NAP 
and ketamine exhibited direct interactions with ADNP, as observed via in silico 
docking. (4) Conclusions: Through a microtubule-linked mechanism, NAP rapidly 
localized to the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments, ameliorating mutated 
ADNP-related deficiencies. These novel findings explain previously published 
gene expression results and broaden NAP (davunetide) utilization in research and 
clinical development.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12182251
PMCID: PMC10527813
PMID: 37759476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest 
except patent contributions (above). The funders had no role in the design of 
the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the 
writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results.