---
reference_id: "PMID:32954315"
title: "11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 inhibition in idiopathic intracranial hypertension: a double-blind randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- Markey K
- Mitchell J
- Botfield H
- Ottridge RS
- Matthews T
- Krishnan A
- Woolley R
- Westgate C
- Yiangou A
- Alimajstorovic Z
- Shah P
- Rick C
- Ives N
- Taylor AE
- Gilligan LC
- Jenkinson C
- Arlt W
- Scotton W
- Fairclough RJ
- Singhal R
- Stewart PM
- Tomlinson JW
- Lavery GG
- Mollan SP
- Sinclair AJ
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcz050
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 inhibition in idiopathic intracranial hypertension: a double-blind randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** Markey K, Mitchell J, Botfield H, Ottridge RS, Matthews T, Krishnan A, Woolley R, Westgate C, Yiangou A, Alimajstorovic Z, Shah P, Rick C, Ives N, Taylor AE, Gilligan LC, Jenkinson C, Arlt W, Scotton W, Fairclough RJ, Singhal R, Stewart PM, Tomlinson JW, Lavery GG, Mollan SP, Sinclair AJ
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcz050](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcz050)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2020 Jan 10;2(1):fcz050. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcz050. 
eCollection 2020.

11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 inhibition in idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension: a double-blind randomized controlled trial.

Markey K(1), Mitchell J(1)(2)(3), Botfield H(4), Ottridge RS(5), Matthews T(6), 
Krishnan A(7), Woolley R(5), Westgate C(1)(2), Yiangou A(1)(2)(3), 
Alimajstorovic Z(1)(2), Shah P(8), Rick C(9), Ives N(5), Taylor AE(1)(2), 
Gilligan LC(1)(2), Jenkinson C(1)(2), Arlt W(1)(2), Scotton W(1)(2)(3), 
Fairclough RJ(10), Singhal R(11), Stewart PM(12), Tomlinson JW(13), Lavery 
GG(1)(2), Mollan SP(1)(6), Sinclair AJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, College of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(2)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Birmingham Health 
Partners, Birmingham B15 2TH, UK.
(3)Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation 
Trust, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham B15 2WB, UK.
(4)Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(5)Birmingham Clinical Trials Unit, Institute of Applied Health Research, 
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 
2TT, UK.
(6)Birmingham Neuro-Ophthalmology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS 
Foundation Trust, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham B15 2WB, UK.
(7)Department of Neurology, The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool L9 
7LJ, UK.
(8)Institute of Neurological Sciences, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, NHS 
Greater Glasgow and Clyde, Glasgow G51 4TF, UK.
(9)Nottingham Clinical Trials Unit, Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, 
UK.
(10)Emerging Innovations Unit, Discovery Sciences, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, 
AstraZeneca, Cambridge CB2 0SL, UK.
(11)Upper GI Unit and Minimally Invasive Unit, Heartlands Hospital, University 
Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham B9 5SS, UK.
(12)Medical School, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.
(13)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism (OCDEM), NIHR Oxford 
Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, 
Headington, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.

Erratum in
    Brain Commun. 2020 Aug 25;2(2):fcaa108. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaa108.

Treatment options for idiopathic intracranial hypertension are limited. The 
enzyme 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 has been implicated in regulating 
cerebrospinal fluid secretion, and its activity is associated with alterations 
in intracranial pressure in idiopathic intracranial hypertension. We assessed 
therapeutic efficacy, safety and tolerability and investigated indicators of in 
vivo efficacy of the 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 inhibitor AZD4017 
compared with placebo in idiopathic intracranial hypertension. A multicenter, 
UK, 16-week phase II randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 
12-week treatment with AZD4017 or placebo was conducted. Women aged 18-55 years 
with active idiopathic intracranial hypertension (>25 cmH2O lumbar puncture 
opening pressure and active papilledema) were included. Participants received 
400 mg of oral AZD4017 twice daily compared with matching placebo over 12 weeks. 
The outcome measures were initial efficacy, safety and tolerability. The primary 
clinical outcome was lumbar puncture opening pressure at 12 weeks analysed by 
intention-to-treat. Secondary clinical outcomes were symptoms, visual function, 
papilledema, headache and anthropometric measures. In vivo efficacy was 
evaluated in the central nervous system and systemically. A total of 31 subjects 
[mean age 31.2 (SD = 6.9) years and body mass index 39.2 (SD = 12.6) kg/m2] were 
randomized to AZD4017 (n = 17) or placebo (n = 14). At 12 weeks, lumbar puncture 
pressure was lower in the AZD4017 group (29.7 cmH2O) compared with placebo (31.3 
cmH2O), but the difference between groups was not statistically significant 
(mean difference: -2.8, 95% confidence interval: -7.1 to 1.5; P = 0.2). An 
exploratory analysis assessing mean change in lumbar puncture pressure within 
each group found a significant decrease in the AZD4017 group [mean change: -4.3 
cmH2O (SD = 5.7); P = 0.009] but not in the placebo group [mean change: -0.3 
cmH2O (SD = 5.9); P = 0.8]. AZD4017 was safe, with no withdrawals related to 
adverse effects. Nine transient drug-related adverse events were reported. One 
serious adverse event occurred in the placebo group (deterioration requiring 
shunt surgery). In vivo biomarkers of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 
activity (urinary glucocorticoid metabolites, hepatic prednisolone generation, 
serum and cerebrospinal fluid cortisol:cortisone ratios) demonstrated 
significant enzyme inhibition with the reduction in serum cortisol:cortisone 
ratio correlating significantly with reduction in lumbar puncture pressure 
(P = 0.005, R = 0.70). This is the first phase II randomized controlled trial in 
idiopathic intracranial hypertension evaluating a novel therapeutic target. 
AZD4017 was safe and well tolerated and inhibited 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 1 activity in vivo. Reduction in serum cortisol:cortisone 
correlated with decreased intracranial pressure. Possible clinical benefits were 
noted in this small cohort. A longer, larger study would now be of interest.

© The Author(s) (2020). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcz050
PMCID: PMC7425517
PMID: 32954315