---
reference_id: "PMID:16966065"
title: "[Nephronophtisis]."
authors:
- Niaudet P
- Salomon R
journal: Nephrol Ther
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.nephro.2006.06.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Nephronophtisis].
**Authors:** Niaudet P, Salomon R
**Journal:** Nephrol Ther (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nephro.2006.06.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nephro.2006.06.006)

## Content

1. Nephrol Ther. 2006 Sep;2(4):200-6. doi: 10.1016/j.nephro.2006.06.006. Epub
2006  Aug 1.

[Nephronophtisis].

[Article in French]

Niaudet P(1), Salomon R.

Author information:
(1)Service de néphrologie pédiatrique et Inserm U574, hôpital 
Necker-Enfants-Malades, 149, rue de Sèvres, 75743 Paris cedex 15, France. 
niaudet@necker.fr

Nephronophthisis is a chronic tubulo-interstitial nephritis which progress to 
terminal renal failure. It is an heterogeneous entity at the clinical as well as 
at the genetic level. There are three main clinical forms of nephronophtisis 
which have been associated with five gene defects. Juvenile nephronophtisis, the 
most frequent, progress to end stage renal failure before age 15. It is an 
autosomal recessive disease which is responsible for a urine concentration 
defect starting after age 2, failure to thrive and a progressive deterioration 
of renal function without signs of glomerular disease. Kidney size is normal. 
Histologic lesions concern tubular basement membranes which are thickened and 
multilayered or thinned. There is an associated interstitial fibrosis. Some 
children present with extrarenal symptoms: tapetoretinal degeneration 
(Senior-Loken syndrome), mental retardation, cerebellar ataxia, bone anomalies 
or liver involvement. Infantile nephronophtisis is a recessive autosomic 
tubulo-interstitial nephritis with cortical microcysts which progress to end 
stage renal failure before age 5. Adolescent nephronophtisis is a less frequent 
form of nephronophtisis. Medullary cystic disease is transmitted as an autosomic 
dominant trait. Clinical and histological signs are similar to nephronophthisis, 
but the disease progress later to terminal renal failure and is not accompanied 
by extra-renal symptoms. Several genes which are involved in nephronophtisis, 
encode proteins that localize in different cell compartments, in particular to 
the primary apical cilia, as it is the case for many other cystic kidney 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nephro.2006.06.006
PMID: 16966065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]