---
reference_id: "PMID:11431708"
title: Disruption of the ProSAP2 gene in a t(12;22)(q24.1;q13.3) is associated with the 22q13.3 deletion syndrome.
authors:
- Bonaglia MC
- Giorda R
- Borgatti R
- Felisari G
- Gagliardi C
- Selicorni A
- Zuffardi O
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/321293
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of the ProSAP2 gene in a t(12;22)(q24.1;q13.3) is associated with the 22q13.3 deletion syndrome.
**Authors:** Bonaglia MC, Giorda R, Borgatti R, Felisari G, Gagliardi C, Selicorni A, Zuffardi O
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/321293](https://doi.org/10.1086/321293)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Aug;69(2):261-8. doi: 10.1086/321293. Epub 2001 Jun 18.

Disruption of the ProSAP2 gene in a t(12;22)(q24.1;q13.3) is associated with the 
22q13.3 deletion syndrome.

Bonaglia MC(1), Giorda R, Borgatti R, Felisari G, Gagliardi C, Selicorni A, 
Zuffardi O.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS E. Medea, 23842 Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy. bonaglia@bp.lnf.it

The terminal 22q13.3 deletion syndrome is characterized by severe 
expressive-language delay, mild mental retardation, hypotonia, joint laxity, 
dolichocephaly, and minor facial dysmorphisms. We identified a child with all 
the features of 22q13.3 deletion syndrome. The patient's karyotype showed a de 
novo balanced translocation between chromosomes 12 and 22, with the breakpoint 
in the 22q13.3 critical region of the 22q distal deletion syndrome [46, XY, 
t(12;22)(q24.1;q13.3)]. FISH investigations revealed that the translocation was 
reciprocal, with the chromosome 22 breakpoint within the 22q subtelomeric cosmid 
106G1220 and the chromosome 12q breakpoint near STS D12S317. Using Southern blot 
analysis and inverse PCR, we located the chromosome 12 breakpoint in an intron 
of the FLJ10659 gene and located the chromosome 22 breakpoint within exon 21 of 
the human homologue of the ProSAP2 gene. Short homologous sequences (5-bp, 
CTG[C/A]C) were found at the breakpoint on both derivative chromosomes. The 
translocation does not lead to the loss of any portion of DNA. Northern blot 
analysis of human tissues, using the rat ProSAP2 cDNA, showed that full-length 
transcripts were found only in the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum. The 
FLJ10659 gene is expressed in various tissues and does not show tissue-specific 
isoforms. The finding that ProSAP2 is included in the critical region of the 22q 
deletion syndrome and that our proband displays all signs and symptoms of the 
syndrome suggests that ProSAP2 haploinsufficiency is the cause of the 22q13.3 
deletion syndrome. ProSAP2 is a good candidate for this syndrome, because it is 
preferentially expressed in the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum and encodes a 
scaffold protein involved in the postsynaptic density of excitatory synapses.

DOI: 10.1086/321293
PMCID: PMC1235301
PMID: 11431708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]