---
reference_id: "PMID:38416279"
title: "Herpes Zoster Recurrence: A Narrative Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Parikh R
- Spence O
- Giannelos N
- Kaan I
journal: Dermatol Ther (Heidelb)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s13555-024-01101-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Herpes Zoster Recurrence: A Narrative Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Parikh R, Spence O, Giannelos N, Kaan I
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (Heidelb) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13555-024-01101-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13555-024-01101-7)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2024 Mar;14(3):569-592. doi: 
10.1007/s13555-024-01101-7. Epub 2024 Feb 28.

Herpes Zoster Recurrence: A Narrative Review of the Literature.

Parikh R(1), Spence O(2), Giannelos N(3), Kaan I(4).

Author information:
(1)Global Medical Affairs, Shingrix, GSK Wavre, Av. Fleming 20, Wavre, Belgium. 
raunak.p.parikh@gsk.com.
(2)Vaccine Epidemiology - Viral Non-Respiratory, GSK, Rockville, MD, USA.
(3)Value Evidence, GSK, Wavre, Belgium.
(4)Value Evidence and Outcomes, GSK, Singapore, Singapore.

INTRODUCTION: Herpes zoster (HZ; shingles) is a painful, cutaneous disease 
caused by reactivation of the varicella zoster virus, which causes varicella 
(chickenpox) typically during childhood. The considerable healthcare burden of 
HZ is relatively well documented, with approximately one in three individuals 
experiencing at least one episode during their lifetime, debilitating symptoms 
including neuropathic pain, and complications such as post-herpetic neuralgia, 
vision loss, and rarely, stroke, and increased severity in immunocompromised 
individuals. However, we are not aware of a comprehensive review of literature 
specifically examining the burden of HZ recurrence.
METHODS: We conducted a PubMed search (1 January 2003-2 February 2023) to assess 
available literature on the incidence, risk factors, and clinical features of HZ 
recurrence.
RESULTS: The incidence of HZ recurrence reported by the studies identified was 
wide ranging. Studies in general populations of immunocompetent or 
immunocompetent/immunosuppressed (mixed) populations with an initial HZ episode 
estimate that approximately 1.2-9.6% of individuals may experience HZ 
recurrence, with an incidence rate of 1.7-16.6 cases per 1000 person-years. HZ 
recurrence was reported in 0.0-18.2% of immunocompromised individuals with HZ, 
with an incidence rate of 17.0-55 cases per 1000 person-years. Incidence rates 
varied according to study design, follow-up, and study populations. Recognized 
risk factors for HZ recurrence include immunocompromised status, female sex, 
family history, and comorbidities such as diabetes. Other factors that may 
predispose individuals to recurrence include long-lasting pain after the initial 
HZ episode and the presence of herpes zoster ophthalmicus.
DISCUSSION: Our review underlines that following an initial HZ episode, 
individuals remain at risk of HZ recurrence, adding to the disease burden in a 
population. As HZ is preventable by vaccination, national HZ vaccination 
recommendations should include the need for and timing of vaccination in both 
immunocompetent and immunocompromised individuals who have a history of HZ.

Plain Language Summary: Herpes zoster (HZ), also known as shingles, results from 
the same virus that causes chickenpox in childhood. In shingles, the chickenpox 
virus is reactivated, most commonly causing a painful skin rash. About one in 
three people have shingles at least once in their lifetime. Neuralgia (a 
burning, stabbing, and sometimes severe pain along a nerve pathway) may continue 
for months after the initial rash. Shingles may lead to loss of vision and 
rarely stroke. Shingles is more severe in people with weakened immunity. We 
reviewed published information on shingles recurrence (i.e., a second, third, or 
later episode of shingles), as we were not aware of a broad review of 
information specifically on recurrence. We focused on the rate of recurrence and 
factors that increase the risk of recurrence. Overall, in around one-tenth of 
individuals who experience shingles, the disease may reoccur after complete 
resolution. The rate of recurrence varied on the basis of how the studies were 
carried out and the type of patients included in the studies. Well-known factors 
that increase the risk of shingles recurrence are reduced immunity, female sex, 
family history, and other conditions (e.g., diabetes). Other factors that may 
increase the risk of shingles recurrence include pain that lasts for a long time 
after the first episode of shingles and having herpes zoster ophthalmicus, which 
leads to eye complications. Our review summarizes available data. As shingles is 
preventable by vaccination, strategies to prevent this disease should include 
those who have a history of shingles.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13555-024-01101-7
PMCID: PMC10965844
PMID: 38416279

Conflict of interest statement: Raunak Parikh, O’Mareen Spence, and Nikolaos 
Giannelos are employees of GSK and may hold stock or stock options. Iain Kaan 
was an employee of GSK while working on this manuscript and may hold stock or 
stock options. Iain Kann is now an employee of Aeolian Logic Pte Ltd, Singapore 
and may hold stock or stock options.