---
reference_id: "PMID:38760822"
title: Methylmalonic acidemia triggers lysosomal-autophagy dysfunctions.
authors:
- Costanzo M
- Cevenini A
- Kollipara L
- Caterino M
- Bianco S
- Pirozzi F
- Scerra G
- "D'Agostino M"
- Pavone LM
- Sickmann A
- Ruoppolo M
journal: Cell Biosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13578-024-01245-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Methylmalonic acidemia triggers lysosomal-autophagy dysfunctions.
**Authors:** Costanzo M, Cevenini A, Kollipara L, Caterino M, Bianco S, Pirozzi F, Scerra G, D'Agostino M, Pavone LM, Sickmann A, Ruoppolo M
**Journal:** Cell Biosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13578-024-01245-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13578-024-01245-1)

## Content

1. Cell Biosci. 2024 May 17;14(1):63. doi: 10.1186/s13578-024-01245-1.

Methylmalonic acidemia triggers lysosomal-autophagy dysfunctions.

Costanzo M(1)(2), Cevenini A(3)(4), Kollipara L(5), Caterino M(3)(4), Bianco 
S(3)(4), Pirozzi F(3)(4), Scerra G(3), D'Agostino M(3), Pavone LM(3), Sickmann 
A(5)(6)(7), Ruoppolo M(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of 
Naples Federico II, Via Pansini 5, Naples, 80131, Italy. 
michele.costanzo@unina.it.
(2)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate Franco Salvatore, Naples, Italy. 
michele.costanzo@unina.it.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of 
Naples Federico II, Via Pansini 5, Naples, 80131, Italy.
(4)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate Franco Salvatore, Naples, Italy.
(5)Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V, Dortmund, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Chemistry, College of Physical Sciences, University of 
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(7)Medizinische Fakultät, Medizinische Proteom-Center (MPC), Ruhr-Universität 
Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(8)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of 
Naples Federico II, Via Pansini 5, Naples, 80131, Italy. 
margherita.ruoppolo@unina.it.
(9)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate Franco Salvatore, Naples, Italy. 
margherita.ruoppolo@unina.it.

BACKGROUND: Methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) is a rare inborn error of propionate 
metabolism caused by deficiency of the mitochondrial methylmalonyl-CoA mutase 
(MUT) enzyme. As matter of fact, MMA patients manifest impairment of the primary 
metabolic network with profound damages that involve several cell components, 
many of which have not been discovered yet. We employed cellular models and 
patients-derived fibroblasts to refine and uncover new pathologic mechanisms 
connected with MUT deficiency through the combination of multi-proteomics and 
bioinformatics approaches.
RESULTS: Our data show that MUT deficiency is connected with profound proteome 
dysregulations, revealing molecular actors involved in lysosome and autophagy 
functioning. To elucidate the effects of defective MUT on lysosomal and 
autophagy regulation, we analyzed the morphology and functionality of 
MMA-lysosomes that showed deep alterations, thus corroborating omics data. 
Lysosomes of MMA cells present as enlarged vacuoles with low degradative 
capabilities. Notwithstanding, treatment with an anti-propionigenic drug is 
capable of totally rescuing lysosomal morphology and functional activity in 
MUT-deficient cells. These results indicate a strict connection between MUT 
deficiency and lysosomal-autophagy dysfunction, providing promising therapeutic 
perspectives for MMA.
CONCLUSIONS: Defective homeostatic mechanisms in the regulation of autophagy and 
lysosome functions have been demonstrated in MUT-deficient cells. Our data prove 
that MMA triggers such dysfunctions impacting on autophagosome-lysosome fusion 
and lysosomal activity.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13578-024-01245-1
PMCID: PMC11102240
PMID: 38760822

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential competing 
interests.