---
reference_id: "PMID:36606277"
title: Severe early-onset manifestations of generalized arterial calcification of infancy (mimicking severe coarctation of the aorta) with ABCC6 gene variant - Case report and literature review.
authors:
- Fãgãrãşan A
- Gozar L
- Ghiragosian SR
- Murariu M
- Pop M
- Crauciuc A
- Miclea D
- Şuteu CC
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.1032519
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe early-onset manifestations of generalized arterial calcification of infancy (mimicking severe coarctation of the aorta) with ABCC6 gene variant - Case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Fãgãrãşan A, Gozar L, Ghiragosian SR, Murariu M, Pop M, Crauciuc A, Miclea D, Şuteu CC
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2022.1032519](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2022.1032519)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Dec 20;9:1032519. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.1032519.
eCollection 2022.

Severe early-onset manifestations of generalized arterial calcification of
infancy (mimicking severe coarctation of the aorta) with ABCC6 gene variant -
Case report and literature review.

Fãgãrãşan A(1)(2), Gozar L(1)(2), Ghiragosian SR(2), Murariu M(1), Pop M(3)(4),
Crauciuc A(1), Miclea D(5), Şuteu CC(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Pediatric Cardiology, Emergency Institute of Cardiovascular
Diseases and Transplantation, Târgu Mureş, Romania.
(2)Department of Pediatrics III, George Emil Palade University of Medicine,
Pharmacy, Science, and Technology of Târgu Mureş, Târgu Mureş, Romania.
(3)ME1 Department, George Emil Palade University of Medicine, Pharmacy, Science,
and Technology of Târgu Mureş, Târgu Mureş, Romania.
(4)Department of Radiology, Emergency Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases and
Heart Transplant, Târgu Mureş, Romania.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, "Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.

INTRODUCTION: Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is a rare
cause of infantile heart failure and systemic hypertension with a poor
prognosis, characterized by extensive calcification and proliferation of the
intimal layer of large and medium sized arteries.
CASE REPORT: We present the first case report of successful surgical treatment
of severe aortic arch obstruction by calcified plaques mimicking severe
coarctation of the aorta and the outcome (of bisphosphonate therapy) in a
newborn with GACI. Furthermore, we report the identification of a variant in ATP
Binding Cassette Subfamily C, Member 6 (ABCC6) gene, possibly associated with
severe early-onset manifestations of GACI.
CONCLUSION: This case report highlights the importance of considering GACI in an
infant with heart failure, systemic hypertension, and evidence of increased
echogenicity of the arterial vessels. We noted the favorable outcome in
improving the aortic calcification in our patient after surgical treatment and
bisphosphonates therapy. Early diagnosis and treatment improve the long-term
prognosis. A better understanding of this rare genetic disease could lead to new
therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2022 Fãgãrãşan, Gozar, Ghiragosian, Murariu, Pop, Crauciuc, Miclea
and Şuteu.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.1032519
PMCID: PMC9807665
PMID: 36606277

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
