---
reference_id: "PMID:39337454"
title: "Understanding Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Therapeutic Advances."
authors:
- Rizea RE
- Corlatescu AD
- Costin HP
- Dumitru A
- Ciurea AV
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25189966
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Therapeutic Advances.
**Authors:** Rizea RE, Corlatescu AD, Costin HP, Dumitru A, Ciurea AV
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25189966](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25189966)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Sep 15;25(18):9966. doi: 10.3390/ijms25189966.

Understanding Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and 
Therapeutic Advances.

Rizea RE(1)(2), Corlatescu AD(1), Costin HP(1), Dumitru A(1)(3)(4), Ciurea 
AV(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, "Carol 
Davila", 020021 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, "Bagdasar-Arseni" Clinical Emergency Hospital, 
041915 Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Morphopathology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, "Carol 
Davila", 020021 Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Emergency University Hospital Bucharest, 050098 Bucharest, Romania.
(5)Sanador Clinical Hospital, 010991 Bucharest, Romania.

This review offers an in-depth examination of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS), addressing its epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical presentation, 
diagnostic techniques, and current as well as emerging treatments. The purpose 
is to condense key findings and illustrate the complexity of ALS, which is 
shaped by both genetic and environmental influences. We reviewed the literature 
to discuss recent advancements in understanding molecular mechanisms such as 
protein misfolding, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and axonal 
transport defects, which are critical for identifying potential therapeutic 
targets. Significant progress has been made in refining diagnostic criteria and 
identifying biomarkers, leading to earlier and more precise diagnoses. Although 
current drug treatments provide some benefits, there is a clear need for more 
effective therapies. Emerging treatments, such as gene therapy and stem cell 
therapy, show potential in modifying disease progression and improving the 
quality of life for ALS patients. The review emphasizes the importance of 
continued research to address challenges such as disease variability and the 
limited effectiveness of existing treatments. Future research should concentrate 
on further exploring the molecular foundations of ALS and developing new 
therapeutic approaches. The implications for clinical practice include ensuring 
the accessibility of new treatments and that healthcare systems are equipped to 
support ongoing research and patient care.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25189966
PMCID: PMC11432652
PMID: 39337454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.