---
reference_id: "PMID:30268388"
title: "Treatment of urticarial vasculitis: A systematic review."
authors:
- Kolkhir P
- Grakhova M
- Bonnekoh H
- Krause K
- Maurer M
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.09.007
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Animals
- Biological Therapy
- Female
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Male
- Omalizumab/therapeutic use
- Skin/pathology
- Urticaria/drug therapy
- Vasculitis/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of urticarial vasculitis: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Kolkhir P, Grakhova M, Bonnekoh H, Krause K, Maurer M
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2018.09.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2018.09.007)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019 Feb;143(2):458-466. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2018.09.007. Epub 2018 Sep 27.

Treatment of urticarial vasculitis: A systematic review.

Kolkhir P(1), Grakhova M(2), Bonnekoh H(3), Krause K(3), Maurer M(4).

Author information:
(1)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health,
Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Allergie-Centrum-Charité, Berlin,
Germany; I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Division of
Immune-mediated skin diseases, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Regional Clinical Hospital No. 1, Tyumen, Russia.
(3)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health,
Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Allergie-Centrum-Charité, Berlin,
Germany.
(4)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health,
Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Allergie-Centrum-Charité, Berlin,
Germany. Electronic address: marcus.maurer@charite.de.

Comment in
    Int J Dermatol. 2023 Jan;62(1):e25-e27. doi: 10.1111/ijd.16025.

Urticarial vasculitis (UV) is a difficult-to-treat condition characterized by
long-lasting urticarial rashes and histopathologic findings of leukocytoclastic
vasculitis. Treatment is dictated by the severity of skin and systemic
involvement and the underlying systemic disease. This is a comprehensive
systematic review of the efficacy of current UV treatment options. We searched
for relevant studies in 7 databases, including MEDLINE, Scopus, and Web of
Science. In total, 261 eligible studies and 789 unique patients with UV were
included in the systematic review. Most patients with UV are adult women with
chronic (≥6 weeks) and systemic disease. UV is mostly idiopathic but can be
associated with drugs, malignancy, autoimmunity, and infections. It usually
resolves with their withdrawal or cure. Corticosteroids are effective for the
treatment of skin symptoms in more than 80% of patients with UV. However, their
long-term administration can lead to potentially serious adverse effects. The
addition of immunomodulatory or immunosuppressive agents often allows
corticosteroid tapering and improves the efficacy of therapy. Biologicals,
including omalizumab, as well as corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide, dapsone,
mycophenolate mofetil, plasmapheresis, colchicine, hydroxychloroquine,
intravenous immunoglobulin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and
cyclosporine, can be effective for both skin and systemic symptoms in patients
with UV. H1-antihistamines, montelukast, danazol, H2-antihistamines,
pentoxifylline, doxepin, and tranexamic acid are not effective in most patients
with UV. As of yet, no drugs have been approved for UV, and management
recommendations are based mostly on case reports and retrospective studies.
Prospective studies investigating the effects of treatment on the signs and
symptoms of UV are needed.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.09.007
PMID: 30268388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
