---
reference_id: "PMID:40042308"
title: The structural protein VP3 of enterovirus D68 interacts with MAVS to inhibit the NF-κB signaling pathway.
authors:
- Chen H
- Huang M
- Hou B
- Liu Z
- Tan R
- Cui L
- Wang T
- Wang Z
journal: J Virol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.00163-25
keywords:
- Humans
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- "Enterovirus D, Human/metabolism, genetics"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism, genetics"
- Virus Replication
- HEK293 Cells
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Enterovirus Infections/virology, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- Viroporin Proteins/metabolism
- Host-Pathogen Interactions
- Immune Evasion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The structural protein VP3 of enterovirus D68 interacts with MAVS to inhibit the NF-κB signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Chen H, Huang M, Hou B, Liu Z, Tan R, Cui L, Wang T, Wang Z
**Journal:** J Virol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.00163-25](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.00163-25)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2025 Apr 15;99(4):e0016325. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00163-25. Epub 2025 Mar
5.

The structural protein VP3 of enterovirus D68 interacts with MAVS to inhibit the
NF-κB signaling pathway.

Chen H(#)(1), Huang M(#)(1), Hou B(#)(1), Liu Z(1), Tan R(1), Cui L(1), Wang
T(1), Wang Z(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
(2)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China.
(3)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology of Infectious Disease,
Tianjin Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Tianjin, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) is an emerging pathogen causing severe respiratory
infections, and the immune evasion mediated by EV-D68 structural protein has
been under discussion for several years. Our early research has identified that
EV-D68 structural protein VP3 targets specifically the interferon regulatory
factor 7 to inhibit type I interferon signaling, but not interferon regulatory
factor 3, which is indispensable for mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein
(MAVS)-activated type I interferon signaling. Interestingly, in this study, we
found that VP3 co-localizes and interacts with MAVS. Furthermore, VP3 acts as a
negative regulator of MAVS/Sendai virus-activated NF-κB signaling pathway.
Overexpression of VP3 can promote EV-D68 replication and reverse MAVS-mediated
inhibition of virus replication. The mechanism of the interaction between VP3
and MAVS may be that VP3 not only disrupts the mitochondrial membrane potential
but also leads to the release of MAVS from mitochondria. Moreover, VP3 binds to
the transmembrane domain of MAVS with mitochondrial membrane localization
function, which provides support for the mechanism of action. Finally, in our
study, we found that VP3 interaction with MAVS to inhibit NF-κB activation is a
mechanism that is prevalent in enteroviruses. Overall, our data demonstrate that
the interaction between VP3 and MAVS can be used by enteroviruses to evade host
innate immunity as a broad-spectrum strategy.IMPORTANCEEnterovirus D68 (EV-D68),
as an emerging pathogen, has resulted in a rising number of pediatric infections
worldwide since its initial outbreak in the United States in 2014. This virus
can cause severe respiratory illnesses and is linked to acute flaccid myelitis.
In this article, we report that the structural protein VP3 of EV-D68 inhibits
the activation of the NF-κB signaling pathway by targeting mitochondrial
antiviral signaling protein (MAVS). Further studies demonstrate that VP3 can
induce mitochondrial damage, resulting in the loss of MAVS localization in
mitochondria. These findings suggest that the interaction between VP3 and MAVS
may represent a mechanism by which EV-D68 suppresses the activation of the NF-κB
signaling pathway, facilitating immune evasion and promoting viral replication.
Our study suggests potential therapeutic strategies for enterovirus-related
viral diseases and the development of novel antiviral drugs.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00163-25
PMCID: PMC11998529
PMID: 40042308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
