---
reference_id: "PMID:35042376"
title: Antiphospholipid syndrome-mediated acute cerebrovascular diseases and long-term outcomes.
authors:
- García-Grimshaw M
- Posadas-Pinto DR
- Jiménez-Ruiz A
- Valdés-Ferrer SI
- Cadena-Fernández A
- Torres-Ruiz JJ
- Barrientos-Guerra JD
- Amancha-Gabela M
- Chiquete E
- Flores-Silva FD
- Cantú-Brito C
journal: Lupus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/09612033221074178
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid syndrome-mediated acute cerebrovascular diseases and long-term outcomes.
**Authors:** García-Grimshaw M, Posadas-Pinto DR, Jiménez-Ruiz A, Valdés-Ferrer SI, Cadena-Fernández A, Torres-Ruiz JJ, Barrientos-Guerra JD, Amancha-Gabela M, Chiquete E, Flores-Silva FD, Cantú-Brito C
**Journal:** Lupus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/09612033221074178](https://doi.org/10.1177/09612033221074178)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2022 Feb;31(2):228-237. doi: 10.1177/09612033221074178. Epub 2022 Jan
18.

Antiphospholipid syndrome-mediated acute cerebrovascular diseases and long-term 
outcomes.

García-Grimshaw M(1), Posadas-Pinto DR(1), Jiménez-Ruiz A(2), Valdés-Ferrer 
SI(1)(3), Cadena-Fernández A(1), Torres-Ruiz JJ(4), Barrientos-Guerra JD(1), 
Amancha-Gabela M(1), Chiquete E(1), Flores-Silva FD(1), Cantú-Brito C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, 574397Instituto Nacional de Ciencias 
Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Stroke, Dementia & Heart Disease Laboratory, 6221Western University, London, 
ON, Canada.
(3)88982Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, 574397Instituto Nacional de 
Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.

OBJECTIVES: The antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is an autoimmune disease 
associated with thrombotic and non-thrombotic neurologic manifestations. APS is 
classified as primary (PAPS) or secondary (SAPS) when it co-exists with another 
autoimmune disease. We aim to describe the spectrum of acute cerebrovascular 
disease among patients with APS, their differences between stroke subtypes, and 
long-term functional outcomes.
METHODS: Retrospective cohort study including adult (≥18 years) patients with 
APS followed in the stroke clinic of a tertiary-care reference center for 
autoimmune diseases in Mexico from 2009 to 2019.
RESULTS: We studied 120 cases; 99 (82.5%) women; median age 43 years 
(interquartile range 35-52); 63.3% with SAPS. Demographics, comorbidities, and 
antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) positivity were similar between APS type and 
stroke subtypes. Amongst index events, we observed 84 (70%) acute ischemic 
strokes (AIS), 19 (15.8%) cerebral venous thromboses (CVT), 11 (9.2%) 
intracerebral hemorrhages (ICH), and six (5%) subarachnoid hemorrhages (SAH). 
Sixty-seven (55.8%) were known patients with APS; the median time from APS 
diagnosis to index stroke was 46 months (interquartile range 12-96); 64.7% of 
intracranial hemorrhages (ICH or SAH) occurred ≥4 years after APS was diagnosed 
(23.5% anticoagulation-related); 63.2% of CVT cases developed before APS was 
diagnosed or simultaneously. Recurrences occurred in 26 (22.8%) patients, AIS, 
in 18 (69.2%); intracranial hemorrhage, in eight (30.8%). Long-term functional 
outcomes were good (modified Rankin Scale ≤2) in 63.2% of cases, during 
follow-up, the all-cause mortality rate was 19.2%.
CONCLUSION: We found no differences between stroke subtypes and APS types. aPL 
profiles were not associated with any of the acute cerebrovascular diseases 
described in this cohort. CVT may be an initial thrombotic manifestation of APS 
with low mortality and good long-term functional outcome.

DOI: 10.1177/09612033221074178
PMID: 35042376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]