---
reference_id: "PMID:39567721"
title: Oxidative damage and mitochondrial dysfunction in cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency.
authors:
- Balci MC
- Gedikbasi A
- Dogan SA
- Kahraman S
- Tatoryan S
- Neijmann ST
- Karaca M
- Atalar F
- Gokcay G
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-80273-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxidative damage and mitochondrial dysfunction in cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency.
**Authors:** Balci MC, Gedikbasi A, Dogan SA, Kahraman S, Tatoryan S, Neijmann ST, Karaca M, Atalar F, Gokcay G
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-80273-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-80273-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Nov 21;14(1):28815. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-80273-w.

Oxidative damage and mitochondrial dysfunction in cystathionine beta-synthase 
deficiency.

Balci MC(1)(2), Gedikbasi A(3), Dogan SA(4), Kahraman S(5), Tatoryan S(6), 
Neijmann ST(5), Karaca M(7), Atalar F(6), Gokcay G(7)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nutrition and Metabolism, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, 
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Türkiye, Turkey. mehmetcbalci@hotmail.com.
(2)Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Division of Nutrition and Metabolism, 
Children's Hospital, Turgut Ozal Millet Cd, Fatih, Istanbul, 34093, Türkiye, 
Turkey. mehmetcbalci@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Pediatric Basic Sciences, Institute of Child Health, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Türkiye, Turkey.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Center for Life Sciences and 
Technologies, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Türkiye, Turkey.
(5)Department of Rare Diseases, Institute of Health Sciences, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Türkiye, Turkey.
(6)Department of Rare Diseases, Institute of Child Health, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Türkiye, Turkey.
(7)Division of Pediatric Nutrition and Metabolism, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, 
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Türkiye, Turkey.

Cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency (CBSD) is the most prevalent inherited 
disorder of homocysteine metabolism in the transsulphuration pathway. Research 
have suggested oxidative stress and inflammation as candidate pathogenic 
mechanisms in CBSD. This study aims to evaluate mitochondrial dysfunction and 
oxidative stress biomarkers in cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency (CBSD) 
patients, which may aid in understanding the pathogenesis of CBSD and improving 
treatment. The study group comprised 23 patients with a diagnosis of CBSD and 
healthy controls. We analysed serum levels of NAD+ and NADH by fluorometric 
assay, FGF-21 and GDF-15 by ELISA, mitochondrial DAMPs by real time qRT-PCR, 
total homocysteine levels in plasma by enzymatic test and compared the results 
in CBSD group with healthy controls. In patient group, a positive correlation 
was found between the total homocysteine level and both GDF-15 and NAD+/NADH 
levels. Furthermore, there was a negative correlation between total homocysteine 
levels and both total NAD++NADH and NADH levels. The alterations in NAD+, 
FGF-21, GDF-15 levels, and NAD+/NADH ratio in patients suggest that oxidative 
damage coexists with mitochondrial dysfunction in CBSD. Assessment of oxidative 
damage and addition of anti-oxidant therapy together with mitochondrial support 
may have additional benefits in reducing long-term morbidity in CBSD patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-80273-w
PMCID: PMC11579338
PMID: 39567721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests. Ethical approval: An ethical approval (file 
number; 2023/1637) was obtained from Istanbul Faculty of Medicine Ethics 
Committee before the study and written informed consent was obtained from each 
patient or guardian.