---
reference_id: "PMID:28963081"
title: "Identification of mutations in the prostaglandin transporter gene SLCO2A1 and phenotypic comparison between two subtypes of primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO): A single-center study."
authors:
- Hou Y
- Lin Y
- Qi X
- Yuan L
- Liao R
- Pang Q
- Cui L
- Jiang Y
- Wang O
- Li M
- Dong J
- Xia W
journal: Bone
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2017.09.015
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Organic Anion Transporters/genetics
- "Osteoarthropathy, Primary Hypertrophic/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of mutations in the prostaglandin transporter gene SLCO2A1 and phenotypic comparison between two subtypes of primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO): A single-center study.
**Authors:** Hou Y, Lin Y, Qi X, Yuan L, Liao R, Pang Q, Cui L, Jiang Y, Wang O, Li M, Dong J, Xia W
**Journal:** Bone (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2017.09.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2017.09.015)

## Content

1. Bone. 2018 Jan;106:96-102. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2017.09.015. Epub 2017 Sep 28.

Identification of mutations in the prostaglandin transporter gene SLCO2A1 and 
phenotypic comparison between two subtypes of primary hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy (PHO): A single-center study.

Hou Y(1), Lin Y(2), Qi X(2), Yuan L(2), Liao R(2), Pang Q(2), Cui L(2), Jiang 
Y(2), Wang O(2), Li M(2), Dong J(3), Xia W(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, Ministry of 
Health, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Shuaifuyuan No. 1, Wangfujing, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100730, 
China; Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shanxi 
Medical University, Taiyuan 030001, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, Ministry of 
Health, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Shuaifuyuan No. 1, Wangfujing, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100730, 
China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan 030001, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, Ministry of 
Health, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Shuaifuyuan No. 1, Wangfujing, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100730, 
China. Electronic address: xiaweibo@medmail.com.cn.

Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO) is an inherited disease 
characterized by digital clubbing, periostosis, and pachydermia. Based on two 
causative genes, hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (HPGD) and solute carrier 
organic anion transporter family member 2A1 (SLCO2A1), PHO is categorized into 
two subtypes: hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, primary, autosomal recessive 1 
(PHOAR1) and hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, primary, autosomal recessive 2 
(PHOAR2). In this study, we summarized the clinical manifestations and analyzed 
SLCO2A1 gene in 23 PHOAR2 patients in our center. As a result, 18 patients 
displayed complete phenotypes of PHO with digital clubbing, periostosis, and 
pachydermia. 29 mutations were found in total, and 22 of them were novel 
mutations including 13 missense, three nonsense, four deletion, one frame-shift 
and one splicing site mutations. Compared with nine PHOAR1 patients we 
previously reported, PHO patients with SLCO2A1 mutations were all male and 
presented with a later onset age. Peptic ulcers and myelofibrosis occurred only 
in PHOAR2 patients. The urinary level of prostaglandin E2 metabolite (PGEM) is 
significantly higher in PHOAR2 patients than that in PHOAR1 group. In 
conclusion, this study was the largest cohort to date to summarize PHOAR2 
patients and to assess the phenotypic difference between two subtypes of PHO. 
The difference of urinary PGEM concentration between two subtypes is helpful for 
the differential diagnosis of PHO.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2017.09.015
PMID: 28963081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]