---
reference_id: "PMID:33323469"
title: Phenotype and genotype spectra of a Chinese cohort with nephronophthisis-related ciliopathy.
authors:
- Tang X
- Liu C
- Liu X
- Chen J
- Fan X
- Liu J
- Ma D
- Cao G
- Chen Z
- Xu D
- Zhu Y
- Jiang X
- Cheng L
- Wu Y
- Hou L
- Li Y
- Shao X
- Zheng S
- Zhang A
- Zheng B
- Jian S
- Rong Z
- Su Q
- Gao X
- Rao J
- Shen Q
- Xu H
- Chinese Children Genetic Kidney Disease Database (CCGKDD)
- “Internet Plus” Nephrology Alliance of the National Center for Children’s Care
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2020-107184
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype and genotype spectra of a Chinese cohort with nephronophthisis-related ciliopathy.
**Authors:** Tang X, Liu C, Liu X, Chen J, Fan X, Liu J, Ma D, Cao G, Chen Z, Xu D, Zhu Y, Jiang X, Cheng L, Wu Y, Hou L, Li Y, Shao X, Zheng S, Zhang A, Zheng B, Jian S, Rong Z, Su Q, Gao X, Rao J, Shen Q, Xu H, Chinese Children Genetic Kidney Disease Database (CCGKDD), “Internet Plus” Nephrology Alliance of the National Center for Children’s Care
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2020-107184](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2020-107184)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2022 Feb;59(2):147-154. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2020-107184. Epub 
2020 Dec 15.

Phenotype and genotype spectra of a Chinese cohort with nephronophthisis-related 
ciliopathy.

Tang X(#)(1)(2), Liu C(#)(3), Liu X(#)(4)(5), Chen J(1)(2), Fan X(1)(2), Liu 
J(1)(2), Ma D(6), Cao G(3), Chen Z(4)(5), Xu D(7), Zhu Y(7), Jiang X(8), Cheng 
L(8), Wu Y(9), Hou L(9), Li Y(10), Shao X(10), Zheng S(10), Zhang A(11), Zheng 
B(12), Jian S(13), Rong Z(14), Su Q(14), Gao X(15), Rao J(16)(17)(18), Shen 
Q(16)(2), Xu H(16)(2)(18); Chinese Children Genetic Kidney Disease Database 
(CCGKDD); “Internet Plus” Nephrology Alliance of the National Center for 
Children’s Care.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Shanghai Kidney Development and Pediatric Kidney Disease Research Center, 
Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Nephrology and Rheumatology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(4)Nephrology, Bejing Children's Hospital, Beijing, China.
(5)Beijing Children's Key Laboratory of Chronic Kidney Disease and Blood 
Purification, Beijing Children's Hospital, Beijing, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institutes of Biomedical 
Sciences, Fudan University School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(7)Nephrology, Anhui Provincial Children's Hospital, Hefei, China.
(8)Pediatric, Sun Yat-sen University First Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong, China.
(9)Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(10)Nephrology and Rheumatology, Guiyang Children's Hospital, Guiyang, China.
(11)Nephrology, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Nanjing Children's 
Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(12)Nanjing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated 
Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(13)Pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China.
(14)Pediatrics, Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, 
China.
(15)Nephrology, Guangzhou Children's Hospital, Guangzhou, China.
(16)Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China hxu@shmu.edu.cn jiarao@fudan.edu.cn shenqian@shmu.edu.cn.
(17)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Institutes of Brain Science 
and School of Basic Medical Science，Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(18)Shanghai Key Lab of Birth Defect, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China, Shanghai, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Nephronophthisis-related ciliopathies (NPHP-RC) account for the 
majority of cases of monogenetically caused end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in 
children. Exploring the correlation between the phenotype and genotype of 
NPHP-RC is helpful for early diagnosis and management. We investigated the 
phenotype and genotype spectra of NPHP-RC in a Chinese multicentre cohort.
METHODS: Crosss-ectional and longitudinal data of 60 patients from 57 families 
with pathogenic NPHP-RC gene mutations distributed in 22 regions of China were 
collected into a unified, anonymous database. The mean observation time of this 
cohort was 3.5±3.1 years.
RESULTS: Mutations in NPHP1 and NPHP3 were the most common genetic defects. 
Overall, 45% of patients presented with isolated nephronophthisis (NPH), and 55% 
exhibited the extrarenal phenotype, which frequently involved the liver (41.7%, 
n=25), central nervous system (26.7%, n=16), eyes (26.7%, n=16) and skeletal 
system (11.7%, n=7). Accidental detection of elevated serum creatinine and 
non-specific symptoms caused by chronic kidney disease occurred in 65% of 
patients. Patients carrying NPHP1 mutations mainly presented with isolated NPH 
(90%, 18/20) and progressed to ESRD at a mean age of 12.9±0.5 years. The mean 
age of ESRD onset in the non-NPHP1 group was lower than that in the NPHP1 group 
(6.2±1.4 years, p<0.001), especially for patients carrying NPHP3 mutations 
(3.1±1.2 years), showing a heterogeneous phenotype characterised by Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome (12.5%, n=5), Joubert syndrome (7.5%, n=3), COACH syndrome (2.5%, n=1), 
Mainzer-Saldino syndrome (2.5%, n=1), short-rib thoracic dysplasia (2.5%, n=1) 
and unclassified symptoms (32.5%, n=13).
CONCLUSIONS: The Chinese Children Genetic Kidney Disease Database registry 
characterised the spectrum of the phenotype and genotype of NPHP-RC in the 
Chinese population. NPHP1 and NPHP3 were the most common pathogenic genes. Rapid 
progression to ESRD and liver involvement were noted in patients with NPHP3 
mutations.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2020-107184
PMID: 33323469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.