---
reference_id: "PMID:18072270"
title: Evidence of a four-hit mechanism involving SMARCB1 and NF2 in schwannomatosis-associated schwannomas.
authors:
- Sestini R
- Bacci C
- Provenzano A
- Genuardi M
- Papi L
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20679
keywords:
- Adult
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Loss of Heterozygosity
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Neurilemmoma/genetics
- Neurofibromin 2/genetics
- Peripheral Nervous System Neoplasms/genetics
- SMARCB1 Protein
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence of a four-hit mechanism involving SMARCB1 and NF2 in schwannomatosis-associated schwannomas.
**Authors:** Sestini R, Bacci C, Provenzano A, Genuardi M, Papi L
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20679](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20679)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2008 Feb;29(2):227-31. doi: 10.1002/humu.20679.

Evidence of a four-hit mechanism involving SMARCB1 and NF2 in 
schwannomatosis-associated schwannomas.

Sestini R(1), Bacci C, Provenzano A, Genuardi M, Papi L.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical Physiopathology, University of 
Florence, Florence, Italy.

Schwannomatosis is characterized by the onset of multiple intracranial, spinal, 
or peripheral schwannomas, without involvement of the vestibular nerve, which is 
instead pathognomonic of neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2). Recently, a 
schwannomatosis family with a germline mutation of the SMARCB1 gene on 
chromosome 22 has been described. We report on the molecular analysis of the 
SMARCB1 and NF2 genes in a series of 21 patients with schwannomatosis and in 
eight schwannomatosis-associated tumors from four different patients. A novel 
germline SMARCB1 mutation was found in one patient; inactivating somatic 
mutations of NF2, associated with loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of 22q, were 
found in two schwannomas of this patient. This is the second report of a 
germline SMARCB1 mutation in patients affected by schwannomatosis and the first 
report of SMARCB1 mutations associated with somatic NF2 mutations in 
schwannomatosis-associated tumors. The latter observation suggests that a 
four-hit mechanism involving the SMARCB1 and NF2 genes may be implicated in 
schwannomatosis-related tumorigenesis.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20679
PMID: 18072270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]