---
reference_id: "PMID:38987788"
title: "Total pulmonary arterial reconstruction in a patient with arterial tortuosity syndrome affecting the pulmonary artery: a case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Alshair FM
- Alsulami AS
- Shihata MS
- Alradi OO
- Debis RS
- Baghaffar AH
- Fatani MA
journal: J Cardiothorac Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13019-024-02905-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pulmonary Artery/surgery, abnormalities"
- Female
- "Vascular Malformations/surgery, complications"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/surgery, complications, genetics"
- Vascular Surgical Procedures/methods
- "Stenosis, Pulmonary Artery/surgery"
- "Joint Instability/surgery, genetics"
- Plastic Surgery Procedures/methods
- Arteries/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Total pulmonary arterial reconstruction in a patient with arterial tortuosity syndrome affecting the pulmonary artery: a case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Alshair FM, Alsulami AS, Shihata MS, Alradi OO, Debis RS, Baghaffar AH, Fatani MA
**Journal:** J Cardiothorac Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13019-024-02905-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13019-024-02905-6)

## Content

1. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2024 Jul 10;19(1):432. doi: 10.1186/s13019-024-02905-6.

Total pulmonary arterial reconstruction in a patient with arterial tortuosity
syndrome affecting the pulmonary artery: a case report and review of the
literature.

Alshair FM(1), Alsulami AS(2), Shihata MS(3), Alradi OO(4)(2), Debis RS(4)(5),
Baghaffar AH(4)(2), Fatani MA(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Department of Surgery, King Abdulaziz University
Hospital, P.O. Box: 80215, Jeddah, 21589, Saudi Arabia. Fahadalshair@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Cardiothoracic Surgery Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Centre, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Department of Surgery, King Abdulaziz University
Hospital, P.O. Box: 80215, Jeddah, 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Cardiothoracic Surgery Department, Al‑Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Arterial tortuosity syndrome is a rare Autosomal recessive disease
that leads to a loss of function of the connective tissues of the body, this
happens due to a mutation in the solute carrier family 2 member 10 (SLC2A10)
gene. ATS is more likely to occur in Large and medium-sized arteries including
the aorta and pulmonary arteries. This syndrome causes the arteries to be
elongated and tortuous, This tortuosity disturbs the blood circulation resulting
in stenosis and lack of blood flow to organs and this chronic turbulent flow
increases the risk of aneurysm development, dissection and ischemic events.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 2 years old Arabian female child was diagnosed with ATS
affecting the pulmonary arteries as a newborn, underwent a pulmonary arterial
surgical reconstruction at the age of 2 years old due to the development of
pulmonary artery stenosis with left pulmonary artery having a peak gradient of
73 mmHg with a peak velocity of 4.3 m/s and the right pulmonary artery having a
peak gradient of 46 mmHg with a peak velocity of 3.4 m/s causing right
ventricular hypertension. After surgical repair the left pulmonary artery has a
peak pressure gradient of 20 mmHg, with the right pulmonary artery having a peak
pressure gradient of 20 mmHg.
CONCLUSION: ATS is a rare genetic condition that affects the great arteries
especially the pulmonary arteries causing stenotic and tortuous vessels that may
be central branches or distal peripheral branches that leads to severe right
ventricular dysfunction and hypertension. We believe that surgical treatment
provides the optimum outcomes when compared to transcather approaches especially
when the peripheral arteries are involved. Some challenges and hiccups might
occur, especially lung reperfusion injury that needs to be diagnosed and treated
accordingly.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13019-024-02905-6
PMCID: PMC11234637
PMID: 38987788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
