---
reference_id: "PMID:37149843"
title: "EML4-ALK biology and drug resistance in non-small cell lung cancer: a new phase of discoveries."
authors:
- Elshatlawy M
- Sampson J
- Clarke K
- Bayliss R
journal: Mol Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/1878-0261.13446
keywords:
- Humans
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins
- Serine Endopeptidases
- Cell Cycle Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EML4-ALK biology and drug resistance in non-small cell lung cancer: a new phase of discoveries.
**Authors:** Elshatlawy M, Sampson J, Clarke K, Bayliss R
**Journal:** Mol Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1878-0261.13446](https://doi.org/10.1002/1878-0261.13446)

## Content

1. Mol Oncol. 2023 Jun;17(6):950-963. doi: 10.1002/1878-0261.13446. Epub 2023 May
 15.

EML4-ALK biology and drug resistance in non-small cell lung cancer: a new phase
of discoveries.

Elshatlawy M(1), Sampson J(1)(2), Clarke K(3), Bayliss R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biological Sciences, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
University of Leeds, UK.
(2)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, UK.
(3)Leeds Cancer Center, St.James' University Hospital, Leeds Teaching Hospitals
NHS Trust, UK.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) can be driven to oncogenic activity by
different types of mutational events such as point-mutations, for example F1174L
in neuroblastoma, and gene fusions, for example with echinoderm
microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4) in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). EML4-ALK variants result from different breakpoints, generating fusions
of different sizes and properties. The most common variants (Variant 1 and
Variant 3) form cellular compartments with distinct physical properties. The
presence of a partial, probably misfolded beta-propeller domain in variant 1
confers solid-like properties to the compartments it forms, greater dependence
on Hsp90 for protein stability and higher cell sensitivity to ALK tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs). These differences translate to the clinic because
variant 3, on average, worsens patient prognosis and increases metastatic risk.
Latest generation ALK-TKIs are beneficial for most patients with EML4-ALK
fusions. However, resistance to ALK inhibitors can occur via point-mutations
within the kinase domain of the EML4-ALK fusion, for example G1202R, reducing
inhibitor effectiveness. Here, we discuss the biology of EML4-ALK variants,
their impact on treatment response, ALK-TKI drug resistance mechanisms and
potential combination therapies.

© 2023 The Authors. Molecular Oncology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1878-0261.13446
PMCID: PMC10257413
PMID: 37149843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
