---
reference_id: "PMID:26231314"
title: "Bardet-Biedl syndrome: Is it only cilia dysfunction?"
authors:
- Novas R
- Cardenas-Rodriguez M
- Irigoín F
- Badano JL
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.07.031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bardet-Biedl syndrome: Is it only cilia dysfunction?
**Authors:** Novas R, Cardenas-Rodriguez M, Irigoín F, Badano JL
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2015.07.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2015.07.031)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2015 Nov 14;589(22):3479-91. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.07.031.
Epub  2015 Jul 29.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome: Is it only cilia dysfunction?

Novas R(1), Cardenas-Rodriguez M(1), Irigoín F(2), Badano JL(3).

Author information:
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Mataojo 
2020, Montevideo CP11400, Uruguay.
(2)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Mataojo 
2020, Montevideo CP11400, Uruguay; Departamento de Histología y Embriología, 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Gral. Flores 
2125, Montevideo CP11800, Uruguay.
(3)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Mataojo 
2020, Montevideo CP11400, Uruguay. Electronic address: jbadano@pasteur.edu.uy.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous, pleiotropic 
disorder, characterized by both congenital and late onset defects. From the 
analysis of the mutational burden in patients to the functional characterization 
of the BBS proteins, this syndrome has become a model for both understanding 
oligogenic patterns of inheritance and the biology of a particular cellular 
organelle: the primary cilium. Here we briefly review the genetics of BBS to 
then focus on the function of the BBS proteins, not only in the context of the 
cilium but also highlighting potential extra-ciliary roles that could be 
relevant to the etiology of the disorder. Finally, we provide an overview of how 
the study of this rare syndrome has contributed to the understanding of cilia 
biology and how this knowledge has informed on the cellular basis of different 
clinical manifestations that characterize BBS and the ciliopathies.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.07.031
PMID: 26231314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]