---
reference_id: "PMID:24793237"
title: Excessive transforming growth factor-β signaling is a common mechanism in osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Grafe I
- Yang T
- Alexander S
- Homan EP
- Lietman C
- Jiang MM
- Bertin T
- Munivez E
- Chen Y
- Dawson B
- Ishikawa Y
- Weis MA
- Sampath TK
- Ambrose C
- Eyre D
- Bächinger HP
- Lee B
journal: Nat Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/nm.3544
keywords:
- Analysis of Variance
- Animals
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- "Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel"
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins
- Female
- Immunoblotting
- Mass Spectrometry
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Molecular Chaperones
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Proteins/genetics
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Surface Plasmon Resonance
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
- X-Ray Microtomography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Excessive transforming growth factor-β signaling is a common mechanism in osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Grafe I, Yang T, Alexander S, Homan EP, Lietman C, Jiang MM, Bertin T, Munivez E, Chen Y, Dawson B, Ishikawa Y, Weis MA, Sampath TK, Ambrose C, Eyre D, Bächinger HP, Lee B
**Journal:** Nat Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.3544](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3544)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2014 Jun;20(6):670-5. doi: 10.1038/nm.3544. Epub 2014 May 4.

Excessive transforming growth factor-β signaling is a common mechanism in 
osteogenesis imperfecta.

Grafe I(1), Yang T(1), Alexander S(1), Homan EP(1), Lietman C(1), Jiang MM(2), 
Bertin T(1), Munivez E(1), Chen Y(1), Dawson B(2), Ishikawa Y(3), Weis MA(4), 
Sampath TK(5), Ambrose C(6), Eyre D(4), Bächinger HP(3), Lee B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)1] Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA. [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)1] Research Department, Shriners Hospital for Children, Portland, Oregon, 
USA. [2] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and 
Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(5)Genzyme Research Center, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Texas Health Science Center 
at Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable disorder, in both a dominant and 
recessive manner, of connective tissue characterized by brittle bones, fractures 
and extraskeletal manifestations. How structural mutations of type I collagen 
(dominant OI) or of its post-translational modification machinery (recessive OI) 
can cause abnormal quality and quantity of bone is poorly understood. Notably, 
the clinical overlap between dominant and recessive forms of OI suggests common 
molecular pathomechanisms. Here, we show that excessive transforming growth 
factor-β (TGF-β) signaling is a mechanism of OI in both recessive (Crtap(-/-)) 
and dominant (Col1a2(tm1.1Mcbr)) OI mouse models. In the skeleton, we find 
higher expression of TGF-β target genes, higher ratio of phosphorylated Smad2 to 
total Smad2 protein and higher in vivo Smad2 reporter activity. Moreover, the 
type I collagen of Crtap(-/-) mice shows reduced binding to the small 
leucine-rich proteoglycan decorin, a known regulator of TGF-β activity. 
Anti-TGF-β treatment using the neutralizing antibody 1D11 corrects the bone 
phenotype in both forms of OI and improves the lung abnormalities in Crtap(-/-) 
mice. Hence, altered TGF-β matrix-cell signaling is a primary mechanism in the 
pathogenesis of OI and could be a promising target for the treatment of OI.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.3544
PMCID: PMC4048326
PMID: 24793237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]