---
reference_id: "PMID:35980763"
title: A polygenic risk score predicts atrial fibrillation in cardiovascular disease.
authors:
- Marston NA
- Garfinkel AC
- Kamanu FK
- Melloni GM
- Roselli C
- Jarolim P
- Berg DD
- Bhatt DL
- Bonaca MP
- Cannon CP
- Giugliano RP
- "O'Donoghue ML"
- Raz I
- Scirica BM
- Braunwald E
- Morrow DA
- Ellinor PT
- Lubitz SA
- Sabatine MS
- Ruff CT
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac460
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A polygenic risk score predicts atrial fibrillation in cardiovascular disease.
**Authors:** Marston NA, Garfinkel AC, Kamanu FK, Melloni GM, Roselli C, Jarolim P, Berg DD, Bhatt DL, Bonaca MP, Cannon CP, Giugliano RP, O'Donoghue ML, Raz I, Scirica BM, Braunwald E, Morrow DA, Ellinor PT, Lubitz SA, Sabatine MS, Ruff CT
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehac460](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehac460)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2023 Jan 14;44(3):221-231. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac460.

A polygenic risk score predicts atrial fibrillation in cardiovascular disease.

Marston NA(1)(2), Garfinkel AC(3), Kamanu FK(1)(2), Melloni GM(1)(2), Roselli 
C(4), Jarolim P(5), Berg DD(1)(2), Bhatt DL(2), Bonaca MP(6), Cannon CP(2), 
Giugliano RP(1)(2), O'Donoghue ML(1)(2), Raz I(7), Scirica BM(1)(2), Braunwald 
E(1)(2), Morrow DA(1)(2), Ellinor PT(4), Lubitz SA(4), Sabatine MS(1)(2), Ruff 
CT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department for Medicine, TIMI Study Group, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Cardiovascular Disease Initiative, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department for Medicine, CPC Clinical Research, Aurora, CO, USA.
(7)Department for Medicine, Hebrew University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2023 Jan 14;44(3):232-234. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac527.

AIMS: Interest in targeted screening programmes for atrial fibrillation (AF) has 
increased, yet the role of genetics in identifying patients at highest risk of 
developing AF is unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 36,662 subjects without prior AF were analyzed 
from four TIMI trials. Subjects were divided into quintiles using a validated 
polygenic risk score (PRS) for AF. Clinical risk for AF was calculated using the 
CHARGE-AF model. Kaplan-Meier event rates, adjusted hazard ratios (HRs), 
C-indices, and net reclassification improvement were used to determine if the 
addition of the PRS improved prediction compared with clinical risk and 
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP). Over 2.3 years, 1018 new 
AF cases developed. AF PRS predicted a significant risk gradient for AF with a 
40% increased risk per 1-SD increase in PRS [HR: 1.40 (1.32-1.49); P < 0.001]. 
Those with high AF PRS (top 20%) were more than two-fold more likely to develop 
AF [HR 2.45 (1.99-3.03), P < 0.001] compared with low PRS (bottom 20%). 
Furthermore, PRS provided an additional gradient of risk stratification on top 
of the CHARGE-AF clinical risk score, ranging from a 3-year incidence of 1.3% in 
patients with low clinical and genetic risk to 8.7% in patients with high 
clinical and genetic risk. The subgroup of patients with high clinical risk, 
high PRS, and elevated NT-proBNP had an AF risk of 16.7% over 3 years. The 
C-index with the CHARGE-AF clinical risk score alone was 0.65, which improved to 
0.67 (P < 0.001) with the addition of NT-proBNP, and increased further to 0.70 
(P < 0.001) with the addition of the PRS.
CONCLUSION: In patients with cardiovascular conditions, AF PRS is a strong 
independent predictor of incident AF that provides complementary predictive 
value when added to a validated clinical risk score and NT-proBNP.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac460
PMCID: PMC10310983
PMID: 35980763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: N.A.M. reports grant 
support from the National Institutes of Health and involvement in clinical 
trials with Amgen, Pfizer, Novartis, AstraZeneca, and Ionis without personal 
fees, payments, or increase in salary. A.C.G., F.K.K., and G.M.M. report no 
disclosures. C.R. is supported by a grant from Bayer AG to the Broad Institute 
focused on the development of therapeutics for cardiovascular disease. P.J. 
reports research support from Abbott Laboratories, Amgen, Inc., AstraZeneca, LP, 
Daiichi-Sankyo, Inc., Eisai, Inc., GlaxoSmithKline, Merck & Co., Inc., Regeneron 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Roche Diagnostics Corporation, Siemens Healthineers, 
Takeda Global Research and Development Center, and Waters Technologies 
Corporation, and consulting fees from Roche Diagnostics Corporation. D.D.B. is 
supported by Harvard Catalyst KL2/CMeRIT (NIH/NCATS UL 1TR002541) and has 
received research grant support to his institution from AstraZeneca and Pfizer 
and consulting fees from AstraZeneca. D.L.B. reports grants from AstraZeneca, 
during the conduct of the study; grants from Amarin, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Garmin, Owkin, HLS Therapeutics, Eisai, Ethicon, Medtronic, 89Bio, 
sanofi aventis, Contego Medical, The Medicines Company, Roche, Pfizer, Forest 
Laboratories/AstraZeneca, Stasys, Ischemix, Amgen, Lilly, Chiesi, Ironwood, 
Merck, Abbott, Regeneron, Idorsia, Faraday Pharmaceuticals, Javelin, Reid 
Hoffman Foundation, Moderna, Beren, Aker Biomarine, Recardio, Acesion Pharma, 
Synaptic, Fractyl, Afimmune, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Lexicon; other from 
FlowCo, Clinical Cardiology, VA, Takeda, Endotronix, Vascular Solutions, and 
Svelte, grants and other from PLx Pharma, Novartis, NirvaMed, MyoKardia/BMS, 
Janssen, Novo Nordisk, Cardax, and Boston Scientific, PhaseBio, Novo Nordisk, 
Cereno Scientific, CellProthera; personal fees from Duke Clinical Research 
Institute, Oakstone CME, High Enroll, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Mayo Clinic, Arnold 
and Porter law firm, Piper Sandler, Cowen and Company, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Rutgers University, Wiley, AngioWave, K2P, Canadian 
Medical and Surgical Knowledge Translation Research Group, Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology, TobeSoft, Bayer, MJH Life Sciences, Level Ex, 
Population Health Research Institute, Belvoir Publications, Slack Publications, 
WebMD, Elsevier, Harvard Clinical Research Institute (now Baim Institute for 
Clinical Research), HMP Global, Cleveland Clinic, Mount Sinai School of 
Medicine, Medtelligence/ReachMD, CSL Behring; personal fees from from DRS. LINQ, 
non-financial support, and other from American College of Cardiology; other from 
Medscape Cardiology, Philips, Regado Biosciences, Boston VA Research Institute, 
St. Jude Medical (now Abbott), Biotronik, CSI; personal fees and non-financial 
support from Society of Cardiovascular Patient Care; non-financial support from 
American Heart Association; grants, personal fees, and other from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, outside the submitted work. M.P.B. discloses grant support from 
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, and Sanofi and consulting fees from Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, and Sanofi. C.P.C. reports research grants from Amgen, 
Boehringer Ingelheim (BI), Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS), Daiichi-Sankyo, Janssen, 
Merck, Novo Nordisk, and Pfizer. Consulting fees from Aegerion, Alnylam, Amarin, 
Amgen, Applied Therapeutics, Ascendia, BI, BMS, Corvidia, Eli Lilly, HLS 
Therapeutics, Innovent, Janssen, Kowa, Merck, Pfizer, Rhoshan, and Sanofi. 
R.P.G. reports grants from Amgen and Daiichi-Sankyo, during the conduct of the 
study; personal fees from Akcea, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Lexicon, American 
College of Cardiology, Bristol-Myers Squibb, CVS Caremark, Pfizer, Servier, 
outside the submitted work; grants and personal fees from Amarin, 
Daiichi-Sankyo, Merck, Amgen; and Institutional research grant to the TIMI Study 
Group at Brigham and Women’s Hospital for research he is not directly involved 
in from Abbott, Amgen, Aralez, AstraZeneca, Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc., BRAHMS, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai, GlaxoSmithKline, Intarcia, Janssen, 
MedImmune, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Poxel, Quark Pharmaceuticals, Roche, Takeda, 
The Medicines Company, and Zora Biosciences. M.L.O. reports institutional 
research grants from Amgen, Janssen, The Medicines Company, Eisai, 
GlaxoSmithKline, and Astra Zeneca. I.R. received personal fees from AstraZeneca, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Concenter BioPharma, and Silkim, Eli 
Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novo Nordisk, Orgenesis, Pfizer, Sanofi, SmartZyme 
Innovation, Panaxia, FutuRx, Insuline Medical, Medial EarlySign, CameraEyes, 
Exscopia, Dermal Biomics, Johnson & Johnson, Novartis, Teva, GlucoMe, and 
DarioHealth. B.M.S. reports research grants from AstraZeneca, Eisai, Novartis, 
and Merck and consulting fees from AstraZeneca, Biogen Idec, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Covance, Dr Reddy’s Laboratories, Eisai, Elsevier Practice Update 
Cardiology, GlaxoSmithKline, Lexicon, Merck, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, and St Jude’s 
Medical; and has equity in Health [at] Scale. E.B. reports research grants 
through the Brigham and Women’s Hospital from Astra Zeneca, Daiichi-Sankyo, 
Merck, and Novartis. Consultancies with Amgen, Cardurion, MyoKardia, 
NovoNordisk, Boehringer Ingelheim/Lilly, IMMEDIATE, and Verve. Uncompensated 
consultancies and lectures with The Medicines Company. D.A.M. reports grants to 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital from Abbott Laboratories, AstraZeneca, BRAHMS, 
Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai, GlaxoSmithKline, Medicines Company, Merck, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Quark Pharmaceuticals, Roche Diagnostics, Takeda, and Zora Biosciences. 
He has received consulting fees from Aralez, AstraZeneca, Bayer Pharma, InCarda, 
Novartis, and Roche Diagnostics. P.T.E. receives sponsored research support from 
Bayer AG and IBM Health, and he has consulted for Bayer AG, Novartis, MyoKardia, 
and Quest Diagnostics. S.A.L. receives sponsored research support from 
Bristol-Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Bayer AG, Boehringer Ingelheim, Fitbit, and IBM and 
has consulted for Bristol-Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Bayer AG, and Blackstone Life 
Sciences. Dr. Lubitz is supported by NIH grants R01HL139731, R01HL157635 and 
American Heart Association 18SFRN34250007. C.T.R. Honoraria; Modest; 
Bristol-Myers Squib, Pfizer, Portola, Honoraria; Significant; Bayer, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Daiichi-Sankyo, Janssen, Research Grant; Modest; Daiichi-Sankyo, 
MedImmune, National Institute of Health, Research Grant; Significant; Boehringer 
Ingelheim. M.S.S.: Other; Modest; Anthos Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, CVS Caremark, DalCor, IFM Therapeutics, Intarcia, 
Medicines Company, MedImmune, Merck, Other; Significant; Amgen, Research Grant; 
Significant; Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai; Intarcia, 
Medicines Company, MedImmune, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Quark.