---
reference_id: "PMID:15357947"
title: Coordinated induction by IL15 of a TCR-independent NKG2D signaling pathway converts CTL into lymphokine-activated killer cells in celiac disease.
authors:
- Meresse B
- Chen Z
- Ciszewski C
- Tretiakova M
- Bhagat G
- Krausz TN
- Raulet DH
- Lanier LL
- Groh V
- Spies T
- Ebert EC
- Green PH
- Jabri B
journal: Immunity
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2004.06.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coordinated induction by IL15 of a TCR-independent NKG2D signaling pathway converts CTL into lymphokine-activated killer cells in celiac disease.
**Authors:** Meresse B, Chen Z, Ciszewski C, Tretiakova M, Bhagat G, Krausz TN, Raulet DH, Lanier LL, Groh V, Spies T, Ebert EC, Green PH, Jabri B
**Journal:** Immunity (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.immuni.2004.06.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2004.06.020)

## Content

1. Immunity. 2004 Sep;21(3):357-66. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2004.06.020.

Coordinated induction by IL15 of a TCR-independent NKG2D signaling pathway 
converts CTL into lymphokine-activated killer cells in celiac disease.

Meresse B(1), Chen Z, Ciszewski C, Tretiakova M, Bhagat G, Krausz TN, Raulet DH, 
Lanier LL, Groh V, Spies T, Ebert EC, Green PH, Jabri B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2004 Sep;21(3):303-4. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2004.08.002.

A major function of NKG2D linking innate and adaptive immunity is to upregulate 
antigen-specific CTL-mediated cytotoxicity in tissues expressing stress-induced 
NKG2D ligands, such as MIC, by coactivating TCR signaling. Here, we show that, 
under conditions of dysregulated IL15 expression in vivo in patients with celiac 
disease and in vitro in healthy individuals, multiple steps of the NKG2D/DAP10 
signaling pathway leading to ERK and JNK activation are coordinately primed to 
activate direct cytolytic function independent of TCR specificity in effector 
CD8 T cells. These findings may not only explain previous reports of 
transformation of CTL into NK-like "lymphokine-activated killers" (LAK cells) 
under high doses of IL2 (a substitute for IL15) but may also have significant 
implications for understanding and treating immunopathological diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2004.06.020
PMID: 15357947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]