---
reference_id: "PMID:32620537"
title: A systematic cross-sectional survey of multiple sulfatase deficiency.
authors:
- Cappuccio G
- Alagia M
- Brunetti-Pierri N
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.06.005
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency Disease/diagnosis, enzymology, genetics"
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- "Sulfatases/deficiency, genetics"
- Survival Rate
- Systematic Reviews as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic cross-sectional survey of multiple sulfatase deficiency.
**Authors:** Cappuccio G, Alagia M, Brunetti-Pierri N
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.06.005)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2020 Aug;130(4):283-288. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.06.005.
Epub  2020 Jun 17.

A systematic cross-sectional survey of multiple sulfatase deficiency.

Cappuccio G(1), Alagia M(2), Brunetti-Pierri N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy;
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy;
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy. Electronic
address: brunetti@tigem.it.

Erratum in
    Mol Genet Metab. 2020 Sep - Oct;131(1-2):284. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.012.

Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency (MSD) is an inborn error of metabolism caused by
pathogenic variants in the SUMF1 gene encoding the formylglycine-generating
enzyme (FGE) that activates all known sulfatases. FGE deficiency results in
widespread tissue accumulation of multiple sulphated substrates. Through a
systematic analysis of published cases, we retrieved 80 MSD cases and reviewed
the disease clinical, biochemical, and genetic findings. Leukodystrophy,
neurosensorial hearing loss, and ichthyosis were the most frequent findings at
diagnosis. Of 51 reported pathogenic variants, 20 were likely gene disruptive
and the remaining were missense variants. No correlations between class of
variants and clinical severity or degree of enzyme deficiency were detected.
However, cases harboring variants located at N-terminal always had severe
neonatal presentations. Moreover, cases with neonatal onset showed the lowest
overall survival rate compared to late-infantile and juvenile onsets. Using
GnomAD, carrier frequency for pathogenic SUMF1 variants was estimated to be
~1/700 and the disease prevalence was approximately 1/2,000,000. In summary, MSD
is an ultra-rare multisystem disorder with mainly neurologic, hearing and skin
involvements. Although the collected data were retrospective and heterogenous,
the quantitative data inform the disease natural history and are important for
both counseling and design of future interventional studies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.06.005
PMID: 32620537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
