---
reference_id: "PMID:18541082"
title: Haematological and biochemical indicators for the early diagnosis of dengue viral infection.
authors:
- Butt N
- Abbassi A
- Munir SM
- Ahmad SM
- Sheikh QH
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haematological and biochemical indicators for the early diagnosis of dengue viral infection.
**Authors:** Butt N, Abbassi A, Munir SM, Ahmad SM, Sheikh QH
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2008)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2008 May;18(5):282-5.

Haematological and biochemical indicators for the early diagnosis of dengue 
viral infection.

Butt N(1), Abbassi A, Munir SM, Ahmad SM, Sheikh QH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre, Karachi, 
Pakistan. dr-nazishbutt@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine the haematological and biochemical indicators for the 
early diagnosis of dengue viral infection.
STUDY DESIGN: A case series.
PLACE AND DURATION OF STUDY: At Medical Unit-III, Ward 7, Jinnah Postgraduate 
Medical Centre and referred cases from Faiz-e-Rehman Hospital, Metroville, 
Karachi from September to November 2007.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients presenting with a fever of less than 2 weeks 
duration, generalized morbiliform rash and bleeding manifestations were 
included. Clinical history was recorded and patients were placed on fluid and 
haematological support. Diagnosis was established by Polymerase Chain Reaction 
(PCR) for dengue virus or detection of dengue virus specific IgM and IgG.
RESULTS: One hundred and four patients met the inclusion criteria during the 
study period. Sixty six patients had clinical and haematological features 
suggestive of grade I Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever (DHF); 34 patients had grade II 
DHF and 4 had grade III DHF out of whom 3 progressed to grade IV DHF. All the 
patients presented with fever followed by generalized morbiliform rash (81.73%), 
vomiting (79.8%), abdominal pain (65.38%), backache (62.5%), depression (60.6%) 
and mucosal bleeding manifestations (34.6%). Clinically, conjunctival infection 
was present in 93 patients (89.4%), hepatomegaly 59 (56.7%), lymphadenopathy in 
17 (16.3%), splenomegaly in 13 (12.5%), pleural effusion in 11 (10.5%) and 
ascites in 8 (7.6%). Common laboratory findings were thrombocytopenia in 100% 
patients, leucopenia in 55 (52.8%), raised hematocrit in 52 (50%), and elevated 
aminotransferases, gamma GT in 100 (96%) patients. The overall mortality was 
2.88%.
CONCLUSION: In this series clinical history and examination supported by the 
triad of thrombocytopenia, raised hematocrit and elevated liver enzymes was 
sufficient for the early diagnosis of dengue hemorrhagic fever without waiting 
for dengue serology.

PMID: 18541082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]