---
reference_id: "PMID:20301442"
title: Usher Syndrome Type I.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Koenekoop RK
- Arriaga MA
- Gillies N
- Trzupek KM
- Lentz JJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Usher Syndrome Type I.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Koenekoop RK, Arriaga MA, Gillies N, Trzupek KM, Lentz JJ

## Content

1. Usher Syndrome Type I.

Koenekoop RK(1), Arriaga MA(2), Gillies N(3), Trzupek KM(4), Lentz JJ(5).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Dec 10 [updated 2026 Jun 9].

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Surgery, Human Genetics, and Adult Ophthalmology, McGill University 
Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
(2)Otolaryngology and Neurosurgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, Louisiana
(3)Human Development Center, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 
New Orleans, Louisiana
(4)Ocular & Rare Disease Genetics Services, InformedDNA, St Petersburg, Florida
(5)Neuroscience Center of Excellence, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, Louisiana

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Usher syndrome type I (USH1) is characterized by 
congenital bilateral profound sensorineural hearing loss, vestibular areflexia, 
and adolescent-onset retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Individuals do not typically 
have adequate hearing levels to develop speech, but may develop speech after 
receiving a cochlear implant or use sign language for communication. RP, a 
progressive bilateral symmetric degeneration of photoreceptors in the retina, 
develops in early adolescence, resulting in progressively constricted visual 
fields first, due to rod photoreceptor cell loss, followed by impaired visual 
acuity due to cone photoreceptor cell loss.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of USH1 is established in a proband with 
characteristic findings on electrophysiologic and subjective tests of hearing 
and retinal function. Identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in one of 
five genes – MYO7A, USH1C, CDH23, PCDH15, and USH1G – confirms the diagnosis.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: In infants, an initial trial of hearing 
aids is recommended to stimulate residual hearing and accustom the infant to 
auditory stimulation. Cochlear implantation should be considered as young as 
medically feasible, typically before age one year. Timely audioverbal therapy 
following cochlear implantation is required for the development of speech. Sign 
language is recommended as early as birth to stimulate communication and 
language development prior to hearing aids and/or cochlear implants and is used 
throughout life as an additional means of communication when cochlear implants 
are not working or accessible, or as a primary means of communication for those 
using a nonauditory modality. Individuals with USH1 typically learn sign 
languages visually and then develop tactile sign language skills later in life 
when necessitated by decreasing vision. Families may access support to learn a 
sign language with their child through early intervention services, Deaf mentor 
programs, parent support organizations, nonprofit agencies, or their local 
school system. Physical therapy is recommended to manage vestibular dysfunction 
and imbalance throughout the disease course, beginning in childhood and again as 
vision loss progresses. Standard treatments for RP. Skills for adjusting to 
progressive vision loss can be accessed through school, vocational 
rehabilitation, or training programs. Counseling for individuals living with 
USH1 and family members is recommended to manage mental health throughout the 
disease course, beginning in childhood and again as vision loss progresses. 
Surveillance: Annual audiometry and tympanometry in those with cochlear implants 
or hearing aids to assure adequate auditory stimulation. Annual otoscopic exam 
with tympanometry in children with profound hearing loss to evaluate for chronic 
otitis media. Annual ophthalmologic evaluation with fundus photography, visual 
acuity, visual field testing, electroretinography, optical coherence tomography, 
and fundus autofluorescence prior to the onset of visual manifestations. After 
the onset of visual manifestations in children and adults, annual ophthalmic 
evaluation with visual acuity, visual field testing, and optical coherence 
tomography to determine degree of peripheral vision, evaluate for macular edema 
and cataracts, and advise on ability to drive. Assess family needs at each 
visit. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Competition in sports requiring acute 
vision and/or good balance may be difficult and possibly dangerous. Because of 
the high risk for disorientation when submerged in water, swimming needs to be 
undertaken with caution. Progressive loss of peripheral vision impairs the 
ability to safely drive a car. Exposure to bright sunlight and smoking tobacco 
can accelerate progression of RP. Refrain from smoking and avoid exposing eyes 
to sunlight by wearing sunglasses and a cap. Evaluation of relatives at risk: 
The hearing of at-risk sibs should be assessed as soon after birth as possible 
to allow early diagnosis and treatment of hearing loss.
GENETIC COUNSELING: USH1 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for an USH1-related pathogenic variant, 
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the USH1-causing pathogenic variants 
have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives and prenatalpreimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301442