---
reference_id: "PMID:16136388"
title: Surveillance in Lynch syndrome.
authors:
- Mecklin JP
- Järvinen HJ
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s10689-005-1475-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surveillance in Lynch syndrome.
**Authors:** Mecklin JP, Järvinen HJ
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10689-005-1475-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10689-005-1475-x)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2005;4(3):267-71. doi: 10.1007/s10689-005-1475-x.

Surveillance in Lynch syndrome.

Mecklin JP(1), Järvinen HJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Jyväskylä Central Hospital, 40620, Jyväskylä, Finland. 
jukka-pekka.mecklin@ksshp.fi

The major aim of surveillance in Lynch syndrome is to diagnose malignant or 
premalignant lesions at the asymptomatic stage by regular checkups, particularly 
in the large bowel. Therefore, screening for colorectal adenomas and carcinomas 
by regular colonoscopies is the main topic of the present review. However, it 
should be remembered, that primary prevention - whether through the use of 
chemoprevention or the promotion of a healthy life-style may form a significant 
part of such surveillance in the future. Observational studies indicate that the 
adenoma carcinoma sequence is the main pathway in the development of colorectal 
cancer in Lynch syndrome. A colonoscopy every 1-3 years starting at age 20 to 25 
years and the removal of observed adenomas is recommended for individuals known 
to have Lynch syndrome associated mutations. The incidence of colorectal cancer 
in family branches screened this way is lower than that in past unscreened 
generations. The screening of other malignancies associated with Lynch syndrome 
is more complex. Screening for endometrial cancer has recommended previously, 
but no benefits have been shown in recent studies. The value of screening for 
other extracolonic cancers remains also uncertain.

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-005-1475-x
PMID: 16136388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]