---
reference_id: "PMID:33409147"
title: "Cone-beam computed tomographic imaging of silent sinus syndrome: A case series and a literature review."
authors:
- Manila NG
- Tahmasbi Arashlow M
- Ehlers S
- Liang H
- Nair MK
journal: Imaging Sci Dent
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5624/isd.2020.50.4.365
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cone-beam computed tomographic imaging of silent sinus syndrome: A case series and a literature review.
**Authors:** Manila NG, Tahmasbi Arashlow M, Ehlers S, Liang H, Nair MK
**Journal:** Imaging Sci Dent (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5624/isd.2020.50.4.365](https://doi.org/10.5624/isd.2020.50.4.365)

## Content

1. Imaging Sci Dent. 2020 Dec;50(4):365-371. doi: 10.5624/isd.2020.50.4.365. Epub
 2020 Dec 15.

Cone-beam computed tomographic imaging of silent sinus syndrome: A case series 
and a literature review.

Manila NG(1), Tahmasbi Arashlow M(1), Ehlers S(1), Liang H(1), Nair MK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Texas A&M University College of Dentistry, 
Dallas, TX, USA.

While silent sinus syndrome (SSS) is familiar to otolaryngologists and 
ophthalmologists, it is a rare clinical entity in dentistry and is likely to be 
underdiagnosed due to dentists' lack of awareness of this condition. SSS 
presents a diagnostic challenge to dentists, as patients typically have no 
history of trauma or sinusitis. The characteristic feature of SSS is a gradual 
retreat of the maxillary sinus walls, resulting in enophthalmos and hypoglobus. 
Multidetector (multislice) computed tomography is the imaging modality of choice 
for SSS and other paranasal sinus diseases. Cone-beam computed tomography 
promises to be an alternative low-dose imaging modality. This report describes 3 
cases of SSS in adults, who had no identified clinical symptoms except 
diminutive and opacified maxillary sinuses, as well as the inward bowing of the 
sinus walls as noted on cone-beam computed tomographic imaging.

Copyright © 2020 by Korean Academy of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology.

DOI: 10.5624/isd.2020.50.4.365
PMCID: PMC7758263
PMID: 33409147

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None