---
reference_id: "PMID:37827810"
title: "Antagonism of contractile forces in left ventricular hypertrophy: a diagnostic challenge for better pathophysiological and clinical understanding."
authors:
- Lunkenheimer PP
- Hagendorff A
- Lunkenheimer JM
- Gülker HK
- Niederer P
journal: Open Heart
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/openhrt-2023-002351
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antagonism of contractile forces in left ventricular hypertrophy: a diagnostic challenge for better pathophysiological and clinical understanding.
**Authors:** Lunkenheimer PP, Hagendorff A, Lunkenheimer JM, Gülker HK, Niederer P
**Journal:** Open Heart (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/openhrt-2023-002351](https://doi.org/10.1136/openhrt-2023-002351)

## Content

1. Open Heart. 2023 Oct;10(2):e002351. doi: 10.1136/openhrt-2023-002351.

Antagonism of contractile forces in left ventricular hypertrophy: a diagnostic 
challenge for better pathophysiological and clinical understanding.

Lunkenheimer PP(1), Hagendorff A(2), Lunkenheimer JM(3), Gülker HK(4), Niederer 
P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Thoracic, Cardiac and Vascular Surgery, University 
of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany 
Andreas.Hagendorff@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.
(3)Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Sachsen, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Cardiology, HELIOS University Hospital Wuppertal, Wuppertal, 
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University and ETH (Eidgenössische 
Technische Hochschule), Zürich, Switzerland.

Cardiac function is characterised by haemodynamic parameters in the clinical 
scenario. Due to recent development in imaging techniques, the clinicians focus 
on the quantitative assessment of left ventricular size, shape and motion 
patterns mostly analysed by echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance. 
Because of the physiologically known antagonistic structure and function of the 
heart muscle, the effective performance of the heart remains hidden behind 
haemodynamic parameters. In fact, a smaller component of oblique transmural 
netting of cardiac muscle fibres simultaneously engenders contracting and 
dilating force vectors, while the predominant mass of the tangentially aligned 
fibres only acts in one direction. In case of hypertrophy, an increased 
influence of the dilating transmural fibre component might counteract systolic 
wall thickening, thereby counteract cardiac output. A further important aspect 
is the response to inotropic stimulation that is different for the tangentially 
aligned fibre component in comparison to the transmural component. Both aspects 
highlight the importance to integrate the analysis of intramural fibre 
architecture into the clinical cardiac diagnostics.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/openhrt-2023-002351
PMCID: PMC10582970
PMID: 37827810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.