---
reference_id: "PMID:31426867"
title: "Urea cycle disorders in Argentine patients: clinical presentation, biochemical and genetic findings."
authors:
- Silvera-Ruiz SM
- Arranz JA
- Häberle J
- Angaroni CJ
- Bezard M
- Guelbert N
- Becerra A
- Peralta F
- de Kremer RD
- Laróvere LE
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1177-3
keywords:
- Argentina/epidemiology
- "Argininosuccinic Aciduria/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Citrullinemia/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Hyperammonemia/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Ornithine Carbamoyltransferase Deficiency Disease/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urea cycle disorders in Argentine patients: clinical presentation, biochemical and genetic findings.
**Authors:** Silvera-Ruiz SM, Arranz JA, Häberle J, Angaroni CJ, Bezard M, Guelbert N, Becerra A, Peralta F, de Kremer RD, Laróvere LE
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1177-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1177-3)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Aug 19;14(1):203. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1177-3.

Urea cycle disorders in Argentine patients: clinical presentation, biochemical
and genetic findings.

Silvera-Ruiz SM(1), Arranz JA(2), Häberle J(3), Angaroni CJ(4), Bezard M(4),
Guelbert N(5), Becerra A(5), Peralta F(4), de Kremer RD(4), Laróvere LE(4).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Estudio de las Metabolopatías Congénitas, Hospital de Niños de la
Santísima Trinidad, Cátedra de Clínica Pediátrica, Fac. Cs. Médicas, UNC,
Ferroviarios 1250, CP 5014, Córdoba, Argentina. silenesilvera@outlook.com.ar.
(2)Unitat Metab, Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)University Children's Hospital and Children's Research Center, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(4)Centro de Estudio de las Metabolopatías Congénitas, Hospital de Niños de la
Santísima Trinidad, Cátedra de Clínica Pediátrica, Fac. Cs. Médicas, UNC,
Ferroviarios 1250, CP 5014, Córdoba, Argentina.
(5)Sección Enfermedades Metabólicas, Hospital de Niños de la Santísima Trinidad,
Córdoba, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: The incidence, prevalence, and molecular epidemiology of urea cycle
disorders (UCDs) in Argentina remain underexplored. The present study is the
first to thoroughly assess the clinical and molecular profiles of UCD patients
examined at a single reference center in Argentina.
RESULTS: Forty-nine UCD cases were collected. About half (26/49, 53%) manifested
neonatally with classical presentation and had a high mortality (25/26, 96%).
Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD) was the most common UCD (26
patients). Argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency (ASSD) was detected in 19
cases, while argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) was diagnosed in 4 cases.
Molecular genetic analysis revealed 8 private OTC mutations and two large
deletion/duplication events in the OTC gene. Most mutations in the ASS1 and ASL
genes were recurrent missense changes, and four alterations were novel. The
clinical outcome of our UCD cohort was poor, with an overall mortality of 57%
(28/49 cases), and a 28% (6/21) disability rate among the survivors.
CONCLUSIONS: Most patients in our case series showed severe neonatal onset, with
high morbidity/mortality. We detected in total 19 mutations, most of them
recurrent and of high frequency worldwide. Noteworthy, we highlight the presence
of a geographic cluster with high prevalence of a point mutation in the ASS1
gene. This study suggests that these disorders may be more frequent than
commonly assumed, and stresses the need for increased awareness amongst health
professionals and greater availability of diagnostic tools for accurate
identification, early diagnosis, and timely treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1177-3
PMCID: PMC6700778
PMID: 31426867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors listed above certify that they have
no affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any
financial or non-financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed
in this manuscript.
