---
reference_id: "PMID:35910641"
title: Altered Gut Microbiota in Patients With Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.
authors:
- Wang S
- Huang G
- Wang JX
- Tian L
- Zuo XL
- Li YQ
- Yu YB
journal: Front Microbiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.881508
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered Gut Microbiota in Patients With Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.
**Authors:** Wang S, Huang G, Wang JX, Tian L, Zuo XL, Li YQ, Yu YB
**Journal:** Front Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmicb.2022.881508](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.881508)

## Content

1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Jul 13;13:881508. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.881508. 
eCollection 2022.

Altered Gut Microbiota in Patients With Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.

Wang S(1)(2), Huang G(1)(2), Wang JX(1)(2), Tian L(1)(2), Zuo XL(1)(2), Li 
YQ(1)(2), Yu YB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 
China.
(2)Laboratory of Translational Gastroenterology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong 
University, Jinan, China.

BACKGROUND: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare genetic disorder 
characterized by the development of pigmented spots and gastrointestinal polyps 
and increased susceptibility to cancers. It remains unknown whether gut 
microbiota dysbiosis is linked to PJS.
AIM: This study aimed to assess the structure and composition of the gut 
microbiota, including both bacteria and fungi, in patients with PJS and 
investigate the relationship between gut microbiota dysbiosis and PJS 
pathogenesis.
METHODS: The bacterial and fungal composition of the fecal microbiota was 
analyzed in 23 patients with PJS (cases), 17 first-degree asymptomatic relatives 
(ARs), and 24 healthy controls (HCs) using 16S (MiSeq) and ITS2 (pyrosequencing) 
sequencing for bacteria and fungi, respectively. Differential analyses of the 
intestinal flora were performed from the phylum to species level.
RESULTS: Alpha-diversity distributions of bacteria and fungi indicated that the 
abundance of both taxa differed between PJS cases and controls. However, while 
the diversity and composition of fecal bacteria in PJS cases were significantly 
different from those in ARs and HCs, fungal flora was more stable. 
High-throughput sequencing confirmed the special characteristics and 
biodiversity of the fecal bacterial and fungal microflora in patients with PJS. 
They had lower bacterial biodiversity than controls, with a higher frequency of 
the Proteobacteria phylum, Enterobacteriaceae family, and Escherichia-Shigella 
genus, and a lower frequency of the Firmicutes phylum and the Lachnospiraceae 
and Ruminococcaceae families. Of fungi, Candida was significantly higher in PJS 
cases than in controls.
CONCLUSION: The findings reported here confirm gut microbiota dysbiosis in 
patients with PJS. This is the first report on the bacterial and fungal 
microbiota profile of subjects with PJS, which may be meaningful to provide a 
structural basis for further research on intestinal microecology in PJS.

Copyright © 2022 Wang, Huang, Wang, Tian, Zuo, Li and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.881508
PMCID: PMC9326469
PMID: 35910641

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.