---
reference_id: "PMID:30792255"
title: Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus Treated With Trametinib.
authors:
- Mir A
- Agim NG
- Kane AA
- Josephs SC
- Park JY
- Ludwig K
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2018-2469
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus Treated With Trametinib.
**Authors:** Mir A, Agim NG, Kane AA, Josephs SC, Park JY, Ludwig K
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2018-2469](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2018-2469)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2019 Mar;143(3):e20182469. doi: 10.1542/peds.2018-2469.

Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus Treated With Trametinib.

Mir A(1), Agim NG(1), Kane AA(2), Josephs SC(3), Park JY(4), Ludwig K(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Dermatology.
(2)Plastic Surgery.
(3)Radiology, and.
(4)Pathology, Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, and.
(5)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas kathleen.wiertel@utsouthwestern.edu.

Giant congenital nevi are melanocytic proliferations of the skin that may be 
complicated by melanoma, neurocutaneous melanocytosis, pain, pruritus, and 
disfigurement. Current treatment options include surgical resection and medical 
management of associated symptoms. There is limited efficacy in these 
modalities. No effective pharmacologic treatments are available for the 
treatment of these lesions. We present the case of a 7-year-old girl with a 
giant congenital melanocytic nevus that had an AKAP9-BRAF fusion and was treated 
with trametinib, which resulted in rapid resolution of the patient's lifelong, 
intractable pain and pruritus as well as dramatic improvement in the extent of 
her nevus.

Copyright © 2019 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2018-2469
PMID: 30792255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have 
indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.