---
reference_id: "PMID:26500831"
title: Clustering symptoms of non-severe malaria in semi-immune Amazonian patients.
authors:
- Martins AC
- Araújo FM
- Braga CB
- Guimarães MG
- Nogueira R
- Arruda RA
- Fernandes LN
- Correa LR
- Malafronte Rdos S
- Cruz OG
- Codeço CT
- da Silva-Nunes M
journal: PeerJ
year: '2015'
doi: 10.7717/peerj.1325
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clustering symptoms of non-severe malaria in semi-immune Amazonian patients.
**Authors:** Martins AC, Araújo FM, Braga CB, Guimarães MG, Nogueira R, Arruda RA, Fernandes LN, Correa LR, Malafronte Rdos S, Cruz OG, Codeço CT, da Silva-Nunes M
**Journal:** PeerJ (2015)
**DOI:** [10.7717/peerj.1325](https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.1325)

## Content

1. PeerJ. 2015 Oct 13;3:e1325. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1325. eCollection 2015.

Clustering symptoms of non-severe malaria in semi-immune Amazonian patients.

Martins AC(1), Araújo FM(1), Braga CB(1), Guimarães MG(1), Nogueira R(1), Arruda 
RA(1), Fernandes LN(2), Correa LR(2), Malafronte Rdos S(2), Cruz OG(3), Codeço 
CT(3), da Silva-Nunes M(1).

Author information:
(1)Health Sciences Center, Federal University of Acre , Rio Branco, Acre , 
Brazil.
(2)Tropical Medicine Institute, University of São Paulo , São Paulo , Brazil.
(3)Scientific Computation Programm, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation , Rio de Janeiro, 
Rio de Janeiro , Brazil.

Malaria is a disease that generates a broad spectrum of clinical features. The 
purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical spectrum of malaria in 
semi-immune populations. Patients were recruited in Mâncio Lima, a city situated 
in the Brazilian Amazon region. The study included 171 malaria cases, which were 
diagnosed via the use of a thick blood smear and confirmed by molecular methods. 
A questionnaire addressing 19 common symptoms was administered to all patients. 
Multiple correspondence analysis and hierarchical cluster analysis were 
performed to identify clusters of symptoms, and logistic regression was used to 
identify factors associated with the occurrence of symptoms. The cluster 
analysis revealed five groups of symptoms: the first cluster, which included 
algic- and fever-related symptoms, occurred in up to 95.3% of the cases. The 
second cluster, which comprised gastric symptoms (nausea, abdominal pain, 
inappetence, and bitter mouth), occurred in frequencies that ranged between 
35.1% and 42.7%, and at least one of these symptoms was observed in 71.9% of the 
subjects. All respiratory symptoms were clustered and occurred in 42.7% of the 
malaria cases, and diarrhea occurred in 9.9% of the cases. Symptoms constituting 
the fifth cluster were vomiting and pallor, with a 14.6% and 11.7% of 
prevalence, respectively. A higher parasitemia count (more than 300 
parasites/mm(3)) was associated with the presence of fever, vomiting, dizziness, 
and weakness (P < 0.05). Arthralgia and myalgia were associated with patients 
over the age of 14 years (P < 0.001). Having experienced at least eight malaria 
episodes prior to the study was associated with a decreased risk of chills and 
fever and an increased risk of sore throat (P < 0.05). None of the symptoms 
showed an association with gender or with species of Plasmodium. The clinical 
spectrum of malaria in semi-immune individuals can have a broad range of 
symptoms, the frequency and intensity of which are associated with age, past 
exposure to malaria, and parasitemia. Understanding the full spectrum of 
nonsevere malaria is important in endemic areas to guide both passive and active 
case detection, for the diagnosis of malaria in travelers returning to 
non-endemic areas, and for the development of vaccines aimed to decrease symptom 
severity.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.1325
PMCID: PMC4614890
PMID: 26500831

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.