---
reference_id: "PMID:19767743"
title: Signalling mediated by the endoplasmic reticulum stress transducer OASIS is involved in bone formation.
authors:
- Murakami T
- Saito A
- Hino S
- Kondo S
- Kanemoto S
- Chihara K
- Sekiya H
- Tsumagari K
- Ochiai K
- Yoshinaga K
- Saitoh M
- Nishimura R
- Yoneda T
- Kou I
- Furuichi T
- Ikegawa S
- Ikawa M
- Okabe M
- Wanaka A
- Imaizumi K
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/ncb1963
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Collagen Type I/genetics, metabolism"
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- Cyclic AMP Response Element-Binding Protein/physiology
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/physiology, ultrastructure"
- Female
- Immunohistochemistry
- In Situ Hybridization
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/physiology
- Osteogenesis/genetics
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Protein Folding
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Signalling mediated by the endoplasmic reticulum stress transducer OASIS is involved in bone formation.
**Authors:** Murakami T, Saito A, Hino S, Kondo S, Kanemoto S, Chihara K, Sekiya H, Tsumagari K, Ochiai K, Yoshinaga K, Saitoh M, Nishimura R, Yoneda T, Kou I, Furuichi T, Ikegawa S, Ikawa M, Okabe M, Wanaka A, Imaizumi K
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb1963](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1963)

## Content

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;11(10):1205-11. doi: 10.1038/ncb1963. Epub 2009 Sep
20.

Signalling mediated by the endoplasmic reticulum stress transducer OASIS is 
involved in bone formation.

Murakami T(1), Saito A, Hino S, Kondo S, Kanemoto S, Chihara K, Sekiya H, 
Tsumagari K, Ochiai K, Yoshinaga K, Saitoh M, Nishimura R, Yoneda T, Kou I, 
Furuichi T, Ikegawa S, Ikawa M, Okabe M, Wanaka A, Imaizumi K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Anatomy, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 5200 Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki 889-1692, 
Japan.

Eukaryotic cells have signalling pathways from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to 
cytosol and nuclei, to avoid excess accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER. 
We previously identified a new type of ER stress transducer, OASIS, a bZIP 
(basic leucine zipper) transcription factor, which is a member of the CREB/ATF 
family and has a transmembrane domain. OASIS is processed by regulated 
intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) in response to ER stress, and is highly 
expressed in osteoblasts. OASIS(-/-) mice exhibited severe osteopenia, involving 
a decrease in type I collagen in the bone matrix and a decline in the activity 
of osteoblasts, which showed abnormally expanded rough ER, containing of a large 
amount of bone matrix proteins. Here we identify the gene for type 1 collagen, 
Col1a1, as a target of OASIS, and demonstrate that OASIS activates the 
transcription of Col1a1 through an unfolded protein response element (UPRE)-like 
sequence in the osteoblast-specific Col1a1 promoter region. Moreover, expression 
of OASIS in osteoblasts is induced by BMP2 (bone morphogenetic protein 2), the 
signalling of which is required for bone formation. Additionally, RIP of OASIS 
is accelerated by BMP2 signalling, which causes mild ER stress. Our studies show 
that OASIS is critical for bone formation through the transcription of Col1a1 
and the secretion of bone matrix proteins, and they reveal a new mechanism by 
which ER stress-induced signalling mediates bone formation.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1963
PMID: 19767743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]