---
reference_id: "PMID:32088370"
title: "Comparison of Outcomes of Myeloablative Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation for Pediatric Patients with Bone Marrow Failure, Myelodysplastic Syndrome and Acute Myeloid Leukemia with and without Germline GATA2 Mutations."
authors:
- Hofmann I
- Avagyan S
- Stetson A
- Guo D
- Al-Sayegh H
- London WB
- Lehmann L
journal: Biol Blood Marrow Transplant
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2020.02.015
keywords:
- Bone Marrow Failure Disorders
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- GATA2 Transcription Factor/genetics
- Germ Cells
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/adverse effects
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics, therapy"
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/genetics, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of Outcomes of Myeloablative Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation for Pediatric Patients with Bone Marrow Failure, Myelodysplastic Syndrome and Acute Myeloid Leukemia with and without Germline GATA2 Mutations.
**Authors:** Hofmann I, Avagyan S, Stetson A, Guo D, Al-Sayegh H, London WB, Lehmann L
**Journal:** Biol Blood Marrow Transplant (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbmt.2020.02.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbmt.2020.02.015)

## Content

1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2020 Jun;26(6):1124-1130. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbmt.2020.02.015. Epub 2020 Feb 20.

Comparison of Outcomes of Myeloablative Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation for 
Pediatric Patients with Bone Marrow Failure, Myelodysplastic Syndrome and Acute 
Myeloid Leukemia with and without Germline GATA2 Mutations.

Hofmann I(1), Avagyan S(2), Stetson A(2), Guo D(2), Al-Sayegh H(2), London 
WB(2), Lehmann L(2).

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts. Electronic address: ihofmann@wisc.edu.
(2)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts.

Germline mutations in GATA2 are associated with an inherited predisposition to 
bone marrow failure (BMF), myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), and acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML). Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) remains the only 
curative therapy. However, patients may be at an increased risk for 
transplant-related toxicity (TRT) and transplant-related mortality (TRM) due to 
their underlying disease biology. We performed a retrospective case-control 
study of pediatric patients with BMF/MDS/AML with germline GATA2 mutations, 
comparing HSCT outcomes to randomly selected patients without germline GATA2 
mutations and BMF/MDS (control A) and acute leukemia (control B). The 5-year 
overall and disease-free survival rates in the GATA2 cohort (65%, 51%) were 
similar to control A (58%, 49%) and B (45%, 43%) cohorts. In contrast, the 
5-year event-free survival rate was significantly lower in the GATA2 cohort (7% 
± 6%, 28% ± 10%, and 33% ± 8% for GATA2, A, and B, respectively), due to an 
increased number of unique TRTs. Specifically, neurologic toxicities occurred 
significantly more frequently in GATA2 patients than in the control groups, and 
post-HSCT thrombotic events occurred only in the GATA2 cohort. There was no 
difference in TRM, infections, or graft-versus-host disease across groups. The 
higher incidence of thrombotic and neurologic events specific to GATA2 patients 
warrants further investigation and has potential treatment ramifications.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Transplantation and Cellular Therapy. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2020.02.015
PMCID: PMC7276093
PMID: 32088370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial disclosure statement: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests