---
reference_id: "PMID:38397448"
title: "The Genetic Basis, Lung Involvement, and Therapeutic Options in Niemann-Pick Disease: A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Tirelli C
- Rondinone O
- Italia M
- Mira S
- Belmonte LA
- De Grassi M
- Guido G
- Maggioni S
- Mondoni M
- Miozzo MR
- Centanni S
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14020211
keywords:
- Humans
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type A/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type B/genetics, therapy"
- "Niemann-Pick Diseases/genetics, therapy"
- "Lung Diseases/genetics, therapy"
- Mutation
- Rare Diseases
- Lung/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Genetic Basis, Lung Involvement, and Therapeutic Options in Niemann-Pick Disease: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Tirelli C, Rondinone O, Italia M, Mira S, Belmonte LA, De Grassi M, Guido G, Maggioni S, Mondoni M, Miozzo MR, Centanni S
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14020211](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14020211)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 Feb 11;14(2):211. doi: 10.3390/biom14020211.

The Genetic Basis, Lung Involvement, and Therapeutic Options in Niemann-Pick 
Disease: A Comprehensive Review.

Tirelli C(1), Rondinone O(2), Italia M(1), Mira S(1), Belmonte LA(1), De Grassi 
M(1), Guido G(1), Maggioni S(1), Mondoni M(1), Miozzo MR(2), Centanni S(1).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Unit, ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, Department of Health Sciences, 
University of Milan, 20142 Milan, Italy.
(2)Medical Genetics Unit, ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, Department of Health 
Sciences, University of Milan, 20142 Milan, Italy.

Niemann-Pick Disease (NPD) is a rare autosomal recessive disease belonging to 
lysosomal storage disorders. Three types of NPD have been described: NPD type A, 
B, and C. NPD type A and B are caused by mutations in the gene SMPD1 coding for 
sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1, with a consequent lack of acid 
sphingomyelinase activity. These diseases have been thus classified as acid 
sphingomyelinase deficiencies (ASMDs). NPD type C is a neurologic disorder due 
to mutations in the genes NPC1 or NPC2, causing a defect of cholesterol 
trafficking and esterification. Although all three types of NPD can manifest 
with pulmonary involvement, lung disease occurs more frequently in NPD type B, 
typically with interstitial lung disease, recurrent pulmonary infections, and 
respiratory failure. In this sense, bronchoscopy with broncho-alveolar lavage or 
biopsy together with high-resolution computed tomography are fundamental 
diagnostic tools. Although several efforts have been made to find an effective 
therapy for NPD, to date, only limited therapeutic options are available. Enzyme 
replacement therapy with Olipudase α is the first and only approved 
disease-modifying therapy for patients with ASMD. A lung transplant and 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation are also described for ASMD in the 
literature. The only approved disease-modifying therapy in NPD type C is 
miglustat, a substrate-reduction treatment. The aim of this review was to 
delineate a state of the art on the genetic basis and lung involvement in NPD, 
focusing on clinical manifestations, radiologic and histopathologic 
characteristics of the disease, and available therapeutic options, with a gaze 
on future therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14020211
PMCID: PMC10886890
PMID: 38397448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.