---
reference_id: "PMID:36922031"
title: "Contemporary Concise Review 2022: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease."
authors:
- Calverley PMA
- Walker PP
journal: Respirology
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/resp.14489
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contemporary Concise Review 2022: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Calverley PMA, Walker PP
**Journal:** Respirology (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/resp.14489](https://doi.org/10.1111/resp.14489)

## Content

1. Respirology. 2023 May;28(5):428-436. doi: 10.1111/resp.14489. Epub 2023 Mar
15.

Contemporary Concise Review 2022: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Calverley PMA(1), Walker PP(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool, UK.
(2)School of Health and Life Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

International respiratory organizations now recommend using lower limit of 
normal and standardized residuals to diagnose airflow obstruction and COPD 
though using a fixed ratio <0.7 is simpler and robustly predicts important 
clinical outcomes. The most common COPD comorbidities are coronary artery 
calcification, emphysema and bronchiectasis. COPD patients with psychological 
(high anxiety and depression) and cachectic (underweight and osteoporotic) 
comorbidity have higher mortality and exacerbate more. Serum eosinophil count 
remains an important COPD biomarker and we have greater clarity about normal 
eosinophil levels in COPD and the wider population. Criteria for entry into COPD 
clinical trials continue to exclude many patients, in particular those at 
greater risk of exacerbation and death. The effect of hyperinflation on cardiac 
function impacts COPD mortality and is an important target for successful lung 
volume reduction procedures.

© 2023 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.14489
PMID: 36922031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]