---
reference_id: "PMID:33058944"
title: The ubiquitination machinery of the Fanconi Anemia DNA repair pathway.
authors:
- Tan W
- Deans AJ
journal: Prog Biophys Mol Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2020.09.009
keywords:
- DNA Damage
- DNA Repair
- Fanconi Anemia/genetics
- "Fanconi Anemia Complementation Group D2 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Ubiquitination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ubiquitination machinery of the Fanconi Anemia DNA repair pathway.
**Authors:** Tan W, Deans AJ
**Journal:** Prog Biophys Mol Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2020.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2020.09.009)

## Content

1. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2021 Aug;163:5-13. doi:
10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2020.09.009.  Epub 2020 Oct 12.

The ubiquitination machinery of the Fanconi Anemia DNA repair pathway.

Tan W(1), Deans AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Genome Stability Unit, St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research, 9 Princes 
St, Fitzroy, Victoria, 3065, Australia.
(2)Genome Stability Unit, St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research, 9 Princes 
St, Fitzroy, Victoria, 3065, Australia; Department of Medicine, St. Vincent's 
Health, The University of Melbourne, Australia. Electronic address: 
https://twitter.com/GenomeStability.

The Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway maintains genome stability by preventing DNA 
damage from occurring when replication is blocked. Central to the FA pathway is 
the monoubiquitination of FANCI-FANCD2 mediated by a ubiquitin RING-E3 ligase 
complex called the FA core complex. Genetic mutation in any component of the FA 
core complex results in defective FANCI-FANCD2 monoubiquitination and phenotypes 
of DNA damage sensitivity, birth defects, early-onset bone marrow failure and 
cancer. Here, we discuss the mechanisms of the FA core complex and FANCI-FANCD2 
monoubiquitination at sites of blocked replication and review our current 
understanding of the biological functions of these proteins in replication fork 
protection.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2020.09.009
PMID: 33058944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare they have no competing interests.