---
reference_id: "PMID:26525374"
title: Understanding asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome.
authors:
- Wurst KE
- Kelly-Reif K
- Bushnell GA
- Pascoe S
- Barnes N
journal: Respir Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.10.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome.
**Authors:** Wurst KE, Kelly-Reif K, Bushnell GA, Pascoe S, Barnes N
**Journal:** Respir Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2015.10.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2015.10.004)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2016 Jan;110:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.10.004. Epub 2015 Oct
9.

Understanding asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome.

Wurst KE(1), Kelly-Reif K(2), Bushnell GA(2), Pascoe S(3), Barnes N(4).

Author information:
(1)GSK R&D, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. Electronic address: 
kewurst@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 
USA.
(3)GSK R&D, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(4)GSK, Brentford, Middlesex, UK; William Harvey Institute, Barts and The London 
School of Medicine and Dentistry.

Asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndrome (ACOS) is a 
loosely-defined clinical entity referring to patients who exhibit 
characteristics of both asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Clinical definitions and classifications for ACOS vary widely, which impacts our 
understanding of prevalence, diagnosis and treatment of the condition. This 
literature review was therefore conducted to characterize the prevalence of ACOS 
and the effect of different disease definitions on these estimates, as this has 
not previously been explored. From an analysis of English language literature 
published from 2000 to 2014, the estimated prevalence of ACOS ranges from 12.1% 
to 55.2% among patients with COPD and 13.3%-61.0% among patients with asthma 
alone. This variability is linked to differences in COPD and asthma diagnostic 
criteria, disease ascertainment methods (spirometry-based versus clinical or 
symptom-based diagnoses and claims data), and population characteristics 
including age, gender and smoking. Understanding the reasons for differences in 
prevalence estimates of ACOS across the literature may help guide decision 
making on the most appropriate criteria for defining ACOS and aid investigators 
in designing future ACOS clinical studies aimed at effective treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2015.10.004
PMID: 26525374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]