---
reference_id: "PMID:29799399"
title: Evaluation of germ-cell neoplasia in situ entity in testicular tumors.
authors:
- Akyüz M
- Topaktaş R
- Ürkmez A
- Koca O
- Öztürk Mİ
journal: Turk J Urol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.5152/tud.2018.48855
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of germ-cell neoplasia in situ entity in testicular tumors.
**Authors:** Akyüz M, Topaktaş R, Ürkmez A, Koca O, Öztürk Mİ
**Journal:** Turk J Urol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.5152/tud.2018.48855](https://doi.org/10.5152/tud.2018.48855)

## Content

1. Turk J Urol. 2018 Mar 16;45(6):418-422. doi: 10.5152/tud.2018.48855. Print
2019  Nov.

Evaluation of germ-cell neoplasia in situ entity in testicular tumors.

Akyüz M(1), Topaktaş R(1), Ürkmez A(1), Koca O(1), Öztürk Mİ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Health Sciences University Haydarpaşa Numune Training 
and Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Germ-cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS) is accepted as the precursor of 
the testicular tumors. The aim in our study is to compare the lymphadenopathy 
and metastasis parameters in patients diagnosed with testicular tumor with or 
without GCNIS based on pathological evaluation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Data from 108 patients who underwent orchiectomy for 
testicular tumor between January 2007 and December 2014 in our clinic were 
retrospectively analyzed and included in the study. Patients were divided into 
two groups based on the pathology reports as GCNIS or not. Groups were compared 
regarding lymphadenopathy, metastasis, tumor marker levels, tumor size, 
lymphovascular invasion, rete testis invasion. Mann-Whitney U test was used for 
statistical evaluation.
RESULTS: Mean age of the patients included in the study were calculated as 
34.6±9.3 years. Eighty-five (78.7%) patients had GCNIS, while 23 (21.3%) of them 
had not. In terms of metastasis, lymphadenopathy, marker levels, tumor size, 
lymphovascular invasion and rete testis invasion, no statistical significant 
difference were observed between two groups (p>0.05).
CONCLUSION: In our study, no statistical significant difference was observed on 
the prognostic factors concerning the GCNIS entity, which is reported frequently 
in testicular tumor pathologies. For presently these findings show us that GCNIS 
cannot be used as a prognostic factor.

DOI: 10.5152/tud.2018.48855
PMCID: PMC6788558
PMID: 29799399

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No conflict of interest 
was declared by the authors.