---
reference_id: "PMID:39960766"
title: Genetic and functional dissection of the glutamate-proline pathway reveals a shortcut for glutamate catabolism in Leishmania.
authors:
- Campagnaro GD
- Kaysel Cruz A
journal: FEBS J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/febs.70030
keywords:
- Proline/metabolism
- Glutamic Acid/metabolism
- "Leishmania/metabolism, genetics"
- "Protozoan Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Animals
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways/genetics
- Glutamine/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and functional dissection of the glutamate-proline pathway reveals a shortcut for glutamate catabolism in Leishmania.
**Authors:** Campagnaro GD, Kaysel Cruz A
**Journal:** FEBS J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.70030](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.70030)

## Content

1. FEBS J. 2025 May;292(10):2645-2670. doi: 10.1111/febs.70030. Epub 2025 Feb 17.

Genetic and functional dissection of the glutamate-proline pathway reveals a
shortcut for glutamate catabolism in Leishmania.

Campagnaro GD(1), Kaysel Cruz A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Ribeirão Preto Medical School,
University of São Paulo, Brazil.

Trypanosomatids are early-divergent eukaryotes that have adapted to parasitism.
During their life cycles, these parasites switch between a mammalian and an
invertebrate host, and the ability to adapt their metabolism to different
nutritional sources is instrumental for their success. In the invertebrate host,
these protists have access to high amounts of amino acids and efficiently
utilise it for energy production. Proline is a particularly efficient energy
source for trypanosomes. Glutamate is also efficiently used by Trypanosoma cruzi
and can be converted into proline as part of the glutamate-proline pathway prior
to its intramitochondrial catabolism. By employing a series of genetic
modifications and functional analysis, we show here that Leishmania parasites,
the causative agents of leishmaniases, can utilise proline, glutamate and
glutamine as energy sources, and although these parasites possess all the genes
necessary for the biosynthesis of proline from glutamate, this pathway has, at
best, limited function, with at least one of its components
(pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase) assuming divergent functions in different
life cycle stages of the parasite. In fact, we show that the catabolism of
glutamate is independent of proline biosynthesis and the former is most likely
directly imported into the mitochondrion and catabolised to recover the cellular
redox metabolism and increase mitochondrial membrane potential. Moreover, our
data suggest a relevant role for glutamate dehydrogenase in nutritional stress
response in Leishmania. These findings highlight relevant differences in amino
acid metabolism between Trypanosoma and Leishmania and suggest a diversification
in amino acid metabolic pathways within Trypanosomatidae.

© 2025 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.70030
PMID: 39960766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
