---
reference_id: "PMID:17243956"
title: "Association of vitiligo with HLA-A2: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Liu JB
- Li M
- Chen H
- Zhong SQ
- Yang S
- Du WD
- Hao JH
- Zhang TS
- Zhang XJ
- Zeegers MP
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2006.01899.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of vitiligo with HLA-A2: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Liu JB, Li M, Chen H, Zhong SQ, Yang S, Du WD, Hao JH, Zhang TS, Zhang XJ, Zeegers MP
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-3083.2006.01899.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-3083.2006.01899.x)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2007 Feb;21(2):205-13. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2006.01899.x.

Association of vitiligo with HLA-A2: a meta-analysis.

Liu JB(1), Li M, Chen H, Zhong SQ, Yang S, Du WD, Hao JH, Zhang TS, Zhang XJ, 
Zeegers MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Huiyang People's Hospital, Huizhou, Guangdong, 
China. ayzxj@mail.hf.ah.cn

BACKGROUND: Linkage and association studies suggest that the human leucocyte 
antigen (HLA) region may be involved in the genetic susceptibility of vitiligo. 
HLA-A2 has been reported to be associated with vitiligo in some, but not all, 
studies.
OBJECTIVE: To identify sources of the heterogeneity among studies and to 
quantify effect estimates, we examined the association of HLA-A2 with vitiligo 
in a meta-analysis of all observational studies comparing the frequencies of 
HLA-A2 between vitiligo individuals and controls during 1966-2005.
METHODS: The summary odds ratio (OR) was calculated by using a fixed- or a 
random-effects model. Meta-regression analysis was undertaken to investigate the 
effects of study characteristics on the pooled OR.
RESULTS: Eleven case-controlled studies fulfilled our inclusion criteria. The 
studies identified a total of 777 patients and 4820 controls. Meta-analysis 
showed a significantly increased frequency of HLA-A2 in vitiligo among cases [OR 
= 2.07, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.67-2.58]. Heterogeneity was explained by 
the quality of the study and the ethnic background of the participants. 
Meta-regression analysis further showed that the percentage of familial vitiligo 
among the subjects had a significant effect on the pooled OR (P = 0.008). No 
study had a significant effect on the pooled OR and no publication bias 
presented in the studies analysed (P = 0.688).
CONCLUSION: These findings strongly suggest an association between HLA-A2 and 
vitiligo.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2006.01899.x
PMID: 17243956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]