---
reference_id: "PMID:31233731"
title: Alterations in GRHL2-OVOL2-ZEB1 axis and aberrant activation of Wnt signaling lead to altered gene transcription in posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy.
authors:
- Chung DD
- Zhang W
- Jatavallabhula K
- Barrington A
- Jung J
- Aldave AJ
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2019.107696
keywords:
- Aged
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Expression Regulation/physiology
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Introns/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Wnt Signaling Pathway/physiology
- Zinc Finger E-box-Binding Homeobox 1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alterations in GRHL2-OVOL2-ZEB1 axis and aberrant activation of Wnt signaling lead to altered gene transcription in posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy.
**Authors:** Chung DD, Zhang W, Jatavallabhula K, Barrington A, Jung J, Aldave AJ
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2019.107696](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2019.107696)

## Content

1. Exp Eye Res. 2019 Nov;188:107696. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2019.107696. Epub 2019
Jun  21.

Alterations in GRHL2-OVOL2-ZEB1 axis and aberrant activation of Wnt signaling 
lead to altered gene transcription in posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy.

Chung DD(1), Zhang W(1), Jatavallabhula K(1), Barrington A(1), Jung J(1), Aldave 
AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: aldave@jsei.ucla.edu.

Mutations associated with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD) have 
been identified in three genes: ZEB1 (zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1) 
associated with sub-type PPCD3; OVOL2 (ovol-like zinc finger 2) associated with 
sub-type PPCD1; and GRHL2 (grainyhead like transcription factor 2) associated 
with sub-type PPCD4. Each of these genes encodes a transcription factor that 
regulates cell-state transitions. While the discovery of these PPCD-associated 
genes has greatly expanded our knowledge of the genetic basis of PPCD, the 
molecular mechanisms via which mutations in these genes lead to 
indistinguishable disease phenotypes have yet to be elucidated. To characterize 
the gene expression profiles of the genetic sub-types of PPCD, RNA-seq was 
performed on corneal endothelium derived from an individual with PPCD1 who 
harbors a c.-307T > C OVOL2 promoter mutation. Transcriptomic analysis of this 
and previously-reported RNA-seq data from two individuals with PPCD (the first 
with PPCD3 associated with a ZEB1 truncating mutation (c.1381delinsGACGAT) and 
the second with genetically unresolved PPCD in which ZEB1 coding region, OVOL2 
promoter and GRHL2 promoter, exon 1, and intron 1 mutations were excluded) 
revealed: OVOL2 expression increased in PPCD1 (259 fold), unchanged in PPCD3 and 
slightly increased in genetically unresolved PPCD (from 0 TPM to 0.86 TPM, 
undefined fold change); ZEB1 expression decreased in PPCD1 (-5.9 fold), PPCD3 
(-3.95 fold) and genetically unresolved PPCD (-3.96 fold); and GRHL2 expression 
increased in PPCD1 (333.5 fold), slightly increased (from 0 TPM to 0.67 TPM, 
undefined fold change) in PPCD3 and increased in genetically unresolved PPCD 
(1853 fold). Additionally, as the majority of pedigrees affected with PPCD 
remain genetically unresolved, we screened the promoter, exon 1, and intron 1 
regions of GRHL2 in 24 PPCD probands who do not harbor a ZEB1 or OVOL2 mutation. 
GRHL2 screening did not identify any novel or rare GRHL2 variant in these 24 
individuals. As ZEB1 can act as an activator or repressor of downstream target 
gene expression depending on Wnt signaling pathway activation or deactivation, 
we also sought to determine whether or not Wnt signaling is active in PPCD by 
performing immunohistochemistry in corneal tissue sections derived from an 
individual affected with PPCD3 and from an individual with genetically 
unresolved PPCD. Immunohistochemistry results demonstrated corneal endothelial 
nuclear accumulation of S552 phos-β-catenin and cytosolic localization of 
S33/37/T42 non-phosphorylated β-catenin in PPCD, indicating aberrant activation 
of Wnt signaling, which was not observed in control corneal endothelium. These 
findings suggest that alterations in the ZEB1-OVOL2-GRHL2 axis (caused by 
PPCD-associated mutations) lead to changes in corneal endothelial cell state and 
molecular pathways, including the aberrant activation of the Wnt signaling 
pathway.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2019.107696
PMID: 31233731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]