---
reference_id: "PMID:37215607"
title: "DICER1 syndrome and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the cervix: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Stambouli A
- Cartault A
- Petit IO
- Evrard S
- Mery E
- Savagner F
- Trudel S
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1150418
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DICER1 syndrome and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the cervix: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Stambouli A, Cartault A, Petit IO, Evrard S, Mery E, Savagner F, Trudel S
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2023.1150418](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.1150418)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 May 5;11:1150418. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1150418. 
eCollection 2023.

DICER1 syndrome and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the cervix: a case report and 
literature review.

Stambouli A(1), Cartault A(2), Petit IO(2), Evrard S(3), Mery E(3), Savagner 
F(#)(1)(4), Trudel S(#)(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Department, Federative Institute of Biology, Toulouse, 
France.
(2)Endocrinology Department, Children's Hospital of Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(3)Pathology Department, IUCT, Institut Claudius Regaud, Toulouse, France.
(4)Inserm UMR 1297, Toulouse, France.
(5)Inserm UMR 1291, CHU Purpan-BP, Toulouse, France.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas (ERMS) of the uterine cervix and corpus 
are rare pediatric tumors usually associated with a late age of onset and 
frequent somatic DICER1 mutation. It may also develop in the context of a 
familial predisposition such as DICER1 syndrome requiring specific medical care 
for children and young adults at risk for a broad range of tumors.
CASE PRESENTATION: This is a case of a prepubescent 9-year-old girl who was 
presented to our department for metrorrhagias due to a vaginal cervical mass, 
initially classified as a müllerian endocervical polyp on negative myogenin 
immunostaining. The patient subsequently manifested growth retardation (-2DS) 
and learning disabilities leading to genetic explorations and the identification 
of a germline pathogenic DICER1 variant. The family history revealed thyroid 
diseases in the father, aunt and paternal grandmother before the age of 20.
CONCLUSION: Rare tumors such as cervical ERMS associated with a family history 
of thyroid disease during infancy could be related to DICER1 syndrome. 
Identifying at-risk relatives is challenging but necessary to detect early 
DICER1 spectrum tumors in young patients.

© 2023 Stambouli, Cartault, Petit, Evrard, Mery, Savagner and Trudel.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.1150418
PMCID: PMC10196141
PMID: 37215607

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.