---
reference_id: "PMID:38933059"
title: "A neonate with a spongy failing heart - What could it be?"
authors:
- Archana A
- Natarajan CK
- Kumar VH
- Subramaniyam G
- Ramachandran B
- Balakrishnan K
- Suresh Rao KG
- Berwal A
- Nandyala V
- Iyer S
journal: Ann Pediatr Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/apc.apc_193_23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A neonate with a spongy failing heart - What could it be?
**Authors:** Archana A, Natarajan CK, Kumar VH, Subramaniyam G, Ramachandran B, Balakrishnan K, Suresh Rao KG, Berwal A, Nandyala V, Iyer S
**Journal:** Ann Pediatr Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/apc.apc_193_23](https://doi.org/10.4103/apc.apc_193_23)

## Content

1. Ann Pediatr Cardiol. 2024 Jan-Feb;17(1):81-84. doi: 10.4103/apc.apc_193_23.
Epub  2024 May 24.

A neonate with a spongy failing heart - What could it be?

Archana A(1), Natarajan CK(1), Kumar VH(1), Subramaniyam G(2), Ramachandran 
B(3), Balakrishnan K(4), Suresh Rao KG(4), Berwal A(1), Nandyala V(1), Iyer 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Kanchi Kamakoti Child Trust Hospital, Chennai, 
Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Kanchi Kamakoti Child Trust Hospital, 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Department of Paediatric Intensive Care, Kanchi Kamakoti Child Trust 
Hospital, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(4)Department of Heart and Lung Transplantation and Mechanical Circulatory 
Support, MGM Healthcare, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

A neonate born of third-degree consanguineous marriage presented on day 12 of 
life with congestive cardiac failure. A male sibling died at 3 months of age, 
cause of which was not known. He was treated with decongestive measures and 
multiple inotropes. 2D Echocardiogram revealed severe Left ventricular 
dysfunction with prominent trabeculations and deep recesses in the left 
ventricle suggestive of Left ventricular non-compaction. He was also found to 
have horse-shoe kidney. Considering the presence of cardiac left ventricular non 
compaction, horse-shoe kidney and family history of neonatal death and pregnancy 
loss clinical exome sequencing was done. It detected a homozygous missense 
variant in exon 6 of the AGK gene suggestive of Senger's syndrome. Baby was on 
regular follow-up and was thriving well on diuretics, sacubitril-valsartan and 
weekly levosimendan infusions. At 8 months of age, cardiac transplantation was 
successfully done and baby has been doing well post-transplantation. LVNC in 
children is rare with an estimated incidence of 0.11 per 100,000, the highest 
incidence being during infancy. Senger's syndrome is autosomal recessive in 
inheritance. Senger's syndrome associated with Left ventricular non compaction 
has been reported only once in literature so far. Renal manifestations in the 
form of horse shoe kidney like in our index baby has not been reported 
previously with Senger's syndrome.

Copyright: © 2024 Annals of Pediatric Cardiology.

DOI: 10.4103/apc.apc_193_23
PMCID: PMC11198940
PMID: 38933059

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.