---
reference_id: "PMID:31323869"
title: Advances in the Development of Antiviral Strategies against Parvovirus B19.
authors:
- Manaresi E
- Gallinella G
journal: Viruses
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/v11070659
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in the Development of Antiviral Strategies against Parvovirus B19.
**Authors:** Manaresi E, Gallinella G
**Journal:** Viruses (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v11070659](https://doi.org/10.3390/v11070659)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2019 Jul 18;11(7):659. doi: 10.3390/v11070659.

Advances in the Development of Antiviral Strategies against Parvovirus B19.

Manaresi E(1), Gallinella G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, I-40138 
Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, I-40138 
Bologna, Italy. giorgio.gallinella@unibo.it.

Parvovirus B19 (B19V) is a human pathogenic virus, responsible for an ample 
range of clinical manifestations. Infections are usually mild, self-limiting, 
and controlled by the development of a specific immune response, but in many 
cases clinical situations can be more complex and require therapy. Presently 
available treatments are only supportive, symptomatic, or unspecific, such as 
administration of intravenous immunoglobulins, and often of limited efficacy. 
The development of antiviral strategies against B19V should be considered of 
highest relevance for increasing the available options for more specific and 
effective therapeutic treatments. This field of research has been explored in 
recent years, registering some achievements as well as interesting future 
perspectives. In addition to immunoglobulins, some compounds have been shown to 
possess inhibitory activity against B19V. Hydroxyurea is an antiproliferative 
drug used in the treatment of sickle-cell disease that also possesses inhibitory 
activity against B19V. The nucleotide analogues Cidofovir and its lipid 
conjugate Brincidofovir are broad-range antivirals mostly active against dsDNA 
viruses, which showed an antiviral activity also against B19V. Newly synthesized 
coumarin derivatives offer possibilities for the development of molecules with 
antiviral activity. Identification of some flavonoid molecules, with direct 
inhibitory activity against the viral non-structural (NS) protein, indicates a 
possible line of development for direct antiviral agents. Continuing research in 
the field, leading to better knowledge of the viral lifecycle and a precise 
understanding of virus-cell interactions, will offer novel opportunities for 
developing more efficient, targeted antiviral agents, which can be translated 
into available therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.3390/v11070659
PMCID: PMC6669595
PMID: 31323869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest