---
reference_id: "PMID:17531174"
title: Antiphospholipid antibodies in response to infection.
authors:
- Avcin T
- Toplak N
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-007-0034-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid antibodies in response to infection.
**Authors:** Avcin T, Toplak N
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-007-0034-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-007-0034-x)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2007 Jun;9(3):212-8. doi: 10.1007/s11926-007-0034-x.

Antiphospholipid antibodies in response to infection.

Avcin T(1), Toplak N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergology, Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University 
Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Ljubljana, Vrazov trg 1, SI-1525 
Ljubljana, Slovenia. tadej.avcin@kclj.si

An association between infections and antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) has been 
reported in several epidemiologic and experimental studies. Infection-induced 
aPL have been traditionally regarded as transient and were generally not 
associated with clinical features of antiphospholipid syndrome. The distinction 
between autoimmune and postinfectious aPL on the basis of requirement of binding 
cofactor is not absolute, and in recent years, several reports demonstrated that 
some patients can produce pathogenic antibodies in response to infection. 
Infections most frequently associated with antiphospholipid syndrome include 
parvovirus B19, cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus, HIV, streptococcal and 
staphylococcal infections, gram-negative bacteria, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-007-0034-x
PMID: 17531174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]