---
reference_id: "PMID:30149958"
title: "The Validity of Drug Effects on Proteinuria, Albuminuria, Serum Creatinine, and Estimated GFR as Surrogate End Points for ESKD: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Palmer SC
- Ruospo M
- Teixeira-Pinto A
- Craig JC
- Macaskill P
- Strippoli GFM
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.06.011
keywords:
- Albuminuria/drug therapy
- Antihypertensive Agents/therapeutic use
- Biomarkers/blood
- Creatinine/blood
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Glomerular Filtration Rate/drug effects
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/blood, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Male
- Prognosis
- Proteinuria/drug therapy
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Reproducibility of Results
- Risk Assessment
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Validity of Drug Effects on Proteinuria, Albuminuria, Serum Creatinine, and Estimated GFR as Surrogate End Points for ESKD: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Palmer SC, Ruospo M, Teixeira-Pinto A, Craig JC, Macaskill P, Strippoli GFM
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.06.011](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.06.011)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2018 Dec;72(6):779-789. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.06.011. Epub
 2018 Aug 24.

The Validity of Drug Effects on Proteinuria, Albuminuria, Serum Creatinine, and 
Estimated GFR as Surrogate End Points for ESKD: A Systematic Review.

Palmer SC(1), Ruospo M(2), Teixeira-Pinto A(3), Craig JC(4), Macaskill P(3), 
Strippoli GFM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(2)Diaverum Medical Scientific Office; Diaverum Academy, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Sydney School of Public Health, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, 
Australia.
(5)Diaverum Medical Scientific Office; Diaverum Academy, Lund, Sweden; Sydney 
School of Public Health, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia; Department of 
Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, Italy. Electronic 
address: gfmstrippoli@gmail.com.

Comment in
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2018 Dec;72(6):771-773. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.08.017.

RATIONALE & OBJECTIVE: Proteinuria, albuminuria, and serum creatinine level are 
widely used as surrogate end point measures of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). 
We evaluated the correlation between antihypertensive drug effects on surrogate 
renal end points and ESKD.
STUDY DESIGN: Systematic review.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: Randomized controlled trials of blood pressure-lowering 
therapy.
SELECTION CRITERIA FOR STUDIES: Trials of pharmacological blood 
pressure-lowering strategies reporting drug effects on albuminuria, proteinuria, 
or serum creatinine level and ESKD through March 26, 2018.
ANALYTICAL APPROACH: Bayesian bivariate meta-analysis to calculate correlations 
between drug effects on surrogate end points and drug effects on ESKD. Risks of 
bias were adjudicated using the Cochrane tool.
RESULTS: 22 randomized controlled trials involving 69,642 participants were 
eligible. Risks of bias in the included trials were frequently unclear due to 
incomplete reporting. Relative risk for ESKD was statistically significant in 1 
of 29 (3.4%) treatment comparisons. There appeared to be little or no 
correlation between antihypertensive drug effects on serum creatinine level, 
albuminuria, proteinuria, and the corresponding effects on ESKD. All 
correlations had wide 95% credible intervals that included the null effect.
LIMITATIONS: Low power due to infrequent outcomes of ESKD and incomplete data 
reporting in primary trials.
CONCLUSIONS: The association between antihypertensive drug effects on doubling 
of serum creatinine level and albuminuria or proteinuria with ESKD in treatment 
trials is not sufficiently certain to enable the confident use of these markers 
to guide clinical or regulatory decision making.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.06.011
PMID: 30149958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]