---
reference_id: "PMID:25422356"
title: MED13-dependent signaling from the heart confers leanness by enhancing metabolism in adipose tissue and liver.
authors:
- Baskin KK
- Grueter CE
- Kusminski CM
- Holland WL
- Bookout AL
- Satapati S
- Kong YM
- Burgess SC
- Malloy CR
- Scherer PE
- Newgard CB
- Bassel-Duby R
- Olson EN
journal: EMBO Mol Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404218
keywords:
- Adipose Tissue/metabolism
- "Adipose Tissue, White/metabolism"
- Animals
- Energy Metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Liver/metabolism
- Male
- "Mediator Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Myocardium/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- "Thinness/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# MED13-dependent signaling from the heart confers leanness by enhancing metabolism in adipose tissue and liver.
**Authors:** Baskin KK, Grueter CE, Kusminski CM, Holland WL, Bookout AL, Satapati S, Kong YM, Burgess SC, Malloy CR, Scherer PE, Newgard CB, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN
**Journal:** EMBO Mol Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.15252/emmm.201404218](https://doi.org/10.15252/emmm.201404218)

## Content

1. EMBO Mol Med. 2014 Dec;6(12):1610-21. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404218.

MED13-dependent signaling from the heart confers leanness by enhancing 
metabolism in adipose tissue and liver.

Baskin KK(1), Grueter CE(2), Kusminski CM(3), Holland WL(3), Bookout AL(1), 
Satapati S(4), Kong YM(1), Burgess SC(4), Malloy CR(5), Scherer PE(6), Newgard 
CB(7), Bassel-Duby R(8), Olson EN(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(3)Touchstone Diabetes Center, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(4)Advanced Imaging Research Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(5)Advanced Imaging Research Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA Department of Radiology, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA Department of Molecular 
Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(6)Touchstone Diabetes Center, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA Department of Cell Biology, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(7)Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and Metabolism Center, Duke University, Durham, 
NC, USA Duke Molecular Physiology Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA 
Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Department of Medicine, Duke 
University, Durham, NC, USA.
(8)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(9)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine, 
Dallas, TX, USA eric.olson@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2014 Dec 03;6(12):1521-4. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404749.

The heart requires a continuous supply of energy but has little capacity for 
energy storage and thus relies on exogenous metabolic sources. We previously 
showed that cardiac MED13 modulates systemic energy homeostasis in mice. Here, 
we sought to define the extra-cardiac tissue(s) that respond to cardiac MED13 
signaling. We show that cardiac overexpression of MED13 in transgenic (MED13cTg) 
mice confers a lean phenotype that is associated with increased lipid uptake, 
beta-oxidation and mitochondrial content in white adipose tissue (WAT) and 
liver. Cardiac expression of MED13 decreases metabolic gene expression in the 
heart but enhances them in WAT. Although exhibiting increased energy expenditure 
in the fed state, MED13cTg mice metabolically adapt to fasting. Furthermore, 
MED13cTg hearts oxidize fuel that is readily available, rendering them more 
efficient in the fed state. Parabiosis experiments in which circulations of 
wild-type and MED13cTg mice are joined, reveal that circulating factor(s) in 
MED13cTg mice promote enhanced metabolism and leanness. These findings 
demonstrate that MED13 acts within the heart to promote systemic energy 
expenditure in extra-cardiac energy depots and point to an unexplored metabolic 
communication system between the heart and other tissues.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/emmm.201404218
PMCID: PMC4287978
PMID: 25422356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Obesity has reached epidemic proportions worldwide and is associated with increased risk of
cardiovascular disease, hypertension, and diabetes, resulting in enhanced morbidity and mortality
(Van Gaal et al, 2006). Obesity is
associated with a variety of abnormalities in metabolic homeostasis, including insulin resistance,
glucose intolerance, hyperlipidemia, and a condition described as “metabolic
inflexibility”, referring to impairment in normal switching from fatty acid to glucose
utilization in the fasted to fed transition (Storlien et al, 2004; Harmancey et al, 2008).

The ability of the body to adapt to metabolic changes in both the fed and fasted states requires
inter-organ communication. While it is well known that adipose tissue communicates in an endocrine
manner with most other organs (Sun et al, 2011; Rosen & Spiegelman, 2014), it is also
becoming clear that such signaling is reciprocal. The heart is particularly interesting with respect
to inter-organ metabolic signaling because it requires a continual supply of energy to sustain
contraction and metabolism, but stores only enough energy for a few heart beats. Under normal
conditions, the heart relies primarily on oxidation of fatty acids delivered via the circulation for
energy and responds to metabolic signals from adipose tissue (Karmazyn
et al, 2008). However, under
conditions of stress, and in the postprandial state, the heart shifts toward glucose metabolism.
Abnormalities in cardiac energy homeostasis, as occur in diabetes and other disorders, correlate
with increased incidence of contractile dysfunction and heart failure (Madrazo & Kelly, 2008).

Recently, we discovered a key role of the Mediator component MED13 in the control of systemic
energy homeostasis from the heart (Grueter et al, 2012). The Mediator complex regulates transcription by bridging the general
transcriptional machinery with specific transcription factors. This complex consists of ˜30
proteins, which exist in two major conformations that differ by the presence or absence of the CDK8
submodule. The CDK8 submodule consists of four proteins, CDK8, cyclin C, MED12, and MED13 (Conaway
& Conaway, 2011). This submodule functions to inhibit
transcription when bound to the core Mediator complex, and by tethering chromatin modifying proteins
and transcriptional elongation factors to sites of transcription initiation (Grueter, 2013). MED13 is especially important in regulating transcription, as
it serves as the molecular bridge between the core Mediator complex and the kinase submodule
(Knuesel et al, 2009).

Our initial studies revealed an unexpected influence of the heart on systemic metabolism (Grueter
et al, 2012). Elevated expression of
MED13 within hearts of transgenic mice confers a lean phenotype with a pronounced reduction in
adipose tissue mass. Conversely, knockdown of Med13 in Drosophila
or cardiac deletion of Med13 in mice enhances susceptibility to diet-induced
obesity (Pospisilik et al, 2010;
Grueter et al, 2012; Lee
et al, 2014). These findings raise
interesting and important questions regarding the mechanism for cardiac control of systemic energy
homeostasis and the tissues responsible for altered energy expenditure in response to cardiac MED13
expression. In the present study, we identify white adipose tissue (WAT) and liver as physiological
targets for MED13-dependent regulation of energy homeostasis by the heart. Elevated expression of
MED13 in the heart enhances metabolic gene expression, mitochondria number and energy consumption in
WAT, and results in changes in metabolite profile and energy consumption in liver. MED13 also
decreases cardiac metabolic gene expression and alters metabolomic profile in the heart and liver.
Although energy expenditure is increased in the fed state, transgenic mice with cardiac
overexpression of MED13 (MED13cTg mice) are metabolically flexible and able to adapt to fasting.
Finally, using heterotypic parabiosis, we demonstrate that circulating factors in MED13cTg mice
regulate WAT and liver metabolism, and wild-type (WT) mice subjected to the lean systemic milieu of
MED13cTg mice acquire an enhanced metabolic phenotype. These results provide evidence that crosstalk
between the heart and energy depots occurs in vivo and suggest that this is
regulated in the heart at the level of transcription by MED13.

Transgenic mice with enhanced cardiac MED13 expression (MED13cTg mice) display a lean phenotype,
have a 15% reduction in fat mass at 12 weeks of age on normal chow compared to WT
mice, and are resistant to diet-induced obesity. Oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production,
measures of energy expenditure, were significantly increased in MED13cTg mice, primarily in the dark
cycle or fed state, with no change in the respiratory exchange ratio, food intake or physical
activity compared to WT littermates (Grueter et al, 2012). Because of the profound effects of cardiac MED13 expression on whole-body
metabolism, we sought to identify the tissue(s) responsible for the enhanced metabolic state of
these animals.

We first analyzed lipid uptake in vivo using
[3H]-triolein tracer studies. MED13cTg mice displayed a 60% increase
in lipid clearance rate compared to WT littermates, measured by decreased
[3H]-triolein in MED13cTg blood (Fig1A). In order to identify the tissue(s) responsible for the enhanced lipid clearance, we
analyzed [3H]-triolein levels in multiple tissues. Lipid uptake in muscle
and most other organs was comparable in WT and MED13cTg mice. In contrast, lipid uptake was
increased in subcutaneous (scWAT), epididymal (eWAT), and mesenteric (mesWAT) white adipose tissue
(WAT) of MED13cTg mice (Fig1B). In the same
[3H]-triolein tracer studies, we also analyzed steady-state lipid oxidation
and observed a significant increase in lipid oxidation in all WAT depots and in liver of MED13cTg
mice (Fig1C). These experiments point to the WAT and liver
as the main non-cardiac tissues responsible for the enhanced metabolic rate we observe in the
MED13cTg mice.

Increased whole-body [3H]-triolein clearance in MED13cTg mice after a
3-h fast.Increased lipid ([3H]-triolein) uptake in MED13cTg white adipose tissue
(WAT) after a 3-h fast.Increased lipid ([3H]-triolein) oxidation in MED13cTg WAT and liver
after a 3-h fast.

Increased whole-body [3H]-triolein clearance in MED13cTg mice after a
3-h fast.

Increased lipid ([3H]-triolein) uptake in MED13cTg white adipose tissue
(WAT) after a 3-h fast.

Increased lipid ([3H]-triolein) oxidation in MED13cTg WAT and liver
after a 3-h fast.

Data information: Data are mean ± SEM, t-test,
n = 8–12.

Studies summarized in Fig1 demonstrate that cardiac
expression of MED13 selectively enhances lipid uptake and metabolism in WAT and liver, whereas other
tissues are insensitive to this signaling mechanism. To further explore the mechanistic basis of the
lean phenotype conferred by cardiac MED13 overexpression, we compared gene expression profiles of
WAT from WT and MED13cTg mice by RNA deep sequencing. Detailed analysis of the gene expression
profiles revealed over 800 significantly upregulated genes in WAT of MED13cTg mice on normal chow.
Strikingly, we discovered concerted upregulation of multiple genes in the fatty acid
β-oxidation pathway and in the Krebs cycle in MED13cTg WAT compared to WAT from WT
littermates (Fig2A and Supplementary Fig S1). These
experiments further confirm the triolein tracer experiments that revealed an increase in
β-oxidation in MED13cTg WAT.

Enhanced expression of genes involved in fatty acid uptake and oxidation and Krebs cycle in
MED13cTg WAT determined by RNA deep sequencing, n = 3.Increased mitochondrial protein expression detected by Western blot analysis in MED13cTg WAT,
n = 3. Data are mean ± SEM,
t-test.Mitochondrial content demonstrated by transmission electron microscopy in MED13cTg WAT. Top scale
bars, 5 μm; bottom scale bars, 1 μm.

Enhanced expression of genes involved in fatty acid uptake and oxidation and Krebs cycle in
MED13cTg WAT determined by RNA deep sequencing, n = 3.

Increased mitochondrial protein expression detected by Western blot analysis in MED13cTg WAT,
n = 3. Data are mean ± SEM,
t-test.

Mitochondrial content demonstrated by transmission electron microscopy in MED13cTg WAT. Top scale
bars, 5 μm; bottom scale bars, 1 μm.

Source data are available online for this figure.

Increased mitochondrial number can enhance energy expenditure. Indeed, transmission electron
microscopy revealed that MED13cTg adipocytes had increased mitochondrial content compared to WT
adipocytes (Fig2C). Markers of the inner and outer
mitochondrial membrane, cytochrome c oxidase or complex IV (COXIV) and voltage-dependent anion
channel (VDAC), respectively, were also increased in MED13cTg WAT as determined by Western blot
(Fig2B). These results indicate that overexpression of MED13
in the heart leads to increased mitochondrial content, and increased expression of oxidative enzymes
in adipose tissue, resulting in an increased rate of fatty acid oxidation.

Although MED13cTg mice display enhanced hepatic lipid oxidation (Fig1C), lipid uptake by the liver was comparable in MED13cTg and WT littermates
(Fig1B). Consequently, hepatic lipid accumulation was
markedly decreased in MED13cTg mice, visualized by reduced oil red O staining of intracellular
lipids (Fig3A). In order to functionally assess changes in
liver metabolism, we analyzed mitochondrial metabolism and function of the electron transport chain
in isolated hepatic mitochondria. Under basal conditions, in the presence of substrates pyruvate and
malate, hepatic mitochondria from MED13cTg mice displayed dramatically higher oxygen consumption
rates (OCR) (Fig3B). Rotenone, an inhibitor of complex I of
the electron transport chain, decreased OCR similarly in both WT and MED13cTg liver mitochondria.
Interestingly, MED13cTg hepatic mitochondria exhibited a higher OCR in response to the complex II
substrate succinate, compared to WT hepatic mitochondria. Finally, while the complex III inhibitor
antimycin A repressed OCR in WT and MED13cTg mitochondria, significant increases in OCRs were
observed in MED13cTg mitochondria in response to the complex IV substrate, ascorbate (Fig3B). These experiments demonstrate that MED13cTg hepatic
mitochondria harbor fully intact and functional electron transport chains, and moreover, exhibit a
higher mitochondrial respiratory capacity in response to a variety of substrates.

ALiver from fed MED13cTg mice on normal chow accumulate less lipids than WT, indicated by
decreased oil red O staining. Top scale bars, 100 μm; bottom scale bars,
20 μm.BMED13cTg liver mitochondria have higher basal oxygen consumption rates, measured using the XF24
Extracellular Flux Analyzer. Data are mean ± SEM, t-test,
n = 5.C–DMED13cTg liver mitochondria have (C) decreased steady-state levels of short, medium, and
long-chain acylcarnitine, and (D) decreased levels of Acyl-CoA species, measured by
metabolomics.

Liver from fed MED13cTg mice on normal chow accumulate less lipids than WT, indicated by
decreased oil red O staining. Top scale bars, 100 μm; bottom scale bars,
20 μm.

MED13cTg liver mitochondria have higher basal oxygen consumption rates, measured using the XF24
Extracellular Flux Analyzer. Data are mean ± SEM, t-test,
n = 5.

MED13cTg liver mitochondria have (C) decreased steady-state levels of short, medium, and
long-chain acylcarnitine, and (D) decreased levels of Acyl-CoA species, measured by
metabolomics.

To gain further insight into metabolic changes caused by cardiac MED13 overexpression, we
measured a large panel of acylcarnitines, acyl-CoAs, amino acids, organic acids (Krebs cycle
intermediates), and ceramides by targeted MS/MS and GC/MS in liver from MED13cTg and WT mice, in the
fed and fasted states. Tissue analyses revealed a very clear difference between MED13cTg and WT
animals that is specific to the fed condition. We observed a pattern of decreased acylcarnitines in
the liver of fed MED13cTg mice (Fig3C). Acyl-CoAs also
tended to decrease in the fed state in MED13cTg compared to WT livers (Fig3D). These changes in the fed state occurred independent of alterations in Krebs
cycle intermediates, suggesting that substrate influx to the Krebs cycle remains adequate to
maintain normal levels of all intermediates (Supplementary Fig S2A). Collectively, these data
indicate that overexpression of MED13 in the heart enhances hepatic lipid metabolism, particularly
in the fed condition.

Given that MED13 is a transcriptional regulator, we investigated cardiac gene expression in
detail, by performing RNA deep sequencing on ventricles isolated from MED13cTg mice. We discovered
that many genes in the fatty acid β-oxidation pathway and in the Krebs cycle were
downregulated in MED13cTg hearts compared to hearts from WT littermates (Fig4A and Supplementary Fig S3A and B).

AExpression of fatty acid oxidation and Krebs cycle genes in MED13cTg heart determined by RNA deep
sequencing, n = 3.B–CMED13cTg hearts have decreased (B) acylcarnitines and (C) long-chain acyl-CoA species in the fed
state, as measured by metabolomics, n = 5.D–FIn conditions simulating the fed state, MED13cTg hearts displayed (D) normal coronary flow rates,
(E) decreased oxygen consumption, and (F) decreased long-chain fatty acid (LCFA) substrate oxidation
rates, as determined by Langendorff heart perfusions and 13C NMR analysis,
n = 4–6.G–IIn conditions simulating the fasted state, MED13cTg hearts displayed (G) normal coronary flow
rates, (H) increased oxygen consumption, and (I) increased endogenous substrate oxidation, as
determined by Langendorff heart perfusions and 13C NMR analysis.JIn conditions simulating the fed state, when glucose is readily available, the oxidation ratio
shifts towards a preference for glucose in MED13cTg hearts. In conditions simulating the fasted
state, when LCFAs are more readily available, oxidation ratios are similar in WT and MED13cTg
hearts, n = 4–6. Data information: Data are mean ± SEM, t-test.

Expression of fatty acid oxidation and Krebs cycle genes in MED13cTg heart determined by RNA deep
sequencing, n = 3.

MED13cTg hearts have decreased (B) acylcarnitines and (C) long-chain acyl-CoA species in the fed
state, as measured by metabolomics, n = 5.

In conditions simulating the fed state, MED13cTg hearts displayed (D) normal coronary flow rates,
(E) decreased oxygen consumption, and (F) decreased long-chain fatty acid (LCFA) substrate oxidation
rates, as determined by Langendorff heart perfusions and 13C NMR analysis,
n = 4–6.

In conditions simulating the fasted state, MED13cTg hearts displayed (G) normal coronary flow
rates, (H) increased oxygen consumption, and (I) increased endogenous substrate oxidation, as
determined by Langendorff heart perfusions and 13C NMR analysis.

In conditions simulating the fed state, when glucose is readily available, the oxidation ratio
shifts towards a preference for glucose in MED13cTg hearts. In conditions simulating the fasted
state, when LCFAs are more readily available, oxidation ratios are similar in WT and MED13cTg
hearts, n = 4–6.

To determine the functional consequence of decreased metabolic gene expression, we investigated
cardiac metabolism using Langendorff heart perfusions to quantify substrate utilization in the
heart. We first verified that the exogenous substrates provided to the heart in perfusion
experiments were within the physiological range detected in WT and MED13cTg mouse serum. The
concentrations of glucose, free fatty acids, triglycerides, and ketones were the same in WT and
MED13cTg serum in the postprandial state (Supplementary Fig S3D). We perfused hearts under
conditions that simulated the fed state with Krebs buffer supplemented with
[1,6-13C] 10 mM glucose and uniformly labeled
[U-13C] 0.1 mM long-chain fatty acids (LCFA) in the presence of
insulin. Throughout the 60-min perfusion experiments, we did not detect differences in coronary flow
rates (Fig4D), but oxygen consumption rates (OCR) were
decreased in MED13cTg hearts (Fig4E), suggesting that
substrate utilization is either decreased or altered in MED13cTg hearts in the fed state.

Substrate oxidation was determined by 13C-NMR analysis of perfused hearts; a
representative 13C-NMR spectra is provided in Supplementary Fig S3E. In the fed state,
oxidation of exogenous uniformly labeled [U-13C] long-chain fatty acids was
decreased in MED13cTg hearts, while oxidation of exogenous [1,6-13C]
glucose and endogenous substrate(s) was similar in WT and MED13cTg hearts (Fig4F). Thus, when perfused under the fed-like state in the presence of insulin, a
higher concentration of glucose and lower concentration of LCFA, MED13cTg hearts consume less oxygen
than WT hearts as a result of oxidizing less fatty acids. These results suggest that hearts from
MED13cTg mice prefer to oxidize substrate that is more readily available.

In a separate set of experiments, we perfused hearts under conditions that simulate the fasted
state with Krebs buffer supplemented with [1,6-13C] 8 mM glucose and
uniformly labeled [U-13C] 0.4 mM long-chain fatty acids. As in the
fed state, we did not detect differences in coronary flow rates (Fig4G), but oxygen consumption rates (OCR) were increased in MED13cTg hearts (Fig4H), indicating that substrate utilization is increased in
MED13cTg hearts in the fasted state. Although we were unable to detect changes in oxidation of
exogenous [1,6-13C] glucose and uniformly labeled
[U-13C] long-chain fatty acids, determined by 13C-NMR analysis
of perfused hearts, oxidation of endogenous substrate(s) was significantly increased in MED13cTg
hearts in the fasted-like state (Fig4I).

To gain insight into the possible endogenous substrates utilized by MED13cTg hearts, we performed
metabolomics on ventricles isolated from WT and MED13cTg mice, in the fed and fasted states. We
observed dramatic decreases in a large array of acylcarnitine species in fed MED13cTg compared to
fed WT hearts (Fig4B), while there was a trend of increased
long-chain acylcarnitine species in fasted MED13cTg compared to fasted WT hearts (Fig5D and Supplementary Table S3). A similar but less dramatic
decline was also observed in medium, long-chain, and very long-chain acyl-CoAs in hearts from fed
MED13cTg compared to fed WT mice (Fig4C), whereas there was
a trend of increased long-chain and very long-chain acyl-CoAs in fasted MED13cTg compared to fasted
WT hearts (Supplementary Fig S4A and Supplementary Table S4). Thus, in the fed state, metabolic gene
expression is decreased in MED13cTg hearts, long-chain fatty acid utilization is decreased, and
there is a decrease in accumulation of intermediates of fatty acid metabolism. However, in MED13cTg
hearts in the fasted state, endogenous substrate utilization is increased and there is a trend of
increased accumulation of intermediates of fatty acid metabolism. These results demonstrate that
MED13 plays a central role in the regulation of cardiac metabolism by increasing utilization of fuel
that is most readily available with alternating nutrient states (Fig4J).

A–CNon-esterified free fatty acids (NEFA) (A), triglycerides (B), and glucose levels (C) in serum
from fed and fasted mice.D–FAcylcarnitine species in (D) heart, (E) liver, and (F) serum from fed and fasted mice.G–IAmino acids in (G) serum, (H) liver, and (I) heart from fed and fasted mice,
n = 5. Data information: Data are mean ± SEM, two-way ANOVA followed by
Tukey's test, *P < 0.05 TG fed versus WT fed,
#P < 0.05 fed versus fasted.

Non-esterified free fatty acids (NEFA) (A), triglycerides (B), and glucose levels (C) in serum
from fed and fasted mice.

Acylcarnitine species in (D) heart, (E) liver, and (F) serum from fed and fasted mice.

Amino acids in (G) serum, (H) liver, and (I) heart from fed and fasted mice,
n = 5.

Inter-organ communication is required to orchestrate an adaptive response to metabolic stress
such as starvation. Short-term fasting (< 24 h) mobilizes triglyceride stores
from adipose tissue, resulting in increased circulating fatty acids. Some of the fatty acids are
taken up by the liver, converted to acetyl CoA, and then either oxidized or secreted into the blood
in the form of ketone bodies. Hepatic glycogenolysis supplies the brain with glucose, and muscle
supplies gluconeogenic amino acids for hepatic gluconeogenesis (Cahill, 1976). Because metabolism is enhanced and triglyceride storage is diminished in
MED13cTg mice, we investigated whether these mice were still able to adapt to short-term metabolic
stress.

We first investigated circulating levels of non-esterified free fatty acids (NEFA),
triglycerides, and glucose in MED13cTg mice after an overnight fast (about 18 h). There was
no significant difference in NEFA, triglycerides, or glucose or in MED13cTg serum in the fed or
fasted state (Fig5A–C). Even though MED13cTg mice
display enhanced metabolic rates in the fed state, NEFA levels were still increased after fasting
(Fig5A). Additionally, serum triglycerides and glucose
levels decreased in fasted MED13cTg mice, to comparable levels seen in WT serum (Fig5B and C).

Remarkably, levels of medium, long-chain, and very long-chain acylcarnitine species that fell
precipitously in liver and heart of fed MED13cTg mice (Fig5D
and E, Supplementary Tables S1 and S3) were maintained at the same levels in the serum of fed
MED13cTg and WT mice (Fig5F, Supplementary Table S5). Clear
increases in circulating acylcarnitines were observed in response to fasting in both WT and MED13cTg
mice, suggesting normal switching of tissues from glucose to lipid metabolism in response to dietary
status in MED13cTg mice. With regard to the other analyte modules, Krebs cycle intermediates were
not different in MED13cTg compared to WT mice in either the fed or fasted states, in heart or in
liver (Supplementary Fig S2A and B). This suggests that despite the large decreases in lipid-derived
acylcarnitine and acyl-CoA intermediates, substrate influx to the Krebs cycle remains adequate to
maintain normal levels of all intermediates.

Similarly, no genotype or diet differences were noted in the levels of most ceramide species,
with the following exceptions. In liver, C16, C18, C20, C26:1, and d18:1/C26 ceramides were
decreased in fed MED13cTg versus fed WT mice, whereas these analytes were not different when
comparing livers from fasted MED13cTg and WT mice (Supplementary Fig S2C). Interestingly, C16, C18,
and C20 ceramides showed a trend to increase in hearts of fed MED13cTg versus fed WT mice, with few
changes in the other ceramide species in fed or fasted mice (Supplementary Fig S2D). Amino acid
profiling revealed increases in the branched chain amino acids valine, leucine, and isoleucine, and
neutral amino acids, proline and methionine in heart samples from fed MED13cTg mice compared to fed
WT mice; however, these metabolites were not different in hearts in the fasted state (FigI). These same amino acids were elevated in serum of fed MED13cTg
compared to fed WT mice (Fig5G). Changes in these
metabolites were not evident in liver in the fed or fasted states, but the urea cycle intermediate
ornithine was elevated in fed MED13cTg mice compared to fed WT mice (Fig5H). Interestingly, propionyl CoA, a product of methionine, valine, and
isoleucine catabolism, was elevated in heart (Supplementary Fig S4A, Supplementary Table S2) and
liver (Supplementary Fig S4B, Supplementary Table S4) of fed MED13cTg mice compared to fed WT mice.
Additionally, C5 acylcarnitine, also a product of BCAA catabolism, was increased in plasma of
MED13cTg mice (Fig5F). These findings may suggest that amino
acid mobilization and utilization contribute to maintenance of metabolic homeostasis and normal
levels of Krebs cycle intermediates in MED13cTg mice.

We interpret these metabolic signatures to mean that expression of MED13 in the heart regulates
not only cardiac metabolism, but also whole-body metabolic homeostasis. Normally, feeding causes
lowering of circulating fatty acid levels, in part via suppression of lipolysis, and this coupled
with a rise in glucose-derived malonyl CoA, a potent allosteric inhibitor of CPT1, causes fatty acid
oxidation to be decreased. Our metabolic profiling shows that MED13cTg fed mice experience a
significant decline in a broad array of intermediates of fatty acid oxidation (acyl-CoAs and
acylcarnitines), particularly in heart. Indeed, we observed a decrease in oxygen consumption and
long-chain fatty acid oxidation in hearts of MED13cTg mice in the fed state. Decreased fatty acid
oxidation in the fed state in MED13cTg mice, however, does not appear to involve a surfeit of
malonyl CoA, as direct measurements of malonyl CoA levels by LC-MS/MS in fed MED13cTg compared to WT
hearts revealed no differences in this important CPT1 allosteric inhibitor (Supplementary Fig S3F).
The decrease in heart and liver acylcarnitines and acyl-CoAs that we observed is not due to
substrate depletion, as the levels of circulating FFA are not different in fed MED13cTg compared to
fed WT mice. Our studies imply potential compensation of non-cardiac tissues to counter the depleted
acyl-CoA and acylcarnitine pool in the heart, as suggested by maintenance of normal circulating
levels of acylcarnitines. Recent studies have indicated that circulating acylcarnitines can serve as
an important fuel in sustained exercise (Seiler et al, 2014), and their increased release by liver and heart may be a mechanism that
allows sustained cardiac function under conditions of substrate pool depletion.

To explore how metabolic homeostasis is regulated and to investigate inter-organ communication in
MED13cTg mice, we tested whether circulating factors in MED13cTg mice regulate metabolism in
extra-cardiac energy depots. We performed isotypic (WT-WT and TG-TG) and heterotypic (WT-TG)
parabiosis experiments with WT and MED13cTg (TG) mice (Supplementary Fig S5). Male mice were
surgically conjoined at 4 weeks of age, allowed 2 weeks to adapt and recover from
surgery, and followed for an additional 5 weeks. All parabiotic mouse pairs gained weight
over time; however, the WT-TG heterotypic parabiotic pairs weighed significantly less than the WT-WT
isotypic pairs (Fig6A). Because TG mice weigh less than WT
mice (Grueter et al, 2012), we
determined individual parabiot weights throughout the course of the experiment by weighing conjoined
mice on conjoined scales. While heterotypic TG parabiots (designated as TG-WT, shown in blue)
weighed the same as isotypic TG parabiots (designated as TG-TG, shown in red), heterotypic WT
parabiots (designated as WT-TG, shown in green) weighed significantly less than isotypic WT
parabiots (designated as WT-WT, shown in black) (Fig6B,
Supplementary Fig S5). These results demonstrate that WT mice acquire a lean systemic milieu when
subjected to heterotypic parabiosis and suggest that circulating factor(s) in MED13cTg mice are, at
least in part, responsible for the lean phenotype.

AHeterotypic parabiotic pairs gain less weight than isotypic WT parabiotic pairs.BHeterotypic TG parabiots weigh the same as isotypic TG parabiots, while heterotypic WT parabiots
weigh significantly less than isotypic WT parabiots.CSchematic of isotypic and heterotypic parabiosis.D,EExpression of (D) fatty acid oxidation genes and (E) Krebs cycle genes in WAT of parabiots as
determined by qPCR. 18S rRNA was used for normalization.F,GOxygen consumption is significantly increased in mitochondria isolated from (F) WAT and (G) liver
of isotypic TG and heterotypic TG and WT parabiots, n = 6 pair
(12 mice) per group.HCardiac MED13 increases lipid uptake in adipose tissue, and increases lipid oxidation and
decreases lipid storage in both adipose tissue and liver. Inter-organ communication in MED13cTg mice
is controlled by circulating factors that enhance WAT and liver metabolism resulting in a lean
phenotype. Data information: Data are mean ± SEM, two-way ANOVA followed by
Dunnett's test, *P < 0.05 versus isotypic WT-WT
parabiots.

Heterotypic parabiotic pairs gain less weight than isotypic WT parabiotic pairs.

Heterotypic TG parabiots weigh the same as isotypic TG parabiots, while heterotypic WT parabiots
weigh significantly less than isotypic WT parabiots.

Schematic of isotypic and heterotypic parabiosis.

Expression of (D) fatty acid oxidation genes and (E) Krebs cycle genes in WAT of parabiots as
determined by qPCR. 18S rRNA was used for normalization.

Oxygen consumption is significantly increased in mitochondria isolated from (F) WAT and (G) liver
of isotypic TG and heterotypic TG and WT parabiots, n = 6 pair
(12 mice) per group.

Cardiac MED13 increases lipid uptake in adipose tissue, and increases lipid oxidation and
decreases lipid storage in both adipose tissue and liver. Inter-organ communication in MED13cTg mice
is controlled by circulating factors that enhance WAT and liver metabolism resulting in a lean
phenotype.

To determine how circulating factors in MED13cTg mice regulate body weight of WT mice, we
investigated WAT and liver of parabiots, the tissues largely responsible for enhanced metabolic rate
in MED13cTg mice. We quantified gene expression in WAT of isotypic and heterotypic parabiots and
discovered that 7 weeks of conjoined circulation leads to remodeling of the genetic
signatures in WAT. Expression of fatty acid oxidation genes (Fig6D) and Krebs cycle genes (Fig6E) were significantly
increased in isotypic TG WAT, similar to what we observed in MED13cTg WAT by RNA-seq (Fig2). Fatty acid oxidation and Krebs cycle genes remain highly
expressed in WAT of heterotypic TG parabiots and are even more highly expressed in WAT of
heterotypic WT parabiots (Fig6D and E). These results
indicate that circulating factors in MED13cTg mice regulate metabolic gene expression in WAT.

We then investigated the metabolic consequences of enhanced gene expression by measuring
metabolic rates in WAT and liver in parabiots. We isolated mitochondria from isotypic and
heterotypic parabiot WAT and liver and quantified oxygen consumption rates (OCR). Under basal
conditions, in the presence of substrates pyruvate and malate, adipose and hepatic mitochondria from
isotypic and heterotypic TG parabiots displayed dramatically higher oxygen consumption rates than
isotypic WT parabiots (Fig6F and G), similar to what we
found in MED13cTg hepatic mitochondria (Fig3B). Furthermore,
adipose and hepatic mitochondria from heterotypic WT parabiots had markedly enhanced basal OCR,
demonstrating that circulating factors regulate not only metabolic gene expression, but also
metabolic rates in WAT and liver. Additionally, adipose and hepatic mitochondria from heterotypic WT
parabiots responded to substrates and inhibitors of the electron transport chain in a similar manner
as mitochondria from isotypic and heterotypic TG parabiots (Fig6F and G). These experiments demonstrate that adipose and hepatic mitochondria from all
parabiots harbor fully intact and functional electron transport chains. Moreover, WAT and liver from
heterotypic WT parabiots metabolically remodel when subjected to the lean systemic milieu of
MED13cTg mice. Taken together, these results provide strong evidence that circulating factors in
MED13cTg mice are responsible for regulating WAT and liver metabolism and ultimately a lean
phenotype.

The results of this study demonstrate that elevation of MED13 expression in the mouse heart
enhances metabolic rates and mitochondrial content of WAT and liver, resulting in a lean phenotype,
with distinct changes in metabolic profile that are most pronounced in the fed state. These
findings, to our knowledge, are the first to document a metabolic response of peripheral tissues to
a transcriptional program emanating from the heart. While lipid metabolism is enhanced in adipose
tissue of MED13cTg mice, which are lean, these mice are insulin sensitive (Grueter
et al, 2012). Thus, their enhanced
adipose lipid metabolism is not indicative of an insulin-resistant or pathological state.

Cardiac MED13 overexpression also regulates substrate oxidation in the heart. Hearts from
MED13cTg mice oxidize substrate that is more readily available. In the fed state, when glucose
levels are high, more glucose is oxidized, but MED13cTg hearts can still oxidize LCFA in the fasted
state. Although pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) gene expression is decreased in MED13cTg hearts,
glucose oxidation is not decreased, suggesting that other compensatory modes of PDH regulation (such
as allosteric regulation by acetyl CoA, NADH, and ATP, or post-translational regulation by
phosphorylation or dephosphorylation) are invoked. These results indicate that MED13cTg hearts are
metabolically flexible, rather than reverting to a pathologic, glucose-dependent metabolic
state.

In-depth metabolomic profiling of tissues and serum from MED13cTg mice revealed profound
decreases in acylcarnitines and acyl-CoA species in heart and liver in the fed state, without
changes in serum acylcarnitine species. However, we did not observe significant differences in liver
and hearts from fasting mice. This data, coupled with no changes in Krebs cycle intermediary
metabolites in the fed or fasted state, suggest that MED13cTg mice are metabolically flexible and
display normal substrate switching from glucose to lipid metabolism in response to fasting. The
metabolomic profiling also suggests an increased reliance on amino acid metabolism in the MED13TG
mice to help maintain fuel homeostasis.

Although basal metabolic rates are increased in MED13cTg mice (Grueter
et al, 2012), specifically in adipose
tissue and liver, our results demonstrate that glucose and fatty acid metabolism are unchanged in
skeletal muscle (Fig1). Skeletal muscle is responsible for
30–40% of resting metabolic rate (Zurlo et al, 1990), and consequently, lean phenotypes of many mouse models have
been attributed to enhanced muscle metabolism (Reitman, 2002;
Gilliam & Neufer, 2012). Furthermore, muscle can supply
metabolites required for adaptation during times of nutrient stress such as fasting (Koves
et al, 2008). Fasting serum
metabolomics profiling data suggest that skeletal muscle from MED13cTg mice adapts to fasting
comparably to WT muscle.

Parabiosis experiments demonstrate that circulating factors in MED13cTg mice regulate weight
gain, intra-organ metabolism, and perhaps inter-organ metabolic communication (Fig6). Remarkably, the lean systemic milieu of MED13cTg mice is able
to metabolically remodel WAT, liver and essentially whole-body metabolism in WT mice. Key metabolic
hormones that regulate metabolism such as adiponectin, thyroxine (T4), and corticosterone are not
altered in MED13cTg mice (Supplementary Fig S4). Additionally, epinephrine, norepinephrine,
dopamine, and their metabolites 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC), 3-methoxytyramine (3-MT),
and homovanillic acid (HVA) were below levels of detection in WT and MED13cTg serum, suggesting that
these circulating compounds are also not responsible for the lean phenotype of the MED13cTg mouse.
Furthermore, while we observed increased gene expression of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP,
Nppb) and atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP, Nppa) in the ventricles
of MED13cTg hearts (Supplementary Fig S3), circulating levels of ANP and BNP are most likely not
critical in metabolic regulation of MED13cTg mice (Supplementary Fig S4) due to the absence of a
corresponding increase in NEFA (Fig5A) (Bordicchia
et al, 2012).

The results presented here indicate that circulating factors regulate metabolism in MED13cTg
mice; however, we are still investigating specific mechanisms and molecules that are responsible for
this regulation. Our data are compatible with a model in which a primary action of MED13 expression
is to regulate fatty acid oxidation in the heart, resulting in secondary metabolic adaptations in
liver and adipose, including increased lipid and amino acid mobilization from those depots. It is
also conceivable that the heart releases metabolites that signal to peripheral tissues to control
metabolism. Indeed, it was recently reported that possible metabolic crosstalk exists between heart
and liver in the setting of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Magida & Leinwand, 2014). Such mechanisms could be mediated by yet unidentified
circulating factors, including those not measured with the current targeted metabolomics approach
(Fig6H).

Several components of the Mediator complex have been implicated in the regulation of metabolism.
For example, MED1 regulates glucose homeostasis (Chen et al, 2010), and MED23 regulates insulin signaling (Wang
et al, 2009). Several Mediator
subunits regulate lipid metabolism as well, including MED15, CDK8, and cyclin C (Yang
et al, 2006; Zhao
et al, 2012; Zhang
et al, 2013). MED13 is the only
Mediator subunit examined thus far with respect to a potential metabolic role specifically in the
heart. Thus, it will be interesting to determine whether other subunits exert similar cardiac
functions and whether MED13 exerts similar metabolic functions in noncardiac tissues.

All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at UT
Southwestern Medical Center. Animals were housed in a pathogen-free barrier facility with a 12-h
light/dark cycle and maintained on standard chow (2916 Teklad Global). MED13cTg and WT littermates
were generated as previously described, and backcrossed into C57Bl6 for at least 10 generations
(Grueter et al, 2012). Male mice aged
6–8 weeks were used for all experiments except for the parabiosis experiments, and the
number of animals used is specified in the figure legends. Tissue was taken in the fed state except
when mentioned otherwise.

Experiments to determine tissue-specific uptake and oxidation of
[3H]-triolein were performed as previously described (Kusminski
et al, 2012). Briefly,
[3H]-triolein (2 μCi per mouse in 100 μl of
5% intralipid) was injected into the mouse tail vein after a 3-h fast. Blood samples were
collected at 1, 2, 5, 10, and 15 min after injection. Mice were euthanized 20 min
after injection; blood samples and tissues were excised, weighed, and frozen at −80°C
until processing. Lipids were extracted, and radioactivity content of blood and tissues was
quantified.

RNA was isolated from adipose tissue and both ventricles of WT and MED13cTg mice using
TRIzol™ according to the manufacturer's instructions. Total RNA (10 ng) was
submitted for transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq). Data analysis was performed using the software
suite TopHat and Cufflink with default settings (Trapnell et al, 2012). Data have been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression
Omnibus and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE62450.

Tissues were fixed by perfusion with 4% paraformaldehyde and 1% glutaraldehyde in
0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer. Fixed tissues were post-fixed, stained, dehydrated, and
embedded in EDbed-812 resin. Tissue sections were cut and post-stained, and images were acquired on
a FEI Tecnai G2 Spirit TEM.

Protein was isolated from homogenized adipose tissue in modified RIPA buffer. 10 μg of
protein was loaded per sample, and proteins were detected using specific antibodies.

Liver was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, sectioned, and stained with oil red O.

Oxygen consumption rates (OCR) were determined using the XF24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer
(Seahorse Bioscience) according to the manufacturer's instructions and as previously
described (Kusminski et al, 2012).
Briefly, mitochondria were isolated from WT and MED13cTg WAT and liver and seeded
(5 μg per well) in 1× MAS buffer (70 mM sucrose, 220 mM mannitol,
10 mM KH2PO4, 5 mM HEPES, and 1 mM EDTA in 0.2%
fatty-acid-free BSA). Basal OCR was measured after 10 min equilibration at 37°C.
Subsequent OCR were determined after the addition of rotenone (2 μM final
concentration), succinate (10 mM), antimycin A (4 μM), and ascorbate
(10 mM containing 1 mM TMPD).

Serum, liver, and both heart ventricles were collected from WT and MED13cTg mice in the
ad libitum fed state and after an overnight fast (˜18 h) and
snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen until processing. Tissue was pulverized under liquid nitrogen and
processed for metabolomics analysis as previously described (An et al, 2004; Koves et al, 2008).

Hearts from WT and MED13cTg mice were quickly excised and arrested in ice-cold saline. Aortas
were cannulated for retrograde perfusion with Krebs buffer supplemented with uniformly labeled
long-chain fatty acids ([U-13C] FA, 0.1 mM, or 0.4 mM) bound
to BSA and [1,6-13C] 10 mM or 8 mM glucose with or without
insulin (10 mU/ml). A pressure transducer was placed into the left ventricle to monitor
cardiac performance throughout the perfusion protocol. Hearts were perfused for 60 min and
coronary flow samples taken every 15 min for oxygen consumption measurements. After
60 min of perfusion, hearts were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen hearts were
freeze-dried, hydrated, and pulverized in 4% perchloric acid. The organic phase was collected
and used for substrate utilization determination by 13C-NMR as previous described (Stowe
et al, 2006).

Trunk blood was collected from male mice in the ad libitum fed state and after
an overnight fast (˜18 h), and serum was used for the following measurements.
Non-esterified free fatty acids (NEFA) and glucose levels were quantified using colorimetric assays
(Wako Diagnostics). Thyroxine (T4) and corticosterone were measured with radioimmunoassays (RIA, MP
Biomedicals), and BNP and ANP were measured with enzyme immunoassays (EIA,
Sigma-Aldrich®).

Male mouse littermates were surgically conjoined at 4 weeks of age. The method used was a
modified protocol from Bunster and Meyer (1933) and Wright
et al (2001). Briefly, a longitudinal
incision was made on anesthetized mice from the base of the tail to just posterior to the ear, and
the dorsal skin from each mouse and the ventral skin from each mouse were sutured to conjoin two
mice. Isotypic and heterotypic parabiots were weighed weekly, and 7 weeks post-surgery
tissues were harvested for mitochondrial isolation or snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and processed
for further analysis.

All data are expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM).
Unpaired Student's t-test or two-way ANOVA with the appropriate post
hoc test was performed to determine statistical significance, and the analysis is specified
in the figure legends. A P < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.