---
reference_id: "PMID:27060064"
title: Systematic review of case reports of antiphospholipid syndrome following infection.
authors:
- Abdel-Wahab N
- Lopez-Olivo MA
- Pinto-Patarroyo GP
- Suarez-Almazor ME
journal: Lupus
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1177/0961203316640912
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Anticardiolipin/blood"
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/complications, epidemiology"
- Bacterial Infections/epidemiology
- HIV Infections/epidemiology
- Hepatitis C/epidemiology
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin Isotypes
- Mycoses/epidemiology
- Parasitic Diseases/epidemiology
- Virus Diseases/epidemiology
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Systematic review of case reports of antiphospholipid syndrome following infection.
**Authors:** Abdel-Wahab N, Lopez-Olivo MA, Pinto-Patarroyo GP, Suarez-Almazor ME
**Journal:** Lupus (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0961203316640912](https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203316640912)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2016 Dec;25(14):1520-1531. doi: 10.1177/0961203316640912. Epub 2016 Apr
 7.

Systematic review of case reports of antiphospholipid syndrome following 
infection.

Abdel-Wahab N(1)(2), Lopez-Olivo MA(1), Pinto-Patarroyo GP(3), Suarez-Almazor 
ME(4).

Author information:
(1)Section of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Department of General 
Internal Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
TX, USA.
(2)Rheumatology and Rehabilitation Department, Assiut University Hospitals, 
Assiut, Egypt.
(3)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Section of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Department of General 
Internal Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
TX, USA msalmazor@mdanderson.org.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to conduct a systematic review of 
case reports documenting the development of antiphospholipid syndrome or 
antiphospholipid syndrome-related features after an infection.
METHODS: We searched Medline, EMBASE, Web of Science, PubMed ePubs, and The 
Cochrane Library - CENTRAL through March 2015 without restrictions. Studies 
reporting cases of antiphospholipid syndrome or antiphospholipid 
syndrome-related features following an infection were included.
RESULTS: Two hundred and fifty-nine publications met inclusion criteria, 
reporting on 293 cases. Three different groups of patients were identified; 
group 1 included patients who fulfilled the criteria for definitive 
antiphospholipid syndrome (24.6%), group 2 included patients who developed 
transient antiphospholipid antibodies with thromboembolic phenomena (43.7%), and 
group 3 included patients who developed transient antiphospholipid antibodies 
without thromboembolic events (31.7%). The most common preceding infection was 
viral (55.6%). In cases that developed thromboembolic events Human 
immunodeficiency and Hepatitis C viruses were the most frequently reported. 
Parvovirus B19 was the most common in cases that developed antibodies without 
thromboembolic events. Hematological manifestations and peripheral thrombosis 
were the most common clinical manifestations. Positive anticardiolipin 
antibodies were the most frequent antibodies reported, primarily coexisting IgG 
and IgM isotypes. Few patients in groups 1 and 2 had persistent antiphospholipid 
antibodies for more than 6 months. Outcome was variable with some cases 
reporting persistent antiphospholipid syndrome features and others achieving 
complete resolution of clinical events.
CONCLUSIONS: Development of antiphospholipid antibodies with all traditional 
manifestations of antiphospholipid syndrome were observed after variety of 
infections, most frequently after chronic viral infections with Human 
immunodeficiency and Hepatitis C. The causal relationship between infection and 
antiphospholipid syndrome cannot be established, but the possible contribution 
of various infections in the pathogenesis of antiphospholipid syndrome need 
further longitudinal and controlled studies to establish the incidence, and 
better quantify the risk and the outcomes of antiphospholipid-related events 
after infection.

© The Author(s) 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203316640912
PMCID: PMC7508159
PMID: 27060064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is a systemic autoimmune disease with persistent elevation of antiphospholipid (aPL) antibodies that can result in recurrent thromboembolic events, and pregnancy-related morbidity with recurrent fetal losses.(1) The disease may be life-threatening with multiple organ failure in about 1% of cases, who develop catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome (CAPS).(2)

The reported prevalence of elevated aPL antibodies, mainly anticardiolipin (aCL) and lupus anticoagulant (LA), among healthy individuals is 1–5%; higher among elderly individuals with chronic diseases. It is not clear how many people with elevated aPL antibodies develop APS.(3–7) APS often occurs in association with other autoimmune diseases, most commonly systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).(2)

The molecular pathogenesis of APS is complex, and environmental triggers may play a crucial role in genetically predisposed individuals.(8) APS may occur in association with an infection or malignancy, or may be induced by certain drugs (e.g., interferon-alpha).(9) The pathogenesis of these associations is unclear.(10) Molecular mimicry with shared genetic epitopes with infectious agents has been proposed as a possible mechanism.(11, 12) Previous studies suggested that infection may lead to the development of transiently elevated non-thrombogenic aPL antibodies lacking anti-β2 glycoprotein-I (anti-β2 GPI) activity.(13, 14) However, there are increasing case reports of patients with various types of infections who develop aPL antibodies and thromboembolic events.

We conducted a systematic review of all such reported cases in the literature to summarize existing evidence. Although a systematic review of case reports cannot support causality between infection and APS, it can identify unrecognized or rare associations, and can generate hypotheses for subsequent studies. Our objective was to identify potentially putative infections identified in the literature in association with APS, and to describe related clinical and immunologic features.

We searched electronic databases (Medline, EMBASE, Web of Science, PubMed ePubs, and The Cochrane Library - CENTRAL) with no language restrictions, from inception through March 2015 to identify case reports of patients with elevated aPL antibodies after an infection. References of included articles were also searched manually. Search terms are provided in Appendix 1.

The screening of eligible publications was carried out independently by two raters. First, the titles and abstracts of all citations were reviewed. Next, the full text of potentially relevant citations was reviewed. Discrepancies were resolved by consensus. Cases were only included if they reported patients with a history of infection that was diagnosed before elevated aPL antibodies were identified in those patients, whether or not they had APS-related clinical features. We considered any type of infection as long as the infectious agent was identified. To meet the definition of aPL antibodies elevation, one positive laboratory test either LA, aCL, or anti-β2 GPI antibodies after a prior diagnosis of infection was required. For the diagnosis of APS, infection must be followed by thromboembolic manifestations (arterial or venous), or pregnancy-related complications, with persistent elevation of aPL antibodies that remained positive for at least 12 weeks.(1) Diagnosis of CAPS was considered when the authors of the reported cases considered the diagnosis of CAPS, or when thromboembolic events developed in three or more organs simultaneously with persistent aPL antibodies positivity and small vessels occlusion confirmed by biopsy.(15) A time frame was not chosen between the earlier diagnosis of infection and the subsequent recognition of aPL antibodies positivity as there are no published validated criteria to define this time window. Nevertheless, studies were excluded if they reported patients with APS diagnosed before the infection was acquired, or coexisted with the diagnosis of infection. Studies were also excluded if they reported patients with a definite history of SLE diagnosed prior to APS or infection.

Data was extracted by one reviewer and crosschecked by another. Data from articles published in languages other than English were extracted by physician collaborators proficient in the original language (Chinese, Japanese, Spanish, French, and Germany). We extracted data on the potentially putative infections (whether viral, bacterial, fungal, or parasitic), clinical presentation following infection and prior comorbidities, laboratory abnormalities, aPL antibodies elevation (whether LA, aCL, or anti-β2 GPI antibodies), aPL antibodies positivity (whether persistent or transient), treatment required and patient outcomes.

We used a modified version of a tool for quality appraisal of case reports.(16) The assessment was carried out by one investigator and a random sample was crosschecked by another. For articles published in languages other than English only one reviewer performed the assessment. We used four items: i) patient was described adequately (i.e., chief complaint, history, clinical and laboratory evaluations, treatments), ii) an accurate diagnosis was provided (i.e., valid and reliable outcome measures were utilized), iii) convincing evidence in support of the diagnosis was presented (i.e., according to the criteria for diagnosis of APS/CAPS, or describing the evidence for diagnosis), and iv) alternate explanations were considered and refuted (differential diagnosis was illustrated and scientifically excluded, or underlying possible mechanisms that could explain the finding were addressed). Possible item ratings were yes, partially, or no.

Data were summarized using descriptive statistics, with means and standard deviations for continuous variables and frequencies and percentages for dichotomous variables.

A total of 2,510 unique citations were initially retrieved (Figure 1). We identified 358 citations as potentially relevant and reviewed the full publication. We excluded 29 publications reporting cases in which no proof that infection preceded the development of APS, 57 publications reporting cases in which diagnosis of APS preceded the infection, 9 publications were not retrievable, and 4 Russian language publications as we were unable to translate them. We included 259 publications (reporting on 293 cases where clinical description of each reported case was provided separately). Bibliographic references for the case reports are included in Appendix 2. Cases from the United States were most common (20.5%), followed by Spain (14.7%), and France (12.6%).

The overall quality of the cases was good to moderate. Most cases reported an adequate description of the chief complaint, patient past medical history, laboratory and image investigations, and treatments (87.0%). Accurate diagnosis with valid and reliable outcomes measures were reported for two thirds (65.9%). Convincing evidence of diagnosis was provided in 81.6% and an alternate explanation was reported in 73.0% (Appendix 2).

The mean age of the cases was 34.0 years (standard deviation, 19.4 years). One hundred and fifty-three patients (52.2%) were male. Patients were categorized into 1 of 3 groups according to the clinical presentation reported. Group 1 included 72 patients (24.6%) whose infection was followed by symptoms that fulfilled the classification criteria for definitive APS, including 17 patients (5.8%) who fulfilled the most up-to-date CAPS criteria.(1, 13) Group 2 included 128 patients (43.7%) who developed thromboembolic phenomena associated with elevated aPL antibodies during the course of infection, but did not fulfill APS/CAPS criteria (either transient antibodies or not enough follow-up duration). Group 3 included 93 patients (31.7%) who developed transient elevated aPL antibodies after an infection but did not develop thromboembolic manifestations or pregnancy-related complications.

The most common type of infection across all groups was viral (55.6%) (Table 1). In general, Human immunodeficiency (HIV) and Hepatitis C (HCV) viruses were the most frequent infections reported primarily in cases that developed thromboembolic events in group 1 (17.0%) and group 2 (9.9%). Parvovirus B19 (PVB19) was the most frequently reported viral infection in group 3 (antibodies with no thromboembolic or pregnancy events) (16.1%).

Bacterial infections were reported in 108 patients (36.9%), most commonly secondary to Coxiella burnetii, Mycoplasma pneumonia, streptococci, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Most Coxiella cases resulted in development of antibodies without clinical manifestations, while for the other infections the majority of the cases reported had APS.

Parasitic and fungal infections were less common across all groups; only 12 patients (4.1%) had a parasitic infection and 5 patients (1.7%) had a fungal infection. Fifteen patients (5.1%) were reported to have more than one type of infection (viral, bacterial, spirochetal, parasitic, and fungal). In 22 cases (7.5%) the infectious agent was not clearly identified. These cases were reported to have gastrointestinal, urinary, upper respiratory tract infections, or other unspecified infections.

In cases that developed CAPS, HCV was the most common infection reported, although another 9 different viral and bacterial infections were also observed (Appendix 3).

Most commonly, infection alone was reported as the precipitating factor for APS or elevated aPL antibodies with no other comorbidities were identified (83.6%) (Table 2). A history of other concomitant diseases was reported in the remainder of the cases, most frequently an autoimmune or inflammatory disease (7.5%) (cases with SLE were excluded), or a previous diagnosis of cancer (2.4%). In addition, a prior history of congenital, cardiovascular, blood, or allergic diseases was reported in a few cases. For these cases, there was no evidence of the presence of aPL antibodies before the onset of infection. Viral infection was predominant in cases with a prior history of autoimmune diseases (81.8%), with PVB19 occurring in approximately one third of the cases (31.8%) (Appendix 4).

Table 3 shows the most common features in patients who presented with thromboembolic or pregnancy related events (with or without fulfilling APS criteria). Hematologic manifestations, were reported in 33.5% of the cases, with 5.0% developing disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). Thrombocytopenia was reported in 33.3% of cases fulfilling the diagnosis of APS or CAPS, in 21.9% of those who developed thromboembolic events with elevated aPL antibodies and in 6 out of 10 cases complicated by DIC. Peripheral thrombosis was the most commonly reported thromboembolic complication occurring in 30.0% of the cases, followed by stroke or transient ischemic attacks (23.5%) and pulmonary thromboembolism (16.5%). Obstetric complications (with up to 5 recurrent abortions) were reported among 7 patients in the group fulfilling APS criteria (9.7%). Other less frequent manifestations are shown in Table 3.

In patients with HIV, avascular necrosis was the main presentation followed by peripheral thrombosis, stroke, and cutaneous necrosis as well. Whereas in patients with HCV infection, thrombocytopenia, peripheral thrombosis, and stroke were the main clinical features similarly observed (Appendix 5).

By definition, patients in group 3 did not develop thromboembolic manifestations or pregnancy complications related to APS or CAPS. Transient thrombocytopenia after the infection was detected in 9 patients (9.7%); 4 (4.3%) of whom had platelet counts of less than 100,000/mm3, but was not associated with any clinical consequences. No other laboratory abnormalities were reported.

All cases were tested for at least one positive aPL antibody as per our inclusion criteria, but not all cases were tested for the same antibodies (Table 4). Positive aCL antibodies were the most frequently reported in groups 1 (89.2%) and 2 (93.3%), mainly as coexisting IgG and IgM antibodies. Positive LA was the most common in group 3 (92.3%) and anti-β2 GPI antibodies were reported in 60.6% of all cases among the three groups. Additionally, positive aPL antibodies with unspecified isotype were reported in 8.5%.

In cases that developed anti-β2 GPI antibodies, viral infections were predominant (65.0%); HCV in group 1 (40.0%), CMV in group 2 (20.0%) followed by HIV and varicella (16.0% each), and PVB19 in group 3 (45.0%).

Follow-up was reported for 168 cases, and among them 120 (71.4%) had transient aPL antibodies (in general considered for most case as less than 6 months). Persistent positive antibodies were observed in 28 patients in group 1 (84.8%) in contrast to only 11 patients in group 2 (14.3%) and 9 patients in group 3 (15.5%). Nine patients in group 1 (27.3%) and 7 patients in group 2 (9.2%) showed persistent positive aPL antibodies for more than 6 months. Follow-up data was reported in 41 cases that developed anti-β2 GPI antibodies, and revealed transient antibodies not associated with any clinical consequences in 70.7%.

Details of treatment were available for 266 cases. All patients received antimicrobial therapy. Anticoagulation was given to most patients who develop thromboembolic events; anticoagulants and/or antiplatelet therapy (aspirin or clopidogrel) were administered to 54 patients in group 1 (88.5%) and 72 patients in group 2 (63.2%). In group 3, only 1 HIV infected case (1.1%) received anticoagulation for stroke thought to be secondary to neurosyphilis with brain vasculitis.

Data on patient outcomes was available in 236 cases. In group 1, 7 patients (15.2%) died (5 from CAPS, 1 from active acquired immunodeficiency, and the cause of death was not defined in 1 patient with HIV infection); 17 (37.0%) continued to have recurrent APS manifestations, and 22 (47.8%) became asymptomatic on antithrombotic therapy.

HIV and HCV were the most common infections reported in patients who died; no specific aPL antibody was identified. Two thirds of cases that developed CAPS, had persistent APS or died.

In group 2, 9 (8.1%) died from thrombotic complications and the remainder (91.9%) had complete resolution of thrombotic events with no recurrences. Four patients in group 3 (5.1%) died during the course of their infection, the rest recovered completely with no complications of APS or CAPS.

Patients with anti-β2 GPI antibodies and HCV had worse outcomes (persistent APS and death) than those with PVB19, where antibodies were transient and not associated with thromboembolic events.

Sixty-five cases were 18 years old or younger. Of these, 38 (58.5%) had viral, and 22 (33.9%) had bacterial infections (Appendix 6). Infection was the sole precipitating factor in 52 cases (80.0%), and 37 cases (56.9%) developed clinical manifestations (groups 1 and 2) mainly hematologic and cutaneous, followed by peripheral thrombosis and stroke. Non-typical presentations such as cardiac, vena cava, carotid artery, pulmonary thrombosis, and splenic infarction were also reported in the pediatric group. Three cases diagnosed were diagnosed with CAPS where the identified agents were Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and PVB19. Persistent APS and death were reported in 6 cases; 88.2% had complete recovery.

Since their discovery, aPL antibodies have been a subject of great interest. Cardiolipin was the major tissue extract for reactive non-treponemal tests for syphilis since 1906.(17, 18) Although cardiolipin antibodies (IgG, IgM or IgA) were considered a serological marker for syphilis, many other infections, such as hepatitis, varicella, measles, scarlet fever, or viral pneumonia, were associated with transient positive tests considered to be false positive tests for syphilis.(19–21) It was subsequently observed that patients with autoimmune diseases, primarily SLE, could develop persistent false positive tests for syphilis.(22–24) In the early 1980s, aCL antibodies cross-reacting with negatively charged phospholipids were discovered using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and its association with APS syndrome was described.(23, 25–28) Further studies identified the role of β2 GPI, a cofactor with anticoagulant properties required to enhance aCL binding to target phospholipids.(13, 29, 30) Generally, it had been thought that aCL antibodies in patients with infection were not associated with β2 GPI.(14, 31) However, increasingly, case reports of patients have shown that aCL, LA and β2 GPI can occur after infection with clinical consequences, not just as a transient non-pathogenic process.

To our knowledge, we are reporting the largest and most comprehensive systematic review of case reports on the association of infection with subsequent APS or APS-related features. Our review identified 293 case reports with more than 50 different infections associated with subsequent development of aPL antibodies. We classified cases according to the clinical presentation reported: APS or CAPS, as per diagnostic criteria (group 1), APS events not fulfilling criteria (group 2), and elevated aPL antibodies alone with no associated thromboembolic or pregnancy events (group 3). The most common putative infections in all three groups were viral, with HIV and HCV as the most frequent infections in patients with clinical manifestations (group 1 and 2), and PVB19 in group 3. Bacterial infections were the second most common infections in all 3 groups with Mycoplasma pneumonia, streptococci, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis being the most frequently reported in group 1 and 2, while Coxiella cases were more frequent in group 3. Infection alone was the sole precipitating factor in the majority of the reported cases (83.6%), with the remainder reporting primarily pre-existing autoimmune or inflammatory disorders (SLE was excluded) or cancer. In cases with pre-existing autoimmune disease, PVB19 infection was the predominant infection.

Thrombocytopenia and peripheral vascular thrombosis were the most common presenting features among patients with clinical manifestations (groups 1 and 2). Outcomes were variable and ranged from complete resolution of clinical manifestations and antibodies to persistent APS with recurrent events, and CAPS. In general, patients who fulfilled criteria for APS or CAPS were more likely to develop chronic persistent disease. HIV and HCV were the most common infections reported in those cases where persistent APS or death occurred. Non-typical presentations such as retinal, aortic, and abdominal vessel occlusion, splenic infarction, and/or adrenal crisis were also reported.

Among the included cases, 65 were children with 23 different infectious agents identified. Similar to adults, viral infection was the most common putative infection followed by bacterial. More than half of the cases developed clinical manifestations (groups 1 and 2) with occasional atypical presentations. Persistent APS and death were reported in few cases, but the majority had complete recovery.

The coexistence of infection and thromboembolic events has been previously reported in two other reviews, and in two case reports with a literature search included.(32–35) The first review of 100 patients with APS thrombotic manifestations and infection reported skin infections, HIV, pneumonia, HCV, and urinary infection as the most common infections, with pulmonary, skin, and renal thromboembolic events as the main clinical presentations.(32) In their review, cases with aPL antibodies and infection were not included unless thromboembolic events occurred. They reported a lower proportion of HIV cases compared to our findings, while the prevalence of HCV was relatively similar. Sixty eight percent of their cases had primary APS, with the reminder reporting other autoimmune diseases (27 cases had SLE). The timing of infection in relation to the diagnosis of primary APS was not clearly specified. The other comprehensive review described 82 patients with chronic HCV or HIV and reported non-typical presentations compared to patients from other case series of APS without infection.(35) Their findings, as ours, showed that avascular necrosis, followed by cutaneous necrosis and peripheral thrombosis, and neurological manifestations were most common in patients with HIV. Intra-abdominal thrombosis and myocardial infarction were more frequent in patients with HCV. Both reviews had a more limited search (only one database), and did not follow the specific steps required for systematic reviews, such as specific inclusion criteria, and quality appraisal.(32, 35, 36) Another previous review of 80 patients with CAPS pointed to infection as a possible triggering factor in 35% of the cases, but the majority of them had previous diagnosis of SLE or primary APS. Respiratory tract infection was the most common precipitating factor.(36) Analysis of 280 patients from a CAPS Registry also showed that infection was the most common precipitating factor in 22%, but the infectious agents were not identified.(37)

With respect to the frequency of aPL antibodies, aCL antibodies were the most commonly reported in groups 1 and 2, primarily coexisting IgG and IgM isotypes, and LA was the most frequently reported antibody in group 3. Many reports however, were old and did not test for the presence of anti-β2 GPI. Genetic polymorphism of β2 GPI may be an important risk factor in susceptibility to APS. (38–42) Molecular mimicry between infectious agents and β2 GPI has been proposed as a possible etiology of APS (11, 12) but the relationship between mimicry and genetic variants is unknown. In our review, positive anti-β2 GPI antibodies were identified across all three groups. Overall, more than two thirds of anti-β2 GPI antibodies were transient and not associated with any clinical consequences. However, in HCV infections, anti-β2 GPI appeared to be associated with persistent APS and/or death. None of the previous reviews had information on anti-β2 GPI.(32, 35, 36)

Our systematic review included a comprehensive literature search without any language restrictions, with specific criteria for inclusion and quality appraisal. Our findings are limited nevertheless by the quality and breadth of the data in the reports, which was not uniform or consistent (e.g. all reported cases were not tested for all aPL antibodies). Publication bias could account for increased number of cases with HIV and HCV. Most importantly, case series and reports are uncontrolled, and while they can suggest hypotheses they cannot establish robust associations. Nevertheless, clinicians should be aware of the large number of cases reported in the literature suggesting that infection may be implicated in the pathogenesis of APS, perhaps in genetically predisposed individuals. While case reports can identify signals, they are not robust enough for statistical inference. Therefore, the evidence provided is not sufficient to recommend systematic screening in patients with infections, but should alert physician of the possible putative association in patients with both signs and symptoms of infection and clinical features of APS.

In conclusion, development of aPL antibodies with all traditional manifestations of APS was observed after a variety of infections including viruses, bacteria, fungi and parasites. Our findings warrant the need for controlled longitudinal studies to establish the incidence and outcomes of aPL-related events after infection, and to help identify if specific infections may warrant systematic screening for aPL antibodies.