---
reference_id: "PMID:33729987"
title: "AIRE deficiency, from preclinical models to human APECED disease."
authors:
- Besnard M
- Padonou F
- Provin N
- Giraud M
- Guillonneau C
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.046359
keywords:
- Animals
- Autoantibodies
- Autoantigens
- Autoimmune Diseases/metabolism
- Coculture Techniques
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Epithelial Cells/metabolism
- Humans
- Immune Tolerance
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Keratinocytes/cytology
- Mice
- Mutation
- Organoids/metabolism
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Rats
- Thymocytes/metabolism
- Thymus Gland/metabolism
- "Transcription Factors/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- AIRE Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AIRE deficiency, from preclinical models to human APECED disease.
**Authors:** Besnard M, Padonou F, Provin N, Giraud M, Guillonneau C
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.046359](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.046359)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2021 Feb 5;14(2):dmm046359. doi: 10.1242/dmm.046359.

AIRE deficiency, from preclinical models to human APECED disease.

Besnard M(1), Padonou F(1), Provin N(1), Giraud M(2), Guillonneau C(2).

Author information:
(1)Université de Nantes, Inserm, CNRS, Centre de Recherche en Transplantation et 
Immunologie, UMR 1064, ITUN, F-44000 Nantes, France.
(2)Université de Nantes, Inserm, CNRS, Centre de Recherche en Transplantation et 
Immunologie, UMR 1064, ITUN, F-44000 Nantes, France 
carole.guillonneau@univ-nantes.fr matthieu.giraud@univ-nantes.fr.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a 
rare life-threatening autoimmune disease that attacks multiple organs and has 
its onset in childhood. It is an inherited condition caused by a variety of 
mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene that encodes a protein whose 
function has been uncovered by the generation and study of Aire-KO mice. These 
provided invaluable insights into the link between AIRE expression in medullary 
thymic epithelial cells (mTECs), and the broad spectrum of self-antigens that 
these cells express and present to the developing thymocytes. However, these 
murine models poorly recapitulate all phenotypic aspects of human APECED. Unlike 
Aire-KO mice, the recently generated Aire-KO rat model presents visual features, 
organ lymphocytic infiltrations and production of autoantibodies that resemble 
those observed in APECED patients, making the rat model a main research asset. 
In addition, ex vivo models of AIRE-dependent self-antigen expression in primary 
mTECs have been successfully set up. Thymus organoids based on pluripotent stem 
cell-derived TECs from APECED patients are also emerging, and constitute a 
promising tool to engineer AIRE-corrected mTECs and restore the generation of 
regulatory T cells. Eventually, these new models will undoubtedly lead to main 
advances in the identification and assessment of specific and efficient new 
therapeutic strategies aiming to restore immunological tolerance in APECED 
patients.

© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.046359
PMCID: PMC7875492
PMID: 33729987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.