---
reference_id: "PMID:24954210"
title: "Cellular senescence: from physiology to pathology."
authors:
- Muñoz-Espín D
- Serrano M
journal: Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/nrm3823
keywords:
- Aging/pathology
- Animals
- Cellular Senescence/physiology
- Humans
- Mice/embryology
- Neoplasms/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular senescence: from physiology to pathology.
**Authors:** Muñoz-Espín D, Serrano M
**Journal:** Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrm3823](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3823)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;15(7):482-96. doi: 10.1038/nrm3823.

Cellular senescence: from physiology to pathology.

Muñoz-Espín D(1), Serrano M(1).

Author information:
(1)Tumour Suppression Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), 
Madrid, E-28029, Spain.

Recent discoveries are redefining our view of cellular senescence as a trigger 
of tissue remodelling that acts during normal embryonic development and upon 
tissue damage. To achieve this, senescent cells arrest their own proliferation, 
recruit phagocytic immune cells and promote tissue renewal. This sequence of 
events - senescence, followed by clearance and then regeneration - may not be 
efficiently completed in aged tissues or in pathological contexts, thereby 
resulting in the accumulation of senescent cells. Increasing evidence indicates 
that both pro-senescent therapies and antisenescent therapies can be beneficial. 
In cancer and during active tissue repair, pro-senescent therapies contribute to 
minimize the damage by limiting proliferation and fibrosis, respectively. 
Conversely, antisenescent therapies may help to eliminate accumulated senescent 
cells and to recover tissue function.

DOI: 10.1038/nrm3823
PMID: 24954210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]