---
reference_id: "PMID:36376441"
title: Metagenomic analysis of diarrheal stools in Kolkata, India, indicates the possibility of subclinical infection of Vibrio cholerae O1.
authors:
- Takahashi E
- Motooka D
- Nakamura S
- Miyoshi SI
- Chowdhury G
- Mukhopadhyay AK
- Dutta S
- Morita D
- Iida T
- Okamoto K
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-24167-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metagenomic analysis of diarrheal stools in Kolkata, India, indicates the possibility of subclinical infection of Vibrio cholerae O1.
**Authors:** Takahashi E, Motooka D, Nakamura S, Miyoshi SI, Chowdhury G, Mukhopadhyay AK, Dutta S, Morita D, Iida T, Okamoto K
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-022-24167-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-24167-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2022 Nov 14;12(1):19473. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-24167-9.

Metagenomic analysis of diarrheal stools in Kolkata, India, indicates the 
possibility of subclinical infection of Vibrio cholerae O1.

Takahashi E(1)(2), Motooka D(3), Nakamura S(3)(4), Miyoshi SI(5), Chowdhury 
G(6), Mukhopadhyay AK(6), Dutta S(6), Morita D(1), Iida T(3)(4)(7), Okamoto 
K(8).

Author information:
(1)Collaborative Research Center of Okayama University for Infectious Diseases 
in India, NICED-JICA Building, 57 Dr. S.C. Banerjee Road, Beliaghata, Kolkata, 
700 010, India.
(2)Department of Health Pharmacy, Yokohama University of Pharmacy, 601 
Matano-Cho, Totsuka-Ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 245-0066, Japan.
(3)Department of Infection Metagenomics, Research Institute for Microbial 
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(4)Center for Infectious Disease Education and Research (CiDER), Osaka 
University, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(5)Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences of Okayama 
University, 1-1-1 Tsushima-Naka, Kita-Ku, Okayama, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan.
(6)National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases, NICED-JICA Building, 57 
Dr. S.C. Banerjee Road, Beliaghata, Kolkata, 700 010, India.
(7)Department of Bacterial Infections, Research Institute for Microbial 
Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(8)Collaborative Research Center of Okayama University for Infectious Diseases 
in India, NICED-JICA Building, 57 Dr. S.C. Banerjee Road, Beliaghata, Kolkata, 
700 010, India. k-oka@xd6.so-net.ne.jp.

We examined the stools of 23 patients in Kolkata, who were diagnosed as cholera 
patients because Vibrio cholerae O1 was detected from their stools by culturing 
methods, and further explored by metagenomic sequencing analysis. Subsequently, 
the presence of the gene encoding A subunit of cholera toxin (ctxA) and the 
cholera toxin (CT) level in these stool samples were examined. ctxA was examined 
by both metagenomic sequencing analysis and polymerase chain reaction. In these 
examinations, two samples did not show positive in any of these tests. The 
metagenomic analysis showed that the genes for Streptococcus pneumoniae and 
Salmonella enterica were present in the stools of these two patients, 
respectively. Therefore, these two patients were not considered to have diarrhea 
due to V. cholerae infection. From these results, we predicted that some Kolkata 
residents harbor a small number of V. cholerae in their intestines as a form of 
subclinical infection with V. cholerae. Next, we analyzed the stool samples of 
22 diarrhea patients from which V. cholerae was not isolated. The results showed 
that 3 of the patients seemed to have subclinical infection of V. cholerae based 
on the amount of the genes. These results indicated that subclinical infections 
with V. cholerae O1 occur in Kolkata.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-24167-9
PMCID: PMC9663449
PMID: 36376441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.