---
reference_id: "PMID:21546088"
title: Complement in the brain.
authors:
- Veerhuis R
- Nielsen HM
- Tenner AJ
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.04.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complement in the brain.
**Authors:** Veerhuis R, Nielsen HM, Tenner AJ
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molimm.2011.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2011.04.003)

## Content

1. Mol Immunol. 2011 Aug;48(14):1592-603. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.04.003. Epub
 2011 May 4.

Complement in the brain.

Veerhuis R(1), Nielsen HM, Tenner AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands. R.Veerhuis@vumc.nl

The brain is considered to be an immune privileged site, because the blood-brain 
barrier limits entry of blood borne cells and proteins into the central nervous 
system (CNS). As a result, the detection and clearance of invading 
microorganisms and senescent cells as well as surplus neurotransmitters, aged 
and glycated proteins, in order to maintain a healthy environment for neuronal 
and glial cells, is largely confined to the innate immune system. In recent 
years it has become clear that many factors of innate immunity are expressed 
throughout the brain. Neuronal and glial cells express Toll like receptors as 
well as complement receptors, and virtually all complement components can be 
locally produced in the brain, often in response to injury or developmental 
cues. However, as inflammatory reactions could interfere with proper functioning 
of the brain, tight and fine tuned regulatory mechanisms are warranted. In age 
related diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), accumulating amyloid 
proteins elicit complement activation and a local, chronic inflammatory response 
that leads to attraction and activation of glial cells that, under such 
activation conditions, can produce neurotoxic substances, including 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and oxygen radicals. This process may be exacerbated 
by a disturbed balance between complement activators and complement regulatory 
proteins such as occurs in AD, as the local synthesis of these proteins is 
differentially regulated by pro-inflammatory cytokines. Much knowledge about the 
role of complement in neurodegenerative diseases has been derived from animal 
studies with transgenic overexpressing or knockout mice for specific complement 
factors or receptors. These studies have provided insight into the potential 
therapeutic use of complement regulators and complement receptor antagonists in 
chronic neurodegenerative diseases as well as in acute conditions, such as 
stroke. Interestingly, recent animal studies have also indicated that complement 
activation products are involved in brain development and synapse formation. Not 
only are these findings important for the understanding of how brain development 
and neural network formation is organized, it may also give insights into the 
role of complement in processes of neurodegeneration and neuroprotection in the 
injured or aged and diseased adult central nervous system, and thus aid in 
identifying novel and specific targets for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.04.003
PMCID: PMC3142281
PMID: 21546088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]