---
reference_id: "PMID:12928484"
title: "Mutations in COX10 result in a defect in mitochondrial heme A biosynthesis and account for multiple, early-onset clinical phenotypes associated with isolated COX deficiency."
authors:
- Antonicka H
- Leary SC
- Guercin GH
- Agar JN
- Horvath R
- Kennaway NG
- Harding CO
- Jaksch M
- Shoubridge EA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg284
keywords:
- Alkyl and Aryl Transferases/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Cardiomyopathies/genetics
- Catalysis
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- Chromosomes/ultrastructure
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electron Transport Complex IV
- "Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel"
- Exons
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Genome
- "Heme/analogs & derivatives, chemistry, genetics"
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- "Mitochondria/genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Retroviridae/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in COX10 result in a defect in mitochondrial heme A biosynthesis and account for multiple, early-onset clinical phenotypes associated with isolated COX deficiency.
**Authors:** Antonicka H, Leary SC, Guercin GH, Agar JN, Horvath R, Kennaway NG, Harding CO, Jaksch M, Shoubridge EA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddg284](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddg284)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Oct 15;12(20):2693-702. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg284. Epub 2003
 Aug 19.

Mutations in COX10 result in a defect in mitochondrial heme A biosynthesis and 
account for multiple, early-onset clinical phenotypes associated with isolated 
COX deficiency.

Antonicka H(1), Leary SC, Guercin GH, Agar JN, Horvath R, Kennaway NG, Harding 
CO, Jaksch M, Shoubridge EA.

Author information:
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, Department of Human Genetics, McGill 
University, Montreal, H3A 2B4, Canada.

Deficiencies in the activity of cytochrome c oxidase (COX) are an important 
cause of autosomal recessive respiratory chain disorders. Patients with isolated 
COX deficiency are clinically and genetically heterogeneous, and mutations in 
several different assembly factors have been found to cause specific clinical 
phenotypes. Two of the most common clinical presentations, Leigh Syndrome and 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, have so far only been associated with mutations in 
SURF1 or SCO2 and COX15, respectively. Here we show that expression of COX10 
from a retroviral vector complements the COX deficiency in a patient with anemia 
and Leigh Syndrome, and in a patient with anemia, sensorineural deafness and 
fatal infantile hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A partial rescue was also obtained 
following microcell-mediated transfer of mouse chromosomes into patient 
fibroblasts. COX10 functions in the first step of the mitochondrial heme A 
biosynthetic pathway, catalyzing the conversion of protoheme (heme B) to heme O 
via the farnesylation of a vinyl group at position C2. Heme A content was 
reduced in mitochondria from patient muscle and fibroblasts in proportion to the 
reduction in COX enzyme activity and the amount of fully assembled enzyme. 
Mutation analysis of COX10 identified four different missense alleles, 
predicting amino acid substitutions at evolutionarily conserved residues. A 
topological model places these residues in regions of the protein shown to have 
important catalytic functions by mutation analysis of a prokaryotic ortholog. 
Mutations in COX10 have previously been reported in a single family with 
tubulopathy and leukodystrophy. This study shows that mutations in this gene can 
cause nearly the full range of clinical phenotypes associated with early onset 
isolated COX deficiency.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg284
PMID: 12928484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]