---
reference_id: "PMID:8659547"
title: Analyses of loss-of-function mutations of the MITF gene suggest that haploinsufficiency is a cause of Waardenburg syndrome type 2A.
authors:
- Nobukuni Y
- Watanabe A
- Takeda K
- Skarka H
- Tachibana M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1996'
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- "Codon, Terminator/genetics"
- DNA Probes/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Haplotypes
- Helix-Loop-Helix Motifs/genetics
- Humans
- Leucine Zippers/genetics
- Male
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/classification, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analyses of loss-of-function mutations of the MITF gene suggest that haploinsufficiency is a cause of Waardenburg syndrome type 2A.
**Authors:** Nobukuni Y, Watanabe A, Takeda K, Skarka H, Tachibana M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1996)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Jul;59(1):76-83.

Analyses of loss-of-function mutations of the MITF gene suggest that
haploinsufficiency is a cause of Waardenburg syndrome type 2A.

Nobukuni Y(1), Watanabe A, Takeda K, Skarka H, Tachibana M.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, USA.

Waardenburg syndrome type 2 (WS2) is a dominantly inherited disorder
characterized by a pigmentation anomaly and hearing impairment due to lack of
melanocyte. Previous work has linked a subset of families with WS2 (WS2A) to the
MITF gene that encodes a transcription factor with a
basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLH-Zip) motif and that is involved in
melanocyte differentiation. Several splice-site and missense mutations have been
reported in individuals affected with WS2A. In this report, we have identified
two novel point mutations in the MITF gene in affected individuals from two
different families with WS2A. The two mutations (C760--> T and C895--> T) create
stop codons in exons 7 and 8, respectively. Corresponding mutant alleles predict
the truncated proteins lacking HLH-Zip or Zip structure. To understand how these
mutations cause WS2 in heterozygotes, we generated mutant MITF cDNAs and used
them for DNA-binding and luciferase reporter assays. The mutated MITF proteins
lose the DNA-binding activity and fail to transactivate the promoter of
tyrosinase, a melanocyte-specific enzyme. However, these mutated proteins do not
appear to interfere with the activity of wild-type MITF protein in these assays,
indicating that they do not show a dominant-negative effect. These findings
suggest that the phenotypes of the two families with WS2A in the present study
are caused by loss-of-function mutations in one of the two alleles of the MITF
gene, resulting in haploinsufficiency of the MITF protein, the protein necessary
for normal development of melanocytes.

PMCID: PMC1915102
PMID: 8659547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
