---
reference_id: "PMID:25814232"
title: New perspectives on the prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Semsarian C
- Ingles J
- Maron MS
- Maron BJ
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.01.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New perspectives on the prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Semsarian C, Ingles J, Maron MS, Maron BJ
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2015.01.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2015.01.019)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015 Mar 31;65(12):1249-1254. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2015.01.019.

New perspectives on the prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Semsarian C(1), Ingles J(1), Maron MS(2), Maron BJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology, Centenary Institute, Sydney, 
Australia; Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; 
Department of Cardiology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(2)Tufts Medical Center and School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Center, Minneapolis Heart Institute Foundation, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Electronic address: hcm.maron@mhif.org.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015 Oct 20;66(16):1845-1846. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2015.07.074.
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015 Oct 20;66(16):1846-1847. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2015.07.073.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an important genetic heart muscle disease 
for which prevalence in the general population has not been completely resolved. 
For the past 20 years, most data have supported the occurrence of HCM at about 1 
in 500. However, the authors have interrogated a number of relevant advances in 
cardiovascular medicine, including widespread fee-for-service genetic testing, 
population genetic studies, and contemporary diagnostic imaging, as well as a 
greater index of suspicion and recognition for both the clinically expressed 
disease and the gene-positive-phenotype-negative subset (at risk for developing 
the disease). Accounting for the potential impact of these initiatives 
on disease occurrence, the authors have revisited the prevalence of HCM in the 
general population. They suggest that HCM is more common than previously 
estimated, which may enhance its recognition in the practicing cardiovascular 
community, allowing more timely diagnosis and the implementation of appropriate 
treatment options for many patients.

Copyright © 2015 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.01.019
PMID: 25814232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]