---
reference_id: "PMID:38979632"
title: Roles for PMP22 in Schwann cell cholesterol homeostasis in health and disease.
authors:
- Stefanski KM
- Wilkinson MC
- Sanders CR
journal: Biochem Soc Trans
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1042/BST20231359
keywords:
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- Humans
- Schwann Cells/metabolism
- "Myelin Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Homeostasis
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- Lipid Metabolism
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1/metabolism, genetics"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Roles for PMP22 in Schwann cell cholesterol homeostasis in health and disease.
**Authors:** Stefanski KM, Wilkinson MC, Sanders CR
**Journal:** Biochem Soc Trans (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BST20231359](https://doi.org/10.1042/BST20231359)

## Content

1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2024 Aug 28;52(4):1747-1756. doi: 10.1042/BST20231359.

Roles for PMP22 in Schwann cell cholesterol homeostasis in health and disease.

Stefanski KM(1), Wilkinson MC(1), Sanders CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37240-7917, U.S.A.

Underexpression, overexpression, and point mutations in peripheral myelin
protein 22 (PMP22) cause most cases of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTD). While
its exact functions remain unclear, PMP22 is clearly essential for formation and
maintenance of healthy myelin in the peripheral nervous system. This review
explores emerging evidence for roles of PMP22 in cholesterol homeostasis. First,
we highlight dysregulation of lipid metabolism in PMP22-based forms of CMTD and
recently-discovered interactions between PMP22 and cholesterol biosynthesis
machinery. We then examine data that demonstrates PMP22 and cholesterol
co-traffic in cells and co-localize in lipid rafts, including how
disease-causing PMP22 mutations result in aberrations in cholesterol
localization. Finally, we examine roles for interactions between PMP22 and ABCA1
in cholesterol efflux. Together, this emerging body of evidence suggests that
PMP22 plays a role in facilitating enhanced cholesterol synthesis and
trafficking necessary for production and maintenance of healthy myelin.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BST20231359
PMCID: PMC11574964
PMID: 38979632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing
interests associated with the manuscript.
