---
reference_id: "PMID:31833391"
title: G6PD A- is the major cause of G6PD deficiency among the Siddis of Karnataka, India.
authors:
- Devendra R
- Gupta V
- Biradar SS
- Bhat P
- Hegde S
- Hoti SL
- Mukherjee MB
- Hegde HV
journal: Ann Hum Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/03014460.2019.1699954
content_type: abstract_only
---

# G6PD A- is the major cause of G6PD deficiency among the Siddis of Karnataka, India.
**Authors:** Devendra R, Gupta V, Biradar SS, Bhat P, Hegde S, Hoti SL, Mukherjee MB, Hegde HV
**Journal:** Ann Hum Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03014460.2019.1699954](https://doi.org/10.1080/03014460.2019.1699954)

## Content

1. Ann Hum Biol. 2020 Feb;47(1):55-58. doi: 10.1080/03014460.2019.1699954. Epub 
2019 Dec 13.

G6PD A- is the major cause of G6PD deficiency among the Siddis of Karnataka, 
India.

Devendra R(1), Gupta V(1), Biradar SS(2), Bhat P(2), Hegde S(2), Hoti SL(2), 
Mukherjee MB(1), Hegde HV(2).

Author information:
(1)ICMR-National Institute of Immunohaematology, Parel, India.
(2)ICMR-National Institute of Traditional Medicine, Belagavi, India.

Background: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most 
common human erythroenzymopathy affecting more than 400 million people 
worldwide. G6PD deficiency was reported in India more than 50 years ago and the 
prevalence rate varies from 5.7% to 27.9% in different caste and tribal 
groups.Aim: To study the prevalence of, and the mutations causing, G6PD 
deficiency among the Siddis of Karnataka.Subjects and methods: A total of 755 
individuals were screened using the DPIP dye decolorisation method and the 
deficiency was further confirmed by quantitative assay. Molecular 
characterisation was performed by PCR-RFLP method and DNA sequencing. 
Biochemical characterisation was performed as per WHO criteria.Results: Of the 
755 individuals, 71 individuals (9.4%) were found to be G6PD deficient with an 
enzyme activity ranging from 0.02 to 3.83 IU/gm Hb. Mutational analysis could be 
performed on 49 G6PD deficient individuals and 45 (91.8%) of them showed the 
presence of the G6PD A- variant while the remaining 4 (8.2%) had the G6PD 
Kerala-Kalyan mutation. Microsatellite analysis in G6PD A- individuals showed 
the presence of 166/195 bp, AC/CTT alleles.Conclusions: G6PD deficiencies among 
the Siddis are predominantly due to G6PD A- mutation. Furthermore, biochemical 
parameters and the microsatellite repeat markers in the Siddi A- chromosome 
confirmed they are African descendants with Indian admixture.

DOI: 10.1080/03014460.2019.1699954
PMID: 31833391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]