---
reference_id: "PMID:15736406"
title: "Characterization of osteosarcoma cell lines MG-63, Saos-2 and U-2 OS in comparison to human osteoblasts."
authors:
- Pautke C
- Schieker M
- Tischer T
- Kolk A
- Neth P
- Mutschler W
- Milz S
journal: Anticancer Res
year: '2004'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of osteosarcoma cell lines MG-63, Saos-2 and U-2 OS in comparison to human osteoblasts.
**Authors:** Pautke C, Schieker M, Tischer T, Kolk A, Neth P, Mutschler W, Milz S
**Journal:** Anticancer Res (2004)

## Content

1. Anticancer Res. 2004 Nov-Dec;24(6):3743-8.

Characterization of osteosarcoma cell lines MG-63, Saos-2 and U-2 OS in 
comparison to human osteoblasts.

Pautke C(1), Schieker M, Tischer T, Kolk A, Neth P, Mutschler W, Milz S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery University of Technology Munich 
(TUM), Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675 Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Osteosarcomas are malignant bone tumors consisting of cells with 
abnormal cellular functions. Although osteosarcoma-derived cells are commonly 
used for osteoblastic models, the molecular composition of the osteosarcoma 
extracellular matrix (ECM) is not well characterized.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We compared three osteosarcoma cell lines (MG-63, Saos-2 
and U-2 OS) with normal human osteoblasts by immunocytochemistry. Cellular 
characteristics were assessed by morphometric analysis and proliferation 
kinetics.
RESULTS: All investigated osteosarcoma cell lines exhibited very heterogeneous 
labelling profiles and each differed significantly from that of normal 
osteoblasts. Saos-2 cells revealed the most mature osteoblastic labelling 
profile while U-2 OS cells were negative for most of the investigated 
osteoblastic markers.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that each osteosarcoma cell line exhibits a 
characteristic labelling profile and thus produces a differently composed 
extracellular matrix. This can be used in attempts to better characterize 
osteosarcoma, a as well as for their diagnosis.

PMID: 15736406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]