---
reference_id: "PMID:20847235"
title: IDH2 mutations in patients with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria.
authors:
- Kranendijk M
- Struys EA
- van Schaftingen E
- Gibson KM
- Kanhai WA
- van der Knaap MS
- Amiel J
- Buist NR
- Das AM
- de Klerk JB
- Feigenbaum AS
- Grange DK
- Hofstede FC
- Holme E
- Kirk EP
- Korman SH
- Morava E
- Morris A
- Smeitink J
- Sukhai RN
- Vallance H
- Jakobs C
- Salomons GS
journal: Science
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1126/science.1192632
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IDH2 mutations in patients with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria.
**Authors:** Kranendijk M, Struys EA, van Schaftingen E, Gibson KM, Kanhai WA, van der Knaap MS, Amiel J, Buist NR, Das AM, de Klerk JB, Feigenbaum AS, Grange DK, Hofstede FC, Holme E, Kirk EP, Korman SH, Morava E, Morris A, Smeitink J, Sukhai RN, Vallance H, Jakobs C, Salomons GS
**Journal:** Science (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1192632](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1192632)

## Content

1. Science. 2010 Oct 15;330(6002):336. doi: 10.1126/science.1192632. Epub 2010
Sep  16.

IDH2 mutations in patients with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria.

Kranendijk M(1), Struys EA, van Schaftingen E, Gibson KM, Kanhai WA, van der 
Knaap MS, Amiel J, Buist NR, Das AM, de Klerk JB, Feigenbaum AS, Grange DK, 
Hofstede FC, Holme E, Kirk EP, Korman SH, Morava E, Morris A, Smeitink J, Sukhai 
RN, Vallance H, Jakobs C, Salomons GS.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Unit, Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical 
Center, 1081 HV Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Heterozygous somatic mutations in the genes encoding isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 
and -2 (IDH1 and IDH2) were recently discovered in human neoplastic disorders. 
These mutations disable the enzymes' normal ability to convert isocitrate to 
2-ketoglutarate (2-KG) and confer on the enzymes a new function: the ability to 
convert 2-KG to d-2-hydroxyglutarate (D-2-HG). We have detected heterozygous 
germline mutations in IDH2 that alter enzyme residue Arg(140) in 15 unrelated 
patients with d-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (D-2-HGA), a rare neurometabolic 
disorder characterized by supraphysiological levels of D-2-HG. These findings 
provide additional impetus for investigating the role of D-2-HG in the 
pathophysiology of metabolic disease and cancer.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1192632
PMID: 20847235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]