---
reference_id: "PMID:37389396"
title: "Small Bowel Intussusception due to Solitary Peutz-Jeghers Jejunal Polyp: A Rare Entity."
authors:
- Kamath B
- Doddamallappa S
- Roy A
- Dhobale S
journal: J Indian Assoc Pediatr Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4103/jiaps.jiaps_160_22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small Bowel Intussusception due to Solitary Peutz-Jeghers Jejunal Polyp: A Rare Entity.
**Authors:** Kamath B, Doddamallappa S, Roy A, Dhobale S
**Journal:** J Indian Assoc Pediatr Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4103/jiaps.jiaps_160_22](https://doi.org/10.4103/jiaps.jiaps_160_22)

## Content

1. J Indian Assoc Pediatr Surg. 2023 May-Jun;28(3):250-252. doi: 
10.4103/jiaps.jiaps_160_22. Epub 2023 May 2.

Small Bowel Intussusception due to Solitary Peutz-Jeghers Jejunal Polyp: A Rare 
Entity.

Kamath B(1), Doddamallappa S(1), Roy A(1), Dhobale S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, HBT Medical College and RN Cooper Hospital, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is characterized by mucocutaneous pigmentation with 
multiple hamartomatous polyps of the gastrointestinal tract and/or a familial 
history with autosomal dominant inheritance pattern having incomplete 
penetrance, with some cases arising from spontaneous mutations. We present this 
case of a 12-year-old female who presented with jejunojejunal intussusception 
and on exploration revealed a polypoidal mass around 50 cm from duodenojejunal 
flexure acting as a lead point. A segmental jejunal resection with anastomosis 
was performed and histopathology confirmed a solitary Peutz-Jeghers (PJ) 
hamartomatous polyp. She neither had mucocutaneous pigmentation nor family 
history of PJS or any other polyps anywhere in the gut on further evaluation by 
endoscopies. A solitary PJ polyp in the jejunum is a rare entity, and to the 
best of our knowledge, only around 13 cases have been reported in world 
literature so far. Regular follow-up is essential in young children, so that 
future manifestations of the PJS are not missed.

Copyright: © 2023 Journal of Indian Association of Pediatric Surgeons.

DOI: 10.4103/jiaps.jiaps_160_22
PMCID: PMC10305953
PMID: 37389396

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.