---
reference_id: "PMID:36821389"
title: Kidney glycolysis serves as a mammalian phosphate sensor that maintains phosphate homeostasis.
authors:
- Zhou W
- Simic P
- Zhou IY
- Caravan P
- Vela Parada X
- Wen D
- Washington OL
- Shvedova M
- Pierce KA
- Clish CB
- Mannstadt M
- Kobayashi T
- Wein MN
- Jüppner H
- Rhee EP
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/JCI164610
keywords:
- Animals
- Phosphates/metabolism
- Parathyroid Hormone/metabolism
- NAD/metabolism
- "Fibroblast Growth Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Kidney/metabolism
- Homeostasis
- Glycolysis
- Mammals/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kidney glycolysis serves as a mammalian phosphate sensor that maintains phosphate homeostasis.
**Authors:** Zhou W, Simic P, Zhou IY, Caravan P, Vela Parada X, Wen D, Washington OL, Shvedova M, Pierce KA, Clish CB, Mannstadt M, Kobayashi T, Wein MN, Jüppner H, Rhee EP
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI164610](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI164610)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2023 Apr 17;133(8):e164610. doi: 10.1172/JCI164610.

Kidney glycolysis serves as a mammalian phosphate sensor that maintains 
phosphate homeostasis.

Zhou W(1)(2), Simic P(1)(2), Zhou IY(3), Caravan P(3), Vela Parada X(1)(2), Wen 
D(1)(2), Washington OL(1)(2), Shvedova M(2), Pierce KA(4), Clish CB(4), 
Mannstadt M(2), Kobayashi T(2), Wein MN(2), Jüppner H(2)(5), Rhee EP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Division, Department of Medicine, and.
(2)Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2023 May;19(5):277. doi: 10.1038/s41581-023-00710-3.

How phosphate levels are detected in mammals is unknown. The bone-derived 
hormone fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) lowers blood phosphate levels by 
reducing kidney phosphate reabsorption and 1,25(OH)2D production, but phosphate 
does not directly stimulate bone FGF23 expression. Using PET scanning and LC-MS, 
we found that phosphate increases kidney-specific glycolysis and synthesis of 
glycerol-3-phosphate (G-3-P), which then circulates to bone to trigger FGF23 
production. Further, we found that G-3-P dehydrogenase 1 (Gpd1), a cytosolic 
enzyme that synthesizes G-3-P and oxidizes NADH to NAD+, is required for 
phosphate-stimulated G-3-P and FGF23 production and prevention of 
hyperphosphatemia. In proximal tubule cells, we found that phosphate 
availability is substrate-limiting for glycolysis and G-3-P production and that 
increased glycolysis and Gpd1 activity are coupled through cytosolic NAD+ 
recycling. Finally, we show that the type II sodium-dependent phosphate 
cotransporter Npt2a, which is primarily expressed in the proximal tubule, 
conferred kidney specificity to phosphate-stimulated G-3-P production. 
Importantly, exogenous G-3-P stimulated FGF23 production when Npt2a or Gpd1 were 
absent, confirming that it was the key circulating factor downstream of 
glycolytic phosphate sensing in the kidney. Together, these findings place 
glycolysis at the nexus of mineral and energy metabolism and identify a 
kidney-bone feedback loop that controls phosphate homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI164610
PMCID: PMC10104895
PMID: 36821389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]