---
reference_id: "PMID:29722015"
title: "EAST/SeSAME syndrome: Review of the literature and introduction of four new Latvian patients."
authors:
- Celmina M
- Micule I
- Inashkina I
- Audere M
- Kuske S
- Pereca J
- Stavusis J
- Pelnena D
- Strautmanis J
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13374
keywords:
- Brain/abnormalities
- "Ear, Inner/abnormalities"
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/epidemiology, genetics"
- Kidney/abnormalities
- Latvia/epidemiology
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying/genetics"
- "Seizures/epidemiology, genetics"
- Kcnj10 Channel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EAST/SeSAME syndrome: Review of the literature and introduction of four new Latvian patients.
**Authors:** Celmina M, Micule I, Inashkina I, Audere M, Kuske S, Pereca J, Stavusis J, Pelnena D, Strautmanis J
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13374](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13374)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2019 Jan;95(1):63-78. doi: 10.1111/cge.13374. Epub 2018 Jul 8.

EAST/SeSAME syndrome: Review of the literature and introduction of four new 
Latvian patients.

Celmina M(1)(2), Micule I(3), Inashkina I(4), Audere M(5), Kuske S(6), Pereca 
J(7), Stavusis J(4), Pelnena D(4), Strautmanis J(8).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Pediatrics, Children's Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia.
(2)Faculty of Continuing Education, University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia.
(3)Clinic for Medical Genetics and Prenatal Diagnostics, Children's Clinical 
University Hospital, Riga, Latvia.
(4)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Center, Riga, Latvia.
(5)ENT Department, Children's Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia.
(6)Latvian Children's Hearing Center, Riga, Latvia.
(7)Emergency Department, Royal Infirmary of Edinburg, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(8)Clinic for Pediatric Neurology and Neurosurgery, Children's Clinical 
University Hospital, Riga, Latvia.

EAST (Epilepsy, Ataxia, Sensorineural deafness, Tubulopathy) or SeSAME 
(Seizures, Sensorineural deafness, Ataxia, Mental retardation, and Electrolyte 
imbalance) syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome first described in 
2009 independently by Bockenhauer and Scholl. It is caused by mutations in 
KCNJ10, which encodes Kir4.1, an inwardly rectifying K+ channel found in the 
brain, inner ear, kidney and eye. To date, 16 mutations and at least 28 patients 
have been reported. In this paper, we review mutations causing EAST/SeSAME 
syndrome, clinical manifestations in detail, and efficacy of treatment in 
previously reported patients. We also report a new Latvian kindred with 4 
patients. In contrast to the majority of previous reports, we found a 
progressive course of the disorder in terms of hearing impairment and neurologic 
deficit. The treatment is based on antiepileptic drugs, electrolyte replacement, 
hearing aids and mobility devices. Future research should concentrate on 
recognizing the lesions in the central nervous system to evaluate new potential 
diagnostic criteria and on formally evaluating intellectual disability.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13374
PMID: 29722015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]