---
reference_id: "PMID:37962718"
title: "Resection of anorectal fistula cancer associated with Crohn's disease after preoperative chemoradiotherapy: a case report."
authors:
- Inoue T
- Sekido Y
- Ogino T
- Hata T
- Miyoshi N
- Takahashi H
- Uemura M
- Mizushima T
- Doki Y
- Eguchi H
journal: Surg Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s40792-023-01778-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resection of anorectal fistula cancer associated with Crohn's disease after preoperative chemoradiotherapy: a case report.
**Authors:** Inoue T, Sekido Y, Ogino T, Hata T, Miyoshi N, Takahashi H, Uemura M, Mizushima T, Doki Y, Eguchi H
**Journal:** Surg Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40792-023-01778-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40792-023-01778-6)

## Content

1. Surg Case Rep. 2023 Nov 14;9(1):197. doi: 10.1186/s40792-023-01778-6.

Resection of anorectal fistula cancer associated with Crohn's disease after 
preoperative chemoradiotherapy: a case report.

Inoue T(1), Sekido Y(2), Ogino T(1), Hata T(1), Miyoshi N(1), Takahashi H(1), 
Uemura M(1), Mizushima T(3), Doki Y(1), Eguchi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, 2-2 Yamadaoka E-2, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, 2-2 Yamadaoka E-2, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. 
ysekido@gesurg.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Osaka Police Hospital, Tennoji-Ku 
Kitayamacho 10-31, Osaka City, Osaka, 543-0035, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Anorectal fistula cancer is often diagnosed in an advanced state, 
and radical resection is difficult when invasion of the pelvic wall is observed. 
In addition, there is currently no clear evidence for perioperative treatment of 
locally advanced cases. We report a case of anorectal fistula cancer with 
widespread infiltration diagnosed during the course of Crohn's disease, which 
was curatively resected after preoperative chemoradiotherapy.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 49-year-old man who had been diagnosed with Crohn's disease 
(ileocolonic type) at the age of 25 and was found to have an anorectal fistula 
and perianal abscess at the age of 44 was referred to our department with 
complaints of abdominal pain and diarrhea. Computed tomography (CT) showed anal 
stenosis due to a pelvic mass. Pathological analysis of a biopsy taken under 
general anesthesia indicated mucinous carcinoma. Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) revealed infiltration into the prostate, seminal vesicles, levator ani 
muscle, and left internal obturator muscle, and the patient was diagnosed with 
cT4N0M0 cStage IIIB anorectal fistula cancer (UICC TNM classification 8th 
edition). After performing a laparoscopic sigmoid colostomy, chemoradiation 
therapy (capecitabine + oxaliplatin, 50.4 Gy/28fr) was initiated. The patient 
then underwent laparoscopic total pelvic exenteration, colonic conduit 
diversion, extensive perineal resection, and reconstruction using bilateral 
gluteus maximus flaps and a right rectus abdominis musculocutaneous flap. The 
pathological diagnosis was mucinous adenocarcinoma, pT4, and all margins were 
negative. No recurrence was evident 6 months after the operation without 
adjuvant chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: We described a case of curative resection after preoperative 
chemoradiotherapy for anorectal fistula cancer with extensive invasion that was 
diagnosed during the course of Crohn's disease.An accumulation of cases is 
needed to determine the usefulness of preoperative chemoradiation therapy for 
local control of anorectal fistula cancer associated with Crohn's disease.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40792-023-01778-6
PMCID: PMC10645675
PMID: 37962718

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no competing interests.