---
reference_id: "PMID:26455503"
title: "Programmed DNA breaks in lymphoid cells: repair mechanisms and consequences in human disease."
authors:
- Prochazkova J
- Loizou JI
journal: Immunology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/imm.12547
keywords:
- Animals
- "B-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- DNA Damage/genetics
- DNA Repair/genetics
- "DNA Repair-Deficiency Disorders/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Neoplasms/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Recombination, Genetic"
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Programmed DNA breaks in lymphoid cells: repair mechanisms and consequences in human disease.
**Authors:** Prochazkova J, Loizou JI
**Journal:** Immunology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imm.12547](https://doi.org/10.1111/imm.12547)

## Content

1. Immunology. 2016 Jan;147(1):11-20. doi: 10.1111/imm.12547. Epub 2015 Nov 18.

Programmed DNA breaks in lymphoid cells: repair mechanisms and consequences in 
human disease.

Prochazkova J(1), Loizou JI(1).

Author information:
(1)CeMM Research Centre for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.

In recent years, several novel congenital human disorders have been described 
with defects in lymphoid B-cell and T-cell functions that arise due to mutations 
in known and/or novel components of DNA repair and damage response pathways. 
Examples include impaired DNA double-strand break repair, as well as compromised 
DNA damage-induced signal transduction, including phosphorylation and 
ubiquitination. These disorders reinforce the importance of genome stability 
pathways in the development of lymphoid cells in humans. Furthermore, these 
conditions inform our knowledge of the biology of the mechanisms of genome 
stability and in some cases may provide potential routes to help exploit these 
pathways therapeutically. Here we review the mechanisms that repair programmed 
DNA lesions that occur during B-cell and T-cell development, as well as human 
diseases that arise through defects in these pathways.

© 2015 The Authors. Immunology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.12547
PMCID: PMC4988471
PMID: 26455503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]