---
reference_id: "PMID:20188343"
title: "Homozygosity for a missense mutation in SERPINH1, which encodes the collagen chaperone protein HSP47, results in severe recessive osteogenesis imperfecta."
authors:
- Christiansen HE
- Schwarze U
- Pyott SM
- AlSwaid A
- Al Balwi M
- Alrasheed S
- Pepin MG
- Weis MA
- Eyre DR
- Byers PH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.034
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Base Sequence
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Collagen Type I/chemistry, metabolism"
- Consanguinity
- Conserved Sequence
- DNA/genetics
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "HSP47 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/metabolism
- Protein Stability
- Radiography
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygosity for a missense mutation in SERPINH1, which encodes the collagen chaperone protein HSP47, results in severe recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Christiansen HE, Schwarze U, Pyott SM, AlSwaid A, Al Balwi M, Alrasheed S, Pepin MG, Weis MA, Eyre DR, Byers PH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.034)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Mar 12;86(3):389-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.034.
Epub  2010 Feb 25.

Homozygosity for a missense mutation in SERPINH1, which encodes the collagen 
chaperone protein HSP47, results in severe recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.

Christiansen HE(1), Schwarze U, Pyott SM, AlSwaid A, Al Balwi M, Alrasheed S, 
Pepin MG, Weis MA, Eyre DR, Byers PH.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98195, USA.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is characterized by bone fragility and fractures 
that may be accompanied by bone deformity, dentinogenesis imperfecta, short 
stature, and shortened life span. About 90% of individuals with OI have dominant 
mutations in the type I collagen genes COL1A1 and COL1A2. Recessive forms of OI 
resulting from mutations in collagen-modifying enzymes and chaperones CRTAP, 
LEPRE1, PPIB, and FKBP10 have recently been identified. We have identified an 
autosomal-recessive missense mutation (c.233T>C, p.Leu78Pro) in SERPINH1, which 
encodes the collagen chaperone-like protein HSP47, that leads to a severe OI 
phenotype. The mutation results in degradation of the endoplasmic reticulum 
resident HSP47 via the proteasome. Type I procollagen accumulates in the Golgi 
of fibroblasts from the affected individual and a population of the secreted 
type I procollagen is protease sensitive. These findings suggest that HSP47 
monitors the integrity of the triple helix of type I procollagen at the 
ER/cis-Golgi boundary and, when absent, the rate of transit from the ER to the 
Golgi is increased and helical structure is compromised. The normal 
3-hydroxylation of the prolyl residue at position 986 of the triple helical 
domain of proalpha1(I) chains places the role of HSP47 downstream from the 
CRTAP/P3H1/CyPB complex that is involved in prolyl 3-hydroxylation. 
Identification of this mutation in SERPINH1 gives further insight into critical 
steps of the collagen biosynthetic pathway and the molecular pathogenesis of OI.

Copyright 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.034
PMCID: PMC2833387
PMID: 20188343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]