---
reference_id: "PMID:29471783"
title: Seroprevalence of dengue IgG antibodies in symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals three years after an outbreak in Zhejiang Province, China.
authors:
- Luo S
- Cui W
- Li C
- Ling F
- Fu T
- Liu Q
- Ren J
- Sun J
journal: BMC Infect Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12879-018-3000-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seroprevalence of dengue IgG antibodies in symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals three years after an outbreak in Zhejiang Province, China.
**Authors:** Luo S, Cui W, Li C, Ling F, Fu T, Liu Q, Ren J, Sun J
**Journal:** BMC Infect Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12879-018-3000-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-018-3000-5)

## Content

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2018 Feb 23;18(1):92. doi: 10.1186/s12879-018-3000-5.

Seroprevalence of dengue IgG antibodies in symptomatic and asymptomatic 
individuals three years after an outbreak in Zhejiang Province, China.

Luo S(1), Cui W(2), Li C(3), Ling F(3), Fu T(1), Liu Q(4), Ren J(3), Sun 
J(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Yiwu Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Yiwu, China.
(2)Yantai Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Yantai, China.
(3)Zhejiang Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hangzhou, 
China.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious 
Diseases, National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, 
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.
(5)Zhejiang Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hangzhou, 
China. jmsun@cdc.zj.cn.
(6)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious 
Diseases, National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, 
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China. 
jmsun@cdc.zj.cn.

BACKGROUND: Cross-reacting antibodies enhanced dengue infection in humans and 
antibody dependent enhancement (ADE) have been proposed as early mechanisms 
underlying DHF/DSS. However, the duration of dengue IgG antibodies in the body 
as well as factors associated with said duration remain unclear.
METHODS: Blood samples from 59 dengue symptomatic persons and 48 asymptomatic 
individuals were collected. Study participant demographic information (including 
age in 2009, gender, and place of residence) were also collected. Serum samples 
were tested for dengue specific IgG by Panbio dengue IgG indirect enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Chi-square tests and logistic regression analysis 
of dengue IgG antibodies seroprevalence divided by gender, age groups, and 
symptomatic or asymptomatic infection were conducted using the Statistical 
Package for the Social Sciences.
RESULTS: Overall, 70 (65.42%) blood samples were seropositive for dengue IgG 
antibodies with similar seroprevalences found when dividing by gender and 
different age groups. However, seroprevalence of dengue IgG antibodies in 
samples from dengue symptomatic persons was significantly higher than that in 
samples from asymptomatic individuals (96.61% vs 27.08%) according to 
multivariable logistic regression analysis, the odds ratio (OR) of the factor 
was 76.731.
CONCLUSIONS: Dengue IgG antibodies were detectable in samples from most 
individuals three years after infection. Dengue symptomatic persons had a higher 
dengue IgG prevalence compared to asymptomatic individuals.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-018-3000-5
PMCID: PMC5824482
PMID: 29471783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Experimental research reported in this study has been performed with the 
approval of the ethics committee of Zhejiang Provincial Centre for Disease 
Control and Prevention (Zhejiang CDC). Human research was carried out in 
compliance with the Helsinki Declaration. Written consents were obtained from 
participants (> 16 years old) or a parent or guardian on behalf of any 
participants under the age of 16. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.