---
reference_id: "PMID:36737426"
title: "Osteoarthritis: pathogenic signaling pathways and therapeutic targets."
authors:
- Yao Q
- Wu X
- Tao C
- Gong W
- Chen M
- Qu M
- Zhong Y
- He T
- Chen S
- Xiao G
journal: Signal Transduct Target Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41392-023-01330-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoarthritis: pathogenic signaling pathways and therapeutic targets.
**Authors:** Yao Q, Wu X, Tao C, Gong W, Chen M, Qu M, Zhong Y, He T, Chen S, Xiao G
**Journal:** Signal Transduct Target Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41392-023-01330-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-023-01330-w)

## Content

1. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2023 Feb 3;8(1):56. doi: 
10.1038/s41392-023-01330-w.

Osteoarthritis: pathogenic signaling pathways and therapeutic targets.

Yao Q(#)(1), Wu X(#)(2), Tao C(#)(2), Gong W(#)(2), Chen M(2), Qu M(2), Zhong 
Y(2), He T(2), Chen S(3), Xiao G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 
Cell Microenvironment, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cell 
Microenvironment and Disease Research, Southern University of Science and 
Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, China. yaoq@sustech.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 
Cell Microenvironment, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cell 
Microenvironment and Disease Research, Southern University of Science and 
Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 
Cell Microenvironment, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cell 
Microenvironment and Disease Research, Southern University of Science and 
Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, China. xiaogz@sustech.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Osteoarthritis (OA) is a chronic degenerative joint disorder that leads to 
disability and affects more than 500 million population worldwide. OA was 
believed to be caused by the wearing and tearing of articular cartilage, but it 
is now more commonly referred to as a chronic whole-joint disorder that is 
initiated with biochemical and cellular alterations in the synovial joint 
tissues, which leads to the histological and structural changes of the joint and 
ends up with the whole tissue dysfunction. Currently, there is no cure for OA, 
partly due to a lack of comprehensive understanding of the pathological 
mechanism of the initiation and progression of the disease. Therefore, a better 
understanding of pathological signaling pathways and key molecules involved in 
OA pathogenesis is crucial for therapeutic target design and drug development. 
In this review, we first summarize the epidemiology of OA, including its 
prevalence, incidence and burdens, and OA risk factors. We then focus on the 
roles and regulation of the pathological signaling pathways, such as 
Wnt/β-catenin, NF-κB, focal adhesion, HIFs, TGFβ/ΒΜP and FGF signaling pathways, 
and key regulators AMPK, mTOR, and RUNX2 in the onset and development of OA. In 
addition, the roles of factors associated with OA, including MMPs, ADAMTS/ADAMs, 
and PRG4, are discussed in detail. Finally, we provide updates on the current 
clinical therapies and clinical trials of biological treatments and drugs for 
OA. Research advances in basic knowledge of articular cartilage biology and OA 
pathogenesis will have a significant impact and translational value in 
developing OA therapeutic strategies.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41392-023-01330-w
PMCID: PMC9898571
PMID: 36737426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.