---
reference_id: "PMID:14756886"
title: Lichen simplex chronicus (atopic/neurodermatitis) of the anogenital region.
authors:
- Lynch PJ
journal: Dermatol Ther
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1396-0296.2004.04002.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lichen simplex chronicus (atopic/neurodermatitis) of the anogenital region.
**Authors:** Lynch PJ
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1396-0296.2004.04002.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1396-0296.2004.04002.x)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther. 2004;17(1):8-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1396-0296.2004.04002.x.

Lichen simplex chronicus (atopic/neurodermatitis) of the anogenital region.

Lynch PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, Davis, California, USA. 
pjlynch@ucdavis.edu

Lichen simplex chronicus (LSC) of the anogenital area is an eczematous disease 
characterized by unremitting itching and scratching. In most instances, it 
arises in individuals who are genetically atopic, and as such, LSC can be viewed 
as a localized variant of atopic/neurodermatitis. Common triggers for the 
development of the disease include psychological distress, and local 
environmental problems such as heat, sweating, and excess dryness. Lichen 
simplex chronicus may also develop as a superimposed condition in the presence 
of other anogenital diseases such as candidiasis, psoriasis, lichen sclerosus, 
tinea cruris, and neoplasia. Lichen simplex chronicus frequently persists as an 
itch-scratch cycle, even when environmental triggers are removed and the 
underlying disease is treated. For this reason, successful therapy requires 
attention not only to trigger factors, but also to repair of the damaged barrier 
layer, reduction in inflammation, and breakup of the itch-scratch cycle.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1396-0296.2004.04002.x
PMID: 14756886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]