---
reference_id: "PMID:22214486"
title: In vitro study of transporters involved in intestinal absorption of inorganic arsenic.
authors:
- Calatayud M
- Barrios JA
- Vélez D
- Devesa V
journal: Chem Res Toxicol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1021/tx200491f
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vitro study of transporters involved in intestinal absorption of inorganic arsenic.
**Authors:** Calatayud M, Barrios JA, Vélez D, Devesa V
**Journal:** Chem Res Toxicol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1021/tx200491f](https://doi.org/10.1021/tx200491f)

## Content

1. Chem Res Toxicol. 2012 Feb 20;25(2):446-53. doi: 10.1021/tx200491f. Epub 2012 
Jan 26.

In vitro study of transporters involved in intestinal absorption of inorganic 
arsenic.

Calatayud M(1), Barrios JA, Vélez D, Devesa V.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de Alimentos (CSIC) , Av. Agustín 
Escardino, 7, 46980 Paterna, Valencia, Spain.

Inorganic arsenic (iAs) [As(III)+As(V)] is a drinking water contaminant, and 
human exposure to these arsenic species has been linked with a wide range of 
health effects. The main path of exposure is the oral route, and the intestinal 
epithelium is the first physiological barrier that iAs must cross in order to be 
absorbed. However, there is a lack of information about intestinal iAs 
absorption. The aim of this study was to evaluate the participation of certain 
transporters [glucose transporters (GLUT and SGLT), organic anion transporting 
polypeptides (OATPs), aquaporins (AQPs), and phosphate transporters (NaPi and 
PiT)] in intestinal absorption of As(V) and As(III), using the Caco-2 cell line 
as a model of the intestinal epithelium. For this purpose, the effects of 
chemical inhibition and gene silencing of the transporters of interest on iAs 
uptake were evaluated, and also the differential expression of these 
transporters after treatment with iAs. The results show that chemical inhibition 
using rifamycin SV (OATP inhibitor), phloridzin (SGLT inhibitor), phloretin 
(GLUT and AQP inhibitor), and copper sulfate (AQP inhibitor) leads to a 
significant reduction in the apparent permeability and cellular retention of 
As(III). RT-qPCR indicates up-regulation of GLUT2, GLUT5, OATPB, AQP3, and AQP10 
after exposure to As(III), while exposure to As(V) increases the expression of 
sodium-dependent phosphate transporters, especially NaPiIIb. Gene silencing of 
OATPB, AQP10, and GLUT5 for As(III) and NaPiIIb for As(V) significantly reduces 
uptake of the inorganic forms. These results indicate that these transporters 
may be involved in intestinal absorption of iAs.

DOI: 10.1021/tx200491f
PMID: 22214486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]