---
reference_id: "PMID:38031892"
title: Reduction in retinal microvascular perfusion during migraine attacks.
authors:
- Podraza K
- Bangera N
- Feliz A
- Charles A
journal: Headache
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/head.14654
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Adolescent
- Child
- Male
- Fluorescein Angiography/methods
- Prospective Studies
- Retinal Vessels/diagnostic imaging
- Macula Lutea/blood supply
- Migraine with Aura
- Perfusion
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Headache
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduction in retinal microvascular perfusion during migraine attacks.
**Authors:** Podraza K, Bangera N, Feliz A, Charles A
**Journal:** Headache (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/head.14654](https://doi.org/10.1111/head.14654)

## Content

1. Headache. 2024 Jan;64(1):16-36. doi: 10.1111/head.14654. Epub 2023 Nov 30.

Reduction in retinal microvascular perfusion during migraine attacks.

Podraza K(1)(2), Bangera N(1)(3), Feliz A(1), Charles A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, California, 
USA.
(2)Hartford Healthcare Headache Center, Mystic, Connecticut, USA.
(3)Center for Advanced Diagnostics, Evaluation and Therapeutics (CADET NM Inc.), 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine if there are changes in structure and function of the 
retinal vasculature during and between migraine attacks using optical coherence 
tomography angiography (OCTA).
BACKGROUND: Migraine attacks commonly include visual symptoms, but the potential 
role of the retina in these symptoms is not well understood. OCTA is a rapid, 
non-invasive imaging technique that is used to visualize the retinal 
microvasculature with high spatial resolution in a clinical setting. In this 
study we used OCTA to quantify different features of the retinal vasculature in 
patients with migraine during and between attacks, as well as in healthy 
controls (HCs).
METHODS: We performed a prospective cohort study of 37 patients with migraine 
with aura (MA) (median [interquartile range, IQR] age of 37 [14] years, 86% 
female) and 30 with migraine without aura (MO) (median [IQR] age of 
37 [17] years, 77% female) and 20 HCs (median [IQR] age of 35 [7] years, 50% 
female). Macular OCTA scans were obtained for all participants for the 
interictal analysis. In 12 MA and eight MO, scans were captured both during and 
outside of migraine attacks and five HCs had initial and repeat scans. In 
addition to analyzing the morphology of the foveal avascular zone, we calculated 
the vessel flux index (VFI), which is an indicator of retinal perfusion and 
conventional metrics (such as vessel area density) in the foveal and parafoveal 
regions.
RESULTS: There was a significant difference in the parafoveal VFI in the ictal 
state between the groups (p = 0.009). During migraine attacks there was a 
significant reduction in the parafoveal region VFI in MA (-7%, 95% confidence 
interval [CI] -10% to -4%; p = 0.006) and MO (-7%, 95% CI -10% to -3%; 
p = 0.016) from their interictal baseline as compared to the change between 
repeat scans in HCs (2%, 95% CI -3% to 7%). Interictally, there was a mean 
(standard deviation [SD]) 13% (10%) (p = 0.003) lower blood perfusion in the MA 
group as compared to the MO group in the foveal region (mean [SD] 0.093 [0.023] 
vs. 0.107 [0.021], p = 0.003). Interictal analysis also revealed higher 
circularity in the superficial foveal avascular zone in the MA group compared 
with the MO group (mean [SD] 0.686 [0.088] vs. 0.629 [0.120], p = 0.004). In 
addition, interictal analysis of the patients with MA or MO and unilateral 
headache showed increased retinal vascular parameters consistent with greater 
perfusion in the eye ipsilateral to the side of the pain as compared with the 
contralateral eye.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that perfusion is reduced in MA and MO in 
the parafoveal retina during the ictal period. Interictally, the foveal retina 
in MA has reduced perfusion when compared to the foveal retina in MO. Patients 
with unilateral headache showed interictal asymmetry of retinal perfusion 
between eyes. These results indicate that changes in retinal perfusion could be 
a part of migraine pathophysiology, and that distinct retinal vascular 
signatures identified with OCTA could represent biomarkers for migraine.

© 2023 The Authors. Headache: The Journal of Head and Face Pain published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Headache Society.

DOI: 10.1111/head.14654
PMID: 38031892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]