---
reference_id: "PMID:32320389"
title: Vector bionomics and vectorial capacity as emergent properties of mosquito behaviors and ecology.
authors:
- Wu SL
- S치nchez C HM
- Henry JM
- Citron DT
- Zhang Q
- Compton K
- Liang B
- Verma A
- Cummings DAT
- Le Menach A
- Scott TW
- Wilson AL
- Lindsay SW
- Moyes CL
- Hancock PA
- Russell TL
- Burkot TR
- Marshall JM
- Kiware S
- Reiner RC Jr
- Smith DL
journal: PLoS Comput Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007446
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vector bionomics and vectorial capacity as emergent properties of mosquito behaviors and ecology.
**Authors:** Wu SL, S치nchez C HM, Henry JM, Citron DT, Zhang Q, Compton K, Liang B, Verma A, Cummings DAT, Le Menach A, Scott TW, Wilson AL, Lindsay SW, Moyes CL, Hancock PA, Russell TL, Burkot TR, Marshall JM, Kiware S, Reiner RC Jr, Smith DL
**Journal:** PLoS Comput Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007446](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007446)

## Content

1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2020 Apr 22;16(4):e1007446. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007446.  eCollection 2020 Apr.

Vector bionomics and vectorial capacity as emergent properties of mosquito 
behaviors and ecology.

Wu SL(1), S치nchez C HM(1)(2), Henry JM(3), Citron DT(3), Zhang Q(3), Compton 
K(3), Liang B(1), Verma A(4), Cummings DAT(5), Le Menach A(6), Scott TW(7), 
Wilson AL(8), Lindsay SW(9), Moyes CL(10), Hancock PA(10), Russell TL(11), 
Burkot TR(11), Marshall JM(1), Kiware S(12), Reiner RC Jr(3)(13), Smith 
DL(3)(13).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Biostatistics & Epidemiology, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(2)Instituto Tecnol칩gico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, Monterrey, 
Mexico.
(3)Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(4)Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United 
States of America.
(6)Clinton Health Access Initiative, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.
(7)University of California, Davis, California, United States of America.
(8)Liverpool School of Tropical Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Biosciences, University of Durham, Durham, United Kingdom.
(10)Big Data Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(11)Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook University, 
Cairns, Australia.
(12)Ifakara Health Institute, Environmental Health and Ecological Sciences 
Thematic Group, Ifakara, Tanzania.
(13)Department of Health Metrics Sciences, School of Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

Mosquitoes are important vectors for pathogens that infect humans and other 
vertebrate animals. Some aspects of adult mosquito behavior and mosquito ecology 
play an important role in determining the capacity of vector populations to 
transmit pathogens. Here, we re-examine factors affecting the transmission of 
pathogens by mosquitoes using a new approach. Unlike most previous models, this 
framework considers the behavioral states and state transitions of adult 
mosquitoes through a sequence of activity bouts. We developed a new framework 
for individual-based simulation models called MBITES (Mosquito Bout-based and 
Individual-based Transmission Ecology Simulator). In MBITES, it is possible to 
build models that simulate the behavior and ecology of adult mosquitoes in 
exquisite detail on complex resource landscapes generated by spatial point 
processes. We also developed an ordinary differential equation model which is 
the Kolmogorov forward equations for models developed in MBITES under a specific 
set of simplifying assumptions. While mosquito infection and pathogen 
development are one possible part of a mosquito's state, that is not our main 
focus. Using extensive simulation using some models developed in MBITES, we show 
that vectorial capacity can be understood as an emergent property of simple 
behavioral algorithms interacting with complex resource landscapes, and that 
relative density or sparsity of resources and the need to search can have 
profound consequences for mosquito populations' capacity to transmit pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007446
PMCID: PMC7197866
PMID: 32320389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.