---
reference_id: "PMID:21355097"
title: Phase 2 trial of romidepsin in patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Piekarz RL
- Frye R
- Prince HM
- Kirschbaum MH
- Zain J
- Allen SL
- Jaffe ES
- Ling A
- Turner M
- Peer CJ
- Figg WD
- Steinberg SM
- Smith S
- Joske D
- Lewis I
- Hutchins L
- Craig M
- Fojo AT
- Wright JJ
- Bates SE
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312603
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antibiotics, Antineoplastic/pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- "Depsipeptides/pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Large-Cell, Anaplastic/drug therapy"
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous/drug therapy"
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Peripheral/drug therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Remission Induction
- Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Survival Rate
- Tissue Distribution
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase 2 trial of romidepsin in patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Piekarz RL, Frye R, Prince HM, Kirschbaum MH, Zain J, Allen SL, Jaffe ES, Ling A, Turner M, Peer CJ, Figg WD, Steinberg SM, Smith S, Joske D, Lewis I, Hutchins L, Craig M, Fojo AT, Wright JJ, Bates SE
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2010-10-312603](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-10-312603)

## Content

1. Blood. 2011 Jun 2;117(22):5827-34. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312603. Epub
2011  Feb 25.

Phase 2 trial of romidepsin in patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma.

Piekarz RL(1), Frye R, Prince HM, Kirschbaum MH, Zain J, Allen SL, Jaffe ES,
Ling A, Turner M, Peer CJ, Figg WD, Steinberg SM, Smith S, Joske D, Lewis I,
Hutchins L, Craig M, Fojo AT, Wright JJ, Bates SE.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, Division of Cancer Treatment and
Diagnosis, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health/DHHS, 6130
Executive Blvd., Rockville, MD 20852, USA. rpiekarz@nih.gov

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Jun 2;117(22):5787-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-04-340380.

Romidepsin (depsipeptide or FK228) is a histone deacetylase inhibitor, one of a
new class of agents active in T-cell lymphoma. A phase 2 trial was conducted in
cutaneous (CTCL) and peripheral (PTCL) T-cell lymphoma. Major and durable
responses in CTCL supported the approval of romidepsin for CTCL. Forty-seven
patients with PTCL of various subtypes including PTCL NOS, angioimmunoblastic,
ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma, and enteropathy-associated T-cell
lymphoma were enrolled. All patients had received prior therapy with a median of
3 previous treatments (range 1-11); 18 (38%) had undergone stem-cell transplant.
All patients were evaluated for toxicity; 2 patients discovered to be ineligible
were excluded from response assessment. Common toxicities were nausea, fatigue,
and transient thrombocytopenia and granulocytopenia. Complete responses were
observed in 8 and partial responses in 9 of 45 patients, for an overall response
rate of 38% (95% confidence interval 24%-53%). The median duration of overall
response was 8.9 months (range 2-74). Responses were observed in various
subtypes, with 6 responses among the 18 patients with prior stem-cell
transplant. The histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin has single agent
clinical activity associated with durable responses in patients with relapsed
PTCL.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312603
PMCID: PMC3112033
PMID: 21355097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
