---
reference_id: "PMID:37705065"
title: "Is punctate palmoplantar keratoderma type 1 associated with malignancy? A systematic review of the literature."
authors:
- Gram SB
- Bjerrelund J
- Jelsig AM
- Bygum A
- Leboeuf-Yde C
- Ousager LB
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02862-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Neoplasms/genetics
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Family
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is punctate palmoplantar keratoderma type 1 associated with malignancy? A systematic review of the literature.
**Authors:** Gram SB, Bjerrelund J, Jelsig AM, Bygum A, Leboeuf-Yde C, Ousager LB
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02862-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02862-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Sep 13;18(1):290. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02862-8.

Is punctate palmoplantar keratoderma type 1 associated with malignancy? A 
systematic review of the literature.

Gram SB(1)(2), Bjerrelund J(3)(4), Jelsig AM(5), Bygum A(3)(4)(6), Leboeuf-Yde 
C(7), Ousager LB(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, J.B. Winsløws 
Vej 4, Indgang 24, 5000, Odense C, Denmark. stine.bjorn.gram@rsyd.dk.
(2)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark. stine.bjorn.gram@rsyd.dk.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, J.B. Winsløws 
Vej 4, Indgang 24, 5000, Odense C, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(6)Hudklinikken Kolding, Kolding, Denmark.
(7)Institute for Regional Health Research, University of Southern Denmark, 
Odense, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: An association between punctate palmoplantar keratoderma type 1 
(PPPK1) and malignancy has been proposed for decades. Some authors suggest that 
individuals with PPPK1 should undergo screening for various types of 
malignancies while others caution that an association is not well-established. 
In this systematic review, we summarized and evaluated the current evidence for 
a possible association between PPPK1 and malignancy.
METHODS: The review was conducted along PRISMA guidelines. The search used 
Embase, MEDLINE, Scopus, and the Human Gene Mutation Database up to March 2022. 
All studies reporting on individuals with the diagnosis of PPPK1 with or 
without history of malignancy were included. Two authors screened for eligible 
studies, extracted predefined data, and performed a quality assessment.
RESULTS: Of 773 studies identified, 45 were included. Most studies were reports 
on single families (24 of 45 studies) or multiple families (10 of 45 studies). 
The number of index cases with PPPK1 across all included studies was 280, and 
when family members reported with PPPK1 were added, a total of 817 individuals 
were identified. Overall, 23 studies reported on individuals with PPPK1 with a 
history of malignancy, whereas 22 studies reported on individuals with PPPK1 
without a history of malignancy. Although the extracted data were not considered 
to be of sufficient quality to synthesize and answer our research question, the 
review did not confirm an association between PPPK1 and malignancy.
CONCLUSION: This review shows that there is a lack of well-designed studies on 
this topic to conclude whether individuals with PPPK1 have an increased risk of 
malignancy. Based on the present literature, however, we could not confirm an 
association between PPPK1 and malignancy and find it highly questionable if 
patients with PPPK1 should be offered surveillance for malignancies.

© 2023. Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02862-8
PMCID: PMC10500882
PMID: 37705065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.