---
reference_id: "PMID:24156116"
title: GLB1-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Regier DS
- Tifft CJ
- Rothermel CE
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GLB1-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Regier DS, Tifft CJ, Rothermel CE

## Content

1. GLB1-Related Disorders.

Regier DS(1), Tifft CJ(2), Rothermel CE(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2013 Oct 17 [updated 2021 Apr 22].

Author information:
(1)Medical Director, Rare Disease Institute, Children's National Hospital, 
Washington, DC
(2)Deputy Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(3)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: GLB1-related disorders comprise two phenotypically 
distinct lysosomal storage disorders: GM1 gangliosidosis and 
mucopolysaccharidosis type IVB (MPS IVB). The phenotype of GM1 gangliosidosis 
constitutes a spectrum ranging from severe (infantile) to intermediate 
(late-infantile and juvenile) to mild (chronic/adult). Type I (infantile) GM1 
gangliosidosis begins before age 12 months. Prenatal manifestations may include 
nonimmune hydrops fetalis, intrauterine growth restriction, and placental 
vacuolization; congenital dermal melanocytosis (Mongolian spots) may be 
observed. Macular cherry-red spot is detected on eye exam. Progressive central 
nervous system dysfunction leads to spasticity and rapid regression; blindness, 
deafness, decerebrate rigidity, seizures, feeding difficulties, and oral 
secretions are observed. Life expectancy is two to three years. Type II can be 
subdivided into the late-infantile (onset age 1-3 years) and juvenile (onset age 
3-10 years) phenotypes. Central nervous system dysfunction manifests as 
progressive cognitive, motor, and speech decline as measured by psychometric 
testing. There may be mild corneal clouding, hepatosplenomegaly, and/or 
cardiomyopathy; the typical course is characterized by progressive neurologic 
decline, progressive skeletal disease in some individuals (including kyphosis 
and avascular necrosis of the femoral heads), and progressive feeding 
difficulties leading to aspiration risk. Type III begins in late childhood to 
the third decade with generalized dystonia leading to unsteady gait and speech 
disturbance followed by extrapyramidal signs including akinetic-rigid 
parkinsonism. Cardiomyopathy develops in some and skeletal involvement occurs in 
most. Intellectual impairment is common late in the disease with prognosis 
directly related to the degree of neurologic impairment. MPS IVB is 
characterized by skeletal dysplasia with specific findings of axial and 
appendicular dysostosis multiplex, short stature (below 15th centile in adults), 
kyphoscoliosis, coxa/genu valga, joint laxity, platyspondyly, and odontoid 
hypoplasia. First signs and symptoms may be apparent at birth. Bony involvement 
is progressive, with more than 84% of adults requiring ambulation aids; life 
span does not appear to be limited. Corneal clouding is detected in some 
individuals and cardiac valvular disease may develop.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a GLB1-related disorder is established in a 
proband with suggestive clinical findings by identification of biallelic 
pathogenic (or likely pathogenic) variants in GLB1 by molecular genetic testing, 
or of significantly reduced activity of the beta-galactosidase enzyme activity 
in peripheral blood leukocytes or fibroblasts.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Best provided by specialists in 
biochemical genetics, cardiology, orthopedics, and neurology and therapists 
knowledgeable about GLB1-related disorders; surgery is best performed in centers 
with surgeons and anesthesiologists experienced in the care of individuals with 
lysosomal storage disorders; early and ongoing interventions to optimize 
comfort, mobility, educational and social outcomes. Anesthetic expertise and 
precautions are necessary to anticipate and manage complications relating to 
skeletal involvement and airway compromise. Surveillance: GM1 gangliosidosis. 
Assess yearly: quality of life by neurologist, physiotherapist and nutritionist; 
seizure risk by a neurologist; cervical spine stability; and hip dislocation 
risk. Perform every one to three years: electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, and 
eye examination. MPS IVB. Yearly: ocular exam; assess lower extremities for 
malalignment, hips for dysplasia/subluxation, thoracolumbar spine for kyphosis, 
and cervical spine for instability; assessment by physiotherapist to optimize 
ambulation; perform endurance tests to evaluate functional status of the 
cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and nervous systems. Perform 
electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Unplanned anesthesia management due to increased 
risk for complications; psychotropic medications because of the risk of 
worsening neurologic disease; positioning that increases aspiration risk during 
feedings, seizure medication dosages that result in excessive sedation, and 
circumstances that exacerbate fall risk for those with GM1 gangliosidosis; 
excessive weight gain in those with MPS IVB.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GLB1-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a GLB1 
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% 
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the GLB1 pathogenic 
variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for 
at-risk relatives and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 24156116