---
reference_id: "PMID:34751445"
title: "Hypopigmented lesions in pityriasis lichenoides chronica patients: Are they only post-inflammatory hypopigmentation?"
authors:
- Elbendary A
- Abdel-Halim MRE
- Youssef R
- Abdel Halim D
- Elmasry MF
- Gad A
- El Sharkawy DA
journal: Australas J Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ajd.13746
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Hypopigmentation/pathology
- Male
- Pityriasis Lichenoides/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypopigmented lesions in pityriasis lichenoides chronica patients: Are they only post-inflammatory hypopigmentation?
**Authors:** Elbendary A, Abdel-Halim MRE, Youssef R, Abdel Halim D, Elmasry MF, Gad A, El Sharkawy DA
**Journal:** Australas J Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ajd.13746](https://doi.org/10.1111/ajd.13746)

## Content

1. Australas J Dermatol. 2022 Feb;63(1):68-73. doi: 10.1111/ajd.13746. Epub 2021
Nov 9.

Hypopigmented lesions in pityriasis lichenoides chronica patients: Are they only
post-inflammatory hypopigmentation?

Elbendary A(1), Abdel-Halim MRE(1), Youssef R(1), Abdel Halim D(1), Elmasry
MF(1), Gad A(2)(3), El Sharkawy DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Department, Kasr Alainy Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University,
Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Lowell General Hospital, Lowell, MA, USA.
(3)Biostatistics and Cancer Epidemiology Department, National Cancer Institute,
Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Pityriasis lichenoides chronica (PLC) lesions are
reported to subside with post-inflammatory hypopigmentation (PIH); hence, the
most widely perceived nature of hypopigmented macules in PLC is PIH. However, to
the best of our knowledge, no studies describing histopathological findings in
these lesions are reported in literature. The aim of this study is to evaluate
the hypopigmented lesions encountered in PLC patients and to shed light on their
histopathological features.
METHODS: A cross-sectional observational study included twenty-one patients with
PLC recruited in a period of twelve months. Clinical characteristics of each
patient were collected. A skin biopsy from hypopigmented lesions whenever
present was taken and assessed with routine haematoxylin and eosin stain.
RESULTS: Seventeen patients (81%) were less than 13 years old. Most patients
(85.7%) demonstrated diffuse distribution of lesions. Hypopigmented lesions were
present on the face in 12 (57.14%) patients. Histopathologically, hypopigmented
lesions showed features of post-inflammatory hypopigmentation in 19% of
patients, residual PLC in 52.4% and active PLC 28.6% of patients.
CONCLUSION: Hypopigmented lesions in PLC were noted mainly in younger ages,
histopathologically they may show features of active or residual disease, beyond
post-inflammatory hypopigmentation. Consequently active treatment for patients
presenting predominantly with hypopigmented lesions could be required to control
the disease.

© 2021 Australasian College of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ajd.13746
PMID: 34751445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
