---
reference_id: "PMID:39429812"
title: "Neuropsychiatric prodromes and symptom timings in relation to disease onset and/or flares in SLE: results from the mixed methods international INSPIRE study."
authors:
- Sloan M
- Bourgeois JA
- Leschziner G
- Pollak TA
- Pitkanen M
- Harwood R
- Bosley M
- Bortoluzzi A
- Andreoli L
- Diment W
- Brimicombe J
- Ubhi M
- Barrere C
- Naughton F
- Gordon C
- "D'Cruz D"
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102634
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychiatric prodromes and symptom timings in relation to disease onset and/or flares in SLE: results from the mixed methods international INSPIRE study.
**Authors:** Sloan M, Bourgeois JA, Leschziner G, Pollak TA, Pitkanen M, Harwood R, Bosley M, Bortoluzzi A, Andreoli L, Diment W, Brimicombe J, Ubhi M, Barrere C, Naughton F, Gordon C, D'Cruz D
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102634](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102634)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2024 May 20;73:102634. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102634.
eCollection 2024 Jul.

Neuropsychiatric prodromes and symptom timings in relation to disease onset
and/or flares in SLE: results from the mixed methods international INSPIRE
study.

Sloan M(1), Bourgeois JA(2), Leschziner G(3), Pollak TA(4), Pitkanen M(4),
Harwood R(5), Bosley M(6), Bortoluzzi A(7), Andreoli L(8)(9), Diment W(6),
Brimicombe J(1), Ubhi M(10), Barrere C(6), Naughton F(11), Gordon C(10), D'Cruz
D(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care Unit, University of Cambridge,
UK.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of California,
Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, CA, United States.
(3)Department of Neurology, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK.
(4)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London,
and South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(5)Swansea University Medical School, Wales, UK.
(6)Patient and Public Co-Investigators.
(7)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara and
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria S. Anna, Ferrara, Italy.
(8)Unit of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, ASST Spedali Civili, Italy.
(9)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia,
Brescia, Italy.
(10)Rheumatology Research Group, Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, College
of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(11)Behavioural and Implementation Science Group, School of Health Sciences,
University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(12)The Louise Coote Lupus Unit, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Neuropsychiatric symptoms in SLE and other systemic autoimmune
rheumatic diseases (SARDs) are challenging to diagnose, attribute and manage. We
investigated the timings of onset of a broad range of neuropsychiatric (NP)
symptoms in relation to timing of SLE onset. In addition, we explored whether NP
symptoms may be a prodrome to SARD onset and to subsequent flares.
METHODS: We collected patient reports of the timing of their first episode of 29
NP symptoms relative to SLE non-NP symptom onset. Surveys (n = 676 SLE patients
and n = 400 clinicians) and interviews (n = 50 clinicians; and n = 69 SARD
patients, including 27 SLE patients) were completed from 2022 to 2023, and
analysed using mixed methods.
FINDINGS: The majority of NP symptoms did not first present around the time of
SLE onset, contrary to the prevailing view among many rheumatology participants
and in the literature. For example, among patients who experienced
hallucinations, 54% reported first presentation >1 year after disease onset.
Patient interviews also revealed that a range of NP symptoms may be a prodrome
to SLE/SARDs onset and later flares, including symptoms not represented in
existing classification criteria. Evidence of a possible prodromal syndrome was
elicited from those patients who experienced hallucinations. Of these, 61% (SLE)
and 34% (other SARDs) reported increasingly disrupted dreaming sleep (usually
nightmares) prior to their hallucinations. In-depth interviews revealed that
progression of symptoms in flares showed a high degree of inter-patient
variation, whilst symptom progression was often similar in individual patient's
recurrent flares.
INTERPRETATION: Neuropsychiatric symptoms can first present at any stage in the
SLE disease course. Attributional decisions should evaluate timings of NP
symptoms in relation to timing of SLE/SARD symptom onset rather than time of
diagnosis due to frequent diagnostic delays. Greater recognition of
prodromal/early NP symptoms indicating impending SLE flares (and potentially
other SARD flares) could enable quicker flare identification and treatment.
FUNDING: The Lupus Trust.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102634
PMCID: PMC11490656
PMID: 39429812

Conflict of interest statement: MS was funded by The Lupus Trust for this study
via funding provided to Cambridge University. JAB has received speaking fees
from Psychiatric Times and Oakstone and receives royalties from American
Psychiatric Publishing, Springer International, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
and Cambridge University Press. LA has received consultancy fees/speaker fees
from: Eli Lilly, Glaxo Smith Kline, Janssen, Novartis, Pfizer, UCB, and Werfen
Group, CG reports consultancy/advisory fees from: Alumis, Amgen, Astra-Zeneca,
Sanofi, UCB and MGP. DD’C reports consultancy/speaker fees from GSK, Eli Lilly,
Vifor and UCB, and a leadership role on the board of APS support UK. All other
authors declare no potential conflicts of interest. TP was supported by the
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London. This
paper represents independent research part-funded by the National Institute for
Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at South London and Maudsley
NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London. The views expressed are those of
the study participants and/or author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS,
the funders, the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.
