---
reference_id: "PMID:27749330"
title: "Targeting DNA Repair: The Role of PARP Inhibition in the Treatment of Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer."
authors:
- Castro E
- Mateo J
- Olmos D
- de Bono JS
journal: Cancer J
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000219
keywords:
- DNA Repair
- Humans
- Male
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant/drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting DNA Repair: The Role of PARP Inhibition in the Treatment of Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer.
**Authors:** Castro E, Mateo J, Olmos D, de Bono JS
**Journal:** Cancer J (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PPO.0000000000000219](https://doi.org/10.1097/PPO.0000000000000219)

## Content

1. Cancer J. 2016 Sep/Oct;22(5):353-356. doi: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000219.

Targeting DNA Repair: The Role of PARP Inhibition in the Treatment of
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer.

Castro E(1), Mateo J, Olmos D, de Bono JS.

Author information:
(1)From the *Prostate Cancer Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre
(CNIO); and †HM Hospitales-Centro Integral Oncológico HM Clara Campal, Madrid,
Spain; ‡Divisions of Cancer Therapeutics and Clinical Studies, The Institute of
Cancer Research; and §Drug Development Unit, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation
Trust, London, United Kingdom; and ∥CNIO-IBIMA Genitourinary Cancer Unit at
Hospital Virgen de la Victoria and Hospital Regional de Malaga, Malaga, Spain.

Several genomic studies have identified DNA repair gene defects in prostate
cancer in the last 5 years. The mechanisms by which these DNA repair defects
promote carcinogenesis and tumor progression in the prostate have not been fully
elucidated, but their presence in at least 20-25% of metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancers (CRPCs) provides an opportunity for a
therapeutic strategy that turns a tumor strength into its weakness and may lead
to arguably the first molecularly stratified treatment for this
disease.Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors have been developed as an
anticancer synthetic lethal therapeutic strategy for tumors with impaired
homologous recombination DNA repair, based on a synthetic lethal effect.
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors have shown to induce significant tumor
responses in cancer patients carrying germline BRCA1/2 mutations. Recent
evidence from a phase II clinical trial supports further testing of PARP
inhibitors for the treatment of metastatic CRPC with either germline or somatic
defects in BRCA2, ATM, PALB2, and other DNA repair genes.We review the current
evidence of how this strategy is relevant for the treatment of advanced prostate
cancers, the available data from trials with PARP inhibitors in metastatic CRPC,
and the ongoing studies analyzing combinations of these drugs with other
therapies.

DOI: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000219
PMID: 27749330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
