---
reference_id: "PMID:20049135"
title: Recent insights into the mechanisms of vasospastic angina.
authors:
- Yoo SY
- Kim JY
journal: Korean Circ J
year: '2009'
doi: 10.4070/kcj.2009.39.12.505
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent insights into the mechanisms of vasospastic angina.
**Authors:** Yoo SY, Kim JY
**Journal:** Korean Circ J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.4070/kcj.2009.39.12.505](https://doi.org/10.4070/kcj.2009.39.12.505)

## Content

1. Korean Circ J. 2009 Dec;39(12):505-11. doi: 10.4070/kcj.2009.39.12.505. Epub 
2009 Dec 30.

Recent insights into the mechanisms of vasospastic angina.

Yoo SY(1), Kim JY.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Gangneung Asan Hospital, Gangneung, Korea.

Coronary artery spasm plays an important role in the pathogenesis of many types 
of ischemic heart disease, not only in vasospastic angina but also in myocardial 
infarction and sudden death, particularly in the asian population. Patients with 
vasospastic angina are known to have defective endothelial function due to 
reduced nitric oxide bioavailability. Moreover, markers of oxidative stress and 
plasma levels of C-reactive protein are elevated. Smoking, polymorphysms of 
endothelial nitric oxide synthetase (eNOS), and low-grade inflammation have been 
regarded as the most important risk factors for vasospastic angina. The recent 
body of evidence indicates that RhoA and its down stream effector, 
ROCK/Rho-kinase, are associated with hypercontraction of vascular smooth muscle 
of the coronary artery and regulation of eNOS activity. Thus, endothelial 
dysfunction through abnormalities of eNOS and enhanced contractility of vascular 
smooth muscle in coronary artery segments are considered major mechanisms in 
vasospastic angina. However, the precise mechanisms for coronary vasospasm are 
not well understood. This article will review current understanding of the 
mechanism of coronary artery spasm.

DOI: 10.4070/kcj.2009.39.12.505
PMCID: PMC2801457
PMID: 20049135