---
reference_id: "PMID:37761349"
title: "Thymoma: An Overview."
authors:
- Alqaidy D
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13182982
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thymoma: An Overview.
**Authors:** Alqaidy D
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics13182982](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13182982)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Sep 18;13(18):2982. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics13182982.

Thymoma: An Overview.

Alqaidy D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi
Arabia.

Thymomas are considered one of the most prevalent types of mediastinal
epithelial tumors, which frequently develop in the anterior mediastinum. Due to
their rarity, these tumors' nomenclature, classification, and staging are likely
to be the subject of debate and argument for most expert pathologists.
Furthermore, the significance of thymoma histologic classifications have been
debated over the past twenty years. While certain advocates argue that staging
at the time of diagnosis is more significant, others believe that histologic
subtyping has a significant impact on how patients behave clinically. In this
review, we will focus on some of the challenges that diagnostic surgical
pathologists may experience while evaluating the histopathology of thymomas and
staging these tumors. We will additionally glance over the clinical
characteristics of these distinct tumors and the current management strategy.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13182982
PMCID: PMC10527963
PMID: 37761349

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.
