---
reference_id: "PMID:2135393"
title: Tau protein and neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Kosik KS
journal: Mol Neurobiol
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1007/BF02780339
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tau protein and neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Kosik KS
**Journal:** Mol Neurobiol (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02780339](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02780339)

## Content

1. Mol Neurobiol. 1990 Fall-Winter;4(3-4):171-9. doi: 10.1007/BF02780339.

Tau protein and neurodegeneration.

Kosik KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology (Neuroscience), Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

Many of the human neurodegenerative conditions involve a reorganization of the 
neuronal cytoskeleton. The way in which the cytoskeleton is reorganized may 
provide a clue to the nature of the insult causing the neurodegeneration. The 
most common of these conditions is Alzheimer's disease, in which microtubules 
are lost from neurites that fill up with filamentous structures. One component 
of the filamentous structures is the microtubule-associated protein (MAP), tau. 
The tau protein is the product of a single gene expressed predominantly in 
neurons. The tau gene undergoes complex alternative splicing that is regulated 
both by development, and by the particular neuronal cell population in which it 
is expressed. Tau protein can be further modified, following its translation by 
phosphorylation at several sites. Much of the recent interest in the transition 
of tau to an abnormal state within a tangle-bearing neuron has focused on 
phosphorylation. A group of proteins that migrate slightly more slowly than tau, 
designated PHF-tau, are found in regions of the Alzheimer brain rich in 
dystrophic neurites, are hyperphosphorylated, fail to bind to microtubules, have 
distinct solubility properties, and can be derived from fractions of paired 
helical filaments (PHF).

DOI: 10.1007/BF02780339
PMID: 2135393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]