---
reference_id: "PMID:36653468"
title: Computational analysis of ventricular mechanics in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients.
authors:
- Mojumder J
- Fan L
- Nguyen T
- Campbell KS
- Wenk JF
- Guccione JM
- Abraham T
- Lee LC
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-28037-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Computational analysis of ventricular mechanics in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients.
**Authors:** Mojumder J, Fan L, Nguyen T, Campbell KS, Wenk JF, Guccione JM, Abraham T, Lee LC
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-28037-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28037-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Jan 18;13(1):958. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-28037-w.

Computational analysis of ventricular mechanics in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
patients.

Mojumder J(1), Fan L(1), Nguyen T(2), Campbell KS(3), Wenk JF(4), Guccione 
JM(5), Abraham T(2), Lee LC(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Cardiology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology & Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, 
USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA, USA.
(6)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI, USA. lclee@egr.msu.edu.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a genetic heart disease that is associated 
with many pathological features, such as a reduction in global longitudinal 
strain (GLS), myofiber disarray and hypertrophy. The effects of these features 
on left ventricle (LV) function are, however, not clear in two phenotypes of 
HCM, namely, obstructive and non-obstructive. To address this issue, we 
developed patient-specific computational models of the LV using clinical 
measurements from 2 female HCM patients and a control subject. Left ventricular 
mechanics was described using an active stress formulation and myofiber disarray 
was described using a structural tensor in the constitutive models. Unloaded LV 
configuration for each subject was first determined from their respective 
end-diastole LV geometries segmented from the cardiac magnetic resonance images, 
and an empirical single-beat estimation of the end-diastolic pressure volume 
relationship. The LV was then connected to a closed-loop circulatory model and 
calibrated using the clinically measured LV pressure and volume waveforms, peak 
GLS and blood pressure. Without consideration of myofiber disarray, peak 
myofiber tension was found to be lowest in the obstructive HCM subject (60 kPa), 
followed by the non-obstructive subject (242 kPa) and the control subject 
(375 kPa). With increasing myofiber disarray, we found that peak tension has to 
increase in the HCM models to match the clinical measurements. In the 
obstructive HCM patient, however, peak tension was still depressed (cf. normal 
subject) at the largest degree of myofiber disarray found in the clinic. The 
computational modeling workflow proposed here can be used in future studies with 
more HCM patient data.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-28037-w
PMCID: PMC9849405
PMID: 36653468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.