---
reference_id: "PMID:36085074"
title: Association of novel MUC16, MAP3K15 and ABCA1 mutation with giant congenital melanocytic nevus.
authors:
- Zhou R
- Wang Q
- Hou J
- Wang D
- Liang Y
journal: Hereditas
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s41065-022-00247-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of novel MUC16, MAP3K15 and ABCA1 mutation with giant congenital melanocytic nevus.
**Authors:** Zhou R, Wang Q, Hou J, Wang D, Liang Y
**Journal:** Hereditas (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s41065-022-00247-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s41065-022-00247-8)

## Content

1. Hereditas. 2022 Sep 9;159(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s41065-022-00247-8.

Association of novel MUC16, MAP3K15 and ABCA1 mutation with giant congenital 
melanocytic nevus.

Zhou R(#)(1), Wang Q(#)(1), Hou J(1), Wang D(2), Liang Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine, 639 Zhi Zao Ju Road, 
Shanghai, 200011, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine, 639 Zhi Zao Ju Road, 
Shanghai, 200011, People's Republic of China. wangdanru1776@163.com.
(3)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine, 639 Zhi Zao Ju Road, 
Shanghai, 200011, People's Republic of China. liangyimin114086@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Giant congenital melanocytic nevus (GCMN) is the benign 
nevomelanocytic proliferation. Mutations in NRAS have been previously detected 
in GCMN, but mutations in BRAF are generally lacking in the Chinese population. 
Mutated genes in this disease can estimate the risk of malignant transformation 
in GCMN. Therefore, it is worth investigating the genetic information of GCMN.
METHODS: Here, we presented two cases of GCMN of the upper extremities. The 
clinical and histological data were analyzed. The whole exome sequencing (WES) 
was performed to investigate the mutational profile of peripheral venous blood 
(PB), normal skin (NS), small melanocytic nevus (SMN), deep penetrating and 
non-penetrating GCMN (dPGCMN and nPGCMN).
RESULTS: We showed a reduction in the circumference of involved upper 
extremities in both patients. The clinical and histopathological data indicated 
the reduction of adipose tissue associated with the invasion of GCMN. The WES 
data revealed that MUC16, MAP3K15 and ABCA1 were novel potential candidate genes 
for the disease as well as biomarkers for predicting malignant transformation.
CONCLUSION: The MUC16, MAP3K15 and ABCA1 may serve as novel biomarkers for 
predicting malignant transformation and targets for the diagnoses and therapy 
for the GCMN.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s41065-022-00247-8
PMCID: PMC9463767
PMID: 36085074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Written informed consent was obtained from the 
patients’ guardians for publication.