---
reference_id: "PMID:39824452"
title: AFB1 consolidates HBV harm to induce liver injury and carcinogenic risk by inactivating FTCD-AS1-PXR-MASP1 axis.
authors:
- Xing Y
- Zhong W
- Wu X
- Ni Z
- Lv W
- Fan Y
- Chen L
- Lin H
- Xie Y
- Lin J
- Niu Y
journal: Toxicology
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2025.154057
keywords:
- Animals
- "Pregnane X Receptor/metabolism, genetics"
- Humans
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- Hepatitis B virus
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, pathology, metabolism, virology"
- Hep G2 Cells
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/chemically induced, pathology, metabolism, virology"
- "Chemical and Drug Induced Liver Injury/pathology, metabolism, virology"
- Hepatitis B/complications
- Tupaiidae
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Male
- "Liver/drug effects, pathology, metabolism"
- Tupaia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AFB1 consolidates HBV harm to induce liver injury and carcinogenic risk by inactivating FTCD-AS1-PXR-MASP1 axis.
**Authors:** Xing Y, Zhong W, Wu X, Ni Z, Lv W, Fan Y, Chen L, Lin H, Xie Y, Lin J, Niu Y
**Journal:** Toxicology (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tox.2025.154057](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2025.154057)

## Content

1. Toxicology. 2025 Feb;511:154057. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2025.154057. Epub 2025 Jan
 15.

AFB1 consolidates HBV harm to induce liver injury and carcinogenic risk by
inactivating FTCD-AS1-PXR-MASP1 axis.

Xing Y(1), Zhong W(1), Wu X(1), Ni Z(1), Lv W(1), Fan Y(1), Chen L(1), Lin H(1),
Xie Y(2), Lin J(3), Niu Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou
515041, China.
(2)Department of Experimental Animal Center, Medical College of Shantou
University, Shantou 515041, China.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shantou
University Medical College, Shantou 515041, China. Electronic address:
jwlin3@126.com.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou
515041, China. Electronic address: ydniu@stu.edu.cn.

Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) has been reported to synergize with hepatitis B virus (HBV)
to induce development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Precise daily exposure
to AFB1 and its contribution to liver injury have not been quantified and have
even been disregarded due to lack of convenient detection, and the strong
species specificity of HBV infection has restricted research on their
synergistic harm. Hence, our objective was to investigate the molecular
mechanisms by which AFB1 exacerbates HBV-related injury. We constructed tree
shrew models with 400 μg HBV plasmid and 4 mg/kg AFB1 co-exposure for 4-6 days.
Injury and molecule expression resulting from HBV and AFB1 toxicity were
observed in vivo and in vitro. Expression datasets of tree shrew livers, human
HCC, and pregnane X receptor (PXR) activation were employed to screen vital
pathways and target genes. The oncogenic hepatitis B virus x (HBx) protein,
HBV-related histopathological damage, metabolic dysregulation, and several
cancer-related signaling pathways were enriched in injured tree shrew livers,
and PXR signaling was inhibited after co-exposure to HBV and AFB1. Furthermore,
in human HCC and HBV-integrated Hep3B and HepG2.215 cells, FTCD Antisense RNA 1
(FTCD-AS1), PXR and mannose-binding lectin-associated serine protease 1 (MASP1)
exhibited strong correlation. Overexpression of FTCD-AS1 and PXR alleviated cell
damage in exposure to 5 μM AFB1 for 48 h. In summary, inactivation of the
FTCD-AS1-PXR-MASP1 axis was pinpointed as the key event in AFB1-enhanced HBV
infection, metabolic dysregulation and carcinogenic injury.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2025.154057
PMID: 39824452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
