---
reference_id: "PMID:1515761"
title: "Collagen type II in Langer-Saldino achondrogenesis: absence of major abnormalities in a less severe case."
authors:
- Bätge B
- Nerlich A
- Brenner R
- Yang C
- Müller PK
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.1992.tb12194.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Collagen type II in Langer-Saldino achondrogenesis: absence of major abnormalities in a less severe case.
**Authors:** Bätge B, Nerlich A, Brenner R, Yang C, Müller PK
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1651-2227.1992.tb12194.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1651-2227.1992.tb12194.x)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 1992 Feb;81(2):158-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.1992.tb12194.x.

Collagen type II in Langer-Saldino achondrogenesis: absence of major 
abnormalities in a less severe case.

Bätge B(1), Nerlich A, Brenner R, Yang C, Müller PK.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Universität, 
Lübeck, Germany.

Collagen extracted either from cartilage or synthesized in vitro was analyzed to 
identify possible molecular defects in the cartilaginous matrix of a male fetus 
suffering from a mild form of type II achondrogenesis (Langer-Saldino). The 
tissue architecture of the patient's cartilage was markedly altered and showed 
numerous fibrous vascular canals which were focally stained by antibodies 
against collagens I and III. Collagen II was present, although heterogenously 
distributed throughout the cartilaginous matrix. Upon electrophoretic 
separation, however, the patient's femoral head cartilage showed the presence of 
collagens II, IX and XI only, which was similar to an age-matched control. The 
hydroxyproline/hydroxylysine ratio of collagen II of the patient was not 
significantly different from that of the control. Likewise, the compositions of 
collagens synthesized by cultured chondrocytes as well as fibroblasts were 
similar in the patient and the control. The results provide strong evidence 
that, in the present mild case of Langer-Saldino achondrogenesis, collagen II is 
expressed and regularly hydroxylated at its lysyl residues. This may indicate 
that cartilage components other than collagen II may be responsible for the 
altered tissue organization observed. Along with previous observations, our data 
suggest that the degree of biochemical matrix alterations may be related to the 
severity of the clinical phenotype.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.1992.tb12194.x
PMID: 1515761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]