---
reference_id: "PMID:34668833"
title: "Proteus Syndrome: Case Report with Anatomopathological Correlation."
authors:
- Arredondo Montero J
- Bronte Anaut M
- López-Gutiérrez JC
journal: Fetal Pediatr Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/15513815.2021.1989097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteus Syndrome: Case Report with Anatomopathological Correlation.
**Authors:** Arredondo Montero J, Bronte Anaut M, López-Gutiérrez JC
**Journal:** Fetal Pediatr Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15513815.2021.1989097](https://doi.org/10.1080/15513815.2021.1989097)

## Content

1. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2022 Oct;41(5):861-864. doi: 
10.1080/15513815.2021.1989097. Epub 2021 Oct 20.

Proteus Syndrome: Case Report with Anatomopathological Correlation.

Arredondo Montero J(1), Bronte Anaut M(2), López-Gutiérrez JC(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Surgery Department, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, 
Spain.
(2)Pathology Department, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(3)Pediatric Surgery Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

Background: Proteus syndrome is characterized by a progressive segmental or 
patchy growth of bone, skin, adipose tissue, and central nervous system, 
associated with a wide range of neoplasms, pulmonary pathology, and thrombotic 
risk. The main histological findings are diffuse patchy overgrowth of skin and 
subcutaneous tissue, plantar cerebriform connective tissue nevus, and 
ossification defects. Case report: We present a patient that met the clinical 
and histological criteria necessary for the diagnosis of the disease. He 
required multiple surgical interventions, including amputation of the right 
foot. Genetic evaluation confirmed an AKT1 mutation. Discussion: CLOVES 
syndrome, neurofibromatosis 1 or PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome are partially 
superimposable entities to Proteus syndrome and may generate diagnostic doubt. 
Although the clinical criteria and histologic findings are indicative, the 
diagnostic confirmation of this entity is genetic.

DOI: 10.1080/15513815.2021.1989097
PMID: 34668833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]