---
reference_id: "PMID:11465871"
title: "Menière's disease: pathophysiology and treatment."
authors:
- Thai-Van H
- Bounaix MJ
- Fraysse B
journal: Drugs
year: '2001'
doi: 10.2165/00003495-200161080-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Menière's disease: pathophysiology and treatment.
**Authors:** Thai-Van H, Bounaix MJ, Fraysse B
**Journal:** Drugs (2001)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00003495-200161080-00005](https://doi.org/10.2165/00003495-200161080-00005)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2001;61(8):1089-102. doi: 10.2165/00003495-200161080-00005.

Menière's disease: pathophysiology and treatment.

Thai-Van H(1), Bounaix MJ, Fraysse B.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Explorations Fonctionnelles ORL et Audiophonologiques, Hĵpital 
Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France. hung.thaivan@chu-lyon.fr

Menière's disease is defined by the association of 4 symptoms: vertigo attacks, 
fluctuating hearing loss, tinnitus and an auricular plenitude sensation. The 
pathophysiology is commonly explained by a distension of membranous labyrinth by 
the endolymph, equally called endolymphatic hydrops. Recent studies also tend to 
relate the disease to immune mechanisms. The treatment is medical in the 
majority of patients but there is no international consensus on the management 
of the different stages of Menière's disease. Regarding the lack of clinical 
studies clearly demonstrating the effectiveness of a certain therapy or another. 
the recommendations are usually based on the empirical experience of 
practitioners and on the observation of a marked amelioration at 2 years of 
treatment in the majority of patients. The treatment of the acute phase of 
Menière's disease is basically symptomatic. Vestibular suppressant drugs have a 
well-established record in controlling acute attacks of vertigo. Most have 
variable anticholinergic, anti-emetic and vestibular sedative effects. If 
necessary, the administration of benzodiazepines will help to alleviate anxiety. 
Long term management of Menière's disease includes a low salt diet, the use of 
diuretics in the post-crisis phase, and the very common use in Europe of 
histaminergic agents. Corticosteroids are used in bilateral forms of Menière's 
disease, particularly if an autoimmune basis is suspected. All authors insist on 
the interest and the importance of regular follow-up, especially with regard to 
the psychological status and responsiveness to treatment of the patient. 
Surgical indications are rare and the least invasive procedures are used first. 
The choice of the procedure should take into consideration the need to preserve 
the auditory function of the patient.

DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200161080-00005
PMID: 11465871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]