---
reference_id: "PMID:28583445"
title: Novel concepts of prevention and treatment of atopic dermatitis through barrier and immune manipulations with implications for the atopic march.
authors:
- Czarnowicki T
- Krueger JG
- Guttman-Yassky E
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2017.04.004
keywords:
- Animals
- Antimicrobial Cationic Peptides/immunology
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/immunology, prevention & control, therapy"
- Environment
- Humans
- Skin/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel concepts of prevention and treatment of atopic dermatitis through barrier and immune manipulations with implications for the atopic march.
**Authors:** Czarnowicki T, Krueger JG, Guttman-Yassky E
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2017.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2017.04.004)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017 Jun;139(6):1723-1734. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2017.04.004.

Novel concepts of prevention and treatment of atopic dermatitis through barrier 
and immune manipulations with implications for the atopic march.

Czarnowicki T(1), Krueger JG(1), Guttman-Yassky E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and the Immunology Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, 
Rockefeller University, New York, NY.
(2)Department of Dermatology and the Immunology Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, 
Rockefeller University, New York, NY. Electronic address: 
emma.guttman@mountsinai.org.

Skin barrier abnormalities have been suggested to play an essential role in 
initiation of early atopic dermatitis (AD). Antigen penetration through a 
compromised barrier likely leads to increased innate immune responses, 
antigen-presenting cell stimulation, and priming of overt cutaneous disease. In 
a TH2-promoting environment, T-cell/B-cell interactions occurring in regional 
lymph nodes lead to excessive IgE switch. Concurrent redistribution of memory T 
cells into the circulation not only leads to exacerbation of AD through T-cell 
skin infiltration but also spreads beyond the skin to initiate the atopic march, 
which includes food allergy, asthma, and allergic rhinitis. Possible primary 
interventions to prevent AD are focusing on improving skin barrier integrity, 
including supplementing barrier function with moisturizers. As for secondary 
prophylaxis in children with established AD, this can be stratified into 
prevention of disease exacerbations by using proactive approaches (with either 
topical corticosteroids or topical calcineurin inhibitors) in mild AD cases or 
the prevention of other atopic disorders that will probably mandate systemic 
immunosuppression in severe AD cases.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2017.04.004
PMID: 28583445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]