---
reference_id: "PMID:36332998"
title: "Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Risk: The Role of Environmental Factors."
authors:
- Liu JL
- Woo JMP
- Parks CG
- Costenbader KH
- Jacobsen S
- Bernatsky S
journal: Rheum Dis Clin North Am
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.rdc.2022.06.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Risk: The Role of Environmental Factors.
**Authors:** Liu JL, Woo JMP, Parks CG, Costenbader KH, Jacobsen S, Bernatsky S
**Journal:** Rheum Dis Clin North Am (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rdc.2022.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rdc.2022.06.005)

## Content

1. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2022 Nov;48(4):827-843. doi:
10.1016/j.rdc.2022.06.005.  Epub 2022 Oct 1.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Risk: The Role of Environmental Factors.

Liu JL(1), Woo JMP(2), Parks CG(2), Costenbader KH(3), Jacobsen S(4), Bernatsky 
S(5).

Author information:
(1)McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Epidemiology Branch, Department of Health and Human Services, National 
Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, 
Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation and Immunity, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Copenhagen Lupus and Vasculitis Clinic, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Denmark.
(5)Centre for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: 
sasha.bernatsky@mcgill.ca.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex, chronic autoimmune disease. The 
etiology of SLE is multifactorial and includes potential environmental triggers, 
which may occur sequentially (the "multi-hit" hypothesis). This review focuses 
on SLE risk potentially associated with environmental factors including 
infections, the microbiome, diet, respirable exposures (eg, crystalline silica, 
smoking, air pollution), organic pollutants, heavy metals, and ultraviolet 
radiation.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rdc.2022.06.005
PMCID: PMC12452043
PMID: 36332998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have nothing to disclose.