---
reference_id: "PMID:20545704"
title: "Phenotypes of childhood asthma: are they real?"
authors:
- Spycher BD
- Silverman M
- Kuehni CE
journal: Clin Exp Allergy
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2010.03541.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypes of childhood asthma: are they real?
**Authors:** Spycher BD, Silverman M, Kuehni CE
**Journal:** Clin Exp Allergy (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2222.2010.03541.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2222.2010.03541.x)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Allergy. 2010 Aug;40(8):1130-41. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2222.2010.03541.x.  Epub 2010 Jun 7.

Phenotypes of childhood asthma: are they real?

Spycher BD(1), Silverman M, Kuehni CE.

Author information:
(1)Swiss Paediatric Respiratory Research Group, Institute of Social and 
Preventive Medicine (ISPM), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

It has been suggested that there are several distinct phenotypes of childhood 
asthma or childhood wheezing. Here, we review the research relating to these 
phenotypes, with a focus on the methods used to define and validate them. 
Childhood wheezing disorders manifest themselves in a range of observable 
(phenotypic) features such as lung function, bronchial responsiveness, atopy and 
a highly variable time course (prognosis). The underlying causes are not 
sufficiently understood to define disease entities based on aetiology. 
Nevertheless, there is a need for a classification that would (i) facilitate 
research into aetiology and pathophysiology, (ii) allow targeted treatment and 
preventive measures and (iii) improve the prediction of long-term outcome. 
Classical attempts to define phenotypes have been one-dimensional, relying on 
few or single features such as triggers (exclusive viral wheeze vs. multiple 
trigger wheeze) or time course (early transient wheeze, persistent and late 
onset wheeze). These definitions are simple but essentially subjective. 
Recently, a multi-dimensional approach has been adopted. This approach is based 
on a wide range of features and relies on multivariate methods such as cluster 
or latent class analysis. Phenotypes identified in this manner are more complex 
but arguably more objective. Although phenotypes have an undisputed standing in 
current research on childhood asthma and wheezing, there is confusion about the 
meaning of the term 'phenotype' causing much circular debate. If phenotypes are 
meant to represent 'real' underlying disease entities rather than superficial 
features, there is a need for validation and harmonization of definitions. The 
multi-dimensional approach allows validation by replication across different 
populations and may contribute to a more reliable classification of childhood 
wheezing disorders and to improved precision of research relying on phenotype 
recognition, particularly in genetics. Ultimately, the underlying 
pathophysiology and aetiology will need to be understood to properly 
characterize the diseases causing recurrent wheeze in children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2010.03541.x
PMID: 20545704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]