---
reference_id: "PMID:7911041"
title: Cardiovascular molecular genetics.
authors:
- Anderson PA
journal: Curr Opin Cardiol
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1097/00001573-199401000-00010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular molecular genetics.
**Authors:** Anderson PA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Cardiol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00001573-199401000-00010](https://doi.org/10.1097/00001573-199401000-00010)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Cardiol. 1994 Jan;9(1):78-90. doi: 10.1097/00001573-199401000-00010.

Cardiovascular molecular genetics.

Anderson PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.

This monograph reviews advances in understanding the genetic basis of heritable 
disorders of the heart and vasculature, including hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
Marfan syndrome, conotruncal malformations, atrioventricular septal defects, 
supravalvular aortic stenosis, and the field defects associated with DiGeorge 
and velocardiofacial syndromes. The prognostic value and the functional effects 
of beta myosin heavy chain gene mutations in familial hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy are discussed. The relation between Marfan syndrome and fibrillin 
mutations and that between supravalvular aortic stenosis and William syndromes 
and elastin mutations are reviewed, as is the presence of microdeletions in 
22q11 in DiGeorge syndrome, velocardiofacial syndrome, and nonsyndromic patients 
with conotruncal malformations. The relation between neural crest cells and 
field defects are considered in the context of the genetic basis of Patch, a 
mutation that results in abnormal neural crest cell migration and conotruncal 
malformations. The role of transforming growth factor beta isoforms in cardiac 
morphogenesis is considered in the light of apparently normal morphogenesis in 
transforming growth factor beta 1 null mice.

DOI: 10.1097/00001573-199401000-00010
PMID: 7911041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]