---
reference_id: "PMID:36277471"
title: A Case Report of Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor-Induced Aortitis Treated with Tocilizumab.
authors:
- Bloomer CH
- Annabathula RV
- Aggarwal V
- Upadhya B
- Lycan TW
journal: Case Reports Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/7971169
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case Report of Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor-Induced Aortitis Treated with Tocilizumab.
**Authors:** Bloomer CH, Annabathula RV, Aggarwal V, Upadhya B, Lycan TW
**Journal:** Case Reports Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/7971169](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/7971169)

## Content

1. Case Reports Immunol. 2022 Oct 12;2022:7971169. doi: 10.1155/2022/7971169.
eCollection 2022.

A Case Report of Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor-Induced Aortitis Treated with
Tocilizumab.

Bloomer CH(1), Annabathula RV(1), Aggarwal V(1), Upadhya B(1), Lycan TW(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Atrium Health at Wake Forest Baptist, Winston Salem, NC,
USA.

Vasculitic immune checkpoint inhibitor-related adverse events (irAEs) are rare,
with limited data to guide their management. Here, we present a case of a
67-year-old female with stage IV cutaneous melanoma who received first-line
pembrolizumab. She had completed 21 cycles of pembrolizumab dosed at 200 mg
every 21 days over 15 months when she developed fatigue, chills, decreased
appetite, night sweats, nausea, diarrhea, dry cough, and chest pain. A routine,
staging positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed aortitis of the
transverse aortic arch. An extensive workup was unremarkable for other causes,
so her condition was labeled a grade III immune-related vasculitis. Based on
this diagnosis, we started high-dose prednisone and discontinued pembrolizumab.
After two months of high-dose prednisone, she developed bothersome weight gain
and insomnia, leading to a switch from prednisone to tocilizumab as a
steroid-sparing agent. The selection of tocilizumab was based on its routine use
for giant cell arteritis which can have extracranial symptoms including thoracic
aortitis. Her symptoms resolved, and subsequent PET scans showed resolution of
the aortitis and no evidence of metastatic melanoma. As the indications for
immunotherapy expand, rare complications are becoming more prevalent, and more
data will be needed to guide their management. While there is evidence for
tocilizumab use as a steroid-sparing treatment for large-vessel vasculitides due
to other conditions, this is the first case of its use to treat an aortitis irAE
to our knowledge. In this case, it was an effective means of treating the
patient while sparing them from prolonged corticosteroids.

Copyright © 2022 Chance H. Bloomer et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/7971169
PMCID: PMC9581648
PMID: 36277471

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest.
