---
reference_id: "PMID:29273917"
title: Recent advances in the pathogenetic mechanisms of sepsis-associated acute kidney injury.
authors:
- Fani F
- Regolisti G
- Delsante M
- Cantaluppi V
- Castellano G
- Gesualdo L
- Villa G
- Fiaccadori E
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-017-0452-4
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/complications, microbiology, pathology"
- Alarmins/metabolism
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Disease Progression
- Epithelial Cells/physiology
- Hemodynamics
- Humans
- Kidney/physiopathology
- Microvessels/physiopathology
- Pathogen-Associated Molecular Pattern Molecules/metabolism
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/etiology, pathology"
- "Sepsis/complications, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in the pathogenetic mechanisms of sepsis-associated acute kidney injury.
**Authors:** Fani F, Regolisti G, Delsante M, Cantaluppi V, Castellano G, Gesualdo L, Villa G, Fiaccadori E
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-017-0452-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-017-0452-4)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2018 Jun;31(3):351-359. doi: 10.1007/s40620-017-0452-4. Epub 2017
Dec  23.

Recent advances in the pathogenetic mechanisms of sepsis-associated acute kidney 
injury.

Fani F(1), Regolisti G(1), Delsante M(1), Cantaluppi V(2), Castellano G(3), 
Gesualdo L(3), Villa G(4), Fiaccadori E(5).

Author information:
(1)Acute and Chronic Renal Failure Unit, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(2)Nephrology and Kidney Transplantation Unit, Department of Translational 
Medicine, University of Eastern Piedmont "A. Avogadro", "Maggiore della Carità" 
University Hospital, Novara, Italy.
(3)Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, University of Bari, Bari, 
Italy.
(4)Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(5)Acute and Chronic Renal Failure Unit, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
University of Parma, Parma, Italy. enrico.fiaccadori@unipr.it.

Sepsis is a serious medical condition that can lead to multi-organ failure and 
shock, and it is associated with increased mortality. Acute kidney injury (AKI) 
is a frequent complication of sepsis in critically ill patients, and often 
requires renal replacement therapy. The pathophysiology of AKI in sepsis has not 
yet been fully defined. In the past, classic theories were mainly focused on 
systemic hemodynamic derangements, underscoring the key role of whole kidney 
hypoperfusion due to reduced renal blood flow. However, a growing body of 
experimental and clinical evidence now shows that, at least in the early phase 
of sepsis-associated AKI, renal blood flow is normal, or even increased. This 
could suggest a dissociation between renal blood flow and kidney function. In 
addition, the scant data available from kidney biopsies in human studies do not 
support diffuse acute tubular necrosis as the predominant lesion. Instead, 
increasing importance is now attributed to kidney damage resulting from a 
complex interaction between immunologic mechanisms, inflammatory cascade 
activation, and deranged coagulation pathways, leading to microvascular 
dysfunction, endothelial damage, leukocyte/platelet activation with the 
formation of micro-thrombi, epithelial tubular cell injury and dysfunction. 
Moreover, the same processes, through maladaptive responses leading to fibrosis 
acting from the very beginning, may set the stage for progression to chronic 
kidney disease in survivors from sepsis-associated AKI episodes. The aim of this 
narrative review is to summarize and discuss the latest evidence on the 
pathophysiological mechanisms involved in septic AKI, based on the most recent 
data from the literature.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-017-0452-4
PMID: 29273917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]