---
reference_id: "PMID:39201832"
title: Thirteen New Patients of PPP2R5D Gene Mutation and the Fine Profile of Genotype-Phenotype Correlation Unraveling the Pathogenic Mechanism Underlying Macrocephaly Phenotype.
authors:
- Jiang Y
- Wu B
- Zhang X
- Yang L
- Wang S
- Li H
- Zhou S
- Qian Y
- Wang H
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/children11080897
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thirteen New Patients of PPP2R5D Gene Mutation and the Fine Profile of Genotype-Phenotype Correlation Unraveling the Pathogenic Mechanism Underlying Macrocephaly Phenotype.
**Authors:** Jiang Y, Wu B, Zhang X, Yang L, Wang S, Li H, Zhou S, Qian Y, Wang H
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children11080897](https://doi.org/10.3390/children11080897)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2024 Jul 26;11(8):897. doi: 10.3390/children11080897.

Thirteen New Patients of PPP2R5D Gene Mutation and the Fine Profile of 
Genotype-Phenotype Correlation Unraveling the Pathogenic Mechanism Underlying 
Macrocephaly Phenotype.

Jiang Y(1), Wu B(1), Zhang X(1), Yang L(1), Wang S(2), Li H(3), Zhou S(4), Qian 
Y(1), Wang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Pediatrics Research Institute, Children's 
Hospital of Fudan University, National Children's Medical Center, 399 Wanyuan 
Road, Shanghai 201102, China.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
Shanghai 201102, China.
(3)Department of Child Health Care, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
National Children's Medical Center, 399 Wanyuan Road, Shanghai 201102, China.
(4)Neurology Department, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, National 
Children's Medical Center, 399 Wanyuan Road, Shanghai 201102, China.

BACKGROUND: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are a group of diseases that 
severely affect the physical and mental health of children. The PPP2R5D gene 
encodes B56δ, the regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). NDDs 
related to the PPP2R5D gene have recently been defined as Houge-Janssens 
syndrome 1.
METHODS: Clinical/whole exome sequencing was performed on approximately 3000 
patients with NDDs from 2017 to 2023. In vitro experiments were performed to 
assess the impairment of variants to protein expression and the assembly of PP2A 
holoenzyme. The genetic information and phenotypes of the reported patients, as 
well as patients in this study, were summarized, and the genotype-phenotype 
relationship was analyzed. The probability of pathogenic missense variants in 
PPP2R5D was predicted using AlphaMissense (AM), and the relationship between 
certain phenotype and 3D protein structural features were analyzed.
RESULTS: Thirteen new patients carrying twelve PPP2R5D gene variants were 
detected, including five novel missense variants and one novel frameshift 
variant. In vitro experiments revealed that the frameshift variant p.H463Mfs*3 
resulted in a ~50 kDa truncated protein with lower expression level. Except for 
E420K and T536R, other missense variants impaired holoenzyme assembly. 
Furthermore, we found that pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants that 
have been reported so far were all missense variants and clustered in three 
conserved regions, and the likelihood of P/LP mutations located in these 
conserved regions was extremely high. In addition, the macrocephaly phenotype 
was related to negatively charged residues involved in substrate recruitment.
CONCLUSIONS: We reported thirteen new patients with PPP2R5D gene variants and 
expanded the PPP2R5D variant spectrum. We confirmed the pathogenicity of novel 
variants through in vitro experiments. Our findings in genotype-phenotype 
relationship provide inspiration for genetic counseling and interpretation of 
variants. We also provide directions for further research on the mechanism of 
macrocephaly phenotype.

DOI: 10.3390/children11080897
PMCID: PMC11352527
PMID: 39201832

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.