---
reference_id: "PMID:23622312"
title: Childhood central nervous system vasculitis.
authors:
- Benseler S
- Pohl D
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52910-7.00024-6
keywords:
- Brain/pathology
- Cerebral Angiography
- Child
- Humans
- Inflammation/pathology
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnosis, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood central nervous system vasculitis.
**Authors:** Benseler S, Pohl D
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-52910-7.00024-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-52910-7.00024-6)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;112:1065-78. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52910-7.00024-6.

Childhood central nervous system vasculitis.

Benseler S(1), Pohl D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto and 
Child Health Evaluative Sciences, Research Institute, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Canada. Electronic address: susanne.benseler@sickkids.ca.

Childhood CNS vasculitis is a newly recognized disease entity, which can occur 
in isolation as a primary disorder - childhood primary angiitis of the CNS 
(cPACNS)-or secondary to systemic diseases. Since early initiation of treatment 
is associated with improved disease outcome, rapid evaluation and timely 
diagnosis are essential. The clinical presentation can be highly variable. 
Children present with newly acquired focal and/or diffuse neurological deficits 
and/or psychiatric symptoms. Inflammatory markers and CSF analysis are 
essential, but show limited sensitivity and specificity. MRI studies are highly 
sensitive for areas of focal inflammation, however lack specificity. Negative 
MRI studies do not exclude inflammatory brain disease. Angiography is the key 
diagnostic modality for large to medium vessel cPACNS. Characteristic 
angiographic findings include segmental cerebral vessel stenoses and 
corresponding contrast enhancement in the vessel wall. In children with normal 
angiography, confirmation of small vessel cPACNS requires brain biopsy. A 
thorough diagnostic evaluation for cPACNS should include a workup for causes of 
secondary CNS vasculitis, evaluation for CNS vasculitis mimics, and analysis of 
markers of nonvasculitic inflammatory brain diseases when appropriate. Early 
recognition with timely treatment of childhood CNS vasculitis can significantly 
alter the course of this potentially devastating disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52910-7.00024-6
PMID: 23622312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]