---
reference_id: "PMID:19550359"
title: Simultaneous tissue factor expression and phosphatidylserine exposure account for the highly procoagulant pattern of melanoma cell lines.
authors:
- Kirszberg C
- Lima LG
- Da Silva de Oliveira A
- Pickering W
- Gray E
- Barrowcliffe TW
- Rumjanek VM
- Monteiro RQ
journal: Melanoma Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/CMR.0b013e32832e40fe
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Simultaneous tissue factor expression and phosphatidylserine exposure account for the highly procoagulant pattern of melanoma cell lines.
**Authors:** Kirszberg C, Lima LG, Da Silva de Oliveira A, Pickering W, Gray E, Barrowcliffe TW, Rumjanek VM, Monteiro RQ
**Journal:** Melanoma Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CMR.0b013e32832e40fe](https://doi.org/10.1097/CMR.0b013e32832e40fe)

## Content

1. Melanoma Res. 2009 Oct;19(5):301-8. doi: 10.1097/CMR.0b013e32832e40fe.

Simultaneous tissue factor expression and phosphatidylserine exposure account 
for the highly procoagulant pattern of melanoma cell lines.

Kirszberg C(1), Lima LG, Da Silva de Oliveira A, Pickering W, Gray E, 
Barrowcliffe TW, Rumjanek VM, Monteiro RQ.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica, Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade 
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

A correlation between cancer and hypercoagulability has been described for more 
than a century. Patients with cancer are at increased risk for thrombotic 
complications, and the clotting initiator protein, tissue factor (TF), is 
possibly involved in this process. In addition to TF, the presence of negatively 
charged phospholipids, particularly phosphatidylserine (PS), is necessary to 
support some of the blood-clotting reactions. There are few reports describing 
PS exposure by tumor cells. In this study, we characterized the procoagulant 
properties of the murine B16F10 and the human WM-266-4 melanoma cell lines. Flow 
cytometry analyses showed constitutive TF expression by both cell lines, in 
contrast to negative staining observed for the nontumorigenic melanocyte 
lineage, melan-A. In addition, tumor cells accelerate plasma clotting in a 
number-dependent manner. For WM-266-4, this ability was partially reversed by an 
anti-TF antibody but not by aprotinin, a nonspecific serine-protease inhibitor. 
Furthermore, flow-cytometric analyses showed the presence of PS at the outer 
leaflet of both cell lines. This phenomenon was determinant for the assembly of 
the intrinsic tenase (FIXa/FVIIIa) and prothrombinase (FXa/FVa) complexes, 
resulting in the activation of FX to FXa and prothrombin to thrombin, 
respectively. As a result, incubation of WM-266-4 with human plasma produces 
robust thrombin generation. In conclusion, simultaneous TF expression and PS 
exposure are responsible for the highly procoagulant pattern of the aggressive 
melanoma cell lines B16F10 and WM-266-4. Therefore, these cell lines might be 
regarded as useful models for studying the role of blood coagulation proteins in 
tumor biology.

DOI: 10.1097/CMR.0b013e32832e40fe
PMID: 19550359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]