---
reference_id: "PMID:36793612"
title: Pathologic and molecular insights in nodal T-follicular helper cell lymphomas.
authors:
- Marques-Piubelli ML
- Amador C
- Vega F
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1105651
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathologic and molecular insights in nodal T-follicular helper cell lymphomas.
**Authors:** Marques-Piubelli ML, Amador C, Vega F
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2023.1105651](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1105651)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2023 Jan 30;13:1105651. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1105651.
eCollection  2023.

Pathologic and molecular insights in nodal T-follicular helper cell lymphomas.

Marques-Piubelli ML(1), Amador C(2), Vega F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States.
(2)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, FL, United States.
(3)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, United States.

T-follicular helper (TFH) cells are one of the T-cell subsets with a critical
role in the regulation of germinal center (GC) reactions. TFH cells contribute
to the positive selection of GC B-cells and promote plasma cell differentiation
and antibody production. TFH cells express a unique phenotype characterized by
PD-1hi, ICOShi, CD40Lhi, CD95hi, CTLAhi, CCR7lo, and CXCR5hi . Three main
subtypes of nodal TFH lymphomas have been described: 1) angioimmunoblastic-type,
2) follicular-type, and 3) not otherwise specified (NOS). The diagnosis of these
neoplasms can be challenging, and it is rendered based on a combination of
clinical, laboratory, histopathologic, immunophenotypic, and molecular findings.
The markers most frequently used to identify a TFH immunophenotype in
paraffin-embedded tissue sections include PD-1, CXCL13, CXCR5, ICOS, BCL6, and
CD10. These neoplasms feature a characteristic and similar, but not identical,
mutational landscape with mutations in epigenetic modifiers (TET2, DNMT3A,
IDH2), RHOA, and T-cell receptor signaling genes. Here, we briefly review the
biology of TFH cells and present a summary of the current pathologic, molecular,
and genetic features of nodal lymphomas. We want to highlight the importance of
performing a consistent panel of TFH immunostains and mutational studies in TCLs
to identify TFH lymphomas.

Copyright © 2023 Marques-Piubelli, Amador and Vega.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1105651
PMCID: PMC9923156
PMID: 36793612

Conflict of interest statement: FV receives research funding from CRISPR
Therapeutics, Allogene Therapeutics, and Geron Corporation. The remaining
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.
