---
reference_id: "PMID:38997542"
title: "Correlation between neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus and immunological markers: a real-world retrospective study."
authors:
- Jiang Y
- Yuan F
- Xu X
- Liu Y
- Liang Y
- Zhang Y
- Lin Z
- Zhao C
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-024-07056-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/immunology, blood"
- Adult
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Autoantibodies/blood, immunology"
- Middle Aged
- China
- Risk Factors
- Young Adult
- Complement C3/immunology
- "Immunoglobulin M/blood, immunology"
- Prothrombin/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correlation between neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus and immunological markers: a real-world retrospective study.
**Authors:** Jiang Y, Yuan F, Xu X, Liu Y, Liang Y, Zhang Y, Lin Z, Zhao C
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-024-07056-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-024-07056-6)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2024 Sep;43(9):2833-2842. doi: 10.1007/s10067-024-07056-6.
Epub  2024 Jul 12.

Correlation between neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus and
immunological markers: a real-world retrospective study.

Jiang Y(#)(1), Yuan F(#)(2), Xu X(1), Liu Y(1), Liang Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Lin
Z(3), Zhao C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, The Tenth Affiliated Hospital of
Southern Medical University, Dongguan People's Hospital, Dongguan, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. lzm-zj99@163.com.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, 600 Tianhe Road, Guangzhou, 510630, China. zhaocl66@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate disparities in clinical profiles and
autoantibody patterns between patients with and without neuropsychiatric
systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE) in a cohort and to identify risk factors
associated with NPSLE in the Chinese population.
METHODS: SLE patients were retrospectively reviewed from two tertiary hospitals.
The relationships between NPSLE and immunological biomarkers were explored.
RESULTS: Among the 945 SLE patients, 75 (7.94%) were diagnosed with NPSLE. The
most prevalent NP manifestations involved cognitive disorder (30.67%), headache
(26.67%), seizure disorder (26.67%), and psychosis (26.67%).We observed
significant associations between psychosis and anti-β2GPI antibodies (F = 6.092,
p = 0.015), polyneuropathy and anti-Scl70 antibodies (F = 20.161, p < 0.001),
demyelinating syndrome and anti-cardiolipin antibodies (F = 6.637, p = 0.011),
myasthenia gravis and anti-RNP (F = 5.864, p = 0.017), and anti-Smith antibodies
(F = 5.096, p = 0.026). Multivariate logistics analysis showed that
anti-prothrombin (aPT) IgM antibodies (OR = 10.985, CI 1.279-94.343, p = 0.029),
age (OR = 1.169, CI 1.032-1.325, p = 0.014), and serum creatinine (SCr)
(OR = 1.014, CI 1.003-1.025, p = 0.009) were independent risk factors of NPSLE,
while anti-Sjogren syndrome antigen B (SSB) antibodies (OR 0.023, CI
0.002-0.622, p = 0.023) and high complement C3 (OR = 0.001, CI 0-0.045,
p < 0.001) indicated reduced risk of NPSLE.
CONCLUSION: Various neuropsychiatric manifestations in SLE were found to be
correlated with specific autoantibodies. Independent risk factors for NPSLE
included aPT IgM antibodies, age, and elevated serum creatinine, while the
absence of anti-SSB antibodies and low complement C3 levels were associated with
increased risk.
KEY POINTS: •Significant associations were found between specific autoantibodies
and neuropsychiatric symptoms, shedding light on potential biomarkers for
predicting and understanding NPSLE. •The study identifies independent risk
factors for NPSLE in the Chinese population, including the presence of
anti-prothrombin IgM antibodies, older age, elevated serum creatinine, and lower
complement C3 levels.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International League of
Associations for Rheumatology (ILAR).

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-024-07056-6
PMID: 38997542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
