---
reference_id: "PMID:41139274"
title: "Integrated Multi-Omics and Experimental Validation Unveil the GZMK/NF-κB Axis Driving Inflammation and Fibroblast Proliferation in Rosacea: A Novel Drug Target Selection Strategy."
authors:
- Wang J
- Bi L
- Zhao H
- Xu Z
- Zhuang Z
- Chen K
- Ouyang H
- Xu J
- Sheng Y
- Wang Z
- Cui Y
journal: FASEB J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1096/fj.202502071R
keywords:
- "Rosacea/metabolism, drug therapy, pathology, genetics"
- "NF-kappa B/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Mice
- Cell Proliferation
- Humans
- "Inflammation/metabolism, pathology"
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- "Granzymes/metabolism, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Signal Transduction
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Multiomics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrated Multi-Omics and Experimental Validation Unveil the GZMK/NF-κB Axis Driving Inflammation and Fibroblast Proliferation in Rosacea: A Novel Drug Target Selection Strategy.
**Authors:** Wang J, Bi L, Zhao H, Xu Z, Zhuang Z, Chen K, Ouyang H, Xu J, Sheng Y, Wang Z, Cui Y
**Journal:** FASEB J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.202502071R](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.202502071R)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2025 Oct 31;39(20):e71164. doi: 10.1096/fj.202502071R.

Integrated Multi-Omics and Experimental Validation Unveil the GZMK/NF-κB Axis 
Driving Inflammation and Fibroblast Proliferation in Rosacea: A Novel Drug 
Target Selection Strategy.

Wang J(1), Bi L(1)(2), Zhao H(1), Xu Z(1), Zhuang Z(1), Chen K(1), Ouyang H(1), 
Xu J(1), Sheng Y(1), Wang Z(1), Cui Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China.

The prevalence of rosacea is high, while the drug options remain limited. 
Mendelian randomization (MR) is an effective way to prioritize plasma proteins 
as novel drug targets based on their causal effects on rosacea. The plasma 
proteins were categorized into different levels of drug targets by the MR and 
Bayesian colocalization analysis. Their genetic and protein expression was 
investigated using an RNA sequencing dataset and experiments in vitro and 
in vivo. MR and colocalization identified Granzyme K (GZMK) as a drug target, 
whose expression increased in the affected samples. A novel mouse model of 
rosacea was established by GZMK, mimicking rosacea-like symptoms both in vitro 
and in vivo. GZMK also promoted cell proliferation and inflammatory factors 
(including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNFα) production in fibroblasts through activating 
the NF-κB pathway in vitro. Our research identified a novel protein involved in 
rosacea pathogenesis, elucidated the underlying mechanisms, and advanced the 
development of potential rosacea treatments.

© 2025 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202502071R
PMID: 41139274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]