---
reference_id: "PMID:29030454"
title: "Infliximab for the treatment of CNS sarcoidosis: A multi-institutional series."
authors:
- Gelfand JM
- Bradshaw MJ
- Stern BJ
- Clifford DB
- Wang Y
- Cho TA
- Koth LL
- Hauser SL
- Dierkhising J
- Vu N
- Sriram S
- Moses H
- Bagnato F
- Kaufmann JA
- Ammah DJ
- Yohannes TH
- Hamblin MJ
- Venna N
- Green AJ
- Pawate S
journal: Neurology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004644
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Central Nervous System Diseases/drug therapy
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology"
- "Infliximab/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- Sarcoidosis/drug therapy
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/immunology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infliximab for the treatment of CNS sarcoidosis: A multi-institutional series.
**Authors:** Gelfand JM, Bradshaw MJ, Stern BJ, Clifford DB, Wang Y, Cho TA, Koth LL, Hauser SL, Dierkhising J, Vu N, Sriram S, Moses H, Bagnato F, Kaufmann JA, Ammah DJ, Yohannes TH, Hamblin MJ, Venna N, Green AJ, Pawate S
**Journal:** Neurology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000004644](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000004644)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2017 Nov 14;89(20):2092-2100. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004644.
Epub  2017 Oct 13.

Infliximab for the treatment of CNS sarcoidosis: A multi-institutional series.

Gelfand JM(1), Bradshaw MJ(1), Stern BJ(1), Clifford DB(1), Wang Y(1), Cho
TA(1), Koth LL(1), Hauser SL(1), Dierkhising J(1), Vu N(1), Sriram S(1), Moses
H(1), Bagnato F(1), Kaufmann JA(1), Ammah DJ(1), Yohannes TH(1), Hamblin MJ(1),
Venna N(1), Green AJ(1), Pawate S(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (J.M.G., S.L.H., J.D., A.J.G.), Division of
Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine (L.L.K.), and Department of
Ophthalmology (A.J.G.), University of California San Francisco; Department of
Neurology (M.J.B., N.V., S.S., H.M., F.B., S.P.), Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN; Department of Neurology (B.J.S., J.A.K., D.J.A.),
University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore; Departments of Neurology and
Medicine (D.B.C., T.H.Y.), Washington University in St. Louis, MO; Department of
Neurology (Y.W., M.J.H.), University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City; and
Department of Neurology (T.A.C., N.V.), Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston.
(2)From the Department of Neurology (J.M.G., S.L.H., J.D., A.J.G.), Division of
Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine (L.L.K.), and Department of
Ophthalmology (A.J.G.), University of California San Francisco; Department of
Neurology (M.J.B., N.V., S.S., H.M., F.B., S.P.), Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN; Department of Neurology (B.J.S., J.A.K., D.J.A.),
University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore; Departments of Neurology and
Medicine (D.B.C., T.H.Y.), Washington University in St. Louis, MO; Department of
Neurology (Y.W., M.J.H.), University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City; and
Department of Neurology (T.A.C., N.V.), Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston.
siddharama.pawate@vanderbilt.edu.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2018 Jul 3;91(1):51. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000005727.
    Neurology. 2018 Jul 3;91(1):51-52. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000005725.

OBJECTIVE: To describe clinical and imaging responses in neurosarcoidosis to
infliximab, a monoclonal antibody against tumor necrosis factor-α.
METHODS: Investigators at 6 US centers retrospectively identified patients with
CNS sarcoidosis treated with infliximab, including only patients with definite
or probable neurosarcoidosis following rigorous exclusion of other causes.
RESULTS: Of 66 patients with CNS sarcoidosis (27 definite, 39 probable) treated
with infliximab for a median of 1.5 years, the mean age was 47.5 years at
infliximab initiation (SD 11.7, range 24-71 years); 56.1% were female; 62.1%
were white, 37.0% African American, and 3% Hispanic. Sarcoidosis was isolated to
the CNS in 19.7%. Using infliximab doses ranging from 3 to 7 mg/kg every 4-8
weeks, MRI evidence of a favorable treatment response was observed in 82.1% of
patients with imaging follow-up (n = 56), with complete remission of active
disease in 51.8% and partial MRI improvement in 30.1%; MRI worsened in 1 patient
(1.8%). There was clinical improvement in 77.3% of patients, with complete
neurologic recovery in 28.8%, partial improvement in 48.5%, clinical stability
in 18.2%, worsening in 3%, and 1 lost to follow-up. In 16 patients in remission
when infliximab was discontinued, the disease recurred in 9 (56%), typically in
the same neuroanatomic location.
CONCLUSIONS: Most patients with CNS sarcoidosis treated with infliximab exhibit
favorable imaging and clinical treatment responses, including some previously
refractory to other immunosuppressive treatments.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class IV evidence that for
patients with CNS sarcoidosis infliximab is associated with favorable imaging
and clinical responses.

© 2017 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004644
PMCID: PMC5711506
PMID: 29030454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
