---
reference_id: "PMID:23836799"
title: Relationship of left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic function with cardiovascular and renal outcomes in African Americans with hypertensive chronic kidney disease.
authors:
- Peterson GE
- de Backer T
- Contreras G
- Wang X
- Kendrick C
- Greene T
- Appel LJ
- Randall OS
- Lea J
- Smogorzewski M
- Vagaonescu T
- Phillips RA
- African American Study of Kidney Disease Investigators
journal: Hypertension
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.00904
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship of left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic function with cardiovascular and renal outcomes in African Americans with hypertensive chronic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Peterson GE, de Backer T, Contreras G, Wang X, Kendrick C, Greene T, Appel LJ, Randall OS, Lea J, Smogorzewski M, Vagaonescu T, Phillips RA, African American Study of Kidney Disease Investigators
**Journal:** Hypertension (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.00904](https://doi.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.00904)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 2013 Sep;62(3):518-25. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.00904. 
Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Relationship of left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic function with 
cardiovascular and renal outcomes in African Americans with hypertensive chronic 
kidney disease.

Peterson GE(1), de Backer T, Contreras G, Wang X, Kendrick C, Greene T, Appel 
LJ, Randall OS, Lea J, Smogorzewski M, Vagaonescu T, Phillips RA; African 
American Study of Kidney Disease Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, UT Southwestern, 5909 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 
75235-9047, USA. Gail.Peterson@UTSouthwestern.edu

Comment in
    Hypertension. 2013 Sep;62(3):455-6. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.01189.

African Americans with hypertension are at high risk for adverse outcomes from 
cardiovascular and renal disease. Patients with stage 3 or greater chronic 
kidney disease have a high prevalence of left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and 
diastolic dysfunction. Our goal was to study prospectively the relationships of 
LV mass and diastolic function with subsequent cardiovascular and renal outcomes 
in the African American Study of Kidney Disease and Hypertension cohort study. 
Of 691 patients enrolled in the cohort, 578 had interpretable echocardiograms 
and complete relevant clinical data. Exposures were LV hypertrophy and diastolic 
parameters. Outcomes were cardiovascular events requiring hospitalization or 
causing death; a renal composite outcome of doubling of serum creatinine or 
end-stage renal disease (censoring death); and heart failure. We found strong 
independent relationships between LV hypertrophy and subsequent cardiovascular 
(hazard ratio, 1.16; 95% confidence interval, 1.05-1.27) events, but not renal 
outcomes. After adjustment for LV mass and clinical variables, lower systolic 
tissue Doppler velocities and diastolic parameters reflecting a less compliant 
LV (shorter deceleration time and abnormal E/A ratio) were significantly 
(P<0.05) associated with future heart failure events. This is the first study to 
show a strong relationship among LV hypertrophy, diastolic parameters, and 
adverse cardiac outcomes in African Americans with hypertension and chronic 
kidney disease. These echocardiographic risk factors may help identify high-risk 
patients with chronic kidney disease for aggressive therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.00904
PMID: 23836799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]