---
reference_id: "PMID:9887329"
title: A Lys644Glu substitution in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) causes dwarfism in mice by activation of STATs and ink4 cell cycle inhibitors.
authors:
- Li C
- Chen L
- Iwata T
- Kitagawa M
- Fu XY
- Deng CX
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.1.35
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cell Cycle/genetics
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/metabolism
- DNA Primers/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- "Dwarfism/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Milk Proteins
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
- STAT1 Transcription Factor
- STAT5 Transcription Factor
- Signal Transduction
- Trans-Activators/metabolism
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Lys644Glu substitution in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) causes dwarfism in mice by activation of STATs and ink4 cell cycle inhibitors.
**Authors:** Li C, Chen L, Iwata T, Kitagawa M, Fu XY, Deng CX
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/8.1.35](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/8.1.35)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Jan;8(1):35-44. doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.1.35.

A Lys644Glu substitution in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) causes 
dwarfism in mice by activation of STATs and ink4 cell cycle inhibitors.

Li C(1), Chen L, Iwata T, Kitagawa M, Fu XY, Deng CX.

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Development and Diseases Branch, 10/9N105, National Institute of 
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases National Institutes of Health, 10 Center 
Drive, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Missense mutations of human fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) result 
in several skeletal dysplasias, including hypochondroplasia, achondroplasia and 
thanatophoric dysplasia. To study the function of FGFR3 in bone growth and to 
create animal models for the FGFR3-related inherited skeletal disorders, we 
introduced a point mutation (Lys644Glu) into the murine FGFR3 genome using a 
knock-in approach. We found that the Lys644Glu mutation resulted in retarded 
endochondral bone growth with severity directly linked to the expression level 
of the mutated Fgfr3. Mice heterozygous for the mutation ( Fgfr3(TD/+) ) 
expressed the mutant allele at approximately 20% of the wild-type level and 
exhibited a mild bone dysplasia. However, when the copy number of the mutant 
allele increased from one (Fgfr3(TD/+) to two (Fgfr3(TD/TD), the retardation of 
bone growth became more severe and showed phenotypes resembling those of 
achondroplasia patients, characterized by a dramatically reduced proliferation 
of growth plate cartilage, macrocephaly and shortening of the long bones, which 
was most pronounced in the femur. Molecular analysis revealed that expression of 
the mutant receptor caused the activation of Stat1, Stat5a and Stat5b, and the 
up-regulation of p16, p18 and p19 cell cycle inhibitors, leading to dramatic 
expansion of the resting zone of chondrocytes at the expense of the 
proliferating chondrocytes. The mutant growth plates consequently were in a less 
active state and generated fewer maturing and hypertrophic chondrocytes. These 
data provide direct genetic evidence that the point mutations in FGFR3 cause 
human skeletal dysplasias and uncover a mechanism through which the FGFR3 
signals regulate bone growth by modulating expression of Stats and ink4 cell 
cycle inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/8.1.35
PMID: 9887329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]