---
reference_id: "PMID:32803924"
title: "Henoch-Schönlein Purpura (IgA Vasculitis): Rapid Evidence Review."
authors:
- Reamy BV
- Servey JT
- Williams PM
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2020'
keywords:
- Acetaminophen/therapeutic use
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Adult
- "Analgesics, Non-Narcotic/therapeutic use"
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/therapeutic use"
- "Arthralgia/drug therapy, etiology"
- Child
- Cyclosporine/therapeutic use
- Disease Progression
- "Glomerulonephritis/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- "IgA Vasculitis/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Mycophenolic Acid/therapeutic use
- Nephrology
- Recurrence
- Referral and Consultation
- "Remission, Spontaneous"
- Urinalysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Henoch-Schönlein Purpura (IgA Vasculitis): Rapid Evidence Review.
**Authors:** Reamy BV, Servey JT, Williams PM
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2020)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2020 Aug 15;102(4):229-233.

Henoch-Schönlein Purpura (IgA Vasculitis): Rapid Evidence Review.

Reamy BV(1), Servey JT(1), Williams PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Henoch-Schönlein purpura, now called immunoglobulin A (IgA) vasculitis, is a 
systemic, immune complex-mediated, small-vessel leukocytoclastic vasculitis 
characterized by nonthrombocytopenic palpable purpura, arthritis, and abdominal 
pain. It is the most common vasculitis in children but can also occur in adults. 
Diagnostic testing is required only to exclude other etiologies of purpura, to 
identify renal involvement, and, if indicated, to determine its extent with 
biopsy. Imaging or endoscopy may be needed to assess organ complications. IgA 
vasculitis spontaneously resolves in 94% of children and 89% of adults, making 
supportive treatment the primary management strategy. However, a subset of 
patients experience renal involvement that can persist and relapse years later. 
Additional complications can include gastrointestinal bleeding, orchitis, and 
central nervous system involvement. Systematic reviews have shown that steroids 
do not prevent complications and should not be used prophylactically. However, 
randomized trials have demonstrated success with high-dose steroids, 
cyclosporine, and mycophenolate in treating glomerulonephritis and other 
complications. Long-term prognosis depends on the extent of renal involvement. 
Six months of follow-up is prudent to assess for disease relapse or remission.

PMID: 32803924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]