---
reference_id: "PMID:37910310"
title: "Trends, clinical characteristics, antimicrobial susceptibility patterns, and outcomes of Campylobacter bacteraemia: a multicentre retrospective study."
authors:
- Baek YJ
- Song JE
- Kim EJ
- Choi H
- Sohn Y
- Jeon YD
- Lee EH
- Ahn JY
- Jeong SJ
- Ku NS
- Choi JY
- Yeom JS
- Song YG
- Kim JH
journal: Infection
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s15010-023-02118-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trends, clinical characteristics, antimicrobial susceptibility patterns, and outcomes of Campylobacter bacteraemia: a multicentre retrospective study.
**Authors:** Baek YJ, Song JE, Kim EJ, Choi H, Sohn Y, Jeon YD, Lee EH, Ahn JY, Jeong SJ, Ku NS, Choi JY, Yeom JS, Song YG, Kim JH
**Journal:** Infection (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s15010-023-02118-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s15010-023-02118-4)

## Content

1. Infection. 2024 Jun;52(3):857-864. doi: 10.1007/s15010-023-02118-4. Epub 2023 
Nov 1.

Trends, clinical characteristics, antimicrobial susceptibility patterns, and 
outcomes of Campylobacter bacteraemia: a multicentre retrospective study.

Baek YJ(1)(2), Song JE(3), Kim EJ(4), Choi H(5), Sohn Y(6), Jeon YD(7), Lee 
EH(1), Ahn JY(1), Jeong SJ(1), Ku NS(1), Choi JY(1), Yeom JS(1), Song YG(1), Kim 
JH(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Severance 
Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital, Soonchunhyang University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Inje University Ilsan Paik Hospital, Goyang, 
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Ajou University College of Medicine, 
Suwon, Republic of Korea.
(5)National Health Insurance Service Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Wonju College of Medicine, Yonsei 
University, Wonju, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Kangwon National University College of 
Medicine, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Severance 
Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
qetu1111@yuhs.ac.

Comment in
    Infection. 2024 Jun;52(3):1185-1187. doi: 10.1007/s15010-024-02205-0.

PURPOSE: We aimed to explore the clinical characteristics of Campylobacter 
bacteraemia and identify the trends, risk factors for mortality, and 
antimicrobial susceptibility patterns from clinical samples.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study included patients confirmed to have 
Campylobacter bacteraemia from seven hospitals between January 2010 and June 
2021. Data on demographics and underlying history, clinical manifestation, and 
antimicrobial susceptibility patterns were collected and analyzed. Annual cases 
of Campylobacter enteritis were extracted from a public database.
RESULTS: A total of 108 patients were included, and five species were isolated. 
Campylobacter jejuni accounted for 54 (50.0%) cases and 17 (16%) patients had no 
symptoms other than fever. In-hospital mortality occurred in 14 (13.0%) 
patients. C. jejuni bacteraemia was associated with lower mortality compared to 
non-C. jejuni bacteraemia. Underlying cancer and septic shock were the 
significant factors associated with in-hospital mortality. Quinolone resistance 
was high (59%), whereas only 4% of isolates exhibited macrolide resistance. 
There has been a significant increase in the number of Campylobacter enteritis 
cases, which was strongly correlated with the number of Campylobacter 
bacteraemia cases (Pearson's coefficient: 0.953; p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: The notably increasing incidence of Campylobacter bacteraemia and 
antibiotic resistance patterns can challenge the treatment, necessitating 
collective efforts of national surveillance and networks by many departments.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany.

DOI: 10.1007/s15010-023-02118-4
PMID: 37910310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]