---
reference_id: "PMID:32880985"
title: "Acromelic dysplasias: how rare musculoskeletal disorders reveal biological functions of extracellular matrix proteins."
authors:
- Stanley S
- Balic Z
- Hubmacher D
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/nyas.14465
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- Cryptorchidism/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Facies
- Fibrillins/metabolism
- Growth Disorders/genetics
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Joints/abnormalities
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Microfibrils/pathology
- Musculoskeletal Abnormalities/genetics
- Skin Abnormalities/genetics
- Smad4 Protein/genetics
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
- Weill-Marchesani Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acromelic dysplasias: how rare musculoskeletal disorders reveal biological functions of extracellular matrix proteins.
**Authors:** Stanley S, Balic Z, Hubmacher D
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nyas.14465](https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.14465)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2021 Apr;1490(1):57-76. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14465. Epub 2020
Sep  2.

Acromelic dysplasias: how rare musculoskeletal disorders reveal biological
functions of extracellular matrix proteins.

Stanley S(1), Balic Z(1), Hubmacher D(1).

Author information:
(1)Leni & Peter W. May Department of Orthopedics, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, New York.

Acromelic dysplasias are a group of rare musculoskeletal disorders that
collectively present with short stature, pseudomuscular build, stiff joints, and
tight skin. Acromelic dysplasias are caused by mutations in genes (FBN1,
ADAMTSL2, ADAMTS10, ADAMTS17, LTBP2, and LTBP3) that encode secreted
extracellular matrix proteins, and in SMAD4, an intracellular coregulator of
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling. The shared musculoskeletal
presentations in acromelic dysplasias suggest that these proteins cooperate in a
biological pathway, but also fulfill distinct roles in specific tissues that are
affected in individual disorders of the acromelic dysplasia group. In addition,
most of the affected proteins directly interact with fibrillin microfibrils in
the extracellular matrix and have been linked to the regulation of TGF-β
signaling. Together with recently developed knockout mouse models targeting the
affected genes, novel insights into molecular mechanisms of how these proteins
regulate musculoskeletal development and homeostasis have emerged. Here, we
summarize the current knowledge highlighting pathogenic mechanisms of the
different disorders that compose acromelic dysplasias and provide an overview of
the emerging biological roles of the individual proteins that are compromised.
Finally, we develop a conceptual model of how these proteins may interact and
form an "acromelic dysplasia complex" on fibrillin microfibrils in connective
tissues of the musculoskeletal system.

© 2020 New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.14465
PMCID: PMC7921208
PMID: 32880985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
