---
reference_id: "PMID:35444561"
title: Changes in Blood Cell Deformability in Chorea-Acanthocytosis and Effects of Treatment With Dasatinib or Lithium.
authors:
- Reichel F
- Kräter M
- Peikert K
- Glaß H
- Rosendahl P
- Herbig M
- Rivera Prieto A
- Kihm A
- Bosman G
- Kaestner L
- Hermann A
- Guck J
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.852946
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Changes in Blood Cell Deformability in Chorea-Acanthocytosis and Effects of Treatment With Dasatinib or Lithium.
**Authors:** Reichel F, Kräter M, Peikert K, Glaß H, Rosendahl P, Herbig M, Rivera Prieto A, Kihm A, Bosman G, Kaestner L, Hermann A, Guck J
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2022.852946](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2022.852946)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2022 Apr 4;13:852946. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.852946.
eCollection  2022.

Changes in Blood Cell Deformability in Chorea-Acanthocytosis and Effects of
Treatment With Dasatinib or Lithium.

Reichel F(1)(2), Kräter M(1)(2), Peikert K(3)(4), Glaß H(3), Rosendahl P(2),
Herbig M(1)(2), Rivera Prieto A(2), Kihm A(5), Bosman G(6), Kaestner L(5)(7),
Hermann A(3)(4)(8)(9), Guck J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für die Physik des Lichts and Max-Planck-Zentrum für
Physik und Medizin, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Biotechnology Center, Center for Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering,
Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(3)Translational Neurodegeneration Section "Albrecht Kossel", Department of
Neurology, University Medical Center Rostock, University of Rostock, Rostock,
Germany.
(4)Division for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of Neurology, Technische
Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(5)Department of Experimental Physics, Saarland University, Saarbrücken,
Germany.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(7)Theoretical Medicine and Biosciences, Saarland University, Homburg, Germany.
(8)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE),
Rostock/Greifswald, Rostock, Germany.
(9)Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany.

Misshaped red blood cells (RBCs), characterized by thorn-like protrusions known
as acanthocytes, are a key diagnostic feature in Chorea-Acanthocytosis (ChAc), a
rare neurodegenerative disorder. The altered RBC morphology likely influences
their biomechanical properties which are crucial for the cells to pass the
microvasculature. Here, we investigated blood cell deformability of five ChAc
patients compared to healthy controls during up to 1-year individual off-label
treatment with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib or several weeks with
lithium. Measurements with two microfluidic techniques allowed us to assess RBC
deformability under different shear stresses. Furthermore, we characterized
leukocyte stiffness at high shear stresses. The results showed that blood cell
deformability-including both RBCs and leukocytes - in general was altered in
ChAc patients compared to healthy donors. Therefore, this study shows for the
first time an impairment of leukocyte properties in ChAc. During treatment with
dasatinib or lithium, we observed alterations in RBC deformability and a
stiffness increase for leukocytes. The hematological phenotype of ChAc patients
hinted at a reorganization of the cytoskeleton in blood cells which partly
explains the altered mechanical properties observed here. These findings
highlight the need for a systematic assessment of the contribution of impaired
blood cell mechanics to the clinical manifestation of ChAc.

Copyright © 2022 Reichel, Kräter, Peikert, Glaß, Rosendahl, Herbig, Rivera
Prieto, Kihm, Bosman, Kaestner, Hermann and Guck.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2022.852946
PMCID: PMC9013823
PMID: 35444561

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
