---
reference_id: "PMID:16887026"
title: Walker-Warburg syndrome.
authors:
- Vajsar J
- Schachter H
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-29
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Brain/abnormalities
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dystrophin/genetics
- "Eye Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Female
- Glycoproteins/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mannosyltransferases/genetics
- "Muscular Dystrophies/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Mutation
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis/methods
- Prognosis
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Walker-Warburg syndrome.
**Authors:** Vajsar J, Schachter H
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-1-29](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-1-29)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2006 Aug 3;1:29. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-29.

Walker-Warburg syndrome.

Vajsar J(1), Schachter H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of
Toronto, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, ON, Canada. jiri.vajsar@sickkids.ca

Walker-Warburg Syndrome (WWS) is a rare form of autosomal recessive congenital
muscular dystrophy associated with brain and eye abnormalities. WWS has a
worldwide distribution. The overall incidence is unknown but a survey in
North-eastern Italy has reported an incidence rate of 1.2 per 100,000 live
births. It is the most severe form of congenital muscular dystrophy with most
children dying before the age of three years. WWS presents at birth with
generalized hypotonia, muscle weakness, developmental delay with mental
retardation and occasional seizures. It is associated with type II cobblestone
lissencephaly, hydrocephalus, cerebellar malformations, eye abnormalities and
congenital muscular dystrophy characterized by hypoglycosylation of
alpha-dystroglycan. Several genes have been implicated in the etiology of WWS,
and others are as yet unknown. Several mutations were found in the Protein
O-Mannosyltransferase 1 and 2 (POMT1 and POMT2) genes, and one mutation was
found in each of the fukutin and fukutin-related protein (FKRP) genes.
Laboratory investigations usually show elevated creatine kinase,
myopathic/dystrophic muscle pathology and altered alpha-dystroglycan. Antenatal
diagnosis is possible in families with known mutations. Prenatal ultrasound may
be helpful for diagnosis in families where the molecular defect is unknown. No
specific treatment is available. Management is only supportive and preventive.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-29
PMCID: PMC1553431
PMID: 16887026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
