---
reference_id: "PMID:18181445"
title: Haemophilus influenzae type b infection in children in Pacific countries.
authors:
- Carapetis JR
- Russell FM
- Mansoor O
- Darcy A
- Fakakovi T
- Metai A
- Potoi NT
- Wilson N
- Mulholland EK
journal: Pac Health Dialog
year: '2004'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haemophilus influenzae type b infection in children in Pacific countries.
**Authors:** Carapetis JR, Russell FM, Mansoor O, Darcy A, Fakakovi T, Metai A, Potoi NT, Wilson N, Mulholland EK
**Journal:** Pac Health Dialog (2004)

## Content

1. Pac Health Dialog. 2004 Mar;11(1):79-83.

Haemophilus influenzae type b infection in children in Pacific countries.

Carapetis JR(1), Russell FM, Mansoor O, Darcy A, Fakakovi T, Metai A, Potoi NT, 
Wilson N, Mulholland EK.

Author information:
(1)Centre for International Child Health, University of Melbourne, Royal 
Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.

Erratum in
    Pac Health Dialog. 2009 Nov;15(2):199.

The Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) disease burden among children under five 
years in four Pacific island countries (PIC was estimated. The incidence of 
confirmed Hib meningitis was calculated using numbers of culture confirmed 
isolates. In addition, the WHO Hib Rapid Assessment Tool (RAT) was used to 
estimate the true Hib meningitis incidence and the number of Hib meningitis and 
pneumonia cases and deaths. The Hib meningitis annual incidence in three PICs 
was 70 to 84 per 100,000 children under five years. The high Hib disease burden 
and the relative cost-effectiveness of Hib vaccine, make the introduction of Hib 
vaccine a good investment for PICs costing US$ 1,000-10,000 for each death 
prevented - ignoring treatment cost savings.

PMID: 18181445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]