---
reference_id: "PMID:32715927"
title: "Autoimmune gastrointestinal dysmotility: the interface between clinical immunology and neurogastroenterology."
authors:
- Nakane S
- Mukaino A
- Ihara E
- Ogawa Y
journal: Immunol Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/25785826.2020.1797319
keywords:
- Autoantibodies
- "Autoimmune Diseases/diagnosis, immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Gastrointestinal Motility
- Humans
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Neurons/immunology
- Patient Care Team
- "Primary Dysautonomias/diagnosis, immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Rheumatic Diseases/immunology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune gastrointestinal dysmotility: the interface between clinical immunology and neurogastroenterology.
**Authors:** Nakane S, Mukaino A, Ihara E, Ogawa Y
**Journal:** Immunol Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/25785826.2020.1797319](https://doi.org/10.1080/25785826.2020.1797319)

## Content

1. Immunol Med. 2021 Jun;44(2):74-85. doi: 10.1080/25785826.2020.1797319. Epub
2020  Jul 27.

Autoimmune gastrointestinal dysmotility: the interface between clinical 
immunology and neurogastroenterology.

Nakane S(1), Mukaino A(1), Ihara E(2)(3), Ogawa Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neurology and Therapeutics, Kumamoto University 
Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Autoimmune gastrointestinal dysmotility (AGID), an idiopathic or paraneoplastic 
phenomenon, is a clinical form of limited autoimmune dysautonomia. The symptoms 
of AGID and gastrointestinal manifestations in patients with autoimmune 
rheumatic diseases are overlapping. Antineuronal autoantibodies are often 
detected in patients with AGID. Autoantibodies play a key role in GI 
dysmotility; however, whether they cause neuronal destruction is unknown. Hence, 
the connection between the presence of these autoantibodies and the specific 
interference in synaptic transmission in the plexus ganglia of the enteric 
nervous system has to be determined. The treatment options for AGID are not 
well-defined. However, theoretically, immunomodulatory therapies have been shown 
to be effective and are therefore used as the first line of treatment. 
Nonetheless, diverse combined immunomodulatory therapies should be considered 
for intractable cases of AGID. We recommend comprehensive autoimmune evaluation 
and cancer screening for clinical diagnosis of AGID. Univocal diagnostic 
criteria, treatment protocols, and outcome definitions for AGID are required for 
prompt diagnosis and treatment and appropriate management of immunotherapy, 
which will circumvent the need for surgeries and improve patient outcome. In 
conclusion, AGID, a disease at the interface of clinical immunology and 
neurogastroenterology, requires further investigations and warrants cooperation 
among specialists, especially clinical immunologists, gastroenterologists, and 
neurologists.

DOI: 10.1080/25785826.2020.1797319
PMID: 32715927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]