---
reference_id: "PMID:17481601"
title: Shox2 is required for chondrocyte proliferation and maturation in proximal limb skeleton.
authors:
- Yu L
- Liu H
- Yan M
- Yang J
- Long F
- Muneoka K
- Chen Y
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.03.518
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Proliferation
- Chondrocytes/cytology
- Core Binding Factor Alpha 1 Subunit/genetics
- Core Binding Factor Alpha 3 Subunit/genetics
- Extremities/embryology
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shox2 is required for chondrocyte proliferation and maturation in proximal limb skeleton.
**Authors:** Yu L, Liu H, Yan M, Yang J, Long F, Muneoka K, Chen Y
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.03.518](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.03.518)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2007 Jun 15;306(2):549-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.03.518. Epub
2007  Apr 1.

Shox2 is required for chondrocyte proliferation and maturation in proximal limb 
skeleton.

Yu L(1), Liu H, Yan M, Yang J, Long F, Muneoka K, Chen Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 
70117, USA.

Mutations in the short stature homeobox gene SHOX lead to growth retardation 
associated with Turner, Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, and Langer mesomelic 
dysplasia syndromes, which marked the shortening of the forearms and lower legs. 
We report here that in contrast to the SHOX mutations in humans, Shox2 
deficiency in mice leads to a virtual elimination of the stylopod in the 
developing limbs, while the zeugopod and autopod appear relatively normal. This 
phenotype is consistent with the restriction of the Shox2 expression to the 
proximal mesenchyme in the limb bud and later to chondrocytes associated with 
the forming stylopod. In the Shox2(-/-) embryo, the mesenchymal condensation for 
the stylopod initiates normally but the cartilaginous element subsequently fails 
in growth, chondrogenesis and endochondral ossification. A dramatic 
down-regulation of Runx2 and Runx3 could account for the lack of chondrocyte 
hypertrophy, while a down-regulation of Ihh expression may be responsible for a 
significant reduction in chondrocyte proliferation in the mutant stylopod. We 
further demonstrate that an enhanced and ectopic Bmp4 expression in the proximal 
limb of the Shox2 embryo may underlie the down-regulation of Runx2, as 
ectopically applied exogenous BMP4 represses Runx2 expression in the early limb 
bud. Moreover, we show that mouse Shox2, similar to human SHOX, can perform 
opposite roles on gene expression: either as a transcription activator or a 
repressor in different cell types. Our results establish a key role for Shox2 in 
regulating the growth of stylopod by controlling chondrocyte maturation via 
Runx2 and Runx3.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.03.518
PMCID: PMC2062576
PMID: 17481601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]