---
reference_id: "PMID:21281836"
title: Pathophysiology of prediabetes.
authors:
- Ferrannini E
- Gastaldelli A
- Iozzo P
journal: Med Clin North Am
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2010.11.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of prediabetes.
**Authors:** Ferrannini E, Gastaldelli A, Iozzo P
**Journal:** Med Clin North Am (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcna.2010.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcna.2010.11.005)

## Content

1. Med Clin North Am. 2011 Mar;95(2):327-39, vii-viii. doi: 
10.1016/j.mcna.2010.11.005.

Pathophysiology of prediabetes.

Ferrannini E(1), Gastaldelli A, Iozzo P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pisa School of Medicine, Via 
Roma, 67, 56100 Pisa, Italy. ferranni@ifc.cnr.it

Prediabetes encompasses conventional diagnostic categories of impaired fasting 
glucose and impaired glucose tolerance but is a band of glucose concentrations 
and a temporal phase over a continuum extending from conventional normal glucose 
tolerance to overt type 2 diabetes. Insulin resistance and defective glucose 
sensing at the β-cell are the central pathophysiologic determinants that 
together cause hyperglycemia. Regardless of the cellular origin of insulin 
resistance, excessive tissue fat utilization is a consistent metabolic 
mechanism. Although genetic influences affect β-cell function, becoming 
overweight is the main acquired challenge to insulin action. The phenotype of 
prediabetes includes dyslipidemia and higher arterial blood pressure.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcna.2010.11.005
PMID: 21281836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]