---
reference_id: "PMID:35053664"
title: "Neurofibromatosis in Children: Actually and Perspectives."
authors:
- Sur ML
- Armat I
- Sur G
- Pop DC
- Samasca G
- Lupan I
- Timis TL
- Florian IA
- Sur D
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/children9010040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurofibromatosis in Children: Actually and Perspectives.
**Authors:** Sur ML, Armat I, Sur G, Pop DC, Samasca G, Lupan I, Timis TL, Florian IA, Sur D
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children9010040](https://doi.org/10.3390/children9010040)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2022 Jan 2;9(1):40. doi: 10.3390/children9010040.

Neurofibromatosis in Children: Actually and Perspectives.

Sur ML(1)(2), Armat I(3), Sur G(2), Pop DC(1), Samasca G(1)(2), Lupan I(4), 
Timis TL(5), Florian IA(6), Sur D(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 400006 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(2)Children Emergency Clinical Hospital, 400006 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(3)Cardiovascular and Transplant Emergency Institute of Târgu Mureș, 540136 
Targu Mures, Romania.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Babes-Bolyai University, 400084 Cluj-Napoca, 
Romania.
(5)Department of Physiology, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 400006 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, 400006 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(7)Institute of Oncology "Ion Chiricuta", 400015 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.

The three types of neurofibromatosis, namely type 1, type 2, and 
schwannomatosis, are generally associated with various benign tumors affecting 
the skin and the nervous system. On rare occasions, especially in patients with 
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), malignant neoplasms may also be present, several 
of them possessing a more aggressive course than in individuals without this 
syndrome. As such, a clear delineation between the three variants of 
neurofibromatosis is crucial to establish the correct diagnosis and management, 
as well as predict the neoplasm-related outcomes. Neurofibromin, the principal 
product of the NF1 gene, is a potent inhibitor of cellular proliferation, having 
been linked to several key signaling pathways involved in tumor growth. 
Therefore, it may provide a useful therapeutic target for tumor management in 
these patients. In this article, we want to present the association between 
deficiency of neurofibromin and the consequences of the lack of this protein 
leading to different kinds of malignant tumors. The therapy is still uncertain 
and most therapeutic options are in development or clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3390/children9010040
PMCID: PMC8774615
PMID: 35053664

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.