---
reference_id: "PMID:39742826"
title: Atypical free sialic acid storage disorder associated with tissue specific mosaicism of SLC17A5.
authors:
- Shinawi M
- Wegner DJ
- Paul AJ
- Buchser W
- Schmidt R
- Sharma J
- Sardiello M
- Sisco K
- Manwaring L
- Reynolds M
- Fulton R
- Fronick C
- Shaver A
- Huang TY
- Carroll A
- Roessler K
- Halpern AL
- Undiagnosed Diseases Network
- Dickson PI
- Wambach JA
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.109004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical free sialic acid storage disorder associated with tissue specific mosaicism of SLC17A5.
**Authors:** Shinawi M, Wegner DJ, Paul AJ, Buchser W, Schmidt R, Sharma J, Sardiello M, Sisco K, Manwaring L, Reynolds M, Fulton R, Fronick C, Shaver A, Huang TY, Carroll A, Roessler K, Halpern AL, Undiagnosed Diseases Network, Dickson PI, Wambach JA
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.109004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.109004)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2025 Jan;144(1):109004. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.109004.
Epub  2024 Dec 24.

Atypical free sialic acid storage disorder associated with tissue specific 
mosaicism of SLC17A5.

Shinawi M(1), Wegner DJ(1), Paul AJ(1), Buchser W(2), Schmidt R(3), Sharma J(1), 
Sardiello M(1), Sisco K(1), Manwaring L(1), Reynolds M(4), Fulton R(2), Fronick 
C(2), Shaver A(5), Huang TY(5), Carroll A(5), Roessler K(5), Halpern AL(5); 
Undiagnosed Diseases Network; Dickson PI(6), Wambach JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Edward Mallinckrodt Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States of America.
(2)McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States of America.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, United States of America.
(5)Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA, United States of America.
(6)Edward Mallinckrodt Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States of America. Electronic address: 
pdickson@wustl.edu.

Free sialic acid storage disorder (FSASD) is a rare autosomal recessive 
lysosomal storage disease caused by pathogenic SLC17A5 variants with variable 
disease severity. We performed a multidisciplinary evaluation of an adolescent 
female with suspected lysosomal storage disease and conducted comprehensive 
studies to uncover the molecular etiology. The proband exhibited intellectual 
disability, a storage disease gestalt, and mildly elevated urine free sialic 
acid levels. Skin electron micrographs showed prominent cytoplasmic vacuolation. 
Clinical exome and genome sequencing identified a maternally-inherited SLC17A5 
variant: c.533delC;p.Thr178Asnfs*34. RNASeq of proband skin fibroblasts revealed 
exon 3 skipping, which was not detected in RNA from proband blood or parental 
fibroblasts. Targeted deep sequencing of proband fibroblast DNA revealed a 
184 bp deletion in ∼15 % of reads, encompassing the 3' end of exon 3. Illumina 
Complete Long Read sequencing confirmed the deletion was in the 
paternally-inherited allele and found in a mosaic state in proband fibroblasts 
and muscle but not in blood or buccal cells. Functional studies, including 
SLC17A5 knockout cells and transient transfections of mutated SLC17A5 
demonstrated pathogenicity of the identified variants. We report an adolescent 
female with atypical FSASD with tissue-specific mosaicism for an intragenic 
deletion in SLC17A5, explaining the atypical clinical course, mild biochemical 
abnormalities, and long diagnostic process.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.109004
PMCID: PMC12184882
PMID: 39742826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest AS, TH, AC, 
KR, and AH were employed by Illumina Inc. at the time of this collaboration.