---
reference_id: "PMID:37112938"
title: "T Cells in Tick-Borne Flavivirus Encephalitis: A Review of Current Paradigms in Protection and Disease Pathology."
authors:
- Stone ET
- Pinto AK
journal: Viruses
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/v15040958
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Flavivirus
- Zika Virus Infection
- Zika Virus
- Flavivirus Infections
- "Encephalitis, Tick-Borne"
- "Encephalitis Viruses, Tick-Borne/physiology"
- T-Lymphocytes
- Ticks
content_type: abstract_only
---

# T Cells in Tick-Borne Flavivirus Encephalitis: A Review of Current Paradigms in Protection and Disease Pathology.
**Authors:** Stone ET, Pinto AK
**Journal:** Viruses (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v15040958](https://doi.org/10.3390/v15040958)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2023 Apr 13;15(4):958. doi: 10.3390/v15040958.

T Cells in Tick-Borne Flavivirus Encephalitis: A Review of Current Paradigms in 
Protection and Disease Pathology.

Stone ET(1), Pinto AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Saint Louis University 
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63103, USA.

The family Flaviviridae is comprised of a diverse group of arthropod-borne 
viruses that are the etiological agents of globally relevant diseases in humans. 
Among these, infection with several of these flaviviruses-including West Nile 
virus (WNV), Zika virus (ZIKV), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), tick-borne 
encephalitis virus (TBEV), and Powassan virus (POWV)-can result in neuroinvasive 
disease presenting as meningitis or encephalitis. Factors contributing to the 
development and resolution of tick-borne flavivirus (TBEV, POWV) infection and 
neuropathology remain unclear, though many recently undertaken studies have 
described the virus-host interactions underlying encephalitic disease. With 
access to neural tissues despite the selectively permeable blood-brain barrier, 
T cells have emerged as one notable contributor to neuroinflammation. The goal 
of this review is to summarize the recent advances in tick-borne flavivirus 
immunology-particularly with respect to T cells-as it pertains to the 
development of encephalitis. We found that although T cell responses are rarely 
evaluated in a clinical setting, they are integral in conjunction with antibody 
responses to restricting the entry of TBFV into the CNS. The extent and means by 
which they can drive immune pathology, however, merits further study. 
Understanding the role of the T cell compartment in tick-borne flavivirus 
encephalitis is instrumental for improving vaccine safety and efficacy, and has 
implications for treatments and interventions for human disease.

DOI: 10.3390/v15040958
PMCID: PMC10146733
PMID: 37112938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.