---
reference_id: "PMID:28927644"
title: Acute kidney injury is a risk factor for subsequent proteinuria.
authors:
- Parr SK
- Matheny ME
- Abdel-Kader K
- Greevy RA Jr
- Bian A
- Fly J
- Chen G
- Speroff T
- Hung AM
- Ikizler TA
- Siew ED
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.07.007
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Aged
- Angiotensin II Type 1 Receptor Blockers/therapeutic use
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Antihypertensive Agents/therapeutic use
- Blood Pressure
- Comorbidity
- "Databases, Factual"
- Diabetes Mellitus/epidemiology
- Diabetic Nephropathies/epidemiology
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Hospitalization
- "Hospitals, Veterans"
- Humans
- "Hypertension/drug therapy, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Kidney/physiopathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- "Proteinuria/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Severity of Illness Index
- Time Factors
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute kidney injury is a risk factor for subsequent proteinuria.
**Authors:** Parr SK, Matheny ME, Abdel-Kader K, Greevy RA Jr, Bian A, Fly J, Chen G, Speroff T, Hung AM, Ikizler TA, Siew ED
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2017.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2017.07.007)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2018 Feb;93(2):460-469. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.07.007. Epub 2017
 Sep 18.

Acute kidney injury is a risk factor for subsequent proteinuria.

Parr SK(1), Matheny ME(2), Abdel-Kader K(3), Greevy RA Jr(4), Bian A(4), Fly 
J(5), Chen G(4), Speroff T(6), Hung AM(1), Ikizler TA(3), Siew ED(7).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Tennessee Valley Health 
System Veterans Administration Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; 
Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; Vanderbilt Center for 
Kidney Disease and Vanderbilt Integrated Program for AKI Research, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Tennessee Valley Health 
System Veterans Administration Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; 
Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA; Division of General Internal Medicine and Public Health, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; Department of 
Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.
(3)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; Vanderbilt Center for 
Kidney Disease and Vanderbilt Integrated Program for AKI Research, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.
(5)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Tennessee Valley Health 
System Veterans Administration Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(6)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Tennessee Valley Health 
System Veterans Administration Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; 
Division of General Internal Medicine and Public Health, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(7)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Tennessee Valley Health 
System Veterans Administration Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; 
Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; Vanderbilt Center for 
Kidney Disease and Vanderbilt Integrated Program for AKI Research, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. Electronic address: 
edward.siew@vanderbilt.edu.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is associated with subsequent chronic kidney disease 
(CKD), but the mechanism is unclear. To clarify this, we examined the 
association of AKI and new-onset or worsening proteinuria during the 12 months 
following hospitalization in a national retrospective cohort of United States 
Veterans hospitalized between 2004-2012. Patients with and without AKI were 
matched using baseline demographics, comorbidities, proteinuria, estimated 
glomerular filtration rate, blood pressure, angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ACEI/ARB) use, and inpatient 
exposures linked to AKI. The distribution of proteinuria over one year 
post-discharge in the matched cohort was compared using inverse probability 
sampling weights. Subgroup analyses were based on diabetes, pre-admission 
ACEI/ARB use, and AKI severity. Among the 90,614 matched AKI and non-AKI pairs, 
the median estimated glomerular filtration rate was 62 mL/min/1.73m2. The 
prevalence of diabetes and hypertension were 48% and 78%, respectively. The odds 
of having one plus or greater dipstick proteinuria was significantly higher 
during each month of follow-up in patients with AKI than in patients without AKI 
(odds ratio range 1.20-1.39). Odds were higher in patients with Stage II or III 
AKI (odds ratios 1.32-1.81) than in Stage I AKI (odds ratios 1.18-1.32), using 
non-AKI as the reference group. Results were consistent regardless of diabetes 
status or baseline ACEI/ARB use. Thus, AKI is a risk factor for incident or 
worsening proteinuria, suggesting a possible mechanism linking AKI and future 
CKD. The type of proteinuria, physiology, and clinical significance warrant 
further study as a potentially modifiable risk factor in the pathway from AKI to 
CKD.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2017.07.007
PMCID: PMC5796522
PMID: 28927644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: All the other authors declared no 
competing interests.