---
reference_id: "PMID:17008092"
title: "Does marital status and altered contact with the social network predict colorectal cancer survival?"
authors:
- Villingshøj M
- Ross L
- Thomsen BL
- Johansen C
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2006.04.027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does marital status and altered contact with the social network predict colorectal cancer survival?
**Authors:** Villingshøj M, Ross L, Thomsen BL, Johansen C
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2006.04.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2006.04.027)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2006 Nov;42(17):3022-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2006.04.027. Epub
2006  Sep 27.

Does marital status and altered contact with the social network predict 
colorectal cancer survival?

Villingshøj M(1), Ross L, Thomsen BL, Johansen C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer Epidemiology, Danish Cancer Society, Strandboulevarden 
49, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

We examined whether changes in the frequency of contact with the social network 
(partner, children, grandchildren, other relatives, friends and colleagues) in a 
group of colorectal cancer patients were associated with survival. The study was 
based on a questionnaire survey from 1991. The study population consisted of 770 
Danish colorectal cancer patients diagnosed in the period 1985-1990, and 
followed up for survival until March 2002. Using Cox regression analysis we 
found a significantly higher mortality among patients who had lost their partner 
before the operation compared to patients cohabiting with the same partner as 
before the operation (rate ratio (RR)=1.4, 95% confidence interval (CI): 
1.1-1.8) possibly because of less active cancer treatment. This needs 
investigation in future studies. Contrary to expectations we also found a 
significantly higher mortality among patients reporting increased contact with 
their children compared to patients reporting unchanged contact frequency 
(RR=1.7, 95% CI: 1.3-2.4). However, a low physical functioning of the cancer 
patient may have confounded the latter result.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2006.04.027
PMID: 17008092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]