---
reference_id: "PMID:25057935"
title: Postoperative acute kidney injury.
authors:
- Romagnoli S
- Ricci Z
journal: Minerva Anestesiol
year: '2015'
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/etiology, therapy"
- "Cardiac Surgical Procedures/adverse effects, methods"
- Cardiopulmonary Bypass
- Humans
- Postoperative Complications/therapy
- Renal Dialysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postoperative acute kidney injury.
**Authors:** Romagnoli S, Ricci Z
**Journal:** Minerva Anestesiol (2015)

## Content

1. Minerva Anestesiol. 2015 Jun;81(6):684-96. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Postoperative acute kidney injury.

Romagnoli S(1), Ricci Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Health Sciences, Section of Anesthesiology and Intensive 
Care, University of Florence, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi, 
Florence, Italy - zaccaria.ricci@gmail.com.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) represents 18-47% of all causes of hospital-acquired 
AKI and it is associated with a high incidence of morbidity and mortality 
especially in patients requiring dialysis. Only recently, with the application 
of new AKI classifications and guidelines (RIFLE, AKIN and KDIGO), a more 
accurate evaluation of the real incidence of kidney dysfunction in patients 
undergoing surgery has been detailed. In patients undergoing non-cardiac, 
non-vascular and non-thoracic surgery several independent preoperative and 
intraoperative predictors of AKI have been identified. Nonetheless, no measure 
for AKI prevention reached a high level of recommendation, although hemodynamic 
monitoring and goal-directed fluid management may limit perioperative AKI. 
Cardiac surgery-related AKI and cardiopulmonary bypass-related AKI have been 
extensively evaluated and several preventive and treatment strategies have been 
developed. Open and endovascular surgery-related AKI have been compared and 
hydration is currently the only preventive strategy with a substantial level of 
efficacy. In addition, AKI in thoracic surgery, overlooked in the past, has been 
evaluated, showing that it frequently complicates postoperative course of 
patients undergoing elective lung cancer resection. Multi-hit mechanisms 
(ischemia, inflammation, toxins) co-act on patients' predisposition 
(susceptibility). A multi-step approach is probably necessary to limit the 
incidence and the severity of postsurgery AKI patients, such as careful risk 
stratification, adoption of preventive measures and goal directed intraoperative 
algorithms. The present review will summarize the current literature about the 
epidemiology of postoperative AKI focusing on patient-related and 
technical-related risk factors, outcome and prevention strategies in different 
groups of surgeries.

PMID: 25057935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]