---
reference_id: PMID:21560056
title: "[Reduced port surgery : Developing a safe pathway to single port access surgery]."
authors:
- Curcillo PG
- Wu AS
- Podolsky ER
- King SA
journal: Chirurg
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s00104-010-2003-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Reduced port surgery : Developing a safe pathway to single port access surgery].
**Authors:** Curcillo PG, Wu AS, Podolsky ER, King SA
**Journal:** Chirurg (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00104-010-2003-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00104-010-2003-6)

## Content

1. Chirurg. 2011 May;82(5):391-7. doi: 10.1007/s00104-010-2003-6.

[Reduced port surgery : Developing a safe pathway to single port access 
surgery].

[Article in German]

Curcillo PG(1), Wu AS, Podolsky ER, King SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA. pgc@curcillo.com

"Scarfree" surgery is a desired goal in the world of laparoscopy and 
interventional endoscopy. One possibility to achieve this goal is abdominal 
access via a natural orifice (natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery, 
NOTES); however, this procedure and its applications lack an appropriate 
platform. Further possibilities are reduced port techniques or single port 
access surgery, which result in minimal scarring. Development and continued 
growth in this area cover a broad spectrum. Although acceptance has been 
demonstrated, the technique must be adopted in a safe and effective manner and 
must be economically and ecologically safe. This article gives an overview of 
the development of the technique, the learning curve, and new applications for 
this new technique. An English full-text version of this article is available at 
SpringerLink as supplemental.

DOI: 10.1007/s00104-010-2003-6
PMID: 21560056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]