---
reference_id: PMID:26791617
title: Dietary exposure to an environmental toxin triggers neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid deposits in the brain.
authors:
- Cox PA
- Davis DA
- Mash DC
- Metcalf JS
- Banack SA
journal: Proc Biol Sci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1098/rspb.2015.2397
keywords:
- "Amino Acids, Diamino/chemistry, toxicity"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/chemically induced, etiology, pathology, prevention & control"
- Animals
- Brain/drug effects
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Cyanobacteria Toxins
- Food Contamination
- Guam
- Humans
- Neurofibrillary Tangles/pathology
- Plant Roots/microbiology
- Population Groups
- Serine/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dietary exposure to an environmental toxin triggers neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid deposits in the brain.
**Authors:** Cox PA, Davis DA, Mash DC, Metcalf JS, Banack SA
**Journal:** Proc Biol Sci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rspb.2015.2397](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2015.2397)

## Content

1. Proc Biol Sci. 2016 Jan 27;283(1823):20152397. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2015.2397.

Dietary exposure to an environmental toxin triggers neurofibrillary tangles and 
amyloid deposits in the brain.

Cox PA(1), Davis DA(2), Mash DC(2), Metcalf JS(3), Banack SA(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ethnomedicine, Jackson Hole, WY, USA paul@ethnomedicine.org.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA.
(3)Institute for Ethnomedicine, Jackson Hole, WY, USA.

Neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) and β-amyloid plaques are the neurological 
hallmarks of both Alzheimer's disease and an unusual paralytic illness suffered 
by Chamorro villagers on the Pacific island of Guam. Many Chamorros with the 
disease suffer dementia, and in some villages one-quarter of the adults perished 
from the disease. Like Alzheimer's, the causal factors of Guamanian amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis/parkinsonism dementia complex (ALS/PDC) are poorly understood. 
In replicated experiments, we found that chronic dietary exposure to a 
cyanobacterial toxin present in the traditional Chamorro diet, 
β-N-methylamino-l-alanine (BMAA), triggers the formation of both NFT and 
β-amyloid deposits similar in structure and density to those found in brain 
tissues of Chamorros who died with ALS/PDC. Vervets (Chlorocebus sabaeus) fed 
for 140 days with BMAA-dosed fruit developed NFT and sparse β-amyloid deposits 
in the brain. Co-administration of the dietary amino acid l-serine with l-BMAA 
significantly reduced the density of NFT. These findings indicate that while 
chronic exposure to the environmental toxin BMAA can trigger neurodegeneration 
in vulnerable individuals, increasing the amount of l-serine in the diet can 
reduce the risk.

© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2015.2397
PMCID: PMC4795023
PMID: 26791617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]