---
reference_id: "PMID:30066227"
title: Therapeutic Approach to Hypertension Urgencies and Emergencies During Acute Coronary Syndrome.
authors:
- Tocci G
- Figliuzzi I
- Presta V
- Miceli F
- Citoni B
- Coluccia R
- Musumeci MB
- Ferrucci A
- Volpe M
journal: High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s40292-018-0275-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic Approach to Hypertension Urgencies and Emergencies During Acute Coronary Syndrome.
**Authors:** Tocci G, Figliuzzi I, Presta V, Miceli F, Citoni B, Coluccia R, Musumeci MB, Ferrucci A, Volpe M
**Journal:** High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40292-018-0275-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40292-018-0275-y)

## Content

1. High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev. 2018 Sep;25(3):253-259. doi: 
10.1007/s40292-018-0275-y. Epub 2018 Jul 31.

Therapeutic Approach to Hypertension Urgencies and Emergencies During Acute 
Coronary Syndrome.

Tocci G(1)(2), Figliuzzi I(3), Presta V(3), Miceli F(3), Citoni B(3), Coluccia 
R(4), Musumeci MB(3), Ferrucci A(3), Volpe M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Hypertension Unit, Division of Cardiology, Department of Clinical and 
Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Sant'Andrea Hospital, 
University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy. giuliano.tocci@uniroma1.it.
(2)IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli, IS, Italy. giuliano.tocci@uniroma1.it.
(3)Hypertension Unit, Division of Cardiology, Department of Clinical and 
Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Sant'Andrea Hospital, 
University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli, IS, Italy.

Uncontrolled hypertension is one of the most common determinant for the 
persistently high burden of cardiovascular (CV) disease, mostly including 
coronary artery disease (CAD) and hospital admissions due to acute coronary 
events. Markedly high blood pressure (BP) levels are also frequently observed 
during the acute phase of coronary syndromes (both ST-segment and non-ST-segment 
elevation myocardial infarction and unstable angina). In particular, a sustained 
raise of BP levels above 180/110 mmHg associated with acute cardiac organ 
damage, i.e. myocardial ischemia, represents a condition of hypertension 
emergency and requires rapid hospital admission, prompt pharmacological 
therapies and non-pharmacological interventions, aimed at restoring coronary 
flow and preserve vital myocardium. Diagnosis of CAD in hypertensive patients 
may often be complicated by the concomitant presence of electrocardiographic 
abnormalities, such as ST-segment depression (at rest or during exercise), which 
may occur even in the absence of coronary atherosclerosis. Thus, proper 
identification of CAD may result difficult to perform in the setting of clinical 
practice, mostly in the presence of left ventricular hypertrophy. In this 
review, we will briefly discuss diagnostic protocols and pharmacological 
strategies that can be applied in a setting of hypertension emergency with acute 
cardiac organ damage in the light of the currently available evidence and 
recommendations from recent guidelines on hypertension management and control.

DOI: 10.1007/s40292-018-0275-y
PMID: 30066227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]