---
reference_id: "PMID:40629707"
title: "Familial Laryngeal Cleft: Pediatric Detection Leads to Adult Diagnosis and Intervention."
authors:
- Turbeville HR
- Morrison RJ
- Green GE
journal: Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/00034894251356731
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Laryngeal Cleft: Pediatric Detection Leads to Adult Diagnosis and Intervention.
**Authors:** Turbeville HR, Morrison RJ, Green GE
**Journal:** Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00034894251356731](https://doi.org/10.1177/00034894251356731)

## Content

1. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2025 Dec;134(12):945-947. doi: 
10.1177/00034894251356731. Epub 2025 Jul 8.

Familial Laryngeal Cleft: Pediatric Detection Leads to Adult Diagnosis and 
Intervention.

Turbeville HR(1), Morrison RJ(1), Green GE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This case report describes five related patients presenting with 
signs and symptoms of chronic aspiration who were found to have laryngeal clefts 
requiring surgical intervention. This case highlights a possible underlying 
genetic cause of laryngeal cleft and need for further study in this area.
METHODS: A retrospective review of patients' clinical presentations, surgical 
intervention, procedural photographs and imaging studies was conducted.
RESULTS: Five members of a family of 6 demonstrated symptoms consistent with 
chronic aspiration that became more evident during the COVID pandemic due to 
social isolation and perceived social pressure around coughing. One child had a 
history of swallowing difficulty and was found to have a laryngeal cleft on 
operative evaluation. This led to further evaluation of the rest of the family, 
with all 4 children and their father having an identifiable laryngeal cleft. All 
showed marked improvement after surgical repair. Genetic testing was performed 
and identified a familial variant of uncertain significance in the FBN1 gene 
(c.466A > C; p.N156H).
CONCLUSION: An unidentified genetic or environmental component may contribute to 
laryngeal cleft. There is insufficient reporting of case of related patients to 
identify an inheritance pattern or specific genetic mutation. Further case 
reporting and study is needed in this area.

DOI: 10.1177/00034894251356731
PMID: 40629707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.