---
reference_id: "PMID:18992820"
title: Phosphorylation of huntingtin reduces the accumulation of its nuclear fragments.
authors:
- Warby SC
- Doty CN
- Graham RK
- Shively J
- Singaraja RR
- Hayden MR
journal: Mol Cell Neurosci
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.09.007
keywords:
- Animals
- COS Cells
- Caspase 6/metabolism
- Cell Nucleus/metabolism
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein
- "Huntington Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Peptide Fragments/genetics, metabolism"
- Phosphorylation
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phosphorylation of huntingtin reduces the accumulation of its nuclear fragments.
**Authors:** Warby SC, Doty CN, Graham RK, Shively J, Singaraja RR, Hayden MR
**Journal:** Mol Cell Neurosci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcn.2008.09.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcn.2008.09.007)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2009 Feb;40(2):121-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.09.007. Epub 
2008 Oct 18.

Phosphorylation of huntingtin reduces the accumulation of its nuclear fragments.

Warby SC(1), Doty CN, Graham RK, Shively J, Singaraja RR, Hayden MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia V5Z4H4, Canada.

Huntingtin is phosphorylated on serine-421 (S421) by the pro-survival signaling 
protein kinases Akt and SGK. Phosphorylation of huntingtin at S421 is variable 
in different regions of the brain with the lowest levels observed in the 
striatum, which is further reduced by the mutation for Huntington disease (HD). 
Cleavage of huntingtin by caspase-6 at amino acid 586 is a crucial event in the 
pathogenesis of HD. Nuclear localization of huntingtin is also an important 
marker of HD and preventing or delaying its nuclear accumulation is protective 
in disease models. Phosphorylation influences proteolysis and clearance of many 
protein substrates. We therefore sought to investigate the influence of 
huntingtin phosphorylation at S421 on the accumulation of huntingtin-caspase-6 
fragments because these fragments are generated in the nucleus and are crucial 
for the disease phenotype. Using phospho-huntingtin mutants and a cleavage 
site-specific neo-epitope huntingtin antibody, we demonstrate that 
phosphorylation at S421 reduces the nuclear accumulation of huntingtin-caspase-6 
fragments by reducing huntingtin cleavage by caspase-6, the levels of 
full-length huntingtin, and its nuclear localization.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.09.007
PMID: 18992820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]