---
reference_id: "PMID:34096690"
title: Sotorasib for Lung Cancers with KRAS p.G12C Mutation.
authors:
- Skoulidis F
- Li BT
- Dy GK
- Price TJ
- Falchook GS
- Wolf J
- Italiano A
- Schuler M
- Borghaei H
- Barlesi F
- Kato T
- Curioni-Fontecedro A
- Sacher A
- Spira A
- Ramalingam SS
- Takahashi T
- Besse B
- Anderson A
- Ang A
- Tran Q
- Mather O
- Henary H
- Ngarmchamnanrith G
- Friberg G
- Velcheti V
- Govindan R
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2103695
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sotorasib for Lung Cancers with KRAS p.G12C Mutation.
**Authors:** Skoulidis F, Li BT, Dy GK, Price TJ, Falchook GS, Wolf J, Italiano A, Schuler M, Borghaei H, Barlesi F, Kato T, Curioni-Fontecedro A, Sacher A, Spira A, Ramalingam SS, Takahashi T, Besse B, Anderson A, Ang A, Tran Q, Mather O, Henary H, Ngarmchamnanrith G, Friberg G, Velcheti V, Govindan R
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2103695](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2103695)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 Jun 24;384(25):2371-2381. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2103695. Epub 
2021 Jun 4.

Sotorasib for Lung Cancers with KRAS p.G12C Mutation.

Skoulidis F(1), Li BT(1), Dy GK(1), Price TJ(1), Falchook GS(1), Wolf J(1), 
Italiano A(1), Schuler M(1), Borghaei H(1), Barlesi F(1), Kato T(1), 
Curioni-Fontecedro A(1), Sacher A(1), Spira A(1), Ramalingam SS(1), Takahashi 
T(1), Besse B(1), Anderson A(1), Ang A(1), Tran Q(1), Mather O(1), Henary H(1), 
Ngarmchamnanrith G(1), Friberg G(1), Velcheti V(1), Govindan R(1).

Author information:
(1)From the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (F.S.), and 
U.S. Oncology Research, the Woodlands (A. Spira) - both in Texas; Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center and Weill Cornell Medicine (B.T.L.) and Thoracic Medical 
Oncology, Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York University (V.V.), New York, and 
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo (G.K.D.) - all in New York; the Queen 
Elizabeth Hospital and University of Adelaide, Woodville, SA, Australia 
(T.J.P.); Sarah Cannon Research Institute at HealthONE, Denver (G.S.F.); 
Department I of Internal Medicine, Center for Integrated Oncology, University 
Hospital Cologne, Cologne (J.W.), the West German Cancer Center, University 
Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen (M.S.), and the German Cancer 
Consortium, Heidelberg (M.S.) - all in Germany; the Early Phase Trials and 
Sarcoma Units, Bergonie Cancer Institute, Bordeaux (A.I.), and Gustave Roussy 
Institute, Villejuif (F.B., B.B.) - both in France; Fox Chase Cancer Center, 
Philadelphia (H.B.); Kanagawa Cancer Center, Yokohama (T.K.), and the Division 
of Thoracic Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, Shizuoka (T.T.) - both in Japan; 
the Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland (A.C.-F.); Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University 
Health Network, Toronto (A. Sacher); Virginia Cancer Specialists, Fairfax (A. 
Spira); Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore 
(A. Spira); Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta (S.S.R.); 
Amgen, Thousand Oaks, CA (A. Anderson, A. Ang, Q.T., O.M., H.H., G.N., G.F.); 
and the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis (R.G.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2021 Aug;18(8):470. doi: 10.1038/s41571-021-00533-w.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Jun 24;384(25):2447-2449. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2107884.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2024 Mar 15;209(6):748-750. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.202208-1596RR.

BACKGROUND: Sotorasib showed anticancer activity in patients with KRAS 
p.G12C-mutated advanced solid tumors in a phase 1 study, and particularly 
promising anticancer activity was observed in a subgroup of patients with 
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: In a single-group, phase 2 trial, we investigated the activity of 
sotorasib, administered orally at a dose of 960 mg once daily, in patients with 
KRAS p.G12C-mutated advanced NSCLC previously treated with standard therapies. 
The primary end point was objective response (complete or partial response) 
according to independent central review. Key secondary end points included 
duration of response, disease control (defined as complete response, partial 
response, or stable disease), progression-free survival, overall survival, and 
safety. Exploratory biomarkers were evaluated for their association with 
response to sotorasib therapy.
RESULTS: Among the 126 enrolled patients, the majority (81.0%) had previously 
received both platinum-based chemotherapy and inhibitors of programmed death 1 
(PD-1) or programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1). According to central review, 124 
patients had measurable disease at baseline and were evaluated for response. An 
objective response was observed in 46 patients (37.1%; 95% confidence interval 
[CI], 28.6 to 46.2), including in 4 (3.2%) who had a complete response and in 42 
(33.9%) who had a partial response. The median duration of response was 11.1 
months (95% CI, 6.9 to could not be evaluated). Disease control occurred in 100 
patients (80.6%; 95% CI, 72.6 to 87.2). The median progression-free survival was 
6.8 months (95% CI, 5.1 to 8.2), and the median overall survival was 12.5 months 
(95% CI, 10.0 to could not be evaluated). Treatment-related adverse events 
occurred in 88 of 126 patients (69.8%), including grade 3 events in 25 patients 
(19.8%) and a grade 4 event in 1 (0.8%). Responses were observed in subgroups 
defined according to PD-L1 expression, tumor mutational burden, and co-occurring 
mutations in STK11, KEAP1, or TP53.
CONCLUSIONS: In this phase 2 trial, sotorasib therapy led to a durable clinical 
benefit without new safety signals in patients with previously treated KRAS 
p.G12C-mutated NSCLC. (Funded by Amgen and the National Institutes of Health; 
CodeBreaK100 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03600883.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2103695
PMCID: PMC9116274
PMID: 34096690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]