---
reference_id: "PMID:30020604"
title: Trimethoprim Sulfamethoxazole.
authors:
- Kemnic TR
- Coleman M
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trimethoprim Sulfamethoxazole.
**Authors:** Kemnic TR, Coleman M

## Content

1. Trimethoprim Sulfamethoxazole.

Kemnic TR, Coleman M(1).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2022 Nov 28.

Author information:
(1)Metro Health Hospital

Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, also known as co-trimoxazole, can be abbreviated 
in the following ways: SXT, TMP-SMX, TMP-SMZ, or TMP-Sulfa. It is an 
antimicrobial used to treat and prevent many bacterial infections. This drug is 
very cost-affordable and used for many types of illnesses. The FDA-Approved 
indications include acute infective exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, otitis 
media in pediatrics only, travelers diarrhea for treatment and prophylaxis, 
urinary tract infections, shigellosis, pneumocystis jirovecii, 
pneumonia/pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PJP/PCP), and toxoplasmosis, both as 
prophylaxis and treatment. There are also non-FDA-approved indications. This 
activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, methods of 
administration, important adverse effects, contraindications, toxicity, and 
monitoring of TMP-SMX so providers can direct patient therapy where necessary 
for infections as part of the interprofessional team.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30020604

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Tyler Kemnic declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Meghan Coleman 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.