---
reference_id: "PMID:28646340"
title: Clinical Management of Ebola Virus Disease Patients in Low-Resource Settings.
authors:
- Sprecher A
- Van Herp M
- Rollin PE
journal: Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/82_2017_18
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Management of Ebola Virus Disease Patients in Low-Resource Settings.
**Authors:** Sprecher A, Van Herp M, Rollin PE
**Journal:** Curr Top Microbiol Immunol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/82_2017_18](https://doi.org/10.1007/82_2017_18)

## Content

1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2017;411:93-113. doi: 10.1007/82_2017_18.

Clinical Management of Ebola Virus Disease Patients in Low-Resource Settings.

Sprecher A(1), Van Herp M(2), Rollin PE(3).

Author information:
(1)Médecins Sans Frontières, Rue Arbre Benit 46, 1050, Brussels, Belgium. 
armand.sprecher@brussels.msf.org.
(2)Médecins Sans Frontières, Rue Arbre Benit 46, 1050, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High Consequence Pathogens and 
Pathology, National Center for Emerging Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA, 30333, USA.

The low-resource environment deprives healthcare providers caring for patients 
with Ebola virus disease (EVD) of many of the means employed for the critically 
ill that are available in better resourced settings, such as advanced 
therapeutic interventions and abundant staff. In addition to these limitations 
may be added those imposed by the remote tropical locations, where EVD outbreaks 
occur. In this setting, a safe environment is created where healthcare workers 
may care for their patients over the evolving course of their acute illness into 
their convalescent period. Clinical management of EVD combines supportive and 
symptomatic care while also addressing the patient's emotional and mental health 
needs. A variety of specific therapies directly targeting the virus has become 
available, but none of these has, as of yet, conclusively demonstrated an 
impact. Healthcare workers caring for EVD patients must be constantly aware that 
they are part of a larger epidemic control operation, and their actions have 
consequences that go beyond their patients to their families and the community 
affected by the outbreak.

DOI: 10.1007/82_2017_18
PMID: 28646340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]