---
reference_id: "PMID:38338982"
title: CXCL12 Neutralizing Antibody Promotes Hair Growth in Androgenic Alopecia and Alopecia Areata.
authors:
- Zheng M
- Kim MH
- Park SG
- Kim WS
- Oh SH
- Sung JH
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25031705
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CXCL12 Neutralizing Antibody Promotes Hair Growth in Androgenic Alopecia and Alopecia Areata.
**Authors:** Zheng M, Kim MH, Park SG, Kim WS, Oh SH, Sung JH
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25031705](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25031705)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jan 30;25(3):1705. doi: 10.3390/ijms25031705.

CXCL12 Neutralizing Antibody Promotes Hair Growth in Androgenic Alopecia and 
Alopecia Areata.

Zheng M(1), Kim MH(1), Park SG(2), Kim WS(3), Oh SH(4), Sung JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Epi Biotech Co., Ltd., Incheon 21983, Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Ajou University, Suwon 16499, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Sungkyunkwan University, 
Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Seoul 03181, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology Research Institute, Severance 
Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea.

We had previously investigated the expression and functional role of C-X-C Motif 
Chemokine Ligand 12 (CXCL12) during the hair cycle progression. CXCL12 was 
highly expressed in stromal cells such as dermal fibroblasts (DFs) and 
inhibition of CXCL12 increased hair growth. Therefore, we further investigated 
whether a CXCL12 neutralizing antibody (αCXCL12) is effective for androgenic 
alopecia (AGA) and alopecia areata (AA) and studied the underlying molecular 
mechanism for treating these diseases. In the AGA model, CXCL12 is highly 
expressed in DFs. Subcutaneous (s.c.) injection of αCXCL12 significantly induced 
hair growth in AGA mice, and treatment with αCXCL12 attenuated the 
androgen-induced hair damage in hair organ culture. Androgens increased the 
secretion of CXCL12 from DFs through the androgen receptor (AR). Secreted CXCL12 
from DFs increased the expression of the AR and C-X-C Motif Chemokine Receptor 4 
(CXCR4) in dermal papilla cells (DPCs), which induced hair loss in AGA. 
Likewise, CXCL12 expression is increased in AA mice, while s.c. injection of 
αCXCL12 significantly inhibited hair loss in AA mice and reduced the number of 
CD8+, MHC-I+, and MHC-II+ cells in the skin. In addition, injection of αCXCL12 
also prevented the onset of AA and reduced the number of CD8+ cells. 
Interferon-γ (IFNγ) treatment increased the secretion of CXCL12 from DFs through 
the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) pathway, and 
αCXCL12 treatment protected the hair follicle from IFNγ in hair organ culture. 
Collectively, these results indicate that CXCL12 is involved in the progression 
of AGA and AA and antibody therapy for CXCL12 is promising for hair loss 
treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25031705
PMCID: PMC10855715
PMID: 38338982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors Mei Zheng and Min-Ho Kim were employed 
by the Epi Biotech. Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.