---
reference_id: "PMID:39932259"
title: Targeting protein hyper-SUMOylation halts cholangiocarcinoma progression by impairing cancer cell viability and tumor-stroma cross talk.
authors:
- Olaizola P
- Olaizola I
- Fernandez de Ara M
- Lapitz A
- Val B
- Izquierdo-Sanchez L
- Fernandez-Barrena MG
- Alvarez L
- "O'Rourke CJ"
- Lee-Law PY
- Davies K
- Gradinaru A
- Jimenez-Agüero R
- La Casta A
- Riaño I
- Macias RIR
- Marin JJG
- Martinez-Chantar ML
- Avila MA
- Aspichueta P
- Andersen JB
- Boulter L
- Bujanda L
- Rodrigues PM
- Perugorria MJ
- Banales JM
journal: Hepatology
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/HEP.0000000000001259
keywords:
- "Cholangiocarcinoma/pathology, drug therapy, metabolism, genetics"
- Humans
- Sumoylation/drug effects
- "Bile Duct Neoplasms/pathology, drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Ubiquitin-Conjugating Enzymes/metabolism, genetics"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Survival/drug effects
- "Ubiquitin-Activating Enzymes/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Mice
- Disease Progression
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Tumor Microenvironment/drug effects
- SUMO-1 Protein/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting protein hyper-SUMOylation halts cholangiocarcinoma progression by impairing cancer cell viability and tumor-stroma cross talk.
**Authors:** Olaizola P, Olaizola I, Fernandez de Ara M, Lapitz A, Val B, Izquierdo-Sanchez L, Fernandez-Barrena MG, Alvarez L, O'Rourke CJ, Lee-Law PY, Davies K, Gradinaru A, Jimenez-Agüero R, La Casta A, Riaño I, Macias RIR, Marin JJG, Martinez-Chantar ML, Avila MA, Aspichueta P, Andersen JB, Boulter L, Bujanda L, Rodrigues PM, Perugorria MJ, Banales JM
**Journal:** Hepatology (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HEP.0000000000001259](https://doi.org/10.1097/HEP.0000000000001259)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2025 Dec 1;82(6):1461-1479. doi: 10.1097/HEP.0000000000001259.
Epub  2025 Feb 11.

Targeting protein hyper-SUMOylation halts cholangiocarcinoma progression by 
impairing cancer cell viability and tumor-stroma cross talk.

Olaizola P(1)(2)(3), Olaizola I(1), Fernandez de Ara M(1), Lapitz A(1)(2)(4), 
Val B(1)(2), Izquierdo-Sanchez L(1)(2), Fernandez-Barrena MG(2)(5)(6), Alvarez 
L(5), O'Rourke CJ(7), Lee-Law PY(1)(8), Davies K(3), Gradinaru A(3), 
Jimenez-Agüero R(1), La Casta A(1), Riaño I(1), Macias RIR(2)(9), Marin 
JJG(2)(9), Martinez-Chantar ML(2)(10), Avila MA(2)(5)(6), Aspichueta 
P(2)(11)(12), Andersen JB(7), Boulter L(3)(13), Bujanda L(1)(2), Rodrigues 
PM(1)(2)(14), Perugorria MJ(1)(2)(15), Banales JM(1)(2)(14)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases, Biogipuzkoa Health 
Research Institute, Donostia University Hospital, University of the Basque 
Country (UPV/EHU), Donostia-San Sebastian, Spain.
(2)National Institute for the Study of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases 
(CIBERehd, "Instituto de Salud Carlos III"), Spain.
(3)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science and 
Technology, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain.
(5)Hepatology Program, CIMA, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(6)Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Navarra (IdiSNA), Pamplona, Spain.
(7)Department of Health and Medical Sciences, Biotech Research and Innovation 
Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)Experimenal Hepatology and Drug Targeting (HEVEPHARM) Group, Institute of 
Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), University of Salamanca, Salamanca, 
Spain.
(10)Liver Disease Laboratory, CIC bioGUNE, Basque Research and Technology 
Alliance (BRTA), Bilbao, Spain.
(11)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine and Nursing, University of the 
Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain.
(12)Biocruces Bizkaia Health Research Institute, Cruces University Hospital, 
Barakaldo, Spain.
(13)Cancer Research UK Scotland Centre, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, 
Edinburgh, UK.
(14)IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.
(15)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Nursing, University of the 
Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain.
(16)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, School of Sciences, University of 
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) includes a diverse group of 
biliary malignancies with poor prognosis. Alterations in post-translational 
modifications contribute to disrupted protein dynamics, cellular disturbances, 
and disease. This study investigates the role of protein SUMOylation in 
cholangiocarcinogenesis and its potential as a therapeutic target.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Analysis of CCA tumors from 4 patient cohorts and CCA cell 
lines, revealed increased expression of the SUMOylation machinery genes SUMO 
activating enzyme 1 ( SAE1 ) and the SUMO conjugating enzyme UBE2I , regardless 
of the tumor's molecular profile, resulting in elevated levels of 
SUMO1-conjugated proteins. Higher SAE1 and UBE2I levels were both indicative of 
unfavorable clinical outcomes. Deregulated SUMOylated proteins in CCA, mostly 
linked to cell proliferation, survival, and homeostasis, were identified through 
immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry. Genetic ( UBE2I -knockdown) and 
pharmacological (ML792 and S-adenosyl-methionine) inhibition of SUMOylation 
effectively suppressed tumorigenesis in subcutaneous and oncogene-driven CCA 
models, reducing the presence of cancer-associated fibroblasts and increasing 
the recruitment of antitumor immune cells. In vitro, targeting SUMOylation 
induced CCA cell death and reduced cell proliferation, colony formation, and 
spheroid growth. Importantly, ML792 and S-adenosyl-methionine did not adversely 
affect normal human cholangiocytes. Moreover, co-culture of wild-type or UBE2I 
-knockdown CCA cells with cancer-associated fibroblasts revealed that depleting 
SUMOylation in CCA cells impaired cancer-associated fibroblast cell growth and 
altered their protein secretome, ultimately disrupting CCA growth through a 
regulatory feedback loop.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant SUMOylation drives CCA progression by enhancing cell 
survival, proliferation, and shaping the tumor microenvironment. Targeting 
SUMOylation shows potential in inhibiting CCA growth, representing a promising 
therapeutic strategy.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/HEP.0000000000001259
PMCID: PMC12614379
PMID: 39932259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts to report.