---
reference_id: "PMID:37952487"
title: "Animal models of shigellosis: a historical overview."
authors:
- Alphonse N
- Odendall C
journal: Curr Opin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2023.102399
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Animal models of shigellosis: a historical overview.
**Authors:** Alphonse N, Odendall C
**Journal:** Curr Opin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coi.2023.102399](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2023.102399)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Immunol. 2023 Dec;85:102399. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2023.102399. Epub
2023  Nov 10.

Animal models of shigellosis: a historical overview.

Alphonse N(1), Odendall C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology and Microbial 
Sciences, King's College London, London, UK; Immunoregulation Laboratory, 
Francis Crick Institute, London, UK. Electronic address: 
noemie.alphonse@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology and Microbial 
Sciences, King's College London, London, UK. Electronic address: 
charlotte.odendall@kcl.ac.uk.

Shigella spp. are major causative agents of bacillary dysentery, a severe 
enteric disease characterized by destruction and inflammation of the colonic 
epithelium accompanied by acute diarrhea, fever, and abdominal pain. Although 
antibiotics have traditionally been effective, the prevalence of 
multidrug-resistant strains is increasing, stressing the urgent need for a 
vaccine. The human-specific nature of shigellosis and the absence of a 
dependable animal model have posed significant obstacles in understanding 
Shigella pathogenesis and the host immune response, both of which are crucial 
for the development of an effective vaccine. Efforts have been made over time to 
develop a physiological model that mimics the pathological features of the human 
disease with limited success until the recent development of genetically 
modified mouse models. In this review, we provide an overview of Shigella 
pathogenesis and chronicle the historical development of various shigellosis 
models, emphasizing their strengths and weaknesses.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coi.2023.102399
PMID: 37952487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.