---
reference_id: "PMID:37289062"
title: Wollamide Cyclic Hexapeptides Synergize with Established and New Tuberculosis Antibiotics in Targeting Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
authors:
- Rollo RF
- Mori G
- Hill TA
- Hillemann D
- Niemann S
- Homolka S
- Fairlie DP
- Blumenthal A
journal: Microbiol Spectr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00465-23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wollamide Cyclic Hexapeptides Synergize with Established and New Tuberculosis Antibiotics in Targeting Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Rollo RF, Mori G, Hill TA, Hillemann D, Niemann S, Homolka S, Fairlie DP, Blumenthal A
**Journal:** Microbiol Spectr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1128/spectrum.00465-23](https://doi.org/10.1128/spectrum.00465-23)

## Content

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Aug 17;11(4):e0046523. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00465-23. 
Epub 2023 Jun 8.

Wollamide Cyclic Hexapeptides Synergize with Established and New Tuberculosis 
Antibiotics in Targeting Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Rollo RF(1), Mori G(1), Hill TA(2)(3), Hillemann D(4), Niemann S(5)(6), Homolka 
S(5), Fairlie DP(2)(3), Blumenthal A(1).

Author information:
(1)Frazer Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.
(2)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.
(3)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide 
and Protein Science, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(4)National and WHO Supranational Reference Center for Mycobacteria, Research 
Center Borstel, Leibniz Lung Center, Borstel, Germany.
(5)Molecular and Experimental Mycobacteriology, Priority Area Infections, 
Research Center Borstel, Leibniz Lung Center, Borstel, Germany.
(6)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site 
Hamburg-Lübeck-Borstel-Riems, Borstel, Germany.

Shorter and more effective treatment regimens as well as new drugs are urgent 
priorities for reducing the immense global burden of tuberculosis (TB). As 
treatment of TB currently requires multiple antibiotics with diverse mechanisms 
of action, any new drug lead requires assessment of potential interactions with 
existing TB antibiotics. We previously described the discovery of wollamides, a 
new class of Streptomyces-derived cyclic hexapeptides with antimycobacterial 
activity. To further assess the value of the wollamide pharmacophore as an 
antimycobacterial lead, we determined wollamide interactions with first- and 
second-line TB antibiotics by determining fractional inhibitory combination 
index and zero interaction potency scores. In vitro two-way and multiway 
interaction analyses revealed that wollamide B1 synergizes with ethambutol, 
pretomanid, delamanid, and para-aminosalicylic acid in inhibiting the 
replication and promoting the killing of phylogenetically diverse clinical and 
reference strains of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC). Wollamide B1 
antimycobacterial activity was not compromised in multi- and extensively 
drug-resistant MTBC strains. Moreover, growth-inhibitory antimycobacterial 
activity of the combination of bedaquiline/pretomanid/linezolid was further 
enhanced by wollamide B1, and wollamide B1 did not compromise the 
antimycobacterial activity of the isoniazid/rifampicin/ethambutol combination. 
Collectively, these findings add new dimensions to the desirable characteristics 
of the wollamide pharmacophore as an antimycobacterial lead compound. IMPORTANCE 
Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease that affects millions of people 
globally, with 1.6 million deaths annually. TB treatment requires combinations 
of multiple different antibiotics for many months, and toxic side effects can 
occur. Therefore, shorter, safer, more effective TB therapies are required, and 
these should ideally also be effective against drug-resistant strains of the 
bacteria that cause TB. This study shows that wollamide B1, a chemically 
optimized member of a new class of antibacterial compounds, inhibits the growth 
of drug-sensitive as well as multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
isolated from TB patients. In combination with TB antibiotics, wollamide B1 
synergistically enhances the activity of several antibiotics, including complex 
drug combinations that are currently used for TB treatment. These new insights 
expand the catalogue of the desirable characteristics of wollamide B1 as an 
antimycobacterial lead compound that might inspire the development of improved 
TB treatments.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00465-23
PMCID: PMC10433873
PMID: 37289062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.