---
reference_id: "PMID:28389773"
title: Analysis of clinical features and visual outcomes of pars planitis.
authors:
- Berker N
- Sen E
- Elgin U
- Atilgan CU
- Dursun E
- Yilmazbas P
journal: Int Ophthalmol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s10792-017-0526-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of clinical features and visual outcomes of pars planitis.
**Authors:** Berker N, Sen E, Elgin U, Atilgan CU, Dursun E, Yilmazbas P
**Journal:** Int Ophthalmol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10792-017-0526-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10792-017-0526-2)

## Content

1. Int Ophthalmol. 2018 Apr;38(2):727-736. doi: 10.1007/s10792-017-0526-2. Epub 
2017 Apr 7.

Analysis of clinical features and visual outcomes of pars planitis.

Berker N(1), Sen E(2), Elgin U(2), Atilgan CU(2), Dursun E(2), Yilmazbas P(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Health Sciences, Ulucanlar Eye Research and Training Hospital, 
Guzeltepe Mh, 747. sk, Parkvadi Apartments, 06690, Cankaya, Ankara, Turkey. 
niluferberker@gmail.com.
(2)University of Health Sciences, Ulucanlar Eye Research and Training Hospital, 
Guzeltepe Mh, 747. sk, Parkvadi Apartments, 06690, Cankaya, Ankara, Turkey.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the demographic characteristics, clinical features, 
treatment and outcomes of patients with pars planitis in a tertiary referral 
center in Turkey.
METHODS: Medical records of patients with pars planitis were retrospectively 
reviewed. The data including demographic and ocular features and treatment 
outcomes were recorded. The distribution of clinical findings and complications 
were evaluated according to age and gender groups. The changes in final BCVA 
compared to the initial BCVA were noted. Statistical analysis was performed 
using SPSS software (Version 18.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA).
RESULTS: Twenty-seven patients (54 eyes) were included in this study. 16 
patients were male (59.3%), and 11 were female (40.7%). Mean age at diagnosis 
was 12.84 ± 8.26 (range 4-36) years. Mean follow-up period was 61.3 ± 52.15 
(range 9-172) months. Mean BCVA was 0.58 ± 0.36 (range 0.03-1.00) (0.40 ± 0.45 
logMAR) at presentation, and 0.81 ± 0.28 (range 0.10-1.00) (0.14 ± 0.27 logMAR) 
at final visit (P = 0.001). Vitreous inflammation (100%), vitreous haze (92.6%), 
snowballs (74.1%), snowbanks (66.7%), anterior chamber cells (66.7%) and 
peripheral retinal vascular sheathing (48.1%) were the most common 
presentations. Ocular complications included vitreous condensation (51.9%), 
cystoid macular edema (22.2%), cataract (18.5%), inferior peripheral retinal 
detachment (11.1%), glaucoma (5.6%) and vitreous hemorrhage (3.7%). Treatments 
included topical, periocular, intravitreal and systemic corticosteroids, 
immunosuppressives, peripheral laser photocoagulation and pars plana vitrectomy 
when needed.
CONCLUSIONS: Pars planitis is an idiopathic chronic intermediate uveitis mostly 
affecting children and adolescents. In spite of its chronic nature with high 
potential of causing ocular complications, adequate treatment and close 
follow-up lead to favorable visual outcomes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10792-017-0526-2
PMID: 28389773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]