---
reference_id: "PMID:22454510"
title: The DSPII splice variant is crucial for desmosome-mediated adhesion in HaCaT keratinocytes.
authors:
- Cabral RM
- Tattersall D
- Patel V
- McPhail GD
- Hatzimasoura E
- Abrams DJ
- South AP
- Kelsell DP
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1242/jcs.084152
keywords:
- Cell Adhesion
- Cell Line
- "Desmoplakins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Desmosomes/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Keratinocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- "Protein Isoforms/genetics, metabolism"
- RNA Splicing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The DSPII splice variant is crucial for desmosome-mediated adhesion in HaCaT keratinocytes.
**Authors:** Cabral RM, Tattersall D, Patel V, McPhail GD, Hatzimasoura E, Abrams DJ, South AP, Kelsell DP
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.084152](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.084152)

## Content

1. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jun 15;125(Pt 12):2853-61. doi: 10.1242/jcs.084152. Epub 2012
 Mar 27.

The DSPII splice variant is crucial for desmosome-mediated adhesion in HaCaT 
keratinocytes.

Cabral RM(1), Tattersall D, Patel V, McPhail GD, Hatzimasoura E, Abrams DJ, 
South AP, Kelsell DP.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, The Blizard Institute, Barts and The London 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark 
Street, London E1 2AT, UK.

Desmosomes are intercellular junctions specialised for strong adhesion that are 
prominent in the epidermis and heart muscle. Defective desmosomal function due 
to inherited mutations in the constitutive desmosomal gene desmoplakin (DSP) 
causes skin or heart disorders and in some instances both. Different mutations 
have different disease-causing molecular mechanisms as evidenced by the varying 
phenotypes resulting from mutations affecting different domains of the same 
protein, but the majority of these mechanisms remain to be determined. Here, we 
studied two mutations in DSP that lead to different dosages of the two major DSP 
splice variants, DSPI and DSPII, and compared their molecular mechanisms. One of 
the mutations results in total DSP haploinsufficiency and is associated with 
autosomal dominant striate palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK). The other leads to 
complete absence of DSPI and the minor isoform DSPIa but normal levels of DSPII, 
and is associated with autosomal recessive epidermolytic PPK, woolly hair and 
severe arrhythmogenic dilated cardiomyopathy. Using siRNA treatments to mimic 
these two mutations and additionally a DSPII-specific siRNA, we found striking 
differences between DSP isoforms with respect to keratinocyte adhesion upon 
cellular stress with DSPII being the key component in intermediate filament (IF) 
stability and desmosome-mediated adhesion. In addition, reduction in DSP 
expression reduced the amount of plakophilin 1, desmocollin (DSC) 2 and DSC3 
with DSPI having a greater influence than DSPII on the expression levels of 
DSC3. These results suggest that the two major DSP splice variants are not 
completely redundant in function and that DSPII dosage is particularly important 
for desmosomal adhesion in the skin.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.084152
PMID: 22454510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]