---
reference_id: "PMID:32546399"
title: Evaluation of physical properties of fiber-reinforced composite resin.
authors:
- Suzaki N
- Yamaguchi S
- Hirose N
- Tanaka R
- Takahashi Y
- Imazato S
- Hayashi M
journal: Dent Mater
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.dental.2020.04.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of physical properties of fiber-reinforced composite resin.
**Authors:** Suzaki N, Yamaguchi S, Hirose N, Tanaka R, Takahashi Y, Imazato S, Hayashi M
**Journal:** Dent Mater (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.dental.2020.04.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2020.04.012)

## Content

1. Dent Mater. 2020 Aug;36(8):987-996. doi: 10.1016/j.dental.2020.04.012. Epub
2020  Jun 13.

Evaluation of physical properties of fiber-reinforced composite resin.

Suzaki N(1), Yamaguchi S(2), Hirose N(1), Tanaka R(1), Takahashi Y(1), Imazato 
S(2), Hayashi M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Restorative Dentistry and Endodontology, Osaka University 
Graduate School of Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan.
(2)Department of Biomaterials Science, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan.
(3)Department of Restorative Dentistry and Endodontology, Osaka University 
Graduate School of Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan. Electronic 
address: mikarin@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate physical properties of a 
fiber-reinforced CAD/CAM resin disc, which included woven layers of 
multi-directional glass fibers.
METHODS: Fiber orientations of CAD/CAM specimens (TRINIA, SHOFU) were specified 
as longitudinal (L), longitudinal-rotated (LR), and anti-longitudinal (AL). A 
fiber-reinforced composite (everX posterior, GC (E)) and a conventional 
composite (Beauti core flow paste, SHOFU (B)) were also tested. A three-point 
bending test and a tensile test with notchless prism-shaped specimens were 
conducted using a universal testing machine (AUTOGRAPH AG-IS, Shimadzu). A water 
absorption test was also carried out after the specimens were stored in water 
for 24h or 1 week. Flexural strength and fracture toughness were obtained by 
conducting a three-point bending test.
RESULTS: TRINIA L and LR groups showed significantly high flexural strength 
(254.2±22.3 and 248.8±16.7MPa, respectively). Those were approximately 2.5 times 
higher than those in AL, E, and B groups (96.8-98.0MPa) (p<0.05, ANOVA and Tukey 
HSD test). No significant difference was shown in flexural modulus among the 
experimental groups. The fracture toughness in L group (9.1±0.4MPa/m1/2) was 
found to be significantly higher than those in other groups (1.9-3.0MPa/m1/2; 
p<0.05). TRINIA group demonstrated significantly lower water absorption 
(4.7±1.9μg/mm3) than did E (16.1±3.1μg/mm3) and B (17.3±3.7μg/mm3) groups 
(p<0.05).
SIGNIFICANCE: TRINIA demonstrated distinct anisotropy. TRINIA can be used as a 
superior restorative material when specifying directions of its fiber mesh 
layers.

Copyright © 2020 The Academy of Dental Materials. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dental.2020.04.012
PMID: 32546399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]