---
reference_id: "PMID:38508838"
title: "Genetics of migraine: complexity, implications, and potential clinical applications."
authors:
- Sutherland HG
- Jenkins B
- Griffiths LR
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00026-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of migraine: complexity, implications, and potential clinical applications.
**Authors:** Sutherland HG, Jenkins B, Griffiths LR
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00026-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00026-7)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2024 Apr;23(4):429-446. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00026-7.

Genetics of migraine: complexity, implications, and potential clinical 
applications.

Sutherland HG(1), Jenkins B(2), Griffiths LR(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Genomics and Personalised Health, Genomics Research Centre, School 
of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Neurology, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Centre for Genomics and Personalised Health, Genomics Research Centre, School 
of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia. Electronic address: lyn.griffiths@qut.edu.au.

Migraine is a common neurological disorder with large burden in terms of 
disability for individuals and costs for society. Accurate diagnosis and 
effective treatments remain priorities. Understanding the genetic factors that 
contribute to migraine risk and symptom manifestation could improve individual 
management. Migraine has a strong genetic basis that includes both monogenic and 
polygenic forms. Some distinct, rare, familial migraine subtypes are caused by 
pathogenic variants in genes involved in ion transport and neurotransmitter 
release, suggesting an underlying vulnerability of the excitatory-inhibitory 
balance in the brain, which might be exacerbated by disruption of homoeostasis 
and lead to migraine. For more prevalent migraine subtypes, genetic studies have 
identified many susceptibility loci, implicating genes involved in both neuronal 
and vascular pathways. Genetic factors can also reveal the nature of 
relationships between migraine and its associated biomarkers and comorbidities 
and could potentially be used to identify new therapeutic targets and predict 
treatment response.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00026-7
PMID: 38508838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests HGS receives partial 
salary funding from the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council 
(APP1122387) and previous research support from the US Migraine Research 
Foundation and the Centre for Genomics and Personalised Health of Queensland 
University of Technology. BJ has received advisory board fees from 
Allergan–Abbvie, Eli Lilly, Lundbeck, Novartis, Pfizer, and Teva; speaker fees 
from Allergan–Abbvie, Eli Lilly, GPCE, HealthEd, Lundbeck, Novartis, Pfizer, The 
Limbic, and Teva; and travel support from Care Pharmacy and Pfizer. BJ was the 
Australian principal investigator for an Allergan–Abbvie trial and is the 
President of the Australian and New Zealand Headache Society. LRG received 
consultancy fees from Teva; participated on the Australian Novartis migraine 
advisory board; has received research support from the Australian National 
Health and Medical Research Council, the US Migraine Research Foundation, the US 
Department of Defence, VariantBio, and an Australian International Science 
Linkages grant; was on the board of the Heart Foundation of Australia, QLD 
division; and is chair for the board of censors of the Human Genetics Society 
Australasia for diagnostic genomics.