---
reference_id: "PMID:36972022"
title: Pembrolizumab plus Chemotherapy in Advanced Endometrial Cancer.
authors:
- Eskander RN
- Sill MW
- Beffa L
- Moore RG
- Hope JM
- Musa FB
- Mannel R
- Shahin MS
- Cantuaria GH
- Girda E
- Mathews C
- Kavecansky J
- Leath CA 3rd
- Gien LT
- Hinchcliff EM
- Lele SB
- Landrum LM
- Backes F
- "O'Cearbhaill RE"
- Al Baghdadi T
- Hill EK
- Thaker PH
- John VS
- Welch S
- Fader AN
- Powell MA
- Aghajanian C
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2302312
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- DNA Mismatch Repair
- Double-Blind Method
- "Endometrial Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- "Paclitaxel/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pembrolizumab plus Chemotherapy in Advanced Endometrial Cancer.
**Authors:** Eskander RN, Sill MW, Beffa L, Moore RG, Hope JM, Musa FB, Mannel R, Shahin MS, Cantuaria GH, Girda E, Mathews C, Kavecansky J, Leath CA 3rd, Gien LT, Hinchcliff EM, Lele SB, Landrum LM, Backes F, O'Cearbhaill RE, Al Baghdadi T, Hill EK, Thaker PH, John VS, Welch S, Fader AN, Powell MA, Aghajanian C
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2302312](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2302312)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2023 Jun 8;388(23):2159-2170. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2302312. Epub 
2023 Mar 27.

Pembrolizumab plus Chemotherapy in Advanced Endometrial Cancer.

Eskander RN(1), Sill MW(1), Beffa L(1), Moore RG(1), Hope JM(1), Musa FB(1), 
Mannel R(1), Shahin MS(1), Cantuaria GH(1), Girda E(1), Mathews C(1), Kavecansky 
J(1), Leath CA 3rd(1), Gien LT(1), Hinchcliff EM(1), Lele SB(1), Landrum LM(1), 
Backes F(1), O'Cearbhaill RE(1), Al Baghdadi T(1), Hill EK(1), Thaker PH(1), 
John VS(1), Welch S(1), Fader AN(1), Powell MA(1), Aghajanian C(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics, 
Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of California, San Diego, 
Rebecca and John Moores Cancer Center, La Jolla (R.N.E.), and the Kaiser 
Permanente National Cancer Institute Community Oncology Research Program 
(NCORP), Antioch Medical Center, Antioch (J.K.) - both in California; the 
Clinical Trial Development Division, Department of Biostatistics and 
Bioinformatics, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo (M.W.S., 
S.B.L.), the Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester (R.G.M.), the Gynecologic Medical Oncology Service, Department of 
Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, and the Department of 
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York (R.E.O., C.A.), and the 
Northwell Health Cancer Institute, New Hyde Park (V.S.J.) - all in New York; the 
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland (L.B.), 
and Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center and James Cancer Hospital, 
Columbus (F.B.); the Pacific Cancer Research Consortium, NCORP, Alaska Women's 
Cancer Care, and Providence Alaska Cancer Center, Anchorage (J.M.H.); the 
Pacific Cancer Research Consortium, NCORP, Swedish Medical Center-First Hill, 
Seattle (F.B.M.); the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma 
City (R.M.); Jefferson Abington Hospital, Asplundh Cancer Pavilion of Sidney 
Kimmel Cancer Center, Jefferson Health, Willow Grove, PA (M.S.S.); Georgia 
NCORP, Atlanta (G.H.C.); Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick 
(E.G.); Women and Infants Hospital, Legoretta Cancer Center, Alpert Medical 
School, Brown University, Providence, RI (C.M.); the University of Alabama at 
Birmingham-Deep South Research Consortium, O'Neal Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of Alabama Hospital, Birmingham (C.A.L.); Odette Cancer Centre, 
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto (L.T.G.), and the London Regional 
Cancer Program, London, ON (S.W.) - both in Canada; Feinberg School of Medicine 
and the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, 
Chicago (E.M.H.); the Indiana University Health Simon Cancer Center, 
Indianapolis (L.M.L.); the Michigan Cancer Research Consortium, NCORP, Trinity 
Health IHA Medical Group, Ypsilanti (T.A.B.); the University of Iowa Hospitals 
and Clinics, Iowa City (E.K.H.); the Division of Gynecologic Oncology, 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis (P.H.T., M.A.P.); and the Division of Gynecologic Oncology, 
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore (A.N.F.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2023 Jun;20(6):353. doi: 10.1038/s41571-023-00763-0.
    N Engl J Med. 2023 Aug 31;389(9):866. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2308037.
    N Engl J Med. 2023 Aug 31;389(9):866-867. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2308037.
    N Engl J Med. 2023 Aug 31;389(9):867. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2308037.
    N Engl J Med. 2023 Aug 31;389(9):867-868. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2308037.
    CA Cancer J Clin. 2023 Sep-Oct;73(5):445-447. doi: 10.3322/caac.21809.
    Transl Cancer Res. 2023 Oct 31;12(10):2438-2441. doi: 10.21037/tcr-23-1343.

BACKGROUND: Standard first-line chemotherapy for endometrial cancer is 
paclitaxel plus carboplatin. The benefit of adding pembrolizumab to chemotherapy 
remains unclear.
METHODS: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, phase 3 trial, we 
assigned 816 patients with measurable disease (stage III or IVA) or stage IVB or 
recurrent endometrial cancer in a 1:1 ratio to receive pembrolizumab or placebo 
along with combination therapy with paclitaxel plus carboplatin. The 
administration of pembrolizumab or placebo was planned in 6 cycles every 3 
weeks, followed by up to 14 maintenance cycles every 6 weeks. The patients were 
stratified into two cohorts according to whether they had mismatch 
repair-deficient (dMMR) or mismatch repair-proficient (pMMR) disease. Previous 
adjuvant chemotherapy was permitted if the treatment-free interval was at least 
12 months. The primary outcome was progression-free survival in the two cohorts. 
Interim analyses were scheduled to be triggered after the occurrence of at least 
84 events of death or progression in the dMMR cohort and at least 196 events in 
the pMMR cohort.
RESULTS: In the 12-month analysis, Kaplan-Meier estimates of progression-free 
survival in the dMMR cohort were 74% in the pembrolizumab group and 38% in the 
placebo group (hazard ratio for progression or death, 0.30; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.19 to 0.48; P<0.001), a 70% difference in relative risk. In the 
pMMR cohort, median progression-free survival was 13.1 months with pembrolizumab 
and 8.7 months with placebo (hazard ratio, 0.54; 95% CI, 0.41 to 0.71; P<0.001). 
Adverse events were as expected for pembrolizumab and combination chemotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with advanced or recurrent endometrial cancer, the 
addition of pembrolizumab to standard chemotherapy resulted in significantly 
longer progression-free survival than with chemotherapy alone. (Funded by the 
National Cancer Institute and others; NRG-GY018 ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT03914612.).

Copyright © 2023 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2302312
PMCID: PMC10351614
PMID: 36972022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]