---
reference_id: "PMID:7859787"
title: Acute alcohol intoxication among children and adolescents.
authors:
- Lamminpää A
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1007/BF01954735
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adolescent
- "Alcoholic Intoxication/complications, metabolism"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Coma/chemically induced
- Ethanol/blood
- Family
- Humans
- "Hypoglycemia/etiology, prevention & control"
- Social Environment
- Water-Electrolyte Balance
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute alcohol intoxication among children and adolescents.
**Authors:** Lamminpää A
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01954735](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01954735)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 1994 Dec;153(12):868-72. doi: 10.1007/BF01954735.

Acute alcohol intoxication among children and adolescents.

Lamminpää A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Severe toxicity from ethanol, manifested as coma, occurs at lower blood alcohol 
concentrations in young teenagers than in adults. Coma, vomiting and hypothermia 
are the commonest symptoms in young teenagers intoxicated by alcohol. The 
biochemical disturbances in children 11-16 years of age with alcohol 
intoxication resemble those of adults. Mild acidosis of a respiratory and 
metabolic origin and mild hypokalaemia are common findings in young teenagers. 
Young teenagers eliminate ethanol at the same rate as adults, whereas preschool 
age children are reported to eliminate ethanol twice as fast. The effect of 
ethanol on the state of consciousness is directly proportional to the blood 
alcohol concentration. Among small children the risk of hypoglycaemia is 
increased. Data on family history, social status, drinking habits, and 
children's motives for getting drunk are also of clinical importance. Fluid 
replacement with glucose-containing fluids and follow up are generally the only 
treatments needed for complete recovery. When children and adolescents are 
healthy, well-nourished and have not fasted, no severe complications are 
expected.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01954735
PMID: 7859787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]