---
reference_id: "PMID:37993348"
title: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Dasí F
journal: Med Clin (Barc)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2023.10.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Dasí F
**Journal:** Med Clin (Barc) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medcli.2023.10.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medcli.2023.10.014)

## Content

1. Med Clin (Barc). 2024 Apr 12;162(7):336-342. doi:
10.1016/j.medcli.2023.10.014.  Epub 2023 Nov 22.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Dasí F(1).

Author information:
(1)Universitat de València, Facultad de Medicina, Departamento de Fisiología, 
IIS INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain. Electronic address: Francisco.Dasi@uv.es.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a rare hereditary condition caused by 
decreased plasma and tissue levels of alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) that can lead to 
serious lung and liver disease in children and adults. AATD patients face 
challenges such as under diagnosis, clinical variability, and limited treatment 
options for liver disease. Early detection and biomarkers for predicting 
outcomes are needed to improve patient outcome. Currently, the only approved 
pharmacological therapy is augmentation therapy, which can delay the progression 
of emphysema. However, alternative strategies such as gene therapy, induced 
pluripotent stem cells, and prevention of AAT polymerization inside hepatocytes 
are being investigated. This review aims to summarize and update current 
knowledge on AATD, identify areas of controversy, and formulate questions for 
further research.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medcli.2023.10.014
PMID: 37993348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]