---
reference_id: "PMID:18032602"
title: A knockin mouse model of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome 1 M390R mutation has cilia defects, ventriculomegaly, retinopathy, and obesity.
authors:
- Davis RE
- Swiderski RE
- Rahmouni K
- Nishimura DY
- Mullins RF
- Agassandian K
- Philp AR
- Searby CC
- Andrews MP
- Thompson S
- Berry CJ
- Thedens DR
- Yang B
- Weiss RM
- Cassell MD
- Stone EM
- Sheffield VC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0708571104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A knockin mouse model of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome 1 M390R mutation has cilia defects, ventriculomegaly, retinopathy, and obesity.
**Authors:** Davis RE, Swiderski RE, Rahmouni K, Nishimura DY, Mullins RF, Agassandian K, Philp AR, Searby CC, Andrews MP, Thompson S, Berry CJ, Thedens DR, Yang B, Weiss RM, Cassell MD, Stone EM, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0708571104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0708571104)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Dec 4;104(49):19422-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0708571104. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

A knockin mouse model of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome 1 M390R mutation has cilia 
defects, ventriculomegaly, retinopathy, and obesity.

Davis RE(1), Swiderski RE, Rahmouni K, Nishimura DY, Mullins RF, Agassandian K, 
Philp AR, Searby CC, Andrews MP, Thompson S, Berry CJ, Thedens DR, Yang B, Weiss 
RM, Cassell MD, Stone EM, Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Radiology, University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder that results 
in retinal degeneration, obesity, cognitive impairment, polydactyly, renal 
abnormalities, and hypogenitalism. Of the 12 known BBS genes, BBS1 is the most 
commonly mutated, and a single missense mutation (M390R) accounts for 
approximately 80% of BBS1 cases. To gain insight into the function of BBS1, we 
generated a Bbs1(M390R/M390R) knockin mouse model. Mice homozygous for the M390R 
mutation recapitulated aspects of the human phenotype, including retinal 
degeneration, male infertility, and obesity. The obese mutant mice were 
hyperphagic and hyperleptinemic and exhibited reduced locomotor activity but no 
elevation in mean arterial blood pressure. Morphological evaluation of Bbs1 
mutant brain neuroanatomy revealed ventriculomegaly of the lateral and third 
ventricles, thinning of the cerebral cortex, and reduced volume of the corpus 
striatum and hippocampus. Similar abnormalities were also observed in the brains 
of Bbs2(-/-), Bbs4(-/-), and Bbs6(-/-) mice, establishing these neuroanatomical 
defects as a previously undescribed BBS mouse model phenotype. Ultrastructural 
examination of the ependymal cell cilia that line the enlarged third ventricle 
of the Bbs1 mutant brains showed that, whereas the 9 + 2 arrangement of axonemal 
microtubules was intact, elongated cilia and cilia with abnormally swollen 
distal ends were present. Together with data from transmission electron 
microscopy analysis of photoreceptor cell connecting cilia, the Bbs1 M390R 
mutation does not affect axonemal structure, but it may play a role in the 
regulation of cilia assembly and/or function.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0708571104
PMCID: PMC2148305
PMID: 18032602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.