---
reference_id: "PMID:17496359"
title: Biomarkers of susceptibility to type 1 diabetes with special reference to the Indian population.
authors:
- Mehra NK
- Kumar N
- Kaur G
- Kanga U
- Tandon N
journal: Indian J Med Res
year: '2007'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers of susceptibility to type 1 diabetes with special reference to the Indian population.
**Authors:** Mehra NK, Kumar N, Kaur G, Kanga U, Tandon N
**Journal:** Indian J Med Res (2007)

## Content

1. Indian J Med Res. 2007 Mar;125(3):321-44.

Biomarkers of susceptibility to type 1 diabetes with special reference to the 
Indian population.

Mehra NK(1), Kumar N, Kaur G, Kanga U, Tandon N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Transplant Immunology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
New Delhi, India. narin98@hotmail.com

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a polygenic autoimmune disease. Susceptibility to T1D 
is strongly linked to a major genetic locus that is the major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) and several other minor loci including insulin, CTLA4 that 
contribute to diabetes risk in an epistatic way. MHC harbours genes whose 
primary function is to govern immune responsiveness. Being the most polymorphic 
genomic region known in humans, MHC serves as a very exciting minigenome model 
for studying susceptibility to T1D. We have observed enormous diversity in HLA 
class I and class II genes in the north Indian population and identified several 
'novel alleles' and 'unique haplotypes'. For example, multiple DR3+ve 
autoimmunity favouring haplotypes have been identified, some of which are unique 
to the Asian north Indian T1D patients. Our molecular studies have revealed that 
(i) the classical Caucasian autoimmunity favouring AH8.1 (HLA-A1 B8 DR3) is rare 
in the Indian population and has been replaced by a variant AH8.1v that differs 
from the Caucasian AH8.1 at several gene loci, (ii) AH8.2 (HLA-A26 B8 DR3) is 
the most common DR3 positive haplotype in this population and resembles the 
Indian AH8.1v rather than Caucasian AH8.1, and (iii) there are additional 
HLA-DR3 haplotypes HLA-A24 B8 DR3 (AH8.3), A3 B8 DR3 (AH8.4) and A31 B8 DR 3 (AH 
8.5) that occur in the Indian population. The studies have led to a hypothesis 
that AH8.1 and AH8.1v might have co-evolved from a common ancestor but 
preferential divergence of AH8.2 over AH8.1 leading to survival advantage might 
have been driven by vigorous pathogenic challenges encountered by the Indian 
population. These studies have important implications in our understanding of 
disease pathogenesis, identification of high risk individuals, disease 
diagnosis, disease management and immunological therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 17496359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]