---
reference_id: "PMID:23905887"
title: Genetic biomarkers in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Coats CJ
- Elliott PM
journal: Biomark Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.2217/bmm.13.79
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic biomarkers in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Coats CJ, Elliott PM
**Journal:** Biomark Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.2217/bmm.13.79](https://doi.org/10.2217/bmm.13.79)

## Content

1. Biomark Med. 2013 Aug;7(4):505-16. doi: 10.2217/bmm.13.79.

Genetic biomarkers in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Coats CJ(1), Elliott PM.

Author information:
(1)The Heart Hospital, 16-18 Westmoreland Street, London, W1G 8PH, UK.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a common inherited heart muscle disorder 
associated with sudden cardiac death, arrhythmias and heart failure. Genetic 
mutations can be identified in approximately 60% of patients; these are 
commonest in genes that encode proteins of the cardiac sarcomere. Similar to 
other Mendelian diseases these mutations are characterized by incomplete 
penetrance and variable clinical expression. Our knowledge of this genetic 
diversity is rapidly evolving as high-throughput DNA sequencing technology is 
now used to characterize an individual patient's disease. In addition, the 
genomic basis of several multisystem diseases associated with a hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy phenotype has been elucidated. Genetic biomarkers can be helpful 
in making an accurate diagnosis and in identifying relatives at risk of 
developing the condition. In the clinical setting, genetic testing and genetic 
screening should be used pragmatically with appropriate counseling. Here we 
review the current role of genetic biomarkers in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
highlight recent progress in the field and discuss future challenges.

DOI: 10.2217/bmm.13.79
PMID: 23905887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]