---
reference_id: "PMID:40673520"
title: "Humeroradial Synostosis: An Updated Classification and Differential Diagnosis Based on Genetic Aetiology."
authors:
- Leduc F
- Vanlerberghe C
- Escande F
- Brunelle P
- Petit F
- Dieux A
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/cge.70023
keywords:
- Humans
- "Synostosis/genetics, diagnosis, classification"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Radius/abnormalities
- "Humerus/abnormalities, pathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Humeroradial Synostosis: An Updated Classification and Differential Diagnosis Based on Genetic Aetiology.
**Authors:** Leduc F, Vanlerberghe C, Escande F, Brunelle P, Petit F, Dieux A
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.70023](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.70023)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2025 Oct;108(4):379-392. doi: 10.1111/cge.70023. Epub 2025 Jul 17.

Humeroradial Synostosis: An Updated Classification and Differential Diagnosis 
Based on Genetic Aetiology.

Leduc F(1), Vanlerberghe C(1), Escande F(2), Brunelle P(3), Petit F(1), Dieux 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)CHU Lille, Université de Lille, Clinique de génétique 'Guy Fontaine', ULR7364 
RADEME, Lille, France.
(2)CHU Lille, Université de Lille, Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, ULR7364 
RADEME, Lille, France.
(3)CHU Lille, Université de Lille, Institut de Génétique Médicale, ULR7364 
RADEME, Lille, France.

Humeroradial synostosis (HRS) is a rare congenital limb malformation, 
characterised by fusion of the humeral and radial bones, leading to functional 
disability of the elbow joint. HRS may be reported in familial or sporadic cases 
and observed either isolated or as part of a syndromic condition. According to 
an extensive review of the literature, a dozen known conditions may comprise an 
HRS. The present review aims to propose an updated classification based on 
molecular pathways (chondrogenesis and osteogenesis; limb development and 
patterning; genome regulation), combined with a concise overview of the 
conditions associated with HRS. This knowledge could guide molecular analyses, 
patient management and genetic counselling. As some cases remain unexplained, 
further genetic and epidemiological studies are required to evaluate the 
contribution of genetic and environmental factors in HRS physiopathology.

© 2025 The Author(s). Clinical Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.70023
PMCID: PMC12405067
PMID: 40673520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.