---
reference_id: "PMID:31909871"
title: Incidence Trends and Mortality of Giant Cell Arteritis in Southern Norway.
authors:
- Andersen JB
- Myklebust G
- Haugeberg G
- Pripp AH
- Diamantopoulos AP
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/acr.24133
keywords:
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Electronic Health Records
- Female
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mortality/trends
- Norway/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Sex Distribution
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence Trends and Mortality of Giant Cell Arteritis in Southern Norway.
**Authors:** Andersen JB, Myklebust G, Haugeberg G, Pripp AH, Diamantopoulos AP
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.24133](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.24133)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2021 Mar;73(3):409-414. doi: 10.1002/acr.24133.

Incidence Trends and Mortality of Giant Cell Arteritis in Southern Norway.

Andersen JB(1), Myklebust G(1), Haugeberg G(1), Pripp AH(2), Diamantopoulos 
AP(3).

Author information:
(1)Sorlandet Hospital, Kristiansand, Norway.
(2)Oslo Centre of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(3)Martina Hansens Hospital, Baerum, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: Southern Norway consists of a homogeneous population of nearly 
300,000 inhabitants and is an ideal epidemiologic setting. We aimed to explore 
potential changes in incidence of giant cell arteritis (GCA) in Southern Norway 
from 2000-2013, with comparisons of previous reports from the same population 
cohort from 1987-1994 and 1992-1996, and to investigate the mortality rates of 
GCA over a period of 14 years.
METHODS: All patients diagnosed with GCA during January 1, 2000 to December 31, 
2013 were identified through the electronic health records and biopsy findings 
databases at our clinic. The diagnosis of GCA and information about death was 
confirmed by reviewing the patients' hospital records. Inclusion criteria were: 
1) fulfillment of the American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for GCA, or 
2) histologically proven GCA, or 3) confirmed arteritis of the large or 
medium-sized vessels by imaging.
RESULTS: A total of 206 patients were included, and 147 (72%) were females. The 
annual incidence rate of GCA per 100,000 inhabitants age ≥50 years was 16.8 (95% 
confidence interval [95% CI] 14.6-19.2), 24.5 for females (95% CI 19.2-26.5), 
and 10.2 for males (95% CI 7.9-13.2). Forty-six patients (22%) died (24 women, 
22 men). The overall standardized mortality ratio was 1.05 (95% CI 0.77-1.38), 
0.92 for females (95% CI 0.61-1.35), and 1.38 for males (95% CI 0.88-2.05). 
Overall survival rate was significantly higher in females compared to males (P < 
0.001).
CONCLUSION: GCA incidence is not increasing. We did not find excess mortality; 
however, males seem to have a worse survival rate compared to females.

© 2020 The Authors. Arthritis Care & Research published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc. on behalf of American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.24133
PMID: 31909871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]