---
reference_id: "PMID:22924932"
title: "Giardia duodenalis assemblage-specific induction of apoptosis and tight junction disruption in human intestinal epithelial cells: effects of mixed infections."
authors:
- Koh WH
- Geurden T
- Paget T
- "O'Handley R"
- Steuart RF
- Thompson RC
- Buret AG
journal: J Parasitol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1645/GE-3021.1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Giardia duodenalis assemblage-specific induction of apoptosis and tight junction disruption in human intestinal epithelial cells: effects of mixed infections.
**Authors:** Koh WH, Geurden T, Paget T, O'Handley R, Steuart RF, Thompson RC, Buret AG
**Journal:** J Parasitol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1645/GE-3021.1](https://doi.org/10.1645/GE-3021.1)

## Content

1. J Parasitol. 2013 Apr;99(2):353-8. doi: 10.1645/GE-3021.1. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Giardia duodenalis assemblage-specific induction of apoptosis and tight junction 
disruption in human intestinal epithelial cells: effects of mixed infections.

Koh WH(1), Geurden T, Paget T, O'Handley R, Steuart RF, Thompson RC, Buret AG.

Author information:
(1)School of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Murdoch University, Western 
Australia.

In view of the interest in genotype-specific pathogenesis in Giardia duodenalis 
, the aim of the present study was to examine the effects of infection with 
different, or mixed, G. duodenalis assemblages on the integrity of human 
intestinal epithelia. To that end, human epithelial cells (HCT-8) were cultured 
and exposed to different G. duodenalis assemblages (A, B, and E) or a 
combination of these assemblages. Epithelial disruption and apoptosis were 
evaluated by fluorescent microscopy and apoptotic oligonucleosome 
quantification. The results indicate that infection with trophozoites disrupts 
epithelial tight junctions and induces varying degrees of enterocyte apoptosis, 
depending on the infecting assemblage. All disruptions were caspase-3 dependent 
and were more pronounced when caused by a non-host specific assemblage. 
Furthermore, infections by isolates in combination with isolates from another 
assemblage enhanced the epithelial disruption and apoptosis. Further studies in 
vitro and in vivo are required to confirm the mechanisms of enhanced 
pathogenicity of mixed or non-host specific (or both) G. duodenalis infections. 
Findings in the present study point to the potential pathogenic importance of 
intra-species polyparasitism in giardiasis.

DOI: 10.1645/GE-3021.1
PMID: 22924932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]