---
reference_id: "PMID:40503591"
title: De Novo SLC12A2 Variant Presenting as Congenital Hearing Loss With Vestibular Areflexia.
authors:
- Ludin K
- Kopps AM
- Richard C
- Unger S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64150
keywords:
- Humans
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 2/genetics"
- Male
- Female
- Phenotype
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Child
- Mutation
- Infant
- Heterozygote
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De Novo SLC12A2 Variant Presenting as Congenital Hearing Loss With Vestibular Areflexia.
**Authors:** Ludin K, Kopps AM, Richard C, Unger S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.64150](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.64150)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2025 Oct;197(10):e64150. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64150. Epub
2025  Jun 12.

De Novo SLC12A2 Variant Presenting as Congenital Hearing Loss With Vestibular 
Areflexia.

Ludin K(1), Kopps AM(1), Richard C(2)(3), Unger S(1).

Author information:
(1)Genetica, Genetic Consultations and Laboratory, Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, University of Tennessee 
Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Le Bonheur Children's Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

Since 2016, variants in SLC12A2 have been implicated in human disease, with 
several different phenotypes being linked to the gene. The first report 
concerned a child with a complex syndrome marked by metabolic derangement but 
normal hearing and cognition and a de novo heterozygous loss of function 
variant. Subsequently, several patients with severe developmental delay, 
sensorineural hearing loss, and bi-allelic loss of function variants were 
reported; this condition is known as Kilquist syndrome. The SLC12A2 knockout 
mouse model has a phenotype that is quite similar to Kilquist patients. In 2020, 
heterozygous variants in SLC12A2 were identified as a cause of non-syndromic 
deafness associated with vestibular areflexia (DFNA78; MIM 619081). In addition, 
de novo heterozygous SLC12A2 variants have also been implicated in developmental 
delay with autistic features. SLC12A2 encodes a Na+K+2Cl- cotransporter (NKCC) 
that is widely expressed in neurons, glial cells, the trachea, salivary glands, 
intestine, sweat glands, and the cochlea. In the inner ear, K+ transport is 
required for the mechano-transduction of auditory stimuli. SLC12A2 functions as 
a dimer and has several isoforms; only one isoform contains exon 21, and this 
isoform is almost exclusively expressed in the inner ear/cochlea. This isoform 
is necessary for homeostasis of the endolymph. To date, the published pathogenic 
variants causing DFNA78 are missense mutations located within exon 21 or in the 
3' splice site of exon 21. We report a patient with profound congenital hearing 
loss and vestibular areflexia with a de novo variant in SLC12A2 located in the 
splice donor site: NM_001046.2: c.2977+4_2977+7del causing an in-frame skip of 
exon 21, as shown by cDNA analysis. Our case adds to the evidence that loss of 
exon 21 of SLC12A2 leads to a cochlear restricted phenotype. From a genetic 
counseling point of view, it reminds us that beyond syndromic forms such as 
Usher syndrome, several non-syndromic forms of genetically determined 
sensorineural hearing loss, including those involving the SLC12A2 gene, may also 
present with vestibular areflexia. This underscores the need for a broad 
sequencing approach when faced with this clinical scenario.

© 2025 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.64150
PMID: 40503591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]