---
reference_id: PMID:22797518
title: Gut microbiota composition correlates with diet and health in the elderly.
authors:
- Claesson MJ
- Jeffery IB
- Conde S
- Power SE
- "O'Connor EM"
- Cusack S
- Harris HM
- Coakley M
- Lakshminarayanan B
- "O'Sullivan O"
- Fitzgerald GF
- Deane J
- "O'Connor M"
- Harnedy N
- "O'Connor K"
- "O'Mahony D"
- van Sinderen D
- Wallace M
- Brennan L
- Stanton C
- Marchesi JR
- Fitzgerald AP
- Shanahan F
- Hill C
- Ross RP
- "O'Toole PW"
journal: Nature
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/nature11319
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Aging/physiology
- Cohort Studies
- "Diet/statistics & numerical data"
- Diet Surveys
- Feces/microbiology
- Fruit
- Geriatric Assessment
- Health
- Health Status
- Health Surveys
- Homes for the Aged
- "Hospitals, Community"
- Humans
- Intestines/microbiology
- Meat
- Metagenome/physiology
- Rehabilitation Centers
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Vegetables
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Gut microbiota composition correlates with diet and health in the elderly.
**Authors:** Claesson MJ, Jeffery IB, Conde S, Power SE, O'Connor EM, Cusack S, Harris HM, Coakley M, Lakshminarayanan B, O'Sullivan O, Fitzgerald GF, Deane J, O'Connor M, Harnedy N, O'Connor K, O'Mahony D, van Sinderen D, Wallace M, Brennan L, Stanton C, Marchesi JR, Fitzgerald AP, Shanahan F, Hill C, Ross RP, O'Toole PW
**Journal:** Nature (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature11319](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11319)

## Content

1. Nature. 2012 Aug 9;488(7410):178-84. doi: 10.1038/nature11319.

Gut microbiota composition correlates with diet and health in the elderly.

Claesson MJ(1), Jeffery IB, Conde S, Power SE, O'Connor EM, Cusack S, Harris HM, 
Coakley M, Lakshminarayanan B, O'Sullivan O, Fitzgerald GF, Deane J, O'Connor M, 
Harnedy N, O'Connor K, O'Mahony D, van Sinderen D, Wallace M, Brennan L, Stanton 
C, Marchesi JR, Fitzgerald AP, Shanahan F, Hill C, Ross RP, O'Toole PW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University College Cork, Ireland.

Alterations in intestinal microbiota composition are associated with several 
chronic conditions, including obesity and inflammatory diseases. The microbiota 
of older people displays greater inter-individual variation than that of younger 
adults. Here we show that the faecal microbiota composition from 178 elderly 
subjects formed groups, correlating with residence location in the community, 
day-hospital, rehabilitation or in long-term residential care. However, 
clustering of subjects by diet separated them by the same residence location and 
microbiota groupings. The separation of microbiota composition significantly 
correlated with measures of frailty, co-morbidity, nutritional status, markers 
of inflammation and with metabolites in faecal water. The individual microbiota 
of people in long-stay care was significantly less diverse than that of 
community dwellers. Loss of community-associated microbiota correlated with 
increased frailty. Collectively, the data support a relationship between diet, 
microbiota and health status, and indicate a role for diet-driven microbiota 
alterations in varying rates of health decline upon ageing.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11319
PMID: 22797518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]