---
reference_id: "PMID:26906301"
title: Terminal Ileitis as a Feature of Henoch-Schönlein Purpura Masquerading as Crohn Disease in Adults.
authors:
- Sampat HN
- McAllister BP
- Gaines DD
- Ostrov B
journal: J Clin Rheumatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000000361
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Terminal Ileitis as a Feature of Henoch-Schönlein Purpura Masquerading as Crohn Disease in Adults.
**Authors:** Sampat HN, McAllister BP, Gaines DD, Ostrov B
**Journal:** J Clin Rheumatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RHU.0000000000000361](https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000000361)

## Content

1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2016 Mar;22(2):82-5. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000000361.

Terminal Ileitis as a Feature of Henoch-Schönlein Purpura Masquerading as Crohn 
Disease in Adults.

Sampat HN(1), McAllister BP, Gaines DD, Ostrov B.

Author information:
(1)From the *Department of Pediatrics, Penn State Hershey Children's Hospital; 
and †Department of Medicine, Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, 
Hershey, PA.

Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP), more recently termed immunoglobulin A (IgA) 
vasculitis, is a systemic small-vessel vasculitis characterized by perivascular 
IgA deposition. This disease manifests clinically as palpable purpura, 
arthralgia, gastrointestinal symptoms, and renal dysfunction. Although ileitis 
can be seen in HSP, terminal ileitis is virtually pathognomonic for Crohn 
disease. We present a comprehensive review of the literature on this 
association, including 2 cases of our own, to demonstrate the importance of 
considering HSP in the differential diagnosis of ileitis suggestive of Crohn 
disease. We review the growing body of literature suggesting a pathophysiologic 
link between the conditions, possibly through an IgA-mediated mechanism.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000000361
PMID: 26906301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]