---
reference_id: "PMID:29138588"
title: "RAI1 gene mutations: mechanisms of Smith-Magenis syndrome."
authors:
- Falco M
- Amabile S
- Acquaviva F
journal: Appl Clin Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2147/TACG.S128455
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RAI1 gene mutations: mechanisms of Smith-Magenis syndrome.
**Authors:** Falco M, Amabile S, Acquaviva F
**Journal:** Appl Clin Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2147/TACG.S128455](https://doi.org/10.2147/TACG.S128455)

## Content

1. Appl Clin Genet. 2017 Nov 3;10:85-94. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S128455. eCollection 
2017.

RAI1 gene mutations: mechanisms of Smith-Magenis syndrome.

Falco M(#)(1), Amabile S(#)(1), Acquaviva F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of 
Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Translational Medical Sciences (DISMET), Section of Pediatric 
Clinical Genetics, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS; OMIM #182290) is a complex genetic disorder 
characterized by distinctive physical features, developmental delay, cognitive 
impairment, and a typical behavioral phenotype. SMS is caused by interstitial 
17p11.2 deletions, encompassing multiple genes and including the retinoic 
acid-induced 1 gene (RAI1), or by mutations in RAI1 itself. About 10% of all the 
SMS patients, in fact, carry an RAI1 mutation responsible for the phenotype. 
RAI1 (OMIM *607642) is a dosage-sensitive gene expressed in many tissues and 
highly conserved among species. Over the years, several studies have 
demonstrated that RAI1 (or its homologs in animal models) acts as a 
transcriptional factor implicated in embryonic neurodevelopment, neuronal 
differentiation, cell growth and cell cycle regulation, bone and skeletal 
development, lipid and glucose metabolisms, behavioral functions, and circadian 
activity. Patients with RAI1 pathogenic variants show some phenotypic 
differences when compared to those carrying the typical deletion. They usually 
have lower incidence of hypotonia and less cognitive impairment than those with 
17p11.2 deletions but more frequently show the behavioral characteristics of the 
syndrome and overeating issues. These differences reflect the primary 
pathogenetic role of RAI1 without the pathogenetic contribution of the other 
genes included in the typical 17p11.2 deletion. The better comprehension of 
physiological roles of RAI1, its molecular co-workers and interactors, and its 
contribution in determining the typical SMS phenotype will certainly open a new 
path for therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.2147/TACG.S128455
PMCID: PMC5680963
PMID: 29138588

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.