---
reference_id: "PMID:39770929"
title: Practical Recommendations for the Diagnosis and Management of Lysosomal Acid Lipase Deficiency with a Focus on Wolman Disease.
authors:
- de Las Heras J
- Almohalla C
- Blasco-Alonso J
- Bourbon M
- Couce ML
- de Castro López MJ
- García Jiménez MC
- Gil Ortega D
- González-Diéguez L
- Meavilla S
- Moreno-Álvarez A
- Pastor-Rosado J
- Sánchez-Pintos P
- Serrano-Gonzalo I
- López E
- Valdivielso P
- Yahyaoui R
- Quintero J
journal: Nutrients
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/nu16244309
keywords:
- "Wolman Disease/diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Sterol Esterase
- Infant
- "Diet, Fat-Restricted"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practical Recommendations for the Diagnosis and Management of Lysosomal Acid Lipase Deficiency with a Focus on Wolman Disease.
**Authors:** de Las Heras J, Almohalla C, Blasco-Alonso J, Bourbon M, Couce ML, de Castro López MJ, García Jiménez MC, Gil Ortega D, González-Diéguez L, Meavilla S, Moreno-Álvarez A, Pastor-Rosado J, Sánchez-Pintos P, Serrano-Gonzalo I, López E, Valdivielso P, Yahyaoui R, Quintero J
**Journal:** Nutrients (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/nu16244309](https://doi.org/10.3390/nu16244309)

## Content

1. Nutrients. 2024 Dec 13;16(24):4309. doi: 10.3390/nu16244309.

Practical Recommendations for the Diagnosis and Management of Lysosomal Acid 
Lipase Deficiency with a Focus on Wolman Disease.

de Las Heras J(1), Almohalla C(2), Blasco-Alonso J(3), Bourbon M(4)(5), Couce 
ML(6), de Castro López MJ(7), García Jiménez MC(8), Gil Ortega D(9), 
González-Diéguez L(10), Meavilla S(11), Moreno-Álvarez A(12), Pastor-Rosado 
J(13), Sánchez-Pintos P(6), Serrano-Gonzalo I(14)(15), López E(16), Valdivielso 
P(17), Yahyaoui R(18), Quintero J(19).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Metabolism, Cruces University Hospital, CIBER-ER, 
Metab-ERN, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Biobizkaia Health 
Research Institute, 48903 Bilbao, Spain.
(2)Unidad de Hepatología, Hospital Universitario Río Hortega, 47012 Valladolid, 
Spain.
(3)Unidad de Diagnóstico y Tratamiento de Enfermedades Metabólicas Hereditarias, 
UGC Pediatría, Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, 29010 Málaga, Spain.
(4)Grupo de Investigação Cardiovascular, Departamento de Promoção da Saúde e 
Prevenção de Doenças não Transmissíveis, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor 
Ricardo Jorge, 1649-016 Lisboa, Portugal.
(5)BioISI, Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute, Faculdade de Ciências, 
Universidade de Lisboa, 1649-004 Lisboa, Portugal.
(6)Metabolic Unit, Department of Forensic Sciences, Pathology, Gynecology and 
Obstetrics, Pediatrics, Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela 
(IDIS), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, CIBERER, 
MetabERN, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(7)Willink Biochemical Genetics Unit, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester University 
Foundation Trust, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9WL, UK.
(8)NeuroMetabolic Unit, Pediatría, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Aragon 
Health Research Institute (IIS Aragón), 50009 Zaragoza, Spain.
(9)Unidad de Gastroenterología, Hepatología y Nutrición Pediátrica, Hospital 
Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, 30120 Murcia, Spain.
(10)Liver Unit, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hospital 
Universitario Central de Asturias, 33011 Oviedo, Spain.
(11)Metabolic Unit, Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Department, Sant 
Joan de Déu Hospital, 08950 Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Unit, Department of 
Pediatrics, A Coruña University Hospital, 15006 A Coruña, Spain.
(13)Lipid Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hospital General Universitario de 
Elche, Universidad Miguel Hernandez de Elche, 03202 Elche, Spain.
(14)Fundación Española Para el Estudio y Terapéutica de la Enfermedad de Gaucher 
y Otras Lisosomales (FEETEG), 50009 Zaragoza, Spain.
(15)GIIS-012 Group, Aragon Health Research Institute (IIS Aragón), 50009 
Zaragoza, Spain.
(16)Spanish LAL-D Patient Organization, 08918 Badalona, Spain.
(17)Unidad de Lípidos, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Victoria, Instituto 
de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Universidad de Málaga, 29010 
Málaga, Spain.
(18)Clinical Laboratory, Laboratory of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Hospital 
Regional Universitario de Málaga, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga 
IBIMA-Plataforma BIONAND, 29590 Málaga, Spain.
(19)Pediatric Hepatology and Liver Transplant Unit, Department of Pediatrics, 
ERN Rare Liver ERN TransplantChild, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Barcelona, Spain.

Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency (LAL-D) is an ultra-rare lysosomal storage 
disease with two distinct phenotypes, an infantile-onset form (formerly Wolman 
disease) and a later-onset form (formerly cholesteryl ester storage disease). 
The objective of this narrative review is to examine the most important aspects 
of the diagnosis and treatment of LAL-D and to provide practical expert 
recommendations. The infantile-onset form occurs in the first weeks of life and 
is characterized by malnourishment and failure to thrive due to gastrointestinal 
impairment (vomiting, diarrhea, malabsorption), as well as systemic 
inflammation, hepatosplenomegaly, and adrenal calcifications. Mortality is close 
to 100% before one year of life in the absence of specific treatment. The 
later-onset form can be diagnosed in childhood or adulthood and is characterized 
by chronic liver injury and/or lipid profile alterations. When LAL-D is 
suspected, enzyme activity should be determined to confirm the diagnosis, with 
analysis from a dried blood spot sample being the quickest and most reliable 
method. In infantile-onset LAL-D, the initiation of enzyme replacement therapy 
(sebelipase α) and careful nutritional management with a low-lipid diet is very 
urgent, as prognosis is directly linked to the early initiation of specific 
treatment. In recent years, our knowledge of the management of LAL-D has 
increased considerably, with improvements regarding the initial enzyme 
replacement therapy dose and careful nutritional treatment with a low-lipid diet 
to decrease lipid deposition and systemic inflammation, leading to better 
outcomes. In this narrative review we offer a quick guide for the initial 
management of infantile-onset LAL-D.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16244309
PMCID: PMC11678757
PMID: 39770929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Javier de las Heras has received speaking and 
scientific consultancy fees from Astra Zeneca-Alexion. Carolina Almohalla 
received speaking fees from Astra Zeneca-Alexion. Javier Blasco-Alonso declares 
no conflicts of interest. Mafalda Bourbon received a project grant from SOBI. 
María-Luz Couce declares no conflicts of interest. María José de Castro López 
declares no conflicts of interest. Mª Concepción García Jiménez received 
speaking fees from Astra Zeneca-Alexion. David Gil Ortega received speaking fees 
from Astra Zeneca-Alexion. Luisa Gonzalez-Dieguez received speaking and 
scientific consultancy fees from Astra Zeneca-Alexion. Silvia Meavilla declares 
no conflicts of interest. Ana Moreno-Álvarez received speaking fees from Astra 
Zeneca-Alexion. José Pastor-Rosado has received conference payments from Astra 
Zeneca-Alexion; grants for attendance at scientific meetings, as well as fees 
for scientific consultancy from Astra Zeneca-Alexion Alexion. Paula 
Sánchez-Pintos received speaking fees from Astra Zeneca-Alexion. Irene 
Serrano-Gonzalo received speaking fees from Astra Zeneca-Alexion. Eduardo López 
is president of the Spanish LAL-D Patient Organization. That organization has 
received consultancy fees from Astra Zeneca-Alexion. Pedro Valdivielso has 
received honoraria for consulting, expert testimony, conferences, presentations, 
manuscripts or educational events from AstraZeneca-Alexion, Amgen, Sanofi, 
Novartis, Ferrer and Daiichi-Sankyo; meeting support from Amgen, Novartis, 
Ferrer, MSD, Daiichi-Sankyo, and Sanofi; and research grants/contracts from 
Ferrer, SOBI, Lipigon, Ionis, and Capenergy. Raquel Yahyaoui has received 
speaking fees and a research grant from Astra Zeneca-Alexion. Jesús Quintero has 
received honoraria for consulting, conferences, presentations, manuscripts or 
educational events from AstraZeneca-Alexion, IPSEN, Miru, and Orphalan; and 
research grants/contracts from IPSEN.