---
reference_id: "PMID:35343667"
title: Per rectal endoscopic myotomy for Hirschsprung's disease and megacolon.
authors:
- Gandhi A
- Bapaye J
- Bapaye A
journal: Minerva Gastroenterol (Torino)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.23736/S2724-5985.22.03166-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Per rectal endoscopic myotomy for Hirschsprung's disease and megacolon.
**Authors:** Gandhi A, Bapaye J, Bapaye A
**Journal:** Minerva Gastroenterol (Torino) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S2724-5985.22.03166-7](https://doi.org/10.23736/S2724-5985.22.03166-7)

## Content

1. Minerva Gastroenterol (Torino). 2023 Jun;69(2):175-183. doi: 
10.23736/S2724-5985.22.03166-7. Epub 2022 Mar 28.

Per rectal endoscopic myotomy for Hirschsprung's disease and megacolon.

Gandhi A(1), Bapaye J(1)(2), Bapaye A(3).

Author information:
(1)Shivanand Desai Center for Digestive Disorders, Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital 
and Research Center, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Rochester General Hospital, Rochester, NY, 
USA.
(3)Shivanand Desai Center for Digestive Disorders, Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital 
and Research Center, Maharashtra, India - amolbapaye@gmail.com.

Hirschsprung's disease (HD) is a congenital disorder characterized by absence of 
intrinsic ganglion cells of the hindgut. It commonly presents in infancy with 
refractory constipation and failure to thrive. Short segment HD affecting the 
rectosigmoid region is the commonest variant. Although surgical or laparoscopic 
single or multi-stage pull-through procedures have been the gold standard for 
more than six decades, these procedures are associated with significant 
morbidity, recurrence, and often multi-stage procedures. Per-rectal endoscopic 
myotomy (PREM) is a recently described novel minimally invasive procedure based 
on the principles of third space endoscopy. It is based on the principle to open 
spastic aganglionic bowel segments by performing a myotomy through a submucosal 
tunnel. This review describes the patient selection and preparation and 
technique of PREM and discusses the status of PREM for treatment of HD.

DOI: 10.23736/S2724-5985.22.03166-7
PMID: 35343667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]