---
reference_id: "PMID:36803229"
title: In-stent restenosis and stented-territory infarction after carotid and vertebrobasilar artery stenting.
authors:
- Ryu JC
- Bae JH
- Ha SH
- Kwon B
- Song Y
- Lee DH
- Chang JY
- Kang DW
- Kwon SU
- Kim JS
- Kim BJ
journal: BMC Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12883-023-03110-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carotid Stenosis/epidemiology, surgery"
- Stents/adverse effects
- Coronary Restenosis
- Carotid Arteries
- "Constriction, Pathologic"
- Infarction
- Treatment Outcome
- Recurrence
- Risk Factors
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In-stent restenosis and stented-territory infarction after carotid and vertebrobasilar artery stenting.
**Authors:** Ryu JC, Bae JH, Ha SH, Kwon B, Song Y, Lee DH, Chang JY, Kang DW, Kwon SU, Kim JS, Kim BJ
**Journal:** BMC Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12883-023-03110-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12883-023-03110-z)

## Content

1. BMC Neurol. 2023 Feb 21;23(1):79. doi: 10.1186/s12883-023-03110-z.

In-stent restenosis and stented-territory infarction after carotid and 
vertebrobasilar artery stenting.

Ryu JC(1), Bae JH(1), Ha SH(2), Kwon B(3), Song Y(3), Lee DH(3), Chang JY(1), 
Kang DW(1), Kwon SU(1), Kim JS(4), Kim BJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Gil Medical Center, Gachon University, Incheon, 
Korea.
(3)Department of Radiology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Neurology, Gangneung Asan Hospital, University of Ulsan College 
of Medicine, Gangneung, Korea.
(5)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. medicj80@hanmail.net.

BACKGROUND: Prognosis after vertebrobasilar stenting (VBS) may differ from that 
after carotid artery stenting (CAS). Here, we directly compared the incidence 
and predictors of in-stent restenosis and stented-territory infarction after VBS 
and compared them with those of CAS.
METHODS: We enrolled patients who underwent VBS or CAS. Clinical variables and 
procedure-related factors were obtained. During the 3 years of follow-up, 
in-stent restenosis and infarction were investigated in each group. In-stent 
restenosis was defined as reduction in the lumen diameter > 50% compared with 
that after stenting. Factors associated with the occurrence of in-stent 
restenosis and stented-territory infarction in VBS and CAS were compared.
RESULTS: Among 417 stent insertions (93 VBS and 324 CAS), there was no 
statistical difference in in-stent restenosis between VBS and CAS (12.9% vs. 
6.8%, P = 0.092). However, stented-territory infarction was more frequently 
observed in VBS than in CAS (22.6% vs. 10.8%; P = 0.006), especially a month 
after stent insertion. HbA1c level, clopidogrel resistance, and multiple stents 
in VBS and young age in CAS increased the risk of in-stent restenosis. Diabetes 
(3.82 [1.24-11.7]) and multiple stents (22.4 [2.4-206.4]) were associated with 
stented-territory infarction in VBS. However, in-stent restenosis (odds ratio: 
15.1, 95% confidence interval: 3.17-72.2) was associated with stented-territory 
infarction in CAS.
CONCLUSIONS: Stented-territory infarction occurred more frequently in VBS, 
especially after the periprocedural period. In-stent restenosis was associated 
with stented-territory infarction after CAS, but not in VBS. The mechanism of 
stented-territory infarction after VBS may be different from that after CAS.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-023-03110-z
PMCID: PMC9942307
PMID: 36803229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.