---
reference_id: "PMID:29719120"
title: "Hepatoblastoma in patients with molecularly proven familial adenomatous polyposis: Clinical characteristics and rationale for surveillance screening."
authors:
- Trobaugh-Lotrario AD
- López-Terrada D
- Li P
- Feusner JH
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.27103
keywords:
- Adenomatous Polyposis Coli/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Genes, APC"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Hepatoblastoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Liver Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mass Screening
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatoblastoma in patients with molecularly proven familial adenomatous polyposis: Clinical characteristics and rationale for surveillance screening.
**Authors:** Trobaugh-Lotrario AD, López-Terrada D, Li P, Feusner JH
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.27103](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.27103)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2018 Aug;65(8):e27103. doi: 10.1002/pbc.27103. Epub 2018
 May 2.

Hepatoblastoma in patients with molecularly proven familial adenomatous 
polyposis: Clinical characteristics and rationale for surveillance screening.

Trobaugh-Lotrario AD(1), López-Terrada D(2), Li P(2), Feusner JH(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Sacred Heart Children's Hospital, Spokane, WA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital and Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital & Research Center 
Oakland, Oakland, CA, USA.

Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) due to APC mutation is associated with an 
increased risk of hepatoblastoma. All cases of hepatoblastoma in patients with 
FAP reported in the literature were reviewed. One hundred and nine patients were 
identified. Thirty-five patients (of 49 with data) were diagnosed with 
hepatoblastoma prior to a later diagnosis of FAP (often in association with 
advanced colorectal carcinoma), emphasizing a need to identify patients earlier 
with germline APC mutations for early colorectal carcinoma screening. 
Hepatoblastoma may present at birth, and screening for hepatoblastoma in infancy 
in families with FAP prior to APC mutation testing results may be warranted.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.27103
PMID: 29719120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]