---
reference_id: "PMID:38584395"
title: "Application of a circular-shaped pulsed field ablation catheter with magnetic sensors for pulmonary vein isolation: a multi-centre clinical study report."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Lai HL
- Chen Q
- Liu H
- Liu QM
- Huang WB
- Tao Y
- Xiong Q
- Zhou N
- Zhao C
- Qiu J
- Xu Z
- Wang DW
journal: Europace
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/europace/euae068
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Application of a circular-shaped pulsed field ablation catheter with magnetic sensors for pulmonary vein isolation: a multi-centre clinical study report.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Lai HL, Chen Q, Liu H, Liu QM, Huang WB, Tao Y, Xiong Q, Zhou N, Zhao C, Qiu J, Xu Z, Wang DW
**Journal:** Europace (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/europace/euae068](https://doi.org/10.1093/europace/euae068)

## Content

1. Europace. 2024 Mar 30;26(4):euae068. doi: 10.1093/europace/euae068.

Application of a circular-shaped pulsed field ablation catheter with magnetic 
sensors for pulmonary vein isolation: a multi-centre clinical study report.

Wang Y(1), Lai HL(2), Chen Q(3), Liu H(4), Liu QM(5), Huang WB(6), Tao Y(2), 
Xiong Q(3), Zhou N(1), Zhao C(1), Qiu J(1), Xu Z(1), Wang DW(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Tongji Hospital, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Jiefang 
Avenue 1095#, 430030 Wuhan, China.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital, Nanchang, 
China.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
(4)Division of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, China.
(5)Division of Cardiology, Xiamen University Affiliated Zhongshan Hospital, 
Xiamen, China.
(6)Division of Cardiology, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South 
University, Changsha, China.

AIMS: A few studies have reported the effect and safety of pulsed field ablation 
(PFA) catheters for ablating atrial fibrillation (AF), which were mainly based 
on basket-shaped or flower-shaped designs. However, the clinical application of 
a circular-shaped multi-electrode catheter with magnetic sensors is very 
limited. To study the efficacy and safety of a PFA system in patients with 
paroxysmal AF using a circular-shaped multi-electrode catheter equipped with 
magnetic sensors for pulmonary vein isolation (PVI).
METHODS AND RESULTS: A novel proprietary bipolar PFA system was used for PVI, 
which utilized a circular-shaped multi-electrode catheter with magnetic sensors 
and allowed for three-dimensional model reconstruction, mapping, and ablation in 
one map. To evaluate the efficacy, efficiency, and safety of this PFA system, a 
prospective, multi-centre, single-armed, pre-market clinical study was 
performed. From July 2021 to December 2022, 151 patients with paroxysmal AF were 
included and underwent PVI. The study examined procedure time, immediate success 
rate, procedural success rate at 12 months, and relevant complications. In all 
151 patients, all the pulmonary veins were acutely isolated using the studied 
system. Pulsed field ablation delivery was 78.4 ± 41.8 times and 31.3 ± 16.7 ms 
per patient. Skin-to-skin procedure time was 74.2 ± 29.8 min, and fluoroscopy 
time was 13.1 ± 7.6 min. The initial 11 (7.2%) cases underwent procedures with 
deep sedation anaesthesia, and the following cases underwent local anaesthesia. 
In the initial 11 cases, 4 cases (36.4%) presented transient vagal responses, 
and the rest were all successfully preventatively treated with atropine 
injection and rapid fluid infusion. No severe complications were found during or 
after the procedure. During follow-up, 3 cases experienced atrial flutter, and 
11 cases had AF recurrence. The estimated 12-month Kaplan-Meier of freedom from 
arrhythmia was 88.4%.
CONCLUSION: The PFA system, comprised of a circular PFA catheter with magnetic 
sensors, could rapidly achieve PVI under three-dimensional guidance and 
demonstrated excellent safety with comparable effects.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/europace/euae068
PMCID: PMC10999647
PMID: 38584395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared.