---
reference_id: "PMID:24121907"
title: A clinical-pathological and survival study of oral squamous cell carcinomas from a population of the North of Portugal.
authors:
- Monteiro LS
- Amaral JB
- Vizcaíno JR
- Lopes CA
- Torres FO
journal: Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4317/medoral.19090
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/mortality, pathology"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mouth Neoplasms/mortality, pathology"
- Portugal
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A clinical-pathological and survival study of oral squamous cell carcinomas from a population of the North of Portugal.
**Authors:** Monteiro LS, Amaral JB, Vizcaíno JR, Lopes CA, Torres FO
**Journal:** Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4317/medoral.19090](https://doi.org/10.4317/medoral.19090)

## Content

1. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2014 Mar 1;19(2):e120-6. doi: 
10.4317/medoral.19090.

A clinical-pathological and survival study of oral squamous cell carcinomas from 
a population of the North of Portugal.

Monteiro LS(1), Amaral JB, Vizcaíno JR, Lopes CA, Torres FO.

Author information:
(1)Instituto Superior de Ciências da Saúde Norte, Rua Central de Gandra, 1317, 
4585-116 Gandra PRD, Portugal, lmonteiro.md@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to analyze the clinical, pathological, and outcome 
characteristics of oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) from a population of the 
North of Portugal.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We conducted a descriptive study of 128 OSCC diagnosed 
between the years of 2000 and 2010 in the Centro Hospitalar do Porto. Through of 
the review of the clinical records we studied several clinical, pathological, 
and outcome variables. The overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) 
were analyzed by Kaplan-Meier method and log-rank test. Cox regression method 
was used for multivariate analysis.
RESULTS: Of 128 patients with OSCC, 83 (64.8%) were male and 45 (35.2%) were 
female, (mean age of 62.13±15.57 years). The most affected location was the 
tongue (n=52; 40.6%). The most common cause of reference was a non-healing ulcer 
(n=35; 28.9%) followed by oral pain (n=27; 22.3%). Sixty (60.6%) patients were 
tobacco consumers and 55 (57.3%) alcohol consumers. The cumulative 3-years OS 
rate was 58.6% and DFS was 55.4%. In multivariable analysis for OS, we found an 
adverse independent prognostic value for advanced tumour size (p<0.001) and for 
the presence of perineural permeation (p=0.012). For DFS, advanced stage tumours 
presented adverse independent prognostic value (p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: OSCC occurred most frequently in males, in older patients, and in 
patients with tobacco and/or alcohol habits. TNM and tumour stage additionally 
to the perineural permeation were the most important prognostic factor for the 
survival of these patients, contributing to identify high-risk subgroups and to 
guide therapy.

DOI: 10.4317/medoral.19090
PMCID: PMC4015041
PMID: 24121907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement:There are no 
potential conflicts of interest.