---
reference_id: PMID:41137641
title: "Protein S Enhances the Phagocytosis of Phosphatidylserine-Exposing Erythrocytes: Implications in Sickle Cell Disease."
authors:
- Auditeau C
- Fricot A
- Gauthier R
- Sissoko A
- Cacan Z
- Gounou C
- Joseph L
- Manceau S
- Allali S
- Dussiot M
- Marin M
- Lavergne A
- Khamari M
- Moog S
- Bianchini E
- Claer L
- Laurance S
- Brousse V
- Eymieux S
- Roingeard P
- Amireault P
- Trovati Maciel T
- Brisson A
- Buffet P
- Saller F
- Borgel D
- Roussel C
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.70117
keywords:
- Humans
- "Anemia, Sickle Cell/blood, pathology, metabolism"
- Phosphatidylserines/metabolism
- "Protein S/metabolism, physiology"
- Phagocytosis
- c-Mer Tyrosine Kinase/metabolism
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- "Erythrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Hemolysis
- "Spleen/pathology, metabolism"
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- Macrophages/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein S Enhances the Phagocytosis of Phosphatidylserine-Exposing Erythrocytes: Implications in Sickle Cell Disease.
**Authors:** Auditeau C, Fricot A, Gauthier R, Sissoko A, Cacan Z, Gounou C, Joseph L, Manceau S, Allali S, Dussiot M, Marin M, Lavergne A, Khamari M, Moog S, Bianchini E, Claer L, Laurance S, Brousse V, Eymieux S, Roingeard P, Amireault P, Trovati Maciel T, Brisson A, Buffet P, Saller F, Borgel D, Roussel C
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.70117](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.70117)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 2026 Jan;101(1):26-40. doi: 10.1002/ajh.70117. Epub 2025 Oct 25.

Protein S Enhances the Phagocytosis of Phosphatidylserine-Exposing Erythrocytes: 
Implications in Sickle Cell Disease.

Auditeau C(1)(2), Fricot A(3), Gauthier R(3), Sissoko A(3), Cacan Z(3), Gounou 
C(4), Joseph L(5), Manceau S(5), Allali S(6), Dussiot M(7), Marin M(3), Lavergne 
A(3), Khamari M(1), Moog S(1)(8), Bianchini E(1), Claer L(3), Laurance S(3), 
Brousse V(3)(9), Eymieux S(10)(11), Roingeard P(10)(11), Amireault P(3)(7), 
Trovati Maciel T(7), Brisson A(4), Buffet P(3)(12), Saller F(1), Borgel D(1)(2), 
Roussel C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Hémostase, Inflammation, Thrombose (HITh), UMR-S1176, INSERM, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(2)Service D'hématologie Biologique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(3)Université Paris Cité, INSERM, BIGR, Paris, France.
(4)UMR-CBMN, CNRS-Université de Bordeaux-IPB, Pessac, France.
(5)Department of Biotherapy, French National Sickle Cell Disease Referral 
Center, Hôpital Necker, Assistance-Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Gr Ex, Paris, 
France.
(6)Reference Centre for Sickle Cell Disease, Necker-Enfants Malades University 
Hospital, AP-HP Centre, Paris, France.
(7)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Hematological Disorders 
and Therapeutic Implications, INSERM, Institut Imagine, Université Paris Cité, 
Paris, France.
(8)Inovarion 251 Rue Saint Jacques, Paris, France.
(9)Centre de Référence MCGRE, Service D'hémato-Immunologie, Hôpital 
Universitaire Robert Debré, APHP, Paris, France.
(10)IBiSA Electron Microscopy Facility, University Hospital Center of Tours, 
Tours, France.
(11)Inserm U1259 MAVIVHe, Université de Tours and CHRU de Tours, Tours, France.
(12)Service de Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Hôpital Universitaire Necker 
Enfants Malades, Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.

The major anticoagulant Protein S (PROS1) also contributes to the phagocytosis 
of apoptotic cells by bridging exposed phosphatidylserine (PtdSer) to the MerTK 
receptor on macrophages (efferocytosis). Whether PROS1 is involved in the 
splenic clearance of PtdSer-positive senescent and altered erythrocytes such as 
erythrocyte ghosts (eryghosts) is unknown. Here, we investigate the contribution 
of PROS1 and MerTK to the phagocytosis of intact RBC and eryghosts in healthy 
subjects and patients with sickle cell disease (SCD). We show that PROS1 
enhances the phagocytosis of ionomycin-treated PtdSer-positive erythrocytes and 
of eryghosts generated in vitro. We confirm that eryghosts circulate in patients 
with SCD at higher levels than in healthy subjects and observe increased 
hemolysis and decreased levels of plasmatic PROS1 in patients with the highest 
concentration of eryghosts. The proportion of circulating eryghosts is 
correlated with the intensity of hyposplenism, and eryghosts are less frequently 
observed in sections of SCD compared to control spleens. We demonstrate that 
circulating eryghosts are procoagulant and adhere to endothelial cells. In SCD, 
PROS1 enhances their phagocytosis in a MerTK-dependent manner but has no such 
effect on intact erythrocytes. PROS1 is therefore involved in 
erythrophagocytosis, a physiological process insufficient in patients with SCD 
due to intense intravascular hemolysis and hyposplenism, leading to PROS1 
consumption and the abnormal persistence of eryghosts in circulation. PROS1 
deficiency may in turn initiate a pathogenic loop, enhancing unregulated 
activation of coagulation and defective clearance of procoagulant and adherent 
eryghosts. This deeper understanding of physiological and pathological 
erythrophagocytosis opens new therapeutic approaches targeting PROS1 in SCD.

© 2025 The Author(s). American Journal of Hematology published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.70117
PMCID: PMC12669952
PMID: 41137641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.J. received consulting fees from Vertex; D.B. 
and F.S. received a research grant from CSL Behring. All the other co‐authors 
have no conflicts of interest to declare.