---
reference_id: PMID:18976725
title: Identification of a 2 Mb human ortholog of Drosophila eyes shut/spacemaker that is mutated in patients with retinitis pigmentosa.
authors:
- Collin RW
- Littink KW
- Klevering BJ
- van den Born LI
- Koenekoop RK
- Zonneveld MN
- Blokland EA
- Strom TM
- Hoyng CB
- den Hollander AI
- Cremers FP
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.10.014
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Case-Control Studies
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Drosophila/genetics
- Drosophila Proteins/genetics
- Electroretinography
- Exons
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a 2 Mb human ortholog of Drosophila eyes shut/spacemaker that is mutated in patients with retinitis pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Collin RW, Littink KW, Klevering BJ, van den Born LI, Koenekoop RK, Zonneveld MN, Blokland EA, Strom TM, Hoyng CB, den Hollander AI, Cremers FP
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.10.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.10.014)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Nov;83(5):594-603. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.10.014. Epub 
2008 Oct 30.

Identification of a 2 Mb human ortholog of Drosophila eyes shut/spacemaker that 
is mutated in patients with retinitis pigmentosa.

Collin RW(1), Littink KW, Klevering BJ, van den Born LI, Koenekoop RK, Zonneveld 
MN, Blokland EA, Strom TM, Hoyng CB, den Hollander AI, Cremers FP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
6525 GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands. r.collin@antrg.umcn.nl

In patients with autosomal-recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP), homozygosity 
mapping was performed for detection of regions harboring genes that might be 
causative for RP. In one affected sib pair, a shared homozygous region of 5.0 Mb 
was identified on chromosome 6, within the RP25 locus. One of the genes residing 
in this interval was the retina-expressed gene EGFL11. Several genes resembling 
EGFL11 were predicted just centromeric of EGFL11. Extensive long-range RT-PCR, 
combined with 5'- and 3'- RACE analysis, resulted in the identification of a 
10-kb transcript, starting with the annotated exons of EGFL11 and spanning 44 
exons and 2 Mb of genomic DNA. The transcript is predicted to encode a 3165-aa 
extracellular protein containing 28 EGF-like and five laminin A G-like domains. 
Interestingly, the second part of the protein was found to be the human ortholog 
of Drosophila eyes shut (eys), also known as spacemaker, a protein essential for 
photoreceptor morphology. Mutation analysis in the sib pair homozygous at RP25 
revealed a nonsense mutation (p.Tyr3156X) segregating with RP. The same mutation 
was identified homozygously in three arRP siblings of an unrelated family. A 
frame-shift mutation (pPro2238ProfsX16) was found in an isolated RP patient. In 
conclusion, we identified a gene, coined eyes shut homolog (EYS), consisting of 
EGFL11 and the human ortholog of Drosophila eys, which is mutated in patients 
with arRP. With a size of 2 Mb, it is one of the largest human genes, and it is 
by far the largest retinal dystrophy gene. The discovery of EYS might shed light 
on a critical component of photoreceptor morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.10.014
PMCID: PMC2668042
PMID: 18976725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]