---
reference_id: "PMID:36399634"
title: Retinoblastoma Expression and Targeting by CDK4/6 Inhibitors in Small Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Wildey G
- Shay AM
- McColl KS
- Yoon S
- Shatat MA
- Perwez A
- Spainhower KB
- Kresak AM
- Lipka M
- Yang M
- Behtaj M
- Fu P
- Alahmadi A
- Mneimneh W
- Abbas A
- Dowlati A
journal: Mol Cancer Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0365
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinoblastoma Expression and Targeting by CDK4/6 Inhibitors in Small Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Wildey G, Shay AM, McColl KS, Yoon S, Shatat MA, Perwez A, Spainhower KB, Kresak AM, Lipka M, Yang M, Behtaj M, Fu P, Alahmadi A, Mneimneh W, Abbas A, Dowlati A
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0365](https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0365)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2023 Feb 1;22(2):264-273. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0365.

Retinoblastoma Expression and Targeting by CDK4/6 Inhibitors in Small Cell Lung 
Cancer.

Wildey G(1), Shay AM(1), McColl KS(1), Yoon S(1), Shatat MA(2), Perwez A(1), 
Spainhower KB(1), Kresak AM(3), Lipka M(1), Yang M(3), Behtaj M(3), Fu P(4), 
Alahmadi A(1), Mneimneh W(3), Abbas A(1), Dowlati A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Case Western Reserve University and 
University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center, Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Cleveland VA Medical 
Center, Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Division of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University and University 
Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center, Cleveland, Ohio.
(4)Department of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.

The canonical model of "small cell lung cancer" (SCLC) depicts tumors arising 
from dual inactivation of TP53 and RB1. However, many genomic studies have 
persistently identified tumors with no RB1 mutations. Here, we examined RB1 
protein expression and function in SCLC. RB1 expression was examined by IHC 
analysis of 62 human SCLC tumors. These studies showed that ∼14% of SCLC tumors 
expressed abundant RB1 protein, which is associated with neuroendocrine gene 
expression and is enriched in YAP1 expression, but no other lineage proteins 
that stratify SCLC. SCLC cells and xenograft tumors with RB1 protein expression 
were sensitive to growth inhibition by the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib, and 
this inhibition was shown to be dependent on RB1 expression by CRISPR knockout. 
Furthermore, a patient with biopsy-validated wild-type RB1 SCLC who received the 
CDK4/6 inhibitor abemaciclib demonstrated a dramatic decrease in mutant TP53 
ctDNA allelic fraction from 62.1% to 0.4% and decreased tumor mass on CT scans. 
Importantly, IHC of the diagnostic biopsy specimen showed RB1 positivity. 
Finally, we identified a transcriptomics-based RB1 loss-of-function signature 
that discriminates between SCLC cells with or without RB1 protein expression and 
validated it in the patient who was responsive to abemaciclib, suggesting its 
potential use to predict CDK4/6 inhibitor response in patients with SCLC. Our 
study demonstrates that RB1 protein is an actionable target in a subgroup of 
SCLC, a cancer that exhibits no currently targetable mutations.

©2022 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0365
PMCID: PMC9898162
PMID: 36399634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: “The authors 
declare that no conflicts of interest exist.”