---
reference_id: "PMID:37601634"
title: Hepatocyte ABCA1 deficiency is associated with reduced HDL sphingolipids.
authors:
- Othman A
- Liu M
- Bode H
- Boudyguina E
- von Eckardstein A
- Parks JS
- Hornemann T
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1208719
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatocyte ABCA1 deficiency is associated with reduced HDL sphingolipids.
**Authors:** Othman A, Liu M, Bode H, Boudyguina E, von Eckardstein A, Parks JS, Hornemann T
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2023.1208719](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2023.1208719)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2023 Aug 4;14:1208719. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1208719.
eCollection 2023.

Hepatocyte ABCA1 deficiency is associated with reduced HDL sphingolipids.

Othman A(1), Liu M(2), Bode H(1), Boudyguina E(2), von Eckardstein A(1)(3),
Parks JS(2)(3), Hornemann T(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Zurich and University
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine-Section on Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC, United States.

ATP binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) limits the formation of high density
lipoproteins (HDL) as genetic loss of ABCA1 function causes virtual HDL
deficiency in patients with Tangier disease. Mice with a hepatocyte-specific
ABCA1 knockout (Abca1 HSKO) have 20% of wild type (WT) plasma HDL-cholesterol
levels, suggesting a major contribution of hepatic ABCA1 to the HDL phenotype.
Whether plasma sphingolipids are reduced in Tangier disease and to what extent
hepatic ABCA1 contributes to plasma sphingolipid (SL) levels is unknown. Here,
we report a drastic reduction of total SL levels in plasma of a Tangier patient
with compound heterozygosity for mutations in ABCA1. Compared to mutation-free
controls, heterozygous mutations in ABCA1 had no significant effect on total SLs
in plasma; however, apoB-depleted plasma showed a reduction in total SL also in
het carriers. Similarly, liver specific Abca1 KO mice (Abca1 HSKO) showed
reduced total sphingolipids in plasma and liver. In parallel, apoM and
sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) levels were reduced in plasma of Abca1 HSKO mice.
Primary hepatocytes from Abca1 HSKO mice showed a modest, but significant
reduction in total SLs concentration compared to WT hepatocytes, although SL de
novo synthesis and secretion were slightly increased in Abca1 HSKO hepatocytes.
We conclude that hepatic ABCA1 is a signficant contributor to maintaining total
plasma pool of HDL sphingolipids, including sphingomyelins and S1P.

Copyright © 2023 Othman, Liu, Bode, Boudyguina, von Eckardstein, Parks and
Hornemann.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1208719
PMCID: PMC10436503
PMID: 37601634

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
