---
reference_id: "PMID:80378"
title: Cholera toxin effects on fluid secretion, adenylate cyclase, and cyclic AMP in porcine small intestine.
authors:
- Forsyth GW
- Hamilton DL
- Goertz KE
- Johnson MR
journal: Infect Immun
year: '1978'
doi: 10.1128/iai.21.2.373-380.1978
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera toxin effects on fluid secretion, adenylate cyclase, and cyclic AMP in porcine small intestine.
**Authors:** Forsyth GW, Hamilton DL, Goertz KE, Johnson MR
**Journal:** Infect Immun (1978)
**DOI:** [10.1128/iai.21.2.373-380.1978](https://doi.org/10.1128/iai.21.2.373-380.1978)

## Content

1. Infect Immun. 1978 Aug;21(2):373-80. doi: 10.1128/iai.21.2.373-380.1978.

Cholera toxin effects on fluid secretion, adenylate cyclase, and cyclic AMP in 
porcine small intestine.

Forsyth GW, Hamilton DL, Goertz KE, Johnson MR.

The effects of cholera toxin on mucosal cyclic nucleotide concentrations and on 
net fluid secretion in the porcine small intestine are reported. Cholera toxin 
causes net secretion of fluid into the small intestine of weanling pigs, and 
secretory rates are dependent on the dose of the toxin placed in intestinal 
loops. Intestinal secretion due to cholera toxin exposure was not consistently 
accompanied by elevated concentrations of mucosal cyclic AMP or cyclic GMP. Net 
fluid fluxes in individual loops did not correlate with mucosal cyclic AMP 
concentration in the same loop. Jejunal adenylate cyclase was activated to a 
lesser extent in pigs, compared with rabbits, after in vivo treatment with 
cholera toxin. In vitro activation in cell-free homogenates was similar for both 
species. Papaverine was similar to cholera toxin in causing fluid secretion 
without cyclic AMP accumulations, but 3-isobutyl-1-methyl xanthine significantly 
increased cyclic AMP concentration and induced fluid secretion in pigs. Weanling 
pigs appeared to differ from rabbits in having a secretory response to cholera 
toxin which was independent of elevations in total mucosal cyclic AMP 
concentration.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.21.2.373-380.1978
PMCID: PMC422005
PMID: 80378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]