---
reference_id: "PMID:37646742"
title: Monkeypox (Mpox) virus isolation and ultrastructural characterisation from a Brazilian human sample case.
authors:
- Miranda MD
- Caldas GC
- Ferreira VN
- Barth OM
- da Silva APD
- Silva MST
- Grinsztejn B
- Veloso VG
- Souza TM
- da Silva EE
- Barreto-Vieira DF
journal: Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1590/0074-02760230090
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox (Mpox) virus isolation and ultrastructural characterisation from a Brazilian human sample case.
**Authors:** Miranda MD, Caldas GC, Ferreira VN, Barth OM, da Silva APD, Silva MST, Grinsztejn B, Veloso VG, Souza TM, da Silva EE, Barreto-Vieira DF
**Journal:** Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1590/0074-02760230090](https://doi.org/10.1590/0074-02760230090)

## Content

1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2023 Aug 28;118:e230090. doi: 10.1590/0074-02760230090.
 eCollection 2023.

Monkeypox (Mpox) virus isolation and ultrastructural characterisation from a 
Brazilian human sample case.

Miranda MD(1), Caldas GC(1)(2), Ferreira VN(1), Barth OM(1), da Silva APD(1)(3), 
Silva MST(4), Grinsztejn B(4), Veloso VG(4), Souza TM(3), da Silva EE(5), 
Barreto-Vieira DF(1).

Author information:
(1)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz-Fiocruz, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Laboratório de 
Morfologia e Morfogênese Viral, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.
(2)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz-Fiocruz, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Laboratório de 
Patologia, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.
(3)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz-Fiocruz, Centro de Desenvolvimento Tecnológico em 
Saúde, Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia de Gestão da Inovação em 
Doenças Negligenciadas, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.
(4)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz-Fiocruz, Instituto Nacional de Infectologia Evandro 
Chagas, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.
(5)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz-Fiocruz, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Laboratório de Vírus 
Respiratórios, Exantemáticos, Enterovírus e Emergências Virais, Rio de Janeiro, 
RJ, Brasil.

BACKGROUND: According to the last 2023 Monkeypox (Mpox) Outbreak Global Map from 
the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), more than 100 countries 
with no Mpox infection report cases. Brazil stands out in this group and is the 
second country with the highest number of cases in the last outbreak.
OBJECTIVE: To contribute to knowledge of the virus infection effects in a 
cellular model, which is important for diagnosis infections not yet included in 
a provider´s differential diagnosis and for developing viral inhibition 
strategies.
METHODS: We describe a virus isolation protocol for a human clinical sample from 
a patient from Brazil, the viral growth in a cell model through plaque forming 
units (PFU) assay, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
FINDINGS: We follow the viral isolation in Vero cell culture from a Mpox 
positive clinically diagnosed sample and show the infection effects on cellular 
structures using a TEM.
MAIN CONCLUSIONS: Understanding the impact of viral growth on cellular 
structures and its replication kinetics may offer better strategies for the 
development of new drugs with antiviral properties.

DOI: 10.1590/0074-02760230090
PMCID: PMC10469757
PMID: 37646742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have read and agreed to the 
published version of the manuscript. The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.