---
reference_id: "PMID:37329181"
title: Dysfunctional sodium channel kinetics as a novel epilepsy mechanism in chromosome 15q11-q13 duplication syndrome.
authors:
- Elamin M
- Lemtiri-Chlieh F
- Robinson TM
- Levine ES
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/epi.17687
keywords:
- Sodium
- Kinetics
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Syndrome
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability
- Sodium Channels
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- Chromosome Aberrations
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysfunctional sodium channel kinetics as a novel epilepsy mechanism in chromosome 15q11-q13 duplication syndrome.
**Authors:** Elamin M, Lemtiri-Chlieh F, Robinson TM, Levine ES
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.17687](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.17687)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2023 Sep;64(9):2515-2527. doi: 10.1111/epi.17687. Epub 2023 Jun 29.

Dysfunctional sodium channel kinetics as a novel epilepsy mechanism in 
chromosome 15q11-q13 duplication syndrome.

Elamin M(1), Lemtiri-Chlieh F(1), Robinson TM(1), Levine ES(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, School of Medicine, University of Connecticut, 
Farmington, Connecticut, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Duplication of the maternal chromosome 15q11.2-q13.1 region causes 
Dup15q syndrome, a highly penetrant neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by 
severe autism and refractory seizures. Although UBE3A, the gene encoding the 
ubiquitin ligase E3A, is thought to be the main driver of disease phenotypes, 
the cellular and molecular mechanisms that contribute to the development of the 
syndrome are yet to be determined. We previously established the necessity of 
UBE3A overexpression for the development of cellular phenotypes in human Dup15q 
neurons, including increased action potential firing and increased inward 
current density, which prompted us to further investigate sodium channel 
kinetics.
METHODS: We used a Dup15q patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cell line 
that was CRISPR-edited to remove the supernumerary chromosome and create an 
isogenic control line. We performed whole cell patch clamp electrophysiology on 
Dup15q and corrected control neurons at two time points of in vitro development.
RESULTS: Compared to corrected neurons, Dup15q neurons showed increased sodium 
current density and a depolarizing shift in steady-state inactivation. Moreover, 
onset of slow inactivation was delayed, and a faster recovery from both fast and 
slow inactivation processes was observed in Dup15q neurons. A fraction of sodium 
current in Dup15q neurons (~15%) appeared to be resistant to slow inactivation. 
Not unexpectedly, a higher fraction of persistent sodium current was also 
observed in Dup15q neurons. These phenotypes were modulated by the 
anticonvulsant drug rufinamide.
SIGNIFICANCE: Sodium channels play a crucial role in the generation of action 
potentials, and sodium channelopathies have been uncovered in multiple forms of 
epilepsy. For the first time, our work identifies in Dup15q neurons 
dysfunctional inactivation kinetics, which have been previously linked to 
multiple forms of epilepsy. Our work can also guide therapeutic approaches to 
epileptic seizures in Dup15q patients and emphasize the role of drugs that 
modulate inactivation kinetics, such as rufinamide.

© 2023 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.17687
PMCID: PMC10529833
PMID: 37329181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: Eric Levine is member of the 
scientific advisory board of Kicho Inc. All other authors report no financial 
disclosures or potential conflicts of interest.