---
reference_id: "PMID:40046440"
title: "Case report: LMNB1 duplication-mediated autosomal dominant adult leukodystrophy in a Chinese family and literature review of Chinese patients."
authors:
- Jiang Y
- Han L
- Li Y
- Zhao Z
- Xin Z
- Zhu Z
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1531593
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: LMNB1 duplication-mediated autosomal dominant adult leukodystrophy in a Chinese family and literature review of Chinese patients.
**Authors:** Jiang Y, Han L, Li Y, Zhao Z, Xin Z, Zhu Z
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2025.1531593](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2025.1531593)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2025 Feb 19;19:1531593. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1531593. 
eCollection 2025.

Case report: LMNB1 duplication-mediated autosomal dominant adult leukodystrophy 
in a Chinese family and literature review of Chinese patients.

Jiang Y(#)(1), Han L(#)(2), Li Y(1), Zhao Z(3), Xin Z(3), Zhu Z(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical College of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Neurorehabilitation, Tianjin 
Medical University, Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Electroencephalogram, Tianjin Huanhu Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Tianjin Huanhu Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Adult-onset autosomal dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) is a rare, slowly 
progressive, and fatal neurodegenerative disorder characterized by central 
nervous system white matter loss due to LMNB1 gene abnormalities encoding 
laminB1. However, not all LMNB1 mutations lead to ADLD. Currently, two genetic 
alterations have been identified in association with the pathogenesis of ADLD: 
LMNB1 gene tandem duplication and LMNB1 gene upstream deletions. We report a 
case of a 60-year-old man diagnosed with ADLD, with pyramidal tract dysfunction 
and autonomic abnormalities as the main clinical manifestations. MRI revealed 
bilateral symmetric high signal intensities in the white matter of the medulla 
oblongata, middle cerebellar peduncles, cerebral peduncle, periventricular white 
matter, centrum semi vale, and the pressure region of the corpus callosum. Whole 
exome sequencing results indicated 73.6Kb duplicate copy number variation 
signals in the 5q23.2 region of the proband's chromosome. The Multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) experiment results indicate 
recurrent mutations across all exons (exon1-11) of the LMNB1 gene. This is the 
eighth ADLD pedigree from China. We conducted a literature review of all ADLD 
pedigrees in China and summarized the characteristics of Chinese patients with 
ADLD to raise awareness of ADLD disease.

Copyright © 2025 Jiang, Han, Li, Zhao, Xin and Zhu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2025.1531593
PMCID: PMC11880262
PMID: 40046440

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.