---
reference_id: "PMID:36173720"
title: "Prevalence of aphthous stomatitis in patients with inflammatory bowel disease after the treatment with monoclonal antibodies: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Salgado-Peralvo AO
- Montero-Alonso M
- Kewalramani N
- Pérez-Sayáns M
- Mateos-Moreno MV
- Garcillán-Izquierdo MR
journal: Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4317/medoral.25528
keywords:
- Humans
- "Stomatitis, Aphthous"
- Tumor Necrosis Factor Inhibitors
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- Prevalence
- "Inflammatory Bowel Diseases/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/epidemiology"
- Crohn Disease/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of aphthous stomatitis in patients with inflammatory bowel disease after the treatment with monoclonal antibodies: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Salgado-Peralvo AO, Montero-Alonso M, Kewalramani N, Pérez-Sayáns M, Mateos-Moreno MV, Garcillán-Izquierdo MR
**Journal:** Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4317/medoral.25528](https://doi.org/10.4317/medoral.25528)

## Content

1. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2022 Nov 1;27(6):e588-e599. doi: 
10.4317/medoral.25528.

Prevalence of aphthous stomatitis in patients with inflammatory bowel disease 
after the treatment with monoclonal antibodies: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Salgado-Peralvo AO(1), Montero-Alonso M, Kewalramani N, Pérez-Sayáns M(#), 
Mateos-Moreno MV, Garcillán-Izquierdo MR.

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Odontología Universidad Complutense de Madrid 28040 Madrid, Spain 
angelors@ucm.es.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Currently, the most frequently employed therapies in the treatment 
of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), i.e., Crohn's Disease (CD), Ulcerative 
Colitis (UC) or unclassified IBD (IBD-U) are monoclonal anti-TNFs and 
anti-integrin therapies, such as vedolizumab (VDZ). Forty-seven per cent of 
these patients present extra-intestinal manifestations, the second most 
prevalent being aphthous stomatitis (AS). The present study aims to investigate 
which of the two therapies is associated with a lower prevalence of AS after 
treatment.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: An electronic search of the MEDLINE (via PubMed), Web of 
Science, SCOPUS, LILACS and OpenGrey databases was carried out. The criteria 
used were those described by the PRISMA Statement. The search was not 
temporarily restricted and was updated to January 2022. The quality assessment 
was analyzed using the JBI Prevalence Critical Appraisal Tool.
RESULTS: After searching, 7 studies were included that met the established 
criteria. Of these, 6 analysed the prevalence of AS in CD patients and 4 in UC. 
A total of 1,744 patients were analysed (CD=1,477 patients; 84.69%; UC=267; 
15.31%). The greatest reduction in AS prevalence was observed after anti-TNF 
therapy. The effect of these therapies on the prevalence of AS in patients with 
IBD-U could not be determined.
CONCLUSIONS: Both biologic therapies achieve a reduction in the prevalence of AS 
in IBD patients (CD and UC). However, the best results were obtained in patients 
treated with anti-TNFs, possibly because VDZ is often used in patients who do 
not respond adequately to previous treatment with anti-TNFs and because of its 
intestinal specificity.

DOI: 10.4317/medoral.25528
PMCID: PMC9648636
PMID: 36173720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.