---
reference_id: "PMID:16443854"
title: "Genotype-phenotype correlation in Costello syndrome: HRAS mutation analysis in 43 cases."
authors:
- Kerr B
- Delrue MA
- Sigaudy S
- Perveen R
- Marche M
- Burgelin I
- Stef M
- Tang B
- Eden OB
- "O'Sullivan J"
- De Sandre-Giovannoli A
- Reardon W
- Brewer C
- Bennett C
- Quarell O
- "M'Cann E"
- Donnai D
- Stewart F
- Hennekam R
- Cavé H
- Verloes A
- Philip N
- Lacombe D
- Levy N
- Arveiler B
- Black G
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.040352
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype correlation in Costello syndrome: HRAS mutation analysis in 43 cases.
**Authors:** Kerr B, Delrue MA, Sigaudy S, Perveen R, Marche M, Burgelin I, Stef M, Tang B, Eden OB, O'Sullivan J, De Sandre-Giovannoli A, Reardon W, Brewer C, Bennett C, Quarell O, M'Cann E, Donnai D, Stewart F, Hennekam R, Cavé H, Verloes A, Philip N, Lacombe D, Levy N, Arveiler B, Black G
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2005.040352](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2005.040352)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2006 May;43(5):401-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.040352. Epub 2006 Jan
 27.

Genotype-phenotype correlation in Costello syndrome: HRAS mutation analysis in 
43 cases.

Kerr B(1), Delrue MA, Sigaudy S, Perveen R, Marche M, Burgelin I, Stef M, Tang 
B, Eden OB, O'Sullivan J, De Sandre-Giovannoli A, Reardon W, Brewer C, Bennett 
C, Quarell O, M'Cann E, Donnai D, Stewart F, Hennekam R, Cavé H, Verloes A, 
Philip N, Lacombe D, Levy N, Arveiler B, Black G.

Author information:
(1)Regional Genetic Service, Central Manchester University Hospital NHS Trust, 
Manchester, UK. bronwyn.kerr@cmmc.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Costello syndrome (CS) is a rare multiple congenital abnormality 
syndrome, associated with failure to thrive and developmental delay. One of the 
more distinctive features in childhood is the development of facial warts, often 
nasolabial and in other moist body surfaces. Individuals with CS have an 
increased risk of malignancy, suggested to be about 17%. Recently, mutations in 
the HRAS gene on chromosome 11p13.3 have been found to cause CS.
METHODS: We report here the results of HRAS analysis in 43 individuals with a 
clinical diagnosis of CS.
RESULTS: Mutations were found in 37 (86%) of patients. Analysis of parental DNA 
samples was possible in 16 cases for both parents and in three cases for one 
parent, and confirmed the mutations as de novo in all of these cases. Three 
novel mutations (G12C, G12E, and K117R) were found in five cases.
CONCLUSIONS: These results confirm that CS is caused, in most cases, by 
heterozygous missense mutations in the proto-oncogene HRAS. Analysis of the 
major phenotypic features by mutation suggests a potential correlation between 
malignancy risk and genotype, which is highest for patients with an uncommon 
(G12A) substitution. These results confirm that mutation testing for HRAS is a 
reliable diagnostic test for CS.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2005.040352
PMCID: PMC2564514
PMID: 16443854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: there are no competing 
interests.