---
reference_id: "PMID:9508243"
title: "Autosomal-recessive omodysplasia: prenatal diagnosis and histomorphometric assessment of the physeal plates of the long bones."
authors:
- Borochowitz Z
- Sabo E
- Misselevitch I
- Boss JH
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1998'
doi: "10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19980319)76:3<238::aid-ajmg7>3.0.co;2-m"
keywords:
- "Abortion, Therapeutic"
- Adult
- "Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Down Syndrome/pathology
- Female
- Fetus/diagnostic imaging
- Growth Plate/pathology
- Humans
- Hydrocephalus/pathology
- Oligohydramnios/pathology
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnosis, pathology"
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Trimester, Second"
- Radiography
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal-recessive omodysplasia: prenatal diagnosis and histomorphometric assessment of the physeal plates of the long bones.
**Authors:** Borochowitz Z, Sabo E, Misselevitch I, Boss JH
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19980319)76:3<238::aid-ajmg7>3.0.co;2-m](https://doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19980319)76:3<238::aid-ajmg7>3.0.co;2-m)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Mar 19;76(3):238-44. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19980319)76:3<238::aid-ajmg7>3.0.co;2-m.

Autosomal-recessive omodysplasia: prenatal diagnosis and histomorphometric 
assessment of the physeal plates of the long bones.

Borochowitz Z(1), Sabo E, Misselevitch I, Boss JH.

Author information:
(1)Simon Winter Institute for Human Genetics, Bnai-Zion Medical Center, 
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa.

Second-semester ultrasonography of a female fetus documented short femora and 
humeri and dislocation of the radii. Based on the clinical and postmortem 
radiological findings, autosomal-recessive omodysplasia was diagnosed. The 
physeal plates of the long tubular bones were assessed by computer-assisted 
image analysis. The dimensions and orientation of the chondrocytic lacunae in 
the physeal plates of the omodysplastic fetus were compared with those in the 
physeal plates of fetuses without gross limb abnormalities (oligohydramnios, n = 
2; hydrocephalus, n = 2; Down syndrome, n = 1). The pathological characteristics 
of the omodysplastic physeal plates were an expanded zone of proliferating 
cartilage and an increased number of closely packed, small chondrocytes. We 
propose that a genetic, functional deficiency of the physeal cells, underlying 
the short-limbed dwarfism of autosomal-recessive omodysplasia, is partially 
compensated, albeit ineffectively, by an increased number of small chondrocytes 
in the proliferating zone of the physeal plate.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19980319)76:3<238::aid-ajmg7>3.0.co;2-m
PMID: 9508243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]