---
reference_id: "PMID:32143290"
title: Clinical Characteristics and In Vitro Analysis of MYO6 Variants Causing Late-Onset Progressive Hearing Loss.
authors:
- Oka SI
- Day TF
- Nishio SY
- Moteki H
- Miyagawa M
- Morita S
- Izumi S
- Ikezono T
- Abe S
- Nakayama J
- Hyogo M
- Okamoto N
- Uehara N
- Oshikawa C
- Kitajiri SI
- Usami SI
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/genes11030273
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Deafness/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- Genotype
- "Hair Cells, Auditory/metabolism, pathology"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Myosin Heavy Chains/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characteristics and In Vitro Analysis of MYO6 Variants Causing Late-Onset Progressive Hearing Loss.
**Authors:** Oka SI, Day TF, Nishio SY, Moteki H, Miyagawa M, Morita S, Izumi S, Ikezono T, Abe S, Nakayama J, Hyogo M, Okamoto N, Uehara N, Oshikawa C, Kitajiri SI, Usami SI
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes11030273](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes11030273)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2020 Mar 4;11(3):273. doi: 10.3390/genes11030273.

Clinical Characteristics and In Vitro Analysis of MYO6 Variants Causing
Late-Onset Progressive Hearing Loss.

Oka SI(1), Day TF(1), Nishio SY(1)(2), Moteki H(1)(2), Miyagawa M(1)(2), Morita
S(3), Izumi S(4), Ikezono T(5), Abe S(6), Nakayama J(7), Hyogo M(8), Okamoto
N(9), Uehara N(10), Oshikawa C(11), Kitajiri SI(1)(2), Usami SI(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan.
(2)Department of Hearing Implant Sciences, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and
Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, North-15, West-7, Sapporo
060-8638, Japan.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Niigata University
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Asahimachi 1, Niigata city,
Niigata 951-8510, Japan.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Otorhinolaryngology, Saitama Medical University,
Morohongo 38, Moroyamamachi, Irumagun, Saitama-ken 350-0495, Japan.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Toranomon Hosipital, 2-2-2 Toranomon,
Minato-ku, Tokyo 105-8470, Japan.
(7)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Shiga University School of Medical
Science, Seta Tsukinowacho, Otsu 520-2192, Japan.
(8)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, 465 Kagii-cho, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Women's and Children's Hospital, 840
Murodo-cho, Izumi, Osaka 594-1101, Japan.
(10)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kobe University School
of Medicine, 7-5-2 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.
(11)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan.

MYO6 is known as a genetic cause of autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive
inherited hearing loss. In this study, to clarify the frequency and clinical
characteristics of hearing loss caused by MYO6 gene mutations, a large-scale
genetic analysis of Japanese patients with hearing loss was performed. By means
of massively parallel DNA sequencing (MPS) using next-generation sequencing for
8074 Japanese families, we found 27 MYO6 variants in 33 families, 22 of which
are novel. In total, 2.40% of autosomal dominant sensorineural hearing loss
(ADSNHL) in families in this study (32 out of 1336) was found to be caused by
MYO6 mutations. The present study clarified that most cases showed
juvenile-onset progressive hearing loss and their hearing deteriorated markedly
after 40 years of age. The estimated hearing deterioration was found to be 0.57
dB per year; when restricted to change after 40 years of age, the deterioration
speed was accelerated to 1.07 dB per year. To obtain supportive evidence for
pathogenicity, variants identified in the patients were introduced to MYO6 cDNA
by site-directed mutagenesis and overexpressed in epithelial cells. They were
then assessed for their effects on espin1-induced microvilli formation. Cells
with wildtype myosin 6 and espin1 co-expressed created long microvilli, while
co-expression with mutant constructs resulted in severely shortened microvilli.
In conclusion, the present data clearly showed that MYO6 is one of the genes to
keep in mind with regard to ADSNHL, and the molecular characteristics of the
identified gene variants suggest that a possible pathology seems to result from
malformed stereocilia of the cochlear hair cells.

DOI: 10.3390/genes11030273
PMCID: PMC7140843
PMID: 32143290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
