---
reference_id: "PMID:34302327"
title: Comparison of Clinical Features and Outcome of Dengue Fever and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Associated With COVID-19 (MIS-C).
authors:
- Dhooria GS
- Kakkar S
- Pooni PA
- Bhat D
- Bhargava S
- Arora K
- Gill K
- Goel N
journal: Indian Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s13312-021-2329-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of Clinical Features and Outcome of Dengue Fever and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Associated With COVID-19 (MIS-C).
**Authors:** Dhooria GS, Kakkar S, Pooni PA, Bhat D, Bhargava S, Arora K, Gill K, Goel N
**Journal:** Indian Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13312-021-2329-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13312-021-2329-9)

## Content

1. Indian Pediatr. 2021 Oct 15;58(10):951-954. doi: 10.1007/s13312-021-2329-9.
Epub  2021 Jul 23.

Comparison of Clinical Features and Outcome of Dengue Fever and Multisystem 
Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Associated With COVID-19 (MIS-C).

Dhooria GS(1), Kakkar S(2), Pooni PA(2), Bhat D(2), Bhargava S(2), Arora K(2), 
Gill K(2), Goel N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana, 
Punjab. Correspondence to: Dr Gurdeep Singh Dhooria, Professor, Department of 
Pediatrics, Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana, Punjab. 
gurdeep2005123@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana, 
Punjab.

OBJECTIVE: To identify clinical and laboratory features that differentiate 
dengue fever patients from MIS-C patients and determine their outcomes.
METHODS: This comparative cross-sectional study was done at a tertiary care 
teaching institute. We enrolled all hospitalized children aged 1 month - 18 
years and diagnosed with either MIS-C and/or dengue fever according to WHO 
criteria between June and December, 2020. Clinical and laboratory features and 
outcomes were recorded on a structured proforma.
RESULTS: During the study period 34 cases of MIS-C and 83 cases of Dengue fever 
were enrolled. Mean age of MIS-C cases (male, 86.3%) was 7.89 (4.61) years. 
MIS-C with shock was seen in 15 cases (44%), MIS-C without shock in 17 cases 
(50%) and Kawasaki disease-like presentation in 2 cases (6%). Patients of MIS-C 
were younger as compared to dengue fever (P=0.002). Abdominal pain and 
erythematous rash were more common in dengue fever. Of the inflammatory markers, 
mean C reactive protein was higher in MIS-C patients [100.2 (85.1) vs 16.9 
(29.3) mg/dL] (P<0.001). In contrast, serum ferritin levels were higher in 
dengue fever patients (P=0.03). Mean hospital stay (patient days) was longer in 
MIS- C compared to dengue fever (8.6 vs 6.5 days; P=0.014).
CONCLUSION: Clinical and laboratory features can give important clues to 
differentiate dengue fever and MIS-C and help initiate specific treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s13312-021-2329-9
PMCID: PMC8549585
PMID: 34302327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]