---
reference_id: "PMID:30850197"
title: Eye and Behçet's disease.
authors:
- Ksiaa I
- Abroug N
- Kechida M
- Zina S
- Jelliti B
- Khochtali S
- Attia S
- Khairallah M
journal: J Fr Ophtalmol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jfo.2019.02.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eye and Behçet's disease.
**Authors:** Ksiaa I, Abroug N, Kechida M, Zina S, Jelliti B, Khochtali S, Attia S, Khairallah M
**Journal:** J Fr Ophtalmol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jfo.2019.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfo.2019.02.002)

## Content

1. J Fr Ophtalmol. 2019 Apr;42(4):e133-e146. doi: 10.1016/j.jfo.2019.02.002. Epub
 2019 Mar 5.

Eye and Behçet's disease.

Ksiaa I(1), Abroug N(1), Kechida M(2), Zina S(1), Jelliti B(1), Khochtali S(1), 
Attia S(1), Khairallah M(3).

Author information:
(1)Service d'ophtalmologie, hôpital universitaire Fattouma Bourguiba, faculté de 
médecine, université de Monastir, 5019 Monastir, Tunisie.
(2)Service de médecine interne, hôpital universitaire Fattouma Bourguiba, 
faculté de médecine, université de Monastir, Monastir, Tunisie.
(3)Service d'ophtalmologie, hôpital universitaire Fattouma Bourguiba, faculté de 
médecine, université de Monastir, 5019 Monastir, Tunisie. Electronic address: 
moncef.khairallah@yahoo.fr.

Behçet's disease is a chronic multisystem disorder characterized by relapsing 
inflammation for which the underlying histopathology is an occlusive vasculitis. 
The disease has a high prevalence in the Mediterranean region, Far and Middle 
Eastern countries. It is clinically characterized by oral and genital 
ulcerations, ocular inflammatory involvement, skin lesions, vascular involvement 
and numerous other systemic manifestations. Uveitis is by far the most common 
ocular manifestation of Behçet's disease. It typically presents in the form of 
relapsing-remitting panuveitis with retinal vasculitis that may result in severe 
visual loss. Management of Behçet's uveitis relies on corticosteroid therapy, 
conventional immunosuppressive drugs and biological agents and requires a close 
collaboration between ophthalmologist and internist. A better understanding of 
auto-inflammatory process and of the role of cytokines implicated in the 
pathogenesis of Behçet's disease will enable researchers to develop more 
specific and effective therapy.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfo.2019.02.002
PMID: 30850197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]