---
reference_id: "PMID:12183721"
title: Protein insufficiency and linear growth restriction in phenylketonuria.
authors:
- Arnold GL
- Vladutiu CJ
- Kirby RS
- Blakely EM
- Deluca JM
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1067/mpd.2002.126455
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Body Height/physiology
- Body Mass Index
- Child
- Child Welfare
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Growth/physiology
- Humans
- Male
- New York
- Phenylalanine/blood
- "Phenylketonurias/blood, complications, physiopathology"
- Prealbumin/metabolism
- "Protein Deficiency/blood, complications, physiopathology"
- Proteins/physiology
- Regression Analysis
- Statistics as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein insufficiency and linear growth restriction in phenylketonuria.
**Authors:** Arnold GL, Vladutiu CJ, Kirby RS, Blakely EM, Deluca JM
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1067/mpd.2002.126455](https://doi.org/10.1067/mpd.2002.126455)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2002 Aug;141(2):243-6. doi: 10.1067/mpd.2002.126455.

Protein insufficiency and linear growth restriction in phenylketonuria.

Arnold GL(1), Vladutiu CJ, Kirby RS, Blakely EM, Deluca JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To study the role of protein sufficiency, age, calorie sufficiency,
and phenylalanine levels in children with phenylketonuria (PKU) and determine
how these affect linear growth.
METHODS: Age, growth measures, plasma prealbumin, and mean phenylalanine levels
were analyzed from a chart review of 38 children with early and continuously
treated PKU.
RESULTS: A regression model was calculated investigating the effects of
prealbumin, age, body mass index, and mean phenylalanine level on height. In
this model, plasma prealbumin of <20 was associated with a loss of 45 height
percentiles, whereas age and body mass index also had smaller but statistically
significant effects. Prealbumin was correlated with height and age such that
children with lower prealbumin levels were shorter and younger. There was no
significant correlation between age and height or mean plasma phenylalanine
level and height. A prealbumin level of 20 mg/dL appeared to constitute a
threshold level, below which height growth was very significantly impaired.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a strong relation between protein insufficiency, as
determined by plasma prealbumin levels, and linear growth impairment. We suggest
that a plasma prealbumin level of at least 20 mg/dL is necessary for optimal
growth in children with PKU.

DOI: 10.1067/mpd.2002.126455
PMID: 12183721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
