---
reference_id: "PMID:17558409"
title: The ciliary gene RPGRIP1L is mutated in cerebello-oculo-renal syndrome (Joubert syndrome type B) and Meckel syndrome.
authors:
- Delous M
- Baala L
- Salomon R
- Laclef C
- Vierkotten J
- Tory K
- Golzio C
- Lacoste T
- Besse L
- Ozilou C
- Moutkine I
- Hellman NE
- Anselme I
- Silbermann F
- Vesque C
- Gerhardt C
- Rattenberry E
- Wolf MT
- Gubler MC
- Martinovic J
- Encha-Razavi F
- Boddaert N
- Gonzales M
- Macher MA
- Nivet H
- Champion G
- Berthélémé JP
- Niaudet P
- McDonald F
- Hildebrandt F
- Johnson CA
- Vekemans M
- Antignac C
- Rüther U
- Schneider-Maunoury S
- Attié-Bitach T
- Saunier S
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/ng2039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ciliary gene RPGRIP1L is mutated in cerebello-oculo-renal syndrome (Joubert syndrome type B) and Meckel syndrome.
**Authors:** Delous M, Baala L, Salomon R, Laclef C, Vierkotten J, Tory K, Golzio C, Lacoste T, Besse L, Ozilou C, Moutkine I, Hellman NE, Anselme I, Silbermann F, Vesque C, Gerhardt C, Rattenberry E, Wolf MT, Gubler MC, Martinovic J, Encha-Razavi F, Boddaert N, Gonzales M, Macher MA, Nivet H, Champion G, Berthélémé JP, Niaudet P, McDonald F, Hildebrandt F, Johnson CA, Vekemans M, Antignac C, Rüther U, Schneider-Maunoury S, Attié-Bitach T, Saunier S
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng2039](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng2039)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2007 Jul;39(7):875-81. doi: 10.1038/ng2039. Epub 2007 Jun 10.

The ciliary gene RPGRIP1L is mutated in cerebello-oculo-renal syndrome (Joubert 
syndrome type B) and Meckel syndrome.

Delous M(1), Baala L, Salomon R, Laclef C, Vierkotten J, Tory K, Golzio C, 
Lacoste T, Besse L, Ozilou C, Moutkine I, Hellman NE, Anselme I, Silbermann F, 
Vesque C, Gerhardt C, Rattenberry E, Wolf MT, Gubler MC, Martinovic J, 
Encha-Razavi F, Boddaert N, Gonzales M, Macher MA, Nivet H, Champion G, 
Berthélémé JP, Niaudet P, McDonald F, Hildebrandt F, Johnson CA, Vekemans M, 
Antignac C, Rüther U, Schneider-Maunoury S, Attié-Bitach T, Saunier S.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U-574, 
Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 75015 Paris, France.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2007 Jul;39(7):818-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0707-818.

Cerebello-oculo-renal syndrome (CORS), also called Joubert syndrome type B, and 
Meckel (MKS) syndrome belong to the group of developmental autosomal recessive 
disorders that are associated with primary cilium dysfunction. Using SNP 
mapping, we identified missense and truncating mutations in RPGRIP1L (KIAA1005) 
in both CORS and MKS, and we show that inactivation of the mouse ortholog 
Rpgrip1l (Ftm) recapitulates the cerebral, renal and hepatic defects of CORS and 
MKS. In addition, we show that RPGRIP1L colocalizes at the basal body and 
centrosomes with the protein products of both NPHP6 and NPHP4, known genes 
associated with MKS, CORS and nephronophthisis (a related renal disorder and 
ciliopathy). In addition, the RPGRIP1L missense mutations found in CORS 
individuals diminishes the interaction between RPGRIP1L and nephrocystin-4. Our 
findings show that mutations in RPGRIP1L can cause the multiorgan phenotypic 
abnormalities found in CORS or MKS, which therefore represent a continuum of the 
same underlying disorder.

DOI: 10.1038/ng2039
PMID: 17558409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]