---
reference_id: "PMID:31441224"
title: "Maternal ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, a genetic condition associated with high maternal and neonatal mortality every clinician should know: A systematic review."
authors:
- Torkzaban M
- Haddad A
- Baxter JK
- Berghella V
- Gahl WA
- Al-Kouatly HB
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61329
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maternal ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, a genetic condition associated with high maternal and neonatal mortality every clinician should know: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Torkzaban M, Haddad A, Baxter JK, Berghella V, Gahl WA, Al-Kouatly HB
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61329](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61329)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Oct;179(10):2091-2100. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61329. Epub 
2019 Aug 22.

Maternal ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, a genetic condition associated 
with high maternal and neonatal mortality every clinician should know: A 
systematic review.

Torkzaban M(1), Haddad A(2)(3), Baxter JK(1), Berghella V(1), Gahl WA(4), 
Al-Kouatly HB(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Medstar Washington Hospital Center, 
Washington, District of Columbia.
(3)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institute of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Section on Human Biochemical Genetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland.

Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD) is a rare X-linked urea cycle 
disorder. Maternal OTCD can lead to life-threatening hyperammonemia if 
untreated. We aimed to compare the outcomes of maternal OTCD when diagnosis is 
known prior to pregnancy to when diagnosis is made during pregnancy. We 
performed a systematic literature review on maternal OTCD using the databases 
Ovid MEDLINE and PubMed from 1982 through 2018. Studies were included if 
addressed maternal OTCD signs, symptoms, and detailed pregnancy outcomes. We 
calculated the median or the mean for continuous variables and percentages for 
categorical variables. Of 36 cases of maternal OTCD, 20 (55%) were diagnosed 
prior to pregnancy while 16 (45%) were not. In the 20 patients diagnosed prior 
to pregnancy, 7 (35%) had either a neurologic or psychiatric presentation during 
pregnancy or postpartum. Two hyperammonemic patients (11%) experienced ICU 
admission, dialysis, and coma with no maternal deaths. All had a favorable 
outcome. In the 16 patients not known to have maternal OTCD prior to pregnancy, 
13 (81%) had neurologic or psychiatric presentation during pregnancy or 
postpartum. Four presented with hyperemesis gravidarum. Eleven (69%) 
hyperammonemic patients had ICU admission and coma and 7 (47%) of them had 
dialysis. There were 5 (31%) maternal deaths. Three patients (19%) had prolonged 
hospitalization course. Overall, three male neonatal deaths were reported. Three 
other male children had liver transplant. Maternal OTCD is associated with high 
maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality when diagnosis is made during 
pregnancy compared to when diagnosis is known prior to pregnancy.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61329
PMID: 31441224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]