---
reference_id: "PMID:12929941"
title: "Chloride channel 7 (ClCN7) gene mutations and autosomal dominant osteopetrosis, type II."
authors:
- Waguespack SG
- Koller DL
- White KE
- Fishburn T
- Carn G
- Buckwalter KA
- Johnson M
- Kocisko M
- Evans WE
- Foroud T
- Econs MJ
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.8.1513
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chloride channel 7 (ClCN7) gene mutations and autosomal dominant osteopetrosis, type II.
**Authors:** Waguespack SG, Koller DL, White KE, Fishburn T, Carn G, Buckwalter KA, Johnson M, Kocisko M, Evans WE, Foroud T, Econs MJ
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.8.1513](https://doi.org/10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.8.1513)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2003 Aug;18(8):1513-8. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.8.1513.

Chloride channel 7 (ClCN7) gene mutations and autosomal dominant osteopetrosis, 
type II.

Waguespack SG(1), Koller DL, White KE, Fishburn T, Carn G, Buckwalter KA, 
Johnson M, Kocisko M, Evans WE, Foroud T, Econs MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
Indiana, USA.

ADO2 is an uncommon sclerosing bone disorder with incomplete penetrance and 
variable expressivity. Positional candidate studies were performed to identify 
the gene responsible for ADO2. In 11 of 12 kindreds, five different missense 
mutations were identified in the ClCN7 gene, indicating the genetic basis and 
possible dominant negative mechanism for ADO2.
INTRODUCTION: Autosomal dominant osteopetrosis, type II (ADO2) is an uncommon 
sclerosing bone disorder with a distinct radiographic appearance and unique 
clinical characteristics. We present the results from our genetic studies 
designed to identify the ADO2 gene through a positional candidate approach.
METHODS: Having identified 12 families with ADO2, we initially performed linkage 
studies in our seven largest kindreds and observed a summed maximum LOD score of 
15.91 at marker D16S521 on chromosome 16p13.3. Critical meiotic recombination 
events further narrowed the putative gene region to a 7.6-cM area, which 
contains the candidate genes ATP6L and chloride channel 7 (ClCN7). We screened 
affected individuals from each ADO2 family for mutations in these genes using 
direct sequencing. Identified mutations were subsequently confirmed through 
direct sequencing or restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. We then 
calculated the overall disease penetrance rate after all available at-risk 
family members were assessed for ClCN7 gene mutations.
RESULTS: No ATP6L mutations were identified in affected subjects. Subsequently, 
as CICN7 gene mutations were being reported, we identified two novel (L213F, 
R762L) and three known (G215R, R286W, R767W) missense mutations in 11 kindreds. 
In our large sample, disease penetrance was 66% (62 clinically affected 
individuals/94 subjects with the gene mutation). To date, nine different 
mutations have been discovered in the ClCN7 gene in 22 of 23 ADO2 families 
studied.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that mutations in the CICN7 gene are responsible for 
ADO2 and that genetic heterogeneity is unlikely to exist in this disorder. Based 
on the preponderance of missense mutations and the knowledge that chloride 
channels probably function as dimers, it seems that heterozygous ClCN7 gene 
mutations may cause ADO2 through a dominant negative mechanism.

DOI: 10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.8.1513
PMID: 12929941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]