---
reference_id: "PMID:36216271"
title: STAG2 microduplication in a patient with eyelid myoclonia and absences and a review of EMA-related reported genes.
authors:
- Gokce-Samar Z
- de Bellescize J
- Arzimanoglou A
- Putoux A
- Chatron N
- Lesca G
- Portes VD
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104636
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STAG2 microduplication in a patient with eyelid myoclonia and absences and a review of EMA-related reported genes.
**Authors:** Gokce-Samar Z, de Bellescize J, Arzimanoglou A, Putoux A, Chatron N, Lesca G, Portes VD
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104636](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104636)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2022 Dec;65(12):104636. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104636. Epub
 2022 Oct 7.

STAG2 microduplication in a patient with eyelid myoclonia and absences and a 
review of EMA-related reported genes.

Gokce-Samar Z(1), de Bellescize J(2), Arzimanoglou A(2), Putoux A(3), Chatron 
N(3), Lesca G(3), Portes VD(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Clinical Epileptology, Sleep Disorders and 
Functional Neurology, Member of ERN-EpiCARE; HFME, University Hospitals of Lyon 
(HCL), Lyon, France. Electronic address: zeynep.gokce-samar@chu-lyon.fr.
(2)Department of Paediatric Clinical Epileptology, Sleep Disorders and 
Functional Neurology, Member of ERN-EpiCARE; HFME, University Hospitals of Lyon 
(HCL), Lyon, France.
(3)Department of Genetics; HFME, Member of ERN-EpiCARE; University Hospitals of 
Lyon (HCL), Lyon, France.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology; Member of ERN-EpiCARE; Rare Disease 
Reference Centre for Intellectual Disability, University Hospitals of Lyon 
(HCL), And University Lyon1, Lyon, France.

Xq25 microduplication involving exclusively STAG2 is a new distinctive 
cohesinopathy including mild to moderate intellectual disability, speech delay 
and facial dysmorphism. Seizures seem to be scarce, but detailed seizure type 
descriptions are missing. We report the case of an 8-year-old boy with mild 
intellectual disability and eyelid myoclonia with onset at age of 3 years, 
initially misinterpreted as tics. An ictal VIDEO-EEG documented eye closure 
elicited generalized 3 Hz spike-waves or polyspike-waves concomitant to eyelid 
myoclonia, sometimes associated to brief clinically observable absences. 
Intermittent photic stimulation revealed a photoparoxysmal response. Array CGH 
identified a 199 kb copy number gain in Xq25 including the whole STAG2 gene, 
inherited from his asymptomatic mother. To the best of our knowledge, this is 
the first case of STAG2 encephalopathy fulfilling all electroclinical criteria 
for epilepsy with eyelid myoclonia and absences (EMA), formally named Jeavons 
syndrome (JS). As for other Genetic Generalized Epilepsy syndromes, EMA/JS 
usually occurs in normally developing children. Intellectual disability of 
variable degree is occasionally reported. On the background of other genes 
responsible for Developmental and Epileptic Encephalopathies, linked to specific 
generalized seizure types or seizure combinations, we discuss the contribution 
of pathogenic variants in CHD2, SYNGAP1 and some other genes as, RORB, NEXMIF 
and KCNB1 to this peculiar EMA phenotype.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104636
PMID: 36216271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]