---
reference_id: "PMID:34570271"
title: Kidney and urinary tract findings among patients with Kabuki (make-up) syndrome.
authors:
- Merdler-Rabinowicz R
- Pode-Shakked B
- Vivante A
- Lahav E
- Kagan M
- Chorin O
- Somech R
- Raas-Rothschild A
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-021-05216-3
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Face/abnormalities
- Hematologic Diseases
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Kidney/diagnostic imaging
- Male
- Urinary Tract/diagnostic imaging
- Urogenital Abnormalities
- Vesico-Ureteral Reflux
- Vestibular Diseases
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kidney and urinary tract findings among patients with Kabuki (make-up) syndrome.
**Authors:** Merdler-Rabinowicz R, Pode-Shakked B, Vivante A, Lahav E, Kagan M, Chorin O, Somech R, Raas-Rothschild A
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-021-05216-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-021-05216-3)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2021 Dec;36(12):4009-4012. doi: 10.1007/s00467-021-05216-3. 
Epub 2021 Sep 27.

Kidney and urinary tract findings among patients with Kabuki (make-up) syndrome.

Merdler-Rabinowicz R(1)(2), Pode-Shakked B(2)(3), Vivante A(2)(4)(5), Lahav 
E(2)(4), Kagan M(2)(4)(5), Chorin O(2)(3), Somech R(2)(6), Raas-Rothschild 
A(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Department A, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba 
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(2)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)The Institute for Rare Diseases, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, 
Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(4)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, 
Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(5)Pediatric Department B, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, , Sheba 
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(6)Pediatric Department A and Immunology Service, Jeffrey Modell Foundation 
Center, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel 
Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(7)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. 
Annick.Rothschild@sheba.health.gov.il.
(8)The Institute for Rare Diseases, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, 
Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel. 
Annick.Rothschild@sheba.health.gov.il.

BACKGROUND: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a genetic disorder caused mainly by de novo 
pathogenic variants in KMT2D or KDM6A, characterized by recognizable facial 
features, intellectual disability, and multi-systemic involvement, including 
short stature, microcephaly, hearing loss, cardiac defects, and additional 
congenital anomalies. While congenital anomalies of the kidneys and urinary 
tract (CAKUT) are known manifestations of this disorder, studies focused solely 
on kidney involvement are scarce, and its prevalence is most likely 
underestimated. This study aimed to describe the prevalence and nature of CAKUT 
and other renal manifestations, in a cohort of KS patients followed at a single 
tertiary center.
METHODS: All patients who were evaluated at the Sheba Medical Center and 
received a clinical and/or molecular diagnosis of KS, over a 16-year period 
(2004-2020), were included. Digital medical records, including ultrasound 
studies, were reviewed by a team of pediatric nephrologists.
RESULTS: Thirteen patients were included in the study, at ages ranging from the 
neonatal period to 20 years. In eight patients, a pathogenic variant in KMT2D 
was established. CAKUT were detected in 8/13 (61.5%) of patients and varied from 
hypospadias, hydronephrosis, or double collecting systems to pelvic kidney, 
kidney asymmetry, horseshoe kidney, or kidney agenesis. One patient experienced 
kidney failure necessitating transplantation at 20 years of age.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings underscore the high prevalence of CAKUT and 
genitourinary involvement in patients with KS and suggest that assessment by 
pediatric nephrology specialists is warranted as part of the routine 
multidisciplinary evaluation of newly diagnosed patients. A higher resolution 
version of the Graphical abstract is available as Supplementary information.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to IPNA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-021-05216-3
PMID: 34570271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]