---
reference_id: "PMID:2728341"
title: Cutaneous wound healing in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Freeman LJ
- Hegreberg GA
- Robinette JD
journal: Vet Surg
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1111/j.1532-950x.1989.tb01049.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous wound healing in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Freeman LJ, Hegreberg GA, Robinette JD
**Journal:** Vet Surg (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1532-950x.1989.tb01049.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-950x.1989.tb01049.x)

## Content

1. Vet Surg. 1989 Mar-Apr;18(2):88-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-950x.1989.tb01049.x.

Cutaneous wound healing in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Freeman LJ(1), Hegreberg GA, Robinette JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, Washington State University, 
Pullman.

Wound healing in five dogs and five cats affected with a connective tissue 
dysplasia resembling Ehlers-Danlos syndrome of humans was compared with wound 
healing in 10 nonaffected animals. Six skin incisions on the lateral aspects of 
the thorax and abdomen of each animal were sutured and assessed daily for 75 
days for evidence of healing. All wounds in nonaffected dogs, affected cats, and 
nonaffected cats healed by first intention. Three incisions in affected dogs had 
dehiscence of all or part of the incision line and healed by granulation, 
contraction, and epithelialization. Biopsies taken at 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, and 75 
days were compared histologically to determine if there were any differences in 
rates of healing between affected and nonaffected animals. Epidermal thickening 
and scab formation were noted at days 3 and 6 in both affected and nonaffected 
animals. Infiltration with mononuclear cells and fibroplasia steadily increased 
from day 6 to day 15 in all groups. Collagen fibril formation was evident by day 
9. At day 75, incision sites were recognized by fine, more compact collagen 
bundles and lack of adnexal structures, as compared with the adjacent dermis in 
both affected and nonaffected animals. Although delayed wound healing has been 
reported to be a complication of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in humans, using 
clinical and histologic criteria, wound healing in dogs and cats with 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome appears to be similar to nonaffected animals.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-950x.1989.tb01049.x
PMID: 2728341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]