---
reference_id: "PMID:33395032"
title: MEK inhibitors in RASopathies.
authors:
- Bergqvist C
- Wolkenstein P
journal: Curr Opin Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000711
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MEK inhibitors in RASopathies.
**Authors:** Bergqvist C, Wolkenstein P
**Journal:** Curr Opin Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CCO.0000000000000711](https://doi.org/10.1097/CCO.0000000000000711)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Oncol. 2021 Mar 1;33(2):110-119. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000711.

MEK inhibitors in RASopathies.

Bergqvist C(1)(2), Wolkenstein P(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Assistance Publique-Hôpital Paris (AP-HP), Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Service de 
Dermatologie.
(2)Université Paris-Est Creteil (UPEC), Faculty of Medicine.
(3)INSERM, Centre d'Investigation Clinique 006, Assistance Publique-Hôpital 
Paris (AP-HP), Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Referral Center of Neurofibromatosis.
(4)INSERM U955 Neurofibromatosis and Lymphoma Oncogenesis, Créteil, France.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: An early understanding of the role of the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK 
signalling pathway in regulating cell proliferation has set the stage for the 
development of several potent and selective MEK inhibitors (MEKi). MEKi 
represent promising therapies for RAS-driven neoplasias and RASopathies 
associated with increased Ras/MAPK activity.
RECENT FINDINGS: Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) is a prototypic RASopathy in which 
early-phase clinical trials with MEKi have been successful in the treatment of 
plexiform neurofibromas (pNF) and low-grade gliomas (LGGs). The phase 2 trial 
(SPRINT) of selumetinib in pNF resulted in at least 20% reduction in the size of 
pNF from baseline in 71% of patients and was associated with clinically 
meaningful improvements. On the basis of this trial, selumetinib (Koselugo) 
received FDA approval for children 2 years of age and older with inoperable, 
symptomatic pNF. The phase 2 trial of selumetinib in LGG resulted in 40% partial 
response and 96% of patients had 2 years of progression-free survival.
SUMMARY: Given the potential of MEK inhibition as an effective and overall well 
tolerated medical treatment, the use of targeted agents in the NF1 population is 
likely to increase considerably. Future work on non-NF1 RASopathies should focus 
on developing preclinical models and defining endpoints for measurement of 
efficacy in order to conduct clinical trials.

Copyright © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000711
PMID: 33395032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]