---
reference_id: "PMID:17012912"
title: A comparative study between transmission electron microscopy and immunofluorescence mapping in the diagnosis of epidermolysis bullosa.
authors:
- Yiasemides E
- Walton J
- Marr P
- Villanueva EV
- Murrell DF
journal: Am J Dermatopathol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1097/01.dad.0000211510.44865.6d
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/classification, diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- Female
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Likelihood Functions
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- Prospective Studies
- Reference Standards
- Sensitivity and Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A comparative study between transmission electron microscopy and immunofluorescence mapping in the diagnosis of epidermolysis bullosa.
**Authors:** Yiasemides E, Walton J, Marr P, Villanueva EV, Murrell DF
**Journal:** Am J Dermatopathol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.dad.0000211510.44865.6d](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.dad.0000211510.44865.6d)

## Content

1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2006 Oct;28(5):387-94. doi: 
10.1097/01.dad.0000211510.44865.6d.

A comparative study between transmission electron microscopy and 
immunofluorescence mapping in the diagnosis of epidermolysis bullosa.

Yiasemides E(1), Walton J, Marr P, Villanueva EV, Murrell DF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, St George Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

The classification of epidermolysis bullosa (EB) into 3 main subtypes has been 
based on transmission electron microscopy (TEM) that is able to directly 
visualize and quantify specific ultrastructural features. Immunofluorescence 
antigenic mapping (IFM) is a technique that determines the precise level of skin 
cleavage by determining binding sites for a series of antibodies. To date, no 
study has compared the accuracy of these two techniques in diagnosing the major 
types of EB. A prospective cohort of 33 patients thought to have EB on clinical 
grounds had TEM, IFM, and genetic testing performed. The sensitivities and 
specificities of TEM and IFM were calculated compared with the genetic results. 
Of 33 cases, 30 had a positive EB diagnosis. TEM subclassified EB into its three 
major forms in 24/30 cases (80%) and IFM in 29/30 cases (97%). Overall, TEM 
sensitivities and specificities when compared with genetic results were 71% and 
81%, respectively. IFM sensitivities and specificities when compared with 
genetic results were 97% and 100%, respectively. If a patient tested positive 
for EB by IFM, the likelihood ratio of having a particular type of EB was 
consistently greater than 20 against the reference standard (compared with a 
likelihood ratio less than 10 for TEM). Our results indicate that the diagnosis 
of EB is improved (sometimes substantially) by the use of IFM compared with TEM.

DOI: 10.1097/01.dad.0000211510.44865.6d
PMID: 17012912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]