---
reference_id: "PMID:34023242"
title: Significance of BMPR2 mutations in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
authors:
- Tatius B
- Wasityastuti W
- Astarini FD
- Nugrahaningsih DAA
journal: Respir Investig
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2021.03.011
keywords:
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptors, Type II/genetics"
- Endothelial Cells
- Humans
- Mutation
- Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
- Pulmonary Artery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Significance of BMPR2 mutations in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
**Authors:** Tatius B, Wasityastuti W, Astarini FD, Nugrahaningsih DAA
**Journal:** Respir Investig (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.resinv.2021.03.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resinv.2021.03.011)

## Content

1. Respir Investig. 2021 Jul;59(4):397-407. doi: 10.1016/j.resinv.2021.03.011.
Epub  2021 May 20.

Significance of BMPR2 mutations in pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Tatius B(1), Wasityastuti W(2), Astarini FD(3), Nugrahaningsih DAA(4).

Author information:
(1)Master in Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and
Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada, 55281, Indonesia; Biomedical Laboratory,
Medicine Faculty, Universitas Muhammadiyah, Semarang, 50272, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing,
Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, 55281, Indonesia. Electronic address:
wasityastuti@ugm.ac.id.
(3)Master in Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and
Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada, 55281, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Therapy, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health
and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, 55281, Indonesia.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a debilitating disease that results
from progressive remodeling and inflammation of pulmonary arteries. PAH develops
gradually, is difficult to diagnose, and has a high mortality rate. Although
mutation in the bone morphogenetic protein receptor 2 (BMPR2) gene has been
identified as the main genetic cause of PAH, the underlying pathways involving
the pathophysiology of PAH are complex and still not fully understood.
Endothelial dysfunction has been observed in PAH development that results in a
multitude of disturbances in the cellular processes in pulmonary vessels.
Changes in the pulmonary vasculature caused by the disruption of BMPR2 signaling
are observed in three main vascular components; endothelial cells, smooth muscle
cells, and fibroblasts. BMPR2 also has a prominent role in maintenance of the
immune system. The disruption of BMPR2 signaling pathway causes an increased
degree of inflammation and decreases the ability of the immune system to resolve
it. Inflammatory processes and changes in pulmonary vasculature interact with
one another, resulting in the progression of chronic PAH. In this review, we
highlight the various components of vascular remodeling and immune response that
are caused by disruption of BMPR2 signaling, including the clinical evidence and
the prospects of these components as a potential target for PAH therapy. Indeed,
development of drugs to target the pathogenic pathways involved in PAH may
complement existing treatment regimens and improve patient prognosis.

Copyright © 2021 The Japanese Respiratory Society. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resinv.2021.03.011
PMID: 34023242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors have no
conflicts of interest.
