---
reference_id: "PMID:34682761"
title: "The Auto-Brewery Syndrome: A Perfect Metabolic \"Storm\" with Clinical and Forensic Implications."
authors:
- Dinis-Oliveira RJ
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/jcm10204637
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Auto-Brewery Syndrome: A Perfect Metabolic "Storm" with Clinical and Forensic Implications.
**Authors:** Dinis-Oliveira RJ
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm10204637](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm10204637)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2021 Oct 10;10(20):4637. doi: 10.3390/jcm10204637.

The Auto-Brewery Syndrome: A Perfect Metabolic "Storm" with Clinical and 
Forensic Implications.

Dinis-Oliveira RJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)TOXRUN-Toxicology Research Unit, University Institute of Health Sciences, 
Advanced Polytechnic and University Cooperative (CESPU), CRL, 4585-116 Gandra, 
Portugal.
(2)Department of Public Health and Forensic Sciences and Medical Education, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal.
(3)UCIBIO-Applied Molecular Biosciences Unit, REQUIMTE, Laboratory of 
Toxicology, Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University 
of Porto, Rua de Jorge Viterbo Ferreira nº 228, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal.

Auto-brewery syndrome (ABS) is a rare, unstudied, unknown, and underreported 
phenomenon in modern medicine. Patients with this syndrome become inebriated and 
may suffer the medical and social implications of alcoholism, including arrest 
for inebriated driving. The pathophysiology of ABS is reportedly due to a fungal 
type dysbiosis of the gut that ferments some carbohydrates into ethanol and may 
mimic a food allergy or intolerance. This syndrome should be considered in 
patients with chronic obstruction or hypomotility presenting with elevated 
breath and blood alcohol concentrations, especially after a high carbohydrate 
intake. A glucose challenge test should be performed as the confirmatory test. 
Treatment typically includes antifungal drugs combined with changes in lifestyle 
and nutrition. Additional studies are particularly needed on the human 
microbiome to shed light on how imbalances of commensal bacteria in the gut 
allow yeast to colonize on a pathological level.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10204637
PMCID: PMC8537665
PMID: 34682761

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that they have no conflict 
of interest. No writing assistance was used in the production of this 
manuscript.