---
reference_id: "PMID:35346573"
title: Inherited variants in CHD3 show variable expressivity in Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome.
authors:
- van der Spek J
- den Hoed J
- Snijders Blok L
- Dingemans AJM
- Schijven D
- Nellaker C
- Venselaar H
- Astuti GDN
- Barakat TS
- Bebin EM
- Beck-Wödl S
- Beunders G
- Brown NJ
- Brunet T
- Brunner HG
- Campeau PM
- Čuturilo G
- Gilissen C
- Haack TB
- Hüning I
- Husain RA
- Kamien B
- Lim SC
- Lovrecic L
- Magg J
- Maver A
- Miranda V
- Monteil DC
- Ockeloen CW
- Pais LS
- Plaiasu V
- Raiti L
- Richmond C
- Rieß A
- Schwaibold EMC
- Simon MEH
- Spranger S
- Tan TY
- Thompson ML
- de Vries BBA
- Wilkins EJ
- Willemsen MH
- Francks C
- Vissers LELM
- Fisher SE
- Kleefstra T
journal: Genet Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.02.014
keywords:
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex/genetics
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited variants in CHD3 show variable expressivity in Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome.
**Authors:** van der Spek J, den Hoed J, Snijders Blok L, Dingemans AJM, Schijven D, Nellaker C, Venselaar H, Astuti GDN, Barakat TS, Bebin EM, Beck-Wödl S, Beunders G, Brown NJ, Brunet T, Brunner HG, Campeau PM, Čuturilo G, Gilissen C, Haack TB, Hüning I, Husain RA, Kamien B, Lim SC, Lovrecic L, Magg J, Maver A, Miranda V, Monteil DC, Ockeloen CW, Pais LS, Plaiasu V, Raiti L, Richmond C, Rieß A, Schwaibold EMC, Simon MEH, Spranger S, Tan TY, Thompson ML, de Vries BBA, Wilkins EJ, Willemsen MH, Francks C, Vissers LELM, Fisher SE, Kleefstra T
**Journal:** Genet Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2022.02.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2022.02.014)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2022 Jun;24(6):1283-1296. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.02.014. Epub 2022
 Mar 26.

Inherited variants in CHD3 show variable expressivity in Snijders Blok-Campeau
syndrome.

van der Spek J(1), den Hoed J(2), Snijders Blok L(3), Dingemans AJM(1), Schijven
D(4), Nellaker C(5), Venselaar H(6), Astuti GDN(7), Barakat TS(8), Bebin EM(9),
Beck-Wödl S(10), Beunders G(11), Brown NJ(12), Brunet T(13), Brunner HG(14),
Campeau PM(15), Čuturilo G(16), Gilissen C(17), Haack TB(10), Hüning I(18),
Husain RA(19), Kamien B(20), Lim SC(21), Lovrecic L(22), Magg J(23), Maver
A(22), Miranda V(15), Monteil DC(24), Ockeloen CW(25), Pais LS(26), Plaiasu
V(27), Raiti L(21), Richmond C(28), Rieß A(10), Schwaibold EMC(29), Simon
MEH(30), Spranger S(31), Tan TY(12), Thompson ML(32), de Vries BBA(1), Wilkins
EJ(21), Willemsen MH(25), Francks C(33), Vissers LELM(1), Fisher SE(33),
Kleefstra T(34).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; International Max Planck Research
School for Language Sciences, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Language and
Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Nuffield Department of Women's and Reproductive Health, University of Oxford,
Women's Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom; Department of
Engineering Science, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom; Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health
Information and Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)Center for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands; Division of Human Genetics, Center for Biomedical Research
(CEBIOR), Faculty of Medicine, Diponegoro University, Semarang, Indonesia.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.
(11)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands.
(12)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Department of Pediatrics, University of
Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Technical University
Munich, Munich, Germany.
(14)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Clinical
Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, GROW School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, and MHeNS School for Mental health and Neuroscience,
Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(15)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Sainte-Justine
Hospital, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(16)University Children's Hospital Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia; Faculty of
Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(17)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands; Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular
Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(18)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(19)Department of Neuropediatrics, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(20)Genetic Services of Western Australia, King Edward Memorial Hospital, Perth,
Western Australia, Australia.
(21)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(22)Clinical Institute for Genomic Medicine, University Medical Center
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(23)Department of Neuropaediatrics, Developmental Neurology, Social Pediatrics,
University Children's Hospital, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(24)Department of Pediatrics, Naval Medical Center Portsmouth, Portsmouth, VA.
(25)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.
(26)Broad Institute Center for Mendelian Genomics, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA.
(27)INSMC Alessandrescu-Rusescu, Regional Center of Medical Genetics Bucharest,
Bucharest, Romania.
(28)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane and
Women's hospital, Herston, Queensland, Australia; School of Medicine, Griffith
University, Southport, Queensland, Australia.
(29)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(30)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.
(31)Praxis für Humangenetik-Bremen, Bremen, Germany.
(32)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL.
(33)Department of Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(34)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Center of Excellence for
Neuropsychiatry, Vincent van Gogh Institute for Psychiatry, Venray, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: Tjitske.Kleefstra@radboudumc.nl.

PURPOSE: Common diagnostic next-generation sequencing strategies are not
optimized to identify inherited variants in genes associated with dominant
neurodevelopmental disorders as causal when the transmitting parent is
clinically unaffected, leaving a significant number of cases with
neurodevelopmental disorders undiagnosed.
METHODS: We characterized 21 families with inherited heterozygous missense or
protein-truncating variants in CHD3, a gene in which de novo variants cause
Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome.
RESULTS: Computational facial and Human Phenotype Ontology-based comparisons
showed that the phenotype of probands with inherited CHD3 variants overlaps with
the phenotype previously associated with de novo CHD3 variants, whereas
heterozygote parents are mildly or not affected, suggesting variable
expressivity. In addition, similarly reduced expression levels of CHD3 protein
in cells of an affected proband and of healthy family members with a CHD3
protein-truncating variant suggested that compensation of expression from the
wild-type allele is unlikely to be an underlying mechanism. Notably, most
inherited CHD3 variants were maternally transmitted.
CONCLUSION: Our results point to a significant role of inherited variation in
Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome, a finding that is critical for correct variant
interpretation and genetic counseling and warrants further investigation toward
understanding the broader contributions of such variation to the landscape of
human disease.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.02.014
PMID: 35346573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest M.L.T. is an employee of
HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology. For D.M., the following statements are
applicable: “Research disclaimer: The views expressed in this article reflect
the results of research conducted by the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the official policy or position of the Department of the Navy, Department of
Defense, or the United States Government. Copyright statement: I am a military
service member. This work was prepared as part of my official duties. Title 17
U.S.C. 105 provides that "Copyright protection under this title is not available
for any work of the United States Government." Title 17 U.S.C. 101 defines a
United States Government work as a work prepared by a military service member or
employee of the United States Government as part of that person’s official
duties.” All other authors declare no conflicts of interest.
