---
reference_id: "PMID:38865810"
title: GABAergic implications in anxiety and related disorders.
authors:
- Arora I
- Mal P
- Arora P
- Paul A
- Kumar M
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2024.150218
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GABAergic implications in anxiety and related disorders.
**Authors:** Arora I, Mal P, Arora P, Paul A, Kumar M
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2024.150218](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2024.150218)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2024 Sep 10;724:150218. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2024.150218. Epub 2024 Jun 3.

GABAergic implications in anxiety and related disorders.

Arora I(1), Mal P(1), Arora P(1), Paul A(1), Kumar M(2).

Author information:
(1)Chitkara College of Pharmacy, Chitkara University, Punjab, India.
(2)Chitkara College of Pharmacy, Chitkara University, Punjab, India. Electronic 
address: manish.kumar@chitkara.edu.in.

Evidence indicates that anxiety disorders arise from an imbalance in the 
functioning of brain circuits that govern the modulation of emotional responses 
to possibly threatening stimuli. The circuits under consideration in this 
context include the amygdala's bottom-up activity, which signifies the existence 
of stimuli that may be seen as dangerous. Moreover, these circuits encompass 
top-down regulatory processes that originate in the prefrontal cortex, 
facilitating the communication of the emotional significance associated with the 
inputs. Diverse databases (e.g., Pubmed, ScienceDirect, Web of Science, Google 
Scholar) were searched for literature using a combination of different terms 
e.g., "anxiety", "stress", "neuroanatomy", and "neural circuits", etc. A 
decrease in GABAergic activity is present in both anxiety disorders and severe 
depression. Research on cerebral functional imaging in depressive individuals 
has shown reduced levels of GABA within the cortical regions. Additionally, 
animal studies demonstrated that a reduction in the expression of GABAA/B 
receptors results in a behavioral pattern resembling anxiety. The amygdala 
consists of inhibitory networks composed of GABAergic interneurons, responsible 
for modulating anxiety responses in both normal and pathological conditions. The 
GABAA receptor has allosteric sites (e.g., α/γ, γ/β, and α/β) which enable 
regulation of neuronal inhibition in the amygdala. These sites serve as 
molecular targets for anxiolytic medications such as benzodiazepine and 
barbiturates. Alterations in the levels of naturally occurring regulators of 
these allosteric sites, along with alterations to the composition of the GABAA 
receptor subunits, could potentially act as mechanisms via which the extent of 
neuronal inhibition is diminished in pathological anxiety disorders.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2024.150218
PMID: 38865810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Authors 
declare none.