---
reference_id: "PMID:29751893"
title: Dynamics of dengue disease with human and vector mobility.
authors:
- Enduri MK
- Jolad S
journal: Spat Spatiotemporal Epidemiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.sste.2018.03.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dynamics of dengue disease with human and vector mobility.
**Authors:** Enduri MK, Jolad S
**Journal:** Spat Spatiotemporal Epidemiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.sste.2018.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sste.2018.03.001)

## Content

1. Spat Spatiotemporal Epidemiol. 2018 Jun;25:57-66. doi: 
10.1016/j.sste.2018.03.001. Epub 2018 Mar 10.

Dynamics of dengue disease with human and vector mobility.

Enduri MK(1), Jolad S(2).

Author information:
(1)Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gandhinagar, Gujarat 380005, 
India. Electronic address: endurimuralikrishna@iitgn.ac.in.
(2)Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gandhinagar, Gujarat 380005, 
India. Electronic address: shiva.jolad@iitgn.ac.in.

Dengue is a vector borne disease transmitted to humans by Aedes aegypti 
mosquitoes carrying virus of different serotypes. Dengue exhibits complex 
spatial and temporal dynamics, influenced by various biological, human and 
environmental factors. In this work, we study the dengue spread for a single 
serotype (DENV-1) including statistical models of human mobility with 
exponential step length distribution, by using reaction-diffusion equations and 
Stochastic Cellular Automata (SCA) approach. We analyze the spatial and temporal 
spreading of the disease using parameters from field studies. We choose mosquito 
density data from Ahmedabad city as a proxy for climate data in our SCA model. 
We find an interesting result that although human mobility makes the infection 
spread faster, there is an apparent early suppression of the epidemic compared 
to immobile humans. The disease extinction time is lesser when human mobility is 
included.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sste.2018.03.001
PMID: 29751893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]