---
reference_id: "PMID:41020477"
title: Novel Pathogenic Biallelic Variants in KIAA0586 Expand the Variant Spectrum of Ciliopathies.
authors:
- Shen Y
- He R
- Lu C
- Wang Z
- Yu Y
- Cao Z
- Luo M
journal: Cytoskeleton (Hoboken)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/cm.70047
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Pathogenic Biallelic Variants in KIAA0586 Expand the Variant Spectrum of Ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Shen Y, He R, Lu C, Wang Z, Yu Y, Cao Z, Luo M
**Journal:** Cytoskeleton (Hoboken) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cm.70047](https://doi.org/10.1002/cm.70047)

## Content

1. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken). 2025 Sep 29. doi: 10.1002/cm.70047. Online ahead of 
print.

Novel Pathogenic Biallelic Variants in KIAA0586 Expand the Variant Spectrum of 
Ciliopathies.

Shen Y(1), He R(2), Lu C(1), Wang Z(3), Yu Y(1), Cao Z(1), Luo M(1).

Author information:
(1)National Human Genetic Resources Center, National Research Institute for 
Family Planning, Beijing, China.
(2)Institute for Translational Medicine on Cell Fate and Disease, Shanghai Ninth 
People's Hospital, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of 
National Ministry of Education, Department of Pathophysiology, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanchang Medical College, Nanchang, 
China.

Joubert syndrome (JBTS) is a group of recessive neurodevelopmental disorders 
classified as a specific type of ciliopathy with genetic heterogeneity. JBTS23, 
a subtype of Joubert syndrome, is caused by variations in the KIAA0586 gene. In 
this study, we report a 9-month-old boy diagnosed with JBTS based on the 
presence of the molar tooth sign in the midbrain and global developmental delay. 
Whole-exome sequencing identified two pathogenic variants in KIAA0586 
(c.3944 T>G and c.3686 + 3A>G), consistent with an autosomal recessive 
inheritance pattern. These findings were confirmed through Sanger sequencing of 
the proband and his parents. This study identifies two novel pathogenic variants 
in KIAA0586, provides a genetic diagnosis for this patient as JBTS23, and 
expands the variant spectrum of KIAA0586 associated with JBTS.

© 2025 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cm.70047
PMID: 41020477