---
reference_id: "PMID:19876934"
title: "The molecular basis of oral-facial-digital syndrome, type 1."
authors:
- Macca M
- Franco B
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.30224
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The molecular basis of oral-facial-digital syndrome, type 1.
**Authors:** Macca M, Franco B
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.30224](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.30224)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2009 Nov 15;151C(4):318-25. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.30224.

The molecular basis of oral-facial-digital syndrome, type 1.

Macca M(1), Franco B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics of the Federico II University of Naples, Italy.

Oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1 (OFDI; OFD1; OMIM 311200) is a rare 
developmental disorder transmitted as an X-linked dominant condition with 
embryonic male lethality. OFD1 is characterized by malformation of the oral 
cavity, face, and digits. Central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities and cystic 
kidney disease can also be part of this condition. This disorder is due to 
mutations in the OFD1 gene that encodes a centrosomal protein localized at the 
basal bodies at the origin of primary cilia. Characterization of in vitro and in 
vivo models demonstrated that, similarly to what described for other ciliary 
proteins, Ofd1 inactivation is associated to defective sonic hedgehog (Shh) and 
canonical Wnt signaling pathways. Functional studies have demonstrated that OFD1 
has a crucial role in the biology of primary cilia thus ascribing this 
pleiotropic disease to the growing number of disorders associated to dysfunction 
of primary cilia. OFD1 shares phenotypic similarities with this latter group of 
disorders, such as cystic kidneys, skeletal, and CNS abnormalities. Future 
studies will address whether all clinical manifestations of these diseases can 
be entirely explained by cilia dysfunction or may also be due to direct roles of 
the proteins involved.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.30224
PMID: 19876934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]