---
reference_id: "PMID:38409970"
title: "Zellweger Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Yogi P
- Bahik C
- Yadav R
- Bhattarai P
- Pandey R
- Manandar SR
journal: JNMA J Nepal Med Assoc
year: '2024'
doi: 10.31729/jnma.8467
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zellweger Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Yogi P, Bahik C, Yadav R, Bhattarai P, Pandey R, Manandar SR
**Journal:** JNMA J Nepal Med Assoc (2024)
**DOI:** [10.31729/jnma.8467](https://doi.org/10.31729/jnma.8467)

## Content

1. JNMA J Nepal Med Assoc. 2024 Feb 24;62(270):155-157. doi: 10.31729/jnma.8467.

Zellweger Syndrome: A Case Report.

Yogi P(1), Bahik C(1), Yadav R(1), Bhattarai P(2), Pandey R(3), Manandar SR(2).

Author information:
(1)Kathmandu Medical College and Teaching Hospital, Sinamangal, Kathmandu, 
Nepal.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Kathmandu Medical College and Teaching Hospital, 
Sinamangal, Kathmandu, Nepal.
(3)Sindhuli Hospital, Kamalamai, Sindhuli, Nepal.

Zellweger syndrome is an autosomal recessive disease within the spectrum of 
peroxisome biogenesis disorder manifesting in the neonatal period with profound 
dysfunction of the central nervous system, liver and kidney. Common clinical 
presentations include hypotonia, seizure, hepatomegaly, craniofacial dysmorphism 
and early death. Mutation in one of the PEX genes coding for a peroxisome 
assembly protein creates a functionally incompetent organelle causing 
accumulation of very long chain fatty acids in various organs. Here we report 
the case of a 5-month-old male presented at birth with hypotonia, poor feeding, 
gross congenital anomalies and later during early infancy with failure to 
thrive, several episodes of seizures, aspiration due to feeding difficulties and 
recurrent severe pneumonia. A whole genomic sequencing brought us to the final 
diagnosis of Zellweger syndrome. Despite an absence of treatment options, prompt 
diagnosis of Zellweger syndrome is important for providing appropriate 
symptomatic care, definitive genetic testing and prenatal counselling.
KEYWORDS: case reports; mutation; neonate; Zellweger syndrome.

DOI: 10.31729/jnma.8467
PMCID: PMC10924519
PMID: 38409970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.