---
reference_id: "PMID:34813854"
title: "Papilledema: A review of etiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management."
authors:
- Xie JS
- Donaldson L
- Margolin E
journal: Surv Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.survophthal.2021.11.007
keywords:
- Acetazolamide
- Humans
- "Intracranial Hypertension/complications, diagnosis"
- Optic Nerve Diseases
- "Papilledema/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- "Pseudotumor Cerebri/complications, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Papilledema: A review of etiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management.
**Authors:** Xie JS, Donaldson L, Margolin E
**Journal:** Surv Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.survophthal.2021.11.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.survophthal.2021.11.007)

## Content

1. Surv Ophthalmol. 2022 Jul-Aug;67(4):1135-1159. doi:
10.1016/j.survophthal.2021.11.007. Epub 2021 Nov 20.

Papilledema: A review of etiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management.

Xie JS(1), Donaldson L(2), Margolin E(3).

Author information:
(1)Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Faculty of Medicine, Department
of Medicine, Division of Neurology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Electronic address: edmargolin@gmail.com.

Papilledema is optic nerve head edema secondary to raised intracranial pressure
(ICP). It is distinct from other causes of optic disk edema in that visual
function is usually normal in the acute phase. Papilledema is caused by
transmission of elevated ICP to the subarachnoid space surrounding the optic
nerve that hinders axoplasmic transport within ganglion cell axons. There is
ongoing controversy as to whether axoplasmic flow stasis is produced by physical
compression of axons or microvascular ischemia. The most common cause of
papilledema, especially in patients under the age of 50, is idiopathic
intracranial hypertension (IIH); however, conditions that decrease cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) outflow by either causing CSF derangements or mechanically blocking
CSF outflow channels, and rarely conditions that increase CSF production, can be
the culprit. When papilledema is suspected clinically, blood pressure should be
measured, and pseudopapilledema should be ruled out. Magnetic resonance imaging
of the brain and orbits with venography sequences is the preferred neuroimaging
modality that should be performed next to look for indirect imaging signs of
increased ICP and to rule out nonidiopathic causes. Lumbar puncture with
measurement of opening pressure and evaluation of CSF composition should then be
performed. In patients not in a typical demographic group for IIH, further
investigations should be conducted to assess for underlying causes of increased
ICP. Magnetic resonance imaging of the neck and spine, magnetic resonance
angiography of the brain, computed tomography of the chest, complete blood
count, and creatinine testing should be able to identify most secondary causes
of intracranial hypertension. Treatment for patients with papilledema should be
targeted toward the underlying etiology. Most patients with IIH respond to
weight loss and oral acetazolamide. For patients with decreased central acuity
and constricted visual fields at presentation, as well as patients who do not
respond to treatment with acetazolamide, surgical treatments should be
considered, with ventriculoperitoneal shunting being the typical procedure of
choice.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.survophthal.2021.11.007
PMID: 34813854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.
