---
reference_id: "PMID:35873859"
title: "Dyspnea in patients with atrial fibrillation: Mechanisms, assessment and an interdisciplinary and integrated care approach."
authors:
- van der Velden RMJ
- Hermans ANL
- Pluymaekers NAHA
- Gawalko M
- Elliott A
- Hendriks JM
- Franssen FME
- Slats AM
- van Empel VPM
- Van Gelder IC
- Thijssen DHJ
- Eijsvogels TMH
- Leue C
- Crijns HJGM
- Linz D
- Simons SO
journal: Int J Cardiol Heart Vasc
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcha.2022.101086
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dyspnea in patients with atrial fibrillation: Mechanisms, assessment and an interdisciplinary and integrated care approach.
**Authors:** van der Velden RMJ, Hermans ANL, Pluymaekers NAHA, Gawalko M, Elliott A, Hendriks JM, Franssen FME, Slats AM, van Empel VPM, Van Gelder IC, Thijssen DHJ, Eijsvogels TMH, Leue C, Crijns HJGM, Linz D, Simons SO
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol Heart Vasc (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcha.2022.101086](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcha.2022.101086)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol Heart Vasc. 2022 Jul 19;42:101086. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcha.2022.101086. eCollection 2022 Oct.

Dyspnea in patients with atrial fibrillation: Mechanisms, assessment and an 
interdisciplinary and integrated care approach.

van der Velden RMJ(1), Hermans ANL(1), Pluymaekers NAHA(1), Gawalko M(1)(2)(3), 
Elliott A(4), Hendriks JM(4)(5), Franssen FME(6)(7)(8), Slats AM(9), van Empel 
VPM(1), Van Gelder IC(10), Thijssen DHJ(11), Eijsvogels TMH(11), Leue C(12)(13), 
Crijns HJGM(1), Linz D(1)(4)(14)(15), Simons SO(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University Medical Centre and 
Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Pharmacology, West German Heart and Vascular Centre, University 
Duisburg-Essen, Germany.
(3)1st Department of Cardiology, Doctoral School, Medical University of Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Centre for Heart Rhythm Disorders, University of Adelaide and Royal Adelaide 
Hospital, Adelaide, Australia.
(5)Caring Futures Institute, College of Nursing and Health Sciences, Flinders 
University, Adelaide, Australia.
(6)Department of Research and Development, Ciro, Horn, the Netherlands.
(7)NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre 
(MUMC+), Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Leiden University Medical Centre (LUMC), 
Leiden, the Netherlands.
(10)Department of Cardiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Physiology, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud 
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre (MUMC+), Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(13)School of Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNS), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(14)Department of Cardiology, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands.
(15)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common sustained heart rhythm disorder and 
is often associated with symptoms that can significantly impact quality of life 
and daily functioning. Palpitations are the cardinal symptom of AF and many AF 
therapies are targeted towards relieving this symptom. However, up to two-third 
of patients also complain of dyspnea as a predominant self-reported symptom. In 
clinical practice it is often challenging to ascertain whether dyspnea 
represents an AF-related symptom or a symptom of concomitant cardiovascular and 
non-cardiovascular comorbidities, since common AF comorbidities such as heart 
failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease share similar symptoms. In 
addition, therapeutic approaches specifically targeting dyspnea have not been 
well validated. Thus, assessing and treating dyspnea can be difficult. This 
review describes the latest knowledge on the burden and pathophysiology of 
dyspnea in AF patients. We discuss the role of heart rhythm control 
interventions as well as the management of AF risk factors and comorbidities 
with the goal to achieve maximal relief of dyspnea. Given the different and 
often complex mechanistic pathways leading to dyspnea, dyspneic AF patients will 
likely profit from an integrated multidisciplinary approach to tackle all 
factors and mechanisms involved. Therefore, we propose an interdisciplinary and 
integrated care pathway for the work-up of dyspnea in AF patients.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcha.2022.101086
PMCID: PMC9304702
PMID: 35873859

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.