---
reference_id: "PMID:30747096"
title: "Fibromyalgia syndrome: under-, over- and misdiagnosis."
authors:
- Häuser W
- Sarzi-Puttini P
- Fitzcharles MA
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2019'
keywords:
- Chronic Disease
- "Chronic Pain/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Diagnostic Errors
- Fatigue
- "Fibromyalgia/diagnosis, psychology"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibromyalgia syndrome: under-, over- and misdiagnosis.
**Authors:** Häuser W, Sarzi-Puttini P, Fitzcharles MA
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2019)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2019 Jan-Feb;37 Suppl 116(1):90-97. Epub 2019 Feb 8.

Fibromyalgia syndrome: under-, over- and misdiagnosis.

Häuser W(1), Sarzi-Puttini P(2), Fitzcharles MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department Internal Medicine 1, Klinikum Saarbrücken, and Department of 
Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Technische Universität München, 
Germany. whaeuser@klinikum-saarbruecken.de.
(2)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Milan, 
Italy.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, McGill University Health Centre, Quebec, Canada and 
Alan Edwards Pain Management Unit, McGill University Health Centre, Quebec, 
Canada.

Fibromyalgia syndrome (FM) is an enigma. During the past three decades, with the 
gradual acceptance of the validity of FM, it is variously under-, over and 
misdiagnosed. Evidence-based interdisciplinary guidelines have suggested a 
comprehensive clinical assessment to avoid this diagnostic conundrum. Every 
patient with chronic pain should be screened for chronic widespread pain (pain 
in four of five body regions) (CWP). Those with CWP should be screened for 
presence of additional major symptoms of FM: unrefreshed sleep and fatigue. A 
complete medical (including drug) history and complete physical examination is 
mandatory in the evaluation of a patient with CWP in order to consolidate the 
diagnosis of FM or identify features that may point to some other condition that 
may have a presentation similar to FM. Limited simple laboratory testing is 
recommended to screen for possible other diseases. The 2016 criteria may be used 
to further confirm the clinical diagnosis of FM. In consideration of the 
differential diagnosis of FM, attention should be paid to the presence of other 
chronic overlapping pain conditions and of mental disorders. FM as a stand alone 
diagnosis is however rare, as most patients with FM meet criteria for other 
chronic overlapping pain conditions or mental disorders. The severity of FM 
should be assessed in order to direct treatment approaches and help inform the 
likely outcome for an individual patient.

PMID: 30747096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]