---
reference_id: "PMID:25112865"
title: "Deferiprone in Friedreich ataxia: a 6-month randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- Pandolfo M
- Arpa J
- Delatycki MB
- Le Quan Sang KH
- Mariotti C
- Munnich A
- Sanz-Gallego I
- Tai G
- Tarnopolsky MA
- Taroni F
- Spino M
- Tricta F
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ana.24248
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Deferiprone
- Disability Evaluation
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Double-Blind Method
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- "Friedreich Ataxia/blood, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Iron Chelating Agents/therapeutic use
- Male
- Pyridones/therapeutic use
- Severity of Illness Index
- Treatment Outcome
- "Ventricular Function, Left/physiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deferiprone in Friedreich ataxia: a 6-month randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** Pandolfo M, Arpa J, Delatycki MB, Le Quan Sang KH, Mariotti C, Munnich A, Sanz-Gallego I, Tai G, Tarnopolsky MA, Taroni F, Spino M, Tricta F
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.24248](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.24248)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2014 Oct;76(4):509-21. doi: 10.1002/ana.24248. Epub 2014 Aug 30.

Deferiprone in Friedreich ataxia: a 6-month randomized controlled trial.

Pandolfo M(1), Arpa J, Delatycki MB, Le Quan Sang KH, Mariotti C, Munnich A,
Sanz-Gallego I, Tai G, Tarnopolsky MA, Taroni F, Spino M, Tricta F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, Belgium.

OBJECTIVE: We conducted a 6-month, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study to assess safety, tolerability, and efficacy of deferiprone in Friedreich
ataxia (FRDA).
METHODS: Seventy-two patients were treated with deferiprone 20, 40, or
60mg/kg/day or placebo, divided into 2 daily doses. Safety was the primary
objective; secondary objectives included standardized neurological assessments
(Friedreich Ataxia Rating Scale [FARS], International Cooperative Ataxia Rating
Scale [ICARS], 9-Hole Peg Test [9HPT], Timed 25-Foot Walk, Low-Contrast Letter
Acuity), general functional status (Activities of Daily Living), and cardiac
assessments.
RESULTS: Deferiprone was well tolerated at 20mg/kg/day, whereas more adverse
events occurred in the 40mg/kg/day than in the placebo group. The 60mg/kg/day
dose was discontinued due to worsening of ataxia in 2 patients. One patient on
deferiprone 20mg/kg/day experienced reversible neutropenia, but none developed
agranulocytosis. Deferiprone-treated patients receiving 20 or 40mg/kg/day showed
a decline in the left ventricular mass index, compared to an increase in the
placebo-treated patients. Patients receiving 20mg/kg/day of deferiprone had no
significant change in FARS, similar to the placebo-treated patients, whereas
those receiving 40mg/kg/day had worsening in FARS and ICARS scores. The lack of
deterioration in the placebo arm impaired the ability to detect any potential
protective effect of deferiprone. However, subgroup analyses in patients with
less severe disease suggested a benefit of deferiprone 20mg/kg/day on ICARS,
FARS, kinetic function, and 9HPT.
INTERPRETATION: This study demonstrated an acceptable safety profile of
deferiprone at 20mg/kg/day for the treatment of patients with FRDA. Subgroup
analyses raise the possibility that, in patients with less severe disease,
deferiprone 20mg/kg/day may reduce disease progression, whereas higher doses
appear to worsen ataxia.

© 2014 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.24248
PMID: 25112865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
