---
reference_id: "PMID:38534520"
title: "Knee Joint Preservation in Tactical Athletes: A Comprehensive Approach Based upon Lesion Location and Restoration of the Osteochondral Unit."
authors:
- Cognetti DJ
- Defoor MT
- Yuan TT
- Sheean AJ
journal: Bioengineering (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/bioengineering11030246
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Knee Joint Preservation in Tactical Athletes: A Comprehensive Approach Based upon Lesion Location and Restoration of the Osteochondral Unit.
**Authors:** Cognetti DJ, Defoor MT, Yuan TT, Sheean AJ
**Journal:** Bioengineering (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/bioengineering11030246](https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering11030246)

## Content

1. Bioengineering (Basel). 2024 Mar 1;11(3):246. doi: 
10.3390/bioengineering11030246.

Knee Joint Preservation in Tactical Athletes: A Comprehensive Approach Based 
upon Lesion Location and Restoration of the Osteochondral Unit.

Cognetti DJ(1), Defoor MT(1), Yuan TT(2)(3), Sheean AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Brooke Army Medical Center, 3551 Roger 
Brooke Drive, San Antonio, TX 78234, USA.
(2)Advanced Exposures Diagnostics, Interventions and Biosecurity Group, 59 
Medical Wing, Lackland Air Force Base, San Antonio, TX 78236, USA.
(3)Center for Biotechnology (4D Bio3), Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

The unique physical demands of tactical athletes put immense stress on the knee 
joint, making these individuals susceptible to injury. In order to ensure 
operational readiness, management options must restore and preserve the native 
architecture and minimize downtime, while optimizing functionality. 
Osteochondral lesions (OCL) of the knee have long been acknowledged as 
significant sources of knee pain and functional deficits. The management of OCL 
is predicated on certain injury characteristics, including lesion location and 
the extent of subchondral disease. Techniques such as marrow stimulation, 
allograft and autologous chondrocyte implantation are examined in detail, with a 
focus on their application and suitability in tactical athlete populations. 
Moreover, the restoration of the osteochondral unit (OCU) is highlighted as a 
central aspect of knee joint preservation. The discussion encompasses the 
biomechanical considerations and outcomes associated with various cartilage 
restoration techniques. Factors influencing procedure selection, including 
lesion size, location, and patient-specific variables, are thoroughly examined. 
Additionally, the review underscores the critical role of post-operative 
rehabilitation and conditioning programs in optimizing outcomes. Strengthening 
the surrounding musculature, enhancing joint stability, and refining movement 
patterns are paramount in facilitating the successful integration of 
preservation procedures. This narrative review aims to provide a comprehensive 
resource for surgeons, engineers, and sports medicine practitioners engaged in 
the care of tactical athletes and the field of cartilage restoration. The 
integration of advanced preservation techniques and tailored rehabilitation 
protocols offers a promising avenue for sustaining knee joint health and 
function in this demanding population.

DOI: 10.3390/bioengineering11030246
PMCID: PMC10967907
PMID: 38534520

Conflict of interest statement: The opinions and assertions expressed herein are 
those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of the 
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Brooke Army Medical 
Center, the 59th Medical Wing, the Defense Health Agency, the Department of 
Defense, nor any agencies under the U.S. Government. This work was prepared by a 
military or civilian employee of the U.S. Government as part of the individual’s 
official duties and therefore is in the public domain and does not possess 
copyright protection (public domain information may be freely distributed and 
copied; however, as a courtesy it is requested that the Uniformed Services 
University and the author be given an appropriate acknowledgement).