---
reference_id: "PMID:30254215"
title: "Novel calcineurin A (PPP3CA) variant associated with epilepsy, constitutive enzyme activation and downregulation of protein expression."
authors:
- Rydzanicz M
- Wachowska M
- Cook EC
- Lisowski P
- Kuźniewska B
- Szymańska K
- Diecke S
- Prigione A
- Szczałuba K
- Szybińska A
- Koppolu A
- Murcia Pienkowski V
- Kosińska J
- Wiweger M
- Kostrzewa G
- Brzozowska M
- Domańska-Pakieła D
- Jurkiewicz E
- Stawiński P
- Gromadka A
- Zielenkiewicz P
- Demkow U
- Dziembowska M
- Kuźnicki J
- Creamer TP
- Płoski R
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-018-0254-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel calcineurin A (PPP3CA) variant associated with epilepsy, constitutive enzyme activation and downregulation of protein expression.
**Authors:** Rydzanicz M, Wachowska M, Cook EC, Lisowski P, Kuźniewska B, Szymańska K, Diecke S, Prigione A, Szczałuba K, Szybińska A, Koppolu A, Murcia Pienkowski V, Kosińska J, Wiweger M, Kostrzewa G, Brzozowska M, Domańska-Pakieła D, Jurkiewicz E, Stawiński P, Gromadka A, Zielenkiewicz P, Demkow U, Dziembowska M, Kuźnicki J, Creamer TP, Płoski R
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-018-0254-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-018-0254-8)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2019 Jan;27(1):61-69. doi: 10.1038/s41431-018-0254-8. Epub
2018  Sep 25.

Novel calcineurin A (PPP3CA) variant associated with epilepsy, constitutive 
enzyme activation and downregulation of protein expression.

Rydzanicz M(1), Wachowska M(2), Cook EC(3), Lisowski P(4)(5), Kuźniewska B(6), 
Szymańska K(7), Diecke S(5), Prigione A(5), Szczałuba K(1), Szybińska A(8), 
Koppolu A(1)(9), Murcia Pienkowski V(1)(9), Kosińska J(1), Wiweger M(8), 
Kostrzewa G(1), Brzozowska M(10), Domańska-Pakieła D(11), Jurkiewicz E(12), 
Stawiński P(1), Gromadka A(13), Zielenkiewicz P(13), Demkow U(2), Dziembowska 
M(6), Kuźnicki J(8), Creamer TP(3), Płoski R(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Laboratory Diagnostics and Clinical Immunology of Developmental 
Age, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Center for Structural Biology and Department of Molecular & Cellular 
Biochemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, USA.
(4)Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding of the Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Jastrzębiec, Poland.
(5)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC) in the Helmholtz 
Association, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Department of Experimental and Clinical Neuropathology, Mossakowski Medical 
Research Center, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(8)International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(9)Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(10)Department of Forensic Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(11)Department of Child Neurology and Epileptology, The Children's Memorial 
Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(12)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(13)Department of Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(14)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland. rploski@wp.pl.

PPP3CA encodes calmodulin-binding catalytic subunit of calcineurin, a 
ubiquitously expressed calcium/calmodulin-regulated protein phosphatase. 
Recently de novo PPP3CA variants were reported as a cause of disease in 12 
subjects presenting with epileptic encephalopathy and dysmorphic features. We 
describe a boy with similar phenotype and severe early onset epileptic 
encephalopathy in whom a novel de novo c.1324C>T (p.(Gln442Ter)) PPP3CA variant 
was found by whole exome sequencing. Western blot experiments in patient's cells 
(EBV transformed lymphocytes and neuronal cells derived through reprogramming) 
indicate that despite normal mRNA abundance the protein expression level is 
strongly reduced both for the mutated and wild-type protein. By in vitro studies 
with recombinant protein expressed in E. coli we show that c.1324C>T 
(p.(Gln442Ter)) results in constitutive activation of the enzyme. Our results 
confirm the role of PPP3CA defects in pathogenesis of a distinct 
neurodevelopmental disorder including severe epilepsy and dysmorphism and 
provide further functional clues regarding the pathogenic mechanism.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-018-0254-8
PMCID: PMC6303256
PMID: 30254215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.