---
reference_id: "PMID:36726161"
title: C1-inhibitor/C1-inhibitor antibody complexes in acquired angioedema due to C1-inhibitor deficiency.
authors:
- Polai Z
- Kajdacsi E
- Cervenak L
- Balla Z
- Benedek S
- Varga L
- Farkas H
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02625-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Angioedema/diagnosis
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/diagnosis"
- Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein
- Autoantibodies
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C1-inhibitor/C1-inhibitor antibody complexes in acquired angioedema due to C1-inhibitor deficiency.
**Authors:** Polai Z, Kajdacsi E, Cervenak L, Balla Z, Benedek S, Varga L, Farkas H
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02625-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02625-5)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Feb 1;18(1):24. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02625-5.

C1-inhibitor/C1-inhibitor antibody complexes in acquired angioedema due to 
C1-inhibitor deficiency.

Polai Z(1), Kajdacsi E(2), Cervenak L(2), Balla Z(1), Benedek S(2), Varga L(1), 
Farkas H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Hungarian Angioedema Center 
of Reference and Excellence, Semmelweis University, Szentkiralyi u. 46, 
Budapest, 1088, Hungary.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Hungarian Angioedema Center 
of Reference and Excellence, Semmelweis University, Szentkiralyi u. 46, 
Budapest, 1088, Hungary. farkas.henriette@med.semmelweis-univ.hu.

BACKGROUND: Autoantibodies against C1-inhibitor (C1-INH-Ab) have a diagnostic 
value in acquired angioedema due to C1-inhibitor deficiency (C1-INH-AAE), even 
though antibodies can circulate in complexes, which can be undetectable by 
proven methods. Our aim was to measure C1-INH/C1-INH-Ab complexes (CAC) and 
investigate their connection to C1-INH-Ab and the changes in their titer over 
time.
RESULTS: 19 patients were diagnosed with C1-INH-AAE in the Hungarian Angioedema 
Center of Reference and Excellence; 79% of them had an underlying disease. 
Samples were examined with a newly developed in-house complex ELISA method. 
Patients with high C1-INH-Ab titer had a CAC titer which did not exceed the 
normal level and the ones with high CAC titer had a C1-INH-Ab titer which did 
not exceed the normal level. In case of those patients who had C1-INH-Ab and CAC 
of the same type of immunoglobulin, the increasing titer of C1-INH-Ab went 
together with the decreasing level of CAC and vice versa. CAC titer was already 
increased before the diagnosis of the underlying disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Free circulating and complex antibodies are in a dynamically 
changing equilibrium. CAC measurements can help to predict the development of an 
underlying disease. The efficiency of the treatment for underlying disease can 
be monitored by the decreasing CAC titers. Our results show that the CAC can be 
of important additional information besides the complement panel examination in 
case of C1-INH-AAE. Measurement of CAC is recommended to be done parallelly with 
C1-INH-Ab, so as to detect both free and bound antibodies.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02625-5
PMCID: PMC9890765
PMID: 36726161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H. Farkas has received honoraria and travel 
grants from CSL Behring, Shire/Takeda, Swedish Orphan Biovitrum, Octapharma, 
Kalvista and Pharming; and/or served as a consultant for these companies and has 
participated in clinical trials/ registries for BioCryst, CSL Behring, Pharming, 
Pharvaris and Shire. Zs. Balla has participated in clinical trials of CSL 
Behring, Pharvaris and Takeda. The other authors have declared that no conflict 
of interest exists.