---
reference_id: "PMID:37279093"
title: A Bifunctional PARP-HDAC Inhibitor with Activity in Ewing Sarcoma.
authors:
- Ramos L
- Truong S
- Zhai B
- Joshi J
- Ghaidi F
- Lizardo MM
- Shyp T
- Kung SHY
- Rezakhanlou AM
- Oo HZ
- Adomat H
- Le Bihan S
- Collins C
- Bacha J
- Brown D
- Langlands J
- Shen W
- Lallous N
- Sorensen PH
- Daugaard M
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-3897
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/pathology"
- "Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Vorinostat/therapeutic use
- Puma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Bifunctional PARP-HDAC Inhibitor with Activity in Ewing Sarcoma.
**Authors:** Ramos L, Truong S, Zhai B, Joshi J, Ghaidi F, Lizardo MM, Shyp T, Kung SHY, Rezakhanlou AM, Oo HZ, Adomat H, Le Bihan S, Collins C, Bacha J, Brown D, Langlands J, Shen W, Lallous N, Sorensen PH, Daugaard M
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-3897](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-3897)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2023 Sep 1;29(17):3541-3553. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-3897.

A Bifunctional PARP-HDAC Inhibitor with Activity in Ewing Sarcoma.

Ramos L(#)(1)(2)(3), Truong S(#)(2)(3), Zhai B(1)(2)(3), Joshi J(2)(3), Ghaidi
F(2)(3), Lizardo MM(4), Shyp T(4)(5), Kung SHY(2), Rezakhanlou AM(2), Oo HZ(2),
Adomat H(2), Le Bihan S(2), Collins C(1)(2), Bacha J(3), Brown D(3), Langlands
J(3), Shen W(3), Lallous N(1)(2), Sorensen PH(4)(5), Daugaard M(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Rakovina Therapeutics, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition has been shown to induce
pharmacologic "BRCAness" in cancer cells with proficient DNA repair activity.
This provides a rationale for exploring combination treatments with HDAC and
PARP inhibition in cancer types that are insensitive to single-agent PARP
inhibitors (PARPi). Here, we report the concept and characterization of a novel
bifunctional PARPi (kt-3283) with dual activity toward PARP1/2 and HDAC enzymes
in Ewing sarcoma cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Inhibition of PARP1/2 and HDAC was measured using PARP1/2,
HDAC activity, and PAR formation assays. Cytotoxicity was assessed by IncuCyte
live cell imaging, CellTiter-Glo, and spheroid assays. Cell-cycle profiles were
determined using propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry. DNA damage was
examined by γH2AX expression and comet assay. Inhibition of metastatic potential
by kt-3283 was evaluated via ex vivo pulmonary metastasis assay (PuMA).
RESULTS: Compared with FDA-approved PARP (olaparib) and HDAC (vorinostat)
inhibitors, kt-3283 displayed enhanced cytotoxicity in Ewing sarcoma models. The
kt-3283-induced cytotoxicity was associated with strong S and G2-M cell-cycle
arrest in nanomolar concentration range and elevated DNA damage as assessed by
γH2AX tracking and comet assays. In three-dimensional spheroid models of Ewing
sarcoma, kt-3283 showed efficacy in lower concentrations than olaparib and
vorinostat, and kt-3283 inhibited colonization of Ewing sarcoma cells in the ex
vivo PuMA model.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate the preclinical justification for studying the
benefit of dual PARP and HDAC inhibition in the treatment of Ewing sarcoma in a
clinical trial and provides proof-of-concept for a bifunctional single-molecule
therapeutic strategy.

©2023 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-3897
PMCID: PMC10472104
PMID: 37279093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
