---
reference_id: PMID:28881893
title: C-reactive protein to albumin ratio is a prognostic factor for patients with cStage II/III esophageal squamous cell cancer.
authors:
- Otowa Y
- Nakamura T
- Yamamoto M
- Kanaji S
- Matsuda Y
- Matsuda T
- Oshikiri T
- Sumi Y
- Suzuki S
- Kakeji Y
journal: Dis Esophagus
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/dote/dox107
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C-reactive protein to albumin ratio is a prognostic factor for patients with cStage II/III esophageal squamous cell cancer.
**Authors:** Otowa Y, Nakamura T, Yamamoto M, Kanaji S, Matsuda Y, Matsuda T, Oshikiri T, Sumi Y, Suzuki S, Kakeji Y
**Journal:** Dis Esophagus (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/dote/dox107](https://doi.org/10.1093/dote/dox107)

## Content

1. Dis Esophagus. 2017 Dec 1;30(12):1-5. doi: 10.1093/dote/dox107.

C-reactive protein to albumin ratio is a prognostic factor for patients with 
cStage II/III esophageal squamous cell cancer.

Otowa Y(1)(2), Nakamura T(1), Yamamoto M(1), Kanaji S(1), Matsuda Y(1), Matsuda 
T(1), Oshikiri T(1), Sumi Y(1), Suzuki S(1), Kakeji Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Kobe University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe.
(2)Department of Surgery, Shiso Municipal Hospital, Shiso, Hyogo, Japan.

C-reactive protein to albumin (CRP/Alb) ratio, a novel inflammation-based 
prognostic score, was first developed as a prognostic score for septic patients. 
Recent reports show that CRP/Alb ratio is also a prognostic score for cancer 
patients, including esophageal cancer. However, the role of CRP/Alb ratio for 
those with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) and the changes of CRP/Alb ratio 
around NAC have never been discussed. The aim of this study is to evaluate the 
significance of CRP/Alb ratio around NAC for patients with cStage II/III 
esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC). A total of 149 patients who were 
diagnosed as cStage II/III ESCC were enrolled between February 2007 and December 
2014. We retrospectively investigated the relation between pre-NAC and post-NAC 
CRP/Alb ratio and short and long outcomes. The optimal cutoff level for pre-NAC 
and post-NAC CRP/Alb ratio was 0.030 and 0.048, respectively. There was no 
relation between CRP/Alb ratio level and postoperative outcomes. Post-NAC 
CRP/Alb ratio < 0.048 had a significantly higher overall survival rate than 
CRP/Alb ratio ≥0.048 (P< 0.001). Univariate analysis showed that cT, cN, pre-NAC 
CRP/Alb ratio < 0.030 and post-NAC CRP/Alb ratio < 0.048 was prognostic factors 
(P= 0.003, P= 0.022, P= 0.033, and P< 0.001, respectively). Multivariate 
analysis showed that cT and post-NAC CRP/Alb ratio < 0.048 was independent 
prognostic factors (P= 0.030 and P< 0.001, respectively). Post-NAC CRP/Alb ratio 
is an independent prognostic factor in patients with cStage II/III ESCC.

© The Authors 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/dote/dox107
PMID: 28881893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]