---
reference_id: "PMID:18032763"
title: Lenalidomide plus dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma in North America.
authors:
- Weber DM
- Chen C
- Niesvizky R
- Wang M
- Belch A
- Stadtmauer EA
- Siegel D
- Borrello I
- Rajkumar SV
- Chanan-Khan AA
- Lonial S
- Yu Z
- Patin J
- Olesnyckyj M
- Zeldis JB
- Knight RD
- Multiple Myeloma (009) Study Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa070596
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lenalidomide plus dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma in North America.
**Authors:** Weber DM, Chen C, Niesvizky R, Wang M, Belch A, Stadtmauer EA, Siegel D, Borrello I, Rajkumar SV, Chanan-Khan AA, Lonial S, Yu Z, Patin J, Olesnyckyj M, Zeldis JB, Knight RD, Multiple Myeloma (009) Study Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa070596](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa070596)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2007 Nov 22;357(21):2133-42. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa070596.

Lenalidomide plus dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma in North America.

Weber DM(1), Chen C, Niesvizky R, Wang M, Belch A, Stadtmauer EA, Siegel D, 
Borrello I, Rajkumar SV, Chanan-Khan AA, Lonial S, Yu Z, Patin J, Olesnyckyj M, 
Zeldis JB, Knight RD; Multiple Myeloma (009) Study Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 
77030, USA. dmweber@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2007 Nov 22;357(21):2183-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe078203.
    Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2008 Jul;5(7):372-3. doi: 10.1038/ncponc1138.

BACKGROUND: Lenalidomide, an oral immunomodulatory drug that is similar to 
thalidomide but has a different safety profile, has clinical activity in 
relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma.
METHODS: Patients in the United States and Canada who had received at least one 
previous therapy for multiple myeloma but who required additional treatment were 
randomly assigned to receive either 25 mg of lenalidomide or placebo on days 1 
to 21 of a 28-day cycle. Both groups also received 40 mg of oral dexamethasone 
on days 1 to 4, 9 to 12, and 17 to 20 for the first four cycles. After the 
fourth cycle, 40 mg of dexamethasone was administered only on days 1 to 4. 
Safety, clinical response, time to progression, and overall survival were 
assessed.
RESULTS: We assigned 177 patients to the lenalidomide group and 176 to the 
placebo group. Complete, near-complete, or partial responses occurred in 108 
patients (61.0%) in the lenalidomide group and in 35 patients (19.9%) in the 
placebo group (P<0.001); complete responses occurred in 14.1% and 0.6%, 
respectively (P<0.001). The median time to progression was 11.1 months in the 
lenalidomide group and 4.7 months in the placebo group (P<0.001). Median overall 
survival times in the two groups were 29.6 months and 20.2 months, respectively 
(P<0.001). Grade 3 or 4 adverse events were reported in 85.3% of the 
lenalidomide group and in 73.1% of the placebo group; these events resulted in 
study discontinuation in 19.8% and 10.2%, respectively. Grade 3 or 4 neutropenia 
and venous thromboembolism were more common in the lenalidomide group than in 
the placebo group (41.2% vs. 4.6% and 14.7% vs. 3.4%, respectively; P<0.001 for 
both comparisons).
CONCLUSIONS: Lenalidomide plus dexamethasone is superior to placebo plus 
dexamethasone in patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. 
(ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00056160 [ClinicalTrials.gov].).

Copyright 2007 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa070596
PMID: 18032763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]