---
reference_id: "PMID:33981680"
title: "Common and Rare Histological Variants of Hepatoblastoma in Children: A Pathological Diagnosis and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Bharti S
- Bharti JN
- Sinha A
- Yadav T
journal: Gastrointest Tumors
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000512236
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Common and Rare Histological Variants of Hepatoblastoma in Children: A Pathological Diagnosis and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Bharti S, Bharti JN, Sinha A, Yadav T
**Journal:** Gastrointest Tumors (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000512236](https://doi.org/10.1159/000512236)

## Content

1. Gastrointest Tumors. 2021 Apr;8(2):41-46. doi: 10.1159/000512236. Epub 2021
Feb  4.

Common and Rare Histological Variants of Hepatoblastoma in Children: A 
Pathological Diagnosis and Review of the Literature.

Bharti S(1), Bharti JN(1), Sinha A(2), Yadav T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur, 
India.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Jodhpur, India.
(3)Department of Radiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur, 
India.

Hepatoblastoma (HB) is a rare tumor, but it is the most common primary liver 
malignancy in children and comprised of approximately 1% of all pediatric 
malignancies. Mostly, this tumor is sporadic in nature but can show a syndrome 
association. Upregulation in Wnt/β-catenin pathway can be there in 70-80% cases 
of HB. Most often present as abdominal mass and has a raised alpha-fetoprotein 
levels. Distant metastasis usually occurs in the lungs. HB is classified into 2 
broad categories: epithelial and mesenchymal type. The majority of HB are 
epithelial type. The HB must be distinguished from focal nodular hyperplasia, 
hepatocellular adenoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma, while small-cell 
undifferentiated HB from the malignant rhabdoid tumor. The histomorphology and 
immunohistochemistry are essential for the diagnosis of different HB. The 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgery is the mainstay of the treatment. 
The 2 well-established prognostic factors of HB are stage and histological type. 
Herein, we report a case series of common and rare histological variants of HB.

Copyright © 2021 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000512236
PMCID: PMC8077668
PMID: 33981680

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest regarding the 
publication of this article.