---
reference_id: "PMID:40487370"
title: Recent advances in pathogenetic concepts and disease modeling of IgA nephropathy.
authors:
- Dreher L
- Nilges L
- Wiech T
- Rinschen MM
- Tomas NM
journal: Clin Kidney J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfaf152
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in pathogenetic concepts and disease modeling of IgA nephropathy.
**Authors:** Dreher L, Nilges L, Wiech T, Rinschen MM, Tomas NM
**Journal:** Clin Kidney J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ckj/sfaf152](https://doi.org/10.1093/ckj/sfaf152)

## Content

1. Clin Kidney J. 2025 May 16;18(6):sfaf152. doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfaf152.
eCollection  2025 Jun.

Recent advances in pathogenetic concepts and disease modeling of IgA
nephropathy.

Dreher L(1)(2), Nilges L(1)(2), Wiech T(2)(3), Rinschen MM(1)(2)(4), Tomas
NM(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)III. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Hamburg Center for Kidney Health (HCKH), University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology, Nephropathology Section, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Hamburg Center for Translational Immunology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

IgA nephropathy (IgAN) is the most common form of glomerulonephritis and
affected patients are at high risk of developing kidney failure over time.
Recent molecular studies have led to substantial new insights into the
pathogenesis of IgAN. This involves the identification of genetic risk factors
in genome-wide association studies, the use of multi-omics approaches to
integrate big data, the recognition of the importance of the gut-kidney axis,
the role of plasma cells in the production of IgA and IgG, the potential
specificity of circulating IgA for mesangial antigens, and the activation of the
complement system with subsequent damage to glomerular cells. These fundamental
insights were governed by the use of various animal models involving mesangial
deposition of IgA, inflammation and glomerular injury. This review summarizes
recently identified pathophysiological mechanisms as well as animal models of
IgAN and provides an updated view on the molecular events that underlie IgAN.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ckj/sfaf152
PMCID: PMC12142002
PMID: 40487370

Conflict of interest statement: NMT reports consulting fees from Merida
Bioscience and honoraria from CSL Vifor, AstraZeneca and StreamedUp. All other
authors report no conflict of interest.
