---
reference_id: PMID:25541840
title: Association between missense mutations in the BBS2 gene and nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa.
authors:
- Shevach E
- Ali M
- Mizrahi-Meissonnier L
- McKibbin M
- El-Asrag M
- Watson CM
- Inglehearn CF
- Ben-Yosef T
- Blumenfeld A
- Jalas C
- Banin E
- Sharon D
journal: JAMA Ophthalmol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.5251
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electrooculography
- Electroretinography
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Genotyping Techniques
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Proteins/genetics
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between missense mutations in the BBS2 gene and nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Shevach E, Ali M, Mizrahi-Meissonnier L, McKibbin M, El-Asrag M, Watson CM, Inglehearn CF, Ben-Yosef T, Blumenfeld A, Jalas C, Banin E, Sharon D
**Journal:** JAMA Ophthalmol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.5251](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.5251)

## Content

1. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015 Mar;133(3):312-8. doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.5251.

Association between missense mutations in the BBS2 gene and nonsyndromic 
retinitis pigmentosa.

Shevach E(1), Ali M(2), Mizrahi-Meissonnier L(1), McKibbin M(2), El-Asrag M(2), 
Watson CM(2), Inglehearn CF(2), Ben-Yosef T(3), Blumenfeld A(1), Jalas C(4), 
Banin E(1), Sharon D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Section of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Leeds Institute of Biomedical and 
Clinical Sciences, St James's University Hospital, Leeds, England.
(3)Department of Genetics, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research Institute, 
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Center for Rare Jewish Genetic Disorders, Brooklyn, New York.

IMPORTANCE: A large number of genes can cause inherited retinal degenerations 
when mutated. It is important to identify the cause of disease for a better 
disease prognosis and a possible gene-specific therapeutic intervention.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the cause of disease in families with nonsyndromic 
retinitis pigmentosa.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Patients and family members were recruited 
for the study and underwent clinical evaluation and genetic analyses.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Identification of sequence variants in genes using 
next-generation sequencing.
RESULTS: We performed exome sequencing for 4 families, which was followed by 
Sanger sequencing of the identified mutations in 120 ethnicity-matched patients. 
In total, we identified 4 BBS2 missense mutations that cause nonsyndromic 
retinitis pigmentosa. Three siblings of Moroccan Jewish ancestry were compound 
heterozygotes for p.A33D and p.P134R, and 6 patients belonging to 4 families of 
Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry were homozygous for either p.D104A or p.R632P, or 
compound heterozygous for these 2 mutations. The mutations cosegregated with 
retinitis pigmentosa in the studied families, and the affected amino acid 
residues are evolutionarily conserved.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Our study shows that BBS2 mutations can cause 
nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa and highlights yet another candidate for this 
genetically heterogeneous condition.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.5251
PMID: 25541840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]