---
reference_id: "PMID:26749309"
title: Autosomal-Dominant Corneal Endothelial Dystrophies CHED1 and PPCD1 Are Allelic Disorders Caused by Non-coding Mutations in the Promoter of OVOL2.
authors:
- Davidson AE
- Liskova P
- Evans CJ
- Dudakova L
- Nosková L
- Pontikos N
- Hartmannová H
- Hodaňová K
- Stránecký V
- Kozmík Z
- Levis HJ
- Idigo N
- Sasai N
- Maher GJ
- Bellingham J
- Veli N
- Ebenezer ND
- Cheetham ME
- Daniels JT
- Thaung CM
- Jirsova K
- Plagnol V
- Filipec M
- Kmoch S
- Tuft SJ
- Hardcastle AJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.11.018
keywords:
- Alleles
- Base Sequence
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/genetics"
- DNA
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- "Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal-Dominant Corneal Endothelial Dystrophies CHED1 and PPCD1 Are Allelic Disorders Caused by Non-coding Mutations in the Promoter of OVOL2.
**Authors:** Davidson AE, Liskova P, Evans CJ, Dudakova L, Nosková L, Pontikos N, Hartmannová H, Hodaňová K, Stránecký V, Kozmík Z, Levis HJ, Idigo N, Sasai N, Maher GJ, Bellingham J, Veli N, Ebenezer ND, Cheetham ME, Daniels JT, Thaung CM, Jirsova K, Plagnol V, Filipec M, Kmoch S, Tuft SJ, Hardcastle AJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.11.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.11.018)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Jan 7;98(1):75-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.11.018. Epub 
2015 Dec 31.

Autosomal-Dominant Corneal Endothelial Dystrophies CHED1 and PPCD1 Are Allelic 
Disorders Caused by Non-coding Mutations in the Promoter of OVOL2.

Davidson AE(1), Liskova P(2), Evans CJ(1), Dudakova L(3), Nosková L(3), Pontikos 
N(4), Hartmannová H(3), Hodaňová K(3), Stránecký V(3), Kozmík Z(5), Levis HJ(1), 
Idigo N(1), Sasai N(1), Maher GJ(6), Bellingham J(1), Veli N(7), Ebenezer ND(1), 
Cheetham ME(1), Daniels JT(1), Thaung CM(8), Jirsova K(3), Plagnol V(9), Filipec 
M(10), Kmoch S(3), Tuft SJ(8), Hardcastle AJ(11).

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK.
(2)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK; Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Ke 
Karlovu 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic; Department of Ophthalmology, First 
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General University 
Hospital in Prague, U Nemocnice 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic. Electronic 
address: petra.liskova@lf1.cuni.cz.
(3)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Ke 
Karlovu 2, Prague 128 08, Czech Republic.
(4)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK; UCL Genetics Institute, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(5)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Vídeňská 1083, Prague 142 20, Czech 
Republic.
(6)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.
(7)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London EC1V 2PD, UK.
(8)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK; Moorfields Eye Hospital, London EC1V 2PD, UK.
(9)UCL Genetics Institute, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(10)European Eye Clinic Lexum, Antala Staška 1670/80, Prague 140 00, Czech 
Republic.
(11)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London EC1V 9EL, 
UK. Electronic address: a.hardcastle@ucl.ac.uk.

Congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy 1 (CHED1) and posterior polymorphous 
corneal dystrophy 1 (PPCD1) are autosomal-dominant corneal endothelial 
dystrophies that have been genetically mapped to overlapping loci on the short 
arm of chromosome 20. We combined genetic and genomic approaches to identify the 
cause of disease in extensive pedigrees comprising over 100 affected 
individuals. After exclusion of pathogenic coding, splice-site, and copy-number 
variations, a parallel approach using targeted and whole-genome sequencing 
facilitated the identification of pathogenic variants in a conserved region of 
the OVOL2 proximal promoter sequence in the index families (c.-339_361dup for 
CHED1 and c.-370T>C for PPCD1). Direct sequencing of the OVOL2 promoter in other 
unrelated affected individuals identified two additional mutations within the 
conserved proximal promoter sequence (c.-274T>G and c.-307T>C). OVOL2 encodes 
ovo-like zinc finger 2, a C2H2 zinc-finger transcription factor that regulates 
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition and acts as a direct transcriptional 
repressor of the established PPCD-associated gene ZEB1. Interestingly, we did 
not detect OVOL2 expression in the normal corneal endothelium. Our in vitro data 
demonstrate that all four mutated OVOL2 promoters exhibited more transcriptional 
activity than the corresponding wild-type promoter, and we postulate that the 
mutations identified create cryptic cis-acting regulatory sequence binding sites 
that drive aberrant OVOL2 expression during endothelial cell development. Our 
data establish CHED1 and PPCD1 as allelic conditions and show that CHED1 
represents the extreme of what can be considered a disease spectrum. They also 
implicate transcriptional dysregulation of OVOL2 as a common cause of dominantly 
inherited corneal endothelial dystrophies.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.11.018
PMCID: PMC4716680
PMID: 26749309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]