---
reference_id: "PMID:27192509"
title: Benign skin disease with pustules in the newborn.
authors:
- Reginatto FP
- Villa DD
- Cestari TF
journal: An Bras Dermatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20164285
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Benign skin disease with pustules in the newborn.
**Authors:** Reginatto FP, Villa DD, Cestari TF
**Journal:** An Bras Dermatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1590/abd1806-4841.20164285](https://doi.org/10.1590/abd1806-4841.20164285)

## Content

1. An Bras Dermatol. 2016 Apr;91(2):124-34. doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20164285.

Benign skin disease with pustules in the newborn.

Reginatto FP(1), Villa DD(2), Cestari TF(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Santa Casa de Misericórdia de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

The neonatal period comprises the first four weeks of life. It is a period of 
adaptation where the skin often presents several changes: transient lesions, 
resulting from a physiological response, others as a consequence of transient 
diseases and some as markers of severe disorders. The presence of pustules in 
the skin of the newborn is always a reason for the family and for the assisting 
doctor to be worried, since the newborn is especially vulnerable to bacterial, 
viral or fungal infection. However, the majority of neonatal skin pustules is 
not infectious, comprising the benign neonatal pustulosis. Benign neonatal 
pustuloses are a group of clinical disease characterized by pustular eruptions 
in which a contagious agent is not responsible for its etiology. The most common 
ones are erythema toxicum neonatorum, the transient neonatal pustular melanosis 
and the benign cephalic pustulosis. These dermatoses are usually benign, 
asymptomatic and self-limited. It is important that the dermatologist and the 
neonatologist can identify benign and transient lesions, those caused by 
genodermatoses, and especially differentiate between neonates with systemic 
involvement from those with benign skin lesions, avoiding unnecessary diagnostic 
tests and worries.

DOI: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20164285
PMCID: PMC4861557
PMID: 27192509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None.