---
reference_id: "PMID:11411958"
title: Arthritis in familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Uthman I
- Hajj-Ali RA
- Arayssi T
- Masri AF
- Nasr F
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1007/s002960100103
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arthritis in familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Uthman I, Hajj-Ali RA, Arayssi T, Masri AF, Nasr F
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s002960100103](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002960100103)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2001 May;20(4):145-8. doi: 10.1007/s002960100103.

Arthritis in familial Mediterranean fever.

Uthman I(1), Hajj-Ali RA, Arayssi T, Masri AF, Nasr F.

Author information:
(1)American University of Beirut, Medical Center, Lebanon. iuthman@aub.edu.lb

We studied the rheumatic and various clinical manifestations of familial 
Mediterranean fever (FMF) in Lebanon. A retrospective review was performed of 
the medical records of 74 FMF patients seen at the American University of Beirut 
Medical Centre (AUB-MC) from 1979 to 1996. We also reviewed the medical 
literature from 1968 to 2000 using MEDLINE and the key words "familial 
Mediterranean fever" and "arthritis". Arthritis was the presenting symptom in 12 
cases (16.2%). Twenty-three patients (31%) had definite arthritis during the 
course of the disease that was monoarticular in 16 (70%), oligoarticular in six 
(26%), and polyarticular (rheumatoid-like) in one (4%). Arthritis of the large 
joints of the knees and ankles was the most frequent articular involvement. The 
arthritis was transient, monoarticular, nonerosive, and nondeforming in the 
majority of cases. Four patients (5.4%) had chronic arthritis, with one 
requiring total hip replacement. As in previous reports on arthritis of FMF, the 
majority of FMF patients studied in Lebanon had a transient monoarticular 
nonerosive and nondeforming type of arthritis affecting predominantly the large 
joints of the lower extremities.

DOI: 10.1007/s002960100103
PMID: 11411958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]