---
reference_id: "PMID:35598361"
title: The regulation of CD73 in non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Han Y
- Lee T
- He Y
- Raman R
- Irizarry A
- Martin ML
- Giaccone G
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.04.025
keywords:
- "5'-Nucleotidase/genetics"
- B7-H1 Antigen/metabolism
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics"
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- GPI-Linked Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/genetics
- Mutation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The regulation of CD73 in non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Han Y, Lee T, He Y, Raman R, Irizarry A, Martin ML, Giaccone G
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2022.04.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2022.04.025)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2022 Jul;170:91-102. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.04.025. Epub 2022
May 19.

The regulation of CD73 in non-small cell lung cancer.

Han Y(1), Lee T(1), He Y(1), Raman R(1), Irizarry A(2), Martin ML(2), Giaccone
G(3).

Author information:
(1)Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY,
10065, USA.
(2)Englander Institute for Precision Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine-New York
Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, 10021, USA.
(3)Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY,
10065, USA. Electronic address: gig4001@med.cornell.edu.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the leading cause of global cancer-related mortality.
Although immune checkpoint therapy has achieved remarkable results in lung
cancer, EGFR-mutant or ALK-positive non-smallcell lung cancer patients show
limited benefit. Besides the low tumor mutational burden, PD-L1 expression and
CD8+ tumor-infiltrating T cells, upregulation of CD73/adenosine pathway also
contributes to the immune-inert microenvironment of EGFR-mutant NSCLC. However,
the detailed mechanism underlying the regulation of CD73 is unclear.
METHODS: TCGA data was used to analyze the CD73 expression in cancer patients.
Western blotting, qPCR, and ChIP-PCR were performed in multiple NSCLC cancer
cell lines and patient derived organoids were used to explore the regulation of
CD73 expression using western blotting.
RESULTS: CD73 expression was highly expressed in multiple cancer types.
Pharmacological or genetic inhibition of EGFR, MEK, KRAS, or ALK dramatically
reduced the CD73 mRNA and protein expression in NSCLC cancer cells and
patient-derived organoids with EGFR mutation, KRAS mutation or
ALK-rearrangement. C-Jun overexpression-induced CD73 mRNA and protein
expression. ChIP assay showed that c-Jun bind to CD73 genomic regions.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher CD73 expression in NSCLC cancer cells and patient-derived
organoids with EGFR mutation, KRAS mutation or ALK-rearrangement.
Mechanistically, CD73 is regulated by ERK-Jun pathway, wherein c-Jun regulates
CD73 expression via binding to CD73 genomic regions.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2022.04.025
PMID: 35598361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
