---
reference_id: "PMID:6202140"
title: "Basophilic stippling of red blood cells: a nonspecific finding of multiple etiology."
authors:
- Cheson BD
- Rom WN
- Webber RC
journal: Am J Ind Med
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1002/ajim.4700050409
keywords:
- Disease/blood
- Erythrocyte Count
- Erythrocyte Inclusions/pathology
- Erythrocyte Indices
- Erythrocytes/pathology
- "Erythrocytes, Abnormal/pathology"
- Hematocrit
- Humans
- Lead Poisoning/blood
- Staining and Labeling
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Basophilic stippling of red blood cells: a nonspecific finding of multiple etiology.
**Authors:** Cheson BD, Rom WN, Webber RC
**Journal:** Am J Ind Med (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajim.4700050409](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajim.4700050409)

## Content

1. Am J Ind Med. 1984;5(4):327-34. doi: 10.1002/ajim.4700050409.

Basophilic stippling of red blood cells: a nonspecific finding of multiple 
etiology.

Cheson BD, Rom WN, Webber RC.

Basophilic stippling of red blood cells (BSC) has been noted in lead 
intoxication since 1899 and has been considered a classic laboratory sign of 
lead poisoning since that time. BSC are inclusions of aggregated ribosomes found 
only in the red blood cells and may be confused with siderotic (iron) granules. 
Heinz Bodies, or even reticulocytes. BSC are an inconstant finding in lead 
intoxication. In a review of peripheral blood smears from 1,000 consecutive 
internal medicine patients, we found BSC in 27%. These occurred in a variety of 
malignant, rheumatologic, hematologic, cardiovascular, and other diseases, 
frequently with an associated anemia. BSC may even be found in a small 
percentage of normal people; thus, it must be emphasized that BSC is a 
nonspecific finding. Furthermore, BSC has been replaced by blood lead (since the 
1940s) and zinc protoporphyrin (since the 1970s) levels for biologic monitoring 
of lead-exposed workers.

DOI: 10.1002/ajim.4700050409
PMID: 6202140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]