---
reference_id: "PMID:30016746"
title: Tubulin genes and malformations of cortical development.
authors:
- Romaniello R
- Arrigoni F
- Fry AE
- Bassi MT
- Rees MI
- Borgatti R
- Pilz DT
- Cushion TD
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.07.012
keywords:
- Basal Ganglia/pathology
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, growth & development, pathology"
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Corpus Callosum/pathology
- Humans
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Neuroimaging
- Tubulin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tubulin genes and malformations of cortical development.
**Authors:** Romaniello R, Arrigoni F, Fry AE, Bassi MT, Rees MI, Borgatti R, Pilz DT, Cushion TD
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.07.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.07.012)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2018 Dec;61(12):744-754. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.07.012.
Epub  2018 Jul 17.

Tubulin genes and malformations of cortical development.

Romaniello R(1), Arrigoni F(2), Fry AE(3), Bassi MT(4), Rees MI(5), Borgatti 
R(1), Pilz DT(6), Cushion TD(7).

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit, Scientific Institute, IRCCS 
Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(2)Neuroimaging Unit, Scientific Institute, IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, 
Lecco, Italy.
(3)Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, UK.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation 
Unit, Scientific Institute, IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(5)Institute of Life Science, College of Medicine, Swansea University, Swansea, 
UK.
(6)West of Scotland Genetics Service, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, 
Glasgow, UK.
(7)Department of Cancer and Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, UK. Electronic address: CushionT@cardiff.ac.uk.

A large number of genes encoding for tubulin proteins are expressed in the 
developing brain. Each is subject to specific spatial and temporal expression 
patterns. However, most are highly expressed in post-mitotic neurons during 
stages of neuronal migration and differentiation. The major tubulin subclasses 
(alpha- and beta-tubulin) share high sequence and structural homology. These 
globular proteins form heterodimers and subsequently co-assemble into 
microtubules. Microtubules are dynamic, cytoskeletal polymers which play key 
roles in cellular processes crucial for cortical development, including neuronal 
proliferation, migration and cortical laminar organisation. Mutations in seven 
genes encoding alpha-tubulin (TUBA1A), beta-tubulin (TUBB2A, TUBB2B, TUBB3, 
TUBB4A, TUBB) and gamma-tubulin (TUBG1) isoforms have been associated with a 
wide and overlapping range of brain malformations or "Tubulinopathies". The 
majority of cortical phenotypes include lissencephaly, polymicrogyria, 
microlissencephaly and simplified gyration. Well-known hallmarks of the 
tubulinopathies include dysmorphism of the basal ganglia (fusion of the caudate 
nucleus and putamen with absence of the anterior limb of the internal capsule), 
midline commissural structures hypoplasia and/or agenesis (anterior commissure, 
corpus callosum and fornix), hypoplasia of the oculomotor and optic nerves, 
cerebellar hypoplasia or dysplasia and dysmorphism of the hind-brain structures. 
The cortical and extra-cortical brain phenotypes observed are largely dependent 
on the specific tubulin gene affected. In the present review, all the published 
data on tubulin family gene mutations and the associated cortical phenotypes are 
summarized. In addition, the most typical neuroimaging patterns of malformations 
of cortical development associated with tubulin gene mutations detected on the 
basis of our own experience are described.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.07.012
PMID: 30016746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]