---
reference_id: "PMID:37837580"
title: A Nationwide Study of GATA2 Deficiency in Italy Reveals Novel Symptoms and Genotype-phenotype Association.
authors:
- Roncareggi S
- Girardi K
- Fioredda F
- Pedace L
- Arcuri L
- Badolato R
- Bonanomi S
- Borlenghi E
- Cirillo E
- Coliva T
- Consonni F
- Conti F
- Farruggia P
- Gambineri E
- Guerra F
- Locatelli F
- Mancuso G
- Marzollo A
- Masetti R
- Micalizzi C
- Onofrillo D
- Piccini M
- Pignata C
- Raddi MG
- Santini V
- Vendemini F
- Biondi A
- Saettini F
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-023-01583-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- "GATA2 Deficiency/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Italy/epidemiology
- Prospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Nationwide Study of GATA2 Deficiency in Italy Reveals Novel Symptoms and Genotype-phenotype Association.
**Authors:** Roncareggi S, Girardi K, Fioredda F, Pedace L, Arcuri L, Badolato R, Bonanomi S, Borlenghi E, Cirillo E, Coliva T, Consonni F, Conti F, Farruggia P, Gambineri E, Guerra F, Locatelli F, Mancuso G, Marzollo A, Masetti R, Micalizzi C, Onofrillo D, Piccini M, Pignata C, Raddi MG, Santini V, Vendemini F, Biondi A, Saettini F
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-023-01583-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-023-01583-8)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2023 Nov;43(8):2192-2207. doi: 10.1007/s10875-023-01583-8.
Epub  2023 Oct 14.

A Nationwide Study of GATA2 Deficiency in Italy Reveals Novel Symptoms and 
Genotype-phenotype Association.

Roncareggi S(1)(2), Girardi K(3), Fioredda F(4), Pedace L(3), Arcuri L(4), 
Badolato R(5), Bonanomi S(1), Borlenghi E(6), Cirillo E(7), Coliva T(1), 
Consonni F(8)(9), Conti F(10), Farruggia P(11), Gambineri E(9)(12), Guerra 
F(1)(2), Locatelli F(3), Mancuso G(13), Marzollo A(14), Masetti R(15), Micalizzi 
C(16), Onofrillo D(17), Piccini M(18), Pignata C(7), Raddi MG(18), Santini 
V(18), Vendemini F(1), Biondi A(1)(2)(19), Saettini F(20).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione IRCCS San Gerardo Dei Tintori, Monza, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento Di Medicina E Chirurgia, Università Degli Studi Milano-Bicocca, 
Monza, Italy.
(3)Department of Pediatric Onco-Haematology and Cell and Gene Therapy, Ospedale 
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)U.O.C. Ematologia, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(5)Paediatrics Clinic and Institute for Molecular Medicine A. Nocivelli, 
Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, ASST- Spedali Civili of 
Brescia, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(6)U.O.C. Ematologia, ASST Spedali Civili Di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(7)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Section of Pediatrics, Federico 
II University, Naples, Italy.
(8)Department of Health Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(9)Centre of Excellence, Division of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Meyer 
Children's Hospital IRCCS, Florence, Italy.
(10)Pediatric Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Di Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.
(11)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Unit, Pediatric Department, ARNAS Civico, 
Di Cristina and Benfratelli Hospitals, Palermo, Italy.
(12)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health 
(NEUROFARBA), University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(13)Unit of Immunology, Rheumatology, Allergy and Rare Diseases (UnIRAR), IRCCS 
San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(14)Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplant Division, Padua 
University Hospital, Via Giustiniani 3, 35128, Padua, Italy.
(15)Pediatric Oncology and Hematology Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero 
Universitaria Di Bologna, Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Unit, Department of 
Medical and Surgical Sciences DIMEC, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(16)U.O.S.D. Centro Trapianto Di Midollo Osseo, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 
Genoa, Italy.
(17)UOSD Oncoematologia Pediatrica, Ospedale Civile Santo Spirito, Pescara, 
Italia.
(18)Ematologia, DMSC, AOU Careggi, Università Di Firenze, Florence, Italy.
(19)Centro Tettamanti, Fondazione IRCCS San Gerardo Dei Tintori, Via Cadore, 
Monza, Italy.
(20)Centro Tettamanti, Fondazione IRCCS San Gerardo Dei Tintori, Via Cadore, 
Monza, Italy. f.saettini@gmail.com.

GATA2 deficiency is a rare disorder encompassing a broadly variable phenotype 
and its clinical picture is continuously evolving. Since it was first described 
in 2011, up to 500 patients have been reported. Here, we describe a cohort of 31 
Italian patients (26 families) with molecular diagnosis of GATA2 deficiency. 
Patients were recruited contacting all the Italian Association of Pediatric 
Hematology and Oncology (AIEOP) centers, the Hematology Department in their 
institution and Italian societies involved in the field of vascular anomalies, 
otorhinolaryngology, dermatology, infectious and respiratory diseases. Median 
age at the time of first manifestation, molecular diagnosis and last follow-up 
visit was 12.5 (age-range, 2-52 years), 18 (age-range, 7-64 years) and 22 years 
(age-range, 3-64), respectively. Infections (39%), hematological malignancies 
(23%) and undefined cytopenia (16%) were the most frequent symptoms at the onset 
of the disease. The majority of patients (55%) underwent hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation. During the follow-up rarer manifestations emerged. The clinical 
penetrance was highly variable, with the coexistence of severely affected 
pediatric patients and asymptomatic adults in the same pedigree. Two individuals 
remained asymptomatic at the last follow-up visit. Our study highlights new 
(pilonidal cyst/sacrococcygeal fistula, cholangiocarcinoma and gastric 
adenocarcinoma) phenotypes and show that lymphedema may be associated with 
null/regulatory mutations. Countrywide studies providing long prospective 
follow-up are essential to unveil the exact burden of rarer manifestations and 
the natural history in GATA2 deficiency.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-023-01583-8
PMID: 37837580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]