---
reference_id: "PMID:20014369"
title: "The cognitive phenotype in Klinefelter syndrome: a review of the literature including genetic and hormonal factors."
authors:
- Boada R
- Janusz J
- Hutaff-Lee C
- Tartaglia N
journal: Dev Disabil Res Rev
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/ddrr.83
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The cognitive phenotype in Klinefelter syndrome: a review of the literature including genetic and hormonal factors.
**Authors:** Boada R, Janusz J, Hutaff-Lee C, Tartaglia N
**Journal:** Dev Disabil Res Rev (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ddrr.83](https://doi.org/10.1002/ddrr.83)

## Content

1. Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2009;15(4):284-94. doi: 10.1002/ddrr.83.

The cognitive phenotype in Klinefelter syndrome: a review of the literature 
including genetic and hormonal factors.

Boada R(1), Janusz J, Hutaff-Lee C, Tartaglia N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, 
The Children's Hospital, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Klinefelter syndrome (KS) or 47,XXY occurs in approximately 1 in 650 males. 
Individuals with KS often present with physical characteristics including tall 
stature, hypogonadism, and fertility problems. In addition to medical findings, 
the presence of the extra X chromosome can lead to characteristic cognitive and 
language deficits of varying severity. While a small, but significant downward 
shift in mean overall IQ has been reported, the general cognitive abilities of 
patients with KS are not typically in the intellectual disability range. Most 
studies support that males with KS have an increased risk of language disorders 
and reading disabilities. Results of other studies investigating the 
relationship between verbal and nonverbal/spatial cognitive abilities have been 
mixed, with differing results based on the age and ascertainment method of the 
cohort studied. Executive function deficits have been identified in children and 
adults with KS, however, the research in this area is limited and further 
investigation of the neuropsychological profile is needed. In this article, we 
review the strengths and weaknesses of previous cognitive and neuropsychological 
studies in males with KS in childhood and adulthood, provide historical 
perspective of these studies, and review what is known about how hormonal and 
genetic factors influence cognitive features in 47,XXY/KS.

DOI: 10.1002/ddrr.83
PMCID: PMC3056507
PMID: 20014369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]