---
reference_id: "PMID:18381106"
title: Non-myeloablative radioimmunotherapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
authors:
- Schaefer-Cutillo J
- Friedberg JW
journal: Semin Hematol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2008.02.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-myeloablative radioimmunotherapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
**Authors:** Schaefer-Cutillo J, Friedberg JW
**Journal:** Semin Hematol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.seminhematol.2008.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.seminhematol.2008.02.009)

## Content

1. Semin Hematol. 2008 Apr;45(2):110-7. doi: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2008.02.009.

Non-myeloablative radioimmunotherapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Schaefer-Cutillo J(1), Friedberg JW.

Author information:
(1)Lymphoma Program, James P. Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester, 
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Iodine 131-tositumomab and ibritumomab tiuxetan, radioimmunoconjugates that 
target the CD20 antigen, have been approved in the United States for use in 
relapsed or refractory, indolent, and transformed B-cell lymphomas. These 
well-tolerated agents have among the highest single-agent activity observed for 
these histologies. Furthermore, emerging data suggest a role for 
radioimmunotherapy (RIT) as upfront therapy of indolent lymphoma, with expanding 
utility in the treatment of more aggressive histologies. This review will 
summarize the key trials that led to approval of both (131)I-tositumomab and 
ibritumomab tiuxetan, discuss recent publications on re-treatment and therapy of 
de novo indolent lymphoma and aggressive histologies, and conclude with new 
topics in RIT.

DOI: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2008.02.009
PMID: 18381106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]