---
reference_id: "PMID:19707181"
title: "Aromatase deficiency in men: a clinical perspective."
authors:
- Rochira V
- Carani C
journal: Nat Rev Endocrinol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2009.176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aromatase deficiency in men: a clinical perspective.
**Authors:** Rochira V, Carani C
**Journal:** Nat Rev Endocrinol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrendo.2009.176](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2009.176)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2009 Oct;5(10):559-68. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2009.176. Epub 
2009 Aug 25.

Aromatase deficiency in men: a clinical perspective.

Rochira V(1), Carani C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Endocrinology and Metabolism and Geriatrics, 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. 
vincenzo.rochira@unimore.it

Human aromatase deficiency is a very rare syndrome characterized by congenital 
estrogen deprivation that is caused by loss-of-function mutations in CYP19A1, 
which encodes aromatase. Here, we review the presentation, diagnosis and 
treatment of aromatase deficiency in men to provide useful advice for clinical 
management of the condition. At presentation, all men with aromatase deficiency 
have tall stature, delayed bone maturation, osteopenia or osteoporosis and 
eunuchoid skeletal proportions. Diagnosis of the condition is supported by the 
presence of unfused epiphyses and undetectable serum estradiol levels; the 
condition can be further substantiated by genetic sequencing of CYP19A1. 
Transdermal estradiol treatment at a daily dose of about 25 microg might be 
adequate for lifelong replacement therapy. BMD and levels of serum estradiol, 
luteinizing hormone and testosterone should be monitored carefully and 
considered powerful biochemical markers of adequate estrogen substitution in 
clinical practice. Early diagnosis is important to initiate estrogen therapy as 
soon after puberty as possible to avoid the skeletal complications that are 
associated with this condition.

DOI: 10.1038/nrendo.2009.176
PMID: 19707181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]