---
reference_id: "PMID:38849516"
title: Epigenetic alterations in patients with anorexia nervosa-a systematic review.
authors:
- Käver L
- Hinney A
- Rajcsanyi LS
- Maier HB
- Frieling H
- Steiger H
- Voelz C
- Beyer C
- Trinh S
- Seitz J
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-024-02601-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Anorexia Nervosa/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/genetics"
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study/methods
- Epigenomics/methods
- Epigenome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic alterations in patients with anorexia nervosa-a systematic review.
**Authors:** Käver L, Hinney A, Rajcsanyi LS, Maier HB, Frieling H, Steiger H, Voelz C, Beyer C, Trinh S, Seitz J
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-024-02601-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-024-02601-w)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2024 Dec;29(12):3900-3914. doi: 10.1038/s41380-024-02601-w.
Epub  2024 Jun 7.

Epigenetic alterations in patients with anorexia nervosa-a systematic review.

Käver L(1), Hinney A(2)(3), Rajcsanyi LS(2)(3), Maier HB(4), Frieling H(4),
Steiger H(5), Voelz C(6), Beyer C(6), Trinh S(6), Seitz J(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroanatomy, RWTH Aachen University, Wendlingweg 2, 52074,
Aachen, Germany. lkaever@ukaachen.de.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, University Hospital Essen, Virchowstrasse 174, 45147, Essen,
Germany.
(3)Center for Translational and Behavioral Neuroscience, University Hospital
Essen, Hufelandstraße 55, 45147, Essen, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Socialpsychiatry and Psychotherapy, Hannover
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 1A1, Canada.
(6)Institute of Neuroanatomy, RWTH Aachen University, Wendlingweg 2, 52074,
Aachen, Germany.
(7)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, RWTH Aachen University, Neuenhofer Weg 21, 52074, Aachen,
Germany.
(8)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and
Psychotherapy, LVR University Hospital Essen, Virchowstrasse 174, 45147, Essen,
Germany.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a complex metabolic and psychological disorder that is
influenced by both heritable genetic components and environmental factors.
Exposure to various environmental influences can lead to epigenetically induced
changes in gene expression. Epigenetic research in AN is still in its infancy,
and studies to date are limited in determining clear, valid links to disease
onset and progression are limited. Therefore, the aim of this systematic review
was to compile and critically evaluate the available results of epigenetic
studies specifically in AN and to provide recommendations for future studies. In
accordance with the PRISMA guidelines, a systematic literature search was
performed in three different databases (PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science)
through May 2023. Twenty-three original papers or conference abstracts on
epigenetic studies in AN were collected. Epigenome-wide association studies
(EWASs), which analyze DNA methylation across the genome in patients with AN and
identify potential disease-relevant changes in promoter/regulatory regions of
genes, are the most promising for future research. To date, five EWASs on AN
have been published, suggesting a potential reversibility of
malnutrition-induced epigenetic changes once patients recover. Hence,
determining differential DNA methylation levels could serve as a biomarker for
disease status or early diagnosis and might be involved in disease progression
or chronification. For future research, EWASs with a larger sample size,
longitudinal study design and uniform methods should be performed to contribute
to the understanding of the pathophysiology of AN, the development of individual
interventions and a better prognosis for affected patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-024-02601-w
PMCID: PMC11609096
PMID: 38849516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests.
