---
reference_id: "PMID:11393330"
title: Treatment of typical absence seizures and related epileptic syndromes.
authors:
- Panayiotopoulos CP
journal: Paediatr Drugs
year: '2001'
doi: 10.2165/00128072-200103050-00006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of typical absence seizures and related epileptic syndromes.
**Authors:** Panayiotopoulos CP
**Journal:** Paediatr Drugs (2001)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00128072-200103050-00006](https://doi.org/10.2165/00128072-200103050-00006)

## Content

1. Paediatr Drugs. 2001;3(5):379-403. doi: 10.2165/00128072-200103050-00006.

Treatment of typical absence seizures and related epileptic syndromes.

Panayiotopoulos CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology and Epilepsies, St Thomas' Hospital, 
London, England. tom.panayiotopoulos@gstt.sthames.nhs.uk

Typical absences are brief (seconds) generalised seizures of sudden onset and 
termination. They have 2 essential components: clinically, the impairment of 
consciousness (absence) and, generalised 3 to 4Hz spike/polyspike and slow wave 
discharges on electroencephalogram (EEG). They differ fundamentally from other 
seizures and are pharmacologically unique. Their clinical and EEG manifestations 
are syndrome-related. Impairment of consciousness may be severe, moderate, mild 
or inconspicuous. This is often associated with motor manifestations, 
automatisms and autonomic disturbances. Clonic, tonic and atonic components 
alone or in combination are motor symptoms; myoclonia, mainly of facial muscles, 
is the most common. The ictal EEG discharge may be consistently brief (2 to 5 
seconds) or long (15 to 30 seconds), continuous or fragmented, with single or 
multiple spikes associated with the slow wave. The intradischarge frequency may 
be constant or may vary (2.5 to 5Hz). Typical absences are easily precipitated 
by hyperventilation in about 90% of untreated patients. They are usually 
spontaneous, but can be triggered by photic, pattern, video games stimuli, and 
mental or emotional factors. Typical absences usually start in childhood or 
adolescence. They occur in around 10 to 15% of adults with epilepsies, often 
combined with other generalised seizures. They may remit with age or be 
lifelong. Syndromic diagnosis is important for treatment strategies and 
prognosis. Absences may be severe and the only seizure type, as in childhood 
absence epilepsy. They may predominate in other syndromes or be mild and 
nonpredominant in syndromes such as juvenile myoclonic epilepsy where myoclonic 
jerks and generalised tonic clonic seizures are the main concern. Typical 
absence status epilepticus occurs in about 30% of patients and is more common in 
certain syndromes, e.g. idiopathic generalised epilepsy with perioral myoclonia 
or phantom absences. Typical absence seizures are often easy to diagnose and 
treat. Valproic acid, ethosuximide and lamotrigine, alone or in combination, are 
first-line therapy. Valproic acid controls absences in 75% of patients and also 
GTCS (70%) and myoclonic jerks (75%); however, it may be undesirable for some 
women. Similarly, lamotrigine may control absences and GTCS in possibly 50 to 
60% of patients, but may worsen myoclonic jerks; skin rashes are common. 
Ethosuximide controls 70% of absences, but it is unsuitable as monotherapy if 
other generalised seizures coexist. A combination of any of these 3 drugs may be 
needed for resistant cases. Low dosages of lamotrigine added to valproic acid 
may have a dramatic beneficial effect. Clonazepam, particularly in absences with 
myoclonic components, and acetazolamide may be useful adjunctive drugs.

DOI: 10.2165/00128072-200103050-00006
PMID: 11393330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]