---
reference_id: "PMID:31570112"
title: Pathogenicity of new BEST1 variants identified in Italian patients with best vitelliform macular dystrophy assessed by computational structural biology.
authors:
- Frecer V
- Iarossi G
- Salvetti AP
- Maltese PE
- Delledonne G
- Oldani M
- Staurenghi G
- Falsini B
- Minnella AM
- Ziccardi L
- Magli A
- Colombo L
- "D'Esposito F"
- Miertus J
- Viola F
- Attanasio M
- Maggio E
- Bertelli M
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-019-2080-3
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Bestrophins/chemistry, genetics"
- Child
- Computational Biology
- Female
- Humans
- Italy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Protein Subunits/chemistry, genetics"
- Regression Analysis
- Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenicity of new BEST1 variants identified in Italian patients with best vitelliform macular dystrophy assessed by computational structural biology.
**Authors:** Frecer V, Iarossi G, Salvetti AP, Maltese PE, Delledonne G, Oldani M, Staurenghi G, Falsini B, Minnella AM, Ziccardi L, Magli A, Colombo L, D'Esposito F, Miertus J, Viola F, Attanasio M, Maggio E, Bertelli M
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-019-2080-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-019-2080-3)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2019 Oct 1;17(1):330. doi: 10.1186/s12967-019-2080-3.

Pathogenicity of new BEST1 variants identified in Italian patients with best
vitelliform macular dystrophy assessed by computational structural biology.

Frecer V(1), Iarossi G(2), Salvetti AP(3), Maltese PE(4), Delledonne G(3),
Oldani M(3), Staurenghi G(3), Falsini B(5), Minnella AM(5), Ziccardi L(6), Magli
A(7), Colombo L(8), D'Esposito F(9)(10)(11), Miertus J(12), Viola F(13),
Attanasio M(14), Maggio E(14), Bertelli M(15)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Chemistry of Drugs, Faculty of Pharmacy, Comenius
University in Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Bambino Gesù IRCCS Children's Hospital, Rome,
Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences "Luigi Sacco", Sacco Hospital,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(4)MAGI'S Lab S.R.L., Via Delle Maioliche 57/D, 38068, Rovereto, TN, Italy.
paolo.maltese@assomagi.org.
(5)Institute of Ophthalmology, Visual Electrophysiology Service, Fondazione
Policlinico Gemelli/UniversitàCattolica del S. Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(6)Neurophthalmology and Neurophysiology Unit, GB Bietti Foundation-IRCCS, Rome,
Italy.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Orthoptic and Pediatric Ophthalmology,
University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, San Paolo Hospital, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.
(9)Imperial College Ophthalmic Research Unit, Western Eye Hospital, Imperial
College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(10)Eye Clinic, Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive Sciences and
Dentistry, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(11)MAGI Euregio, Bolzano, Italy.
(12)Genius n.o., Trnava, Slovakia.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda, Clinica Regina
Elena, Milan, Italy.
(14)IRCCS-Ospedale Sacro Cuore Don Calabria, Negrar, VR, Italy.
(15)MAGI'S Lab S.R.L., Via Delle Maioliche 57/D, 38068, Rovereto, TN, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) is an autosomal dominant
macular degeneration. The typical central yellowish yolk-like lesion usually
appears in childhood and gradually worsens. Most cases are caused by variants in
the BEST1 gene which encodes bestrophin-1, an integral membrane protein found
primarily in the retinal pigment epithelium.
METHODS: Here we describe the spectrum of BEST1 variants identified in a cohort
of 57 Italian patients analyzed by Sanger sequencing. In 13 cases, the study
also included segregation analysis in affected and unaffected relatives. We used
molecular mechanics to calculate two quantitative parameters related to
calcium-activated chloride channel (CaCC composed of 5 BEST1 subunits) stability
and calcium-dependent activation and related them to the potential pathogenicity
of individual missense variants detected in the probands.
RESULTS: Thirty-six out of 57 probands (63% positivity) and 16 out of 18
relatives proved positive to genetic testing. Family study confirmed the
variable penetrance and expressivity of the disease. Six of the 27 genetic
variants discovered were novel: p.(Val9Gly), p.(Ser108Arg), p.(Asn179Asp),
p.(Trp182Arg), p.(Glu292Gln) and p.(Asn296Lys). All BEST1 variants were assessed
in silico for potential pathogenicity. Our computational structural biology
approach based on 3D model structure of the CaCC showed that individual amino
acid replacements may affect channel shape, stability, activation, gating,
selectivity and throughput, and possibly also other features, depending on where
the individual mutated amino acid residues are located in the tertiary structure
of BEST1. Statistically significant correlations between mean logMAR
best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), age and modulus of computed BEST1
dimerization energies, which reflect variations in the in CaCC stability due to
amino acid changes, permitted us to assess the pathogenicity of individual BEST1
variants.
CONCLUSIONS: Using this computational approach, we designed a method for
estimating BCVA progression in patients with BEST1 variants.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-019-2080-3
PMCID: PMC6771118
PMID: 31570112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that they have no competing
interests. The authors declare that they have no proprietary interest in the
development or marketing of the instruments described.
