---
reference_id: "PMID:20301658"
title: Heritable Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Geiger H
- Tinker RJ
- Talbert J
- Phillips JA III
- Austin ED
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heritable Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Geiger H, Tinker RJ, Talbert J, Phillips JA III, Austin ED

## Content

1. Heritable Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Overview.

Geiger H(1), Tinker RJ(2), Talbert J(1), Phillips JA III(1), Austin ED(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Jul 18 [updated 2026 Apr 9].

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee
(2)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York
(3)Pediatric Pulmonary Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. Describe the clinical characteristics of 
heritable pulmonary arterial hypertension (HPAH); 2.. Review the genetic causes 
of HPAH; 3.. Review the differential diagnosis of HPAH; 4.. Provide an 
evaluation strategy to identify the genetic cause of HPAH in a proband (when 
possible); 5.. Review management of HPAH, including targeted therapies, and 
surveillance of at-risk relatives for detection of early treatable 
manifestations of HPAH; 6.. Inform genetic risk assessment.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301658