---
reference_id: "PMID:34986808"
title: "Acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction: clinical and histological findings of 275 cases."
authors:
- Makselis A
- Petroska D
- Kadziauskiene A
- Jaruseviciene R
- Ruzgys A
- Cimbalas A
- Besusparis J
- Asoklis RS
journal: BMC Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12886-021-02185-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction: clinical and histological findings of 275 cases.
**Authors:** Makselis A, Petroska D, Kadziauskiene A, Jaruseviciene R, Ruzgys A, Cimbalas A, Besusparis J, Asoklis RS
**Journal:** BMC Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12886-021-02185-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-021-02185-x)

## Content

1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2022 Jan 5;22(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s12886-021-02185-x.

Acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction: clinical and histological findings of 
275 cases.

Makselis A(1)(2), Petroska D(3)(4), Kadziauskiene A(1)(2), Jaruseviciene R(5), 
Ruzgys A(1), Cimbalas A(1)(2), Besusparis J(3)(4), Asoklis RS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Eye Diseases, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, 
Santariskiu 2, LT-08661, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(2)Center of Eye Diseases, Vilnius University, Santariskiu 2, LT-08661, Vilnius, 
Lithuania.
(3)National Center of Pathology, affiliate of Vilnius University Hospital 
Santaros Klinikos, P. Baublio 5, LT-08406, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, M. K. Ciurlionio 21, LT-03101, 
Vilnius, Lithuania.
(5)Centre of Eye Diseases, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, 
Santariskiu 2, LT-08661, Vilnius, Lithuania. kinderruta@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction is a blockage of the lacrimal 
outflow system usually caused by local nonspecific inflammation of the lacrimal 
sac and the nasolacrimal duct. However, cases exist where the primary 
nasolacrimal system obstruction is caused by malignancies. Our aim was to 
investigate lacrimal sac pathologies in patients with acquired nasolacrimal duct 
obstruction and compare their clinical manifestations.
METHODS: This retrospective clinical study included 275 patients with acquired 
nasolacrimal duct obstruction who underwent external dacryocystorhinostomy and 
lacrimal sac biopsy. Cases were classified into tumor or nonspecific pathology 
groups and subdivided according to the level of inflammation. Histological and 
clinical data were analyzed.
RESULTS: Three tumors (1.1%) (an adenoid cystic carcinoma, an eccrine 
spiradenoma and small B cell lymphoma) were diagnosed. Chronic nongranulomatous 
inflammation was the most common histological finding, corresponding to 194 
cases (70.5%). The other 81 (29.5%) were subacute, acute forms of 
nongranulomatous inflammation, tumors and fibrosis cases. Epiphora with 
continuous purulent discharge was the most common clinical sign reported by 144 
(52.4%) patients, and two (0.7%) patients had a palpable mass near the medial 
canthal tendon, which was identified as an eccrine spiradenoma and small B cell 
lymphoma. There was no significant difference in the clinical symptoms, duration 
or case history between the nonspecific pathology and tumor groups (p = 0.292).
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic nongranulomatous inflammation of the lacrimal sac was the 
most common finding among acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction cases. There 
were no associations between the histological findings and clinical 
presentation. The authors recommend a lacrimal sac biopsy only in cases when a 
tumor is clinically suspected.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-021-02185-x
PMCID: PMC8734260
PMID: 34986808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.