---
reference_id: "PMID:24763542"
title: Ultraviolet radiation and systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Barbhaiya M
- Costenbader KH
journal: Lupus
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1177/0961203314530488
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ultraviolet radiation and systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Barbhaiya M, Costenbader KH
**Journal:** Lupus (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0961203314530488](https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203314530488)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2014 May;23(6):588-95. doi: 10.1177/0961203314530488.

Ultraviolet radiation and systemic lupus erythematosus.

Barbhaiya M(1), Costenbader KH.

Author information:
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and 
Allergy, Harvard Medical School, USA.

Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation is among the environmental factors that 
have been proposed and studied in association with systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE). While it is known that UV radiation exposure may exacerbate pre-existing 
lupus, it remains unclear whether UV exposure is a risk factor for the 
development of SLE. Experimental studies show a significant immunomodulatory 
role for UV radiation, but strong epidemiologic data regarding its role in 
triggering SLE onset are lacking. Further studies are needed to assess the role 
of UV radiation in relation to development of incident SLE, yet they are 
challenging to design due to difficulties in accurate exposure assessment, the 
heterogeneous nature of SLE, and the challenge of assessing photosensitivity, a 
feature of SLE, which often precedes its diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203314530488
PMID: 24763542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]