---
reference_id: "PMID:29691382"
title: Snord116-dependent diurnal rhythm of DNA methylation in mouse cortex.
authors:
- Coulson RL
- Yasui DH
- Dunaway KW
- Laufer BI
- Vogel Ciernia A
- Zhu Y
- Mordaunt CE
- Totah TS
- LaSalle JM
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-03676-0
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/physiology
- Cerebral Cortex/metabolism
- "Chromatin/genetics, metabolism"
- Circadian Rhythm
- DNA Methylation
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Small Nucleolar/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Snord116-dependent diurnal rhythm of DNA methylation in mouse cortex.
**Authors:** Coulson RL, Yasui DH, Dunaway KW, Laufer BI, Vogel Ciernia A, Zhu Y, Mordaunt CE, Totah TS, LaSalle JM
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-018-03676-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03676-0)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2018 Apr 24;9(1):1616. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-03676-0.

Snord116-dependent diurnal rhythm of DNA methylation in mouse cortex.

Coulson RL(1), Yasui DH(1), Dunaway KW(1), Laufer BI(1), Vogel Ciernia A(1), Zhu 
Y(1), Mordaunt CE(1), Totah TS(1), LaSalle JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Genome Center, MIND Institute, 
University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA.
(2)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Genome Center, MIND Institute, 
University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA. jmlasalle@ucdavis.edu.

Rhythmic oscillations of physiological processes depend on integrating the 
circadian clock and diurnal environment. DNA methylation is epigenetically 
responsive to daily rhythms, as a subset of CpG dinucleotides in brain exhibit 
diurnal rhythmic methylation. Here, we show a major genetic effect on rhythmic 
methylation in a mouse Snord116 deletion model of the imprinted disorder 
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). More than 23,000 diurnally rhythmic CpGs are 
identified in wild-type cortex, with nearly all lost or phase-shifted in PWS. 
Circadian dysregulation of a second imprinted Snord cluster at the 
Temple/Kagami-Ogata syndrome locus is observed at the level of methylation, 
transcription, and chromatin, providing mechanistic evidence of cross-talk. 
Genes identified by diurnal epigenetic changes in PWS mice overlapped rhythmic 
and PWS-specific genes in human brain and are enriched for PWS-relevant 
phenotypes and pathways. These results support the proposed evolutionary 
relationship between imprinting and sleep, and suggest possible chronotherapy in 
the treatment of PWS and related disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03676-0
PMCID: PMC5915486
PMID: 29691382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.