---
reference_id: "PMID:37174013"
title: Occurrence of Hepatoblastomas in Patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann Spectrum (BWSp).
authors:
- Klein SD
- DeMarchis M
- Linn RL
- MacFarland SP
- Kalish JM
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15092548
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Occurrence of Hepatoblastomas in Patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann Spectrum (BWSp).
**Authors:** Klein SD, DeMarchis M, Linn RL, MacFarland SP, Kalish JM
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15092548](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15092548)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Apr 29;15(9):2548. doi: 10.3390/cancers15092548.

Occurrence of Hepatoblastomas in Patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann Spectrum 
(BWSp).

Klein SD(1)(2), DeMarchis M(1), Linn RL(3), MacFarland SP(2)(4)(5), Kalish 
JM(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(4)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.
(5)Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.

Patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), an epigenetic imprinting 
disorder involving alterations in genes at the 11p15 chromosomal location, are 
predisposed to develop hepatoblastomas (HBs), which are rare embryonal liver 
tumors. Tumors can develop after a BWS diagnosis or, conversely, can be the 
presenting feature leading to a subsequent diagnosis. While HBs are the cardinal 
tumors of BWS, not all patients with the BWS spectrum will develop HBs. This 
observation has led to many hypotheses, including genotype-associated risk, 
tissue mosaicism, and tumor-specific second hits. To explore these hypotheses, 
we present the largest cohort of patients with BWS and HBs to date. Our cohort 
comprised 16 cases, and we broadened our sample size by searching the literature 
for all cases of BWS with HBs. From these isolated case studies, we amassed 
another 34 cases, bringing the total number to 50 cases of BWS-HB. We observed 
that paternal uniparental isodisomy (upd(11)pat) was the most common genotype, 
representing 38% of cases. The next most common genotype was IC2 LOM, 
representing 14% of cases. Five patients had clinical BWS without a molecular 
diagnosis. To investigate the potential mechanism of HBs in BWS, we analyzed 
normal liver and HB samples from eight cases and isolated tumor samples from 
another two cases. These samples underwent methylation testing, and 90% of our 
tumor samples underwent targeted cancer next-generation sequencing (NGS) panels. 
These matched samples provided novel insights into the oncogenesis of HBs in 
BWS. We found that 100% of the HBs that underwent NGS panel testing had variants 
in the CTNNB1 gene. We further identified three distinct groups of BWS-HB 
patients based on epigenotype. We also demonstrated epigenotype mosaicism, where 
11p15 alterations can differ between the blood, HB, and normal liver. In light 
of this epigenotype mosaicism, tumor risk assessment based on blood profiling 
may not be accurate. Therefore, universal screening is recommended for all 
patients with BWS.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15092548
PMCID: PMC10177446
PMID: 37174013

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.