---
reference_id: "PMID:37818127"
title: "The odontoblastic differentiation of dental mesenchymal stem cells: molecular regulation mechanism and related genetic syndromes."
authors:
- Pan H
- Yang Y
- Xu H
- Jin A
- Huang X
- Gao X
- Sun S
- Liu Y
- Liu J
- Lu T
- Wang X
- Zhu Y
- Jiang L
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1174579
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The odontoblastic differentiation of dental mesenchymal stem cells: molecular regulation mechanism and related genetic syndromes.
**Authors:** Pan H, Yang Y, Xu H, Jin A, Huang X, Gao X, Sun S, Liu Y, Liu J, Lu T, Wang X, Zhu Y, Jiang L
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2023.1174579](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2023.1174579)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Sep 25;11:1174579. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1174579. 
eCollection 2023.

The odontoblastic differentiation of dental mesenchymal stem cells: molecular 
regulation mechanism and related genetic syndromes.

Pan H(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Yang Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Xu H(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Jin 
A(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Huang X(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Gao X(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Sun 
S(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Liu Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Liu J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Lu 
T(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Wang X(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Zhu Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Jiang 
L(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center of Craniofacial Orthodontics, Department of Oral and 
Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)College of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)National Center for Stomatology, Shanghai, China.
(4)National Clinical Research Center for Oral Disease, Shanghai, China.
(5)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai, China.
(6)Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, Shanghai, China.

Dental mesenchymal stem cells (DMSCs) are multipotent progenitor cells that can 
differentiate into multiple lineages including odontoblasts, osteoblasts, 
chondrocytes, neural cells, myocytes, cardiomyocytes, adipocytes, endothelial 
cells, melanocytes, and hepatocytes. Odontoblastic differentiation of DMSCs is 
pivotal in dentinogenesis, a delicate and dynamic process regulated at the 
molecular level by signaling pathways, transcription factors, and 
posttranscriptional and epigenetic regulation. Mutations or dysregulation of 
related genes may contribute to genetic diseases with dentin defects caused by 
impaired odontoblastic differentiation, including tricho-dento-osseous (TDO) 
syndrome, X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (XLH), Raine syndrome (RS), 
hypophosphatasia (HPP), Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia (SIOD), and 
Elsahy-Waters syndrome (EWS). Herein, recent progress in the molecular 
regulation of the odontoblastic differentiation of DMSCs is summarized. In 
addition, genetic syndromes associated with disorders of odontoblastic 
differentiation of DMSCs are discussed. An improved understanding of the 
molecular regulation and related genetic syndromes may help clinicians better 
understand the etiology and pathogenesis of dentin lesions in systematic 
diseases and identify novel treatment targets.

Copyright © 2023 Pan, Yang, Xu, Jin, Huang, Gao, Sun, Liu, Liu, Lu, Wang, Zhu 
and Jiang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1174579
PMCID: PMC10561098
PMID: 37818127

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.