---
reference_id: "PMID:34696155"
title: "Effect of Blue Light on Acne Vulgaris: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Diogo MLG
- Campos TM
- Fonseca ESR
- Pavani C
- Horliana ACRT
- Fernandes KPS
- Bussadori SK
- Fantin FGMM
- Leite DPV
- Yamamoto ÂTA
- Navarro RS
- Motta LJ
journal: Sensors (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/s21206943
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Blue Light on Acne Vulgaris: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Diogo MLG, Campos TM, Fonseca ESR, Pavani C, Horliana ACRT, Fernandes KPS, Bussadori SK, Fantin FGMM, Leite DPV, Yamamoto ÂTA, Navarro RS, Motta LJ
**Journal:** Sensors (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/s21206943](https://doi.org/10.3390/s21206943)

## Content

1. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Oct 19;21(20):6943. doi: 10.3390/s21206943.

Effect of Blue Light on Acne Vulgaris: A Systematic Review.

Diogo MLG(1), Campos TM(1), Fonseca ESR(2), Pavani C(1), Horliana ACRT(1), 
Fernandes KPS(1), Bussadori SK(1), Fantin FGMM(3), Leite DPV(3), Yamamoto 
ÂTA(4), Navarro RS(3), Motta LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Biophotonics Applied to Health Sciences Department, Nove de Julho University 
(UNINOVE), Vergueiro 245, São Paulo 01504-001, Brazil.
(2)Physics Department Covilhã, Universidade da Beira Interior, 6200-354 Covilhã, 
Portugal.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Universidade Brasil, São Paulo 08230-030, 
Brazil.
(4)Dentistry Department, Universidade Cruzeiro do Sul, São Paulo 01311-925, 
Brazil.

Acne is a dermatosis that affects almost 90% of the adolescent population 
worldwide and its treatment is performed with retinoids, antimicrobials, acids, 
and topical or systemic antibiotics. Side effects such as skin irritation in 
addition to microbial resistance to antibiotics are the main side effects found. 
Phototherapy with blue light is being used as an alternative treatment. Our 
objective was to analyze the use of blue light to treat inflammatory acne. We 
conducted a systematic literature review, following the recommendation PRISMA 
(Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and MetaAnalyses), including 
in the sample randomized clinical trial studies that compared blue light with 
another intervention as control. The research was carried out in the PUBMED and 
WEB of SCIENCE databases and the methodological quality of the studies evaluated 
were made by the Cochrane Collaboration Bias Risk Scale. After the exclusion of 
duplicates, the titles and abstracts of 81 articles were evaluated, and 50 
articles were selected for full reading, including in the review at the end 8 
articles. Studies have shown significant improvements in the overall picture of 
acne. It is concluded that despite the great potential in its use in the 
treatment of acne, there is a need for more detailed trials on the effect of 
blue light on the treatment of inflammatory acne.

DOI: 10.3390/s21206943
PMCID: PMC8537635
PMID: 34696155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.