---
reference_id: "PMID:34956087"
title: "Clinical Characteristics and Long-Term Recombinant Human Growth Hormone Treatment of 18q- Syndrome: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Liu S
- Chen M
- Yang H
- Chen S
- Wang L
- Duan L
- Zhu H
- Pan H
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2021.776835
keywords:
- Child
- China
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosome Disorders/complications, drug therapy"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18"
- Female
- "Growth Disorders/drug therapy, genetics"
- Human Growth Hormone/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Recombinant Proteins/therapeutic use
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characteristics and Long-Term Recombinant Human Growth Hormone Treatment of 18q- Syndrome: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Liu S, Chen M, Yang H, Chen S, Wang L, Duan L, Zhu H, Pan H
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2021.776835](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2021.776835)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Dec 9;12:776835. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.776835. eCollection 2021.

Clinical Characteristics and Long-Term Recombinant Human Growth Hormone 
Treatment of 18q- Syndrome: A Case Report and Literature Review.

Liu S(1), Chen M(1), Yang H(1), Chen S(1), Wang L(1), Duan L(1), Zhu H(1), Pan 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Endocrinology of National Health Commission, Department of 
Endocrinology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: 18q- syndrome is a rare chromosomal disease caused by the deletion 
of the long arm of chromosome 18. Some cases with 18q- syndrome can be combined 
with growth hormone deficiency (GHD), but data on the efficacy of recombinant 
human growth hormone (rhGH) treatment in 18q- syndrome are limited.
METHODS: Here, we report one case of 18q- syndrome successfully treated with 
long-term rhGH supplement. Previously reported cases in the literature are also 
reviewed to investigate the karyotype-phenotype relationship and their 
therapeutic response to rhGH.
RESULTS: A 7.9-year-old girl was referred for evaluation for short stature. 
Physical exam revealed proportionally short stature with a height of 111.10 cm 
(-3.02 SD score (SDS)), low-set ears, a high-arched palate, a small jaw, webbed 
neck, widely spaced nipples, long and tapering fingers, and cubitus valgus. 
Thyroid function test indicated subclinical hypothyroidism. The peak value of 
growth hormone was 10.26 ng/ml in the levodopa provocation test. Insulin-like 
growth factor 1 (IGF-1) was 126 ng/ml (57-316 ng/ml). Other laboratory 
investigations, including complete blood cell count, liver and kidney function, 
gonadal function, serum adrenocorticotropin levels, and serum cortisol levels, 
were all within normal ranges. Karyotype analysis showed 46, XX, del (18) (q21). 
L-Thyroxine replacement and rhGH treatment were initiated and maintained in the 
following 7 years. At the age of 14.8, her height has reached 159.5 cm with a 
height SDS increase of 2.82 SDS (from -3.02 SDS to -0.20 SDS). No significant 
side effects were found during the treatment. The literature review indicated 
the average rhGH treatment duration of 16 patients was 5.9 ± 3.3 years, and the 
average height SDS significantly increased from -3.12 ± 0.94 SDS to -1.38 ± 1.29 
SDS after the rhGH treatment (p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: The main clinical manifestations of 18q- syndrome include 
characteristic appearance, intellectual disability, and abnormal genital 
development. The literature review suggested a significant height benefit for 
short stature with 18q- syndrome from long-term rhGH treatment.

Copyright © 2021 Liu, Chen, Yang, Chen, Wang, Duan, Zhu and Pan.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.776835
PMCID: PMC8695685
PMID: 34956087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.