---
reference_id: "PMID:31280235"
title: Children with type 1 diabetes of early age at onset - immune and metabolic phenotypes.
authors:
- Sales Luis M
- Alcafache M
- Ferreira S
- Fitas AL
- Simões Pereira J
- Caramalho Í
- Lopes L
- Limbert C
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2019-0103
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Children with type 1 diabetes of early age at onset - immune and metabolic phenotypes.
**Authors:** Sales Luis M, Alcafache M, Ferreira S, Fitas AL, Simões Pereira J, Caramalho Í, Lopes L, Limbert C
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2019-0103](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2019-0103)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2019 Sep 25;32(9):935-941. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2019-0103.

Children with type 1 diabetes of early age at onset - immune and metabolic 
phenotypes.

Sales Luis M(1)(2), Alcafache M(1), Ferreira S(1), Fitas AL(1), Simões Pereira 
J(1)(3), Caramalho Í(4), Lopes L(1), Limbert C(1).

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology Unit, Hospital de Dona Estefânia, 
Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Paediatric Unit, Hospital São Francisco Xavier, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa 
Ocidental, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Endocrinology Unit, Instituto Português de Oncologia, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Gulbenkian Science Institute, Lisbon, Portugal.

Objectives We aimed to evaluate children with type 1 diabetes (T1D) with early 
age at onset (EAO) for clinical, immune and metabolic features in order to 
identify age-related disease phenotypes. Methods Comparative study of two groups 
of T1D children: EAO (≤5 years) and later age at onset (LAO; >5 years), 
regarding the presence of other autoimmune (AI) diseases, diabetes ketoacidosis 
and immunologic profile at onset and metabolic data 1 year after diagnosis. 
Statistical analysis was performed with significance set for p < 0.05. Results 
The study included 137 children (EAO = 52, mean age 3.6 ± 1.5 [mean ± standard 
deviation (SD)] and LAO = 85, mean age 10.4 ± 2.9). EAO was more associated with 
concomitant AI diseases (p = 0.032). Despite no differences in disease onset, 
EAO presented with lower C-peptide levels (p = 0.01) and higher absolute 
lymphocyte number (p < 0.0001), with an inverse correlation between these two 
variables (p = 0.028). Additionally, the EAO group had a higher frequency of 
serum detection of three antibodies (Abs) (p = 0.0008), specifically insulin Abs 
(p = 0.0001). One year after diagnosis, EAO had higher total daily insulin (TDI) 
dose (p = 0.008), despite similar hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c). Conclusions Our data 
show an association of EAO T1D with more AI diseases, higher number of Abs, 
lower initial insulin reservoir and higher insulin requirements 1 year after 
diagnosis. In this group, immune imbalance seems more evident and disease 
progression faster, probably reflecting distinct "immune environment" with 
different ages at disease onset. Further studies in the field of immunogenetics 
and immune tolerance are required, to improve patient stratification and find 
novel targets for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2019-0103
PMID: 31280235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]