---
reference_id: "PMID:37146916"
title: Deep intronic mutation in CRTAP results in unstable isoforms of the protein to induce type I collagen aggregation in a lethal type of osteogenesis imperfecta type VII.
authors:
- Udupa P
- Shrikondawar AN
- Nayak SS
- Shah H
- Ranjan A
- Girisha KM
- Bhavani GS
- Ghosh DK
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166741
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Collagen Type I/genetics, metabolism"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, metabolism"
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Molecular Chaperones/genetics
- Mutation
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
- Amino Acids
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep intronic mutation in CRTAP results in unstable isoforms of the protein to induce type I collagen aggregation in a lethal type of osteogenesis imperfecta type VII.
**Authors:** Udupa P, Shrikondawar AN, Nayak SS, Shah H, Ranjan A, Girisha KM, Bhavani GS, Ghosh DK
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166741](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166741)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2023 Aug;1869(6):166741. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166741. Epub 2023 May 3.

Deep intronic mutation in CRTAP results in unstable isoforms of the protein to
induce type I collagen aggregation in a lethal type of osteogenesis imperfecta
type VII.

Udupa P(1), Shrikondawar AN(2), Nayak SS(1), Shah H(3), Ranjan A(2), Girisha
KM(4), Bhavani GS(5), Ghosh DK(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka 576104, India.
(2)Computational and Functional Genomics Group, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting
and Diagnostics, Hyderabad 500039, Telangana, India.
(3)Department of Pediatric Orthopedics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal,
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka 576104, India.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka 576104, India; Department of
Genetics, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sultan Qaboos University,
Muscat, Sultanate of Oman.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka 576104, India. Electronic
address: gsl.bhavani@manipal.edu.
(6)Enteric Disease Division, Department of Microbiology, Kasturba Medical
College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka
576104, India. Electronic address: debasish.kumar@manipal.edu.

Genetic mutations are involved in Mendelian disorders. Unbuffered intronic
mutations in gene variants can generate aberrant splice sites in mutant
transcripts, resulting in mutant isoforms of proteins with modulated expression,
stability, and function in diseased cells. Here, we identify a deep intronic
variant, c.794_1403A>G, in CRTAP by genome sequencing of a male fetus with
osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type VII. The mutation introduces cryptic splice
sites in intron-3 of CRTAP, resulting in two mature mutant transcripts with
cryptic exons. While transcript-1 translates to a truncated isoform (277 amino
acids) with thirteen C-terminal non-wild-type amino acids, transcript-2
translates to a wild-type protein sequence, except that this isoform contains an
in-frame fusion of non-wild-type twenty-five amino acids in a tetratricopeptide
repeat sequence. Both mutant isoforms of CRTAP are unstable due to the presence
of a unique 'GWxxI' degron, which finally leads to loss of proline hydroxylation
and aggregation of type I collagen. Although type I collagen aggregates undergo
autophagy, the overall proteotoxicity resulted in death of the proband cells by
senescence. In summary, we present a genetic disease pathomechanism by linking a
novel deep intronic mutation in CRTAP to unstable mutant isoforms of the protein
in lethal OI type VII.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2023.166741
PMCID: PMC7616376
PMID: 37146916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Authors report
no competing conflict of interest.
