---
reference_id: "PMID:36203991"
title: Migraine aura-like symptoms at onset of stroke and stroke-like symptoms in migraine with aura.
authors:
- Scutelnic A
- Kreis LA
- Beyeler M
- Heldner MR
- Meinel TR
- Kaesmacher J
- Hakim A
- Arnold M
- Fischer U
- Mattle HP
- Schankin CJ
- Jung S
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1004058
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Migraine aura-like symptoms at onset of stroke and stroke-like symptoms in migraine with aura.
**Authors:** Scutelnic A, Kreis LA, Beyeler M, Heldner MR, Meinel TR, Kaesmacher J, Hakim A, Arnold M, Fischer U, Mattle HP, Schankin CJ, Jung S
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.1004058](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.1004058)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Sep 14;13:1004058. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1004058. 
eCollection 2022.

Migraine aura-like symptoms at onset of stroke and stroke-like symptoms in 
migraine with aura.

Scutelnic A(1), Kreis LA(1), Beyeler M(1), Heldner MR(1), Meinel TR(1), 
Kaesmacher J(2), Hakim A(2), Arnold M(1), Fischer U(1)(3), Mattle HP(1), 
Schankin CJ(1), Jung S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, University Hospital Bern, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Inselspital, 
University Hospital and University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Neurology and Stroke Centre, University Hospital Bern, 
University of Bern, Basel, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Front Neurol. 2023 Mar 13;14:1178144. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1178144.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: In general, suddenly occurring neurological deficits, 
i.e., negative neurological symptoms, are considered symptoms of focal cerebral 
ischemia, while positive irritative symptoms with gradual onset are viewed as 
the characteristics of migraine aura. Nevertheless, cortical spreading 
depolarization, the pathophysiological basis of migraine aura, has also been 
observed in acute ischemic stroke. The aim of our study was to determine the 
frequency of migraine aura-like symptoms at ischemic stroke onset and 
stroke-like symptoms in migraine with aura.
METHODS: We interviewed 350 consecutive patients with ischemic stroke and 343 
with migraine with aura using a structured questionnaire. Stroke diagnosis was 
confirmed by imaging, and migraine with aura was diagnosed according to the 
current criteria of the International Headache Society. Patients with wake-up 
strokes or severe cognitive deficits that precluded a useful interview were 
excluded from the study.
RESULTS: Seventy-eight patients with stroke (22.3%) reported visual symptoms, 
145 (41.4%) sensory symptoms, 197 (56.3%) a paresis, and 201 patients (57.4%) 
more than one symptom, compared to 326 migraine patients with aura (95%) with 
visual symptoms (P < 0.001), 175 (51%) with sensory symptoms (p = 0.011), 50 
(14.6%) with paresis (P < 0.001), and 211 (61.5%) with more than one symptom (p 
= 0.27). Among patients with stroke, migraine-like symptoms were frequent: 36 
patients (46.2%) with visual disturbance and 78 (53.8%) with sensory symptoms 
experienced irritative sensations. Paresis-onset in stroke lasted longer than 5 
min in 43 patients (21.8%). Spreading of sensory and motor symptoms occurred in 
37 (25.5%) and 37 (18.8%) patients, respectively. Stroke-like negative symptoms 
in migraine with aura occurred in 39 patients (12%) with visual symptoms, in 55 
(31.4%) with sensory symptoms, and paresis appeared suddenly in 14 patients 
(28%). More than one symptom in succession occurred in 117 patients with stroke 
(58.2%) and in 201 migraine with aura patients (95.3%; P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Many patients with stroke experience migraine-like symptoms at 
stroke onset, and many migraine with aura patients have stroke-like symptoms. 
Though overall the symptom frequencies of the two groups are significantly 
different, clarifying the differential diagnosis in an individual patient 
requires additional history elements, physical findings, or results of ancillary 
investigations.

Copyright © 2022 Scutelnic, Kreis, Beyeler, Heldner, Meinel, Kaesmacher, Hakim, 
Arnold, Fischer, Mattle, Schankin and Jung.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.1004058
PMCID: PMC9531679
PMID: 36203991

Conflict of interest statement: Authors AS and SJ report research support from 
the Swiss Heart Foundation. Author JK reports grants from the Swiss Academy of 
Medical Sciences/Bangerter Foundation, Swiss Stroke Society, and Clinical Trials 
Unit Bern during the conduct of the study. Author MRH has received grants from 
the Swiss Heart Foundation, the Bangerter Foundation, the Swiss National Science 
Foundation, the sitem-insel Support Funds, and personal fees for advisory board 
participation from Amgen. Author UF reports consulting for Medtronic, Stryker, 
CSL Behring. Advisory boards for Portola/Alexion (money paid to institution). 
Author MA reports personal fees from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Covidien, Daiichi Sankyo, Medtronic, Novartis, Pfizer, and Amgen. Author HPM 
grants from Abbott for the PC and PRIMA trials and from Cerenovus for the ARISE 
studies. Personal and speaker fees from Cerenovus, Bayer, Servier, Medtronic, 
and Stryker. Author CJS reports consulting, advisory boards, speaker, travel 
support for/from Novartis, Eli Lilly, TEVA Pharmaceuticals, Allergan, Almirall, 
Amgen, Lundbeck, MindMed, and Grünenthal. Part-time employee at Zynnon. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.