---
reference_id: "PMID:16917882"
title: "Lasker's coefficient of isonymy between and within 16 Sardinian villages in the periods 1825-1849, 1875-1899, and 1925-1949."
authors:
- Sanna E
- Iovine MC
- Melis M
- Floris G
journal: Am J Hum Biol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/ajhb.20532
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lasker's coefficient of isonymy between and within 16 Sardinian villages in the periods 1825-1849, 1875-1899, and 1925-1949.
**Authors:** Sanna E, Iovine MC, Melis M, Floris G
**Journal:** Am J Hum Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajhb.20532](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajhb.20532)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Biol. 2006 Sep-Oct;18(5):621-9. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.20532.

Lasker's coefficient of isonymy between and within 16 Sardinian villages in the 
periods 1825-1849, 1875-1899, and 1925-1949.

Sanna E(1), Iovine MC, Melis M, Floris G.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Sperimentale, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, 
Italy. sannae@unica.it

Coefficients of relationship by isonymy, based on the frequency of common 
surnames, were used to estimate the biological affinity between (R(ib)) and 
within (R(iw)) 16 Sardinian villages in the periods 1825-1849, 1875-1899, and 
1925-1949. The database for the surname analysis consisted of 13,515 marriages 
registered in the parishes of villages, all belonging to the Sardinian 
linguistic area. The values of R(ib) and R(iw) tend to decrease in time. In all 
three periods, the R(ib) values generally decrease as the geographical distance 
between villages increases. The negative values of the Bravais-Pearson 
coefficient of correlation between the matrix of R(ib) values and the matrices 
of geographical distances (calculated both in a straight line and from road 
distances) are significant for each period (modified Mantel test), with slightly 
higher correlation coefficients for road distances. Moreover, the plots of 
isonymic relationships obtained by nonmetric multidimensional scaling for 
1825-1849 and 1925-1949 show that the biological relationships between 
neighboring villages increase in the latter period. The positive values of the 
Bravais-Pearson coefficients of correlation between R(iw) and altitude are 
significant in all three periods, while the correlation between R(iw) and 
population size is not significant, even when altitude is controlled for. Since 
altitude is considered an indicator of isolation, the results obtained with the 
coefficient of relationship by isonymy within villages also support the 
isolation-by-distance model. R(ib) values provided a reliable picture of the 
biological relationships between 16 Sardinian villages, while R(iw) values 
illustrated the biological affinity within the communities for a period of 100 
years, from 1825-1849 to 1925-1949.

DOI: 10.1002/ajhb.20532
PMID: 16917882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]