---
reference_id: "PMID:34526996"
title: Transcriptional Changes in Regulatory T Cells From Patients With Autoimmune Polyendocrine Syndrome Type 1 Suggest Functional Impairment of Lipid Metabolism and Gut Homing.
authors:
- Berger AH
- Bratland E
- Sjøgren T
- Heimli M
- Tyssedal T
- Bruserud Ø
- Johansson S
- Husebye ES
- Oftedal BE
- Wolff ASB
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.722860
keywords:
- Adult
- Case-Control Studies
- "Fatty Acid Synthase, Type I/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- "Intestinal Mucosa/immunology, metabolism"
- Lipid Metabolism/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptional Changes in Regulatory T Cells From Patients With Autoimmune Polyendocrine Syndrome Type 1 Suggest Functional Impairment of Lipid Metabolism and Gut Homing.
**Authors:** Berger AH, Bratland E, Sjøgren T, Heimli M, Tyssedal T, Bruserud Ø, Johansson S, Husebye ES, Oftedal BE, Wolff ASB
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.722860](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.722860)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Aug 30;12:722860. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.722860. 
eCollection 2021.

Transcriptional Changes in Regulatory T Cells From Patients With Autoimmune 
Polyendocrine Syndrome Type 1 Suggest Functional Impairment of Lipid Metabolism 
and Gut Homing.

Berger AH(1)(2)(3), Bratland E(1)(2)(3), Sjøgren T(1)(2)(4), Heimli M(1)(2)(5), 
Tyssedal T(1)(2), Bruserud Ø(1)(2)(6), Johansson S(1)(2)(3), Husebye 
ES(1)(2)(4), Oftedal BE(1)(2)(4), Wolff ASB(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Kristian Gerhard (KG) Jebsen Center for Autoimmune Disorders, University of 
Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway.
(4)Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(5)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Haukeland University 
Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS-1) is a monogenic model disorder 
of organ-specific autoimmunity caused by mutations in the Autoimmune regulator 
(AIRE) gene. AIRE facilitates the expression of organ-specific transcripts in 
the thymus, which is essential for efficient removal of dangerous self-reacting 
T cells and for inducing regulatory T cells (Tregs). Although reduced numbers 
and function of Tregs have been reported in APS-I patients, the impact of AIRE 
deficiency on gene expression in these cells is unknown. Here, we report for the 
first time on global transcriptional patterns of isolated Tregs from APS-1 
patients compared to healthy subjects. Overall, we found few differences between 
the groups, although deviant expression was observed for the genes TMEM39B, 
SKIDA1, TLN2, GPR15, FASN, BCAR1, HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, HLA-DRA, GPSM3 and AKR1C3. 
Of significant interest, the consistent downregulation of GPR15 may indicate 
failure of Treg gut homing which could be of relevance for the gastrointestinal 
manifestations commonly seen in APS-1. Upregulated FASN expression in APS-1 
Tregs points to increased metabolic activity suggesting a putative link to 
faulty Treg function. Functional studies are needed to determine the 
significance of these findings for the immunopathogenesis of APS-1 and for Treg 
immunobiology in general.

Copyright © 2021 Berger, Bratland, Sjøgren, Heimli, Tyssedal, Bruserud, 
Johansson, Husebye, Oftedal and Wolff.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.722860
PMCID: PMC8435668
PMID: 34526996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.