---
reference_id: "PMID:27188665"
title: Varicella zoster virus infection.
authors:
- Gershon AA
- Breuer J
- Cohen JI
- Cohrs RJ
- Gershon MD
- Gilden D
- Grose C
- Hambleton S
- Kennedy PG
- Oxman MN
- Seward JF
- Yamanishi K
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.16
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella zoster virus infection.
**Authors:** Gershon AA, Breuer J, Cohen JI, Cohrs RJ, Gershon MD, Gilden D, Grose C, Hambleton S, Kennedy PG, Oxman MN, Seward JF, Yamanishi K
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2015.16](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2015.16)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2015 Jul 2;1:15016. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.16.

Varicella zoster virus infection.

Gershon AA(1), Breuer J(2), Cohen JI(3), Cohrs RJ(4), Gershon MD(5), Gilden 
D(4), Grose C(6), Hambleton S(7), Kennedy PG(8), Oxman MN(9), Seward JF(10), 
Yamanishi K(11).

Author information:
(1)Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, 630 West 168th 
Street, New York, New York 10032, USA.
(2)Department of Infection and Immunity, University College London, UK.
(3)Medical Virology Section, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Departments of Neurology and Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases/Virology, Children's Hospital, University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(7)Primary Immunodeficiency Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle 
University Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(8)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Southern General 
Hospital, Glasgow University, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.
(9)Infectious Diseases Section, Medicine Service, Veterans Affairs San Diego 
Healthcare System, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, 
University of California San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego, California, 
USA.
(10)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory 
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, Georgia, 
USA.
(11)Research Foundation for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 
Japan.

Infection with varicella zoster virus (VZV) causes varicella (chickenpox), which 
can be severe in immunocompromised individuals, infants and adults. Primary 
infection is followed by latency in ganglionic neurons. During this period, no 
virus particles are produced and no obvious neuronal damage occurs. Reactivation 
of the virus leads to virus replication, which causes zoster (shingles) in 
tissues innervated by the involved neurons, inflammation and cell death - a 
process that can lead to persistent radicular pain (postherpetic neuralgia). The 
pathogenesis of postherpetic neuralgia is unknown and it is difficult to treat. 
Furthermore, other zoster complications can develop, including myelitis, cranial 
nerve palsies, meningitis, stroke (vasculopathy), retinitis, and 
gastroenterological infections such as ulcers, pancreatitis and hepatitis. VZV 
is the only human herpesvirus for which highly effective vaccines are available. 
After varicella or vaccination, both wild-type and vaccine-type VZV establish 
latency, and long-term immunity to varicella develops. However, immunity does 
not protect against reactivation. Thus, two vaccines are used: one to prevent 
varicella and one to prevent zoster. In this Primer we discuss the pathogenesis, 
diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of VZV infections, with an emphasis on the 
molecular events that regulate these diseases. For an illustrated summary of 
this Primer, visit: http://go.nature.com/14xVI1.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.16
PMCID: PMC5381807
PMID: 27188665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests J.B., J.I.C., R.J.C., 
M.D.G., D.G., C.G., S.H., M.N.O. and J.F.S. declare no competing interests. 
A.A.G. declares service contracts from Merck to investigate the safety of VZV 
vaccines (identifying VZV in samples from patients with possible adverse 
reactions), chairs an independent data monitoring committee for 
GlaxoSmithKline’s Phase III subunit glycoprotein E zoster vaccine trial, 
consults with Pfizer when invited, and has participated in an educational 
programme (supported by an unrestricted educational grant) on zoster for 
GlaxoSmithKline. P.G.E.K. has served on a scientific advisory board on zoster 
vaccination for Sanofi Pasteur MSD. Y.K. is Director General of the BIKEN 
foundation (The Research Foundation for Microbial Diseases of Osaka University), 
which produces varicella vaccines.