---
reference_id: "PMID:11544476"
title: "Hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy is caused by a mutation in CDH3, encoding P-cadherin."
authors:
- Sprecher E
- Bergman R
- Richard G
- Lurie R
- Shalev S
- Petronius D
- Shalata A
- Anbinder Y
- Leibu R
- Perlman I
- Cohen N
- Szargel R
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/ng716
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cadherins/genetics
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16"
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/complications, genetics"
- Genetic Markers
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/complications, genetics"
- Mutation
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy is caused by a mutation in CDH3, encoding P-cadherin.
**Authors:** Sprecher E, Bergman R, Richard G, Lurie R, Shalev S, Petronius D, Shalata A, Anbinder Y, Leibu R, Perlman I, Cohen N, Szargel R
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng716](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng716)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Oct;29(2):134-6. doi: 10.1038/ng716.

Hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy is caused by a mutation in CDH3, 
encoding P-cadherin.

Sprecher E(1), Bergman R, Richard G, Lurie R, Shalev S, Petronius D, Shalata A, 
Anbinder Y, Leibu R, Perlman I, Cohen N, Szargel R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa 31096, Israel. 
e_sprecher@rambam.health.gov.il

Congenital hypotrichosis associated with juvenile macular dystrophy (HJMD; 
MIM601553) is an autosomal recessive disorder of unknown etiology, characterized 
by hair loss heralding progressive macular degeneration and early blindness. We 
used homozygosity mapping in four consanguineous families to localize the gene 
defective in HJMD to 16q22.1. This region contains CDH3, encoding P-cadherin, 
which is expressed in the retinal pigment epithelium and hair follicles. 
Mutation analysis shows in all families a common homozygous deletion in exon 8 
of CDH3. These results establish the molecular etiology of HJMD and implicate 
for the first time a cadherin molecule in the pathogenesis of a human hair and 
retinal disorder.

DOI: 10.1038/ng716
PMID: 11544476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]