---
reference_id: "PMID:16385448"
title: "Deletion of PREPL, a gene encoding a putative serine oligopeptidase, in patients with hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome."
authors:
- Jaeken J
- Martens K
- Francois I
- Eyskens F
- Lecointre C
- Derua R
- Meulemans S
- Slootstra JW
- Waelkens E
- de Zegher F
- Creemers JW
- Matthijs G
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1086/498852
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Basic/genetics"
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Neutral/genetics"
- Base Sequence
- "Biotin/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- "Blotting, Northern"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2/genetics"
- Cystinuria/genetics
- "Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel"
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Organophosphorus Compounds/metabolism
- Prolyl Oligopeptidases
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Serine Endopeptidases/genetics, metabolism"
- Substrate Specificity
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletion of PREPL, a gene encoding a putative serine oligopeptidase, in patients with hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome.
**Authors:** Jaeken J, Martens K, Francois I, Eyskens F, Lecointre C, Derua R, Meulemans S, Slootstra JW, Waelkens E, de Zegher F, Creemers JW, Matthijs G
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1086/498852](https://doi.org/10.1086/498852)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Jan;78(1):38-51. doi: 10.1086/498852. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Deletion of PREPL, a gene encoding a putative serine oligopeptidase, in patients 
with hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome.

Jaeken J(1), Martens K, Francois I, Eyskens F, Lecointre C, Derua R, Meulemans 
S, Slootstra JW, Waelkens E, de Zegher F, Creemers JW, Matthijs G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium.

In 11 patients with a recessive congenital disorder, which we refer to as "the 
hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome," microdeletion of part of the SLC3A1 and PREPL 
genes on chromosome 2p21 was found. Patients present with generalized hypotonia 
at birth, nephrolithiasis, growth hormone deficiency, minor facial dysmorphism, 
and failure to thrive, followed by hyperphagia and rapid weight gain in late 
childhood. Since loss-of-function mutations in SLC3A1 are known to cause 
isolated cystinuria type I, and since the expression of the flanking genes, 
C2orf34 and PPM1B, was normal, the extended phenotype can be attributed to the 
deletion of PREPL. PREPL is localized in the cytosol and shows homology with 
prolyl endopeptidase and oligopeptidase B. Substitution of the predicted 
catalytic residues (Ser470, Asp556, and His601) by alanines resulted in loss of 
reactivity with a serine hydrolase-specific probe. In sharp contrast to prolyl 
oligopeptidase and oligopeptidase B, which require both aminoterminal and 
carboxyterminal sequences for activity, PREPL activity appears to depend only on 
the carboxyterminal domain. Taken together, these results suggest that PREPL is 
a novel oligopeptidase, with unique structural and functional characteristics, 
involved in hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome.

DOI: 10.1086/498852
PMCID: PMC1380222
PMID: 16385448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]