---
reference_id: PMID:30733602
title: The proteostasis network and its decline in ageing.
authors:
- Hipp MS
- Kasturi P
- Hartl FU
journal: Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41580-019-0101-y
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Humans
- "Molecular Chaperones/genetics, metabolism"
- "Parkinson Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Protein Folding
- Proteolysis
- Proteostasis
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The proteostasis network and its decline in ageing.
**Authors:** Hipp MS, Kasturi P, Hartl FU
**Journal:** Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41580-019-0101-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-019-0101-y)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2019 Jul;20(7):421-435. doi: 10.1038/s41580-019-0101-y.

The proteostasis network and its decline in ageing.

Hipp MS(1), Kasturi P(1), Hartl FU(2).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Cellular Biochemistry, 
Martinsried, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Cellular Biochemistry, 
Martinsried, Germany. uhartl@biochem.mpg.de.

Ageing is a major risk factor for the development of many diseases, prominently 
including neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer disease and Parkinson 
disease. A hallmark of many age-related diseases is the dysfunction in protein 
homeostasis (proteostasis), leading to the accumulation of protein aggregates. 
In healthy cells, a complex proteostasis network, comprising molecular 
chaperones and proteolytic machineries and their regulators, operates to ensure 
the maintenance of proteostasis. These factors coordinate protein synthesis with 
polypeptide folding, the conservation of protein conformation and protein 
degradation. However, sustaining proteome balance is a challenging task in the 
face of various external and endogenous stresses that accumulate during ageing. 
These stresses lead to the decline of proteostasis network capacity and proteome 
integrity. The resulting accumulation of misfolded and aggregated proteins 
affects, in particular, postmitotic cell types such as neurons, manifesting in 
disease. Recent analyses of proteome-wide changes that occur during ageing 
inform strategies to improve proteostasis. The possibilities of pharmacological 
augmentation of the capacity of proteostasis networks hold great promise for 
delaying the onset of age-related pathologies associated with proteome 
deterioration and for extending healthspan.

DOI: 10.1038/s41580-019-0101-y
PMID: 30733602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]