---
reference_id: "PMID:35637045"
title: "Additional autoimmune diseases associated with type 1 diabetes in children and adolescents: A French single-center study from 2014 to 2021."
authors:
- Burbaud M
- Renard E
- Jellimann S
- Luc A
- Di Patrizio M
- Remen T
- Legagneur C
journal: Arch Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2022.03.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Additional autoimmune diseases associated with type 1 diabetes in children and adolescents: A French single-center study from 2014 to 2021.
**Authors:** Burbaud M, Renard E, Jellimann S, Luc A, Di Patrizio M, Remen T, Legagneur C
**Journal:** Arch Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arcped.2022.03.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcped.2022.03.002)

## Content

1. Arch Pediatr. 2022 Jul;29(5):381-387. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2022.03.002. Epub 
2022 May 27.

Additional autoimmune diseases associated with type 1 diabetes in children and 
adolescents: A French single-center study from 2014 to 2021.

Burbaud M(1), Renard E(1), Jellimann S(1), Luc A(2), Di Patrizio M(1), Remen 
T(2), Legagneur C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of pediatrics, Regional University Hospital of Nancy, Allée du 
Morvan, Vandoeuvre-Lès-Nancy 54511, France.
(2)MPI department, Methodology, data management and statistic Unit, Regional 
University Hospital of Nancy, Vandoeuvre-Lès-Nancy, France.
(3)Department of pediatrics, Regional University Hospital of Nancy, Allée du 
Morvan, Vandoeuvre-Lès-Nancy 54511, France. Electronic address: 
c.legagneur@chru-nancy.fr.

CONTEXT: Patients with type 1 diabetes (T1D) are more likely to develop other 
autoimmune diseases than the general population.
OBJECTIVES: To describe additional autoimmunity in a cohort of children and 
adolescents with T1D, as well as to identify factors associated with the 
presence of additional autoantibodies (AABs) and of additional autoimmune 
diseases (AADs).
SETTING: This was a single-center retrospective cohort study of 179 children and 
adolescents (median age: 9.1 years) diagnosed with T1D between 2014 and 2020 in 
a specialized center in France. Patients were screened for autoimmune 
thyroiditis and celiac disease at T1D diagnosis and once every 1-2 years during 
follow-up. Other AADs and their specific autoantibodies were screened for only 
if clinical or laboratory signs were present.
RESULTS: At T1D diagnosis, 15.6% of participants presented with at least one 
type of AAB including antibodies specific to Hashimoto's disease (TPOAb and/or 
TGAb) and/or to celiac disease (tTGAb and/or EMAb). Only 2.8% of participants 
presented with an AAD as early as T1D diagnosis. The median follow-up was 37 
months. The cumulative incidence of AABs and AADs at 2 years of follow-up was, 
respectively, 3.9% and 5.4%, and it doubled at 3 years of follow-up. Only one 
patient, also affected by Down syndrome, was diagnosed with 2 AADs. Hashimoto's 
disease was the most frequently diagnosed AAD, followed by celiac disease, both 
at an asymptomatic stage. Vitiligo and Graves' disease were also diagnosed in 
this cohort but affected few patients. Children aged 6-12 years were more likely 
to present with an AAD at diabetes diagnosis (p = 0.043).
CONCLUSION: The high prevalence and incidence of additional autoimmunity in 
children and adolescents with T1D justifies regular screening of AABs and AADs.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcped.2022.03.002
PMID: 35637045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.