---
reference_id: "PMID:39663153"
title: "Efficacy and safety of nine immunosuppressive agents for primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis in adults: a pairwise and network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhu Y
- Chen B
- Xu G
journal: Ren Fail
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/0886022X.2024.2438861
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Cyclosporine/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination/adverse effects, methods"
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/drug therapy"
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of nine immunosuppressive agents for primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis in adults: a pairwise and network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhu Y, Chen B, Xu G
**Journal:** Ren Fail (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/0886022X.2024.2438861](https://doi.org/10.1080/0886022X.2024.2438861)

## Content

1. Ren Fail. 2024 Dec;46(2):2438861. doi: 10.1080/0886022X.2024.2438861. Epub
2024  Dec 11.

Efficacy and safety of nine immunosuppressive agents for primary focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis in adults: a pairwise and network meta-analysis.

Zhu Y(1), Chen B(1), Xu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Jiangxi Medical 
College, Nanchang University, Nanchang, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Immunosuppressants are widely used as the preferred treatment for 
primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (pFSGS). Nevertheless, controversies 
persist regarding the effectiveness and side effects of different 
immunosuppressive medications.
METHODS: From July 2023 until June 2024, we systematically searched PubMed, 
Cochrane Library, Web of Science, clinicalrials.gov, SinoMed, Chinese 
Biomedical, Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure, Wanfang, and VIP 
information. Randomized controlled trials comparing different immunosuppressants 
were included in adult patients with pFSGS, with total remission (TR) and 24-h 
urine total protein (24-h UTP) as the main outcome measures.
RESULTS: We identified 20 RCTs comparing nine different immunosuppressants for 
the final analysis. Most immunosuppressants showed better therapeutic effects in 
TR compared to non-immunosuppressive therapies (NIT), with risk ratios (RRs) of 
2.22 (95% CI 1.41-3.50) for cyclosporin, 2.10 (1.57-2.80) for 
leflunomide-combined steroids, 2.01 (1.24-3.27) for chlorambucil-combined 
steroids, 1.98 (1.17-3.33) for tacrolimus-combined steroids, 1.89 (1.36-2.63) 
for cyclosporin-combined steroids, 1.67 (1.28-2.18) for mycophenolate 
mofetil-combined steroids, and 1.47 (1.21-1.80) for steroids. Only mycophenolate 
mofetil-combined steroids (SMD -11, 95% CI -21 to -0.64) showed significant 
superiority in reducing 24-h UTP when compared with NIT. The subgroup analyses 
of steroids-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) patients showed that CSA + STE 
was significantly superior than the NIT group, with RR of 10.5 (95% CI 
2.28-44.35).
CONCLUSION: Steroids remain the recommended initial treatment for pFSGS. For 
those patients with SRNS, CSA + STE might be the best choice for improving the 
rate of TR. LEF + STE and MMF + STE also appear to offer a steroid-saving 
alternative to high-dose glucocorticoids for patients.

DOI: 10.1080/0886022X.2024.2438861
PMCID: PMC11636141
PMID: 39663153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).