---
reference_id: "PMID:37443770"
title: "Dopamine Transporter Deficiency Syndrome (DTDS): Expanding the Clinical Phenotype and Precision Medicine Approaches."
authors:
- Ng J
- Barral S
- Waddington SN
- Kurian MA
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12131737
keywords:
- Precision Medicine
- Phenotype
- Dopamine Plasma Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- "Thymidine/analogs & derivatives"
- Triphenylmethyl Compounds
- Parkinson Disease
- Dystonic Disorders
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dopamine Transporter Deficiency Syndrome (DTDS): Expanding the Clinical Phenotype and Precision Medicine Approaches.
**Authors:** Ng J, Barral S, Waddington SN, Kurian MA
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12131737](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12131737)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Jun 28;12(13):1737. doi: 10.3390/cells12131737.

Dopamine Transporter Deficiency Syndrome (DTDS): Expanding the Clinical 
Phenotype and Precision Medicine Approaches.

Ng J(1)(2), Barral S(3), Waddington SN(1)(4), Kurian MA(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Gene Transfer Technology Group, EGA UCL Institute for Women's Health, 
University College London, London WC1E 6HX, UK.
(2)Genetic Therapy Accelerator Centre, Queens Square Institute of Neurology, 
University College London, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(3)Developmental Neurosciences, Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease in 
Children, GOS UCL Institute of Child Health, University College London, London 
WC1N 1DZ, UK.
(4)Wits/SAMRC Antiviral Gene Therapy Research Unit, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2193, South Africa.
(5)Paediatric Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London WC1N 
3JH, UK.

Infantile parkinsonism-dystonia due to dopamine transporter deficiency syndrome 
(DTDS) is an ultrarare childhood movement disorder caused by biallelic 
loss-of-function mutations in the SLC6A3 gene. Advances in genomic analysis have 
revealed an evolving spectrum of SLC6A3-related neurological and 
neuropsychiatric disorders. Since the initial clinical and genetic 
characterisation of DTDS in 2009, there have been thirty-one published cases 
with a variety of protein-truncating variants (nonsense variants, splice-site 
changes, and deletions) and missense changes. Amino acid substitutions result in 
mutant proteins with impaired dopamine transporter function due to reduced 
transporter activity, impaired dopamine binding, reduced cell-surface 
expression, and aberrant posttranslational protein modification with impaired 
glycosylation. In this review, we provide an overview of the expanding clinical 
phenotype of DTDS and the precision therapies in development, including 
pharmacochaperones and gene therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12131737
PMCID: PMC10341083
PMID: 37443770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.N., M.A.K., and S.N.W. are co-inventors on a 
patent application titled “Gene therapy for DTDS” (GB2101958.3). M.A.K. was 
sponsored by Agilis to attend the AADC Deficiency International Advisory Board 
(AADC-D IAB) on 27 June 2018. S.N.W. has previous or existing consultancy 
agreements with ONO Pharmaceuticals, Synpromics Ltd., Reliance Biosciences, 
Codiak Biosciences, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company, and LivaNova Plc. M.A.K. and 
S.N.W. hold or have previously held consultancy agreements with Biomarin, and 
S.N.W. and J.N. also have consultancy agreements with Albion Capital. J.N. and 
S.N.W. have sponsored research agreements with Synpromics/Askbio Europe and 
Rocket Pharma. M.A.K. and S.N.W. are founders of Bloomsbury Genetic Therapies. 
J.N. holds equity in Bloomsbury Genetic Therapies.