---
reference_id: "PMID:21129728"
title: "Temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome is caused by loss-of-function mutations in chondroitin synthase 1, a potential target of BMP signaling."
authors:
- Li Y
- Laue K
- Temtamy S
- Aglan M
- Kotan LD
- Yigit G
- Canan H
- Pawlik B
- Nürnberg G
- Wakeling EL
- Quarrell OW
- Baessmann I
- Lanktree MB
- Yilmaz M
- Hegele RA
- Amr K
- May KW
- Nürnberg P
- Topaloglu AK
- Hammerschmidt M
- Wollnik B
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.003
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/metabolism
- Brachydactyly
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "N-Acetylgalactosaminyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Syndrome
- Zebrafish
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome is caused by loss-of-function mutations in chondroitin synthase 1, a potential target of BMP signaling.
**Authors:** Li Y, Laue K, Temtamy S, Aglan M, Kotan LD, Yigit G, Canan H, Pawlik B, Nürnberg G, Wakeling EL, Quarrell OW, Baessmann I, Lanktree MB, Yilmaz M, Hegele RA, Amr K, May KW, Nürnberg P, Topaloglu AK, Hammerschmidt M, Wollnik B
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.003)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Dec 10;87(6):757-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.003.

Temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome is caused by loss-of-function mutations 
in chondroitin synthase 1, a potential target of BMP signaling.

Li Y(1), Laue K, Temtamy S, Aglan M, Kotan LD, Yigit G, Canan H, Pawlik B, 
Nürnberg G, Wakeling EL, Quarrell OW, Baessmann I, Lanktree MB, Yilmaz M, Hegele 
RA, Amr K, May KW, Nürnberg P, Topaloglu AK, Hammerschmidt M, Wollnik B.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Germany.

Altered Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling leads to multiple 
developmental defects, including brachydactyly and deafness. Here we identify 
chondroitin synthase 1 (CHSY1) as a potential mediator of BMP effects. We show 
that loss of human CHSY1 function causes autosomal-recessive Temtamy preaxial 
brachydactyly syndrome (TPBS), mainly characterized by limb malformations, short 
stature, and hearing loss. After mapping the TPBS locus to chromosome 
15q26-qterm, we identified causative mutations in five consanguineous TPBS 
families. In zebrafish, antisense-mediated chsy1 knockdown causes defects in 
multiple developmental processes, some of which are likely to also be causative 
in the etiology of TPBS. In the inner ears of zebrafish larvae, chsy1 is 
expressed similarly to the BMP inhibitor dan and in a complementary fashion to 
bmp2b. Furthermore, unrestricted Bmp2b signaling or loss of Dan activity leads 
to reduced chsy1 expression and, during epithelial morphogenesis, defects 
similar to those that occur upon Chsy1 inactivation, indicating that Bmp 
signaling affects inner-ear development by repressing chsy1. In addition, we 
obtained strikingly similar zebrafish phenotypes after chsy1 overexpression, 
which might explain why, in humans, brachydactyly can be caused by mutations 
leading either to loss or to gain of BMP signaling.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.003
PMCID: PMC2997369
PMID: 21129728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]