---
reference_id: "PMID:21637013"
title: "A review of Dientamoeba fragilis carriage in humans: several reasons why this organism should be considered in the diagnosis of gastrointestinal illness."
authors:
- Barratt JL
- Harkness J
- Marriott D
- Ellis JT
- Stark D
journal: Gut Microbes
year: '2011'
doi: 10.4161/gmic.2.1.14755
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of Dientamoeba fragilis carriage in humans: several reasons why this organism should be considered in the diagnosis of gastrointestinal illness.
**Authors:** Barratt JL, Harkness J, Marriott D, Ellis JT, Stark D
**Journal:** Gut Microbes (2011)
**DOI:** [10.4161/gmic.2.1.14755](https://doi.org/10.4161/gmic.2.1.14755)

## Content

1. Gut Microbes. 2011 Jan-Feb;2(1):3-12. doi: 10.4161/gmic.2.1.14755.

A review of Dientamoeba fragilis carriage in humans: several reasons why this 
organism should be considered in the diagnosis of gastrointestinal illness.

Barratt JL(1), Harkness J, Marriott D, Ellis JT, Stark D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Microbiology, SydPath, St. Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst, 
Australia.

Dientamoeba fragilis is a protozoan that inhabits the human gut. It is 
approximately 100 years since Dientamoeba's discovery and first description when 
it was described as a rare and harmless commensal. Since then it has struggled 
to gain recognition as a pathogen despite the evidence supporting its 
pathogenicity. Dientamoeba remains neglected, probably due to the misconceptions 
that it is uncommon and non-pathogenic. Usually, carriage of Dientamoeba is 
associated with symptoms such as abdominal pain and diarrhea. Moreover, 
antimicrobial therapy followed by resolution of symptoms coincides with the 
eradication of Dientamoeba. This manuscript reviews the scientific literature 
relating to Dientamoeba's prevalence and pathogenicity. While much of the 
evidence supporting its pathogenicity is only circumstantial, it is apparent 
that most researchers agree that Dientamoeba is pathogenic. Therefore, in 
symptomatic patients who harbor Dientamoeba and no other pathogen, Dientamoeba 
should be considered as the etiological agent and treated as such.

© 2011 Landes Bioscience

DOI: 10.4161/gmic.2.1.14755
PMID: 21637013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]