---
reference_id: "PMID:36159989"
title: A novel mutation in SPINK5 gene underlies a case of atypical Netherton syndrome.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Song H
- Yu L
- Wu N
- Zheng X
- Liang B
- Wang P
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.943264
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation in SPINK5 gene underlies a case of atypical Netherton syndrome.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Song H, Yu L, Wu N, Zheng X, Liang B, Wang P
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.943264](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.943264)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Sep 9;13:943264. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.943264. eCollection
 2022.

A novel mutation in SPINK5 gene underlies a case of atypical Netherton syndrome.

Wang Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Song H(1)(2)(3)(4), Yu L(1)(2)(3)(4), Wu N(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Zheng X(1)(2)(3)(4), Liang B(1)(2)(3)(4), Wang P(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei, China.
(2)Institute of Dermatology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Dermatology, Anhui Medical University, Ministry of 
Education, Hefei, China.
(4)Provincial Laboratory of Inflammatory and Immune Mediated Diseases, Hefei, 
China.

Netherton syndrome (NS, OMIM #256500) is a rare autosomal recessive disease 
characterized by a triad of congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (CIE) or 
ichthyosis linearis circumflexa (ILC), trichorrhexis invaginata (TI), and atopic 
predisposition. The disease is caused by a mutation in the SPINK5 gene (serine 
protease inhibitor of Kazal type 5) encoding LEKTI (lymphoepithelial Kazal 
type-related inhibitor). We performed whole-exome sequencing on one Chinese NS 
family and made genotype-phenotype correlation analysis on the patients 
clinically diagnosed with NS or congenital ichthyosis erythroderma. We 
identified a novel frameshift mutation c.2474_2475del (p.Glu825Glyfs*2) in the 
SPINK5 gene. The N-terminal mutations of LEKTI cause a severer phenotype, while 
the C-terminal mutations of LEKT1 are related to a milder phenotype. Our 
findings suggest that Netherton syndrome may be underestimated clinically, and 
our findings further expand the reservoir of SPINK5 mutations in Netherton 
syndrome.

Copyright © 2022 Wang, Song, Yu, Wu, Zheng, Liang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.943264
PMCID: PMC9500337
PMID: 36159989

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.