---
reference_id: "PMID:40046954"
title: "Scimitar syndrome: A case report."
authors:
- Zhao X
- Huang J
- Yang J
- Cen B
journal: Radiol Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2025.01.063
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scimitar syndrome: A case report.
**Authors:** Zhao X, Huang J, Yang J, Cen B
**Journal:** Radiol Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.radcr.2025.01.063](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radcr.2025.01.063)

## Content

1. Radiol Case Rep. 2025 Feb 6;20(4):2222-2226. doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2025.01.063.
 eCollection 2025 Apr.

Scimitar syndrome: A case report.

Zhao X(1), Huang J(1), Yang J(1), Cen B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Baise People's Hospital, Guangxi, China.

Scimitar syndrome is a rare vascular malformation characterized by partial or 
total abnormal flow of the right pulmonary vein into the inferior vena cava, 
located above or below the diaphragm. Scimitar syndrome is a rare disease has an 
incidence of approximately 1-3 per 100,000 live births. And it can be divided 
into infantile type and child/adult type. Infantile patients have more 
deformities and poor prognosis, so it is urgent to combine multidisciplinary 
early precision diagnosis and treatment. Most children with childhood/adult 
forms are asymptomatic or have mild symptoms and can live normally without 
medical intervention. Here we report a case of a 3 year, 8-month-old girl who 
was diagnosed with Scimitar syndrome in our hospital. By presenting multiplanar 
CT images of malformed drainage veins in this patient's lungs and analyzing a 
series of cardiopulmonary abnormalities resulting from them, we have 
demonstrated in detail the diagnostic process of this rare disease, Scimitar 
syndrome. For patients with Scimitar syndrome, whether to take surgical 
treatment should be determined according to the specific cardiopulmonary 
function of patients, mild patients can take regular follow-up strategy. For 
patients with obvious clinical symptoms, surgery can significantly improve the 
long-term prognosis.

© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of University of 
Washington.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2025.01.063
PMCID: PMC11880889
PMID: 40046954