---
reference_id: "PMID:39319460"
title: Prediction of Severe Baseline Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis and Subsequent Risk of Stroke and Cardiovascular Disease.
authors:
- Poorthuis MHF
- Hageman SHJ
- Fiolet ATL
- Kappelle LJ
- Bots ML
- Steg PG
- Visseren FLJ
- Bhatt DL
- de Borst GJ
journal: Stroke
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.123.046894
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carotid Stenosis/epidemiology, complications"
- Aged
- Male
- Stroke/epidemiology
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Cardiovascular Diseases/epidemiology
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Registries
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Incidence
- Follow-Up Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prediction of Severe Baseline Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis and Subsequent Risk of Stroke and Cardiovascular Disease.
**Authors:** Poorthuis MHF, Hageman SHJ, Fiolet ATL, Kappelle LJ, Bots ML, Steg PG, Visseren FLJ, Bhatt DL, de Borst GJ
**Journal:** Stroke (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STROKEAHA.123.046894](https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.123.046894)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2024 Nov;55(11):2632-2640. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.123.046894. Epub
2024  Sep 25.

Prediction of Severe Baseline Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis and Subsequent Risk 
of Stroke and Cardiovascular Disease.

Poorthuis MHF(1), Hageman SHJ(2), Fiolet ATL(3), Kappelle LJ(1), Bots ML(4), 
Steg PG(5)(6), Visseren FLJ(2), Bhatt DL(7), de Borst GJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology (M.H.F.P., L.J.K.), University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht University, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Vascular Medicine (S.H.J.H., F.L.J.V.), University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cardiology (A.T.L.F.), University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht University, the Netherlands.
(4)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care (M.L.B.), University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, the Netherlands.
(5)Université Paris-Cité, INSERM-UMR1148, F-75018, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux 
de Paris, Hôpital Bichat, French Alliance for Cardiovascular Trials, France 
(P.G.S.).
(6)Institut Universitaire de France, Paris (P.G.S.).
(7)Mount Sinai Fuster Heart Hospital, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY (D.L.B.).
(8)Department of Vascular Surgery (G.J.B.), University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht University, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Stroke. 2024 Nov;55(11):2641-2642. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.048875.

BACKGROUND: Risk models to identify patients at high risk of asymptomatic 
carotid artery stenosis (ACAS) can help in selecting patients for screening, but 
long-term outcomes in these patients are unknown. We assessed the diagnostic and 
prognostic value of the previously published Prevalence of ACAS (PACAS) risk 
model to detect ACAS at baseline and to predict subsequent risk of stroke and 
cardiovascular disease (CVD) during follow-up.
METHODS: We validated the discrimination and calibration of the PACAS risk model 
to detect severe (≥70% narrowing) ACAS with patients from the Reduction of 
Atherothrombosis for Continued Health registry. We subsequently calculated the 
incidence rates of stroke and CVD (fatal and nonfatal stroke or myocardial 
infarction or vascular death) during follow-up in 4 risk groups (low, medium, 
high, and very high, corresponding to sum scores of ≤9, 10-13, 14-17, and ≥18, 
respectively).
RESULTS: Among 26 384 patients, aged between 45 and 80 years, without prior 
carotid procedures, 1662 (6.3%) had severe baseline ACAS. During ≈70 000 
patient-years of follow-up, 1124 strokes and 2484 CVD events occurred. 
Discrimination of the PACAS model was 0.67 (95% CI, 0.65-0.68), and calibration 
showed adequate concordance between predicted and observed risks of severe 
baseline ACAS after recalibration. Significantly higher incidence rates of 
stroke (Ptrend<0.011) and CVD (Ptrend<0.0001) during follow-up were found with 
increasing PACAS risk groups. Among patients with high PACAS sum score of ≥14 
(corresponding to 27.7% of all patients), severe baseline ACAS prevalence was 
11.4%. In addition, 56.6% of incident strokes and 64.9% of incident CVD events 
occurred in this group.
CONCLUSIONS: The PACAS risk model can reliably identify patients at high risk of 
severe baseline ACAS. Incidence rates of stroke and CVD during follow-up were 
significantly higher in patients with high PACAS sum scores. Selective screening 
of patients with high PACAS sum scores may help to prevent future stroke or CVD.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.123.046894
PMCID: PMC11518973
PMID: 39319460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Bhatt discloses the following relationships: 
advisory board: Angiowave, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, CellProthera, Cereno 
Scientific, Elsevier Practice Update Cardiology, High Enroll, Janssen, Level Ex, 
McKinsey, Medscape Cardiology, Merck, MyoKardia, NirvaMed, Novo Nordisk, 
PhaseBio, PLx Pharma, and Stasys; board of directors: American Heart Association 
New York City, Angiowave (stock options), Bristol Myers Squibb (stock), DRS.LINQ 
(stock options), and High Enroll (stock); consultant: Broadview Ventures, Hims, 
SFJ, and Youngene; data monitoring committees: Acesion Pharma, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Baim Institute for Clinical Research (formerly 
Harvard Clinical Research Institute, for the PORTICO trial [Portopulmonary 
Hypertension Treatment With Macitentan: A Randomized Clinical Trial], funded by 
St. Jude Medical, now Abbott), Boston Scientific (chair: the PEITHO trial 
[Pulmonary Embolism Thrombolysis]), Cleveland Clinic, Contego Medical (chair: 
PERFORMANCE 2 [Protection Against Emboli During Carotid Artery Stenting Using 
the Neuroguard IEP System]), Duke Clinical Research Institute, Mayo Clinic, 
Mount Sinai School of Medicine (for the ENVISAGE trial, funded by Daiichi 
Sankyo; for the ABILITY-DM trial, funded by Concept Medical; for ALLAY-HF 
[Safety and Efficacy of the Alleviant System for No-Implant Interatrial Shunt 
Creation in Patients With Chronic Heart Failure], funded by Alleviant Medical), 
Novartis, Population Health Research Institute, and Rutgers University (for the 
National Institutes of Health-funded MINT trial [Myocardial Ischemia and 
Transfusion]); honoraria: American College of Cardiology (senior associate 
editor: Clinical Trials and News, ACC.org; chair: ACC Accreditation Oversight 
Committee), Arnold and Porter law firm (work related to Sanofi/Bristol Myers 
Squibb clopidogrel litigation), Baim Institute for Clinical Research (formerly 
Harvard Clinical Research Institute; the RE-DUAL PCI [Evaluation of Dual Therapy 
With Dabigatran vs Triple Therapy With Warfarin in Patients With AF That Undergo 
a PCI With Stenting] Clinical Trial Steering Committee funded by Boehringer 
Ingelheim; AEGIS-II [Study to Investigate CSL112 in Subjects With Acute Coronary 
Syndrome] Executive Committee funded by CSL Behring), Belvoir Publications 
(editor-in-chief: Harvard Heart Letter), Canadian Medical and Surgical Knowledge 
Translation Research Group (clinical trial steering committees), CSL Behring 
(AHA lecture), Cowen and Company, Duke Clinical Research Institute (clinical 
trial steering committees, including for the PRONOUNCE trial [A Trial Comparing 
Cardiovascular Safety of Degarelix Versus Leuprolide in Patients With Advanced 
Prostate Cancer and Cardiovascular Disease], funded by Ferring Pharmaceuticals), 
HMP Global (editor-in-chief: Journal of Invasive Cardiology), Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology (guest editor, associate editor), K2P (co-chair: 
interdisciplinary curriculum), Level Ex, Medtelligence/ReachMD (Continuing 
Medical Education [CME] steering committees), MJH Life Sciences, Oakstone CME 
(course director: Comprehensive Review of Interventional Cardiology), Piper 
Sandler, Population Health Research Institute (for the COMPASS [Cardiovascular 
Outcomes for People Using Anticoagulation Strategies] Operations Committee, 
Publications Committee, Steering Committee, and USA national coleader, funded by 
Bayer), WebMD (CME steering committees), and Wiley (steering committee); other: 
Clinical Cardiology (deputy editor); patent: Sotagliflozin (named on a patent 
for sotagliflozin assigned to Brigham and Women’s Hospital that assigned to 
Lexicon; neither he nor Brigham and Women’s Hospital receive any income from 
this patent); research funding: Abbott, Acesion Pharma, Afimmune, Aker 
Biomarine, Alnylam, Amarin, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Beren, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers Squibb, Cardax, CellProthera, Cereno 
Scientific, Chiesi, CinCor, Cleerly, CSL Behring, Eisai, Ethicon, Faraday 
Pharmaceuticals, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Forest Laboratories, Fractyl, Garmin, 
HLS Therapeutics, Idorsia, Ironwood, Ischemix, Janssen, Javelin, Lexicon, Lilly, 
Medtronic, Merck, Moderna, MyoKardia, NirvaMed, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Otsuka, 
Owkin, Pfizer, PhaseBio, PLx Pharma, Recardio, Regeneron, Reid Hoffman 
Foundation, Roche, Sanofi, Stasys, Synaptic, The Medicines Company, Youngene, 
and 89Bio; royalties: Elsevier (editor: Braunwald’s Heart Disease); site 
coinvestigator: Abbott, Biotronik, Boston Scientific, CSI, Endotronix, St. Jude 
Medical (now Abbott), Philips, SpectraWAVE, Svelte, and Vascular Solutions; 
trustee: American College of Cardiology; and unfunded research: FlowCo. Dr Steg 
discloses the following relationships: employment: Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux 
de Paris and Université Paris-Cité; research grants: Bayer; consulting: Amarin, 
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen, 
Pfizer, PhaseBio, Novartis, NovoNordisk, Regeneron, Sanofi, and Servier; and 
patent issued as coinventor of use of alirocumab to reduce cardiovascular risk 
(patent assigned to Sanofi). The other authors report no conflicts.