---
reference_id: "PMID:20098328"
title: Beta-thalassemia.
authors:
- Cao A
- Galanello R
journal: Genet Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181cd68ed
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beta-thalassemia.
**Authors:** Cao A, Galanello R
**Journal:** Genet Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181cd68ed](https://doi.org/10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181cd68ed)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2010 Feb;12(2):61-76. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181cd68ed.

Beta-thalassemia.

Cao A(1), Galanello R.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Cagliari, Italy.

Beta-thalassemia is caused by the reduced (beta) or absent (beta) synthesis of 
the beta globin chains of the hemoglobin tetramer. Three clinical and 
hematological conditions of increasing severity are recognized, i.e., the 
beta-thalassemia carrier state, thalassemia intermedia, and thalassemia major. 
The beta-thalassemia carrier state, which results from heterozygosity for 
beta-thalassemia, is clinically asymptomatic and is defined by specific 
hematological features. Thalassemia major is a severe transfusion-dependent 
anemia. Thalassemia intermedia comprehend a clinically and genotypically very 
heterogeneous group of thalassemia-like disorders, ranging in severity from the 
asymptomatic carrier state to the severe transfusion-dependent type. The 
clinical severity of beta-thalassemia is related to the extent of imbalance 
between the alpha and nonalpha globin chains. The beta globin (HBB) gene maps in 
the short arm of chromosome 11, in a region containing also the delta globin 
gene, the embryonic epsilon gene, the fetal A-gamma and G-gamma genes, and a 
pseudogene (psiB1). Beta-thalassemias are heterogeneous at the molecular level. 
More than 200 disease-causing mutations have been so far identified. The 
majority of mutations are single nucleotide substitutions, deletions, or 
insertions of oligonucleotides leading to frameshift. Rarely, beta-thalassemia 
results from gross gene deletion. In addition to the variation of the phenotype 
resulting from allelic heterogeneity at the beta globin locus, the phenotype of 
beta-thalassemia could also be modified by the action of genetic factors mapping 
outside the globin gene cluster and not influencing the fetal hemoglobin. Among 
these factors, the ones best delineated so far are those affecting bilirubin, 
iron, and bone metabolisms. Because of the high carrier rate for HBB mutations 
in certain populations and the availability of genetic counseling and prenatal 
diagnosis, population screening is ongoing in several at-risk populations in the 
Mediterranean. Population screening associated with genetic counseling was 
extremely useful by allowing couples at risk to make informed decision on their 
reproductive choices. Clinical management of thalassemia major consists in 
regular long-life red blood cell transfusions and iron chelation therapy to 
remove iron introduced in excess with transfusions. At present, the only 
definitive cure is bone marrow transplantation. Therapies under investigation 
are the induction of fetal hemoglobin with pharmacologic compounds and stem cell 
gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181cd68ed
PMID: 20098328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]