---
reference_id: "PMID:40745060"
title: Collagen IV in Gould syndrome and Alport syndrome.
authors:
- Massoudi D
- Miner JH
- Gould DB
journal: Nat Rev Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41581-025-00982-x
keywords:
- "Collagen Type IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics"
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Collagen IV in Gould syndrome and Alport syndrome.
**Authors:** Massoudi D, Miner JH, Gould DB
**Journal:** Nat Rev Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41581-025-00982-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41581-025-00982-x)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2025 Nov;21(11):778-793. doi: 10.1038/s41581-025-00982-x.
Epub  2025 Jul 31.

Collagen IV in Gould syndrome and Alport syndrome.

Massoudi D(1), Miner JH(2), Gould DB(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. minerj@wustl.edu.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA. douglas.gould@ucsf.edu.
(4)Department of Anatomy, Institute for Human Genetics, Cardiovascular Research
Institute, Bakar Aging Research Institute, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. douglas.gould@ucsf.edu.

Collagen IV is a basement membrane component that is encoded by six genes in
mammals (COL4Α1-COL4A6). The α-chains encoded by these genes assemble into three
known heterotrimers - collagen α1α1α2(IV), α3α4α5(IV) and α5α5α6(IV) - that
provide structure and act as multifunctional signalling platforms. The ancestral
collagen superfamily members collagen alpha-1(IV) chain (COL4Α1) and collagen
alpha-2(IV) chain (COL4Α2) are present throughout the animal kingdom and in all
developing and most mature mammalian tissues. Consistent with this broad
distribution, variants in COL4A1 and COL4A2 cause a congenital multisystem
disorder called Gould syndrome (GS), which is characterized by cerebral, ocular,
muscular and kidney defects. The main clinical consequences involve the cerebral
vasculature (porencephaly, small-vessel disease, leukoencephalopathy and
intracerebral haemorrhage). However, the full clinical spectrum, including the
organs affected and acquired phenotypes such as vascular dementia, is still
being defined. By contrast, variants in COL4A3, COL4A4 or COL4A5 cause Alport
syndrome (AS), a disorder of variable severity that affects the kidney, ear and
eye. AS nephropathies often progress from haematuria to proteinuria, renal
impairment and kidney failure. The auditory features include sensorineural
hearing loss, whereas the ocular features comprise corneal dystrophy,
lenticonus, dot-and-fleck retinopathy and maculopathy. Although GS and AS have
little clinical resemblance, the high conservation of the genes and proteins
suggests common elements of underlying pathophysiology. Conventional therapies
that modify haemodynamics have lengthened the time to kidney failure for
patients living with AS. However, no curative or mechanism-based interventions
exist for GS. Gene-editing approaches hold promise for both disorders.

© 2025. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41581-025-00982-x
PMID: 40745060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: J.H.M. is a member of the
Alport Syndrome Foundation’s Scientific Advisory Research Network, has ownership
interest in Sintra Therapeutics and has consultancy relationships with Eloxx
Pharmaceuticals, Sintra Therapeutics and Bayer AG. The other authors declare no
competing interests.
