---
reference_id: "PMID:38327047"
title: Prenatal delivery of a therapeutic antisense oligonucleotide achieves broad biodistribution in the brain and ameliorates Angelman syndrome phenotype in mice.
authors:
- Clarke MT
- Remesal L
- Lentz L
- Tan DJ
- Young D
- Thapa S
- Namuduri SR
- Borges B
- Kirn G
- Valencia J
- Lopez ME
- Lui JH
- Shiow LR
- Dindot S
- Villeda S
- Sanders SJ
- MacKenzie TC
journal: Mol Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.02.004
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Angelman Syndrome/therapy, drug therapy"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use"
- Tissue Distribution
- Brain/metabolism
- Phenotype
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal delivery of a therapeutic antisense oligonucleotide achieves broad biodistribution in the brain and ameliorates Angelman syndrome phenotype in mice.
**Authors:** Clarke MT, Remesal L, Lentz L, Tan DJ, Young D, Thapa S, Namuduri SR, Borges B, Kirn G, Valencia J, Lopez ME, Lui JH, Shiow LR, Dindot S, Villeda S, Sanders SJ, MacKenzie TC
**Journal:** Mol Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.02.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.02.004)

## Content

1. Mol Ther. 2024 Apr 3;32(4):935-951. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.02.004. Epub
2024  Feb 6.

Prenatal delivery of a therapeutic antisense oligonucleotide achieves broad
biodistribution in the brain and ameliorates Angelman syndrome phenotype in
mice.

Clarke MT(1), Remesal L(2), Lentz L(1), Tan DJ(3), Young D(4), Thapa S(3),
Namuduri SR(1), Borges B(1), Kirn G(1), Valencia J(5), Lopez ME(3), Lui JH(3),
Shiow LR(3), Dindot S(6), Villeda S(7), Sanders SJ(8), MacKenzie TC(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, USA; The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and
Stem Cell Research, San Francisco, California, USA; Center for Maternal-Fetal
Precision Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, USA.
(3)BioMarin Pharmaceutical, San Rafael, California, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, UCSF Weill Institute for
Neurosciences, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA;
Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, 138632, Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, USA; The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and
Stem Cell Research, San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine &
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA.
(7)The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell
Research, San Francisco, California, USA; Department of Anatomy, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(8)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, UCSF Weill Institute for
Neurosciences, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA;
Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Paediatrics,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7TY, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, USA; The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and
Stem Cell Research, San Francisco, California, USA; Center for Maternal-Fetal
Precision Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, USA. Electronic address: tippi.mackenzie@ucsf.edu.

Angelman syndrome (AS), an early-onset neurodevelopmental disorder characterized
by abnormal gait, intellectual disabilities, and seizures, occurs when the
maternal allele of the UBE3A gene is disrupted, since the paternal allele is
silenced in neurons by the UBE3A antisense (UBE3A-AS) transcript. Given the
importance of early treatment, we hypothesized that prenatal delivery of an
antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) would downregulate the murine Ube3a-AS,
resulting in increased UBE3A protein and functional rescue. Using a mouse model
with a Ube3a-YFP allele that reports on-target ASO activity, we found that in
utero, intracranial (IC) injection of the ASO resulted in dose-dependent
activation of paternal Ube3a, with broad biodistribution. Accordingly, in utero
injection of the ASO in a mouse model of AS also resulted in successful
restoration of UBE3A and phenotypic improvements in treated mice on the
accelerating rotarod and fear conditioning. Strikingly, even intra-amniotic (IA)
injection resulted in systemic biodistribution and high levels of UBE3A
reactivation throughout the brain. These findings offer a novel strategy for
early treatment of AS using an ASO, with two potential routes of administration
in the prenatal window. Beyond AS, successful delivery of a therapeutic ASO into
neurons has implications for a clinically feasible prenatal treatment for
numerous neurodevelopmental disorders.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.02.004
PMCID: PMC11163203
PMID: 38327047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests D.J.T., S.T., L.R.S.,
M.E.L., and J.H.L. are employees of and stockholders in BioMarin Pharmaceutical,
Inc. S.V. is an employee of Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical. T.C.M. is on the
Scientific Advisory Board of Acrigen.
