---
reference_id: "PMID:30014148"
title: Association of MOG-IgG Serostatus With Relapse After Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis and Proposed Diagnostic Criteria for MOG-IgG-Associated Disorders.
authors:
- López-Chiriboga AS
- Majed M
- Fryer J
- Dubey D
- McKeon A
- Flanagan EP
- Jitprapaikulsan J
- Kothapalli N
- Tillema JM
- Chen J
- Weinshenker B
- Wingerchuk D
- Sagen J
- Gadoth A
- Lennon VA
- Keegan BM
- Lucchinetti C
- Pittock SJ
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.1814
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aquaporin 4/immunology
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Biomarkers/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Encephalomyelitis, Acute Disseminated/blood, diagnosis, immunology"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Infant
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/immunology
- Recurrence
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of MOG-IgG Serostatus With Relapse After Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis and Proposed Diagnostic Criteria for MOG-IgG-Associated Disorders.
**Authors:** López-Chiriboga AS, Majed M, Fryer J, Dubey D, McKeon A, Flanagan EP, Jitprapaikulsan J, Kothapalli N, Tillema JM, Chen J, Weinshenker B, Wingerchuk D, Sagen J, Gadoth A, Lennon VA, Keegan BM, Lucchinetti C, Pittock SJ
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.1814](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.1814)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2018 Nov 1;75(11):1355-1363. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.1814.

Association of MOG-IgG Serostatus With Relapse After Acute Disseminated 
Encephalomyelitis and Proposed Diagnostic Criteria for MOG-IgG-Associated 
Disorders.

López-Chiriboga AS(1)(2), Majed M(1)(2), Fryer J(2)(3), Dubey D(1)(2), McKeon 
A(1)(2)(3), Flanagan EP(1)(2), Jitprapaikulsan J(2)(3), Kothapalli N(2)(3), 
Tillema JM(1)(2), Chen J(2)(4), Weinshenker B(1)(2), Wingerchuk D(2)(5), Sagen 
J(2), Gadoth A(2)(3), Lennon VA(1)(2)(3)(6), Keegan BM(1)(2), Lucchinetti 
C(1)(2), Pittock SJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Center for Multiple Sclerosis and Autoimmune Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(5)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(6)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

IMPORTANCE: Recent studies have reported a higher relapse rate following an 
initial inflammatory demyelinating disorder in pediatric patients with 
persistent seropositivity of antibodies targeting myelin oligodendrocyte 
glycoprotein (MOG-IgG1). To date, the clinical implications of longitudinal 
MOG-IgG1 seropositivity using live cell assays with IgG1 secondary antibodies in 
adults after acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) are unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether MOG-IgG1 serostatus (transient vs persistent) 
and titer change over time provide clinical utility in predicting the likelihood 
of relapse after ADEM.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cohort study identified patients with an 
initial diagnosis of ADEM evaluated at a single referral center between January 
1, 1990, and October 1, 2017. Fifty-one patients were included, including 31 
children and 20 adults. Longitudinal serologic testing was performed detecting 
autoantibodies targeting aquaporin 4 (AQP4-IgG) and MOG-IgG1 with clinically 
validated fluorescence-activated cell sorting assays. Patients were divided into 
3 cohorts: persistent seropositivity, transient seropositivity, and 
seronegativity.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Clinical demographic characteristics, longitudinal 
AQP4-IgG and MOG-IgG1 serostatus, titers, relapses, use of immunotherapy, and 
Expanded Disability Status Scale score at follow-up.
RESULTS: Of 51 patients presenting with an initial diagnosis of ADEM, 20 (39%) 
were adult, 24 (47%) were female, and ages ranged from 12 months to 57 years. 
Seventeen patients fulfilled criteria for persistent seropositivity; of those, 8 
of 9 children (89%) and 7 of 8 adults (88%) had at least 1 relapse after median 
(range) follow-up periods of 75 (15-236) months and 39 (9-161) months, 
respectively. Eight patients (16%), including 4 adults, fulfilled criteria for 
transient seropositivity; of those, no children and 1 of 4 adults (25%) relapsed 
after median (range) follow-up periods of 32 (24-114) months and 16 (13-27) 
months, respectively. Of 24 patients with AQP4-IgG and MOG-IgG seronegativity, 6 
of 17 children (35%) and 2 of 7 adults (29%) had at least 1 relapse after median 
(range) follow-up periods of 36 (3-203) months and 34 (15-217) months, 
respectively. There were only 2 patients, including 1 adult, with AQP4-IgG 
seropositivity, and both relapsed. The hazard ratio for relapses in those with 
persistent MOG-IgG1 positivity compared with AQP4-IgG and MOG-IgG1 
seronegativity was 3.1 (95% CI, 1.1-8.9; P = .04) in children and 5.5 (95% CI, 
1.4-22.5; P = .02) in adults. Immunotherapy was used in 5 of 9 children (56%) 
and 6 of 8 adults (75%) with persistent seropositivity and in 3 of 17 children 
(18%) and 1 of 7 adults (14%) with AQP4-IgG and MOG-IgG seronegativity.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Relapse occurred in 15 of 17 patients (88%) with 
persistent MOG-IgG1 seropositivity after ADEM; only 1 patient with transient 
seropositivity experienced relapse. Our data extend the clinical utility of 
MOG-IgG1 serological testing to adult patients and highlights that longitudinal 
serologic evaluation of MOG-IgG1 could help predict disease course and 
consideration of immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.1814
PMCID: PMC6248120
PMID: 30014148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr McKeon has 
a patent pending for glial fibrillary acidic protein and microtubule-associated 
protein 1B as markers of neurological autoimmunity and paraneoplastic disorders; 
has consulted for Grifols, MedImmune, and Euroimmun; and has received research 
support from MedImmune and Euroimmun. Dr Flanagan has received research support 
from MedImmune. Dr Weinshenker has received royalties from RSR, Oxford 
University, Hospices Civils de Lyon, and MVZ Labor PD Dr. Volkmann und Kollegen 
GbR for a patent of NMO-IgG as a diagnostic test for neuromyelitis optica (NMO) 
and related disorders. Dr Weinshenker also serves as a member of an adjudication 
committee for clinical trials in NMO being conducted by MedImmune and Alexion; 
as a consultant for Caladrius Biosciences and Brainstorm Therapeutics regarding 
potential clinical trials for NMO; and as a member of a data safety monitoring 
committee for clinical trials conducted by Novartis. Dr Wingerchuk has received 
research support paid to Mayo Clinic by Alexion and Terumo BCT and serves as a 
consultant for MedImmune and Caladrius Biosciences. Dr Lennon has received 
royalties for technology relating to aquaporin 4 (AQP4) antibodies for diagnosis 
of NMO and its spectrum disorders, is a named inventor on filed patents that 
relate to functional AQP4/NMO-IgG assays and NMO-IgG as a cancer marker, and has 
a patent pending for glial fibrillary acidic protein and microtubule-associated 
protein 1B as markers of neurological autoimmunity and paraneoplastic disorders. 
Dr Pittock is a named inventor on filed patents that relate to functional 
AQP4/NMO-IgG assays and NMO-IgG as a cancer marker; has consulted for Alexion 
and MedImmune; and has received research support from Grifols, MedImmune, and 
Alexion. All compensation for consulting activities is paid directly to Mayo 
Clinic. No other disclosures were reported.