---
reference_id: "PMID:11484904"
title: Role of metabolism in arsenic toxicity.
authors:
- Vahter M
- Concha G
journal: Pharmacol Toxicol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0773.2001.d01-128.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of metabolism in arsenic toxicity.
**Authors:** Vahter M, Concha G
**Journal:** Pharmacol Toxicol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1034/j.1600-0773.2001.d01-128.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0773.2001.d01-128.x)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Toxicol. 2001 Jul;89(1):1-5. doi:
10.1034/j.1600-0773.2001.d01-128.x.

Role of metabolism in arsenic toxicity.

Vahter M(1), Concha G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. Marie.Vahter@imm.ki.se

In humans, as in most mammalian species, inorganic arsenic is methylated to 
methylarsonic acid (MMA) and dimethylarsinic acid (DMA) by alternating reduction 
of pentavalent arsenic to trivalent and addition of a methyl group from 
S-adenosylmethionine. The methylation of inorganic arsenic may be considered a 
detoxification mechanism, as the end metabolites, MMA and DMA, are less reactive 
with tissue constituents, less toxic, and more readily excreted in the urine 
than is inorganic arsenic, especially the trivalent form (AsIII, arsenite). The 
latter is highly reactive with tissue components, due to its strong affinity for 
sulfhydryl groups. Thus, following exposure to AsV the first step in the 
biotransformation, i.e. the reduction to AsIII, may be considered a 
bioactivation. Also, reactive intermediate metabolites of high toxicity, mainly 
MMAIII, may be formed and distributed to tissues. Low levels of MMAIII and 
DMAIII have been detected in urine of individuals chronically exposed to 
inorganic arsenic via drinking water. However, the contribution of MMAIIIand 
DMAIII to the toxicity observed after intake of inorganic arsenic by humans 
remains to be elucidated. The major route of excretion of arsenic is via the 
kidneys. Evaluation of the methylation of arsenic is mainly based on the 
relative amounts of the different metabolites in urine. On average human urine 
contains 10-30% inorganic arsenic, 10-20% MMA and 60-80% DMA.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0773.2001.d01-128.x
PMID: 11484904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]