---
reference_id: "PMID:37510386"
title: "Melkersson-Rosenthal Syndrome and Migraine: A New Phenotype Associated with SCN1A Variants?"
authors:
- Azzarà A
- Cassano I
- Lintas C
- Pilato F
- Capone F
- Di Lazzaro V
- Gurrieri F
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14071482
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Melkersson-Rosenthal Syndrome and Migraine: A New Phenotype Associated with SCN1A Variants?
**Authors:** Azzarà A, Cassano I, Lintas C, Pilato F, Capone F, Di Lazzaro V, Gurrieri F
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14071482](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14071482)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jul 20;14(7):1482. doi: 10.3390/genes14071482.

Melkersson-Rosenthal Syndrome and Migraine: A New Phenotype Associated with 
SCN1A Variants?

Azzarà A(1), Cassano I(1), Lintas C(1)(2), Pilato F(3)(4), Capone F(3)(4), Di 
Lazzaro V(3)(4), Gurrieri F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
Università Campus Bio-Medico di Roma, Via Alvaro del Portillo 21, 00128 Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Operative Research Unit of Medical Genetics, Fondazione Policlinico 
Universitario Campus Bio-Medico, Via Alvaro del Portillo 200, 00128 Rome, Italy.
(3)Research Unit of Neurology, Neurophysiology, Neurobiology and Psichiatry, 
Department of Medicine and Surgery, Università Campus Bio-Medico di Roma, Via 
Alvaro del Portillo 21, 00128 Rome, Italy.
(4)Operative Research Unit of Neurology, Neurophysiology, Neurobiology and 
Psichiatry, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Campus Bio-Medico, Via Alvaro 
del Portillo 200, 00128 Rome, Italy.

Peripheral facial palsy rarely occurs as part of Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome 
(MRS), which is characterized by the classical triad of tongue cheilitis, 
recurrent episodes of orofacial swelling, and palsy. MRS is a disorder with 
variable expressivity and clinical as well as genetic heterogeneity; however, 
the causative gene remains to be identified. Migraine is a common neurological 
disorder, presenting with or without aura, which may be associated with 
neurological symptoms. The classical example of monogenic migraine is familial 
hemiplegic migraine (FHM), which has phenotypic variability in carriers of 
variants in the same gene or even carriers of the same variant. We present a 
family in which two sisters displayed recurrent migraines, one of which 
presented recurrent facial palsy and had clinical diagnosis of MRS. We performed 
WES and Sanger sequencing for segregation analysis in the available family 
members. We identified a c.3521C>G missense heterozygous variant in SCN1A 
carried only by the affected sister. Variants in the SCN1A gene can cause a 
spectrum of early-onset epileptic encephalopathies, in addition to FHM; 
therefore, our finding reasonably explains the proband phenotype, in which the 
main symptom was recurrent facial palsy. This report also adds knowledge to the 
clinical spectrum of SCN1A alterations and suggests a potential overlap between 
MRS and FHM.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14071482
PMCID: PMC10378782
PMID: 37510386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.