---
reference_id: "PMID:38791925"
title: "Current Preoperative Management of Vulvar Squamous Cell Carcinoma: An Overview."
authors:
- Della Corte L
- Cafasso V
- Guarino MC
- Gullo G
- Cucinella G
- Lopez A
- Zaami S
- Riemma G
- Giampaolino P
- Bifulco G
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16101846
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Preoperative Management of Vulvar Squamous Cell Carcinoma: An Overview.
**Authors:** Della Corte L, Cafasso V, Guarino MC, Gullo G, Cucinella G, Lopez A, Zaami S, Riemma G, Giampaolino P, Bifulco G
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16101846](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16101846)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 May 11;16(10):1846. doi: 10.3390/cancers16101846.

Current Preoperative Management of Vulvar Squamous Cell Carcinoma: An Overview.

Della Corte L(1), Cafasso V(2), Guarino MC(2), Gullo G(3), Cucinella G(3), Lopez 
A(3), Zaami S(4), Riemma G(5), Giampaolino P(2), Bifulco G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive Sciences and Dentistry, School of 
Medicine, University of Naples Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Public Health, University of Naples Federico II, 80131 Naples, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Villa Sofia Cervello Hospital, 
University of Palermo, 90146 Palermo, Italy.
(4)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Forensic and Orthopedic Sciences, 
Departmental Section of Legal Medicine, "Sapienza" University of Rome, 00161 
Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialized Surgery, University of 
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 80138 Naples, Italy.

Vulvar carcinoma is a rare cancer affecting the genital tract, constituting 4% 
of gynecological tumors. Vulvar squamous cell carcinoma (VSCC) is the most 
common type. Diagnosis relies on biopsy during vulvoscopy, plus imaging such as 
ultrasonography (USG), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission 
tomography (PET). This review aims to lay out a thorough overview as to the 
current preoperative management of VSCC, both in case of vulvar and lymph node 
involvement. The data research was conducted using the following databases: 
MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of Sciences, Scopus, ClinicalTrial.gov, OVID and Cochrane 
Library from 2010 to 2024. The selection criteria included only original 
articles. Seventeen studies were assessed for eligibility. A concordance rate of 
62.3% for vHSIL and 65.2% for carcinoma at vulvoscopy, with a sensitivity of 
98%, specificity of 40%, PPV (Positive Predictive Value) of 37% and NPV 
(Negative Predictive Value) of 98% in identifying malignant lesions was found. 
Regarding the reliability of PET for staging and assessing lymph node 
involvement, a mean SUV (Standardized Uptake Value) for malignant vulvar lesions 
of 8.4 (range 2.5-14.7) was reported. In the case of MRI, useful for the 
evaluation of loco-regional infiltration and lymph node involvement, the ratio 
of the short-to-long-axis diameter and the reader's diagnostic confidence for 
the presence of lymph node metastasis yielded accuracy of 84.8% and 86.9%, 
sensitivity of 86.7% and 87.5%, specificity of 81.3% and 86.2%, PPV of 89.7% and 
87.5% and NPV of 76.5% and 86.2%, respectively. A long lymph node axis >10 mm 
and a short diameter >5.8 mm were found to be predictors of malignancy. At USG, 
instead, the two main characteristics of potentially malignant lymph nodes are 
cortical thickness and short axis length; the combination of these ultrasound 
parameters yielded the highest accuracy in distinguishing between negative and 
positive lymph nodes. Despite the heterogeneity of the included studies and the 
lack of randomized clinical trials, this review provides a broad overview of the 
three imaging tools used for the presurgical management of VSCC. Nowadays, 
although MRI and PET represent the gold standard, ultrasound evaluation is 
taking on a growing role, as long as it is carried out by expert sonographer. 
The management of this rare disease should be always performed by a 
multidisciplinary team in order to precisely stage the tumor and determine the 
most suitable treatment approach.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16101846
PMCID: PMC11119127
PMID: 38791925

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.