---
reference_id: "PMID:32802893"
title: "The Gut Microbiota and Respiratory Diseases: New Evidence."
authors:
- Chunxi L
- Haiyue L
- Yanxia L
- Jianbing P
- Jin S
journal: J Immunol Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1155/2020/2340670
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Gut Microbiota and Respiratory Diseases: New Evidence.
**Authors:** Chunxi L, Haiyue L, Yanxia L, Jianbing P, Jin S
**Journal:** J Immunol Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2020/2340670](https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/2340670)

## Content

1. J Immunol Res. 2020 Jul 31;2020:2340670. doi: 10.1155/2020/2340670.
eCollection  2020.

The Gut Microbiota and Respiratory Diseases: New Evidence.

Chunxi L(1), Haiyue L(2), Yanxia L(1), Jianbing P(1), Jin S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, 
Southern Medical University, Guangdong Guangzhou 510515, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangdong Guangzhou 510282, China.

Human body surfaces, such as the skin, intestines, and respiratory and 
urogenital tracts, are colonized by a large number of microorganisms, including 
bacteria, fungi, and viruses, with the gut being the most densely and 
extensively colonized organ. The microbiome plays an essential role in immune 
system development and tissue homeostasis. Gut microbiota dysbiosis not only 
modulates the immune responses of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract but also 
impacts the immunity of distal organs, such as the lung, further affecting lung 
health and respiratory diseases. Here, we review the recent evidence of the 
correlations and underlying mechanisms of the relationship between the gut 
microbiota and common respiratory diseases, including asthma, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cystic fibrosis (CF), lung cancer, and 
respiratory infection, and probiotic development as a therapeutic intervention 
for these diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Li Chunxi et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/2340670
PMCID: PMC7415116
PMID: 32802893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.