---
reference_id: "PMID:38277989"
title: "Treatment recommendations for glycogen storage disease type IB- associated neutropenia and neutrophil dysfunction with empagliflozin: Consensus from an international workshop."
authors:
- Grünert SC
- Derks TGJ
- Mundy H
- Dalton RN
- Donadieu J
- Hofbauer P
- Jones N
- Uçar SK
- LaFreniere J
- Contreras EL
- Pendyal S
- Rossi A
- Schneider B
- Spiegel R
- Stepien KM
- Wesol-Kucharska D
- Veiga-da-Cunha M
- Wortmann SB
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108144
keywords:
- Humans
- Neutrophils/metabolism
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type I/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Neutropenia/drug therapy, etiology"
- Monosaccharide Transport Proteins
- Antiporters/metabolism
- Benzhydryl Compounds
- Glucosides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment recommendations for glycogen storage disease type IB- associated neutropenia and neutrophil dysfunction with empagliflozin: Consensus from an international workshop.
**Authors:** Grünert SC, Derks TGJ, Mundy H, Dalton RN, Donadieu J, Hofbauer P, Jones N, Uçar SK, LaFreniere J, Contreras EL, Pendyal S, Rossi A, Schneider B, Spiegel R, Stepien KM, Wesol-Kucharska D, Veiga-da-Cunha M, Wortmann SB
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108144](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108144)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2024 Mar;141(3):108144. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108144.
Epub  2024 Jan 17.

Treatment recommendations for glycogen storage disease type IB- associated
neutropenia and neutrophil dysfunction with empagliflozin: Consensus from an
international workshop.

Grünert SC(1), Derks TGJ(2), Mundy H(3), Dalton RN(3), Donadieu J(4), Hofbauer
P(5), Jones N(6), Uçar SK(7), LaFreniere J(8), Contreras EL(9), Pendyal S(10),
Rossi A(11), Schneider B(12), Spiegel R(13), Stepien KM(14), Wesol-Kucharska
D(15), Veiga-da-Cunha M(16), Wortmann SB(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine and Neonatology,
Medical Centre- University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Section of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University
Medical Center of Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9700 RB
Groningen, the Netherlands.
(3)Evelina London Children's Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Centre de reference des neutropénies chroniques, Paris Sorbonne Université,
Assistance Publique des Hopitaux de Paris, Hopital Trousseau, Paris 75012,
France.
(5)Department of Production, Landesapotheke Salzburg, Hospital Pharmacy,
Salzburg, Austria.
(6)University Children's Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University and
Salzburger Landeskliniken, Salzburg, Austria.
(7)Division of Metabolism and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, Ege
University Children's Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(8)Sophie's Hope Foundation, Hopkinton, MA, USA; curegsd1b.org.
(9)www.ninalaguerrera.org.
(10)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(11)Department of Translational Medicine, Section of Paediatrics, University of
Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(12)Sophie's Hope Foundation, Hopkinton, MA, USA.
(13)Pediatric Department B, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Rappaport School of
Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel.
(14)Adult Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Salford Royal Organisation, Northern
Care Alliance NHS Foundation Trust, M6 8HD Salford, Greater Manchester, United
Kingdom.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition, and Metabolic Diseases, Children's
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(16)Groupe de Recherches Metaboliques, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain (Université
Catholique de Louvain), B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.
(17)University Children's Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University and
Salzburger Landeskliniken, Salzburg, Austria; Amalia Children's Hospital,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: s.wortmann@salk.at.

Glycogen storage disease type Ib (GSD Ib, biallelic variants in SLC37A4) is a
rare disorder of glycogen metabolism complicated by neutropenia/neutrophil
dysfunction. Since 2019, the SGLT2-inhibitor empagliflozin has provided a
mechanism-based treatment option for the symptoms caused by
neutropenia/neutrophil dysfunction (e.g. mucosal lesions, inflammatory bowel
disease). Because of the rarity of GSD Ib, the published evidence on safety and
efficacy of empagliflozin is still limited and does not allow to develop
evidence-based guidelines. Here, an international group of experts provides 14
best practice consensus treatment recommendations based on expert practice and
review of the published evidence. We recommend to start empagliflozin in all GSD
Ib individuals with clinical or laboratory signs related to
neutropenia/neutrophil dysfunction with a dose of 0.3-0.4 mg/kg/d given as a
single dose in the morning. Treatment can be started in an outpatient setting.
The dose should be adapted to the weight and in case of inadequate clinical
treatment response or side effects. We strongly recommend to pause empagliflozin
immediately in case of threatening dehydration and before planned longer
surgeries. Discontinuation of G-CSF therapy should be attempted in all
individuals. If available, 1,5-AG should be monitored. Individuals who have
previously not tolerated starches should be encouraged to make a new attempt to
introduce starch in their diet after initiation of empagliflozin treatment. We
advise to monitor certain safety and efficacy parameters and recommend
continuous, alternatively frequent glucose measurements during the introduction
of empagliflozin. We provide specific recommendations for special circumstances
like pregnancy and liver transplantation.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2024.108144
PMID: 38277989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors
with exception of ELC, JlF, PH and SKU received accommodation support by
Sophie's Hope Foundation. All authors report no conflict of interest related to
this study. TGJD declares that he has confidentiality agreements with third
parties. In the past 36 months, there have been consultation agreements (with
Danone, Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc, ModernaTX Inc., and Beam Therapeutics),
contracts for financial research support for investigator-initiated research
(NCT04311307) and sponsor-initiated research (NCT03517085, NCT03970278,
NCT05139316, and NCT05196165), honoraria for lectures or presentations (by
MEDTalks, Prelum, and Danone), and participations in a Data Safety Monitoring
Board (NCT05095727) and Advisory Boards (Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc,
ModernaTX Inc., and Beam Therapeutics). For all private-public relationships,
all contracts are via UMCG Contract Research Desk and all payments are to UMCG.
ND declares that he is a director and minority shareholder in SpOtOn Clinical
Diagnostics Ltd. KMS declares that in the last 36 months there were consultancy
agreements with BioMarin, Chiesi, Takeda, Sanofi, Amicus and Immusoft
Corporation. SCG declares that over the last 3 years in the area of inherited
metabolic diseases she has received accommodation support from Nutricia
Metabolics, honoraria for lectures from Vitaflo and Ultragenyx, and that she is
an advisory board member of Ultragenyx. JL and BS declare no conflict of
interest. Funding to Sophie's Hope Foundation and curegsd1b.org is by individual
donors, rather than pharmaceutical or medical food industry. ELC declares no
conflict of interest. C.D. Nina la Guerrera (www.ninalaguerrera.org) is a small
size non-for-profit platform, whose main sources of funding are by individual
donors from sectors that have no interest in biomedical research. HM declares
that over the last 3 years in the area of inherited metabolic diseases she has
received accommodation support from Vitaflo. honoraria for lectures from Vitaflo
and Nutricia and served as a paid consultant for Ultragenyx. SBW declares that
over the last 3 years in the area of inherited metabolic diseases she has
received accommodation support from Nutricia Metabolics.
