---
reference_id: "PMID:20548949"
title: "Cushing's syndrome and fetal features resurgence in adrenal cortex-specific Prkar1a knockout mice."
authors:
- Sahut-Barnola I
- de Joussineau C
- Val P
- Lambert-Langlais S
- Damon C
- Lefrançois-Martinez AM
- Pointud JC
- Marceau G
- Sapin V
- Tissier F
- Ragazzon B
- Bertherat J
- Kirschner LS
- Stratakis CA
- Martinez A
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000980
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex/metabolism
- Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/metabolism
- Animals
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cushing Syndrome/embryology, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinase RIalpha Subunit/deficiency, metabolism"
- Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinases/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Signal Transduction
- Steroid 17-alpha-Hydroxylase/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cushing's syndrome and fetal features resurgence in adrenal cortex-specific Prkar1a knockout mice.
**Authors:** Sahut-Barnola I, de Joussineau C, Val P, Lambert-Langlais S, Damon C, Lefrançois-Martinez AM, Pointud JC, Marceau G, Sapin V, Tissier F, Ragazzon B, Bertherat J, Kirschner LS, Stratakis CA, Martinez A
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1000980](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000980)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jun 10;6(6):e1000980. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000980.

Cushing's syndrome and fetal features resurgence in adrenal cortex-specific 
Prkar1a knockout mice.

Sahut-Barnola I(1), de Joussineau C, Val P, Lambert-Langlais S, Damon C, 
Lefrançois-Martinez AM, Pointud JC, Marceau G, Sapin V, Tissier F, Ragazzon B, 
Bertherat J, Kirschner LS, Stratakis CA, Martinez A.

Author information:
(1)CNRS UMR6247, Génétique Reproduction et Développement, Clermont Université, 
Aubière, France.

Carney complex (CNC) is an inherited neoplasia syndrome with endocrine 
overactivity. Its most frequent endocrine manifestation is primary pigmented 
nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD), a bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia 
causing pituitary-independent Cushing's syndrome. Inactivating mutations in 
PRKAR1A, a gene encoding the type 1 alpha-regulatory subunit (R1alpha) of the 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) have been found in 80% of CNC patients with 
Cushing's syndrome. To demonstrate the implication of R1alpha loss in the 
initiation and development of PPNAD, we generated mice lacking Prkar1a 
specifically in the adrenal cortex (AdKO). AdKO mice develop 
pituitary-independent Cushing's syndrome with increased PKA activity. This leads 
to autonomous steroidogenic genes expression and deregulated adreno-cortical 
cells differentiation, increased proliferation and resistance to apoptosis. 
Unexpectedly, R1alpha loss results in improper maintenance and centrifugal 
expansion of cortisol-producing fetal adrenocortical cells with concomitant 
regression of adult cortex. Our data provide the first in vivo evidence that 
loss of R1alpha is sufficient to induce autonomous adrenal hyper-activity and 
bilateral hyperplasia, both observed in human PPNAD. Furthermore, this model 
demonstrates that deregulated PKA activity favors the emergence of a new cell 
population potentially arising from the fetal adrenal, giving new insight into 
the mechanisms leading to PPNAD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000980
PMCID: PMC2883593
PMID: 20548949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.