---
reference_id: "PMID:22194472"
title: A transforming KIF5B and RET gene fusion in lung adenocarcinoma revealed from whole-genome and transcriptome sequencing.
authors:
- Ju YS
- Lee WC
- Shin JY
- Lee S
- Bleazard T
- Won JK
- Kim YT
- Kim JI
- Kang JH
- Seo JS
journal: Genome Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1101/gr.133645.111
keywords:
- Adenocarcinoma/genetics
- Adult
- Alternative Splicing
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Breakpoints
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10"
- Exons
- Gene Order
- "Genome, Human"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Kinesins/genetics
- Lung Neoplasms/genetics
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/chemistry, genetics"
- Protein Conformation
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/chemistry, genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Transcriptome
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A transforming KIF5B and RET gene fusion in lung adenocarcinoma revealed from whole-genome and transcriptome sequencing.
**Authors:** Ju YS, Lee WC, Shin JY, Lee S, Bleazard T, Won JK, Kim YT, Kim JI, Kang JH, Seo JS
**Journal:** Genome Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gr.133645.111](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.133645.111)

## Content

1. Genome Res. 2012 Mar;22(3):436-45. doi: 10.1101/gr.133645.111. Epub 2011 Dec
22.

A transforming KIF5B and RET gene fusion in lung adenocarcinoma revealed from
whole-genome and transcriptome sequencing.

Ju YS(1), Lee WC, Shin JY, Lee S, Bleazard T, Won JK, Kim YT, Kim JI, Kang JH,
Seo JS.

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea.

The identification of the molecular events that drive cancer transformation is
essential to the development of targeted agents that improve the clinical
outcome of lung cancer. Many studies have reported genomic driver mutations in
non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) over the past decade; however, the
molecular pathogenesis of >40% of NSCLCs is still unknown. To identify new
molecular targets in NSCLCs, we performed the combined analysis of massively
parallel whole-genome and transcriptome sequencing for cancer and paired normal
tissue of a 33-yr-old lung adenocarcinoma patient, who is a never-smoker and has
no familial cancer history. The cancer showed no known driver mutation in EGFR
or KRAS and no EML4-ALK fusion. Here we report a novel fusion gene between KIF5B
and the RET proto-oncogene caused by a pericentric inversion of 10p11.22-q11.21.
This fusion gene overexpresses chimeric RET receptor tyrosine kinase, which
could spontaneously induce cellular transformation. We identified the KIF5B-RET
fusion in two more cases out of 20 primary lung adenocarcinomas in the
replication study. Our data demonstrate that a subset of NSCLCs could be caused
by a fusion of KIF5B and RET, and suggest the chimeric oncogene as a promising
molecular target for the personalized diagnosis and treatment of lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.133645.111
PMCID: PMC3290779
PMID: 22194472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
