---
reference_id: "PMID:30215903"
title: "Type 1 Diabetes: Management Strategies."
authors:
- Smith A
- Harris C
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2018'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 1 Diabetes: Management Strategies.
**Authors:** Smith A, Harris C
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2018)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2018 Aug 1;98(3):154-162.

Type 1 Diabetes: Management Strategies.

Smith A(1), Harris C(1).

Author information:
(1)Lawrence Family Medicine Residency Program, Lawrence, MA, USA.

There is considerable benefit of tight glucose control in patients with type 1 
diabetes mellitus. Tight blood glucose control dramatically decreases the 
incidence of microvascular and macrovascular complications. Although glycemic 
goals should be individualized, most nonpregnant adults should strive for an A1C 
level less than 7%. Greater frequency of glucose monitoring and continuous 
glucose monitoring are both associated with lower A1C levels. The choice to 
monitor glucose levels via multiple daily capillary blood samples or continuous 
glucose monitoring is based on cost and patient preference. Intensive insulin 
treatment is recommended with a combination of multiple mealtime bolus and basal 
injections or with continuous insulin infusion through an insulin pump. The 
option to administer insulin with multiple daily injections vs. a pump should be 
individualized. Adjunctive medical therapy is under investigation but is not 
currently recommended. All patients with type 1 diabetes should participate in 
diabetes self-management education and develop individualized premeal insulin 
bolus plans under the guidance of a dietitian, if possible. Blood pressure and 
lipid control are important to prevent cardiovascular disease events. Patients 
with type 1 diabetes should have sick-day plans and be able to identify warning 
signs of hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis. Advances in diabetes care, 
including the bionic pancreas and the closed-loop system of glucose monitoring 
with an automated insulin pump, may have a significant effect on type 1 diabetes 
care in the years ahead.

PMID: 30215903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]