---
reference_id: "PMID:19935646"
title: Cancer-associated IDH1 mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate.
authors:
- Dang L
- White DW
- Gross S
- Bennett BD
- Bittinger MA
- Driggers EM
- Fantin VR
- Jang HG
- Jin S
- Keenan MC
- Marks KM
- Prins RM
- Ward PS
- Yen KE
- Liau LM
- Rabinowitz JD
- Cantley LC
- Thompson CB
- Vander Heiden MG
- Su SM
journal: Nature
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/nature08617
keywords:
- Arginine/genetics
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Catalytic Domain
- Cell Line
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Disease Progression
- Enzyme Assays
- "Glioma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Glutarates/metabolism
- "Histidine/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Isocitrate Dehydrogenase/genetics, metabolism"
- Ketoglutaric Acids/metabolism
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mutant Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation/genetics
- Protein Conformation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer-associated IDH1 mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate.
**Authors:** Dang L, White DW, Gross S, Bennett BD, Bittinger MA, Driggers EM, Fantin VR, Jang HG, Jin S, Keenan MC, Marks KM, Prins RM, Ward PS, Yen KE, Liau LM, Rabinowitz JD, Cantley LC, Thompson CB, Vander Heiden MG, Su SM
**Journal:** Nature (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature08617](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08617)

## Content

1. Nature. 2009 Dec 10;462(7274):739-44. doi: 10.1038/nature08617.

Cancer-associated IDH1 mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate.

Dang L(1), White DW, Gross S, Bennett BD, Bittinger MA, Driggers EM, Fantin VR, 
Jang HG, Jin S, Keenan MC, Marks KM, Prins RM, Ward PS, Yen KE, Liau LM, 
Rabinowitz JD, Cantley LC, Thompson CB, Vander Heiden MG, Su SM.

Author information:
(1)Agios Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Mutations in the enzyme cytosolic isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) are a common 
feature of a major subset of primary human brain cancers. These mutations occur 
at a single amino acid residue of the IDH1 active site, resulting in loss of the 
enzyme's ability to catalyse conversion of isocitrate to alpha-ketoglutarate. 
However, only a single copy of the gene is mutated in tumours, raising the 
possibility that the mutations do not result in a simple loss of function. Here 
we show that cancer-associated IDH1 mutations result in a new ability of the 
enzyme to catalyse the NADPH-dependent reduction of alpha-ketoglutarate to 
R(-)-2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG). Structural studies demonstrate that when arginine 
132 is mutated to histidine, residues in the active site are shifted to produce 
structural changes consistent with reduced oxidative decarboxylation of 
isocitrate and acquisition of the ability to convert alpha-ketoglutarate to 2HG. 
Excess accumulation of 2HG has been shown to lead to an elevated risk of 
malignant brain tumours in patients with inborn errors of 2HG metabolism. 
Similarly, in human malignant gliomas harbouring IDH1 mutations, we find 
markedly elevated levels of 2HG. These data demonstrate that the IDH1 mutations 
result in production of the onco-metabolite 2HG, and indicate that the excess 
2HG which accumulates in vivo contributes to the formation and malignant 
progression of gliomas.

DOI: 10.1038/nature08617
PMCID: PMC2818760
PMID: 19935646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]