---
reference_id: "PMID:16317256"
title: Clinical features of frontotemporal dementia.
authors:
- Boxer AL
- Miller BL
journal: Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/01.wad.0000183086.99691.91
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features of frontotemporal dementia.
**Authors:** Boxer AL, Miller BL
**Journal:** Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.wad.0000183086.99691.91](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.wad.0000183086.99691.91)

## Content

1. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2005 Oct-Dec;19 Suppl 1:S3-6. doi: 
10.1097/01.wad.0000183086.99691.91.

Clinical features of frontotemporal dementia.

Boxer AL(1), Miller BL.

Author information:
(1)Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, UCSF, San Francisco, 
California 94143-1207, USA. adam.boxer@memory.ucsf.edu

What was once called Pick's disease has three major anatomic variants. With all 
three, frontotemporal brain is selectively injured whereas posterior cortical 
regions are spared. These three clinical patterns include a bifrontal, slightly 
asymmetric subtype with more involvement of the right frontotemporal region 
called frontotemporal dementia or the frontal variant of FTD (fvFTD), a 
temporal-predominant subtype called the temporal variant of FTD or semantic 
dementia (SD), and a left frontal-predominant subtype called progressive 
nonfluent aphasia (PNFA). The three anatomic groups help to classify distinctive 
clinical syndromes with unique features. Careful study of these subtypes of 
frontotemporal dementia, using combinations of new quantitative neuroimaging, 
behavioral and physiological measures are yielding important information about 
the functioning of the brain's frontal and temporal regions. As we come to 
better understand the biologic basis for the three FTD clinical syndromes, new 
classification schemas may emerge, but our current clinical criteria serve as a 
strong guide to the diagnosis and separation of FTD from Alzheimer disease and 
other dementias.

DOI: 10.1097/01.wad.0000183086.99691.91
PMID: 16317256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]