---
reference_id: "PMID:33041087"
title: Efficacy of Elbasvir/Grazoprevir in Early Chronic G1/G4 Hepatitis C infection in HIV/HCV co-infected patients with mild fibrosis.
authors:
- Laguno Centeno M
- Alvarez B
- Martínez-Rebollar M
- de la Mora L
- Prieto L
- de Lazzari E
- González-Cordón A
- Torres B
- Cabello A
- Gorgolas M
- Mallolas J
journal: Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.gastrohep.2020.06.019
keywords:
- Adult
- "Benzofurans/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Coinfection/drug therapy
- Drug Combinations
- Genotype
- HIV Infections/complications
- Hepacivirus/genetics
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/complications, drug therapy"
- "Homosexuality, Male"
- Humans
- "Imidazoles/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Liver Cirrhosis/complications
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pilot Projects
- Prospective Studies
- "Quinoxalines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of Elbasvir/Grazoprevir in Early Chronic G1/G4 Hepatitis C infection in HIV/HCV co-infected patients with mild fibrosis.
**Authors:** Laguno Centeno M, Alvarez B, Martínez-Rebollar M, de la Mora L, Prieto L, de Lazzari E, González-Cordón A, Torres B, Cabello A, Gorgolas M, Mallolas J
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Hepatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gastrohep.2020.06.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gastrohep.2020.06.019)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021 Mar;44(3):191-197. doi:
10.1016/j.gastrohep.2020.06.019. Epub 2020 Oct 9.

Efficacy of Elbasvir/Grazoprevir in Early Chronic G1/G4 Hepatitis C infection in
HIV/HCV co-infected patients with mild fibrosis.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Laguno Centeno M(1), Alvarez B(2), Martínez-Rebollar M(3), de la Mora L(4),
Prieto L(2), de Lazzari E(4), González-Cordón A(4), Torres B(4), Cabello A(2),
Gorgolas M(2), Mallolas J(5).

Author information:
(1)Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: mlaguno@clinic.cat.
(2)Servicio de Infecciones, Fundación Jímenez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Hospital Clinic IDIBAPS, Spain.
(4)Unidad de VIH, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Unidad VIH, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Acute hepatitis C virus (AHC) infection is increasingly common among
HIV+ men who have sex with men (MSM). Until 2017, the guidelines recommended
therapy with pegylated-interferon plus ribavirin with a mild sustained
virological response (SVR). This prompted many patients to reject that
treatment, at that time, waiting to be treated with better and safer options
with new Direct-Acting-Antivirals (DAA).
OBJECTIVES: Assess the efficacy and safety of Elbasvir/Grazoprevir to treat
recent chronic hepatitis C infection, genotype 1 or 4, in HIV+ MSM patients.
METHODS: Prospective, open-labeled, two center, pilot study. SVR is analyzed for
treatment with Elbasvir/Grazoprevir (8 weeks in GT1b or 12 in GT1a or GT4) in
patients with a recent chronic HCV infection, defined as HCV infection lasting
less than 4 years and mild liver fibrosis (liver stiffness <8kPa).
RESULTS: Forty-eight patients were included (May 2017-March 2018): 2 GT1b, 24
GT1a and 22 GT4. HCV-RNA>800000UI in 63% and medium liver stiffness 4.9kPa. The
SVR was 98%, one patient failed due to poor adherence. 67% of patients had
adverse effects, but only 16% treatment related. The most frequent side effects
were gastrointestinal (19%), related with the central nervous system (18%),
respiratory (16%) and systemic symptoms (15%). During one year of follow-up
post-therapy, 4 AHC and 18 patients with sexually transmitted diseases (STD)
were diagnosed.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with Elbasvir/Grazoprevir in this scenario is highly
effective and safe. Patients with risky sexual practices must remain linked to
the medical care system to detect new STD and HCV reinfection.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gastrohep.2020.06.019
PMID: 33041087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
