---
reference_id: "PMID:39121557"
title: "Unraveling the Link: Seizure Characteristics and Ammonia Levels in Urea Cycle Disorder During Hyperammonemic Crises."
authors:
- Chanvanichtrakool M
- Schreiber JM
- Chen WL
- Barber J
- Zhang A
- Ah Mew N
- Schulze A
- Wilkening G
- Nagamani SCS
- Gropman A
- Urea Cycle Disease Consortium
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.06.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unraveling the Link: Seizure Characteristics and Ammonia Levels in Urea Cycle Disorder During Hyperammonemic Crises.
**Authors:** Chanvanichtrakool M, Schreiber JM, Chen WL, Barber J, Zhang A, Ah Mew N, Schulze A, Wilkening G, Nagamani SCS, Gropman A, Urea Cycle Disease Consortium
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.06.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.06.013)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2024 Oct;159:48-55. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.06.013. 
Epub 2024 Jun 29.

Unraveling the Link: Seizure Characteristics and Ammonia Levels in Urea Cycle 
Disorder During Hyperammonemic Crises.

Chanvanichtrakool M(1), Schreiber JM(2), Chen WL(2), Barber J(3), Zhang A(3), Ah 
Mew N(4), Schulze A(5), Wilkening G(6), Nagamani SCS(7), Gropman A(8); Urea 
Cycle Disease Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Division of Neurology, Department of 
Pediatrics, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand; Division of Neurogenetics & 
Developmental Pediatrics, Center for Neuroscience and Behavioral Medicine, 
Children's National Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia.
(2)Division of Neurogenetics & Developmental Pediatrics, Center for Neuroscience 
and Behavioral Medicine, Children's National Medical Center, Washington, 
District of Columbia.
(3)Division of Biostatistics and Study Methodology, Children's National Medical 
Center, Washington, District of Columbia.
(4)Division of Genetics & Metabolism, Children's National Hospital, Washington, 
District of Columbia.
(5)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; 
Departments of Pediatrics and Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Colorado, University of 
Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.
(7)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas 
Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(8)Division of Neurogenetics & Developmental Pediatrics, Center for Neuroscience 
and Behavioral Medicine, Children's National Medical Center, Washington, 
District of Columbia. Electronic address: agropman@childrensnational.org.

BACKGROUND: This retrospective clinical study performed at a single clinical 
center aimed to identify the prevalence of seizures in individuals with urea 
cycle disorders (UCDs) with and without hyperammonemic (HA) crises. In addition, 
we sought to correlate the utility of biochemical markers and 
electroencephalography (EEG) in detecting subclinical seizures during HA.
METHODS: Medical records of individuals with UCDs enrolled in Urea Cycle 
Disorders Consortium Longitudinal Study (UCDC-LS) (NCT00237315) at Children's 
National Hospital between 2006 and 2022 were reviewed for evidence of clinical 
and subclinical seizuress during HA crises, and initial biochemical levels 
concurrently.
RESULTS: Eighty-five individuals with UCD were included in the analyses. 
Fifty-six of the 85 patients (66%) experienced HA crises, with a total of 163 HA 
events. Seizures are observed in 13% of HA events. Among all HA events with 
concomitant EEG, subclinical seizures were identified in 27% of crises of 
encephalopathy without clinical seizures and 53% of crises with clinical 
seizures. The odds of seizures increases 2.65 (95% confidence interval [CI], 
1.51 to 4.66) times for every 100 μmol/L increase in ammonia and 1.14 (95% CI, 
1.04 to 1.25) times for every 100 μmol/L increase in glutamine.
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the utility of EEG monitoring during crises 
for patients presenting with clinical seizures or encephalopathy with HA. During 
HA events, measurement of initial ammonia and glutamine can help determine risk 
for seizures and guide EEG monitoring decisions.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2024.06.013
PMCID: PMC11381174
PMID: 39121557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.