---
reference_id: "PMID:38147960"
title: "Fibroblast Subpopulations in Systemic Sclerosis: Functional Implications of Individual Subpopulations and Correlations with Clinical Features."
authors:
- Zhu H
- Luo H
- Skaug B
- Tabib T
- Li YN
- Tao Y
- Matei AE
- Lyons MA
- Schett G
- Lafyatis R
- Assassi S
- Distler JHW
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2023.09.288
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroblast Subpopulations in Systemic Sclerosis: Functional Implications of Individual Subpopulations and Correlations with Clinical Features.
**Authors:** Zhu H, Luo H, Skaug B, Tabib T, Li YN, Tao Y, Matei AE, Lyons MA, Schett G, Lafyatis R, Assassi S, Distler JHW
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jid.2023.09.288](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2023.09.288)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2024 Jun;144(6):1251-1261.e13. doi: 
10.1016/j.jid.2023.09.288. Epub 2023 Dec 24.

Fibroblast Subpopulations in Systemic Sclerosis: Functional Implications of 
Individual Subpopulations and Correlations with Clinical Features.

Zhu H(1), Luo H(2), Skaug B(3), Tabib T(4), Li YN(5), Tao Y(6), Matei AE(5), 
Lyons MA(3), Schett G(7), Lafyatis R(4), Assassi S(3), Distler JHW(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China; Department of Internal Medicine 3, 
Friedrich-Alexander University (FAU) Erlangen-Nürnberg and Universitätsklinikum 
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany; National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric 
Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China. 
Electronic address: honglinzhu@csu.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China; National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric 
Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, McGovern Medical 
School, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, 
USA.
(4)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicine, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine 3, Friedrich-Alexander University (FAU) 
Erlangen-Nürnberg and Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany; 
Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital Düsseldorf, Medical Faculty, 
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany; Hiller Research 
Center, University Hospital Düsseldorf, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine 
University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(6)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China; Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer 
Invasion of the Chinese Ministry of Education, Cancer Research Institute, 
Central South University, Changsha, China.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine 3, Friedrich-Alexander University (FAU) 
Erlangen-Nürnberg and Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine 3, Friedrich-Alexander University (FAU) 
Erlangen-Nürnberg and Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany; 
Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital Düsseldorf, Medical Faculty, 
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany; Hiller Research 
Center, University Hospital Düsseldorf, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine 
University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany. Electronic address: 
joerg.distler@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

Fibroblasts constitute a heterogeneous population of cells. In this study, we 
integrated single-cell RNA-sequencing and bulk RNA-sequencing data as well as 
clinical information to study the role of individual fibroblast populations in 
systemic sclerosis (SSc). SSc skin demonstrated an increased abundance of COMP+, 
COL11A1+, MYOC+, CCL19+, SFRP4/SFRP2+, and PRSS23/SFRP2+ fibroblasts signatures 
and decreased proportions of CXCL12+ and PI16+ fibroblast signatures in the 
Prospective Registry of Early Systemic Sclerosis and Genetics versus Environment 
in Scleroderma Outcome Study cohorts. Numerical differences were confirmed by 
multicolor immunofluorescence for selected fibroblast populations. COMP+, 
COL11A1+, SFRP4/SFRP2+, PRSS23/SFRP2+, and PI16+ fibroblasts were similarly 
altered between normal wound healing and patients with SSc. The proportions of 
profibrotic COMP+, COL11A1+, SFRP4/SFRP2+, and PRSS23/SFRP2+ and proinflammatory 
CCL19+ fibroblast signatures were positively correlated with clinical and 
histopathological parameters of skin fibrosis, whereas signatures of CXCL12+ and 
PI16+ fibroblasts were inversely correlated. Incorporating the proportions of 
COMP+, COL11A1+, SFRP4/SFRP2+, and PRSS23/SFRP2+ fibroblast signatures into 
machine learning models improved the classification of patients with SSc into 
those with progressive versus stable skin fibrosis. In summary, the profound 
imbalance of fibroblast subpopulations in SSc may drive the progression of skin 
fibrosis. Specific targeting of disease-relevant fibroblast populations may 
offer opportunities for the treatment of SSc and other fibrotic diseases.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2023.09.288
PMCID: PMC11116078
PMID: 38147960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest RL reports grants from 
Bristol Meyer Squib, Corbus, Formation, Moderna, Regeneron, Pfizer, and Kiniksa, 
outside the submitted work; and served as a consultant with Bristol Meyers 
Squibb, Formation, Sanofi, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Merck, and Genentech/Roche. 
JHWD declares no financial interests directly related to the study. However, he 
has consultancy relationships with Actelion, Active Biotech, Anamar, Bayer 
Pharma, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, Galapagos, GSK, Inventiva, JB 
Therapeutics, Medac, Pfizer, RuiYi and UCB. JHWD has received research funding 
from Anamar, Active Biotech, Array Biopharma, aTyr, BMS, Bayer Pharma, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, Galapagos, GSK, Inventiva, Novartis, 
Sanofi-Aventis, RedX, UCB. JHWD is a stock owner of 4D Science and Scientific 
Lead of FibroCure. Other authors declared no potential conflicts of interest 
associated with this article.