---
reference_id: "PMID:21037268"
title: ED₅₀ and ED₉₅ of intrathecal levobupivacaine with opioids for Caesarean delivery.
authors:
- Bouvet L
- Da-Col X
- Chassard D
- Daléry F
- Ruynat L
- Allaouchiche B
- Dantony E
- Boselli E
journal: Br J Anaesth
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/bja/aeq296
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ED₅₀ and ED₉₅ of intrathecal levobupivacaine with opioids for Caesarean delivery.
**Authors:** Bouvet L, Da-Col X, Chassard D, Daléry F, Ruynat L, Allaouchiche B, Dantony E, Boselli E
**Journal:** Br J Anaesth (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bja/aeq296](https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aeq296)

## Content

1. Br J Anaesth. 2011 Feb;106(2):215-20. doi: 10.1093/bja/aeq296. Epub 2010 Oct
30.

ED₅₀ and ED₉₅ of intrathecal levobupivacaine with opioids for Caesarean 
delivery.

Bouvet L(1), Da-Col X, Chassard D, Daléry F, Ruynat L, Allaouchiche B, Dantony 
E, Boselli E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Édouard Herriot Hospital, 
Hospices Civils de Lyon, France. lionel.bouvet@chu-lyon.fr

BACKGROUND: This prospective randomized double-blind dose-response study aimed 
to determine the ED₅₀ and ED₉₅ of intrathecal levobupivacaine combined with 
morphine and sufentanil for elective Caesarean delivery.
METHODS: Parturients undergoing elective Caesarean delivery were included and 
allocated to five levobupivacaine dose groups (6, 8, 10, 12, or 14 mg). Combined 
spinal-epidural (CSE) anaesthesia was performed, allowing intrathecal 
administration of the allocated dose of levobupivacaine with intrathecal 
morphine 100 µg and intrathecal sufentanil 2.5 µg, and insertion of epidural 
catheter for completing anaesthesia in the case of failure. The dose was 
considered as successful if a bilateral T6 sensory block to pinprick occurred in 
15 min and if no epidural supplement was required during surgery. A probit 
regression analysis was performed to calculate the ED₅₀ and ED₉₅ of intrathecal 
levobupivacaine for Caesarean delivery.
RESULTS: Eighty-five parturients were included. A block to T6 sensory level was 
reached in 15 min for most of the patients. The ED₅₀ and ED₉₅ of levobupivacaine 
were 6.2 mg (95% CI: 2.6-7.6) and 12.9 mg (11.1-17.9), respectively. 
Haemodynamic stability and the rate of nausea and vomiting were similar among 
groups. Greater doses of levobupivacaine were associated with increased motor 
block duration.
CONCLUSIONS: When combined with intrathecal sufentanil 2.5 µg and intrathecal 
morphine 100 µg, the ED₉₅ of intrathecal levobupivacaine is 12.9 mg for 
Caesarean delivery. If doses of levobupivacaine less than the ED₉₅, particularly 
near the ED₅₀, are used, these doses should be administered under a CSE 
technique.

DOI: 10.1093/bja/aeq296
PMID: 21037268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]