---
reference_id: "PMID:38898018"
title: "Camrelizumab-based induction chemoimmunotherapy in locally advanced stage hypopharyngeal carcinoma: phase II clinical trial."
authors:
- Gong H
- Tian S
- Ding H
- Tao L
- Wang L
- Wang J
- Wang T
- Yuan X
- Heng Y
- Zhang M
- Shi Y
- Xu C
- Wu C
- Wang S
- Zhou L
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-49121-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use, administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Aged
- "Hypopharyngeal Neoplasms/therapy, pathology, mortality, drug therapy"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Adult
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Cisplatin/administration & dosage, therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Progression-Free Survival
- Induction Chemotherapy
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Camrelizumab-based induction chemoimmunotherapy in locally advanced stage hypopharyngeal carcinoma: phase II clinical trial.
**Authors:** Gong H, Tian S, Ding H, Tao L, Wang L, Wang J, Wang T, Yuan X, Heng Y, Zhang M, Shi Y, Xu C, Wu C, Wang S, Zhou L
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-49121-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49121-3)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Jun 19;15(1):5251. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-49121-3.

Camrelizumab-based induction chemoimmunotherapy in locally advanced stage 
hypopharyngeal carcinoma: phase II clinical trial.

Gong H(#)(1), Tian S(#)(2), Ding H(2), Tao L(1), Wang L(2), Wang J(2), Wang 
T(2), Yuan X(1), Heng Y(1), Zhang M(1), Shi Y(1), Xu C(1), Wu C(1), Wang S(3), 
Zhou L(4).

Author information:
(1)ENT institute and Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Eye & ENT Hospital, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, 200031, China.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Eye & ENT Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, 200031, China.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Eye & ENT Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, 200031, China. shengziwang@fudan.edu.cn.
(4)ENT institute and Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Eye & ENT Hospital, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, 200031, China. zhoulent@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2024 Aug 7;15(1):6720. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-51057-7.

This phase II trial aimed to determine the efficacy and safety of induction 
chemoimmunotherapy of camrelizumab plus modified TPF in locally advanced 
hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LA HSCC) (NCT04156698). The primary 
endpoint was objective response rate (ORR), and secondary endpoints were 3-year 
overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), larynx preservation rate 
(LPR), and metastasis-free survival (MFS). Patients (cT3-4aN0-2M0), regardless 
of sex, received induction chemoimmunotherapy for three cycles: camrelizumab 
200 mg d1, docetaxel 75 mg/m2 d1, cisplatin 25 mg/m2 d1-3, and capecitabine 
800 mg/m2 bid d1-14, q21d. Patients were assigned to radioimmunotherapy if they 
had a complete or partial response, those with stable or progressive disease 
underwent surgery and adjuvant (chemo)radiotherapy. Camrelizumab was maintained 
post-radioimmunotherapy. Fifty-one patients were enrolled with a median 
follow-up duration of 23.7 months. After induction therapy, the ORR was 82.4% 
(42/51), meeting the prespecified endpoint. Grade 3/4 adverse events occurred in 
26 patients, and no treatment-related death occurred. As three-year outcomes 
were immature, two-year OS, PFS and LPR were reported. As no distant metastatic 
event had occurred, MFS was not reported here. The two-year OS, PFS, and LPR 
rates were 83.0%, 77.1%, and 70.0%, respectively. The induction 
chemoimmunotherapy of camrelizumab plus TPF showed a high ORR rate with an 
acceptable safety profile in LA HSCC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-49121-3
PMCID: PMC11187213
PMID: 38898018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.