---
reference_id: "PMID:23816600"
title: "Breathing challenges in Rett syndrome: lessons learned from humans and animal models."
authors:
- Ramirez JM
- Ward CS
- Neul JL
journal: Respir Physiol Neurobiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2013.06.022
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mice
- Nerve Net/physiology
- "Respiration Disorders/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Respiratory Mechanics/physiology
- "Rett Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Breathing challenges in Rett syndrome: lessons learned from humans and animal models.
**Authors:** Ramirez JM, Ward CS, Neul JL
**Journal:** Respir Physiol Neurobiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.resp.2013.06.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resp.2013.06.022)

## Content

1. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2013 Nov 1;189(2):280-7. doi:
10.1016/j.resp.2013.06.022. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Breathing challenges in Rett syndrome: lessons learned from humans and animal
models.

Ramirez JM(1), Ward CS, Neul JL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute,
Seattle, WA 98101, USA; Department of Neurological Surgery, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98101, USA. Electronic address: nino1@uw.edu.

Breathing disturbances are a major challenge in Rett Syndrome (RTT). These
disturbances are more pronounced during wakefulness; but irregular breathing
occurs also during sleep. During the day patients can exhibit alternating bouts
of hypoventilation and irregular hyperventilation. But there is significant
individual variability in severity, onset, duration and type of breathing
disturbances. Research in mouse models of RTT suggests that different areas in
the ventrolateral medulla and pons give rise to different aspects of this
breathing disorder. Pre-clinical experiments in mouse models that target
different neuromodulatory and neurotransmitter receptors and MeCP2 function
within glia cells can partly reverse breathing abnormalities. The success in
animal models raises optimism that one day it will be possible to control or
potentially cure the devastating symptoms also in human patients with RTT.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2013.06.022
PMCID: PMC3812329
PMID: 23816600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
