---
reference_id: "PMID:35862567"
title: Carnitine-Acylcarnitine Translocase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Morales Corado JA
- Lee CU
- Enns GM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carnitine-Acylcarnitine Translocase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Morales Corado JA, Lee CU, Enns GM

## Content

1. Carnitine-Acylcarnitine Translocase Deficiency.

Morales Corado JA(1), Lee CU(2), Enns GM(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2022 Jul 21.

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor, Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, 
Columbia University, New York, New York
(2)Assistant Professor, Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, 
Stanford University, Stanford, California
(3)Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Department of 
Pediatrics, Stanford University, Stanford, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase (CACT) is a 
critical component of the carnitine shuttle, which facilitates the transfer of 
long-chain fatty acylcarnitines across the inner mitochondrial membrane. CACT 
deficiency causes a defect in mitochondrial long-chain fatty acid β-oxidation, 
with variable clinical severity. Severe neonatal-onset disease is most common, 
with symptoms evident within two days after birth; attenuated cases may present 
in the first months of life. Hyperammonemia and cardiac arrhythmia are prominent 
in early-onset disease, with high rates of cardiac arrest. Other clinical 
features are typical for disorders of long-chain fatty acid oxidation: poor 
feeding, lethargy, hypoketotic hypoglycemia, hypotonia, transaminitis, liver 
dysfunction with hepatomegaly, and rhabdomyolysis. Univentricular or 
biventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, ranging from mild to severe, may 
respond to appropriate dietary and medical therapies. Hyperammonemia is 
difficult to treat and is an important determinant of long-term neurocognitive 
outcome. Affected individuals with early-onset disease typically experience 
brain injury at presentation, and have recurrent hyperammonemia leading to 
developmental delay / intellectual disability. Affected individuals with 
later-onset disease have milder symptoms and are less likely to experience 
recurrent hyperammonemia, allowing a better developmental outcome. Prompt 
treatment of the presenting episode to prevent hypoglycemic, hypoxic, or 
hyperammonemic brain injury may allow normal growth and development.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Characteristic elevation of long-chain acylcarnitines C16, 
C18, and C18:1 on acylcarnitine profile suggests a diagnosis of CACT or CPT II 
deficiency. The diagnosis of CACT deficiency is confirmed by identification of 
biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC25A20, or in some cases by identifying 
reduced CACT enzyme activity in skin fibroblasts.
MANAGEMENT: Routine daily treatment of manifestations: The mainstay of therapy 
is a high-carbohydrate diet (>60% of total caloric intake) with restriction of 
long-chain dietary fat (to <10% of total calories) and treatment with the 
anaplerotic agent triheptanoin (to provide 25%-35% of total calories). If 
triheptanoin is not available, medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) oil (10%-30% of 
total calories) could be used as a substitute. Fasting is avoided or limited, 
and carnitine supplemented at ~100 mg/kg/day is recommended. Goals of care 
include optimization of caloric intake to avoid or reduce hyperammonemia 
(ammonia scavenger medications are of limited efficacy in this condition) and 
aggressive rehabilitation therapy, including physical and occupational therapy, 
to address motor delays. Placement of a feeding tube and/or feeding therapy may 
be required in those with feeding issues. Emergency treatment of manifestations: 
Administration of high-dextrose-containing fluids: oral/enteral carbohydrate 
polymer (at home) or intravenous dextrose (in the hospital). Hyperammonemia is 
most sensitive to high rates of dextrose infusion (12-15 g/kg/day glucose for 
infants and 10-12 g/kg/day for children age 1-6 years), while ammonia scavenging 
medications (sodium benzoate, sodium phenylbutyrate) are of limited efficacy. 
Cardiac arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, rhabdomyolysis, and acute renal impairment 
should be treated per standard of care, typically in the intensive care unit. 
Consideration should be given for triheptanoin treatment in those with 
cardiogenic shock. Prevention of secondary complications: A home emergency plan 
for prompt illness management should be provided to parents, primary care 
providers, teachers, and school staff. When undergoing surgeries or procedures 
(e.g., dental interventions or neuroimaging requiring sedation), pre-procedure 
hospital management includes IV dextrose with electrolytes appropriate for age. 
Provide the family with an emergency plan and letter for use during emergency 
department visits. Surveillance: Regular evaluations by a metabolic specialist 
and metabolic dietitian. Measurement of growth parameters (including head 
circumference) and monitoring of developmental milestones at each visit. 
Neuropsychological testing using age-appropriate tools as clinically indicated. 
Laboratory monitoring to include serum ammonia level, total CK level, ALT, AST, 
glucose, electrolytes, and albumin levels for periodic surveillance as 
clinically indicated. Measurement of complete blood count, ferritin level, 
prealbumin, CRP, essential fatty acids, calcium, magnesium, phosphate, copper, 
zinc, selenium, folate, and vitamins A, D, E, and B12 annually after the first 
year of life. Measurement of plasma electrolytes, creatinine, blood urea 
nitrogen, and/or cystatin C levels for renal monitoring as clinically indicated. 
Echocardiogram to assess for cardiomyopathy or cardiac dysfunction annually and 
as clinically indicated. EKG or 24-hour Holter test periodically, as clinically 
indicated. Consider EEG or neuroimaging in those with new neurologic symptoms or 
altered mental status. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Prolonged fasting, 
catabolic illness (fever, intercurrent infection), inadequate caloric provision 
during times of catabolic stress (including during fasting), prolonged strenuous 
physical activity, and prolonged administration of anesthetics containing high 
levels of long-chain fatty acids (e.g., propofol). Evaluation of relatives at 
risk: Testing of all at-risk sibs of any age is warranted to allow for early 
diagnosis and treatment of CACT deficiency. For at-risk newborn sibs when 
prenatal testing was not performed, in parallel with newborn screening either 
test for the familial SLC25A20 pathogenic variants or measure acylcarnitine 
profile.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CACT deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an SLC25A20 pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance 
of inheriting neither of the familial SLC25A20 pathogenic variants and being 
unaffected. Heterozygotes (carriers) are asymptomatic. Once the SLC25A20 
pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier 
testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing 
are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 35862567