---
reference_id: "PMID:34427594"
title: "Screening for Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement."
authors:
- US Preventive Services Task Force
- Davidson KW
- Barry MJ
- Mangione CM
- Cabana M
- Caughey AB
- Davis EM
- Donahue KE
- Doubeni CA
- Krist AH
- Kubik M
- Li L
- Ogedegbe G
- Owens DK
- Pbert L
- Silverstein M
- Stevermer J
- Tseng CW
- Wong JB
journal: JAMA
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2021.12531
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening for Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement.
**Authors:** US Preventive Services Task Force, Davidson KW, Barry MJ, Mangione CM, Cabana M, Caughey AB, Davis EM, Donahue KE, Doubeni CA, Krist AH, Kubik M, Li L, Ogedegbe G, Owens DK, Pbert L, Silverstein M, Stevermer J, Tseng CW, Wong JB
**Journal:** JAMA (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2021.12531](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2021.12531)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2021 Aug 24;326(8):736-743. doi: 10.1001/jama.2021.12531.

Screening for Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes: US Preventive Services Task Force 
Recommendation Statement.

US Preventive Services Task Force; Davidson KW(1), Barry MJ(2), Mangione CM(3), 
Cabana M(4), Caughey AB(5), Davis EM(6), Donahue KE(7), Doubeni CA(8), Krist 
AH(9)(10), Kubik M(11), Li L(12), Ogedegbe G(13), Owens DK(14), Pbert L(15), 
Silverstein M(16), Stevermer J(17), Tseng CW(18)(19), Wong JB(20).

Author information:
(1)Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research at Northwell Health, Manhasset, New 
York.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)University of California, Los Angeles.
(4)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, New York.
(5)Oregon Health & Science University, Portland.
(6)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(7)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
(8)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(9)Fairfax Family Practice Residency, Fairfax, Virginia.
(10)Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond.
(11)George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia.
(12)University of Virginia, Charlottesville.
(13)New York University, New York, New York.
(14)Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(15)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester.
(16)Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts.
(17)University of Missouri, Columbia.
(18)University of Hawaii, Honolulu.
(19)Pacific Health Research and Education Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii.
(20)Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.

Summary for patients in
    JAMA. 2021 Aug 24;326(8):778. doi: 10.1001/jama.2021.12606.

IMPORTANCE: An estimated 13% of all US adults (18 years or older) have diabetes, 
and 34.5% meet criteria for prediabetes. The prevalences of prediabetes and 
diabetes are higher in older adults. Estimates of the risk of progression from 
prediabetes to diabetes vary widely, perhaps because of differences in the 
definition of prediabetes or the heterogeneity of prediabetes. Diabetes is the 
leading cause of kidney failure and new cases of blindness among adults in the 
US. It is also associated with increased risks of cardiovascular disease, 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and was 
estimated to be the seventh leading cause of death in the US in 2017. Screening 
asymptomatic adults for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes may allow earlier 
detection, diagnosis, and treatment, with the ultimate goal of improving health 
outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: To update its 2015 recommendation, the USPSTF commissioned a 
systematic review to evaluate screening for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes in 
asymptomatic, nonpregnant adults and preventive interventions for those with 
prediabetes.
POPULATION: Nonpregnant adults aged 35 to 70 years seen in primary care settings 
who have overweight or obesity (defined as a body mass index ≥25 and ≥30, 
respectively) and no symptoms of diabetes.
EVIDENCE ASSESSMENT: The USPSTF concludes with moderate certainty that screening 
for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes and offering or referring patients with 
prediabetes to effective preventive interventions has a moderate net benefit.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION: The USPSTF recommends screening for prediabetes 
and type 2 diabetes in adults aged 35 to 70 years who have overweight or 
obesity. Clinicians should offer or refer patients with prediabetes to effective 
preventive interventions. (B recommendation).

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2021.12531
PMID: 34427594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]