---
reference_id: "PMID:24387945"
title: "Clinical manifestations in children with tonsillar lymphoma: A systematic review."
authors:
- Guimarães AC
- de Carvalho GM
- Bento LR
- Correa C
- Gusmão RJ
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.12.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical manifestations in children with tonsillar lymphoma: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Guimarães AC, de Carvalho GM, Bento LR, Correa C, Gusmão RJ
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.12.005)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2014 May;90(2):146-51. doi: 
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.12.005. Epub 2013 Dec 14.

Clinical manifestations in children with tonsillar lymphoma: A systematic 
review.

Guimarães AC(1), de Carvalho GM(2), Bento LR(2), Correa C(3), Gusmão RJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Campinas 
(UNICAMP), Brazil. Electronic address: alecgxl2@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Campinas 
(UNICAMP), Brazil.
(3)Department of Public Health, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The lymphoma is the most common childhood malignancy in the head and 
neck. Approximately 15% of head and neck lymphomas in children affect the 
Waldeyer's ring. Early diagnosis and treatment are of great importance in the 
prognosis of tonsillar lymphoma patients.
OBJECTIVES: To realize a systematic review of the literature on the clinical 
manifestations present at diagnosis of tonsillar lymphoma in pediatric patients.
DATE SOURCE: Articles in English, Spanish or Portuguese in the last 15 years 
about lymphoma in palatine tonsil in children from PubMed/Medline, LILACS, 
IBECS, Cochrane, SCIELO, BIREME and Scopus.
STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: It was included articles and case reports that 
covered the pediatric age group, up to 18 years old and that contained 
information of the clinical manifestations of tonsillar lymphoma at diagnosis.
RESULTS: We found 87 articles of which 18 were included; there were 66 cases of 
lymphoma of palatine tonsils. The most common clinical manifestations found in 
children with lymphoma in palatine tonsils were unilateral tonsillar enlargement 
(72.7%), alteration in appearance of the tonsil (45.4%) and cervical 
lymphadenopathy (30.3%). The presence of B symptoms occurred in only 16% of the 
patients. Burkitt was the most common type of lymphoma found.
CONCLUSION: The most common clinical manifestations of lymphoma in palatine 
tonsil are the tonsils asymmetry, alteration in the appearance of the mucous and 
cervical lymphadenopathy. A detailed description of cases of lymphoma in 
palatine tonsils and the use of criteria for classification of tonsillar 
asymmetry are important for future revisions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2013.12.005
PMID: 24387945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]