---
reference_id: "PMID:30361521"
title: Systemic immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis.
authors:
- Merlini G
- Dispenzieri A
- Sanchorawala V
- Schönland SO
- Palladini G
- Hawkins PN
- Gertz MA
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-018-0034-3
keywords:
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Doxycycline/therapeutic use
- Heart/physiopathology
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin Light-chain Amyloidosis/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Kidney/metabolism
- Quality of Life/psychology
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Merlini G, Dispenzieri A, Sanchorawala V, Schönland SO, Palladini G, Hawkins PN, Gertz MA
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-018-0034-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-018-0034-3)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018 Oct 25;4(1):38. doi: 10.1038/s41572-018-0034-3.

Systemic immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis.

Merlini G(1)(2), Dispenzieri A(3), Sanchorawala V(4), Schönland SO(5), Palladini 
G(6)(7), Hawkins PN(8), Gertz MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Amyloidosis Research and Treatment Center, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy. gmerlini@unipv.it.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. 
gmerlini@unipv.it.
(3)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Section of Hematology-Oncology and Amyloidosis Center, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine V (Haematology, Oncology and Rheumatology), 
Amyloidosis Center, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Amyloidosis Research and Treatment Center, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(8)National Amyloidosis Centre, University College London (Royal Free Campus), 
London, UK.

Systemic immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis is a protein misfolding disease 
caused by the conversion of immunoglobulin light chains from their soluble 
functional states into highly organized amyloid fibrillar aggregates that lead 
to organ dysfunction. The disease is progressive and, accordingly, early 
diagnosis is vital to prevent irreversible organ damage, of which cardiac damage 
and renal damage predominate. The development of novel sensitive biomarkers and 
imaging technologies for the detection and quantification of organ involvement 
and damage is facilitating earlier diagnosis and improved evaluation of the 
efficacy of new and existing therapies. Treatment is guided by risk assessment, 
which is based on levels of cardiac biomarkers; close monitoring of clonal and 
organ responses guides duration of therapy and changes in regimen. Several new 
classes of drugs, such as proteasome inhibitors and immunomodulatory drugs, 
along with high-dose chemotherapy and autologous haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation, have led to rapid and deep suppression of amyloid light chain 
production in the majority of patients. However, effective therapies for 
patients with advanced cardiac involvement are an unmet need. Passive 
immunotherapies targeting clonal plasma cells and directly accelerating removal 
of amyloid deposits promise to further improve the overall outlook of this 
increasingly treatable disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-018-0034-3
PMID: 30361521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]