---
reference_id: "PMID:35222090"
title: Molecular Changes in the Cardiac RyR2 With Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia (CPVT).
authors:
- Dulhunty AF
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.830367
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Changes in the Cardiac RyR2 With Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia (CPVT).
**Authors:** Dulhunty AF
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2022.830367](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2022.830367)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2022 Feb 10;13:830367. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.830367. 
eCollection 2022.

Molecular Changes in the Cardiac RyR2 With Catecholaminergic Polymorphic 
Ventricular Tachycardia (CPVT).

Dulhunty AF(1).

Author information:
(1)Muscle Research Group, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Eccles 
Institute of Neuroscience, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.

The cardiac ryanodine receptor Ca2+ release channel (RyR2) is inserted into the 
membrane of intracellular sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) myocyte Ca2+ stores, where 
it releases the Ca2+ essential for contraction. Mutations in proteins involved 
in Ca2+ signaling can lead to catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular 
tachycardia (CPVT). The most common cellular phenotype in CPVT is higher than 
normal cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentrations during diastole due to Ca2+ leak from the 
SR through mutant RyR2. Arrhythmias are triggered when the surface membrane 
sodium calcium exchanger (NCX) lowers cytoplasmic Ca2+ by importing 3 Na+ ions 
to extrude one Ca2+ ion. The Na+ influx leads to delayed after depolarizations 
(DADs) which trigger arrhythmia when reaching action potential threshold. 
Present therapies use drugs developed for different purposes that 
serendipitously reduce RyR2 Ca2+ leak, but can adversely effect systolic Ca2+ 
release and other target processes. Ideal drugs would specifically reverse the 
effect of individual mutations, without altering normal channel function. Such 
drugs will depend on the location of the mutation in the 4967-residue monomer 
and the effect of the mutation on local structure, and downstream effects on 
structures along the conformational pathway to the pore. Such atomic resolution 
information is only now becoming available. This perspective provides a summary 
of known or predicted structural changes associated with a handful of CPVT 
mutations. Known molecular changes associated with RyR opening are discussed, as 
well one study where minute molecular changes with a particular mutation have 
been tracked from the N-terminal mutation site to gating residues in the channel 
pore.

Copyright © 2022 Dulhunty.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2022.830367
PMCID: PMC8867003
PMID: 35222090

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.