---
reference_id: "PMID:30654152"
title: "A de novo TBX3 mutation presenting as dorsalization of the little fingers: A forme fruste phenotype of ulnar-mammary syndrome."
authors:
- Al-Qattan MM
- Maddirevula S
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.01.005
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Breast Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- Female
- "Fingers/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, physiopathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- "Ulna/abnormalities, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A de novo TBX3 mutation presenting as dorsalization of the little fingers: A forme fruste phenotype of ulnar-mammary syndrome.
**Authors:** Al-Qattan MM, Maddirevula S, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.01.005)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2020 Jan;63(1):103615. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.01.005. Epub 
2019 Jan 14.

A de novo TBX3 mutation presenting as dorsalization of the little fingers: A 
forme fruste phenotype of ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Al-Qattan MM(1), Maddirevula S(2), Alkuraya FS(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plastic Surgery at King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; 
Division of Plastic Surgery at King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of 
Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: 
falkuraya@kfshrc.edu.sa.

Ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) is a rare syndromic limb malformation caused by 
heterozygous mutations in TBX3. The name highlights the two commonly involved 
body parts i.e. mammary gland and ulnar ray of the upper limbs, although a more 
extensive systemic involvement is also known to occur. Here, we report the 
surprising finding of a patient with a de novo mutation in TBX3 whose clinical 
presentation is limited to dorsalization of both little fingers and slightly 
deep 4th web spaces. We review the literature to confirm that this should be 
considered as a forme fruste phenotype of UMS.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.01.005
PMID: 30654152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]