---
reference_id: "PMID:24858318"
title: "Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: prenatal diagnosis and treatment."
authors:
- Benoit RM
- Baschat AA
journal: Am J Perinatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1372428
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: prenatal diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Benoit RM, Baschat AA
**Journal:** Am J Perinatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0034-1372428](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0034-1372428)

## Content

1. Am J Perinatol. 2014 Aug;31(7):583-94. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1372428. Epub 2014 
May 23.

Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: prenatal diagnosis and treatment.

Benoit RM(1), Baschat AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

CLINICAL PROBLEM: Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) increases perinatal 
morbidity and mortality for 10 to 15% of monochorionic (MC) gestations.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY: MC gestations are at risk due to the angioarchitecture of the 
shared placenta, with anastomoses of varying type, size, and quantity. TTTS 
results from progression of a chronic perfusion imbalance across unbalanced 
placental anastomoses, typically arising between 15 and 26 weeks gestation. The 
resulting abnormal fetal blood volume levels and compensatory physiological 
responses lead to an increased risk for fetal death, end-organ damage, and 
preterm birth. PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS: Surveillance with ultrasound is essential for 
detection and treatment. TTTS is diagnosed once polyhydramnios occurs in the 
recipient (maximal vertical fluid pocket [MVP] > 8 cm) and oligohydramnios in 
the donor (MVP < 2 cm). The Quintero et al method is commonly used for staging, 
utilizing the presence or absence of donor bladder filling, abnormal fetal 
Doppler values, fetal hydrops, and demise.
TREATMENT: Fetoscopic laser photocoagulation of placental anastomoses is an 
effective treatment addressing the underlying pathophysiology. Further research 
is needed to improve survival rates, reduce risks of fetoscopy, and gain 
understanding of the prediction, assessment, and optimization of long-term 
outcomes for TTTS survivors.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0034-1372428
PMID: 24858318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]