---
reference_id: "PMID:36721196"
title: Clinical and functional characterisation of a recurrent KCNQ1 variant in the Belgian population.
authors:
- Sieliwonczyk E
- Alaerts M
- Simons E
- Snyders D
- Nijak A
- Vandendriessche B
- Schepers D
- Akdeniz D
- Van Craenenbroeck E
- Knaepen K
- Rabaut L
- Heidbuchel H
- Van Laer L
- Saenen J
- Labro AJ
- Loeys B
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02618-4
keywords:
- Animals
- Cricetinae
- Alleles
- Belgium
- Cricetulus
- KCNQ1 Potassium Channel/genetics
- Humans
- Jervell-Lange Nielsen Syndrome/genetics
- Long QT Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and functional characterisation of a recurrent KCNQ1 variant in the Belgian population.
**Authors:** Sieliwonczyk E, Alaerts M, Simons E, Snyders D, Nijak A, Vandendriessche B, Schepers D, Akdeniz D, Van Craenenbroeck E, Knaepen K, Rabaut L, Heidbuchel H, Van Laer L, Saenen J, Labro AJ, Loeys B
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02618-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02618-4)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Jan 31;18(1):23. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02618-4.

Clinical and functional characterisation of a recurrent KCNQ1 variant in the
Belgian population.

Sieliwonczyk E(1)(2), Alaerts M(3)(4), Simons E(3), Snyders D(5), Nijak A(3),
Vandendriessche B(3), Schepers D(3)(4)(5), Akdeniz D(3), Van Craenenbroeck
E(6)(7), Knaepen K(3), Rabaut L(3), Heidbuchel H(6)(7), Van Laer L(3)(4), Saenen
J(6)(7), Labro AJ(5)(8), Loeys B(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Antwerp
University Hospital, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
ewa.sieliwonczyk@uantwerpen.be.
(2)Medical Genetics (MEDGEN), GENCOR, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. ewa.sieliwonczyk@uantwerpen.be.
(3)Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Antwerp
University Hospital, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Medical Genetics (MEDGEN), GENCOR, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(5)Experimental Neurobiology Unit, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University
of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Antwerp
University Hospital, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(7)Cardiovascular Research, GENCOR, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(8)Department of Basic and Applied Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: The c.1124_1127delTTCA p.(Ile375Argfs*43) pathogenic variant is the
most frequently identified molecular defect in the KCNQ1 gene in the
cardiogenetics clinic of the Antwerp University Hospital. This variant was
observed in nine families presenting with either Jervell-Lange-Nielsen syndrome
or long QT syndrome (LQTS). Here, we report on the molecular, clinical and
functional characterization of the KCNQ1 c.1124_1127delTTCA variant.
RESULTS: Forty-one heterozygous variant harboring individuals demonstrated a
predominantly mild clinical and electrophysiological phenotype, compared to
individuals harboring other KCNQ1 pathogenic variants (5% symptomatic before
40 years of age, compared to 24% and 29% in p.(Tyr111Cys) and p.(Ala341Val)
variant carriers, respectively, 33% with QTc ≤ 440 ms compared to 10% in
p.(Tyr111Cys) and p.(Ala341Val) variant carriers). The LQTS phenotype was most
comparable to that observed for the Swedish p.(Arg518*) founder mutation (7%
symptomatic at any age, compared to 17% in p.(Arg518*) variant carriers, 33%
with QTc ≤ 440 ms compared to 16% in p.(Arg518*) variant carriers).
Surprisingly, short tandem repeat analysis did not reveal a common haplotype for
all families. One KCNQ1 c.1124_1127delTTCA harboring patient was diagnosed with
Brugada syndrome (BrS). The hypothesis of a LQTS/BrS overlap syndrome was
supported by electrophysiological evidence for both loss-of-function and
gain-of-function (acceleration of channel kinetics) in a heterologous expression
system. However, BrS phenotypes were not identified in other affected
individuals and allelic KCNQ1 expression testing in patient-specific induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs) showed nonsense mediated
decay of the c.1124_1127delTTCA allele.
CONCLUSIONS: The c.1124_1127delTTCA frameshift variant shows a high prevalence
in our region, despite not being confirmed as a founder mutation. This variant
leads to a mild LQTS phenotype in the heterozygous state. Despite initial
evidence for a gain-of-function effect based on in vitro electrophysiological
assessment in CHO cells and expression of the KCNQ1 c.1124_1127delTTCA allele in
patient blood cells, additional testing in iPSC-CMs showed lack of expression of
the mutant allele. This suggests haploinsufficiency as the pathogenic mechanism.
Nonetheless, as inter-individual differences in allele expression in (iPSC-)
cardiomyocytes have not been assessed, a modifying effect on the BrS phenotype
through potassium current modulation cannot be excluded.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02618-4
PMCID: PMC9887867
PMID: 36721196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
