---
reference_id: "PMID:21554949"
title: Arsenic-induced oxidative stress and its reversibility.
authors:
- Flora SJ
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.04.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic-induced oxidative stress and its reversibility.
**Authors:** Flora SJ
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.04.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.04.008)

## Content

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 Jul 15;51(2):257-81. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.04.008. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

Arsenic-induced oxidative stress and its reversibility.

Flora SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Defence Research and Development 
Establishment, Jhansi Road, Gwalior 474002, India. sjsflora@hotmail.com

This review summarizes the literature describing the molecular mechanisms of 
arsenic-induced oxidative stress, its relevant biomarkers, and its relation to 
various diseases, including preventive and therapeutic strategies. Arsenic 
alters multiple cellular pathways including expression of growth factors, 
suppression of cell cycle checkpoint proteins, promotion of and resistance to 
apoptosis, inhibition of DNA repair, alterations in DNA methylation, decreased 
immunosurveillance, and increased oxidative stress, by disturbing the 
pro/antioxidant balance. These alterations play prominent roles in disease 
manifestation, such as carcinogenicity, genotoxicity, diabetes, cardiovascular 
and nervous systems disorders. The exact molecular and cellular mechanisms 
involved in arsenic toxicity are rather unrevealed. Arsenic alters cellular 
glutathione levels either by utilizing this electron donor for the conversion of 
pentavalent to trivalent arsenicals or directly binding with it or by oxidizing 
glutathione via arsenic-induced free radical generation. Arsenic forms 
oxygen-based radicals (OH(•), O(2)(•-)) under physiological conditions by 
directly binding with critical thiols. As a carcinogen, it acts through 
epigenetic mechanisms rather than as a classical mutagen. The carcinogenic 
potential of arsenic may be attributed to activation of redox-sensitive 
transcription factors and other signaling pathways involving nuclear factor κB, 
activator protein-1, and p53. Modulation of cellular thiols for protection 
against reactive oxygen species has been used as a therapeutic strategy against 
arsenic. N-acetylcysteine, α-lipoic acid, vitamin E, quercetin, and a few herbal 
extracts show prophylactic activity against the majority of arsenic-mediated 
injuries in both in vitro and in vivo models. This review also updates the 
reader on recent advances in chelation therapy and newer therapeutic strategies 
suggested to treat arsenic-induced oxidative damage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.04.008
PMID: 21554949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]