---
reference_id: "PMID:28329248"
title: "Clinical characteristics of wild-type transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis: disproving myths."
authors:
- González-López E
- Gagliardi C
- Dominguez F
- Quarta CC
- de Haro-Del Moral FJ
- Milandri A
- Salas C
- Cinelli M
- Cobo-Marcos M
- Lorenzini M
- Lara-Pezzi E
- Foffi S
- Alonso-Pulpon L
- Rapezzi C
- Garcia-Pavia P
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics of wild-type transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis: disproving myths.
**Authors:** González-López E, Gagliardi C, Dominguez F, Quarta CC, de Haro-Del Moral FJ, Milandri A, Salas C, Cinelli M, Cobo-Marcos M, Lorenzini M, Lara-Pezzi E, Foffi S, Alonso-Pulpon L, Rapezzi C, Garcia-Pavia P
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehx043](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehx043)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2017 Jun 21;38(24):1895-1904. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx043.

Clinical characteristics of wild-type transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis: 
disproving myths.

González-López E(1)(2)(3), Gagliardi C(4), Dominguez F(1)(3), Quarta CC(4), de 
Haro-Del Moral FJ(5), Milandri A(4), Salas C(3)(6), Cinelli M(4), Cobo-Marcos 
M(1)(3), Lorenzini M(4), Lara-Pezzi E(2)(3), Foffi S(4), Alonso-Pulpon L(1)(3), 
Rapezzi C(4), Garcia-Pavia P(1)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Heart Failure and Inherited Cardiac Diseases Unit, Department of Cardiology, 
Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Myocardial Biology Programme, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones 
Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Enfermedades Cardiovasculares 
(CIBERCV).
(4)Institute of Cardiology, University of Bologna and S Orsola-Malpighi 
Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, 
Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, 
Spain.
(7)Medical School, Francisco de Vitoria University, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2017 Jun 21;38(24):1909-1912. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx210.

AIMS: Wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTRwt) is mostly considered a 
disease predominantly of elderly male, characterized by concentric LV 
hypertrophy, preserved LVEF, and low QRS voltages. We sought to describe the 
characteristics of a large cohort of ATTRwt patients to better define the 
disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Clinical findings of consecutive ATTRwt patients diagnosed 
at 2 centres were reviewed. ATTRwt was diagnosed histologically or 
non-invasively (LV hypertrophy ≥12 mm, intense cardiac uptake at 99mTc-DPD 
scintigraphy and AL exclusion). Mutations in TTR were excluded in all cases. The 
study cohort comprised 108 patients (78.6 ± 8 years); 67 (62%) diagnosed 
invasively and 41 (38%) non-invasively. Twenty patients (19%) were females. An 
asymmetric hypertrophy pattern was observed in 25 (23%) patients. Mean LVEF was 
52 ± 14%, with 39 patients (37%) showing a LVEF < 50%. Atrial fibrillation (56%) 
and a pseudo-infarct pattern (63%) were the commonest ECG findings. Only 22 
patients fulfilled QRS low-voltage criteria while 10 showed LV hypertrophy on 
ECG. Although heart failure was the most frequent profile leading to diagnosis 
(68%), 7% of individuals presented with atrioventricular block and 11% were 
diagnosed incidentally. Almost one third (35; 32%) were previously misdiagnosed.
CONCLUSION: The clinical spectrum of ATTRwt is heterogeneous and differs from 
the classic phenotype: women are affected in a significant proportion; 
asymmetric LV hypertrophy and impaired LVEF are not rare and only a minority 
have low QRS voltages. Clinicians should be aware of the broad clinical spectrum 
of ATTRwt to correctly identify an entity for which a number of 
disease-modifying treatments are under investigation.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. 
© The Author 2017. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx043
PMID: 28329248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]