---
reference_id: "PMID:38498189"
title: Research progress on incomplete partition type 3 inner ear malformation.
authors:
- Xu K
- Xiao Y
- Luo J
- Chao X
- Wang R
- Fan Z
- Wang H
- Xu L
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-024-08555-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Cochlear Implantation/methods
- "Ear, Inner/abnormalities"
- POU Domain Factors/genetics
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/surgery, genetics, congenital"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics, surgery"
- Mutation
- Vestibular Aqueduct/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Research progress on incomplete partition type 3 inner ear malformation.
**Authors:** Xu K, Xiao Y, Luo J, Chao X, Wang R, Fan Z, Wang H, Xu L
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-024-08555-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-024-08555-7)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2024 Aug;281(8):3943-3948. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-024-08555-7. Epub 2024 Mar 18.

Research progress on incomplete partition type 3 inner ear malformation.

Xu K(1)(2)(3), Xiao Y(1)(3), Luo J(1)(2), Chao X(1)(2), Wang R(1)(2), Fan Z(1), 
Wang H(1), Xu L(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shandong Provincial ENT 
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(2)Department of Auditory Implantology, Second People's Hospital of Shandong 
Province, jinan, China.
(3)Shandong Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, jinan, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shandong Provincial ENT 
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China. sdphxl@126.com.
(5)Department of Auditory Implantology, Second People's Hospital of Shandong 
Province, jinan, China. sdphxl@126.com.

PURPOSE: This review aims to provides a comprehensive overview of the latest 
research progress on IP-III inner ear malformation, focusing on its 
geneticbasis, imaging features, cochlear implantation, and outcome.
METHODS: Review the literature on clinical and genetic mechanisms associated 
with IP-III.
RESULTS: Mutations in the POU3F4 gene emerge as the principal pathogenic 
contributors to IP-III anomalies, primarily manifesting through inner ear 
potential irregularities leading to deafness. While cochlear implantation stands 
as the primary intervention for restoring hearing, the unique nature of the 
inner ear anomaly escalates the complexity of surgical procedures and 
postoperative results. Hence, meticulous preoperative assessment to ascertain 
surgical feasibility and postoperative verification of electrode placement are 
imperative. Additionally, gene therapy holds promise as a prospective treatment 
modality.
CONCLUSIONS: IP-III denotes X-linked recessive hereditary deafness, with 
cochlear implantation currently serving as the predominant therapeutic approach. 
Clinicians are tasked with preoperative assement and individualized 
postoperative rehabilitation.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-024-08555-7
PMCID: PMC11266284
PMID: 38498189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.