---
reference_id: "PMID:16278879"
title: Molecular genetics in classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Malfait F
- De Paepe A
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.30070
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular genetics in classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Malfait F, De Paepe A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.30070](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.30070)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2005 Nov 15;139C(1):17-23. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.30070.

Molecular genetics in classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Malfait F(1), De Paepe A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Belgium.

Classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a heritable disorder of connective tissue that 
is characterized by skin hyperextensibility, fragile and soft skin, delayed 
wound healing with formation of atrophic scars, easy bruising, and generalized 
joint hypermobility. Mutations in the COL5A1 and the COL5A2 gene, encoding the 
alpha1 and the alpha2-chain of type V collagen respectively, are identified in 
approximately 50% of patients with a clinical diagnosis of classic EDS. In 
approximately one third of patients, the disease is caused by a mutation leading 
to a non-functional COL5A1 allele, and resulting in haplo-insufficiency of type 
V collagen. In a smaller proportion of patients, a structural mutation in COL5A1 
or COL5A2, resulting in the production of a functionally defective type V 
collagen protein, is responsible for the phenotype. Inter- and intrafamilial 
phenotypic variability is observed, but no genotype-phenotype correlations can 
be made so far. The relatively low mutation detection rate in the COL5A1/A2 
genes suggests genetic heterogeneity. Indeed rarely mutations in type I collagen 
have been identified in patients with classic EDS. Mutations in the gene for 
tenascin-X have been implicated in an autosomal recessive condition 
phenotypically overlapping with classic EDS. Several other candidate genes, such 
as decorin, have emerged from the study of transgenic mouse models with clinical 
and ultrastructural features reminiscent of classic EDS. However, to date, no 
human examples have been reported for these mouse models.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.30070
PMID: 16278879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]