---
reference_id: "PMID:33346939"
title: "The fate of melanocyte: Mechanisms of cell death in vitiligo."
authors:
- Wu X
- Yang Y
- Xiang L
- Zhang C
journal: Pigment Cell Melanoma Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12955
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The fate of melanocyte: Mechanisms of cell death in vitiligo.
**Authors:** Wu X, Yang Y, Xiang L, Zhang C
**Journal:** Pigment Cell Melanoma Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pcmr.12955](https://doi.org/10.1111/pcmr.12955)

## Content

1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2021 Mar;34(2):256-267. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12955.
Epub  2021 Jan 9.

The fate of melanocyte: Mechanisms of cell death in vitiligo.

Wu X(1), Yang Y(1), Xiang L(1), Zhang C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, PR 
China.

Loss of melanocytes (MCs) is the most notable feature of vitiligo. Hence, it is 
critical to clarify the mechanisms of MC destruction in vitiligo. Apoptosis is 
most widely studied cell death pathways in vitiligo. In addition, the other two 
forms of cell death, conventional necrosis and autophagy seem to be involved in 
the death of vitiligo MCs under certain situations. Moreover, new types of 
regulated cell death including necroptosis, pyroptosis, and ferroptosis may also 
participate in the pathogenesis of vitiligo. Anoikis is likely to be connected 
with the death of detached MCs, which is provoked specifically by loss of 
anchorage. Primary phagocytosis, later called phagoptosis can execute death of 
viable cells, probably partly responsible for the loss of MCs in vitiligo. In 
this review, we aim to summarize the latest insights into various forms of MC 
death in vitiligo and discuss the corresponding mechanisms.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pcmr.12955
PMID: 33346939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]