---
reference_id: "PMID:14723407"
title: "Blood-borne viruses and their survival in the environment: is public concern about community needlestick exposures justified?"
authors:
- Thompson SC
- Boughton CR
- Dore GJ
journal: Aust N Z J Public Health
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-842x.2003.tb00606.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blood-borne viruses and their survival in the environment: is public concern about community needlestick exposures justified?
**Authors:** Thompson SC, Boughton CR, Dore GJ
**Journal:** Aust N Z J Public Health (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1467-842x.2003.tb00606.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-842x.2003.tb00606.x)

## Content

1. Aust N Z J Public Health. 2003 Dec;27(6):602-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-842x.2003.tb00606.x.

Blood-borne viruses and their survival in the environment: is public concern 
about community needlestick exposures justified?

Thompson SC(1), Boughton CR, Dore GJ.

Author information:
(1)Sexual Health and Blood-borne Virus Program, Communicable Diseases Control 
Branch, Department of Health, Perth, Western Australia. 
sandra.thompson@iinet.net.au

BACKGROUND: More than 30 million needle syringes are distributed per year in 
Australia as a component of harm-reduction strategies for injecting drug users 
(IDU). Discarded needle syringes create considerable anxiety within the 
community, but the extent of needlestick injuries and level of blood-borne virus 
transmission risk is unclear. We have undertaken a review of studies of 
blood-borne virus survival as the basis for advice and management of community 
needlestick injuries.
METHODS: A Medline review of published articles on blood-borne virus survival 
and outcome from community injuries.
RESULTS: Hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV) and human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can all survive outside the human body for several 
weeks, with virus survival influenced by virus titer, volume of blood, ambient 
temperature, exposure to sunlight and humidity. HBV has the highest virus titers 
in untreated individuals and is viable for the most prolonged periods in needle 
syringes stored at room temperature. However, prevalence of HBV and HIV are only 
1-2% within the Australian IDU population. In contrast, prevalence of HCV is 
50-60% among Australian IDUs and virus survival in needle syringes has been 
documented for prolonged periods. There have been no published cases of 
blood-borne virus transmission following community needlestick injury in 
Australia.
CONCLUSION: The risk of blood-borne virus transmission from syringes discarded 
in community settings appears to be very low. Despite this, procedures to 
systematically follow up individuals following significant needlestick exposures 
sustained in the community setting should be developed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-842x.2003.tb00606.x
PMID: 14723407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]