---
reference_id: "PMID:37981447"
title: "Nerve Transfer Surgery in Acute Flaccid Myelitis: Prognostic Factors, Long-Term Outcomes, Comparison With Natural History."
authors:
- Rivera GS
- Stokum JA
- Dean J
- Sadowsky CL
- Belzberg AJ
- Elrick MJ
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.10.019
keywords:
- Nerve Transfer
- Myelitis
- Neuromuscular Diseases/surgery
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Central Nervous System Viral Diseases
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nerve Transfer Surgery in Acute Flaccid Myelitis: Prognostic Factors, Long-Term Outcomes, Comparison With Natural History.
**Authors:** Rivera GS, Stokum JA, Dean J, Sadowsky CL, Belzberg AJ, Elrick MJ
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.10.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.10.019)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2024 Jan;150:74-81. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.10.019.
Epub 2023 Oct 31.

Nerve Transfer Surgery in Acute Flaccid Myelitis: Prognostic Factors, Long-Term
Outcomes, Comparison With Natural History.

Rivera GS(1), Stokum JA(2), Dean J(3), Sadowsky CL(3), Belzberg AJ(4), Elrick
MJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Kennedy Krieger
Institute, Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.
(5)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Neurology and Developmental Medicine, Kennedy
Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland. Electronic address:
Elrick@kennedykrieger.org.

BACKGROUND: Nerve transfer surgery is sometimes offered to patients with acute
flaccid myelitis (AFM). The objectives of this study were to evaluate surgical
efficacy, assess which clinical and neurophysiological data are valuable for
preoperative planning, and report long-term outcomes.
METHODS: This is a single-center, retrospective case series of patients with AFM
who received nerve transfer surgery. All patients had preoperative
electromyography and nerve conduction studies (EMG/NCS). Matched control muscles
that did not receive nerve transfer surgery were defined in the same cohort.
RESULTS: Ten patients meeting inclusion criteria received a total of 23 nerve
transfers (19 upper extremity, four lower extremity). The mean age at symptom
onset was 3.8 years, surgery was 0.5 to 1.25 years after diagnosis, and mean
follow-up was 2.3 years (range 1.3 to 4.5 years). Among muscles with
preoperative strength Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 0, muscles receiving
nerve transfers performed significantly better than those that did not (MRC
grade 2.17 ± 0.42 vs 0 ± 0, respectively, P = 0.0001). Preoperative EMG/NCS
predicted worse outcomes in recipient muscles with more abundant acute
denervation potentials (P = 0.0098). Donor nerves found to be partially
denervated performed equally well as unaffected nerves. Limited data suggested
functional improvement accompanying strength recovery.
CONCLUSIONS: Nerve transfer surgery is an effective strategy to restore strength
for patients with AFM with persistent, severe motor deficits. Postoperative
outcomes in patients with complete paralysis are better than the natural history
of disease. This study demonstrates the utility of preoperative clinical and
electrophysiological data in guiding patient selection for nerve transfer
surgery.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.10.019
PMCID: PMC10894453
PMID: 37981447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest No authors
have conflicts of interest to disclose.
