---
reference_id: "PMID:15623692"
title: Sensorimotor cortex excitability in Unverricht-Lundborg disease and Lafora body disease.
authors:
- Canafoglia L
- Ciano C
- Panzica F
- Scaioli V
- Zucca C
- Agazzi P
- Visani E
- Avanzini G
- Franceschetti S
journal: Neurology
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000147475.71345.aa
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Electric Stimulation
- Electroencephalography
- Electromyography
- "Evoked Potentials, Somatosensory"
- Female
- Humans
- "Lafora Disease/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Magnetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Motor Cortex/physiopathology
- "Reflex, Abnormal"
- Somatosensory Cortex/physiopathology
- "Unverricht-Lundborg Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sensorimotor cortex excitability in Unverricht-Lundborg disease and Lafora body disease.
**Authors:** Canafoglia L, Ciano C, Panzica F, Scaioli V, Zucca C, Agazzi P, Visani E, Avanzini G, Franceschetti S
**Journal:** Neurology (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1212/01.wnl.0000147475.71345.aa](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000147475.71345.aa)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2004 Dec 28;63(12):2309-15. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000147475.71345.aa.

Sensorimotor cortex excitability in Unverricht-Lundborg disease and Lafora body 
disease.

Canafoglia L(1), Ciano C, Panzica F, Scaioli V, Zucca C, Agazzi P, Visani E, 
Avanzini G, Franceschetti S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, IRCCS National Neurological Institute 
C. Besta, Milano, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether Unverricht-Lundborg disease (ULD) and Lafora 
body disease (LBD) can be differentiated on the basis of their neurophysiologic 
profiles.
METHODS: Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs), long-loop reflexes (LLRs), and 
the influence of conditioning nerve stimulation on the motor potentials evoked 
by transcranial stimulation in 8 patients with LBD and 10 patients with ULD were 
investigated.
RESULTS: Both groups showed sensorimotor cortex hyperexcitability, but their 
electrophysiologic profiles were different. Enlarged P25 to N33 SSEP components 
and enhanced LLRs were common in the ULD patients, whereas medium-latency 
"giant" SSEP components and less consistently enhanced LLRs were more frequently 
found in the patients with LBD. Cortical relay time was extremely brief in ULD 
but varied in LBD. Conditioning somatosensory stimuli differently affected motor 
cortex excitability, leading to early facilitation in ULD and delayed and 
prolonged facilitation in LBD.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with Unverricht-Lundborg disease (ULD) and Lafora body 
disease (LBD) have different electrophysiologic profiles. The ULD findings point 
to an aberrant subcortical or cortical loop (possibly short-cutting the 
somatosensory cortex) that is involved in generating the prominent action 
myoclonus characterizing the disorder. The LBD findings highlight sustained 
hyperexcitability of the sensorimotor cortex in response to afferent stimuli, 
which fit with a more severe impairment of inhibitory mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000147475.71345.aa
PMID: 15623692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]