---
reference_id: "PMID:24809296"
title: Reduced BAFF-R and increased TACI expression in common variable immunodeficiency.
authors:
- Barbosa RR
- Silva SL
- Silva SP
- Melo AC
- Pereira-Santos MC
- Barata JT
- Hammarström L
- Cascalho M
- Sousa AE
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-014-0047-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced BAFF-R and increased TACI expression in common variable immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Barbosa RR, Silva SL, Silva SP, Melo AC, Pereira-Santos MC, Barata JT, Hammarström L, Cascalho M, Sousa AE
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-014-0047-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-014-0047-y)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2014 Jul;34(5):573-83. doi: 10.1007/s10875-014-0047-y. Epub
2014  May 9.

Reduced BAFF-R and increased TACI expression in common variable 
immunodeficiency.

Barbosa RR(1), Silva SL, Silva SP, Melo AC, Pereira-Santos MC, Barata JT, 
Hammarström L, Cascalho M, Sousa AE.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de 
Lisboa, Av. Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028, Lisboa, Portugal.

PURPOSE: B-cell survival and differentiation critically depend on the 
interaction of BAFF-R and TACI with their ligands, BAFF and APRIL. Mature B-cell 
defects lead to Common Variable Immunodeficiency (CVID), which is associated 
with elevated serum levels of BAFF and APRIL. Nevertheless, BAFF-R and TACI 
expression in CVID and their relationship with ligand availability remain poorly 
understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We found that BAFF-R expression was dramatically reduced on 
B cells of CVID patients, relative to controls. BAFF-R levels inversely 
correlated with serum BAFF concentration both in CVID and healthy subjects. We 
also found that recombinant BAFF stimulation reduced BAFF-R expression on B 
cells without decreasing transcript levels. On the other hand, CVID subjects had 
increased TACI expression on B cells in direct association with serum BAFF but 
not APRIL levels. Moreover, splenomegaly was associated with higher TACI 
expression, suggesting that perturbations of TACI function may underlie 
lymphoproliferation in CVID.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that availability of BAFF determines BAFF-R 
and TACI expression on B cells, and that BAFF-R expression is controlled by BAFF 
binding. Identification of the factors governing BAFF-R and TACI is crucial to 
understanding CVID pathogenesis, and B-cell biology in general, as well as to 
explore their potential as therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-014-0047-y
PMID: 24809296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]