---
reference_id: "PMID:30089633"
title: Laminin 511 is a target antigen in autoimmune pancreatitis.
authors:
- Shiokawa M
- Kodama Y
- Sekiguchi K
- Kuwada T
- Tomono T
- Kuriyama K
- Yamazaki H
- Morita T
- Marui S
- Sogabe Y
- Kakiuchi N
- Matsumori T
- Mima A
- Nishikawa Y
- Ueda T
- Tsuda M
- Yamauchi Y
- Sakuma Y
- Maruno T
- Uza N
- Tsuruyama T
- Mimori T
- Seno H
- Chiba T
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaq0997
keywords:
- Aged
- Animals
- Antigens/blood
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Autoimmune Diseases/blood, immunology"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunization
- Immunoglobulin G/blood
- Integrin alpha6beta1/metabolism
- Laminin/blood
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- Middle Aged
- "Pancreatitis/blood, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laminin 511 is a target antigen in autoimmune pancreatitis.
**Authors:** Shiokawa M, Kodama Y, Sekiguchi K, Kuwada T, Tomono T, Kuriyama K, Yamazaki H, Morita T, Marui S, Sogabe Y, Kakiuchi N, Matsumori T, Mima A, Nishikawa Y, Ueda T, Tsuda M, Yamauchi Y, Sakuma Y, Maruno T, Uza N, Tsuruyama T, Mimori T, Seno H, Chiba T
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.aaq0997](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aaq0997)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2018 Aug 8;10(453):eaaq0997. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaq0997.

Laminin 511 is a target antigen in autoimmune pancreatitis.

Shiokawa M(1), Kodama Y(2), Sekiguchi K(3), Kuwada T(1), Tomono T(1), Kuriyama
K(1), Yamazaki H(4), Morita T(1), Marui S(1), Sogabe Y(1), Kakiuchi N(1),
Matsumori T(1), Mima A(1), Nishikawa Y(1), Ueda T(1), Tsuda M(1), Yamauchi Y(1),
Sakuma Y(1), Maruno T(1), Uza N(1), Tsuruyama T(5), Mimori T(6), Seno H(1),
Chiba T(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. kodamayu@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(3)Laboratory of Extracellular Matrix Biochemistry, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita 565-0871, Japan.
(4)Department of Healthcare Epidemiology, School of Public Health in the
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(5)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.
(6)Department of Clinical Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(7)Kansai Electric Power Hospital, Osaka 553-0003, Japan.

Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP), a major manifestation of immunoglobulin
G4-related disease (IgG4-RD), is an immune-mediated disorder, but the target
autoantigens are still unknown. We previously reported that IgG in patients with
AIP induces pancreatic injuries in mice by binding the extracellular matrix
(ECM). In the current study, we identified an autoantibody against laminin
511-E8, a truncated laminin 511, one of the ECM proteins, in patients with AIP.
Anti-laminin 511-E8 IgG was present in 26 of 51 AIP patients (51.0%), but only
in 2 of 122 controls (1.6%), by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Because
truncated forms of other laminin family members in other organs have been
reported, we confirmed that truncated forms of laminin 511 also exist in human
and mouse pancreas. Histologic studies with patient pancreatic tissues showed
colocalization of patient IgG and laminin 511. Immunization of mice with human
laminin 511-E8 induced antibodies and pancreatic injury, fulfilling the
pathologic criteria for human AIP. Four of 25 AIP patients without laminin
511-E8 antibodies had antibodies against integrin α6β1, a laminin 511 ligand.
AIP patients with laminin 511-E8 antibodies exhibited distinctive clinical
features, as the frequencies of malignancies or allergic diseases were
significantly lower in patients with laminin 511-E8 antibodies than in those
without. The discovery of these autoantibodies should aid in the understanding
of AIP pathophysiology and possibly improve the diagnosis of AIP.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaq0997
PMID: 30089633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
