---
reference_id: "PMID:38884729"
title: Human Genetics of Ventricular Septal Defect.
authors:
- Perrot A
- Rickert-Sperling S
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_27
keywords:
- Humans
- Chromosome Aberrations
- DNA Copy Number Variations/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- "Heart Septal Defects, Ventricular/genetics"
- Mutation
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Genetics of Ventricular Septal Defect.
**Authors:** Perrot A, Rickert-Sperling S
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_27](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_27)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2024;1441:505-534. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_27.

Human Genetics of Ventricular Septal Defect.

Perrot A(1), Rickert-Sperling S(2).

Author information:
(1)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, a Cooperation Between the Max 
Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association and Charité 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Cardiovascular Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany. silke.sperling@charite.de.

Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are recognized as one of the commonest 
congenital heart diseases (CHD), accounting for up to 40% of all cardiac 
malformations, and occur as isolated CHDs as well as together with other cardiac 
and extracardiac congenital malformations in individual patients and families. 
The genetic etiology of VSD is complex and extraordinarily heterogeneous. 
Chromosomal abnormalities such as aneuploidy and structural variations as well 
as rare point mutations in various genes have been reported to be associated 
with this cardiac defect. This includes both well-defined syndromes with known 
genetic cause (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome and Holt-Oram syndrome) and so far 
undefined syndromic forms characterized by unspecific symptoms. Mutations in 
genes encoding cardiac transcription factors (e.g., NKX2-5 and GATA4) and 
signaling molecules (e.g., CFC1) have been most frequently found in VSD cases. 
Moreover, new high-resolution methods such as comparative genomic hybridization 
enabled the discovery of a high number of different copy number variations, 
leading to gain or loss of chromosomal regions often containing multiple genes, 
in patients with VSD. In this chapter, we will describe the broad genetic 
heterogeneity observed in VSD patients considering recent advances in this 
field.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_27
PMID: 38884729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]