---
reference_id: "PMID:18633335"
title: "[Occurrence and pathogenicity of the family of Legionellaceae]."
authors:
- Palusińska-Szysz M
- Cendrowska-Pinkosz M
journal: Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online)
year: '2008'
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Animals
- Biofilms
- "Cross Infection/epidemiology, microbiology"
- "Disease Outbreaks/statistics & numerical data"
- Disease Reservoirs/microbiology
- "Disease Transmission, Infectious/prevention & control"
- Erythromycin/therapeutic use
- Eukaryota/microbiology
- Europe/epidemiology
- Host-Parasite Interactions
- Humans
- "Legionella/classification, isolation & purification, pathogenicity"
- "Legionnaires' Disease/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, microbiology, transmission"
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Species Specificity
- Water Microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Occurrence and pathogenicity of the family of Legionellaceae].
**Authors:** Palusińska-Szysz M, Cendrowska-Pinkosz M
**Journal:** Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online) (2008)

## Content

1. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2008 Jul 10;62:337-53.

[Occurrence and pathogenicity of the family of Legionellaceae].

[Article in Polish]

Palusińska-Szysz M(1), Cendrowska-Pinkosz M.

Author information:
(1)Zakład Genetyki i Mikrobiologii, Instytutu Mikrobiologii i Biotechnologii 
Uniwersytetu Marii Curie-Skłodowskiej w Lublinie. 
marta.szysz@poczta.umcs.lublin.pl

Legionella are widespread in natural aquatic environments and are able to exist 
in water of different temperatures, pH level, and nutrient and oxygen content. 
Their occurrence in nature can be attributed to their relationships with other 
microorganisms. When Legionella co-exist with algae and other bacteria, 
especially in biofilms, the availability of nutrients increases. They also are 
able to infect protozoa and subsequently reproduce within these organisms. As a 
result of these relationships, Legionella are protected against adverse 
conditions, including standard water disinfection techniques. Consequently, they 
are also prevalent in anthropogenic water such as drinking water, whirlpools, 
and cooling tower reservoirs. Aerosol-generating systems aid in the transmission 
of Legionella from water to the air. Human inhalation of contaminated aerosols 
leads to Legionella infection and disease outbreaks. Legionellosis in humans has 
typically been characterized as either a potentially fatal pneumonic condition, 
known as Legionnaires' disease, or an acute, self-limiting, non-pneumonic 
condition known as Pontiac fever. In addition, Legionella spp. cause 
extrapulmonary infection, especially in immunosuppressed patients. Timely 
treatment of Legionnaires' disease is extremely important for the patient's 
recovery. Although erythromycin has historically been used to treat patients 
with Legionnaires' disease, newer macrolides and fluoroquinolones are gaining 
acceptance as the first choice for treatment. Although 52 species of Legionella 
are known, Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1 is responsible for more than 80% 
of hospital- and community-acquired cases of Legionnaires' disease.

PMID: 18633335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]