---
reference_id: "PMID:27990015"
title: "The renal Fanconi syndrome in cystinosis: pathogenic insights and therapeutic perspectives."
authors:
- Cherqui S
- Courtoy PJ
journal: Nat Rev Nephrol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2016.182
keywords:
- Crystallization
- Cystine/physiology
- "Cystinosis/complications, metabolism, therapy"
- "Fanconi Syndrome/etiology, therapy"
- Forecasting
- Humans
- Oxidative Stress
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The renal Fanconi syndrome in cystinosis: pathogenic insights and therapeutic perspectives.
**Authors:** Cherqui S, Courtoy PJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Nephrol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrneph.2016.182](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneph.2016.182)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2017 Feb;13(2):115-131. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2016.182. Epub
2016  Dec 19.

The renal Fanconi syndrome in cystinosis: pathogenic insights and therapeutic 
perspectives.

Cherqui S(1), Courtoy PJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics, University of California San 
Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0734, La Jolla, California 92093-0734, USA.
(2)Cell biology, de Duve Institute and Université catholique de Louvain, 
UCL-Brussels, 75 Avenue Hippocrate, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Cystinosis is an autosomal recessive metabolic disease that belongs to the 
family of lysosomal storage disorders. It is caused by a defect in the lysosomal 
cystine transporter, cystinosin, which results in an accumulation of cystine in 
all organs. Despite the ubiquitous expression of cystinosin, a renal Fanconi 
syndrome is often the first manifestation of cystinosis, usually presenting 
within the first year of life and characterized by the early and severe 
dysfunction of proximal tubule cells, highlighting the unique vulnerability of 
this cell type. The current therapy for cystinosis, cysteamine, facilitates 
lysosomal cystine clearance and greatly delays progression to kidney failure but 
is unable to correct the Fanconi syndrome. This Review summarizes decades of 
studies that have fostered a better understanding of the pathogenesis of the 
renal Fanconi syndrome associated with cystinosis. These studies have unraveled 
some of the early molecular changes that occur before the onset of tubular 
atrophy and identified a role for cystinosin beyond cystine transport, in 
endolysosomal trafficking and proteolysis, lysosomal clearance, autophagy and 
the regulation of energy balance. These studies have also led to the 
identification of new potential therapeutic targets and here, we outline the 
potential role of stem cell therapy for cystinosis and provide insights into the 
mechanism of haematopoietic stem cell-mediated kidney protection.

DOI: 10.1038/nrneph.2016.182
PMCID: PMC5657490
PMID: 27990015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.