---
reference_id: "PMID:34958107"
title: "Hypoplastic myelodysplastic syndrome and acquired aplastic anemia: Immune‑mediated bone marrow failure syndromes (Review)."
authors:
- Votavova H
- Belickova M
journal: Int J Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3892/ijo.2021.5297
keywords:
- "Anemia, Hemolytic, Autoimmune/etiology, genetics"
- "Bone Marrow Failure Disorders/etiology, genetics"
- Humans
- "Immunity/genetics, immunology"
- "Myelodysplastic-Myeloproliferative Diseases/etiology, genetics"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypoplastic myelodysplastic syndrome and acquired aplastic anemia: Immune‑mediated bone marrow failure syndromes (Review).
**Authors:** Votavova H, Belickova M
**Journal:** Int J Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3892/ijo.2021.5297](https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo.2021.5297)

## Content

1. Int J Oncol. 2022 Jan;60(1):7. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2021.5297. Epub 2021 Dec 27.

Hypoplastic myelodysplastic syndrome and acquired aplastic anemia: 
Immune‑mediated bone marrow failure syndromes (Review).

Votavova H(1), Belickova M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genomics, Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague 
128 00, Czech Republic.

Hypoplastic myelodysplastic syndrome (hMDS) and aplastic anemia (AA) are rare 
hematopoietic disorders characterized by pancytopenia with hypoplastic bone 
marrow (BM). hMDS and idiopathic AA share overlapping clinicopathological 
features, making a diagnosis very difficult. The differential diagnosis is 
mainly based on the presence of dysgranulopoiesis, dysmegakaryocytopoiesis, an 
increased percentage of blasts, and abnormal karyotype, all favouring the 
diagnosis of hMDS. An accurate diagnosis has important clinical implications, as 
the prognosis and treatment can be quite different for these diseases. Patients 
with hMDS have a greater risk of neoplastic progression, a shorter survival time 
and a lower response to immunosuppressive therapy compared with patients with 
AA. There is compelling evidence that these distinct clinical entities share a 
common pathophysiology based on the damage of hematopoietic stem and progenitor 
cells (HSPCs) by cytotoxic T cells. Expanded T cells overproduce proinflammatory 
cytokines (interferon‑γ and tumor necrosis factor‑α), resulting in decreased 
proliferation and increased apoptosis of HSPCs. The antigens that trigger this 
abnormal immune response are not known, but potential candidates have been 
suggested, including Wilms tumor protein 1 and human leukocyte antigen class I 
molecules. Our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of these BM failure 
syndromes has been improved by next‑generation sequencing, which has enabled the 
identification of a large spectrum of mutations. It has also brought new 
challenges, such as the interpretation of variants of uncertain significance and 
clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential. The present review discusses 
the main clinicopathological differences between hMDS and acquired AA, focuses 
on the molecular background and highlights the importance of molecular testing.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2021.5297
PMCID: PMC8727136
PMID: 34958107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.