---
reference_id: "PMID:28272206"
title: "Limbic encephalitis associated with anti-NH2-terminal of α-enolase antibodies: A clinical subtype of Hashimoto encephalopathy."
authors:
- Kishitani T
- Matsunaga A
- Ikawa M
- Hayashi K
- Yamamura O
- Hamano T
- Watanabe O
- Tanaka K
- Nakamoto Y
- Yoneda M
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000006181
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Autoantibodies
- Encephalitis/immunology
- Female
- Hashimoto Disease/immunology
- Humans
- Limbic Encephalitis/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phosphopyruvate Hydratase/immunology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Limbic encephalitis associated with anti-NH2-terminal of α-enolase antibodies: A clinical subtype of Hashimoto encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Kishitani T, Matsunaga A, Ikawa M, Hayashi K, Yamamura O, Hamano T, Watanabe O, Tanaka K, Nakamoto Y, Yoneda M
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000006181](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000006181)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017 Mar;96(10):e6181. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000006181.

Limbic encephalitis associated with anti-NH2-terminal of α-enolase antibodies: A 
clinical subtype of Hashimoto encephalopathy.

Kishitani T(1), Matsunaga A, Ikawa M, Hayashi K, Yamamura O, Hamano T, Watanabe 
O, Tanaka K, Nakamoto Y, Yoneda M.

Author information:
(1)The Second Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
University of Fukui, Fukui Department of Neurology and Geriatrics, Kagoshima 
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima Department 
of Neurology, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa Faculty of Nursing and 
Social Welfare Sciences, Fukui Prefectural University, Fukui, Japan.

Several types of autoantibodies have been reported in autoimmune limbic 
encephalitis (LE), such as antibodies against the voltage-gated potassium 
channel (VGKC) complex including leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1 (LGI1). We 
recently reported a patient with autoimmune LE and serum anti-NH2-terminal of 
α-enolase (NAE) antibodies, a specific diagnostic marker for Hashimoto 
encephalopathy (HE), who was diagnosed with HE based on the presence of 
antithyroid antibodies and responsiveness to immunotherapy. This case suggests 
that LE patients with antibodies to both the thyroid and NAE could be diagnosed 
with HE and respond to immunotherapy. The aim of this study was to clarify the 
clinicoimmunological features and efficacy of immunotherapy in LE associated 
with anti-NAE antibodies to determine whether the LE is a clinical subtype of 
HE.We examined serum anti-NAE antibodies in 78 LE patients with limbic 
abnormality on magnetic resonance imaging and suspected HE based on positivity 
for antithyroid antibodies. Nineteen of the 78 patients had anti-NAE antibodies; 
however, 5 were excluded because they were double positive for antibodies to the 
VGKC complex including LGI1. No antibodies against the N-methyl-D-aspartate 
receptor (NMDAR), contactin-associated protein 2 (Caspr2), γ-aminobutyric acid-B 
receptor (GABABR), or α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid 
receptor (AMPAR) were detected in the 19 patients. Among the remaining 14 who 
were positive only for anti-NAE antibodies, the median age was 62.5 (20-83) 
years, 9 (64%) were women, and 8 (57%) showed acute onset, with less than 2 
weeks between onset and admission. Consciousness disturbance (71%) and memory 
disturbance (64%) were frequently observed, followed by psychiatric symptoms 
(50%) and seizures (43%). The frequency of these symptoms significantly differed 
between the acute- and subacute-onset groups. Abnormalities in cerebrospinal 
fluid and electroencephalogram were commonly observed (92% for both). Tumors 
were not identified in any cases. All patients responded to immunotherapy or 
spontaneously remitted, thereby fulfilling the criteria of HE.This study 
demonstrated that LE associated with anti-NAE antibodies is a nonparaneoplastic 
LE and various limbic symptoms that depend on the onset type. Favorable 
therapeutic efficacy suggests that this LE can be considered a clinical subtype 
of HE and that anti-NAE antibodies may be a promising indicator of the need for 
immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000006181
PMCID: PMC5348154
PMID: 28272206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.