---
reference_id: "PMID:39834515"
title: Modeling of auditory neuropathy spectrum disorders associated with the TEME43 variant reveals impaired gap junction function of iPSC-derived glia-like support cells.
authors:
- Kang X
- Ma L
- Wen J
- Gong W
- Liu X
- Hu Y
- Feng Z
- Jing Q
- Cai Y
- Li S
- Cai X
- Yuan K
- Feng Y
journal: Front Mol Neurosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2024.1457874
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling of auditory neuropathy spectrum disorders associated with the TEME43 variant reveals impaired gap junction function of iPSC-derived glia-like support cells.
**Authors:** Kang X, Ma L, Wen J, Gong W, Liu X, Hu Y, Feng Z, Jing Q, Cai Y, Li S, Cai X, Yuan K, Feng Y
**Journal:** Front Mol Neurosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnmol.2024.1457874](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2024.1457874)

## Content

1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2025 Jan 6;17:1457874. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2024.1457874. 
eCollection 2024.

Modeling of auditory neuropathy spectrum disorders associated with the TEME43 
variant reveals impaired gap junction function of iPSC-derived glia-like support 
cells.

Kang X(1)(2), Ma L(2)(3)(4), Wen J(1)(2), Gong W(1)(2), Liu X(1)(2), Hu Y(1)(2), 
Feng Z(1)(2), Jing Q(1)(2), Cai Y(1)(2), Li S(5), Cai X(5), Yuan K(6), Feng 
Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The Affiliated Changsha Central Hospital, 
Hengyang Medical School, University of South China, Changsha, China.
(2)Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of South 
China, Changsha, China.
(3)MOE Key Lab of Rare Pediatric Diseases & Institute for Future Sciences, 
University of South China, Changsha, China.
(4)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Hengyang Medical School, University of 
South China, Hengyang, China.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Xiangya Hospital Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(6)Hunan Key Laboratory of Molecular Precision Medicine, Department of Oncology, 
Xiangya Hospital & Center for Medical Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Central 
South University, Changsha, China.

Auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder (ANSD) is an auditory dysfunction disorder 
characterized by impaired speech comprehension. Its etiology is complex and can 
be broadly categorized into genetic and non-genetic factors. TMEM43 mutation is 
identified as a causative factor in ANSD. While some studies have been conducted 
using animal models, its pathogenic mechanisms in humans remain unclear. TMEM43 
is predominantly expressed in cochlear glia-like support cells (GLSs) and plays 
a vital role in gap junction intercellular communication. In this work, we 
utilized induced pluripotent stem cells from an ANSD patient carrying the TMEM43 
gene mutation c.1114C>T (p.Arg372Ter) and directed their differentiation toward 
GLSs to investigate the effect of TMEM43 mutation on the function of gap 
junctions in cochlear GLSs in vitro. Reduced expression of genes associated with 
GLSs characteristics and reduced gap junction intercellular communication in 
TMEM43 mutant cell lines were observed compared to controls. Transcriptome 
analysis revealed that differentially expressed genes were significantly 
enriched in pathways related to cell proliferation, differentiation, 
extracellular space and adhesion. Furthermore, significant alterations were 
noted in the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway and the calcium signaling pathway, which 
could potentially influence gap junction function and contribute to hearing 
loss. In summary, our study based on patient-derived iPSCs sheds new light on 
the molecular mechanisms by which TMEM43 mutations may lead to ANSD. These 
mutations could result in developmental defects in GLSs and a diminished 
capacity for gap junction function, which may be implicated in the auditory 
deficits observed in ANSD patients. Our study explored the pathological effects 
of the TMEM43 mutation and its causal relationship with ANSD using a 
patient-derived iPSC-based GLSs model, providing a foundation for future 
mechanistic studies and potential drug screening efforts.

Copyright © 2025 Kang, Ma, Wen, Gong, Liu, Hu, Feng, Jing, Cai, Li, Cai, Yuan 
and Feng.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2024.1457874
PMCID: PMC11743952
PMID: 39834515

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer JH declared a 
shared parent affiliation with the authors SL, XC, KY, and YF to the handling 
editor at the time of review.