---
reference_id: "PMID:28379745"
title: Endoscopic Skipping of the Terminal Ileum in Pediatric Crohn Disease.
authors:
- Mansuri I
- Fletcher JG
- Bruining DH
- Kolbe AB
- Fidler JL
- Samuel S
- Tung J
journal: AJR Am J Roentgenol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2214/AJR.16.16575
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endoscopic Skipping of the Terminal Ileum in Pediatric Crohn Disease.
**Authors:** Mansuri I, Fletcher JG, Bruining DH, Kolbe AB, Fidler JL, Samuel S, Tung J
**Journal:** AJR Am J Roentgenol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2214/AJR.16.16575](https://doi.org/10.2214/AJR.16.16575)

## Content

1. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2017 Jun;208(6):W216-W224. doi: 10.2214/AJR.16.16575.
Epub  2017 Apr 5.

Endoscopic Skipping of the Terminal Ileum in Pediatric Crohn Disease.

Mansuri I(1)(2), Fletcher JG(3), Bruining DH(4), Kolbe AB(3), Fidler JL(3), 
Samuel S(5), Tung J(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, 200 
First St SW, Rochester, MN 55905.
(2)2 Present address: Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA.
(3)3 Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(4)4 Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(5)5 Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Nottingham University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Pediatric small-bowel (SB) Crohn disease (CD) may be missed if the 
terminal ileum (TI) appears normal at endoscopy and SB imaging is not performed. 
We sought to estimate the prevalence and clinical characteristics of pediatric 
patients with CD and endoscopic skipping of the TI-that is, pediatric patients 
with active SB or upper gut inflammation and an endoscopically normal TI.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This retrospective study included pediatric patients with 
CD who underwent both CT enterography (CTE) or MR enterography (MRE) and 
ileocolonoscopy within a 30-day period between July 2004 and April 2014. The 
physician global assessment was used as the reference standard for SB CD 
activity. Radiologists reviewed the CTE and MRE studies for inflammatory 
parameters; severity, length, and multifocality of SB inflammation; and the 
presence of penetrating complications.
RESULTS: Of 170 patients who underwent ileal intubation, the TI was 
macroscopically normal or showed nonspecific inflammation in 73 patients (43%). 
Nearly half (36/73, 49%) of the patients with normal or nonspecific findings at 
ileocolonoscopy had radiologically active disease with a median length of SB 
involvement of 20 cm (range, 1 to > 100 cm). Seventeen (47%) of these patients 
had multifocal SB involvement and five (14%) had penetrating complications. 
Overall, endoscopic TI skipping was present in 43 (59%) patients with normal or 
nonspecific ileocolonoscopic findings: 20 with histologic inflammation (17 with 
positive imaging findings), 14 with inflammation at imaging only, and nine with 
proximal disease (upper gut, jejunum, or proximal ileum). There were no 
significant differences in the clinical parameters of the patients with and 
those without endoscopic TI skipping.
CONCLUSION: Ileocolonoscopy may miss SB CD in pediatric patients that is due to 
isolated histologic, intramural, or proximal inflammation. Enterography is 
complementary to ileocolonoscopy in the evaluation of pediatric CD.

DOI: 10.2214/AJR.16.16575
PMID: 28379745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]