---
reference_id: "PMID:12973746"
title: Glutamatergic systems in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Francis PT
journal: Int J Geriatr Psychiatry
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/gps.934
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glutamatergic systems in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Francis PT
**Journal:** Int J Geriatr Psychiatry (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gps.934](https://doi.org/10.1002/gps.934)

## Content

1. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2003 Sep;18(Suppl 1):S15-21. doi: 10.1002/gps.934.

Glutamatergic systems in Alzheimer's disease.

Francis PT(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroscience Research, King's College London, London, UK. 
paul.francis@kcl.ac.uk

Glutamate is the major transmitter of the brain and is involved in all aspects 
of cognitive function since it is the transmitter of cortical and hippocampal 
pyramidal neurones. Furthermore, glutamate and glutamate receptors are involved 
in long-term potentiation, a process believed to underlie learning and memory. 
Histological studies indicate loss of pyramidal neurones and their synapses in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), this together with biochemical evidence suggests 
presynaptic (and postsynaptic) glutamatergic hypoactivity. This represents a 
'double blow' as the activity of glutamatergic neurones is heavily influenced by 
the cholinergic system, which is also dysfunctional in AD. The clinical 
relevance of these changes is emphasised because glutamatergic and cholinergic 
dysfunction are strong correlates of cognitive decline in AD. The mechanism by 
which glutamatergic (and cholinergic) cells die is likely to be a combination of 
necrosis and apoptosis caused by a range of factors which include tangle 
formation and the effects of too much and too little glutamatergic 
neurotransmission.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.934
PMID: 12973746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]