---
reference_id: "PMID:39367955"
title: "Differential Effects of Cerebellar Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation with Gait Training on Functional Mobility, Balance, and Ataxia Symptoms."
authors:
- Brito R
- Fabrício JV
- Araujo A
- Sacchi M
- Baltar A
- Lima FA
- Ribeiro AC
- Sousa B
- Santos C
- Tanaka C
- Monte-Silva K
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-024-01750-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation/methods
- Postural Balance/physiology
- Middle Aged
- Gait/physiology
- Adult
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/physiopathology, rehabilitation, therapy"
- Aged
- "Cerebellum/physiopathology, physiology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Exercise Therapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential Effects of Cerebellar Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation with Gait Training on Functional Mobility, Balance, and Ataxia Symptoms.
**Authors:** Brito R, Fabrício JV, Araujo A, Sacchi M, Baltar A, Lima FA, Ribeiro AC, Sousa B, Santos C, Tanaka C, Monte-Silva K
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-024-01750-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-024-01750-6)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2024 Dec;23(6):2457-2467. doi: 10.1007/s12311-024-01750-6. Epub
2024  Oct 5.

Differential Effects of Cerebellar Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation with
Gait Training on Functional Mobility, Balance, and Ataxia Symptoms.

Brito R(1)(2), Fabrício JV(1), Araujo A(1), Sacchi M(3), Baltar A(1)(2), Lima
FA(1), Ribeiro AC(1), Sousa B(1), Santos C(1), Tanaka C(2)(3), Monte-Silva
K(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Applied Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of Physical Therapy, Universidade
Federal de Pernambuco Jornalista Aníbal Fernandes Avenue, Recife, Pernambuco,
50740-560, Brazil.
(2)NAPeN Network (Núcleo de Assistência e Pesquisa em Neuromodulação), Recife,
Brazil.
(3)Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Applied Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of Physical Therapy, Universidade
Federal de Pernambuco Jornalista Aníbal Fernandes Avenue, Recife, Pernambuco,
50740-560, Brazil. monte.silva@ufpe.br.
(5)NAPeN Network (Núcleo de Assistência e Pesquisa em Neuromodulação), Recife,
Brazil. monte.silva@ufpe.br.

Cerebellar transcranial direct current stimulation (ctDCS) has emerged as a
promising, non-invasive, and safe neuromodulatory intervention capable of
reducing ataxia symptoms and restoring cerebellum-motor connectivity. However,
previous studies have only applied ctDCS in isolation, without association with
specific training. This study aimed to assess the effect of ctDCS combined with
gait training on functional mobility, balance, and symptoms and severity of
ataxia. A randomized, triple-blind, sham-controlled, bi-center clinical trial
was conducted with forty-four adults with cerebellar ataxia. Volunteers were
randomized to receive five daily sessions of either real ctDCS (n = 11; 2 mA for
25 min) or sham ctDCS (n = 11) during gait training. Functional mobility,
balance, and symptoms and severity of ataxia were assessed using the Time Up and
Go test, the MiniBESTest, and the Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Ataxia
(SARA), respectively, before and after the interventions. Both groups showed
improvement in functional mobility, but there was no significant difference
between the ctDCS and sham groups. However, the ctDCS group demonstrated
significant improvements in cerebellar ataxia severity as reflected by SARA
scores, particularly in tests of stance, sitting, speech disturbance,
nose-finger test, and heel-shin slide test. Notably, no improvements were
observed in balance. This study indicates that while ctDCS combined with gait
training may improve specific symptoms of cerebellar ataxia, it does not
significantly enhance overall functional mobility compared to sham treatment.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-024-01750-6
PMID: 39367955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical Approval: This study was
approved by the local research ethics committee (No. ) and registered on
clinicaltrials.org (NCT03703830 - https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT03703830 )
in 2018-11-01. Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
