---
reference_id: "PMID:8827537"
title: "Acyclovir for the prevention and treatment of varicella zoster in children, adolescents and pregnancy."
authors:
- Kesson AM
- Grimwood K
- Burgess MA
- Ferson MJ
- Gilbert GL
- Hogg G
- Isaacs D
- Kakakios A
- McIntyre P
journal: J Paediatr Child Health
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1754.1996.tb01556.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acyclovir for the prevention and treatment of varicella zoster in children, adolescents and pregnancy.
**Authors:** Kesson AM, Grimwood K, Burgess MA, Ferson MJ, Gilbert GL, Hogg G, Isaacs D, Kakakios A, McIntyre P
**Journal:** J Paediatr Child Health (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1440-1754.1996.tb01556.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1754.1996.tb01556.x)

## Content

1. J Paediatr Child Health. 1996 Jun;32(3):211-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1754.1996.tb01556.x.

Acyclovir for the prevention and treatment of varicella zoster in children, 
adolescents and pregnancy.

Kesson AM(1), Grimwood K, Burgess MA, Ferson MJ, Gilbert GL, Hogg G, Isaacs D, 
Kakakios A, McIntyre P.

Author information:
(1)Australasian Society for infectious Diseases, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.

Varicella causes a mild, self-limiting childhood disease that may reactivate 
years later as shingles. In immunocompromised patients with altered cell 
mediated immunity, and rarely in healthy individuals, varicella results in a 
life-threatening infection. The antiviral drug, acyclovir, substantially reduces 
the mortality and risk of severe disease in these groups of patients. Early 
commencement of acyclovir is recommended for children with both varicella and 
altered cell mediated immunity, newborns during the first 2 weeks of life, 
preterm infants in the neonatal nursery, and severe varicella or shingles 
(including ocular zoster) in any patient, as well as during pregnancy. Acyclovir 
may be considered in children with serious cardiopulmonary disease or chronic 
skin disorders where varicella may exacerbate the underlying disease or increase 
the risk of secondary bacterial sepsis. Acyclovir, however, is not recommended 
for healthy individuals without severe disease, as a prophylactic agent against 
varicella, for asthmatics receiving aerosolized or low-dose oral steroids and/or 
as treatment of the post-varicella syndromes. When acyclovir is prescribed it 
should be given intravenously to those with severe disease, those at risk of 
dissemination and in children younger than 2 years of age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1754.1996.tb01556.x
PMID: 8827537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]