---
reference_id: "PMID:19079717"
title: "Respiratory cancer and inhaled inorganic arsenic in copper smelters workers: a linear relationship with cumulative exposure that increases with concentration."
authors:
- Lubin JH
- Moore LE
- Fraumeni JF Jr
- Cantor KP
journal: Environ Health Perspect
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1289/ehp.11515
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory cancer and inhaled inorganic arsenic in copper smelters workers: a linear relationship with cumulative exposure that increases with concentration.
**Authors:** Lubin JH, Moore LE, Fraumeni JF Jr, Cantor KP
**Journal:** Environ Health Perspect (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1289/ehp.11515](https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.11515)

## Content

1. Environ Health Perspect. 2008 Dec;116(12):1661-5. doi: 10.1289/ehp.11515. Epub
 2008 Jul 23.

Respiratory cancer and inhaled inorganic arsenic in copper smelters workers: a 
linear relationship with cumulative exposure that increases with concentration.

Lubin JH(1), Moore LE, Fraumeni JF Jr, Cantor KP.

Author information:
(1)Biostatistics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National 
Cancer Institute, 6120 Executive Boulevard, Rockville, MD 20852, USA. 
lubinj@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Inhalation of high levels of airborne inorganic arsenic is a 
recognized cause of respiratory cancer. Although multiple epidemiologic studies 
have demonstrated this association, there have been few analyses of the 
mathematical relationship between cumulative arsenic exposure and risk of 
respiratory cancer, and no assessment as to whether and how arsenic 
concentration may modify this association.
OBJECTIVES: The objective is an evaluation of the shape of the relationship 
between respiratory cancer mortality and cumulative inhaled arsenic exposure 
among copper smelter workers, and the modification of that relationship by 
arsenic concentration.
METHODS: We used Poisson regression methods to analyze data from a cohort of 
arsenic-exposed copper smelter workers under a linear-exponential model for the 
excess relative risk.
RESULTS: Within categories of arsenic concentration, the association between 
respiratory cancer and cumulative arsenic exposure was consistent with 
linearity. The slope of the linear relationship with cumulative exposure 
increased with increasing arsenic concentration category.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggested a direct concentration effect from inhaled 
inorganic arsenic, whereby the excess relative risk for a fixed cumulative 
exposure was greater when delivered at a higher concentration and shorter 
duration than when delivered at a lower concentration and longer duration.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.11515
PMCID: PMC2599760
PMID: 19079717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]