---
reference_id: "PMID:39434596"
title: "Inpatient hospitalisations for patients with Prader-Willi syndrome: a 2019-2021 National Inpatient Sample analysis."
authors:
- Luccarelli J
- Strong TV
- McCoy TH Jr
journal: J Intellect Disabil Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/jir.13194
keywords:
- Humans
- Prader-Willi Syndrome/epidemiology
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- Adolescent
- United States/epidemiology
- Young Adult
- Child
- Middle Aged
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- "Inpatients/statistics & numerical data"
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inpatient hospitalisations for patients with Prader-Willi syndrome: a 2019-2021 National Inpatient Sample analysis.
**Authors:** Luccarelli J, Strong TV, McCoy TH Jr
**Journal:** J Intellect Disabil Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jir.13194](https://doi.org/10.1111/jir.13194)

## Content

1. J Intellect Disabil Res. 2025 Jan;69(1):79-89. doi: 10.1111/jir.13194. Epub
2024  Oct 22.

Inpatient hospitalisations for patients with Prader-Willi syndrome: a 2019-2021 
National Inpatient Sample analysis.

Luccarelli J(1)(2), Strong TV(3), McCoy TH Jr(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Foundation for Prader-Willi Research, Covina, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genetic disorder characterised by 
hyperphagia, intellectual disability and increased propensity to a range of 
medical disorders. To better characterise the clinical presentation of PWS 
across the lifespan, this study reports on the demographics and clinical 
diagnosis of individuals with PWS hospitalised in the United States.
METHODS: The National Inpatient Sample, an all-payor administrative claims 
database of hospitalisations in the United States, was queried for patients with 
a coded diagnosis of PWS from October 2019 through December 2021. 
Hospitalisations for patients with PWS were matched to five non-PWS 
hospitalisations based on age, sex, year and hospital characteristics.
RESULTS: There were 4400 (95% CI: 3,885 to 4,915) PWS hospitalisations, with a 
median age of 24. Compared to controls, PWS hospitalisations had longer hospital 
stays (median 5 vs. 3 days) and higher in-hospital mortality (2.2% vs. 1.3%). 
Infectious (19.0%) and respiratory (16.2%) diagnoses were most common for PWS 
patients. Codes for overweight or obesity were present in 38.1% of PWS 
hospitalisations, with Hispanic ethnicity was associated with a higher odds of 
overweight/obesity in PWS patients (aOR 1.73; 95% CI: 1.11-2.71).
CONCLUSIONS: PWS hospitalisations are characterised by higher healthcare 
utilisation and complexity compared to matched controls. The high prevalence of 
obesity and significant rates of infectious and respiratory conditions highlight 
specific health challenges for PWS patients. Validation of the Q87.11 
administrative claims code is an essential step for ongoing health services 
research in this condition.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons and MENCAP.

DOI: 10.1111/jir.13194
PMID: 39434596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]