---
reference_id: "PMID:36792021"
title: "Shigellosis in Southeast Asia: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Muzembo BA
- Kitahara K
- Mitra D
- Ohno A
- Khatiwada J
- Dutta S
- Miyoshi SI
journal: Travel Med Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2023.102554
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shigellosis in Southeast Asia: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Muzembo BA, Kitahara K, Mitra D, Ohno A, Khatiwada J, Dutta S, Miyoshi SI
**Journal:** Travel Med Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tmaid.2023.102554](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmaid.2023.102554)

## Content

1. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2023 Mar-Apr;52:102554. doi:
10.1016/j.tmaid.2023.102554.  Epub 2023 Feb 16.

Shigellosis in Southeast Asia: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Muzembo BA(1), Kitahara K(2), Mitra D(3), Ohno A(2), Khatiwada J(4), Dutta S(5), 
Miyoshi SI(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 
University, Okayama, Japan. Electronic address: andersonbasilua@yahoo.fr.
(2)Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 
University, Okayama, Japan; Collaborative Research Centre of Okayama University 
for Infectious Diseases in India at ICMR-NICED, Kolkata, India.
(3)Collaborative Research Centre of Okayama University for Infectious Diseases 
in India at ICMR-NICED, Kolkata, India.
(4)Social Work Institute, Nakhu-4, Kathmandu, Nepal.
(5)Division of Bacteriology, ICMR-National Institute of Cholera and Enteric 
Diseases, Kolkata, India.
(6)Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 
University, Okayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Southeast Asia is attractive for tourism. Unfortunately, travelers 
to this region are at risk of becoming infected with Shigella. We conducted a 
meta-analysis to provide updates on Shigella prevalence in Southeast Asia, along 
with their serogroups and serotypes.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic search using PubMed, EMBASE, and Web of 
Science for peer-reviewed studies from 2000 to November 2022. We selected 
studies that detected Shigella in stools by culture or polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR). Two reviewers extracted the data using a standardized form and performed 
quality assessments using the Joanna Briggs Institute checklist. The random 
effects model was used to estimate the pooled prevalence of Shigella.
RESULTS: During our search, we identified 4376 studies. 29 studies (from six 
Southeast Asian countries) were included in the systematic review, 21 each in 
the meta-analysis of the prevalence of Shigella (Sample size: 109545) and the 
prevalence of Shigella serogroups. The pooled prevalence of Shigella was 4% (95% 
CI: 4-5%) among diarrhea cases. Shigella sonnei was the most abundant serogroup 
in Thailand (74%) and Vietnam (57%), whereas Shigella flexneri was dominant in 
Indonesia (72%) and Cambodia (71%). Shigella dysenteriae and Shigella boydii 
were uncommon (pooled prevalence of 1% each). The pooled prevalence of Shigella 
was 5% (95% CI: 4-6%) in children aged <5 years. The pooled prevalence showed a 
decreasing trend comparing data collected between 2000-2013 (5%; 95% CI: 4-6%) 
and between 2014-2022 (3%; 95% CI: 2-4%). Shigella prevalence was 6% in studies 
that included participants with mixed pathogens versus 3% in those without. 
Shigella flexneri serotype 2a was the most frequently isolated (33%), followed 
by 3a (21%), 1b (10%), 2b (3%), and 6 (3%).
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides compelling evidence for the development of 
effective Shigella vaccines for residents of endemic regions and travellers to 
these areas.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2023.102554
PMID: 36792021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.