---
reference_id: "PMID:30739183"
title: "Infliximab biosimilar for treating neurosarcoidosis: tolerance and efficacy in a retrospective study including switch from the originator and initiation of treatment."
authors:
- Riller Q
- Cotteret C
- Junot H
- Benameur N
- Haroche J
- Mathian A
- Hie M
- Miyara M
- Tilleul P
- Amoura Z
- Cohen Aubart F
journal: J Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-019-09234-y
keywords:
- Adult
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- Azathioprine/therapeutic use
- Biosimilar Pharmaceuticals/therapeutic use
- Central Nervous System Diseases/drug therapy
- Drug Substitution
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infliximab/therapeutic use
- Male
- Methotrexate/therapeutic use
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Sarcoidosis/drug therapy
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infliximab biosimilar for treating neurosarcoidosis: tolerance and efficacy in a retrospective study including switch from the originator and initiation of treatment.
**Authors:** Riller Q, Cotteret C, Junot H, Benameur N, Haroche J, Mathian A, Hie M, Miyara M, Tilleul P, Amoura Z, Cohen Aubart F
**Journal:** J Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-019-09234-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-019-09234-y)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2019 May;266(5):1073-1078. doi: 10.1007/s00415-019-09234-y. Epub
2019  Feb 9.

Infliximab biosimilar for treating neurosarcoidosis: tolerance and efficacy in a
retrospective study including switch from the originator and initiation of
treatment.

Riller Q(1), Cotteret C(2), Junot H(2), Benameur N(2), Haroche J(1), Mathian
A(1), Hie M(1), Miyara M(3), Tilleul P(2), Amoura Z(1), Cohen Aubart F(4).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de
Médecine Interne 2, Centre National de Référence Maladies Systémiques Rares,
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47-83 Boulevard de l'hôpital, 75651, Paris Cedex 13,
France.
(2)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Département de Pharmacie, Hôpital
Pitié-Salpêtrière, 75013, Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Département
d'immunochimie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, 75013, Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Université, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de
Médecine Interne 2, Centre National de Référence Maladies Systémiques Rares,
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47-83 Boulevard de l'hôpital, 75651, Paris Cedex 13,
France. fleur.cohen@aphp.fr.

OBJECTIVES: Infliximab is increasingly used to treat neurosarcoidosis. We aimed
to determine the efficacy and tolerance of an infliximab biosimilar for treating
neurosarcoidosis.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective single-center study to describe the
efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of an infliximab biosimilar in
neurosarcoidosis patients. We compared the survival time without relapse while
receiving the biosimilar or previous originator-infliximab treatment.
RESULTS: Twenty patients with histologically documented neurosarcoidosis were
treated with an infliximab biosimilar (initiation of treatment in 12 and switch
from the originator drug in 8) between February 2016 and August 2018. All
patients presenting with neurological involvement of one or more areas,
including meningeal (n = 15), cerebral (n = 10), spinal cord (n = 9), and/or
cranial nerves (n = 5); epilepsy (n = 3); and/or intracranial hypertension
(n = 3) were enrolled. Eighteen patients received glucocorticoids during
infliximab treatment, and 16 had methotrexate or azathioprine concomitant
treatment. The median duration of follow-up was 25 months (19-28). Six patients
relapsed during biosimilar treatment. Relapse rates and time-to-relapse did not
differ between the infliximab originator previously received and biosimilar
treatment groups (p = 0.40 and 0.51, respectively). Nine patients experienced 11
adverse events with the infliximab biosimilar, including infections (n = 5),
urticaria (n = 4), headache (n = 1), and diarrhea (n = 1). All side effects were
grade 2 or less using the WHO classification.
CONCLUSIONS: In this retrospective study, the infliximab biosimilar was
efficacious and safe for treating neurosarcoidosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-019-09234-y
PMID: 30739183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
