---
reference_id: "PMID:40272133"
title: Aortitis triggered by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor.
authors:
- Gaustad A
- Liff MH
- Nørgaard AN
- Fremo KK
- Brudevold R
journal: Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4045/tidsskr.24.0466
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor/adverse effects, therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Aortitis/chemically induced, drug therapy, diagnostic imaging"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Lymphoma, Large B-Cell, Diffuse/drug therapy"
- Prednisolone/therapeutic use
- Tongue Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Middle Aged
- C-Reactive Protein/analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aortitis triggered by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor.
**Authors:** Gaustad A, Liff MH, Nørgaard AN, Fremo KK, Brudevold R
**Journal:** Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4045/tidsskr.24.0466](https://doi.org/10.4045/tidsskr.24.0466)

## Content

1. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2025 Apr 10;145(5). doi: 10.4045/tidsskr.24.0466.
Print  2025 Apr 22.

Aortitis triggered by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor.

[Article in English, Norwegian]

Gaustad A(1), Liff MH(2), Nørgaard AN(3), Fremo KK(4), Brudevold R(5).

Author information:
(1)Medisinsk avdeling, Diakonhjemmet sykehus, Oslo.
(2)Rehabiliteringsklinikken, St. Olavs hospital, Universitetssykehuset i 
Trondheim, Trondheim.
(3)Radiologisk avdeling, Ullevål sykehus, Oslo.
(4)Anestesiavdelingen, Ålesund sjukehus, Ålesund.
(5)Medisinsk avdeling, Ålesund sjukehus, Ålesund.

BACKGROUND: A man in his sixties was diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma localised in the base of his tongue.
CASE PRESENTATION: The patient was admitted to the emergency department with a 
fever, generalised muscle aches and lethargy 12 days atter receiving his first 
chemotherapy treatment with granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) 
supplementation. There were no focal signs of infection. The patient was started 
on empiric antibiotic treatment. After four days, C-reactive protein (CRP) had 
increased from 104 to 331, but the patient's condition was largely unchanged. A 
computer tomography (CT) scan showed aortitis, most likely caused by G-CSF. The 
patient was treated with prednisolone and rapidly improved.
INTERPRETATION: The diagnosis of G-CSF-induced aortitis should be considered in 
patients with fever after G-CSF treatment, particularly if adequate antibiotic 
treatment does not lead to improvement. Advanced imaging is often indicated. The 
most important measure is to discontinue G-CSF supplementation.

DOI: 10.4045/tidsskr.24.0466
PMID: 40272133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]