---
reference_id: "PMID:27207446"
title: "Information processing speed in multiple sclerosis: Past, present, and future."
authors:
- Costa SL
- Genova HM
- DeLuca J
- Chiaravalloti ND
journal: Mult Scler
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1177/1352458516645869
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Information processing speed in multiple sclerosis: Past, present, and future.
**Authors:** Costa SL, Genova HM, DeLuca J, Chiaravalloti ND
**Journal:** Mult Scler (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1352458516645869](https://doi.org/10.1177/1352458516645869)

## Content

1. Mult Scler. 2017 May;23(6):772-789. doi: 10.1177/1352458516645869. Epub 2016
May  9.

Information processing speed in multiple sclerosis: Past, present, and future.

Costa SL(1), Genova HM(1), DeLuca J(2), Chiaravalloti ND(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychology & Neuroscience Laboratory, Kessler Foundation, West Orange, 
NJ, USA/Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Rutgers New Jersey 
Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA.
(2)Neuropsychology & Neuroscience Laboratory, Kessler Foundation, West Orange, 
NJ, USA/Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Rutgers New Jersey 
Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA/Department of Neurology, Rutgers New Jersey 
Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA.

BACKGROUND: Information processing speed (IPS) is a prevalent cognitive 
impairment in multiple sclerosis (MS).
OBJECTIVES: This review aims to summarize the methods applied to assess IPS in 
MS and its theoretical conceptualization. A PubMed search was performed to 
select articles published between 1 January 2004 and 31 December 2013, resulting 
in 157 articles included.
RESULTS: The majority (54%) of studies assessed IPS with heterogeneous samples 
(several disease courses). Studies often report controlling for presence of 
other neurological disorders (60.5%), age (58.6%), education (51.6%), alcohol 
history (47.8%), or use of steroids (39.5%). Potential confounding variables, 
such as recent relapses (50.3%), history of developmental disorders (19.1%), and 
visual problems (29.9%), were often neglected. Assessments used to study IPS 
were heterogeneous (ranging from simple to complex tasks) among the studies 
under review, with 62 different tasks used. Only 9.6% of articles defined the 
construct of IPS and 22.3% discussed IPS in relation to a theoretical model.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS: The challenges for the upcoming decade include clarification 
of the definition of IPS as well as its theoretical conceptualization and a 
consensus on assessment. Based on the results obtained, we propose a new 
theoretical model, the tri-factor model of IPS.

DOI: 10.1177/1352458516645869
PMID: 27207446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]