---
reference_id: "PMID:29684996"
title: "Low-grade chronic inflammation mediated by mast cells in fibromyalgia: role of IL-37."
authors:
- Mastrangelo F
- Frydas I
- Ronconi G
- Kritas SK
- Tettamanti L
- Caraffa Al
- D Ovidio C
- Younes A
- Gallenga CE
- Conti P
journal: J Biol Regul Homeost Agents
year: '2018'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low-grade chronic inflammation mediated by mast cells in fibromyalgia: role of IL-37.
**Authors:** Mastrangelo F, Frydas I, Ronconi G, Kritas SK, Tettamanti L, Caraffa Al, D Ovidio C, Younes A, Gallenga CE, Conti P
**Journal:** J Biol Regul Homeost Agents (2018)

## Content

1. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2018 Mar-Apr;32(2):195-198.

Low-grade chronic inflammation mediated by mast cells in fibromyalgia: role of 
IL-37.

Mastrangelo F(1), Frydas I(2), Ronconi G(3), Kritas SK(4), Tettamanti L(5), 
Caraffa Al(6), D Ovidio C(7), Younes A(8), Gallenga CE(9), Conti P(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Science and Biotechnology, University of Foggia, 
Foggia, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Parasitology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Macedonia, 
Greece.
(3)UOS Clinica dei Pazienti del Territorio, Policlinico Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, Macedonia, Greece.
(5)Department of Medical and Morphological Science, University of Insubria, 
Varese, Italy.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(7)Section of Legal Medicine, Department of Medicine and Aging Sciences, 
University of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
(8)Department of Anesthesiology, ‘Santo Spirito’ Hospital, Pescara, Italy.
(9)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Specialist Surgery, Section of 
Ophthalmology, University of Ferrara, Italy.
(10)Immunology Division, Postgraduate Medical School, University of 
Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.

It has been observed that acute stress causes the activation of TH1 cells, while 
TH2 cells regulate and act on chronic inflammation. Fibromyalgia (FM) is a 
chronic, idiopathic disorder which affects about twelve million people in the 
United States. FM is characterized by chronic widespread pain, fatigue, aching, 
joint stiffness, depression, cognitive dysfunction and non-restorative sleep. 
The mechanism of induction of muscle pain and inflammation is not yet clear. In 
FM there is an increase in reactivity of central neurons with increased 
sensitivity localized mainly in the CNS. Mast cells are involved in FM by 
releasing proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, chemical mediators, and PGD2. 
TNF is a cytokine generated by MCs and its level is higher in FM. The inhibition 
of pro-inflammatory IL-1 family members and TNF by IL-37 in FM could have a 
therapeutic effect. Here, we report for the first time the relationship between 
MCs, inflammatory cytokines and the new anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-37 in FM.

PMID: 29684996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]