---
reference_id: "PMID:38163131"
title: "Compound heterozygous WDR19 variants associated with nephronophthisis, Caroli disease, refractory epilepsy and congenital bilateral central blindness: Case report."
authors:
- Tang X
- Yi S
- Qin Z
- Yi S
- Chen J
- Yang Q
- Li S
- Luo J
journal: Heliyon
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23257
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compound heterozygous WDR19 variants associated with nephronophthisis, Caroli disease, refractory epilepsy and congenital bilateral central blindness: Case report.
**Authors:** Tang X, Yi S, Qin Z, Yi S, Chen J, Yang Q, Li S, Luo J
**Journal:** Heliyon (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23257](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23257)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2023 Dec 3;10(1):e23257. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23257. 
eCollection 2024 Jan 15.

Compound heterozygous WDR19 variants associated with nephronophthisis, Caroli 
disease, refractory epilepsy and congenital bilateral central blindness: Case 
report.

Tang X(1)(2), Yi S(1)(2), Qin Z(1)(2), Yi S(1)(2), Chen J(3), Yang Q(1)(2), Li 
S(3), Luo J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetic and Metabolic Central Laboratory, Guangxi Birth Defects Research and 
Prevention Institute, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang 
Autonomous Region, Nanning, China.
(2)Guangxi Clinical Research Center for Pediatric Diseases, Guangxi Key 
Laboratory of Reproductive Health and Birth Defects Prevention, Guangxi Key 
Laboratory of Precision Medicine for Genetic Diseases, Guangxi Key Laboratory of 
Birth Defects and Stem Cell Biobank, Guangxi Key Laboratory of Birth Defects 
Research and Prevention, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang 
Autonomous Region, Nanning, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang 
Autonomous Region, Nanning, China.

The WDR19 gene has been reported to be involved in nephronophthisis-related 
ciliopathies such as isolated nephronophthisis 13 (NPHP13), Sensenbrenner 
syndrome, Jeune syndrome, Senior-Loken syndrome, Caroli disease, retinitis 
pigmentosa and Asthenoteratospermia. In the present study, we provided the 
detailed clinical characteristics and genetic analysis of a patient with four 
variants in WDR19 and TG, reviewed a comprehensive mutation analysis in the 
WDR19-related ciliopathies, discussed the relationship between genotype and 
phenotype, and compared the allele frequencies (AFs) of WDR19 variants depending 
on the ethnic background. We used whole-exome sequencing (WES) combined with 
bioinformatics analysis to investigate the genetic variants of a 3-year-old boy 
with common features of WDR19-associated NPHP13 and Caroli disease, bilateral 
central blindness, refractory epilepsy, and elevated thyroid stimulating 
hormone. A novel splice-donor variant, c.98+1G > C, and a recurrent missense 
variant, c.3533G > A, were identified in the WDR19 gene. We used effective mRNA 
analysis to verify the effects on pre-mRNA processing and to assess the 
pathogenicity of the splice-site variant. The patient also harbored compound 
heterozygous variants of the TG gene (c.4889A > G, c.274+2T > G). Of note, using 
a review of an in-house database, we identified four additional likely 
pathogenic WDR19 variants and estimated the overall AF of WDR19 mutations to be 
0.0025 in the southern Chinese population. Our findings have expanded the 
allelic spectrum of mutations in the WDR19 gene and broadened the clinical 
phenotype spectrum of WDR19-related ciliopathies. The results have also provided 
new insights into the clinical heterogeneity of the disorder, which would be 
useful in accurate genetic counseling for affected individuals and carrier 
screening in a general population.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23257
PMCID: PMC10754840
PMID: 38163131

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.