---
reference_id: "PMID:39896662"
title: Single Cell Transcriptome Signatures of Sarcoidosis in Lung Immune Cell Populations.
authors:
- Moore C
- Liao SY
- Wood C
- Sarkar A
- Cardwell J
- MacPhail K
- Mroz MM
- Riley C
- Mould K
- Restrepo C
- Li L
- Maier LA
- Yang IV
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1101/2025.01.20.633917
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single Cell Transcriptome Signatures of Sarcoidosis in Lung Immune Cell Populations.
**Authors:** Moore C, Liao SY, Wood C, Sarkar A, Cardwell J, MacPhail K, Mroz MM, Riley C, Mould K, Restrepo C, Li L, Maier LA, Yang IV
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2025.01.20.633917](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.01.20.633917)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jan 22:2025.01.20.633917. doi:
10.1101/2025.01.20.633917.

Single Cell Transcriptome Signatures of Sarcoidosis in Lung Immune Cell
Populations.

Moore C, Liao SY, Wood C, Sarkar A, Cardwell J, MacPhail K, Mroz MM, Riley C,
Mould K, Restrepo C, Li L, Maier LA, Yang IV.

RATIONALE: To identify cell specific molecular changes associated with
sarcoidosis risk and progression, we aimed to characterize the cellular
composition, gene expression patterns, and cell-cell interactions in BAL cells
from patients with sarcoidosis (both progressive and non-progressive) and
healthy controls.
METHODS: Single cell RNA-seq data were collected on 12 sarcoidosis and 4 control
participants. We combined scRNA-seq data from these participants with our
previously collected data on 4 sarcoidosis and 10 control participants for a
final sample size of 16 sarcoidosis cases (8 progressive and 8 non-progressive)
and 14 controls. Following initial preprocessing in CellRanger, data were
quality controlled, combined, and clustered in Seurat. We tested differences in
cell proportions by disease group using F-tests on cell proportions and
differences in gene expression using pseudobulk analysis. Cell to cell
communication and pathway analysis were performed using CellChat.
RESULTS: We identified five macrophage populations: resident, high
metallothionein (MT) resident, recruited, profibrotic recruited, and
proliferating macrophages. Each subpopulation displayed unique gene expression
profiles, with notable differential expression of genes and pathways linked to
sarcoidosis in resident macrophages, recruited macrophages, and proliferating
macrophages. We also observed changes in gene expression associated with disease
progression in resident and recruited macrophages. In non-macrophages cells, we
observed a significant reduction in the number of B cells in sarcoidosis
patients compared to controls. Among T cell populations, we identified specific
transcriptional alterations at gene and pathway level. Additionally, we observed
distinct differences in cell-to-cell interactions of macrophages and T cells
between sarcoidosis patients and healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings underscore the complexity of immune cell involvement
in sarcoidosis and highlight potential cellular and molecular targets for
further investigation.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.01.20.633917
PMCID: PMC11785102
PMID: 39896662
