---
reference_id: PMID:41466325
title: "Development, validation, and utility of a clinically applicable methylation classifier for recurrence risk prediction in meningiomas."
authors:
- Duckett D
- Santana-Santos L
- McCord M
- Smith V
- Lopes MBS
- Youngblood MW
- Magill ST
- Chandler JP
- Heimberger AB
- Lukas R
- Ahrendsen JT
- Primdahl D
- Stupp R
- Castellani RJ
- Horbinski CM
- Brat DJ
- Jennings LJ
- Sukhanova M
- Jamshidi P
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-025-02184-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development, validation, and utility of a clinically applicable methylation classifier for recurrence risk prediction in meningiomas.
**Authors:** Duckett D, Santana-Santos L, McCord M, Smith V, Lopes MBS, Youngblood MW, Magill ST, Chandler JP, Heimberger AB, Lukas R, Ahrendsen JT, Primdahl D, Stupp R, Castellani RJ, Horbinski CM, Brat DJ, Jennings LJ, Sukhanova M, Jamshidi P
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-025-02184-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-025-02184-9)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2025 Dec 29;13(1):259. doi:
10.1186/s40478-025-02184-9.

Development, validation, and utility of a clinically applicable methylation 
classifier for recurrence risk prediction in meningiomas.

Duckett D(#)(1)(2), Santana-Santos L(#)(1)(2), McCord M(#)(1)(3)(2), Smith V(3), 
Lopes MBS(3), Youngblood MW(4)(2), Magill ST(4)(2), Chandler JP(4)(2), 
Heimberger AB(4)(2), Lukas R(5)(2), Ahrendsen JT(1)(2), Primdahl D(5)(2), Stupp 
R(5)(2), Castellani RJ(1)(2), Horbinski CM(1)(2), Brat DJ(1)(2), Jennings 
LJ(1)(2), Sukhanova M(6)(7), Jamshidi P(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Malnati Brain Tumor Institute of the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA. madina.sukhanova@northwestern.edu.
(7)Malnati Brain Tumor Institute of the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. 
madina.sukhanova@northwestern.edu.
(8)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA. pouya.jamshidi@northwestern.edu.
(9)Malnati Brain Tumor Institute of the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. 
pouya.jamshidi@northwestern.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Meningiomas are common intracranial tumors with complex behavior that can be 
difficult to predict. Historically, morphology has been used to predict tumor 
aggressiveness and risk of recurrence, but this strategy has limitations as a 
prognostic tool. DNA methylation, transcriptomics, and copy number data are 
valuable for identifying groups of tumors with distinct biological signatures, 
thereby predicting recurrence risk. Multiple risk-stratifying classifiers which 
incorporate methylation data are available, but to date, a clinically validated 
risk-predicting classifier which exclusively uses methylation data has not been 
created. Using samples from 217 patients, we developed, validated, and 
implemented a clinically applicable methylation classifier for prognostic 
stratification of meningiomas based on k-means clustering of methylation data. 
Our classifier is 96% accurate, with 91% of samples receiving high confidence 
scores in the validation cohort (n = 76). This classifier is unique in that it 
includes de novo identification of risk groups by DNA methylation, confidence 
score calculation, internal clinical validation, and public model availability. 
Our newly validated classifier has the potential to aid diagnostic workup, 
improve recurrence risk prediction, and enhance clinical management of 
meningiomas.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-025-02184-9
PMCID: PMC12750935
PMID: 41466325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This research was carried out in accordance with the Declaration of 
Helsinki. All patient data was de-identified prior to analysis. This study was 
approved under a Northwestern University Institutional Review Board – approved 
protocol (STU00218648). Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests.