---
reference_id: "PMID:38391320"
title: "Angiosarcoma of the head and neck: A clinicopathologic study with special emphasis on diagnostic pitfalls."
authors:
- Gangadharan J
- Mathews A
- Prasanna Kumary SN
- Somanathan T
- Jayasree K
- Narayanan G
journal: Indian J Pathol Microbiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_655_22
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hemangiosarcoma/diagnosis, pathology"
- Female
- Male
- "Head and Neck Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Aged
- India
- Young Adult
- Immunohistochemistry
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angiosarcoma of the head and neck: A clinicopathologic study with special emphasis on diagnostic pitfalls.
**Authors:** Gangadharan J, Mathews A, Prasanna Kumary SN, Somanathan T, Jayasree K, Narayanan G
**Journal:** Indian J Pathol Microbiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_655_22](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_655_22)

## Content

1. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2024 Jul 1;67(3):559-563. doi:
10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_655_22. Epub 2024 Feb 14.

Angiosarcoma of the head and neck: A clinicopathologic study with special
emphasis on diagnostic pitfalls.

Gangadharan J(1), Mathews A(2), Prasanna Kumary SN(2), Somanathan T(2), Jayasree
K(2), Narayanan G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Government Medical College, Kottayam, Kerala, India.
(2)Department of Pathology, Regional Cancer Centre, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala,
India.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Regional Cancer Centre, Thiruvananthapuram,
Kerala, India.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Angiosarcoma (AS) is a rare malignant vascular tumor that
phenotypically and functionally recapitulate normal endothelium. They constitute
approximately 2-4% of soft tissue sarcomas. We present 36 cases of head and neck
AS diagnosed for 11 years at a tertiary care hospital in South India to analyze
the clinical, pathological, and immunophenotypic profiles with special emphasis
on their differential diagnoses and diagnostic pitfalls.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Head and neck AS diagnosed from January 2006 to December
2017 were included. Clinical characteristics, treatment received, and follow-up
data were obtained from electronic medical records. Hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E)-stained slides and immunohistochemistry (IHC) slides were reviewed, and
the histomorphological features, immunohistochemical staining, and their utility
in resolving differential diagnosis were assessed.
RESULTS: Twenty-two females and 14 males were diagnosed with head and neck AS in
the study period. Histomorphological patterns observed were mixed vasoformative
and solid ( n = 22), pure vasoformative ( n = 13), and pure solid ( n = 1).
Neoplastic cells showed epithelioid, spindly, signet cell-like, clear cell, and
rhabdoid morphology. CD31 was positive in 100% of cases, and CD34 was positive
in 40% of cases. Differential diagnoses included melanoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and
large-cell lymphoma. Surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy were the treatment
modalities used. Twelve patients developed local recurrence, and 12 patients
developed metastasis on follow-up. Twenty-five patients died of disease, on an
average of 24 months after diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Head and neck AS pose a significant diagnostic challenge due to
their broad morphologic spectrum. Proper clinicopathologic correlation is
necessary to avoid misdiagnosis.

Copyright © 2024 Copyright: © 2024 Indian Journal of Pathology and Microbiology.

DOI: 10.4103/ijpm.ijpm_655_22
PMID: 38391320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
