---
reference_id: "PMID:38731973"
title: "Wilson Disease: Copper-Mediated Cuproptosis, Iron-Related Ferroptosis, and Clinical Highlights, with Comprehensive and Critical Analysis Update."
authors:
- Teschke R
- Eickhoff A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25094753
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilson Disease: Copper-Mediated Cuproptosis, Iron-Related Ferroptosis, and Clinical Highlights, with Comprehensive and Critical Analysis Update.
**Authors:** Teschke R, Eickhoff A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25094753](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25094753)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Apr 26;25(9):4753. doi: 10.3390/ijms25094753.

Wilson Disease: Copper-Mediated Cuproptosis, Iron-Related Ferroptosis, and 
Clinical Highlights, with Comprehensive and Critical Analysis Update.

Teschke R(1)(2), Eickhoff A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Division of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, Klinikum Hanau, D-63450 Hanau, Germany.
(2)Academic Teaching Hospital of the Medical Faculty, Goethe University 
Frankfurt, D-60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

Wilson disease is a genetic disorder of the liver characterized by excess 
accumulation of copper, which is found ubiquitously on earth and normally enters 
the human body in small amounts via the food chain. Many interesting disease 
details were published on the mechanistic steps, such as the generation of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cuproptosis causing a copper dependent cell 
death. In the liver of patients with Wilson disease, also, increased iron 
deposits were found that may lead to iron-related ferroptosis responsible for 
phospholipid peroxidation within membranes of subcellular organelles. All topics 
are covered in this review article, in addition to the diagnostic and 
therapeutic issues of Wilson disease. Excess Cu2+ primarily leads to the 
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), as evidenced by early experimental 
studies exemplified with the detection of hydroxyl radical formation using the 
electron spin resonance (ESR) spin-trapping method. The generation of ROS 
products follows the principles of the Haber-Weiss reaction and the subsequent 
Fenton reaction leading to copper-related cuproptosis, and is thereby closely 
connected with ROS. Copper accumulation in the liver is due to impaired biliary 
excretion of copper caused by the inheritable malfunctioning or missing ATP7B 
protein. As a result, disturbed cellular homeostasis of copper prevails within 
the liver. Released from the liver cells due to limited storage capacity, the 
toxic copper enters the circulation and arrives at other organs, causing local 
accumulation and cell injury. This explains why copper injures not only the 
liver, but also the brain, kidneys, eyes, heart, muscles, and bones, explaining 
the multifaceted clinical features of Wilson disease. Among these are 
depression, psychosis, dysarthria, ataxia, writing problems, dysphagia, renal 
tubular dysfunction, Kayser-Fleischer corneal rings, cardiomyopathy, cardiac 
arrhythmias, rhabdomyolysis, osteoporosis, osteomalacia, arthritis, and 
arthralgia. In addition, Coombs-negative hemolytic anemia is a key feature of 
Wilson disease with undetectable serum haptoglobin. The modified Leipzig Scoring 
System helps diagnose Wilson disease. Patients with Wilson disease are 
well-treated first-line with copper chelators like D-penicillamine that 
facilitate the removal of circulating copper bound to albumin and increase in 
urinary copper excretion. Early chelation therapy improves prognosis. Liver 
transplantation is an option viewed as ultima ratio in end-stage liver disease 
with untreatable complications or acute liver failure. Liver transplantation 
finally may thus be a life-saving approach and curative treatment of the disease 
by replacing the hepatic gene mutation. In conclusion, Wilson disease is a 
multifaceted genetic disease representing a molecular and clinical challenge.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25094753
PMCID: PMC11084815
PMID: 38731973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.