---
reference_id: "PMID:33472202"
title: "Acquired Angioedema with C1 Inhibitor Deficiency: Occurrence, Clinical Features, and Management: A Nationwide Retrospective Study in the Czech Republic Patients."
authors:
- Sobotkova M
- Zachova R
- Hakl R
- Kuklinek P
- Kralickova P
- Krcmova I
- Hanzlikova J
- Vachova M
- Bartunkova J
journal: Int Arch Allergy Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000512933
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Biomarkers
- "Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Czech Republic/epidemiology
- Disease Management
- Disease Susceptibility
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Public Health Surveillance
- Retrospective Studies
- Symptom Assessment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired Angioedema with C1 Inhibitor Deficiency: Occurrence, Clinical Features, and Management: A Nationwide Retrospective Study in the Czech Republic Patients.
**Authors:** Sobotkova M, Zachova R, Hakl R, Kuklinek P, Kralickova P, Krcmova I, Hanzlikova J, Vachova M, Bartunkova J
**Journal:** Int Arch Allergy Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000512933](https://doi.org/10.1159/000512933)

## Content

1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2021;182(7):642-649. doi: 10.1159/000512933. Epub
2021  Jan 20.

Acquired Angioedema with C1 Inhibitor Deficiency: Occurrence, Clinical Features, 
and Management: A Nationwide Retrospective Study in the Czech Republic Patients.

Sobotkova M(1), Zachova R(2), Hakl R(3), Kuklinek P(3), Kralickova P(4), Krcmova 
I(4), Hanzlikova J(5), Vachova M(5), Bartunkova J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine Charles University and 
Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czechia, marta.sobotkova@fnmotol.cz.
(2)Department of Immunology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine Charles University and 
Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czechia.
(3)Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergology, St Anne's University 
Hospital in Brno, Faculty of Medicine Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia.
(4)Institute of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, University Hospital Hradec 
Kralove, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Hradec Kralove, Czechia.
(5)Department of Immunology and Allergology, University Hospital and Faculty of 
Medicine in Pilsen, Pilsen, Czechia.

INTRODUCTION: Acquired angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency (AAE-C1-INH) is 
rare but a potentially life-threatening disease. There are no official 
prevalence data, nor approved therapies for this condition.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aimed to collect and analyze clinical data on 
patients with AAE-C1-INH in the Czech Republic.
METHODS: We have conducted a retrospective analysis of AAE-C1-INH patients from 
Czech referral centers for the treatment of hereditary angioedema with C1 
inhibitor deficiency. The inclusion criteria involved recurrent episodes of 
angioedema with the first manifestation at or after the age of 40, negative 
family history of angioedema, and C1 inhibitor function 50% or less.
RESULTS: A total of 14 patients (7 males and 7 females) met the inclusion 
criteria for AAE-C1-INH. The median age of the symptom onset was 59.5 years, and 
the median diagnosis delay was 1 year. The most common clinical manifestation 
was facial edema (100%) and upper airway swelling (85.7%). All patients 
responded to the acute attack treatment with icatibant and plasma-derived or 
recombinant C1 inhibitor concentrate. Lymphoid malignancy was identified in 9 
patients (64%), monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance in 3 (21%), and 
in 1 patient autoimmune disease (ulcerative colitis) was considered causative 
(7%). We were not able to identify any underlying disease only in 1 patient 
(7%). In 6 of 7 patients (86%) treated for lymphoma, either a reduction in the 
frequency of angioedema attacks or both angioedema symptoms' disappearance and 
complement parameter normalization was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of AAE-C1-INH in the Czech Republic is about 
1:760,000. This rare condition occurs in approximately 8% of the patients with 
angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency. AAE-C1-INH is strongly associated with 
lymphoproliferative disorders, and treating these conditions may improve the 
control of angioedema symptoms.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000512933
PMCID: PMC8315685
PMID: 33472202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M. Sobotkova reports being a consultant and 
speaker for Takeda and receiving symposium sponsorship from CSL Behring and 
Takeda. R. Zachova reports receiving symposium sponsorship from CSL Behring and 
Takeda and served as an investigator for clinical trial sponsored by Pharming 
Group NV. R. Hakl reports receiving consultancy/speaker honoraria from CSL 
Behring, Shire, and Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., and serving as a principal 
investigator for clinical trials sponsored by BioCryst Pharmaceuticals, Pharming 
Group NV, and KalVista Pharmaceuticals. P. Kuklinek reports being a consultant 
and speaker for Takeda and receiving symposium sponsorship from Takeda. P. 
Kralickova reports being a consultant and speaker for Takeda and CSL Behring and 
moreover receiving symposium sponsorship from them. I. Krcmova reports being a 
consultant and speaker for Takeda and receiving symposium sponsorship from 
Takeda. J. Hanzlikova reports being a consultant and speaker for Takeda and 
receiving symposium sponsoring from CSL Behring and Takeda. M. Vachova reports 
receiving symposium sponsorship from Takeda. J. Bartunkova has no conflicts of 
interest to declare.