---
reference_id: "PMID:3159805"
title: "Human hypersensitivity angiitis, an immune complex disease."
authors:
- Sams WM Jr
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12275678
keywords:
- Animals
- Antigen-Antibody Complex/immunology
- Complement Activation
- Complement System Proteins/immunology
- Histamine/immunology
- Humans
- "Immune Complex Diseases/immunology, physiopathology"
- Purpura/immunology
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/immunology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human hypersensitivity angiitis, an immune complex disease.
**Authors:** Sams WM Jr
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1523-1747.ep12275678](https://doi.org/10.1111/1523-1747.ep12275678)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 1985 Jul;85(1 Suppl):144s-148s. doi:
10.1111/1523-1747.ep12275678.

Human hypersensitivity angiitis, an immune complex disease.

Sams WM Jr.

Human hypersensitivity angiitis is an immune complex disease in which patients
present with palpable purpuric lesions of the skin and may often have multiple
organ involvement. The antigen may be derived from an infectious organism such
as the hepatitis virus, streptococcus, or a drug, and complexes with antibody.
Under circumstances of vascular turbulence or vessel wall dilatation this
complex may become fixed, activating the complement sequence with elaboration of
chemotactic factors for neutrophils. These cells release lysosomal enzymes
resulting in vessel wall destruction. Red blood cells leak into the tissue
producing purpura and the inflammatory infiltrate accounts for the palpability.
Although many patients have skin lesions only, others may have involvement of
joints, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, and even the lungs. The central
question in the pathogenesis of this disease is why the immune complex is so
selective in its site of deposition. Part of the reason must be related to the
lattice formation of a particular complex, while other reasons are related to
host factors of altered vascular permeability, integrity of clearance mechanisms
or even a genetically determined defect of the phagocytic system.

DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12275678
PMID: 3159805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
