---
reference_id: "PMID:34536613"
title: Self-Reported Physical Activity and Asthma Risk in Children.
authors:
- Lu K
- Sidell M
- Li X
- Rozema E
- Cooper DM
- Radom-Aizik S
- Crawford WW
- Koebnick C
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2021.08.040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Self-Reported Physical Activity and Asthma Risk in Children.
**Authors:** Lu K, Sidell M, Li X, Rozema E, Cooper DM, Radom-Aizik S, Crawford WW, Koebnick C
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2021.08.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2021.08.040)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2022 Jan;10(1):231-239.e3. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2021.08.040. Epub 2021 Sep 16.

Self-Reported Physical Activity and Asthma Risk in Children.

Lu K(1), Sidell M(2), Li X(2), Rozema E(2), Cooper DM(1), Radom-Aizik S(1), 
Crawford WW(3), Koebnick C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Exercise and Genomics Research Center, 
University of California, Irvine, Calif.
(2)Department of Research and Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, 
Pasadena, Calif.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Exercise and Genomics Research Center, 
University of California, Irvine, Calif; Los Angeles Medical Center, Kaiser 
Permanente Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif.
(4)Department of Research and Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, 
Pasadena, Calif. Electronic address: Corinna.Koebnick@kp.org.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2022 Jan;10(1):240-241. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2021.10.009.

BACKGROUND: Increased physical activity (PA) may protect against asthma but PA 
can trigger asthma symptoms.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate relationships between moderate-to-vigorous PA (MVPA) 
assessed during routine care visits and incident asthma.
METHODS: For this retrospective cohort, 542,486 children between 2 and 17 years 
from 2010 to 2017 were included who had an MVPA assessment (exercise vital sign) 
during routine care visits. The association of MVPA and asthma was analyzed 
using Cox proportional hazards regression models as a function of age, with MVPA 
and body mass index (BMI) being time-varying factors, adjusted for race and 
ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and air pollution.
RESULTS: The mean MVPA was 5.4 (standard deviation: 4.4) hours/week. Crude 
asthma incidence density rate (IDR) was highest in children with <1 hour/week of 
MVPA (IDR: 9.07, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 8.79, 9.36) and lowest in 
children engaging in 4 to 7 hours/week of MVPA (IDR: 6.55, 95% CI: 6.33, 6.77). 
In adjusted models, an increase in MVPA was associated with lower asthma risk in 
children reporting 0 hour/week of MVPA (hazard ratio: 0.981, 95% CI: 0.973, 
0.990). In children with ≥8 hours/week of MVPA, an increase in MVPA was 
associated with higher asthma risk (1.005, 95% CI: 1.002, 1.009). There was no 
significant BMI by MVPA interaction.
CONCLUSION: Increasing MVPA in children with low activity levels is associated 
with lower asthma risk; children reporting high levels of activity may 
experience greater asthma risk as their activity levels increase further. 
Understanding the role of PA in the development of asthma and assessing MVPA 
during routine care visits in children may help to develop targeted 
interventions and guide asthma management.

Copyright © 2021 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2021.08.040
PMCID: PMC9032211
PMID: 34536613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of 
interest to disclose. Dr. Lu was an employee of the University of California, 
Irvine during the concept, data collection and development of this publication. 
Dr. Lu is currently an employee of Novartis Pharma.