---
reference_id: "PMID:36697098"
title: Cumulative Incidence of Thromboembolism and Prognostic Impact of Stroke in BRAF V600E-mutant Non-small-cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Yamada S
- Sekine A
- Hagiwara E
- Onodera Y
- Tabata E
- Ikeda S
- Kitamura H
- Baba T
- Komatsu S
- Ogura T
journal: Anticancer Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.21873/anticanres.16237
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/complications, genetics, drug therapy"
- "Lung Neoplasms/complications, genetics, drug therapy"
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Incidence
- Retrospective Studies
- "Thromboembolism/etiology, genetics"
- "Stroke/epidemiology, genetics"
- Venous Thromboembolism
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cumulative Incidence of Thromboembolism and Prognostic Impact of Stroke in BRAF V600E-mutant Non-small-cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Yamada S, Sekine A, Hagiwara E, Onodera Y, Tabata E, Ikeda S, Kitamura H, Baba T, Komatsu S, Ogura T
**Journal:** Anticancer Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.21873/anticanres.16237](https://doi.org/10.21873/anticanres.16237)

## Content

1. Anticancer Res. 2023 Feb;43(2):935-938. doi: 10.21873/anticanres.16237.

Cumulative Incidence of Thromboembolism and Prognostic Impact of Stroke in BRAF
V600E-mutant Non-small-cell Lung Cancer.

Yamada S(1), Sekine A(2), Hagiwara E(2), Onodera Y(2), Tabata E(2), Ikeda S(2),
Kitamura H(2), Baba T(2), Komatsu S(2), Ogura T(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center,
Yokohama, Japan sho.yjp@gmail.com.
(2)Respiratory Medicine, Kanagawa Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center,
Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Cancer and ischemic stroke are closely associated.
Thromboembolism susceptibility in lung cancer may differ depending on oncogenic
alterations. However, the clinical characteristics of thromboembolism in
patients with BRAF-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer remain unknown. Thus, this
study aimed to evaluate the cumulative incidence of thromboembolism in this
population and describe such cases in detail.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively investigated consecutive patients with
BRAF V600E-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer. Cumulative incidence was
calculated using a competing risk analysis.
RESULTS: Of 10 patients with BRAF-V600E mutant lung cancer, five developed a
total of seven thromboembolic events, showing a 1-year cumulative incidence of
43% (95% confidence interval=11-72%). These events consisted of four
cancer-related stroke (CRS) events and three venous events including deep vein
thrombosis or pulmonary embolism. Of note, most of the early thrombotic events
were CRS. Two patients with CRS had multiple brain infarctions during anticancer
drug therapy, characterized by high D-dimer levels, resulting in short-term
mortality (13 and 22 days after stroke onset).
CONCLUSION: A substantial proportion of patients with BRAF V600E-mutant lung
cancer experienced thromboembolism during their disease course. CRS of
undetermined source may predict a worse prognosis in this population.

Copyright © 2023 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.16237
PMID: 36697098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
