---
reference_id: "PMID:15205951"
title: Wilson disease.
authors:
- Langner C
- Denk H
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-004-1047-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilson disease.
**Authors:** Langner C, Denk H
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-004-1047-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-004-1047-8)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2004 Aug;445(2):111-8. doi: 10.1007/s00428-004-1047-8. Epub
2004  Jun 17.

Wilson disease.

Langner C(1), Denk H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 25, 8036 
Graz, Austria. cord.langner@meduni-graz.at

Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper metabolism. 
Since daily copper intake exceeds the body's requirements, effective means of 
excreting excess copper are essential. These are accomplished by ATP7B, a new 
member of the cation-transporting p-type ATPase family, which is mainly 
expressed in the liver and mediates both copper secretion into plasma (coupled 
with ceruloplasmin synthesis) and its excretion into bile. Thus far, more than 
200 mutations of the WD gene have been detected, causing impairment of ATP7B 
function and, ultimately, copper accumulation. Excess copper, however, induces 
free-radical reactions and lipid peroxidation. Resultant liver damage leads to 
steatosis, inflammation, cirrhosis, and, occasionally, fulminant liver failure. 
The diagnosis of WD is commonly made on the basis of typical clinical and 
laboratory findings, including low serum ceruloplasmin, increased urinary copper 
excretion, and increased hepatic copper content. Since liver morphology is 
non-specific, and copper histochemistry may lead to both false-negative and 
false-positive results, the pathologist usually only suspects the disease or 
assists in its confirmation. Although the value of molecular genetic testing is 
limited due to the high number of possible gene mutations, polymerase chain 
reaction may be useful for the evaluation of family members of homozygous index 
patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-004-1047-8
PMID: 15205951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]