---
reference_id: "PMID:22633632"
title: Clinical features and neurologic progression of hyperargininemia.
authors:
- Carvalho DR
- Brum JM
- Speck-Martins CE
- Ventura FD
- Navarro MM
- Coelho KE
- Portugal D
- Pratesi R
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2012.03.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and neurologic progression of hyperargininemia.
**Authors:** Carvalho DR, Brum JM, Speck-Martins CE, Ventura FD, Navarro MM, Coelho KE, Portugal D, Pratesi R
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2012.03.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2012.03.016)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2012 Jun;46(6):369-74. doi:
10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2012.03.016.

Clinical features and neurologic progression of hyperargininemia.

Carvalho DR(1), Brum JM, Speck-Martins CE, Ventura FD, Navarro MM, Coelho KE, 
Portugal D, Pratesi R.

Author information:
(1)SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brazil. 
danielcarvalho@sarah.br

Hyperargininemia is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by a 
deficiency of enzyme arginase I. It is a rare pan-ethnic disease with a clinical 
presentation distinct from that of other urea cycle disorders, and 
hyperammonemic encephalopathy is not usually observed. Hyperargininemia is one 
of the few treatable causes of pediatric spastic paraparesis, and can be 
confused with cerebral palsy. We retrospectively evaluated the clinical onset, 
neurologic manifestations, progression of abnormalities, electroencephalographic 
abnormalities, and laboratory findings of 16 Brazilian patients with 
hyperargininemia. Relevant data about the clinical spectrum and natural history 
of hyperargininemia are detailed. Progressive spastic diplegia constituted the 
key clinical abnormality in this group, but variability in clinical presentation 
and progression were evident in our series. Seizures in hyperargininemia may be 
more common than reported in previous studies. Features distinguishing 
hyperargininemia from cerebral palsy and hereditary spastic paraplegia are 
emphasized in this large series of patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2012.03.016
PMID: 22633632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]