---
reference_id: "PMID:36510321"
title: Antibody-free measurement of cerebrospinal fluid tau phosphorylation across the Alzheimer's disease continuum.
authors:
- Gobom J
- Benedet AL
- Mattsson-Carlgren N
- Montoliu-Gaya L
- Schultz N
- Ashton NJ
- Janelidze S
- Servaes S
- Sauer M
- Pascoal TA
- Karikari TK
- Lantero-Rodriguez J
- Brinkmalm G
- Zetterberg H
- Hansson O
- Rosa-Neto P
- Blennow K
journal: Mol Neurodegener
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13024-022-00586-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antibody-free measurement of cerebrospinal fluid tau phosphorylation across the Alzheimer's disease continuum.
**Authors:** Gobom J, Benedet AL, Mattsson-Carlgren N, Montoliu-Gaya L, Schultz N, Ashton NJ, Janelidze S, Servaes S, Sauer M, Pascoal TA, Karikari TK, Lantero-Rodriguez J, Brinkmalm G, Zetterberg H, Hansson O, Rosa-Neto P, Blennow K
**Journal:** Mol Neurodegener (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13024-022-00586-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13024-022-00586-0)

## Content

1. Mol Neurodegener. 2022 Dec 12;17(1):81. doi: 10.1186/s13024-022-00586-0.

Antibody-free measurement of cerebrospinal fluid tau phosphorylation across the 
Alzheimer's disease continuum.

Gobom J(1)(2), Benedet AL(3)(4), Mattsson-Carlgren N(5)(6), Montoliu-Gaya L(3), 
Schultz N(5), Ashton NJ(3)(7)(8)(9), Janelidze S(5), Servaes S(4), Sauer M(3), 
Pascoal TA(4), Karikari TK(3)(10), Lantero-Rodriguez J(3), Brinkmalm G(3), 
Zetterberg H(3)(11)(12)(13)(14), Hansson O(5)(15), Rosa-Neto P(4), Blennow 
K(3)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden. johan.gobom@neuro.gu.se.
(2)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, 
Sweden. johan.gobom@neuro.gu.se.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(4)Translational Neuroimaging Laboratory, McGill Centre for Studies in Aging, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(6)Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(7)Wallenberg Centre for Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(8)King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, 
Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, London, UK.
(9)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health & Biomedical Research Unit 
for Dementia at South London & Maudsley NHS Foundation, London, UK.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(11)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Mölndal, Sweden.
(12)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen 
Square, London, UK.
(13)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, UK.
(14)Hong Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hong Kong, China.
(15)Memory Clinic, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease is characterized by an abnormal increase of 
phosphorylated tau (pTau) species in the CSF. It has been suggested that 
emergence of different pTau forms may parallel disease progression. Therefore, 
targeting multiple specific pTau forms may allow for a deeper understanding of 
disease evolution and underlying pathophysiology. Current immunoassays measure 
pTau epitopes separately and may capture phosphorylated tau fragments of 
different length depending on the non-pTau antibody used in the assay sandwich 
pair, which bias the measurement.
METHODS: We developed the first antibody-free mass spectrometric method to 
simultaneously measure multiple phosphorylated epitopes in CSF tau: pT181, 
pS199, pS202, pT205, pT217, pT231, and pS396. The method was first evaluated in 
biochemically defined Alzheimer's disease and control CSF samples (n = 38). All 
seven pTau epitopes clearly separated Alzheimer's disease from non-AD 
(p < 0.001, AUC = 0.84-0.98). We proceeded with clinical validation of the 
method in the TRIAD (n = 165) and BioFINDER-2 cohorts (n = 563), consisting of 
patients across the full Alzheimer's disease continuum, including also young 
controls (< 40 years), as well as patients with frontotemporal dementia and 
other neurodegenerative disorders.
RESULTS: Increased levels of all phosphorylated epitopes were found in 
Alzheimer's disease dementia and Aβ positron emission tomography-positive 
patients with mild cognitive impairment compared with Aβ-negative controls. For 
Alzheimer's disease dementia compared with Aβ-negative controls, the best 
biomarker performance was observed for pT231 (TRIAD: AUC = 98.73%, fold 
change = 7.64; BioFINDER-2: AUC = 91.89%, fold change = 10.65), pT217 (TRIAD: 
AUC = 99.71%, fold change = 6.33; BioFINDER-2: AUC = 98.12%, fold change = 8.83) 
and pT205 (TRIAD: AUC = 99.07%, fold change = 5.34; BioFINDER-2: AUC = 93.51%, 
fold change = 3.92). These phospho-epitopes also discriminated between 
Aβ-positive and Aβ-negative cognitively unimpaired individuals: pT217 (TRIAD: 
AUC = 83.26, fold change = 2.39; BioFINDER-2: AUC = 91.05%, fold change = 3.29), 
pT231 (TRIAD: AUC = 86.25, fold change = 3.80; BioFINDER-2: AUC = 78.69%, fold 
change = 3.65) and pT205 (TRIAD: AUC = 71.58, fold change = 1.51; BioFINDER-2: 
AUC = 71.11%, fold change = 1.70).
CONCLUSIONS: While an increase was found for all pTau species examined, the 
highest fold change in Alzheimer's disease was found for pT231, pT217 and pT205. 
Simultaneous antibody-free measurement of pTau epitopes by mass spectrometry 
avoids possible bias caused by differences in antibody affinity for modified or 
processed forms of tau, provides insights into tau pathophysiology and may 
facilitate clinical trials on tau-based drug candidates.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13024-022-00586-0
PMCID: PMC9743664
PMID: 36510321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HZ has served at scientific advisory boards 
and/or as a consultant for Alector, Eisai, Denali, Roche Diagnostics, Wave, 
Samumed, Siemens Healthineers, Pinteon Therapeutics, Nervgen, AZTherapies, CogRx 
and Red Abbey Labs, has given lectures in symposia sponsored by Cellectricon, 
Fujirebio, Alzecure and Biogen, and is a co-founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions 
in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program. KB 
has served as a consultant, at advisory boards, or at data monitoring committees 
for Abcam, Axon, Biogen, JOMDD/Shimadzu. Julius Clinical, Lilly, MagQu, 
Novartis, Roche Diagnostics, and Siemens Healthineers, and is a co-founder of 
Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU 
Ventures Incubator Program. OH has acquired research support (for the 
institution) from ADx, AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, Biogen, Eli Lilly, Eisai, 
Fujirebio, GE Healthcare, Pfizer, and Roche. In the past 2 years, he has 
received consultancy/speaker fees from AC Immune, Amylyx, Alzpath, BioArctic, 
Biogen, Cerveau, Fujirebio, Genentech, Novartis, Roche, and Siemens.