---
reference_id: "PMID:31528200"
title: Validation of a childhood eating disorder outcome scale.
authors:
- Nagamitsu S
- Fukai Y
- Uchida S
- Matsuoka M
- Iguchi T
- Okada A
- Sakuta R
- Inoue T
- Otani R
- Kitayama S
- Koyanagi K
- Suzuki Y
- Suzuki Y
- Sumi Y
- Takamiya S
- Fujii C
- Tsurumaru Y
- Ishii R
- Kakuma T
- Yamashita Y
journal: Biopsychosoc Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13030-019-0162-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Validation of a childhood eating disorder outcome scale.
**Authors:** Nagamitsu S, Fukai Y, Uchida S, Matsuoka M, Iguchi T, Okada A, Sakuta R, Inoue T, Otani R, Kitayama S, Koyanagi K, Suzuki Y, Suzuki Y, Sumi Y, Takamiya S, Fujii C, Tsurumaru Y, Ishii R, Kakuma T, Yamashita Y
**Journal:** Biopsychosoc Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13030-019-0162-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13030-019-0162-3)

## Content

1. Biopsychosoc Med. 2019 Sep 11;13:21. doi: 10.1186/s13030-019-0162-3.
eCollection  2019.

Validation of a childhood eating disorder outcome scale.

Nagamitsu S(1), Fukai Y(2), Uchida S(3), Matsuoka M(4), Iguchi T(5), Okada A(6), 
Sakuta R(7), Inoue T(7), Otani R(7), Kitayama S(8), Koyanagi K(9), Suzuki Y(10), 
Suzuki Y(11), Sumi Y(12)(13), Takamiya S(14)(15), Fujii C(16), Tsurumaru Y(16), 
Ishii R(1), Kakuma T(17), Yamashita Y(1).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Kurume University School of 
Medicine, 67 Asahi-machi, Kurume, Fukuoka, 830-0011 Japan.
(2)2Psychosomatic Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical Center, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)3Department of Pediatrics, Tachikawa Hospital, Tachikawa, Japan.
(4)4Department of Neuropsychiatry, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics Hoshigaoka Maternity Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.
(6)6Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(7)7Child Development and Psychosomatic Medicine Center, Dokkyo Medical 
University Saitama Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.
(8)Himeji City Center for the Disabled, Himeji, Japan.
(9)Nagasaki Prefectural Center of Medicine and Welfare for Children, Nagasaki, 
Japan.
(10)10Department of Pediatrics, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine, 
Fukushima, Japan.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Mie National 
Hospital, Mie, Japan.
(12)12Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, 
Sapporo, Japan.
(13)Mental and Developmental Clinic for Children "ELM TREE", Sapporo, Japan.
(14)14Psychiatry Department, Kobe City Nishi-Kobe Medical Center, Kobe, Japan.
(15)Takamiya Medical Clinic, Akashi, Japan.
(16)16Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(17)17Biostatistics Center, Kurume University, Kurume, Japan.

We developed and validated a childhood eating disorder outcome scale based on 
outcomes associated with body mass index standard deviation score (BMI-SDS). 
This prospective observational study included 131 children with eating disorders 
(aged 5-15 years). Participants' outcomes scales were completed at the first 
visit and at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months. The scale evaluated 12 outcomes: body 
weight change (BW), eating attitude (EA), fear of being fat (FF), body image 
distortion (BD), menstruation (ME), perceived physical condition (PC), attending 
school (AS), disease recognition by school (RS), family function (FA), disease 
recognition by parent (RP), social adaptation (SA), and relationships with 
friends (RF). Responses to all items were on a four-point Likert scale. 
Exploratory factor analysis was used to determine the number of factors based on 
the 12 outcomes. The relation between outcome scale scores and BMI-SDS over the 
12-month follow-up period was analyzed. Two types of factors were extracted: 
disease-specific factors (EA, FF, BD) and biopsychosocial factors (BW, PC, AS, 
FA, SA, RF). Three items (ME, RS, RP) were excluded because they showed no 
significant loading effect. There was a significant negative correlation between 
the outcome scale and BMI-SDS, and changes in outcome scale scores from baseline 
to 12 months were significantly associated with improvement in BMI-SDS. We 
developed a childhood eating disorder outcome scale characterized by 
disease-specific and biopsychosocial factors. Biopsychosocial management 
combined with a therapeutic approach for disease-specific symptoms may support 
body weight recovery for children with eating disorders.

DOI: 10.1186/s13030-019-0162-3
PMCID: PMC6737718
PMID: 31528200

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.