---
reference_id: "PMID:38013309"
title: "Novel mutation in RPGRIP1L gene causing Joubert syndrome: A case report."
authors:
- Duque-Cordoba PA
- Diaz-Ordoñez L
- Gutierrez-Medina JD
- Pachajoa H
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000035600
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel mutation in RPGRIP1L gene causing Joubert syndrome: A case report.
**Authors:** Duque-Cordoba PA, Diaz-Ordoñez L, Gutierrez-Medina JD, Pachajoa H
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000035600](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000035600)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Nov 24;102(47):e35600. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000035600.

Novel mutation in RPGRIP1L gene causing Joubert syndrome: A case report.

Duque-Cordoba PA(1)(2), Diaz-Ordoñez L(1)(2), Gutierrez-Medina JD(1)(3), 
Pachajoa H(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigaciones en Anomalías Congénitas y Enfermedades Raras 
(CIACER), Universidad Icesi, Cali, Colombia.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Básicas Médicas, Facultad de Salud, Universidad 
Icesi, Cali, Colombia.
(3)Centro de Investigaciones Clínicas, Fundación Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia.
(4)Genetic Division, Fundación Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia.

INTRODUCTION: Joubert syndrome is a rare disease of genetic origin with 
autosomal recessive inheritance and extreme genetic heterogeneity with more than 
40 causative genes. Joubert syndrome 7 is caused by mutations in the RPGRIP1L 
gene.
PATIENT CONCERNS: Our report describes a pediatric patient with clinical 
features compatible with JS type 7 such as hypotonia, developmental delay and 
aplasia of the cerebellar vermis.
DIAGNOSIS: The clinical features and the MRI of the head and neck which showed 
alterations at the level of the posterior fossa, with absence of the vermis and 
horizontal disposition of the cerebellar peduncles, were compatible with Joubert 
syndrome. Whole exome sequencing detected the variants RPGRIP1L (NM_015272.2) 
c.697A > T (p. Lys233Ter) and RPGRIP1L (NM_015272.2) c.3545 del 
(p.Pro1182LeufsTer25).
INTERVENTIONS: Resection was performed to correct the polydactyly. At age 2 
years umbilical hernia, adenoid surgery and ventilatory tubes surgery were 
performed. Renal biopsy confirmed interstitial fibrosis and focally accentuated 
mild tubular atrophy with focal tubular hypertrophy, compatible with the 
clinical suspicion of Joubert syndrome. Congenital hip dislocation surgery was 
performed. The patient underwent surgery for correction of concomitant divergent 
strabismus and continued with glasses for astigmatism and hyperopia.
OUTCOMES: Sanger sequencing confirmed the patient´s results and the father was 
found to be a carrier of RPGRIP1L (NM_015272.2) c.697A > T (p. Lys233Ter) and 
the mother and maternal grandmother as carriers of RPGRIP1L (NM_015272.2) 
c.3545del (p.Pro1182LeufsTer25). RPGRIP1L:c.3545del novel variant is a deletion 
which changes the reading frame, altering the RPGR1_C terminal domain and giving 
rise to an incomplete protein whose functions will be altered.
CONCLUSION: This is the first genetically confirmed case of JS in Colombia, the 
first carrier of biallelic RPGRIP1L gene mutations with hip dislocation and 
incomplete glottic closure and the first report of the novel c.3545del likely 
pathogenic variant causing JS.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000035600
PMCID: PMC10681469
PMID: 38013309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.