---
reference_id: "PMID:19364190"
title: "The benefits of pre- and post-challenge urine heavy metal testing: Part 1."
authors:
- Crinnion WJ
journal: Altern Med Rev
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The benefits of pre- and post-challenge urine heavy metal testing: Part 1.
**Authors:** Crinnion WJ
**Journal:** Altern Med Rev (2009)

## Content

1. Altern Med Rev. 2009 Mar;14(1):3-8.

The benefits of pre- and post-challenge urine heavy metal testing: Part 1.

Crinnion WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Medicine, Southwest College of Naturopathic Medicine, USA. 
w.crinnion@scnm.edu

Measuring urine heavy metals is an accepted method for assessing the presence of 
these toxins in an individual. A random sample (without a flushing agent) is 
excellent for showing current exposures because it reflects the level of heavy 
metals in the bloodstream during the hours immediately before bladder voiding. A 
sample taken after using a heavy-metal-mobilizing agent provides a reflection of 
total body burden. By utilizing both pre- and post-flush testing, the clinician 
gains information that cannot be acquired by other means, including 
identification of current exposures to lead and mercury - critical for proper 
treatment. Conducting pre-flush testing is also currently the clinician's only 
means of identifying cadmium toxicity. In addition, pre- and post-challenge 
testing allows the clinician to identify which chelating agent is the most 
effective for the patient; and if oral agents are employed, possible absorption 
problems can be identified. Since these benefits are not realized with only 
post-flush testing, it is recommended that clinicians test both before and after 
a chelation challenge.

PMID: 19364190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]