---
reference_id: "PMID:37546505"
title: "Whipple's Disease; An Overlooked Diagnosis."
authors:
- Motwade N Kerollos K
- Osman Taha B
journal: Middle East J Dig Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.34172/mejdd.2023.333
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple's Disease; An Overlooked Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Motwade N Kerollos K, Osman Taha B
**Journal:** Middle East J Dig Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.34172/mejdd.2023.333](https://doi.org/10.34172/mejdd.2023.333)

## Content

1. Middle East J Dig Dis. 2023 Apr;15(2):136-138. doi: 10.34172/mejdd.2023.333. 
Epub 2023 Apr 30.

Whipple's Disease; An Overlooked Diagnosis.

Motwade N Kerollos K(1), Osman Taha B(2).

Author information:
(1)Loyola University Medical Center, Illinois, USA.
(2)Assiut University Hospitals, Assiut, Egypt.

Whipple disease is a rare multisystem inflammatory disease. Because fewer than 
1000 reported cases have been described, clinical experience with this disorder 
is sparse. We are reporting a case of a 46-year-old man who presented with 
fever, weight loss, and polyarthralgia for 2 months, and 1 month of diarrhea. 
The patient was thoroughly investigated for collagen diseases and COVID-19, with 
no definite diagnosis. A therapeutic trial by immunosuppressive drugs provided 
partial remission followed by a marked rebound of the symptoms. His occult blood 
in stool was positive and subsequent upper endoscopy with proximal small 
intestinal biopsies showed the pathological features of Whipple's disease. The 
patient showed a dramatic improvement following treatment with ceftriaxone and 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Despite the rarity of Whipple's disease, its 
course mimics many rheumatological diseases, inflammatory bowel disease, and 
COVID-19 disease. It should always be a part of the differential diagnosis of 
obscure polyarthralgia and chronic diarrhea.

© 2023 Middle East Journal of Digestive Diseases.

DOI: 10.34172/mejdd.2023.333
PMCID: PMC10404087
PMID: 37546505

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors declare no 
conflict of interest related to this work.