---
reference_id: "PMID:35869935"
title: Pathogenic variants identified using whole-exome sequencing in Chinese patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia.
authors:
- Ye Y
- Huang Q
- Chen L
- Yuan F
- Liu S
- Zhang X
- Chen R
- Fu Y
- Yue Y
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62912
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic variants identified using whole-exome sequencing in Chinese patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Ye Y, Huang Q, Chen L, Yuan F, Liu S, Zhang X, Chen R, Fu Y, Yue Y
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62912](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62912)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 Oct;188(10):3024-3031. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62912. Epub 
2022 Jul 23.

Pathogenic variants identified using whole-exome sequencing in Chinese patients 
with primary ciliary dyskinesia.

Ye Y(1), Huang Q(1), Chen L(2), Yuan F(1), Liu S(1), Zhang X(1), Chen R(1)(3), 
Fu Y(1), Yue Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Institute of Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Southern University of Science and Technology, The Second Clinical Medical 
College of Jinan University, Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
China.
(2)Clinical Centre, The Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, 
Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Respiration Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital 
Of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

The genetic factors contributing to primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), a rare 
autosomal recessive disorder, remain elusive for ~20%-35% of patients with 
complex and abnormal clinical phenotypes. Our study aimed to identify causative 
variants of PCD-associated pathogenic candidate genes using whole-exome 
sequencing (WES). All patients were diagnosed with PCD based on clinical 
phenotype or transmission electron microscopy images of cilia. WES and 
bioinformatic analysis were then conducted on patients with PCD. Identified 
candidate variants were validated by Sanger sequencing. Pathogenicity of 
candidate variants was then evaluated using in silico software and the American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) database. In total, 13 rare 
variants were identified in patients with PCD, among which were three homozygous 
causative variants (including one splicing variant) in the PCD-associated genes 
CCDC40 and DNAI1. Moreover, two stop-gain heterozygous variants of DNAAF3 and 
DNAH1 were classified as pathogenic variants based on the ACMG criteria. This 
study identified novel potential pathogenic genetic factors associated with PCD. 
Noteworthy, the patients with PCD carried multiple rare causative gene variants, 
thereby suggesting that known causative genes along with other functional genes 
should be considered for such heterogeneous genetic disorders.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62912
PMID: 35869935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]