---
reference_id: "PMID:38058750"
title: A Mild Skeletal Dysplasia Caused by a Biallelic Missense Variant in the SLC35D1 Gene.
authors:
- Esen TE
- Uzun ÖÜ
- Ceylan AC
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1159/000530798
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Mild Skeletal Dysplasia Caused by a Biallelic Missense Variant in the SLC35D1 Gene.
**Authors:** Esen TE, Uzun ÖÜ, Ceylan AC
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000530798](https://doi.org/10.1159/000530798)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2023 Dec;14(6):498-503. doi: 10.1159/000530798. Epub 2023 Jun
7.

A Mild Skeletal Dysplasia Caused by a Biallelic Missense Variant in the SLC35D1 
Gene.

Esen TE(1), Uzun ÖÜ(2), Ceylan AC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Metabolism, Kocaeli University School of Medicine, 
İzmit, Turkey.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara Yıldırım Beyazit University, Ankara, 
Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Biallelic variants in the SCL35D1 gene have been originally 
associated with a severe skeletal dysplasia called "Schneckenbecken dysplasia" 
because of the resemblance of the pelvic shape to a snail. More recently, 
SLC35D1 variants have been associated with much milder phenotypes of skeletal 
dysplasia. Our report describes one such individual with a novel SLC35D1 
variant.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 17-year-old male with a coarse face and short stature was 
referred to our clinic. On his radiographic imaging, shortness of the long bones 
and metaphyseal flaring were detected. Using a clinical exome panel, we 
discovered a novel homozygous missense variant in the SLC35D1 gene, c.899G>T 
(p.Gly300Val).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a biallelic variant that was causative for a mild 
skeletal dysplasia and showed its phenotypic effects. Our observation confirms 
the existence of nonlethal skeletal dysplasias associated with biallelic SLC35D1 
variants and suggests the existence of a phenotypic spectrum.

© 2023 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000530798
PMCID: PMC10697730
PMID: 38058750

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare not conflict of interest.