---
reference_id: "PMID:31768631"
title: "Aortic involvement in relapsing polychondritis: case-based review."
authors:
- Erdogan M
- Esatoglu SN
- Hatemi G
- Hamuryudan V
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-019-04468-5
keywords:
- Adult
- Aortic Aneurysm/diagnostic imaging
- Aortic Valve/diagnostic imaging
- Aortitis/diagnostic imaging
- Computed Tomography Angiography/methods
- "Cyclophosphamide/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Fluorodeoxyglucose F18
- Humans
- Infliximab/therapeutic use
- "Methylprednisolone/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Polychondritis, Relapsing/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Positron Emission Tomography Computed Tomography
- "Prednisolone/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aortic involvement in relapsing polychondritis: case-based review.
**Authors:** Erdogan M, Esatoglu SN, Hatemi G, Hamuryudan V
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-019-04468-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-019-04468-5)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2021 Apr;41(4):827-837. doi: 10.1007/s00296-019-04468-5. Epub 
2019 Nov 25.

Aortic involvement in relapsing polychondritis: case-based review.

Erdogan M(1), Esatoglu SN(1), Hatemi G(1), Hamuryudan V(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Cerrahpasa Medical 
School, Istanbul University - Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa, 34998, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Cerrahpasa Medical 
School, Istanbul University - Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa, 34998, Istanbul, Turkey. 
vedathamuryudan@yahoo.com.

Relapsing polychondritis is a systemic inflammatory disease that mainly affects 
ears, nose, eyes, joints, and large airway. Relapsing polychondritis may also 
affect cardiac valves and large vessels with the aorta being most frequently 
involved. We conducted a systematic literature review to delineate the clinical 
characteristics, treatment, and outcome of relapsing polychondritis patients 
with aortic involvement including thoracic and abdominal aorta, aortic valve, 
and coronary arteries. 113 patients reported in 85 manuscripts were retrieved 
through the systematic literature search and references of the selected 
manuscripts. With the addition of a patient from our center, a total of 114 
patients were included in the analyses. Aortic vessel involvement was the 
predominant type of involvement that was identified in 93 (82%) patients, while 
aortic valve involvement was identified in 41 patients (36%). The median age at 
aortic involvement was 37 years [IQR: 30-53] with a delay of 5 years [IQR: 1-8] 
between first relapsing polychondritis symptom and aortic involvement. Nineteen 
percent of the patients were asymptomatic at the time of aortic involvement 
diagnosis. The initial treatment was immunosuppressives in 41 patients (56%) and 
surgery in 28 patients (38%). The mortality ratio was 27% in a 24 month 
follow-up [IQR: 7.5-54 months]. Aortic dissection or rupture was the most 
frequent causes of mortality. Concomitant coronary artery involvement suggested 
a worse outcome. Aortic involvement in relapsing polychondritis is a mortal 
complication despite medical and surgical treatments. It may be asymptomatic in 
19% of the patients which warrants the importance of screening.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-019-04468-5
PMID: 31768631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]