---
reference_id: "PMID:36289483"
title: "Educating physicians on strong opioids by descriptive versus simulated-experience formats: a randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- Wegwarth O
- Spies C
- Ludwig WD
- Donner-Banzhoff N
- Jonitz G
- Hertwig R
journal: BMC Med Educ
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12909-022-03797-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Educating physicians on strong opioids by descriptive versus simulated-experience formats: a randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** Wegwarth O, Spies C, Ludwig WD, Donner-Banzhoff N, Jonitz G, Hertwig R
**Journal:** BMC Med Educ (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12909-022-03797-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-022-03797-7)

## Content

1. BMC Med Educ. 2022 Oct 26;22(1):741. doi: 10.1186/s12909-022-03797-7.

Educating physicians on strong opioids by descriptive versus 
simulated-experience formats: a randomized controlled trial.

Wegwarth O(1)(2), Spies C(3), Ludwig WD(4), Donner-Banzhoff N(5), Jonitz G(6), 
Hertwig R(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Adaptive Rationality, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Lentzeallee 94, 14195, Berlin, Germany. wegwarth@mpib-berlin.mpg.de.
(2)Heisenberg Chair for Medical Risk Literacy and Evidence-Based Decisions, 
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 
wegwarth@mpib-berlin.mpg.de.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Operative Intensive Care, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Drug Commission of the German Medical Association, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Primary Care, Phillips University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(6)Berlin Chamber of Physicians, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Center for Adaptive Rationality, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Lentzeallee 94, 14195, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Long-term prescriptions of strong opioids for chronic noncancer 
pain-which are not supported by scientific evidence-suggest miscalibrated risk 
perceptions among those who prescribe, dispense, and take opioids. Because risk 
perceptions and behaviors can differ depending on whether people learn about 
risks through description or experience, we investigated the effects of 
descriptive versus simulated-experience educative formats on physicians' risk 
perceptions of strong opioids and their prescription behavior for managing 
chronic noncancer pain.
METHODS: Three hundred general practitioners and 300 pain specialists in 
Germany-enrolled separately in two independent exploratory randomized controlled 
online trials-were randomly assigned to either a descriptive format (fact box) 
or a simulated-experience format (interactive simulation).
PRIMARY ENDPOINTS: Objective risk perception (numerical estimates of opioids' 
benefits and harms), actual prescriptions of seven therapy options for managing 
chronic pain.
SECONDARY ENDPOINT: Implementation of intended prescriptions of seven therapy 
options for managing chronic pain.
RESULTS: Both formats improved the proportion of correct numerical estimates of 
strong opioids' benefits and harms immediately after intervention, with no 
notable differences between formats. Compared to description, simulated 
experience led to significantly lower reported actual prescription rates for 
strong and/or weak opioids, and was more effective at increasing prescription 
rates for non-drug-based therapies (e.g., means of opioid reduction) from 
baseline to follow-up for both general practitioners and pain specialists. 
Simulated experience also resulted in a higher implementation of intended 
behavior for some drug-based and non-drug-based therapies.
CONCLUSIONS: The two formats, which recruit different cognitive processes, may 
serve different risk-communication goals: If the goal is to improve exact risk 
perception, descriptive and simulated-experience formats are likely to be 
equally suitable. If, however, the goal is to boost less risky prescription 
habits, simulated experience may be the better choice.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: DRKS00020358 (German Clinical Trials Register, first 
registration: 07/01/2020).

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12909-022-03797-7
PMCID: PMC9607791
PMID: 36289483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests for the submitted work.