---
reference_id: "PMID:18528447"
title: "[Infections of the central nervous system in emergency department]."
authors:
- Gastón I
- Muruzábal J
- Quesada P
- Maraví E
journal: An Sist Sanit Navar
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Infections of the central nervous system in emergency department].
**Authors:** Gastón I, Muruzábal J, Quesada P, Maraví E
**Journal:** An Sist Sanit Navar (2008)

## Content

1. An Sist Sanit Navar. 2008;31 Suppl 1:99-113.

[Infections of the central nervous system in emergency department].

[Article in Spanish]

Gastón I(1), Muruzábal J, Quesada P, Maraví E.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain. 
igastonz@cfnavarra.es

Infections of the central nervous system are frequent diseases in emergency 
care. They can have a bacterial, parasitic or viral origin. Initial symptoms can 
be non-specific, which can complicate and delay diagnosis, hence the extreme 
importance of all the information that can be obtained through anamnesis and 
physical exploration, with frequent complementary explorations. In the last 
hundred years, with the introduction of antibiotic drugs, there has been a 
significant fall in mortality secondary to meningoencephalitis, but in spite of 
that they continue to provoke high morbidity and mortality. Other phenomena, 
such as vaccination campaigns, migratory movements, infection by HIV and other 
states of immunosuppression, have given rise to important epidemiological 
changes such as the virtual disappearance of some infections or the appearance 
of others that rarely existed previously. The list of potential infections of 
the central nervous system is extensive, which is why in this review we set out, 
from the clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic point of view, those that are most 
frequent in our environment and some that, although very infrequent, might 
require emergency attention due to their severity.

PMID: 18528447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]