---
reference_id: "PMID:20301682"
title: Uncomplicated (Pure) Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Hedera P
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uncomplicated (Pure) Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Hedera P

## Content

1. Uncomplicated (Pure) Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview.

Hedera P(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Aug 15 [updated 2025 Jun 5].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. Briefly describe the clinical 
characteristics of uncomplicated (pure) hereditary spastic paraplegia; 2.. 
Review the genetic causes of uncomplicated hereditary spastic paraplegia; 3.. 
Review the differential diagnosis of uncomplicated hereditary spastic 
paraplegia, which includes complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia with a 
focus on treatable genetic disorders; 4.. Provide an evaluation strategy to 
identify the genetic cause of uncomplicated hereditary spastic paraplegia in a 
proband (when possible); 5.. Review management of uncomplicated hereditary 
spastic paraplegia; 6.. Inform genetic counseling of family members of an 
individual with uncomplicated hereditary spastic paraplegia.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301682