---
reference_id: PMID:39226531
title: "Photodynamic therapy in dermatology: established and new indications."
authors:
- Balakirski G
- Lehmann P
- Szeimies RM
- Hofmann SC
journal: J Dtsch Dermatol Ges
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/ddg.15464
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Photodynamic therapy in dermatology: established and new indications.
**Authors:** Balakirski G, Lehmann P, Szeimies RM, Hofmann SC
**Journal:** J Dtsch Dermatol Ges (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ddg.15464](https://doi.org/10.1111/ddg.15464)

## Content

1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2024 Dec;22(12):1651-1662. doi: 10.1111/ddg.15464. Epub 
2024 Sep 3.

Photodynamic therapy in dermatology: established and new indications.

Balakirski G(1), Lehmann P(#)(1), Szeimies RM(2), Hofmann SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Dermatology, Allergology and Dermatosurgery, Helios University 
Hospital Wuppertal, University of Witten/Herdecke, Wuppertal, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Klinikum Vest GmbH, 
Recklinghausen, Academic Teaching Hospital of Ruhr University Bochum, 
Recklinghausen, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is internationally established as an approved 
treatment option for in situ forms of keratinocytic skin cancer (actinic 
keratoses, Bowen's disease, basal cell carcinoma). For these indications, there 
are standardized treatment protocols using narrow-spectrum light sources or 
(artificial) daylight, the use of which is associated with successful healing, a 
low rate of lesion recurrence, and a very good cosmetic result. Daylight PDT is 
superior to conventional PDT in terms of significantly less pain and associated 
higher patient acceptance. Newer indications, for which no approval has yet been 
granted, but which nevertheless have sufficient evidence of efficacy according 
to the study situation, are inflammatory (lichen sclerosus, acne) and infectious 
dermatoses (viral warts, cutaneous leishmaniasis, atypical mycobacteriosis). In 
addition, PDT is increasingly being used in aesthetic dermatology with the aim 
of skin rejuvenation.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft 
published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH on behalf of Deutsche Dermatologische Gesellschaft.

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.15464
PMCID: PMC11626226
PMID: 39226531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.M.S. received grants from Almirall, 
Biofrontera, Dr. Wolff Group, Galderma, Leo Pharma, Novartis, and photonamic for 
clinical studies, honoraria for advisor and lecturer activities from Abbvie, 
Almirall, Eli Lilly, Galderma, Janssen, and Leo Pharma, and is Vice‐President of 
the EURO‐PDT Society.