---
reference_id: "PMID:19541688"
title: Somatosensory temporal discrimination in patients with primary focal dystonia.
authors:
- Scontrini A
- Conte A
- Defazio G
- Fiorio M
- Fabbrini G
- Suppa A
- Tinazzi M
- Berardelli A
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.178236
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Blepharospasm/physiopathology
- "Discrimination, Psychological/physiology"
- Dystonic Disorders/physiopathology
- Female
- Hand/physiopathology
- Humans
- Laryngismus/physiopathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- ROC Curve
- Torticollis/physiopathology
- Touch/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Somatosensory temporal discrimination in patients with primary focal dystonia.
**Authors:** Scontrini A, Conte A, Defazio G, Fiorio M, Fabbrini G, Suppa A, Tinazzi M, Berardelli A
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp.2009.178236](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.2009.178236)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009 Dec;80(12):1315-9. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2009.178236. Epub 2009 Jun 18.

Somatosensory temporal discrimination in patients with primary focal dystonia.

Scontrini A(1), Conte A, Defazio G, Fiorio M, Fabbrini G, Suppa A, Tinazzi M, 
Berardelli A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Sapienza, University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy.

PURPOSES: To determine whether somatosensory temporal discrimination will 
reliably detect subclinical sensory impairment in patients with various forms of 
primary focal dystonia.
METHODS: The somatosensory temporal discrimination threshold (STDT) was tested 
in 82 outpatients affected by cranial, cervical, laryngeal and hand dystonia. 
Results were compared with those for 61 healthy subjects and 26 patients with 
hemifacial spasm, a non-dystonic disorder. STDT was tested by delivering paired 
stimuli starting with an interstimulus interval of 0 ms followed by a 
progressively increasing interstimulus interval.
RESULTS: STDT was abnormal in all the different forms of primary focal dystonias 
in all three body regions (eye, hand and neck), regardless of the distribution 
and severity of motor symptoms. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis 
calculated in the three body regions yielded high diagnostic sensitivity and 
specificity for STDT abnormalities.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide definitive evidence that STDT abnormalities 
are a generalised feature of patients with primary focal dystonias and are a 
valid tool for screening subclinical sensory abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.178236
PMID: 19541688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]