---
reference_id: "PMID:30624615"
title: Adenylyl Cyclase 6 Expression Is Essential for Cholera Toxin-Induced Diarrhea.
authors:
- Fenton RA
- Murali SK
- Kaji I
- Akiba Y
- Kaunitz JD
- Kristensen TB
- Poulsen SB
- Dominguez Rieg JA
- Rieg T
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiz013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenylyl Cyclase 6 Expression Is Essential for Cholera Toxin-Induced Diarrhea.
**Authors:** Fenton RA, Murali SK, Kaji I, Akiba Y, Kaunitz JD, Kristensen TB, Poulsen SB, Dominguez Rieg JA, Rieg T
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiz013](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiz013)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2019 Oct 22;220(11):1719-1728. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiz013.

Adenylyl Cyclase 6 Expression Is Essential for Cholera Toxin-Induced Diarrhea.

Fenton RA(1), Murali SK(1)(2), Kaji I(3)(4), Akiba Y(3)(4), Kaunitz JD(3)(4), 
Kristensen TB(1), Poulsen SB(1), Dominguez Rieg JA(2), Rieg T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Denmark.
(2)University of South Florida, Tampa.
(3)Greater Los Angeles VA Healthcare System, California.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2019 Oct 22;220(11):1711-1712. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiz014.

BACKGROUND: Cholera toxin (CT)-induced diarrhea is mediated by cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP)-mediated active Cl- secretion via the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Although the constitutive activation 
of adenylyl cyclase (AC) in response to CT is due to adenosine diphosphate 
ribosylation of the small G protein α-subunit activating CFTR with consequent 
secretory diarrhea, the AC isoform(s) involved remain unknown.
METHODS: We generated intestinal epithelial cell-specific adenylyl cyclase 6 
(AC6) knockout mice to study its role in CT-induced diarrhea.
RESULTS: AC6 messenger RNA levels were the highest of all 9 membrane-bound AC 
isoforms in mouse intestinal epithelial cells. Intestinal epithelial-specific 
AC6 knockout mice (AC6loxloxVillinCre) had undetectable AC6 levels in small 
intestinal and colonic epithelial cells. No significant differences in fluid and 
food intake, plasma electrolytes, intestinal/colon anatomy and morphology, or 
fecal water content were observed between genotypes. Nevertheless, CT-induced 
fluid accumulation in vivo was completely absent in AC6loxloxVillinCre mice, 
associated with a lack of forskolin- and CT-induced changes in the short-circuit 
current (ISC) of the intestinal mucosa, impaired cAMP generation in acutely 
isolated small intestinal epithelial cells, and significantly impaired apical 
CFTR levels in response to forskolin.
CONCLUSIONS: AC6 is a novel target for the treatment of CT-induced diarrhea.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiz013
PMCID: PMC6941499
PMID: 30624615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]