---
reference_id: "PMID:36720320"
title: Regulation of plasmalogen biosynthesis in mammalian cells and tissues.
authors:
- Honsho M
- Fujiki Y
journal: Brain Res Bull
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2023.01.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulation of plasmalogen biosynthesis in mammalian cells and tissues.
**Authors:** Honsho M, Fujiki Y
**Journal:** Brain Res Bull (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.brainresbull.2023.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2023.01.011)

## Content

1. Brain Res Bull. 2023 Mar;194:118-123. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2023.01.011.
 Epub 2023 Jan 28.

Regulation of plasmalogen biosynthesis in mammalian cells and tissues.

Honsho M(1), Fujiki Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroinflammation and Brain Fatigue Science, Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address: 
honsho.masanori.707@m.kyushu-u.ac.jp.
(2)Institute of Rheological Functions of Food-Kyushu University Collaboration 
Program, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan; Graduate School of Science, 
University of Hyogo, Hyogo, Japan. Electronic address: yfujiki@kyudai.jp.

Plasmalogens are a unique family of cellular glycerophospholipids that contain a 
vinyl-ether bond. Synthesis of plasmalogens is initiated in peroxisomes and 
completed in the endoplasmic reticulum. The absence of plasmalogens in several 
organs of patients with deficiency in peroxisome biogenesis suggests that de 
novo synthesis of plasmalogens contributes significantly to plasmalogen 
homeostasis in humans. Plasmalogen biosynthesis is spatiotemporally regulated by 
a feedback mechanism that senses the amount of plasmalogens in the inner leaflet 
of the plasma membrane and regulates the stability of fatty acyl-CoA reductase 1 
(FAR1), the rate-limiting enzyme for plasmalogen biosynthesis. Dysregulation of 
plasmalogen synthesis impairs cholesterol synthesis in cells and brain, 
resulting in the reduced expression of genes such as mRNA encoding myelin basic 
protein, a phenotype found in the cerebellum of plasmalogen-deficient mice. In 
this review, we summarize the current knowledge of molecular mechanisms 
underlying the regulation of plasmalogen biosynthesis and the link between 
plasmalogen homeostasis and cholesterol biosynthesis, and address the 
pathogenesis of impaired plasmalogen homeostasis in rodent and humans.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2023.01.011
PMID: 36720320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None.