---
reference_id: "PMID:20660402"
title: Molecular architecture of the Goodpasture autoantigen in anti-GBM nephritis.
authors:
- Pedchenko V
- Bondar O
- Fogo AB
- Vanacore R
- Voziyan P
- Kitching AR
- Wieslander J
- Kashtan C
- Borza DB
- Neilson EG
- Wilson CB
- Hudson BG
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0910500
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease/immunology
- "Antibodies/blood, chemistry"
- "Autoantibodies/chemistry, immunology, metabolism"
- "Autoantigens/blood, chemistry"
- "Binding Sites, Antibody"
- "Collagen Type IV/chemistry, immunology, metabolism"
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Epitope Mapping
- "Epitopes/chemistry, metabolism"
- Female
- Glomerular Basement Membrane/immunology
- Humans
- "Isoantibodies/chemistry, metabolism"
- Kidney Glomerulus/immunology
- Kidney Transplantation/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nephritis/immunology
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/immunology, surgery"
- Postoperative Complications/immunology
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Isoforms
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular architecture of the Goodpasture autoantigen in anti-GBM nephritis.
**Authors:** Pedchenko V, Bondar O, Fogo AB, Vanacore R, Voziyan P, Kitching AR, Wieslander J, Kashtan C, Borza DB, Neilson EG, Wilson CB, Hudson BG
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa0910500](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0910500)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 22;363(4):343-54. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0910500.

Molecular architecture of the Goodpasture autoantigen in anti-GBM nephritis.

Pedchenko V(1), Bondar O, Fogo AB, Vanacore R, Voziyan P, Kitching AR, 
Wieslander J, Kashtan C, Borza DB, Neilson EG, Wilson CB, Hudson BG.

Author information:
(1)Center for Matrix Biology, Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 22;363(4):388-91. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1006301.
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 28;363(18):1770; author reply 1771. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1009688.

BACKGROUND: In Goodpasture's disease, circulating autoantibodies bind to the 
noncollagenous-1 (NC1) domain of type IV collagen in the glomerular basement 
membrane (GBM). The specificity and molecular architecture of epitopes of 
tissue-bound autoantibodies are unknown. Alport's post-transplantation 
nephritis, which is mediated by alloantibodies against the GBM, occurs after 
kidney transplantation in some patients with Alport's syndrome. We compared the 
conformations of the antibody epitopes in Goodpasture's disease and Alport's 
post-transplantation nephritis with the intention of finding clues to the 
pathogenesis of anti-GBM glomerulonephritis.
METHODS: We used an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to determine the 
specificity of circulating autoantibodies and kidney-bound antibodies to NC1 
domains. Circulating antibodies were analyzed in 57 patients with Goodpasture's 
disease, and kidney-bound antibodies were analyzed in 14 patients with 
Goodpasture's disease and 2 patients with Alport's post-transplantation 
nephritis. The molecular architecture of key epitope regions was deduced with 
the use of chimeric molecules and a three-dimensional model of the alpha345NC1 
hexamer.
RESULTS: In patients with Goodpasture's disease, both autoantibodies to the 
alpha3NC1 monomer and antibodies to the alpha5NC1 monomer (and fewer to the 
alpha4NC1 monomer) were bound in the kidneys and lungs, indicating roles for the 
alpha3NC1 and alpha5NC1 monomers as autoantigens. High antibody titers at 
diagnosis of anti-GBM disease were associated with ultimate loss of renal 
function. The antibodies bound to distinct epitopes encompassing region E(A) in 
the alpha5NC1 monomer and regions E(A) and E(B) in the alpha3NC1 monomer, but 
they did not bind to the native cross-linked alpha345NC1 hexamer. In contrast, 
in patients with Alport's post-transplantation nephritis, alloantibodies bound 
to the E(A) region of the alpha5NC1 subunit in the intact hexamer, and binding 
decreased on dissociation.
CONCLUSIONS: The development of Goodpasture's disease may be considered an 
autoimmune "conformeropathy" that involves perturbation of the quaternary 
structure of the alpha345NC1 hexamer, inducing a pathogenic conformational 
change in the alpha3NC1 and alpha5NC1 subunits, which in turn elicits an 
autoimmune response. (Funded by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases.)

2010 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0910500
PMCID: PMC4144421
PMID: 20660402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]