---
reference_id: "PMID:16352814"
title: ATRA resolves the differentiation block in t(15;17) acute myeloid leukemia by restoring PU.1 expression.
authors:
- Mueller BU
- Pabst T
- Fos J
- Petkovic V
- Fey MF
- Asou N
- Buergi U
- Tenen DG
journal: Blood
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-07-3068
keywords:
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Cell Differentiation/drug effects, genetics"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/genetics"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Leukemic/drug effects"
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Neutrophils/metabolism, pathology"
- Octamer Transcription Factor-1/metabolism
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Trans-Activators/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Translocation, Genetic/genetics"
- Tretinoin/pharmacology
- Proto-Oncogene Protein Spi-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ATRA resolves the differentiation block in t(15;17) acute myeloid leukemia by restoring PU.1 expression.
**Authors:** Mueller BU, Pabst T, Fos J, Petkovic V, Fey MF, Asou N, Buergi U, Tenen DG
**Journal:** Blood (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2005-07-3068](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2005-07-3068)

## Content

1. Blood. 2006 Apr 15;107(8):3330-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-07-3068. Epub 2005
Dec  13.

ATRA resolves the differentiation block in t(15;17) acute myeloid leukemia by
restoring PU.1 expression.

Mueller BU(1), Pabst T, Fos J, Petkovic V, Fey MF, Asou N, Buergi U, Tenen DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.
beatrice.mueller@insel.ch

Tightly regulated expression of the transcription factor PU.1 is crucial for
normal hematopoiesis. PU.1 knockdown mice develop acute myeloid leukemia (AML),
and PU.1 mutations have been observed in some populations of patients with AML.
Here we found that conditional expression of promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic
acid receptor alpha (PML-RARA), the protein encoded by the t(15;17)
translocation found in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), suppressed PU.1
expression, while treatment of APL cell lines and primary cells with all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) restored PU.1 expression and induced neutrophil
differentiation. ATRA-induced activation was mediated by a region in the PU.1
promoter to which CEBPB and OCT-1 binding were induced. Finally, conditional
expression of PU.1 in human APL cells was sufficient to trigger neutrophil
differentiation, whereas reduction of PU.1 by small interfering RNA (siRNA)
blocked ATRA-induced neutrophil differentiation. This is the first report to
show that PU.1 is suppressed in acute promyelocytic leukemia, and that ATRA
restores PU.1 expression in cells harboring t(15;17).

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-07-3068
PMCID: PMC1895760
PMID: 16352814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
