---
reference_id: "PMID:24798461"
title: "Exome sequencing identifies compound heterozygous mutations in C12orf57 in two siblings with severe intellectual disability, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, chorioretinal coloboma, and intractable seizures."
authors:
- Platzer K
- Hüning I
- Obieglo C
- Schwarzmayr T
- Gabriel R
- Strom TM
- Gillessen-Kaesbach G
- Kaiser FJ
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36592
keywords:
- Child
- "Coloboma/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Congenital Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- Corpus Callosum/pathology
- Exome
- Facies
- Female
- Heterozygote
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Seizures/diagnosis, genetics"
- Siblings
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing identifies compound heterozygous mutations in C12orf57 in two siblings with severe intellectual disability, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, chorioretinal coloboma, and intractable seizures.
**Authors:** Platzer K, Hüning I, Obieglo C, Schwarzmayr T, Gabriel R, Strom TM, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Kaiser FJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36592](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36592)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Aug;164A(8):1976-80. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36592. Epub
2014  May 5.

Exome sequencing identifies compound heterozygous mutations in C12orf57 in two 
siblings with severe intellectual disability, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, 
chorioretinal coloboma, and intractable seizures.

Platzer K(1), Hüning I, Obieglo C, Schwarzmayr T, Gabriel R, Strom TM, 
Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Kaiser FJ.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.

In patients with genetically heterogeneous disorders such as intellectual 
disability or epilepsy, exome sequencing is a powerful tool to elucidate the 
underlying genetic cause. Homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations in 
C12orf57 have recently been described to cause an autosomal recessive syndromic 
form of intellectual disability, including agenesis/hypoplasia of the corpus 
callosum, optic coloboma, and intractable seizures. Here, we report on two 
siblings from nonconsanguineous parents harboring two compound heterozygous 
loss-of-function mutations in C12orf57 identified by exome sequencing, including 
a novel nonsense mutation, and review the patients described in the literature.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36592
PMID: 24798461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]