---
reference_id: "PMID:11404606"
title: "The silent sinus syndrome: a case series and literature review."
authors:
- Vander Meer JB
- Harris G
- Toohill RJ
- Smith TL
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1097/00005537-200106000-00008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The silent sinus syndrome: a case series and literature review.
**Authors:** Vander Meer JB, Harris G, Toohill RJ, Smith TL
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00005537-200106000-00008](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005537-200106000-00008)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2001 Jun;111(6):975-8. doi: 10.1097/00005537-200106000-00008.

The silent sinus syndrome: a case series and literature review.

Vander Meer JB(1), Harris G, Toohill RJ, Smith TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin 53226, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to describe the clinical and pathologic 
features of a form of chronic maxillary atelectasis referred to as the silent 
sinus syndrome, which is characterized by progressive enophthalmos secondary to 
maxillary collapse resulting from maxillary sinus hypoventilation.
METHODS: A retrospective medical record analysis was carried out to identify 
patients with enophthalmos secondary to maxillary collapse. Clinical records, 
including ophthalmology and otolaryngology evaluations as well as computed 
tomography scans and operative reports, were carefully examined. A complete 
literature review for relevant studies was performed to examine possible 
pathophysiology and similar cases.
RESULTS: Four patients with enophthalmos and asymptomatic maxillary sinus 
disease were identified. On computed tomography, all four of the patients had 
opacified, partially collapsed maxillary sinuses with osteopenia of the sinus 
walls and orbital floor displacement resulting in enophthalmos. All four 
underwent successful functional endoscopic sinus surgery and transconjunctival 
orbital floor repair.
CONCLUSION: In some instances, chronic maxillary atelectasis can present with 
enophthalmos secondary to collapse of the maxillary sinus. For reasons that are 
unclear, the sinus component of the disease remains asymptomatic and is 
discovered only after thorough evaluation of the enophthalmos.

DOI: 10.1097/00005537-200106000-00008
PMID: 11404606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]