---
reference_id: "PMID:20402580"
title: Thymic remodeling associated with hyperplasia in myasthenia gravis.
authors:
- Le Panse R
- Bismuth J
- Cizeron-Clairac G
- Weiss JM
- Cufi P
- Dartevelle P
- De Rosbo NK
- Berrih-Aknin S
journal: Autoimmunity
year: '2010'
doi: 10.3109/08916930903563491
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thymic remodeling associated with hyperplasia in myasthenia gravis.
**Authors:** Le Panse R, Bismuth J, Cizeron-Clairac G, Weiss JM, Cufi P, Dartevelle P, De Rosbo NK, Berrih-Aknin S
**Journal:** Autoimmunity (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3109/08916930903563491](https://doi.org/10.3109/08916930903563491)

## Content

1. Autoimmunity. 2010 Aug;43(5-6):401-12. doi: 10.3109/08916930903563491.

Thymic remodeling associated with hyperplasia in myasthenia gravis.

Le Panse R(1), Bismuth J, Cizeron-Clairac G, Weiss JM, Cufi P, Dartevelle P, De 
Rosbo NK, Berrih-Aknin S.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Marie Lannelongue, CNRS UMR 8162, 92350 Le Plessis-Robinson, France. 
rozen.lepanse@u-psud.fr

Acquired myasthenia gravis (MG), a neurological autoimmune disease, is caused by 
autoantibodies against components of the neuromuscular junction that lead to 
disabling muscle fatigability. The thymus is clearly involved in the 
pathogenesis of early-onset MG with anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies, and 
thymic hyperplasia of lympho-proliferative origin is a hallmark of the disease. 
In this review, we describe the structural and cellular changes associated with 
thymic hyperplasia, its main characteristics being the development of ectopic 
germinal centers (GCs) associated with active neoangiogenic processes, such as 
development of high endothelial venules and lymphangiogenesis. What triggers 
such thymic abnormalities in MG is not yet clear. A thymic transcriptome 
analysis has demonstrated a strong inflammatory signature in MG that could 
orchestrate the development of thymic hyperplasia. In this context, thymic 
epithelial cells (TECs) seem to play a central role, either by contributing or 
responding to the inflammatory environment and up-regulating the autoimmune 
response. In particular, MG TECs clearly overexpress various cytokines, among 
which chemokines play a crucial role in the recruitment of peripheral 
lymphocytes to the thymus via the newly expanded vessel network, thereby leading 
to the development of ectopic GCs. Clearly, a better understanding of major 
events that lead to thymic hyperplasia will help optimize strategies toward more 
specific therapy for MG.

DOI: 10.3109/08916930903563491
PMID: 20402580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]