---
reference_id: "PMID:35420684"
title: Silent Kawasaki Disease Affecting Multiple Coronary Arteries in a 39-Year-Old Egyptian Woman.
authors:
- Singab H
- Sami G
- Tag El Sabah M
journal: Tex Heart Inst J
year: '2022'
doi: 10.14503/THIJ-20-7261
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Silent Kawasaki Disease Affecting Multiple Coronary Arteries in a 39-Year-Old Egyptian Woman.
**Authors:** Singab H, Sami G, Tag El Sabah M
**Journal:** Tex Heart Inst J (2022)
**DOI:** [10.14503/THIJ-20-7261](https://doi.org/10.14503/THIJ-20-7261)

## Content

1. Tex Heart Inst J. 2022 Mar 1;49(2):e207261. doi: 10.14503/THIJ-20-7261.

Silent Kawasaki Disease Affecting Multiple Coronary Arteries in a 39-Year-Old 
Egyptian Woman.

Singab H(1), Sami G(1), Tag El Sabah M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, 
Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Department of Pathology, Misr University for Science and Technology, 6th of 
October City, Giza, Egypt.

Kawasaki disease, an acute febrile illness, can cause vasculitis in the coronary 
arteries. It is the chief acquired cause of myocardial infarction and sudden 
cardiac death in infants, children, and young adults in developed countries. We 
report a case of chronic, silent Kawasaki disease complicated by multivessel 
thrombosis in a 39-year-old Egyptian woman. The patient presented with 
progressive, unstable angina but was otherwise asymptomatic and at negligible 
risk of ischemic heart disease. Coronary angiograms showed critical arterial 
stenosis with multiple aneurysms. During revascularization surgery, the 
patient's harvested left internal mammary artery was found to have occlusive 
lesions and aneurysmal areas that made it unfit for bypass grafting, and 
subsequent histopathologic examination revealed features characteristic of 
chronic Kawasaki disease-associated systemic vasculitis. We think that this is 
only the second report of Kawasaki disease in the Arabian Mediterranean region. 
In addition to the patient's case, we discuss the epidemiology and management of 
Kawasaki disease, in hopes of increasing clinicians' awareness.

© 2022 by the Texas Heart® Institute, Houston.

DOI: 10.14503/THIJ-20-7261
PMCID: PMC9053665
PMID: 35420684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]