---
reference_id: "PMID:36672006"
title: Long-Term Seizure Outcomes and Predictors in Patients with Dysembryoplastic Neuroepithelial Tumors Associated with Epilepsy.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Hu Y
- Aihemaitiniyazi A
- Li T
- Zhou J
- Guan Y
- Qi X
- Zhang X
- Wang M
- Liu C
- Luan G
journal: Brain Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/brainsci13010024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Seizure Outcomes and Predictors in Patients with Dysembryoplastic Neuroepithelial Tumors Associated with Epilepsy.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Hu Y, Aihemaitiniyazi A, Li T, Zhou J, Guan Y, Qi X, Zhang X, Wang M, Liu C, Luan G
**Journal:** Brain Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/brainsci13010024](https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci13010024)

## Content

1. Brain Sci. 2022 Dec 22;13(1):24. doi: 10.3390/brainsci13010024.

Long-Term Seizure Outcomes and Predictors in Patients with Dysembryoplastic 
Neuroepithelial Tumors Associated with Epilepsy.

Zhang H(1), Hu Y(2), Aihemaitiniyazi A(1), Li T(1), Zhou J(1)(3), Guan Y(1)(3), 
Qi X(4), Zhang X(5), Wang M(6), Liu C(1)(3), Luan G(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100093, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Aviation General Hospital, China Medical 
University, Beijing 100012, China.
(3)Beijing Institute of Brain Disorders, Capital Medical University, Beijing 
100093, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100093, China.
(5)Department of Radiology, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100093, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100093, China.

To determine the predictors and the long-term outcomes of patients with seizures 
following surgery for dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors (DNTs); Methods: 
Clinical data were collected from medical records of consecutive patients of the 
Department of Neurosurgery of Sanbo Brain Hospital of Capital Medical University 
with a pathological diagnosis of DNT and who underwent surgery from January 2008 
to July 2021. All patients were followed up after surgery for at least one year. 
We estimated the cumulative rate of seizure recurrence-free and generated 
survival curves. A log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test and a Cox proportional hazard 
model were performed for univariate and multivariate analysis to analyze 
influential predictors; Results: 63 patients (33 males and 30 females) were 
included in this study. At the final follow-up, 49 patients (77.8%) were 
seizure-free. The cumulative rate of seizure recurrence-free was 82.5% (95% 
confidence interval (CI) 71.8-91.3%), 79.0% (95% CI 67.8-88.6%) and 76.5% (95% 
CI 64.8-87.0%) at 2, 5, and 10 years, respectively. The mean time for seizure 
recurrence-free was 6.892 ± 0.501 years (95% CI 5.91-7.87). Gross total removal 
of the tumor and a short epilepsy duration were significant predictors of 
seizure freedom. Younger age of seizure onset, bilateral interictal epileptiform 
discharges, and MRI type 3 tumors were risk factors for poor prognosis; 
Conclusions: A favorable long-term seizure outcome was observed for patients 
with DNT after surgical resection. Predictor analysis could effectively guide 
the clinical work and evaluate the prognosis of patients with DNT associated 
with epilepsy.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci13010024
PMCID: PMC9856460
PMID: 36672006

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.