---
reference_id: "PMID:16099856"
title: A mouse model of albright hereditary osteodystrophy generated by targeted disruption of exon 1 of the Gnas gene.
authors:
- Germain-Lee EL
- Schwindinger W
- Crane JL
- Zewdu R
- Zweifel LS
- Wand G
- Huso DL
- Saji M
- Ringel MD
- Levine MA
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1210/en.2005-0681
keywords:
- Adenylyl Cyclases/metabolism
- Animals
- Body Height
- Body Weight
- Bone and Bones/pathology
- Chromogranins
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Exons
- Fertility
- "Fibrous Dysplasia, Polyostotic/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Genomic Imprinting
- Humans
- Litter Size
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout/genetics"
- Parathyroid Hormone/pharmacology
- Phenotype
- Survival Analysis
- Thyrotropin/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model of albright hereditary osteodystrophy generated by targeted disruption of exon 1 of the Gnas gene.
**Authors:** Germain-Lee EL, Schwindinger W, Crane JL, Zewdu R, Zweifel LS, Wand G, Huso DL, Saji M, Ringel MD, Levine MA
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1210/en.2005-0681](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2005-0681)

## Content

1. Endocrinology. 2005 Nov;146(11):4697-709. doi: 10.1210/en.2005-0681. Epub 2005
 Aug 11.

A mouse model of albright hereditary osteodystrophy generated by targeted
disruption of exon 1 of the Gnas gene.

Germain-Lee EL(1), Schwindinger W, Crane JL, Zewdu R, Zweifel LS, Wand G, Huso
DL, Saji M, Ringel MD, Levine MA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Park Building, Suite 211, 600 North Wolfe
Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21287-2520, USA. egermain@jhmi.edu

Albright hereditary osteodystrophy is caused by heterozygous inactivating
mutations in GNAS, a gene that encodes not only the alpha-chain of Gs (Galphas),
but also NESP55 and XLalphas through use of alternative first exons. Patients
with GNAS mutations on maternally inherited alleles are resistant to multiple
hormones such as PTH, TSH, LH/FSH, GHRH, and glucagon, whose receptors are
coupled to Gs. This variant of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy is termed
pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a and is due to presumed tissue-specific paternal
imprinting of Galphas. Previous studies have shown that mice heterozygous for a
targeted disruption of exon 2 of Gnas, the murine homolog of GNAS, showed unique
phenotypes dependent on the parent of origin of the mutated allele. However,
hormone resistance occurred only when the disrupted gene was maternally
inherited. Because disruption of exon 2 is predicted to inactivate Galphas as
well as NESP55 and XLalphas, we created transgenic mice with disruption of exon
1 to investigate the effects of isolated loss of Galphas. Heterozygous mice that
inherited the disruption maternally (-m/+) exhibited PTH and TSH resistance,
whereas those with paternal inheritance (+/-p) had normal hormone
responsiveness. Heterozygous mice were shorter and, when the disrupted allele
was inherited maternally, weighed more than wild-type littermates. Galphas
protein and mRNA expression was consistent with paternal imprinting in the renal
cortex and thyroid, but there was no imprinting in renal medulla, heart, or
adipose. These findings confirm the tissue-specific paternal imprinting of GNAS
and demonstrate that Galphas deficiency alone is sufficient to account for the
hormone resistance of pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2005-0681
PMID: 16099856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
