---
reference_id: "PMID:26437121"
title: Associated extrarenal vascular diseases may complicate the treatment and outcome of renovascular hypertension.
authors:
- Peco-Antić A
- Stajić N
- Krstić Z
- Bogdanović R
- Miloševski-Lomić G
- Đukić M
- Paripović D
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/apa.13229
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Antihypertensive Agents/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Female
- "Fibromuscular Dysplasia/complications, diagnosis"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Renovascular/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Kidney Transplantation
- Male
- Nephrectomy
- "Renal Artery Obstruction/complications, diagnosis"
- Retrospective Studies
- Serbia/epidemiology
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Associated extrarenal vascular diseases may complicate the treatment and outcome of renovascular hypertension.
**Authors:** Peco-Antić A, Stajić N, Krstić Z, Bogdanović R, Miloševski-Lomić G, Đukić M, Paripović D
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/apa.13229](https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.13229)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 2016 Jan;105(1):e35-41. doi: 10.1111/apa.13229. Epub 2015 Nov
4.

Associated extrarenal vascular diseases may complicate the treatment and outcome 
of renovascular hypertension.

Peco-Antić A(1)(2), Stajić N(3), Krstić Z(1)(4), Bogdanović R(1)(3), 
Miloševski-Lomić G(2), Đukić M(1)(5), Paripović D(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical School of University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Nephrology Department, University Children's Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Institute of Mother and Child Health Care of Serbia 
'Dr Vukan Ćupić', Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)Urology Department, University Children's Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Cardiology Department, University Children's Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia.

AIM: This studied reviewed renovascular hypertension (RVH) due to renal artery 
stenosis (RAS) in two Serbian paediatric centres from 2001 to 2013.
METHODS: The patients' demographic data, underlying syndromes, blood pressure 
(BP), antihypertensive treatments and outcomes were reviewed.
RESULTS: The incidence of RVH was 1.9 per million children per year during the 
study period, and there were 25 patients with RAS, aged 10.4 ± 5.2 years. At 
presentation, their mean blood pressure (BP) standard deviation scores were 6.9 
± 3.4 systolic and 5.2 ± 2.6 diastolic. BP loads on 24-hour ambulatory BP were 
88 ± 14% systolic and 80 ± 29% diastolic. We found that 72% had fibromuscular 
dysplasia and 28% had underlying syndromes. RAS was unilateral in 64% and 
bilateral in 28%, and 8% had RAS of a single kidney. Antihypertensive treatment 
included antihypertensive drugs (100%), percutaneous transluminal angioplasty 
(92%), renal auto-transplantation (16%), surgical revascularisation (12%) and 
nephrectomy (12%). After 4.4 ± 3.6 years of follow-up, high BP was cured in 40% 
of the patients and 39.4% of the kidneys and improved in 48% (75.7%), with BP 
decreases of 20.3 ± 3.7% systolic and 16.3 ± 6.2% diastolic.
CONCLUSION: Fibromuscular dysplasia was the most common cause of RVH in this 
study, and hypertension was cured or improved in 88% of the patients.

©2015 Foundation Acta Paediatrica. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apa.13229
PMID: 26437121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]