---
reference_id: "PMID:10982026"
title: "Transcription factor hierarchy in Waardenburg syndrome: regulation of MITF expression by SOX10 and PAX3."
authors:
- Potterf SB
- Furumura M
- Dunn KJ
- Arnheiter H
- Pavan WJ
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1007/s004390000328
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Conserved Sequence
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genotype
- HeLa Cells
- "High Mobility Group Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C3H"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Microphthalmia-Associated Transcription Factor
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutagenesis
- Mutation
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Phenotype
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- SOXE Transcription Factors
- "Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid"
- Time Factors
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Transfection
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcription factor hierarchy in Waardenburg syndrome: regulation of MITF expression by SOX10 and PAX3.
**Authors:** Potterf SB, Furumura M, Dunn KJ, Arnheiter H, Pavan WJ
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004390000328](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004390000328)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2000 Jul;107(1):1-6. doi: 10.1007/s004390000328.

Transcription factor hierarchy in Waardenburg syndrome: regulation of MITF
expression by SOX10 and PAX3.

Potterf SB(1), Furumura M, Dunn KJ, Arnheiter H, Pavan WJ.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4472, USA.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is associated with neural crest-derived melanocyte
deficiency caused by mutations in either one of three transcription factors:
MITF, PAX3, and SOX10. However, the hierarchical relationship of these
transcription factors is largely unknown. We show that SOX10 is capable of
transactivating the MITF promoter 100-fold, and that this transactivation is
further stimulated by PAX3. Promoter deletion and mutational analyses indicate
that SOX10 can activate MITF expression through binding to a region that is
evolutionarily conserved between the mouse and human MITF promoters. A SOX10
mutant that models C-terminal truncations in WS can reduce wild-type SOX10
induction of MITF, suggesting these mutations may act in a dominant-negative
fashion. Our data support a model in which the hypopigmentation in WS, of which
these factors have been implicated, results from a disruption in function of the
central melanocyte transcription factor MITF.

DOI: 10.1007/s004390000328
PMID: 10982026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
