---
reference_id: "PMID:34650187"
title: "Molecular landscape of vulvovaginal squamous cell carcinoma: new insights into molecular mechanisms of HPV-associated and HPV-independent squamous cell carcinoma."
authors:
- Salama AM
- Momeni-Boroujeni A
- Vanderbilt C
- Ladanyi M
- Soslow R
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41379-021-00942-3
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/pathology"
- Female
- Genomics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Papillomaviridae/genetics
- "Papillomavirus Infections/complications, pathology"
- Vulvar Neoplasms/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular landscape of vulvovaginal squamous cell carcinoma: new insights into molecular mechanisms of HPV-associated and HPV-independent squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Salama AM, Momeni-Boroujeni A, Vanderbilt C, Ladanyi M, Soslow R
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41379-021-00942-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41379-021-00942-3)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2022 Feb;35(2):274-282. doi: 10.1038/s41379-021-00942-3. Epub 2021
 Oct 14.

Molecular landscape of vulvovaginal squamous cell carcinoma: new insights into 
molecular mechanisms of HPV-associated and HPV-independent squamous cell 
carcinoma.

Salama AM(#)(1), Momeni-Boroujeni A(#)(1), Vanderbilt C(1), Ladanyi M(1), Soslow 
R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA. soslowr@mskcc.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Squamous cell carcinomas of the lower female genital tract may be human 
papillomavirus-associated or independent. We studied the HPV status, mutational 
repertoire, histology, and clinical data of 28 samples from 26 patients, 65% 
with a vulvar primary and 35% with a vaginal primary. These represented invasive 
vulvovaginal squamous cell carcinomas that underwent clinical tumor-normal 
targeted massively parallel sequencing analysis. HPV status was determined using 
the HPV high-risk RNA ISH assay and/or by MSK-IMPACT. Eleven patients had 
HPV-associated squamous cell carcinoma (four vulvar and seven vaginal) and 15 
patients had HPV-independent SqCC (13 vulvar and 2 vaginal). Well-differentiated 
squamous cell carcinomas were always HPV-independent. HPV-independent moderately 
and poorly differentiated carcinomas frequently had alterations in the NOTCH 
signaling pathway (6/7), which were also associated with increased tumor budding 
(P: 0.002). HPV-associated vulvovaginal squamous cell carcinoma had PIK3CA 
activating mutations (7/11, 64%) as the most common genomic event, while TERT 
gene alterations, mainly TERT promoter mutations (14/15 cases, 93%) featured 
significantly in HPV-independent carcinomas. Other common abnormalities in 
HPV-independent tumors were TP53 mutations (13/15, 87%), CDKN2A alterations 
(10/15, 67%), and NOTCH1 and FAT1 mutations (7/15, 47% each). A subset of both 
HPV-associated and -independent tumors had NOTCH pathway alterations (6/11, 55% 
and 10/15, 67% respectively), but different genes in this pathway were altered 
in these tumors. In summary, TERT, TP53, CDKN2A, and NOTCH1 gene alterations 
strongly point away from an HPV-driven process (odds ratios: 0.01, 0.07, 0, and 
0, respectively with p values < 0.02 for all four genes), while PIK3CA 
activating mutations without the other mutations strongly favors an HPV-driven 
tumor (odds ratio: 10.12, p value: 0.016). HPV-independent carcinomas are more 
likely to be moderately-poorly differentiated with intermediate to high tumor 
cell budding. Cancer cell fraction analysis of HPV-independent squamous 
carcinomas suggests that TERT and/or NOTCH1 alterations along with TP53 
alterations can be the initiating event in these tumors.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to United States & Canadian 
Academy of Pathology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-021-00942-3
PMCID: PMC9450957
PMID: 34650187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: No competing 
financial interests exist for all contributory authors.