---
reference_id: "PMID:38068462"
title: Tacrolimus as a Promising Drug for Epistaxis and Gastrointestinal Bleeding in HHT.
authors:
- Álvarez-Hernández P
- Patier JL
- Marcos S
- Gómez Del Olmo V
- Lorente-Herraiz L
- Recio-Poveda L
- Botella LM
- Viteri-Noël A
- Albiñana V
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12237410
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tacrolimus as a Promising Drug for Epistaxis and Gastrointestinal Bleeding in HHT.
**Authors:** Álvarez-Hernández P, Patier JL, Marcos S, Gómez Del Olmo V, Lorente-Herraiz L, Recio-Poveda L, Botella LM, Viteri-Noël A, Albiñana V
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12237410](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12237410)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Nov 29;12(23):7410. doi: 10.3390/jcm12237410.

Tacrolimus as a Promising Drug for Epistaxis and Gastrointestinal Bleeding in 
HHT.

Álvarez-Hernández P(1), Patier JL(2)(3), Marcos S(1), Gómez Del Olmo V(2), 
Lorente-Herraiz L(4), Recio-Poveda L(4), Botella LM(4), Viteri-Noël A(2)(3), 
Albiñana V(4).

Author information:
(1)Otorrhinolaringology Department, Hospital Universitario Fundación Alcorcón, 
28922 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Internal Medicine Department, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Instituto 
Ramón y Cajal Investigación Sanitaria, IRYCIS, 28034 Madrid, Spain.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universidad de Alcalá (UAH), 28801 
Alcalá de Henares, Spain.
(4)CIBER Rare Diseases Unit 707, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas Margarita 
Salas, Consejo Superior Investigaciones Científicas, CSIC, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT) is a vascular 
autosomically inherited rare disease. Epistaxis (nose bleeds) is the most common 
symptom in HHT, leading to anemia and affecting the patient's quality of life. 
In addition to epistaxis, gastrointestinal bleeding (GI), more often at older 
ages, may lead to severe anemia and the need for blood transfusions. Thus, 
finding drugs to control both types of bleeding is a primary necessity in HHT.
METHODS: A cross-sectional observational study was conducted in a series of 11 
HHT patients treated with low tacrolimus doses (0.5-2 mg/day) on an off-label 
prescription basis. Patients showed refractory bleeding to previous treatments. 
The epistaxis severity score (ESS) and hemoglobin levels were the parameters 
used to evaluate the impact of tacrolimus. The occurrence of side effects was 
also recorded.
RESULTS: Tacrolimus was well tolerated in all of the patients except 2 (who 
stopped the treatment). The remaining patients tolerated the treatment, with a 
general improvement in their health condition. Epistaxis was significantly 
reduced when comparing the ESS before and after the treatment. Hemoglobin levels 
significantly increased, overcoming the anemia, during the course of the 
treatment.
CONCLUSION: Tacrolimus at low doses should be considered as a promising 
treatment for epistaxis and gastrointestinal bleeding in HHT.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12237410
PMCID: PMC10706934
PMID: 38068462

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.