---
reference_id: "PMID:28247525"
title: "Mutation in mitochondrial complex IV subunit COX5A causes pulmonary arterial hypertension, lactic acidemia, and failure to thrive."
authors:
- Baertling F
- Al-Murshedi F
- Sánchez-Caballero L
- Al-Senaidi K
- Joshi NP
- Venselaar H
- van den Brand MA
- Nijtmans LG
- Rodenburg RJ
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23210
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/genetics, pathology"
- Cell Nucleus/genetics
- "Cyclooxygenase 1/chemistry, genetics"
- "Cytochrome c Group/chemistry, genetics"
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency
- Electron Transport Complex IV
- "Failure to Thrive/genetics, pathology"
- Fibroblasts
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/genetics, pathology"
- Mitochondria/genetics
- Mutation
- Protein Subunits/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation in mitochondrial complex IV subunit COX5A causes pulmonary arterial hypertension, lactic acidemia, and failure to thrive.
**Authors:** Baertling F, Al-Murshedi F, Sánchez-Caballero L, Al-Senaidi K, Joshi NP, Venselaar H, van den Brand MA, Nijtmans LG, Rodenburg RJ
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23210](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23210)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2017 Jun;38(6):692-703. doi: 10.1002/humu.23210. Epub 2017 Mar 23.

Mutation in mitochondrial complex IV subunit COX5A causes pulmonary arterial 
hypertension, lactic acidemia, and failure to thrive.

Baertling F(1)(2), Al-Murshedi F(3), Sánchez-Caballero L(1), Al-Senaidi K(4), 
Joshi NP(4), Venselaar H(5), van den Brand MA(1), Nijtmans LG(1), Rodenburg 
RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Centre for Mitochondrial Medicine, Radboud 
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology, 
University Children's Hospital Duesseldorf, Heinrich Heine University, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Genetic and Developmental Medicine Clinic, Department of Genetics, Sultan 
Qaboos University Hospital, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman.
(4)Pediatric Cardiology Unit, Department of Child Health, Sultan Qaboos 
University Hospital, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman.
(5)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

COX5A is a nuclear-encoded subunit of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IV 
(cytochrome c oxidase). We present patients with a homozygous pathogenic variant 
in the COX5A gene. Clinical details of two affected siblings suffering from 
early-onset pulmonary arterial hypertension, lactic acidemia, failure to thrive, 
and isolated complex IV deficiency are presented. We show that the variant lies 
within the evolutionarily conserved COX5A/COX4 interface domain, suggesting that 
it alters the interaction between these two subunits during complex IV 
biogenesis. In patient skin fibroblasts, the enzymatic activity and protein 
levels of complex IV and several of its subunits are reduced. Lentiviral 
complementation rescues complex IV deficiency. The monomeric COX1 assembly 
intermediate accumulates demonstrating a function of COX5A in complex IV 
biogenesis. A potential therapeutic lead is demonstrated by showing that copper 
supplementation leads to partial rescue of complex IV deficiency in patient 
fibroblasts.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23210
PMID: 28247525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]