---
reference_id: "PMID:38448038"
title: Clinical outcomes and safety of immune checkpoint inhibitors in patients with solid tumors and paraneoplastic syndromes.
authors:
- Nassar AH
- El Zarif T
- Khalid AB
- Rahme S
- Zhong C
- Kwak L
- Salame M
- Farhat EB
- Freeman D
- El-Am E
- Ravishankar A
- Ahmad B
- Nana FA
- Kaldas D
- Naqash AR
- Sharon E
- LeBoeuf NR
- Cortellini A
- Malgeri A
- Gupta S
- Al-Hader A
- Sparks JA
- Linnoila J
- Hamnvik OR
- Mouhieddine TH
- Marron T
- Parikh K
- McKay RR
- Dilling T
- Choueiri TK
- Adib E
- Najem E
- Kim SY
- Sonpavde G
journal: J Immunother Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/jitc-2023-008724
keywords:
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/adverse effects
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes/drug therapy, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical outcomes and safety of immune checkpoint inhibitors in patients with solid tumors and paraneoplastic syndromes.
**Authors:** Nassar AH, El Zarif T, Khalid AB, Rahme S, Zhong C, Kwak L, Salame M, Farhat EB, Freeman D, El-Am E, Ravishankar A, Ahmad B, Nana FA, Kaldas D, Naqash AR, Sharon E, LeBoeuf NR, Cortellini A, Malgeri A, Gupta S, Al-Hader A, Sparks JA, Linnoila J, Hamnvik OR, Mouhieddine TH, Marron T, Parikh K, McKay RR, Dilling T, Choueiri TK, Adib E, Najem E, Kim SY, Sonpavde G
**Journal:** J Immunother Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jitc-2023-008724](https://doi.org/10.1136/jitc-2023-008724)

## Content

1. J Immunother Cancer. 2024 Mar 5;12(3):e008724. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2023-008724.

Clinical outcomes and safety of immune checkpoint inhibitors in patients with 
solid tumors and paraneoplastic syndromes.

Nassar AH(1), El Zarif T(2)(3)(4), Khalid AB(5), Rahme S(6), Zhong C(4), Kwak 
L(4), Salame M(7), Farhat EB(4), Freeman D(4), El-Am E(7), Ravishankar A(2)(3), 
Ahmad B(2)(3), Nana FA(8)(9), Kaldas D(10)(11), Naqash AR(12), Sharon E(13), 
LeBoeuf NR(14), Cortellini A(15)(16), Malgeri A(15), Gupta S(17), Al-Hader A(5), 
Sparks JA(14), Linnoila J(18), Hamnvik OR(14), Mouhieddine TH(19), Marron T(20), 
Parikh K(7), McKay RR(21), Dilling T(10), Choueiri TK(22), Adib E(14), Najem 
E(23), Kim SY(2), Sonpavde G(24)(25).

Author information:
(1)Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA amin.nassar@yale.edu.
(2)Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(3)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Indiana Melvin and Bren Simon Comprehensive Cancer Center, Indianapolis, 
Indiana, USA.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, New York, USA.
(7)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(8)Division of Pneumology, CHU UCL Namur, Yvoir, Namur, Belgium.
(9)Division of Pneumology, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, 
Florida, USA.
(11)Department of Clinical Oncology, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt.
(12)Medical Oncology/TSET Phase 1 Program, The University of Oklahoma Stephenson 
Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.
(13)National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(14)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(15)Medical Oncology, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Campus Bio-Medico, 
Rome, Italy.
(16)Department of Medicine and Surgery, Università Campus Bio-Medico di Roma, 
Rome, Italy.
(17)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(18)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(19)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(20)Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(21)Division of Medical Oncology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(22)Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, UK.
(23)Department of Radiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(24)Medical Oncology, AdventHealth Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA.
(25)AdventHealth Cancer Institute, AdventHealth, Altamonte Springs, Florida, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Patients with paraneoplastic syndromes (PNS) are excluded from 
clinical trials involving immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) due to safety 
concerns. Moreover, real-world data on efficacy and safety is scarce.
METHODS: In this retrospective study, data were collected on patients with PNS 
and solid tumors receiving ICI between 2015 and 2022 at nine institutions. 
Patients were classified into: Cohort 1 (pre-existing PNS before ICI 
initiation), cohort 2 (PNS during ICI treatment), and cohort 3 (PNS after ICI 
discontinuation). Patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
(mNSCLC) from cohort 1 were matched to patients who were PNS-free at each 
institution up to a 1:3 ratio for age, sex, type of ICI, use of concurrent 
chemotherapy, and number of lines of systemic therapy prior to ICI initiation. 
Kaplan-Meier method was used to assess overall survival (OS) and time-to-next 
treatment (TTNT).
RESULTS: Among 109 patients with PNS treated with ICIs, median age at ICI 
initiation was 67 years (IQR: 58-74). The most represented cancer type was NSCLC 
(n=39, 36%). In cohort 1 (n=55), PNS exacerbations occurred in 16 (29%) patients 
with median time to exacerbation after ICI of 1.1 months (IQR: 0.7-3.3). 
Exacerbation or de novo PNS prompted temporary/permanent interruption of ICIs in 
14 (13%) patients. For cohort 2 (n=16), median time between ICI initiation and 
de novo PNS was 1.2 months (IQR: 0.4-3.5). Treatment-related adverse events 
(trAEs) occurred in 43 (39%) patients. Grade ≥3 trAEs occurred in 18 (17%) 
patients. PNS-directed immunosuppressive therapy was required in 55 (50%) 
patients. We matched 18 patients with mNSCLC and PNS (cohort 1) to 40 without 
PNS, treated with ICIs. There was no significant difference in OS or TTNT 
between patients with mNSCLC with and without PNS, although a trend was seen 
towards worse outcomes in patients with PNS. TrAEs occurred in 6/18 (33%) and 
14/40 (35%), respectively. Grade ≥3 trAEs occurred in 4 (22%) patients with PNS 
and 7 (18%) patients without PNS.
CONCLUSIONS: Exacerbations of pre-existing PNS occurred in 29% of patients 
treated with ICIs and both exacerbations and de novo PNS occur early in the ICI 
course. TrAE from ICIs were similar between patients with and without PNS. Our 
data suggest that pre-existing PNS should not preclude consideration of ICI 
therapy although patients may not derive the same clinical benefit compared with 
patients without PNS.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2023-008724
PMCID: PMC10916116
PMID: 38448038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AHN receives honoraria from 
OncLive, TEMPUS, and Korean Society for Medical Oncology. Consulting fees: 
Guidepoint Global. RRM: Consulting/Advisory Board – Aveo, AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Bristol Myers Squibb, Blue Earth Diagnostics, Calithera, Caris, Denderon, 
Exelixis, Janssen, Merck, Myovant, Pfizer, Sanofi, SeaGen, Sorrento 
Therapeutics, Tempus. Institutional Research Funding – AstraZeneca, BMS, 
Exelixis, Artera, Oncternal, Bayer, Tempus. JAS is supported by the National 
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (grant numbers R01 
AR080659, R01 AR077607, P30 AR070253, and P30 AR072577), the R. Bruce and Joan 
M. Mickey Research Scholar Fund, and the Llura Gund Award funded by the Gordon 
and Llura Gund Foundation. JAS has received research support from Bristol Myers 
Squibb and performed consultancy for AbbVie, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Bristol Myers Squibb, Gilead, Inova Diagnostics, Janssen, Optum, Pfizer, ReCor, 
and Sobi unrelated to this work. The funders had no role in the decision to 
publish or preparation of this manuscript. The content is solely the 
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official 
views of Harvard University, its affiliated academic health care centers, or the 
National Institutes of Health. AC received grants for consultancies/advisory 
boards: MSD, OncoC4, IQVIA, AstraZeneca, Access Infinity, Ardelis Health, Alpha 
Sight. Speaker fees: AstraZeneca, Eisai, Pierre-Fabre, MSD. Writing/Editorial 
activity: BMS. Travel support: Sanofi and MSD. ARN reports Funding to 
Institution for Trials he is PI on:Loxo@Lilly, Surface Oncology, ADC 
Therapeutics, IGM Biosciences, EMD Serono, Aravive, Nikang Therapeutics, 
Inspirna, Exelixis, Revolution Medicine, Jacobio, Pionyr, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, 
NGM Biopharmaceuticals. ARN receives Consultant Editor Compensation: JCO 
Precision Oncology. Consulting/Advisory Board: Foundation Med. ARN reports 
Travel Compensation from: SITC/ AACR/ Conquer Cancer Foundation, Jazz 
Pharmaceuticals, Binay Tara Foundation, Foundation Med.