---
reference_id: PMID:39312653
title: Spaceflight-induced contractile and mitochondrial dysfunction in an automated heart-on-a-chip platform.
authors:
- Mair DB
- Tsui JH
- Higashi T
- Koenig P
- Dong Z
- Chen JF
- Meir JU
- Smith AST
- Lee PHU
- Ahn EH
- Countryman S
- Sniadecki NJ
- Kim DH
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2404644121
keywords:
- Space Flight/methods
- Humans
- Myocardial Contraction/physiology
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Lab-On-A-Chip Devices
- Weightlessness/adverse effects
- Oxidative Stress
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Mitochondria, Heart/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spaceflight-induced contractile and mitochondrial dysfunction in an automated heart-on-a-chip platform.
**Authors:** Mair DB, Tsui JH, Higashi T, Koenig P, Dong Z, Chen JF, Meir JU, Smith AST, Lee PHU, Ahn EH, Countryman S, Sniadecki NJ, Kim DH
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2404644121](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2404644121)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2024 Oct;121(40):e2404644121. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2404644121. Epub 2024 Sep 23.

Spaceflight-induced contractile and mitochondrial dysfunction in an automated 
heart-on-a-chip platform.

Mair DB(#)(1), Tsui JH(#)(1), Higashi T(2), Koenig P(3), Dong Z(1), Chen JF(1), 
Meir JU(4), Smith AST(5), Lee PHU(6), Ahn EH(1)(7), Countryman S(3), Sniadecki 
NJ(2)(8)(9)(10), Kim DH(1)(8)(9)(10)(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21218.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98195.
(3)BioServe Space Technologies, Ann and HJ Smead Department of Aerospace 
Engineering Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303.
(4)The National Aeronautics and Space Administration, NASA Johnson Space Center, 
Houston, TX 77058.
(5)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98195.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, 
Providence, RI 02912.
(7)Center for Microphysiological Systems, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD 21205.
(8)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195.
(9)Center for Cardiovascular Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98109.
(10)Institute for Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98109.
(11)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205.
(12)Institute for NanoBioTechnology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21218.
(13)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD 21218.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2024 Oct 8;121(41):e2417412121. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2417412121.

With current plans for manned missions to Mars and beyond, the need to better 
understand, prevent, and counteract the harmful effects of long-duration 
spaceflight on the body is becoming increasingly important. In this study, an 
automated heart-on-a-chip platform was flown to the International Space Station 
on a 1-mo mission during which contractile cardiac function was monitored in 
real-time. Upon return to Earth, engineered human heart tissues (EHTs) were 
further analyzed with ultrastructural imaging and RNA sequencing to investigate 
the impact of prolonged microgravity on cardiomyocyte function and health. 
Spaceflight EHTs exhibited significantly reduced twitch forces, increased 
incidences of arrhythmias, and increased signs of sarcomere disruption and 
mitochondrial damage. Transcriptomic analyses showed an up-regulation of genes 
and pathways associated with metabolic disorders, heart failure, oxidative 
stress, and inflammation, while genes related to contractility and calcium 
signaling showed significant down-regulation. Finally, in silico modeling 
revealed a potential link between oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction 
that corresponded with RNA sequencing results. This represents an in vitro model 
to faithfully reproduce the adverse effects of spaceflight on three-dimensional 
(3D)-engineered heart tissue.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2404644121
PMCID: PMC11459163
PMID: 39312653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:D.-H.K. is a 
co-founder, scientific advisory board member, and equity holder of Curi Bio, 
Inc. N.J.S. is a co-founder with equity of Stasys Medical Corporation and is a 
scientific advisory board member and equity holder of Curi Bio, Inc. J.H.T. is 
an employee and equity holder of Tenaya Therapeutics, Inc. The other authors 
declare no competing interest.