---
reference_id: "PMID:29959430"
title: "Diagnosis and management of pseudohypoparathyroidism and related disorders: first international Consensus Statement."
authors:
- Mantovani G
- Bastepe M
- Monk D
- de Sanctis L
- Thiele S
- Usardi A
- Ahmed SF
- Bufo R
- Choplin T
- De Filippo G
- Devernois G
- Eggermann T
- Elli FM
- Freson K
- García Ramirez A
- Germain-Lee EL
- Groussin L
- Hamdy N
- Hanna P
- Hiort O
- Jüppner H
- Kamenický P
- Knight N
- Kottler ML
- Le Norcy E
- Lecumberri B
- Levine MA
- Mäkitie O
- Martin R
- Martos-Moreno GÁ
- Minagawa M
- Murray P
- Pereda A
- Pignolo R
- Rejnmark L
- Rodado R
- Rothenbuhler A
- Saraff V
- Shoemaker AH
- Shore EM
- Silve C
- Turan S
- Woods P
- Zillikens MC
- Perez de Nanclares G
- Linglart A
journal: Nat Rev Endocrinol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41574-018-0042-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of pseudohypoparathyroidism and related disorders: first international Consensus Statement.
**Authors:** Mantovani G, Bastepe M, Monk D, de Sanctis L, Thiele S, Usardi A, Ahmed SF, Bufo R, Choplin T, De Filippo G, Devernois G, Eggermann T, Elli FM, Freson K, García Ramirez A, Germain-Lee EL, Groussin L, Hamdy N, Hanna P, Hiort O, Jüppner H, Kamenický P, Knight N, Kottler ML, Le Norcy E, Lecumberri B, Levine MA, Mäkitie O, Martin R, Martos-Moreno GÁ, Minagawa M, Murray P, Pereda A, Pignolo R, Rejnmark L, Rodado R, Rothenbuhler A, Saraff V, Shoemaker AH, Shore EM, Silve C, Turan S, Woods P, Zillikens MC, Perez de Nanclares G, Linglart A
**Journal:** Nat Rev Endocrinol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41574-018-0042-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41574-018-0042-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2018 Aug;14(8):476-500. doi: 10.1038/s41574-018-0042-0.

Diagnosis and management of pseudohypoparathyroidism and related disorders: 
first international Consensus Statement.

Mantovani G(1), Bastepe M(2), Monk D(3), de Sanctis L(4), Thiele S(5), Usardi 
A(6)(7), Ahmed SF(8), Bufo R(9), Choplin T(10), De Filippo G(11), Devernois 
G(10), Eggermann T(12), Elli FM(1), Freson K(13), García Ramirez A(14), 
Germain-Lee EL(15)(16), Groussin L(17)(18), Hamdy N(19), Hanna P(20), Hiort 
O(5), Jüppner H(2), Kamenický P(6)(21)(22), Knight N(23), Kottler ML(24)(25), Le 
Norcy E(18)(26), Lecumberri B(27)(28)(29), Levine MA(30), Mäkitie O(31), Martin 
R(32), Martos-Moreno GÁ(33)(34)(35), Minagawa M(36), Murray P(37), Pereda A(38), 
Pignolo R(39), Rejnmark L(40), Rodado R(14), Rothenbuhler A(6)(7), Saraff V(41), 
Shoemaker AH(42), Shore EM(43), Silve C(44), Turan S(45), Woods P(23), Zillikens 
MC(46), Perez de Nanclares G(47), Linglart A(48)(49)(50).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Endocrinology 
Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Imprinting and Cancer Group, Cancer Epigenetic and Biology Program (PEBC), 
Institut d'Investigació Biomedica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Department of Public Health and Pediatric 
Sciences, University of Torino, Turin, Italy.
(5)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(6)APHP, Reference Center for Rare Disorders of Calcium and Phosphate 
Metabolism, Platform of Expertise Paris-Sud for Rare Diseases and Filière OSCAR, 
Bicêtre Paris Sud Hospital (HUPS), Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(7)APHP, Endocrinology and diabetes for children, Bicêtre Paris Sud Hospital 
(HUPS), Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(8)Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, School of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Nursing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(9)IPOHA, Italian Progressive Osseous Heteroplasia Association, Cerignola, 
Foggia, Italy.
(10)K20, French PHP and related disorders patient association, Jouars 
Pontchartrain, France.
(11)APHP, Department of medicine for adolescents, Bicêtre Paris Sud Hospital 
(HUPS), Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(12)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, 
Aachen, Germany.
(13)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular 
Biology, Gasthuisberg, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(14)AEPHP, Spanish PHP and related disorders patient association, Huércal-Overa, 
Almería, Spain.
(15)Albright Center & Center for Rare Bone Disorders, Division of Pediatric 
Endocrinology & Diabetes, Connecticut Children's Medical Center, Farmington, CT, 
USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, 
Farmington, CT, USA.
(17)APHP, Department of Endocrinology, Cochin Hospital (HUPC), Paris, France.
(18)University of Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(19)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Centre for Bone 
Quality, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(20)INSERM U1169, Bicêtre Paris Sud, Paris Sud - Paris Saclay University, Le 
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(21)APHP, Department of Endocrinology and Reproductive Diseases, Bicêtre Paris 
Sud Hospital (HUPS), Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(22)INSERM U1185, Paris Sud - Paris Saclay University, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, 
France.
(23)UK acrodysostosis patients' group, London, UK.
(24)Department of Genetics, Reference Centre for Rare Disorders of Calcium and 
Phosphate Metabolism, Caen University Hospital, Caen, France.
(25)BIOTARGEN, UNICAEN, Normandie University, Caen, France.
(26)APHP, Department of Odontology, Bretonneau Hospital (PNVS), Paris, France.
(27)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, La Paz University Hospital, 
Madrid, Spain.
(28)Department of Medicine, Autonomous University of Madrid (UAM), Madrid, 
Spain.
(29)Endocrine Diseases Research Group, Hospital La Paz Institute for Health 
Research (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain.
(30)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes and Center for Bone Health, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(31)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(32)Osteometabolic Disorders Unit, Hormone and Molecular Genetics Laboratory 
(LIM/42), Endocrinology Division, Hospital das Clínicas HCFMUSP, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(33)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, 
CIBERobn, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
(34)Department of Pediatrics, Autonomous University of Madrid (UAM), Madrid, 
Spain.
(35)Endocrine Diseases Research Group, Hospital La Princesa Institute for Health 
Research (IIS La Princesa), Madrid, Spain.
(36)Division of Endocrinology, Chiba Children's Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(37)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Manchester Children's 
Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(38)Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Institute, 
Hospital Universitario Araba-Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Alava, Spain.
(39)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(40)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(41)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Birmingham Children's Hospital, 
Birmingham, UK.
(42)Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN, USA.
(43)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery and Genetics, Center for Research in FOP 
and Related Disorders, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(44)APHP, Service de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaires, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, 
France.
(45)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Marmara 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(46)Department of Internal Medicine, Bone Center Erasmus MC - University Medical 
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(47)Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Institute, 
Hospital Universitario Araba-Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Alava, Spain. 
gnanclares@osakidetza.eus.
(48)APHP, Reference Center for Rare Disorders of Calcium and Phosphate 
Metabolism, Platform of Expertise Paris-Sud for Rare Diseases and Filière OSCAR, 
Bicêtre Paris Sud Hospital (HUPS), Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. 
agnes.linglart@aphp.fr.
(49)APHP, Endocrinology and diabetes for children, Bicêtre Paris Sud Hospital 
(HUPS), Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. agnes.linglart@aphp.fr.
(50)INSERM U1169, Bicêtre Paris Sud, Paris Sud - Paris Saclay University, Le 
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. agnes.linglart@aphp.fr.

This Consensus Statement covers recommendations for the diagnosis and management 
of patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) and related disorders, which 
comprise metabolic disorders characterized by physical findings that variably 
include short bones, short stature, a stocky build, early-onset obesity and 
ectopic ossifications, as well as endocrine defects that often include 
resistance to parathyroid hormone (PTH) and TSH. The presentation and severity 
of PHP and its related disorders vary between affected individuals with 
considerable clinical and molecular overlap between the different types. A 
specific diagnosis is often delayed owing to lack of recognition of the syndrome 
and associated features. The participants in this Consensus Statement agreed 
that the diagnosis of PHP should be based on major criteria, including 
resistance to PTH, ectopic ossifications, brachydactyly and early-onset obesity. 
The clinical and laboratory diagnosis should be confirmed by a molecular genetic 
analysis. Patients should be screened at diagnosis and during follow-up for 
specific features, such as PTH resistance, TSH resistance, growth hormone 
deficiency, hypogonadism, skeletal deformities, oral health, weight gain, 
glucose intolerance or type 2 diabetes mellitus, and hypertension, as well as 
subcutaneous and/or deeper ectopic ossifications and neurocognitive impairment. 
Overall, a coordinated and multidisciplinary approach from infancy through 
adulthood, including a transition programme, should help us to improve the care 
of patients affected by these disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/s41574-018-0042-0
PMCID: PMC6541219
PMID: 29959430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.