---
reference_id: "PMID:17986058"
title: "Narrow-band ultraviolet therapy in early-stage mycosis fungoides: study on 20 patients."
authors:
- Brazzelli V
- Antoninetti M
- Palazzini S
- Prestinari F
- Borroni G
journal: Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0781.2007.00314.x
keywords:
- Aged
- Biopsy
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mycosis Fungoides/pathology, radiotherapy"
- Time Factors
- Ultraviolet Therapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Narrow-band ultraviolet therapy in early-stage mycosis fungoides: study on 20 patients.
**Authors:** Brazzelli V, Antoninetti M, Palazzini S, Prestinari F, Borroni G
**Journal:** Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0781.2007.00314.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0781.2007.00314.x)

## Content

1. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. 2007 Dec;23(6):229-33. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0781.2007.00314.x.

Narrow-band ultraviolet therapy in early-stage mycosis fungoides: study on 20
patients.

Brazzelli V(1), Antoninetti M, Palazzini S, Prestinari F, Borroni G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human and Hereditary Pathology, Institute of Dermatology,
University of Pavia, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
vbrazzelli@libero.it

BACKGROUND: In recent years, narrow-band ultraviolet B (NB-UVB, 311-313 nm) has
been found to be beneficial for early-stages mycosis fungoides (MF). The aim of
this study is to investigate the effect of NB-UVB in 20 patients with
early-stage MF.
METHODS: Twenty patients (10 women and 10 men, mean age 54 +/- 22 years) with
clinically and histologically confirmed MF were enrolled in the study. All of
the patients had clinical stage I disease (T1 or T2, N0, M0) with cutaneous
involvement, consisting of patch-stage disease of limited extent, in 50% of the
cases (stage IA), and more widespread in the other 50% (stage IB). All the
patients were treated with NB-UVB therapy until more than 95% clearance of the
patient's skin lesions had occurred.
RESULTS: A complete response was achieved in 90% of the cases after a mean of 29
+/- 14 treatments within a mean period of 4 months (range 1-8 months), with an
average cumulative dose of 25 +/- 16.77 J/cm(2). In the follow-up period,
relapse occurred after a mean period of 8 months (range 3-17 months), and then
therapy was restarted.
CONCLUSION: This study provides evidence that NB-UVB might be an efficient
option for stage IA and IB MF patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0781.2007.00314.x
PMID: 17986058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
