---
reference_id: "PMID:39016117"
title: Multiorgan manifestations of COL4A1 and COL4A2 variants and proposal for a clinical management protocol.
authors:
- Gasparini S
- Balestrini S
- Saccaro LF
- Bacci G
- Panichella G
- Montomoli M
- Cantalupo G
- Bigoni S
- Mancano G
- Pellacani S
- Leuzzi V
- Volpi N
- Mari F
- Melani F
- Cavallin M
- Pisano T
- Porcedda G
- Vaglio A
- Mei D
- Barba C
- Parrini E
- Guerrini R
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.32099
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Child
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Epilepsy/genetics, etiology, therapy, pathology"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Seizures/genetics
- "Stroke/genetics, pathology"
- "Cataract/genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Hematuria/genetics
- Porencephaly/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, etiology, pathology"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiorgan manifestations of COL4A1 and COL4A2 variants and proposal for a clinical management protocol.
**Authors:** Gasparini S, Balestrini S, Saccaro LF, Bacci G, Panichella G, Montomoli M, Cantalupo G, Bigoni S, Mancano G, Pellacani S, Leuzzi V, Volpi N, Mari F, Melani F, Cavallin M, Pisano T, Porcedda G, Vaglio A, Mei D, Barba C, Parrini E, Guerrini R
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.32099](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.32099)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2024 Dec;196(4):e32099. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.32099. Epub 2024 Jul 17.

Multiorgan manifestations of COL4A1 and COL4A2 variants and proposal for a 
clinical management protocol.

Gasparini S(1)(2), Balestrini S(1)(2), Saccaro LF(3), Bacci G(4), Panichella 
G(2)(5), Montomoli M(1), Cantalupo G(6)(7)(8), Bigoni S(9), Mancano G(1), 
Pellacani S(1)(2), Leuzzi V(10), Volpi N(11), Mari F(12), Melani F(1), Cavallin 
M(1), Pisano T(1), Porcedda G(13), Vaglio A(14)(15), Mei D(1), Barba C(1)(2), 
Parrini E(1), Guerrini R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience and Human Genetics Department, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS 
(full member of the European Reference Network EpiCARE), Florence, Italy.
(2)University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Geneva University and Geneva University Hospitals, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Pediatric Ophthalmology Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, Florence, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University Hospital 
Careggi, Florence, Italy.
(6)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, University Hospital of Verona (full member of the 
European Reference Network EpiCARE), Verona, Italy.
(7)Department of Engineering for Innovation Medicine, Innovation Biomedicine 
Section, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(8)Center for Research on Epilepsy in Pediatric Age (CREP), University Hospital 
of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(9)Medical Genetics Unit, Ferrara University Hospital, Ferrara, Italy.
(10)Unit of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Department of Human Neuroscience, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(11)Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology Unit, Department of Medical, Surgical 
and Neurological Sciences, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(12)Child and Adolescent Epilepsy and Clinical Neurophysiology Departmental 
Unit, USL Centro Toscana, Prato, Italy.
(13)Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, 
Florence, Italy.
(14)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, Florence, 
Italy.
(15)Department of Biomedical, Experimental and Clinical Sciences "Mario Serio", 
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

COL4A1/2 variants are associated with highly variable multiorgan manifestations. 
Depicting the whole clinical spectrum of COL4A1/2-related manifestations is 
challenging, and there is no consensus on management and preventative 
strategies. Based on a systematic review of current evidence on COL4A1/2-related 
disease, we developed a clinical questionnaire that we administered to 43 
individuals from 23 distinct families carrying pathogenic variants. In this 
cohort, we extended ophthalmological and cardiological examinations to 
asymptomatic individuals and those with only limited or mild, often nonspecific, 
clinical signs commonly occurring in the general population (i.e., 
oligosymptomatic). The most frequent clinical findings emerging from both the 
literature review and the questionnaire included stroke (203/685, 29.6%), 
seizures or epilepsy (199/685, 29.0%), intellectual disability or developmental 
delay (168/685, 24.5%), porencephaly/schizencephaly (168/685, 24.5%), motor 
impairment (162/685, 23.6%), cataract (124/685, 18.1%), hematuria (63/685, 
9.2%), and retinal arterial tortuosity (58/685, 8.5%). In oligosymptomatic and 
asymptomatic carriers, ophthalmological investigations detected retinal vascular 
tortuosity (5/13, 38.5%), dysgenesis of the anterior segment (4/13, 30.8%), and 
cataract (2/13, 15.4%), while cardiological investigations were unremarkable 
except for mild ascending aortic ectasia in 1/8 (12.5%). Our multimodal approach 
confirms highly variable penetrance and expressivity in COL4A1/2-related 
conditions, even at the intrafamilial level with neurological involvement being 
the most frequent and severe finding in both children and adults. We propose a 
protocol for prevention and management based on individualized risk estimation 
and periodic multiorgan evaluations.

© 2024 The Author(s). American Journal of Medical Genetics Part C: Seminars in 
Medical Genetics published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.32099
PMID: 39016117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]