---
reference_id: "PMID:28420439"
title: "Fragile X syndrome: a review of clinical and molecular diagnoses."
authors:
- Ciaccio C
- Fontana L
- Milani D
- Tabano S
- Miozzo M
- Esposito S
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-017-0355-y
keywords:
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1/genetics
- "Fragile X Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/epidemiology, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Rare Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fragile X syndrome: a review of clinical and molecular diagnoses.
**Authors:** Ciaccio C, Fontana L, Milani D, Tabano S, Miozzo M, Esposito S
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-017-0355-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-017-0355-y)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2017 Apr 19;43(1):39. doi: 10.1186/s13052-017-0355-y.

Fragile X syndrome: a review of clinical and molecular diagnoses.

Ciaccio C(1), Fontana L(2), Milani D(1), Tabano S(2), Miozzo M(2), Esposito
S(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, University of Milan, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, Via Commenda 9, 20122, Milan, Italy.
(2)Division of Pathology, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation,
University of Milan, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Milan, Italy.
(3)Pediatric Clinic, Department of Surgical and Biomedical Sciences, Università
degli Studi di Perugia, Piazza Lucio Severi 1, Loc. S. Andrea delle Fratte,
06132, Perugia, Italy. susanna.esposito@unimi.it.

BACKGROUND: Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is the second cause of intellectual
disability after Down syndrome and the most prevalent cause of intellectual
disability in males, affecting 1:5000-7000 men and 1:4000-6000 women. It is
caused by an alteration of the FMR1 gene, which maps at the Xq27.3 band: more
than 99% of individuals have a CGG expansion (>200 triplets) in the 5' UTR of
the gene, and FMR1 mutations and duplication/deletion are responsible for the
remaining (<1%) molecular diagnoses of FXS. The aim of this review was to gather
the current clinical and molecular knowledge about FXS to provide clinicians
with a tool to guide the initial assessment and follow-up of FXS and to offer to
laboratory workers and researchers an update about the current diagnostic
procedures.
DISCUSSION: FXS is a well-known condition; however, most of the studies thus far
have focused on neuropsychiatric features. Unfortunately, some of the available
studies have limitations, such as the paucity of patients enrolled or bias due
to the collection of the data in a single-country population, which may be not
representative of the average global FXS population. In recent years, insight
into the adult presentation of the disease has progressively increased.
Pharmacological treatment of FXS is essentially symptom based, but the growing
understanding of the molecular and biological mechanisms of the disease are
paving the way to targeted therapy, which may reverse the effects of FMRP
deficiency and be a real cure for the disease itself, not just its symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical spectrum of FXS is wide, presenting not only as an
isolated intellectual disability but as a multi-systemic condition, involving
predominantly the central nervous system but potentially affecting any
apparatus. Given the relative high frequency of the condition and its complex
clinical management, FXS appears to have an important economic and social
burden.

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-017-0355-y
PMCID: PMC5395755
PMID: 28420439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
