---
reference_id: "PMID:19817892"
title: In Lynch syndrome adenomas, loss of mismatch repair proteins is related to an enhanced lymphocytic response.
authors:
- Meijer TW
- Hoogerbrugge N
- Nagengast FM
- Ligtenberg MJ
- van Krieken JH
journal: Histopathology
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03403.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In Lynch syndrome adenomas, loss of mismatch repair proteins is related to an enhanced lymphocytic response.
**Authors:** Meijer TW, Hoogerbrugge N, Nagengast FM, Ligtenberg MJ, van Krieken JH
**Journal:** Histopathology (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03403.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03403.x)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 2009 Oct;55(4):414-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03403.x.

In Lynch syndrome adenomas, loss of mismatch repair proteins is related to an 
enhanced lymphocytic response.

Meijer TW(1), Hoogerbrugge N, Nagengast FM, Ligtenberg MJ, van Krieken JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

AIMS: Lynch syndrome-associated tumours are characterized by the presence of an 
increased number of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes. This enhanced lymphocytic 
response may be elicited by genetically altered proteins that may arise as a 
result of a defective DNA mismatch repair system. The aim was to investigate 
this hypothesis by correlating loss of mismatch repair proteins and infiltration 
of lymphocytes in Lynch syndrome-associated adenomas and hyperplastic polyps.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mismatch repair protein expression and the number of 
tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes were assessed in Lynch syndrome (41 adenomas and 
nine hyperplastic polyps) and in familial colorectal cancer (nine adenomas and 
one hyperplastic polyp). Nineteen sporadic adenomas were included as a control 
group. Twenty of 32 (63%) adenomas with loss of mismatch repair protein 
expression showed an increase in tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes. Eight adenomas 
(8/32; 25%) displayed many tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes, whereas most 
adenomas (12/32; 38%) showed a minor increase. In adenomas with mismatch repair 
protein expression, both sporadic and Lynch syndrome associated, not one showed 
an increased number of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes. Hyperplastic polyps in 
Lynch syndrome patients showed neither loss of mismatch repair expression nor an 
increase in tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a correlation between the loss of mismatch repair proteins 
and the infiltration of lymphocytes in Lynch syndrome-associated adenomas.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03403.x
PMID: 19817892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]