---
reference_id: "PMID:20301337"
title: "2q37 Microdeletion Syndrome – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Doherty ES
- Lacbawan FL
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 2q37 Microdeletion Syndrome – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Doherty ES, Lacbawan FL

## Content

1. 2q37 Microdeletion Syndrome – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.

Doherty ES(1), Lacbawan FL(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 May 3 [updated 2013 Jan 31].

Author information:
(1)Carilion Clinic, Roanoke, Virginia
(2)Molecular Pathology, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: 2q37 microdeletion syndrome is characterized by 
mild-moderate developmental delay/intellectual disability, brachymetaphalangy of 
digits 3-5 (often digit 4 alone) (>50%), short stature, obesity, hypotonia, 
characteristic facial appearance, autism or autism spectrum disorder (30%), 
joint hypermobility/dislocation, and scoliosis. Other findings include seizures 
(20%-35%), congenital heart disease, CNS abnormalities (hydrocephalus, dilated 
ventricles), umbilical/inguinal hernia, tracheomalacia, situs abnormalities, 
gastrointestinal abnormalities, and renal malformations. Wilms tumor has been 
reported in two individuals.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Chromosome analysis confirms the diagnosis of 2q37 deletion 
syndrome in 80%-85% of affected individuals. In about 15%-20% of cases the small 
size of the deleted region can only be detected using deletion analysis (which 
relies on a variety of methods). In some individuals, 2q37 microdeletion 
syndrome results from chromosome rearrangements involving 2q37 (e.g., chromosome 
2 inversion, ring chromosome 2, or translocation between chromosome 2 and 
another chromosome). Mutation of HDAC4 has been proposed as causative for most 
of the features of the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome. Several affected individuals 
without microdeletions had inactivating mutation of HDAC4, a gene in the 2q37 
deleted region, leading to the proposal that mutation of this gene may be 
causative for most of the features of the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Multidisciplinary care by specialists 
in the following fields is often required: clinical genetics, speech pathology, 
occupational and physical therapy, child development, neurology, cardiology, 
gastroenterology, nutrition/feeding, ophthalmology, and audiology. Infants 
benefit from enrollment in an early-intervention program; most school-age 
children benefit from an individualized educational program (IEP). Surveillance: 
Ongoing routine primary care; periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist to 
provide new recommendations and information about the syndrome; periodic 
neurodevelopmental and/or developmental/behavioral pediatric evaluation to 
assist in the management of cognitive and behavioral problems. Screening for 
renal cysts at age four years and again at puberty is suggested. For young 
children with a deletion that includes 2q37.1, screening for Wilms tumor can be 
considered. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is reasonable to perform genetic 
testing of any young child at risk, so that Wilms tumor surveillance can be 
considered in those with a deletion that includes 2q37.1.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Most individuals with the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome have a 
de novo chromosome deletion and their parents have normal karyotypes. In 
approximately 5% of published cases, probands have inherited the deletion from a 
parent who is a balanced translocation carrier. The risk to sibs of a proband 
depends on the chromosome findings in the parents: the recurrence risk for 
future pregnancies is negligible when parental karyotypes are normal; if a 
parent has a balanced structural chromosome rearrangement, the risk to sibs is 
increased and depends on the specific chromosome rearrangement. Regarding risks 
to offspring: no individual with a cytogenetically visible 2q37 deletion is 
known to have reproduced; however, it is reasonable to expect normal fertility 
in mildly affected individuals with the 2q37 microdeletion syndrome. Prenatal 
diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk is possible. Deletion or mutation of 
HDAC4 may be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner but is more commonly de 
novo.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301337