---
reference_id: "PMID:24511464"
title: Long-term stability and safety of transgenic cultured epidermal stem cells in gene therapy of junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
authors:
- De Rosa L
- Carulli S
- Cocchiarella F
- Quaglino D
- Enzo E
- Franchini E
- Giannetti A
- De Santis G
- Recchia A
- Pellegrini G
- De Luca M
journal: Stem Cell Reports
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.11.001
keywords:
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Epidermal Cells
- "Epidermis/metabolism, pathology"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa, Junctional/therapy"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Therapy
- Humans
- Integrin alpha6beta4/metabolism
- Keratin-14/metabolism
- Laminin/metabolism
- Protein Precursors/metabolism
- Regeneration
- Stem Cell Transplantation
- "Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term stability and safety of transgenic cultured epidermal stem cells in gene therapy of junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
**Authors:** De Rosa L, Carulli S, Cocchiarella F, Quaglino D, Enzo E, Franchini E, Giannetti A, De Santis G, Recchia A, Pellegrini G, De Luca M
**Journal:** Stem Cell Reports (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.11.001)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Dec 26;2(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.11.001. 
eCollection 2014 Jan 14.

Long-term stability and safety of transgenic cultured epidermal stem cells in 
gene therapy of junctional epidermolysis bullosa.

De Rosa L(1), Carulli S(1), Cocchiarella F(1), Quaglino D(2), Enzo E(1), 
Franchini E(1), Giannetti A(3), De Santis G(4), Recchia A(1), Pellegrini G(1), 
De Luca M(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine "Stefano Ferrari," Department of Life 
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41125 Modena, Italy.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41125 
Modena, Italy.
(3)Emeritus of Dermatology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41125 
Modena, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio 
Emilia, 41125 Modena, Italy.

We report a long-term follow-up (6.5 years) of a phase I/II clinical trial 
envisaging the use of autologous genetically modified cultured epidermal stem 
cells for gene therapy of junctional epidermolysis bullosa, a devastating 
genetic skin disease. The critical goals of the trial were to evaluate the 
safety and long-term persistence of genetically modified epidermis. A normal 
epidermal-dermal junction was restored and the regenerated transgenic epidermis 
was found to be fully functional and virtually indistinguishable from a normal 
control. The epidermis was sustained by a discrete number of long-lasting, 
self-renewing transgenic epidermal stem cells that maintained the memory of the 
donor site, whereas the vast majority of transduced transit-amplifying 
progenitors were lost within the first few months after grafting. These data 
pave the way for the safe use of epidermal stem cells in combined cell and gene 
therapy for genetic skin diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.11.001
PMCID: PMC3916757
PMID: 24511464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]