---
reference_id: "PMID:31523532"
title: "Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Congenita: A Rare Cause of Respiratory Distress."
authors:
- Saleem S
- Anwar A
- Iftikhar PM
- Anjum Z
- Tariq Z
journal: Cureus
year: '2019'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.5101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Congenita: A Rare Cause of Respiratory Distress.
**Authors:** Saleem S, Anwar A, Iftikhar PM, Anjum Z, Tariq Z
**Journal:** Cureus (2019)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.5101](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.5101)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2019 Jul 8;11(7):e5101. doi: 10.7759/cureus.5101.

Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Congenita: A Rare Cause of Respiratory Distress.

Saleem S(1), Anwar A(2), Iftikhar PM(3), Anjum Z(4), Tariq Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Neurology, University of Toledo, Toledo, USA.
(2)Neurology, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, USA.
(3)Obstetrics and Gynecology, St. John's University, New York, USA.
(4)Internal Medicine, Fatima Jinnah Medical University, Lahore, PAK.
(5)Internal Medicine, Gujranwala Medical College, Gujranwala, PAK.

Spondyloepiphysal dysplasia (SED) is an inheritable dysplasia of the bone due to
a defect in collagen. It has a prevalence of 3.4 per million. It has two
important types, congenita and tarda, which are differentiated by the age
presentation and heritage mode. SED congenita can present a significant
reduction in the upper segment to a lower segment ratio. Collagen mutation
results in abnormal growth and development of spine and limb bones. The complex
pattern of craniofacial anomalies is due to defective ossification and
connective tissue problem. We here present the case of a three-hour-old girl
with a short trunk and craniofacial anomalies that brought in respiratory
distress to the neonatal intensive care unit. This condition is rare and thus
poses a major diagnostic challenge at an early stage.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.5101
PMCID: PMC6728783
PMID: 31523532

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
