---
reference_id: "PMID:36804377"
title: Transcriptional Profiling Supports the Notochordal Origin of Chordoma and Its Dependence on a TGFB1-TBXT Network.
authors:
- Halvorsen SC
- Benita Y
- Hopton M
- Hoppe B
- Gunnlaugsson HO
- Korgaonkar P
- Vanderburg CR
- Nielsen GP
- Trepanowski N
- Cheah JH
- Frosch MP
- Schwab JH
- Rosenberg AE
- Hornicek FJ
- Sassi S
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2023.01.014
keywords:
- Humans
- "Chordoma/genetics, pathology"
- "Notochord/metabolism, pathology"
- "T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
- "Transforming Growth Factor beta1/genetics, metabolism"
- Brachyury Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptional Profiling Supports the Notochordal Origin of Chordoma and Its Dependence on a TGFB1-TBXT Network.
**Authors:** Halvorsen SC, Benita Y, Hopton M, Hoppe B, Gunnlaugsson HO, Korgaonkar P, Vanderburg CR, Nielsen GP, Trepanowski N, Cheah JH, Frosch MP, Schwab JH, Rosenberg AE, Hornicek FJ, Sassi S
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2023.01.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2023.01.014)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2023 May;193(5):532-547. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2023.01.014. Epub 
2023 Feb 17.

Transcriptional Profiling Supports the Notochordal Origin of Chordoma and Its 
Dependence on a TGFB1-TBXT Network.

Halvorsen SC(1), Benita Y(1), Hopton M(1), Hoppe B(1), Gunnlaugsson HO(1), 
Korgaonkar P(1), Vanderburg CR(2), Nielsen GP(3), Trepanowski N(1), Cheah JH(4), 
Frosch MP(5), Schwab JH(6), Rosenberg AE(3), Hornicek FJ(7), Sassi S(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Harvard NeuroDiscovery Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)High Throughput Sciences Facility, Koch Institute of MIT, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts.
(5)C.S. Kubik Laboratory for Neuropathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: 
fjh21@med.miami.edu.
(8)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Harvard 
Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. 
Electronic address: ssassi@ccib.mgh.harvard.edu.

Chordoma is a rare malignant tumor demonstrating notochordal differentiation. It 
is dependent on brachyury (TBXT), a hallmark notochordal gene and transcription 
factor, and shares histologic features and the same anatomic location as the 
notochord. This study involved a molecular comparison of chordoma and notochord 
to identify dysregulated cellular pathways. The lack of a molecular reference 
from appropriate control tissue limits our understanding of chordoma and its 
relationship to notochord. Therefore, an unbiased comparison of chordoma, human 
notochord, and an atlas of normal and cancerous tissue was conducted using gene 
expression profiling to clarify the chordoma/notochord relationship and 
potentially identify novel drug targets. The study found striking consistency in 
gene expression profiles between chordoma and notochord, supporting the 
hypothesis that chordoma develops from notochordal remnants. A 12-gene 
diagnostic chordoma signature was identified and the TBXT/transforming growth 
factor beta (TGF-β)/SOX6/SOX9 pathway was hyperactivated in the tumor, 
suggesting that pathways associated with chondrogenesis were a central driver of 
chordoma development. Experimental validation in chordoma cells confirmed these 
findings and emphasized the dependence of chordoma proliferation and survival on 
TGF-β. The computational and experimental evidence provided the first molecular 
connection between notochord and chordoma and identified core members of a 
chordoma regulatory pathway involving TBXT. This pathway provides new 
therapeutic targets for this unique malignant neoplasm and highlights TGF-β as a 
prime druggable candidate.

Copyright © 2023 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2023.01.014
PMID: 36804377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]