---
reference_id: "PMID:21860049"
title: "Social-cognitive remediation in schizophrenia: generalization of effects of the Training of Affect Recognition (TAR)."
authors:
- Wölwer W
- Frommann N
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbr071
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Social-cognitive remediation in schizophrenia: generalization of effects of the Training of Affect Recognition (TAR).
**Authors:** Wölwer W, Frommann N
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/sbr071](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbr071)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 2011 Sep;37 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):S63-70. doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbr071.

Social-cognitive remediation in schizophrenia: generalization of effects of the 
Training of Affect Recognition (TAR).

Wölwer W(1), Frommann N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty, 
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Bergische Landstrasse 2, 40629 Düsseldorf, 
Germany. woelwer@uni-duesseldorf.de

In the last decade, several social cognitive remediation programs have been 
developed for use in schizophrenia. Though existing evidence indicates that such 
programs can improve social cognition, which is essential for successful social 
functioning, it remains unclear whether the improvements generalize to social 
cognitive domains not primarily addressed by the intervention and whether the 
improved test performance transfers into everyday social functioning. The 
present study investigated whether, beyond its known effects on facial affect 
recognition, the Training of Affect Recognition (TAR) has effects on prosodic 
affect recognition, theory of mind (ToM) performance, social competence in a 
role-play task, and more general social and occupational functioning. 
Thirty-eight inpatients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective 
disorder were randomly assigned to 6 weeks of treatment with the TAR--primarily 
targeted at facial affect recognition-or Cognitive Remediation Training 
(CRT)--primarily targeted at neurocognition. Intention-to-treat analyses found 
significantly larger pre-post improvements with TAR than with CRT in prosodic 
affect recognition, ToM, and social competence and a trend effect in global 
social functioning. However, the effects on ToM and social competence were no 
longer significant in the smaller group of patients who completed treatment 
according to protocol. Results suggest that TAR effects generalize to other 
social cognitive domains not primarily addressed. TAR may also enhance social 
skills and social functioning, although this has to be confirmed. Results are 
discussed with regard to the need to improve functional outcome in schizophrenia 
against the background of current evidence from other social cognitive 
remediation approaches.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbr071
PMCID: PMC3160117
PMID: 21860049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]