---
reference_id: "PMID:35491068"
title: Diabetes Physical Examination.
authors:
- Malik A
- Ananthakrishnan S
journal: Med Clin North Am
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2021.12.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetes Physical Examination.
**Authors:** Malik A, Ananthakrishnan S
**Journal:** Med Clin North Am (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcna.2021.12.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcna.2021.12.007)

## Content

1. Med Clin North Am. 2022 May;106(3):483-494. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2021.12.007. 
Epub 2022 Apr 4.

Diabetes Physical Examination.

Malik A(1), Ananthakrishnan S(2).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes and Nutrition, Boston University School of Medicine/Boston Medical 
Center, Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, 720 Harrison Avenue, 
DOB 8th Floor, Boston, MA 02118.
(2)Boston University School of Medicine/Boston Medical Center, Section of 
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, 72 East Concord Street, Evans 122, 
Boston, MA, 02118. Electronic address: Soniaa@bu.edu.

The physical examination of the patient with diabetes may have revealed findings 
that confirm the diagnosis, classify the type of diabetes, and begin to evaluate 
for the macro- and microvascular complications of diabetes and significant 
comorbid conditions. While screening for the diagnosis of diabetes occurs with 
assessment for abnormal blood glucose, given the high rates of morbidity and 
mortality associated with diabetes, utilization of the physical examination 
plays a key role in identifying patients at risk for the complications of 
diabetes. The discussion of elements of the physical examination relevant to the 
patient with diabetes, both type 1 and type 2, will be discussed in this 
article.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcna.2021.12.007
PMID: 35491068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]