---
reference_id: "PMID:24433507"
title: "Novel treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia: As₂O₃, retinoic acid and retinoid pharmacology."
authors:
- Zhu G
journal: Curr Pharm Biotechnol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.2174/1389201015666140113095812
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Arsenic Trioxide
- Arsenicals/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Oxides/therapeutic use
- Promyelocytic Leukemia Protein
- "Receptors, Retinoic Acid/chemistry, genetics"
- "Retinoids/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia: As₂O₃, retinoic acid and retinoid pharmacology.
**Authors:** Zhu G
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Biotechnol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1389201015666140113095812](https://doi.org/10.2174/1389201015666140113095812)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2013;14(9):849-58. doi:
10.2174/1389201015666140113095812.

Novel treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia: As₂O₃, retinoic acid and
retinoid pharmacology.

Zhu G.

Erratum in
    Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2014;15(12):1187. Mische, Sarah E [removed];
Seigneres, Beatrice [removed].

Acute promyelocytic leukemia(APL), a specific characteristic of t(15;17)
chromosome translocation, represents 5% to 15% of cases of acute nonlymphocytic
leukemia. An alternative approach is to consider retinoic acid(all-trans RA,
ATRA or 13-cis RA or 9-cis RA) plus chemotherapy or RA plus As₂O₃ regimens as
now novel therapy. Molecular gene analyses are conclusive in vivo evidence that
oncogenic PML/RARa plays a crucial role in APL leukemogenesis. As a novel
approach to APL treatment, one possible the action of RA, A consense sequence
(5'-TCAGGTCATGACCTGA-3') has been postulated for the thyroid hormone (TRE) and
retinoic acid responsive element (RARE) containing half palindromes, which
located in the promoter region of target genes. High dose (100-fold) of
RA-RARE-PML/RARa complex in intracellular localization appears to relieve
repressor from DNA binding, including corepressors N-CoR, SMRT and HDACs,
release PML/RARa- mediated transcriptional repression, and release histone
deacetylase activity from PMLRARa. The resulting PML/RARa oncoprotein
proteolytic degradation through the autophagy-lysosome pathway and the ubiquitin
SUMO-proteasome system (UPS), as well as caspase 3 (cleavage site Asp522 within
a-helics region of PML component of the fusion protein) or neutrophil elastase,
or lysosomal protease enzyme induction. PML protein relocalizes into the
wild-type nuclear body (PML-NB) configuration or/and wild-type RARa upregulated.
An effect to relieve the blockade (inhibition) of PML/RARA-mediated RA dependent
promyelocytic differentiation, and retinoic acid in APL therapy (see Figure in
the full text, George Zhu, 1991). Here, like v-erbA, PML/RARa is a (strong)
transcriptional repressor of the RA receptor (RAR) complex, and PML/RARa fusion
receptor gene act as conditional oncogenic receptor (translocated chimeric
retinoic acid a signaling) or oncogenic PML/RARa may participate in
leukemogenesis of APL through blocking RA-mediated promyelocytic
differentiation. This is first described in eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.2174/1389201015666140113095812
PMID: 24433507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
