---
reference_id: "PMID:20301675"
title: McKusick-Kaufman Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Slavotinek AM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# McKusick-Kaufman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Slavotinek AM

## Content

1. McKusick-Kaufman Syndrome.

Slavotinek AM(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Sep 10 [updated 2020 Dec 3].

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: McKusick-Kaufman syndrome (MKS) is characterized by 
the combination of postaxial polydactyly (PAP), congenital heart disease (CHD), 
and hydrometrocolpos (HMC) in females and genital malformations in males (most 
commonly hypospadias, cryptorchidism, and chordee). HMC in infants usually 
presents as a large cystic abdominal mass arising out of the pelvis, caused by 
dilatation of the vagina and uterus as a result of the accumulation of cervical 
secretions from maternal estrogen stimulation. HMC can be caused by failure of 
the distal third of the vagina to develop (vaginal agenesis), a transverse 
vaginal membrane, or an imperforate hymen. PAP is the presence of additional 
digits on the ulnar side of the hand and the fibular side of the foot. A variety 
of congenital heart defects have been reported including atrioventricular canal, 
atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, or a complex congenital heart 
malformation.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of MKS can be established in a proband 
based on clinical diagnostic criteria of HMC and PAP in the absence of clinical 
or molecular genetic findings suggestive of an alternative diagnosis. The 
molecular diagnosis can be established in proband with suggestive findings and 
biallelic pathogenic variants in MKKS identified by molecular genetic testing. 
However, care must be taken to ensure that the proband does not have 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome, an allelic condition with considerable clinical overlap 
and age-dependent features including retinal dystrophy, obesity, and 
intellectual disability.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgical repair of the obstruction 
causing HMC and drainage of the accumulated fluid. Treatment for polydactyly and 
congenital heart defects and any other anomalies is standard. Surveillance: 
Watch for recurrent later complications of surgery for HMC; ongoing surveillance 
for manifestations of BBS including growth and developmental assessments, 
ophthalmologic examination, and electroretinogram, renal anomaly complications 
and development of severe constipation (which raises the possibility of 
Hirschsprung disease). Agents/circumstances to avoid: Care with anesthesia in 
the neonatal period as severe HMC can cause diaphragmatic compression.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MKS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents of an individual with MKS are known to be heterozygous for an MKKS 
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% 
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. (Note: Genetic counseling 
should encourage caution regarding premature diagnosis of MKS [i.e., a diagnosis 
made before age 5 years] because of the possibility of manifestations of 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome appearing at a later age.) Carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives, prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk, and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible if the MKKS pathogenic variants 
have been identified in the family. Although HMC, PAP, and CHD can be detected 
by prenatal ultrasound examination, the reliability of prenatal ultrasound as a 
method of prenatal diagnosis of MKS is unknown because these findings are 
variable and may not be apparent in an individual until after birth.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301675