---
reference_id: "PMID:20301668"
title: Hemophilia B.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Konkle BA
- Nakaya Fletcher S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemophilia B.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Konkle BA, Nakaya Fletcher S

## Content

1. Hemophilia B.

Konkle BA(1), Nakaya Fletcher S(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2000 Oct 2 [updated 2025 Aug 7].

Author information:
(1)Director, Bleeding Disorders Laboratory, Bloodworks Northwest; Hematologist,
Washington Center for Bleeding Disorders;, Professor Emeritus of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
(2)Manager, Bleeding Disorders Laboratory, Bloodworks Northwest, Seattle,
Washington

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hemophilia B is characterized by deficiency in factor
IX clotting activity that results in prolonged oozing after injuries, tooth
extractions, or surgery, and delayed or recurrent bleeding prior to complete
wound healing. The age of diagnosis and frequency of bleeding episodes are
related to the level of factor IX clotting activity. In any individual with
hemophilia B, bleeding episodes may be more frequent in childhood and
adolescence than in adulthood. Severe hemophilia B: Usually diagnosed during the
first two years of life. Without prophylactic treatment, individuals may average
up to two to five spontaneous bleeding episodes each month, including
spontaneous joint or muscle bleeds, and prolonged bleeding or excessive pain and
swelling from minor injuries, surgery, and tooth extractions. Moderate
hemophilia B: Less frequent spontaneous bleeding, although it varies between
individuals; however, individuals with moderate hemophilia B do have prolonged
or delayed oozing after relatively minor trauma and are usually diagnosed before
age five to six years. The frequency of bleeding episodes varies from once a
month to once a year. Mild hemophilia B: Individuals generally do not have
spontaneous bleeding episodes; however, without pre- and postoperative
treatment, abnormal bleeding occurs with surgery or tooth extractions. The
frequency of bleeding may vary from once a year to once every ten years.
Individuals with mild hemophilia B are often not diagnosed until later in life.
Heterozygous females: Approximately 30% of heterozygous females have factor IX
clotting activity lower than 40% and are at risk for bleeding (even if the
affected family member has mild hemophilia B). As in males, bleeding severity
generally correlates with factor IX levels. After major trauma or invasive
procedures, prolonged or excessive bleeding usually occurs, regardless of
severity.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of hemophilia B is established in individuals
with low factor IX clotting activity. Identification of a hemizygous F9
pathogenic variant by molecular genetic testing confirms the diagnosis in a male
proband. Identification of a heterozygous F9 pathogenic variant by molecular
genetic testing confirms the diagnosis in a female proband.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: For those with severe hemophilia B and those with
moderate or mild hemophilia B and frequent bleeding, prophylactic treatment with
factor IX concentrate infusions to maintain factor IX clotting activity higher
than 1% or as needed to prevent bleeding and allow normal activity improves
outcomes and prevents chronic joint disease. Other non-factor prophylactic
therapies (marstacimab, concizumab, and fitusiran) are approved in those age 12
years and older. Intravenous infusion of plasma-derived or recombinant factor IX
for acute bleeding episodes should be given as soon as possible after symptoms
occur. One product for adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated gene therapy for
hemophilia B is approved and available for use in adult males with factor IX
levels ≤2%. Most individuals who receive gene therapy for hemophilia B will have
mild hemophilia following treatment, although levels vary widely. Supportive
care: Referral to a hemophilia treatment center (HTC) for assessment, education,
genetic counseling, and treatment. Training to facilitate home infusions
administered by parents or affected individuals should be provided for
individuals affected by moderate and severe hemophilia. Physical therapy for
evaluation and treatment of musculoskeletal disease; standard treatments for
pain with help from a pain specialist as needed; standard treatments for
transfusion-related infections contracted prior to virucidal treatment of
plasma-derived concentrates. Surveillance: For young children with severe or
moderate hemophilia B, assessments every six to 12 months at an HTC; older
children and adults with severe or moderate hemophilia B benefit from at least
annual assessment at an HTC; for individuals with mild hemophilia B, assessment
at an HTC every one to two years. Individuals with comorbidities may require
more frequent visits. The assessment should include a review of bleeding
episodes, adjustment of treatment plans as needed, a joint and muscle
evaluation, an inhibitor screen, viral testing if indicated, and a discussion of
any other issues related to the individual's hemophilia B as well as family and
community support. Screening for alloimmune inhibitors is performed after
treatment with factor IX concentrates has been initiated and in any individual
with a suboptimal clinical response to treatment. Agents/circumstances to avoid:
Circumcision of at-risk males until hemophilia B is either excluded or treated
with factor IX concentrate regardless of severity; activities with a high risk
of trauma, particularly head injury. Cautious use of medications and herbal
remedies that affect platelet function, including aspirin. Use precaution with
intramuscular injections (apply pressure and ice); intramuscular injection may
be scheduled after factor IX treatment or while on prophylaxis. Evaluation of
relatives at risk: It is appropriate to evaluate asymptomatic male and female
at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as
possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of targeted therapies,
supportive care, and surveillance. It is recommended that the genetic status of
at-risk females be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as
possible. Pregnancy management: Maternal factor IX levels do not significantly
increase during pregnancy and heterozygous females may need factor IX infusion
support for delivery and/or to treat or prevent postpartum hemorrhage.
Heterozygous mothers should be monitored for delayed bleeding post partum.
Tranexamic acid can be used to prevent and treat postpartum hemorrhage. Other:
Vitamin K does not prevent or control bleeding in hemophilia B.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Hemophilia B is inherited in an X-linked manner. The risk to
sibs of a male proband depends on the genetic status of the mother. The risk to
sibs of a female proband depends on the genetic status of the mother and father.
If the mother of the proband has an F9 pathogenic variant, the chance of the
mother transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%. If the father of the proband
has an F9 pathogenic variant, he will transmit it to all his daughters and none
of his sons. Males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; females
who inherit the pathogenic variant are heterozygotes and may be at risk for
bleeding. Once the F9 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected
family member, genetic testing for at-risk family members and
prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301668
