---
reference_id: "PMID:24577547"
title: Acute hemolytic anemia as an initial presentation of Wilson disease in children.
authors:
- El Raziky MS
- Ali A
- El Shahawy A
- Hamdy MM
journal: J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000127
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adolescent
- "Anemia, Hemolytic/diagnosis, metabolism"
- Ceruloplasmin/metabolism
- Chelating Agents/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/diagnosis, metabolism"
- Humans
- Liver Function Tests
- Male
- Penicillamine/metabolism
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute hemolytic anemia as an initial presentation of Wilson disease in children.
**Authors:** El Raziky MS, Ali A, El Shahawy A, Hamdy MM
**Journal:** J Pediatr Hematol Oncol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPH.0000000000000127](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPH.0000000000000127)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2014 Apr;36(3):173-8. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0000000000000127.

Acute hemolytic anemia as an initial presentation of Wilson disease in children.

El Raziky MS(1), Ali A, El Shahawy A, Hamdy MM.

Author information:
(1)*Pediatric Department, Cairo University †Pediatric Department, National
Hepatology and Tropical Medicine Institute, Cairo, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Wilson disease (WD) is an inherited disorder of copper metabolism.
Hemolytic anemia in WD occurs in up to 17% of patients at some point during
their illness.
AIM: To screen for WD among children presenting with hemolytic anemia.
METHODOLOGY: Twenty cases (mean age, 8.8 ± 3.9 y) with Coombs-negative hemolytic
anemia, attending the hematology clinic of children hospital, Cairo University,
were screened for WD by serum ceruloplasmin level, 24 hours urinary copper
before and after D-penicillamine challenge test, and slit-lamp examination for
detecting Kayser-Fleischer rings.
RESULTS: No case had low ceruloplasmin, whereas bilateral Kayser-Fleischer rings
was detected in 5% of our cases. Urinary copper was elevated in 5% before and in
40% after D-penicillamine challenge test. According to the scoring system used,
1 case had definite WD and 7 cases were likely to have WD. These 8 (40%) cases
were referred to as group B. Group B had a significantly lower hemoglobin, mean
corpuscular volume, mean corpuscular hemoglobin, and reticulocytes (P=0.04,
0.001, 0.04, and 0.04, respectively) and a significantly higher urinary copper
after penicillamine (P=0.000) when compared with group A (unlikely WD).
CONCLUSION: WD is not uncommon in children with hemolytic anemia after exclusion
of other common causes.

DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000127
PMID: 24577547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
