---
reference_id: "PMID:10878487"
title: Humoral and cellular autoimmunity in autoimmune bullous skin disorders.
authors:
- Hertl M
journal: Int Arch Allergy Immunol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1159/000024364
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Humoral and cellular autoimmunity in autoimmune bullous skin disorders.
**Authors:** Hertl M
**Journal:** Int Arch Allergy Immunol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000024364](https://doi.org/10.1159/000024364)

## Content

1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2000 Jun;122(2):91-100. doi: 10.1159/000024364.

Humoral and cellular autoimmunity in autoimmune bullous skin disorders.

Hertl M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität, Erlangen, 
Germany. Michael.hertl@derma.med.uni-erlangen.de

Autoimmune bullous skin diseases, such as pemphigus vulgaris (PV) and bullous 
pemphigoid (BP), are severe, frequently life-threatening skin disorders. 
Immunologically, they are characterized by the presence of serum autoantibodies 
(auto-Ab) targeting distinct adhesion molecules of the epidermis or 
dermoepidermal basement membrane zone. Antibody (Ab) binding interferes with the 
adhesive function of these molecules, leading to detachment and subsequently 
blister formation. PV is the classical example of an Ab-mediated autoimmune 
disease affecting epidermal adhesion. Auto-Ab against the desmosomal adhesion 
molecule, desmoglein 3 (Dsg3), are critical in the pathogenesis of this disease, 
since the transfer of serum IgG Ab reactive with Dsg3 into newborn mice induces 
a bullous skin disease resembling PV. Autoreactive T cell responses to Dsg3 may 
be critical in the pathogenesis of PV because: (1) Ab production generally 
requires T cell help; (2) the involvement of CD4+ T lymphocytes in PV has been 
suggested by the strong association with distinct HLA class II alleles, and (3) 
T cell recognition of epitopes of Dsg3 may be crucial for the initiation and 
perpetuation of the production of Dsg3-specific auto-Ab by B cells. In PV and 
BP, autoreactive CD4+ T cells recognize distinct epitopes of the extracellular 
portions of Dsg3 and BP180 [BP antigen 2 (BPAG2) or type XVII collagen], 
respectively, and produce preferentially T helper type 2 (TH2) cytokines. 
Auto-Ab of the TH2-dependent IgG4 subtype are preferentially seen in the active 
stages of both PV and BP, while auto-Ab of the TH1-dependent IgG1 subclass are 
predominant during the chronic course of these disorders. These observations 
suggest that autoreactive TH2 cells may provide targets to specifically modulate 
the T cell-dependent production of pathogenic auto-Ab in these disorders.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000024364
PMID: 10878487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]