---
reference_id: "PMID:34108180"
title: Role of Tumor-Infiltrating B Cells in Clinical Outcome of Patients with Melanoma Treated With Dabrafenib Plus Trametinib.
authors:
- Brase JC
- Walter RFH
- Savchenko A
- Gusenleitner D
- Garrett J
- Schimming T
- Varaljai R
- Castelletti D
- Kim J
- Dakappagari N
- Schultz K
- Robert C
- Long GV
- Nathan PD
- Ribas A
- Flaherty KT
- Karaszewska B
- Schachter J
- Sucker A
- Schmid KW
- Zimmer L
- Livingstone E
- Gasal E
- Schadendorf D
- Roesch A
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-3586
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage"
- B-Lymphocytes
- Humans
- "Imidazoles/administration & dosage"
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Oximes/administration & dosage"
- "Pyridones/administration & dosage"
- "Pyrimidinones/administration & dosage"
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Tumor-Infiltrating B Cells in Clinical Outcome of Patients with Melanoma Treated With Dabrafenib Plus Trametinib.
**Authors:** Brase JC, Walter RFH, Savchenko A, Gusenleitner D, Garrett J, Schimming T, Varaljai R, Castelletti D, Kim J, Dakappagari N, Schultz K, Robert C, Long GV, Nathan PD, Ribas A, Flaherty KT, Karaszewska B, Schachter J, Sucker A, Schmid KW, Zimmer L, Livingstone E, Gasal E, Schadendorf D, Roesch A
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-3586](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-3586)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2021 Aug 15;27(16):4500-4510. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-3586. Epub 2021 Jun 9.

Role of Tumor-Infiltrating B Cells in Clinical Outcome of Patients with Melanoma
Treated With Dabrafenib Plus Trametinib.

Brase JC(#)(1), Walter RFH(#)(2)(3), Savchenko A(#)(4), Gusenleitner D(#)(5),
Garrett J(6), Schimming T(7)(8), Varaljai R(7), Castelletti D(1), Kim J(9),
Dakappagari N(9), Schultz K(4), Robert C(10), Long GV(11), Nathan PD(12), Ribas
A(13), Flaherty KT(14), Karaszewska B(15), Schachter J(16), Sucker A(7), Schmid
KW(2)(3)(17), Zimmer L(7), Livingstone E(7), Gasal E(18), Schadendorf D(7)(17),
Roesch A(19)(17).

Author information:
(1)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Pathology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(3)Ruhrlandklinik, West German Lung Center, University Hospital Essen,
University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany.
(4)Oncology Precision Medicine, Novartis, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(5)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(6)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(7)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Fachklinik Hornheide, Münster, Germany.
(9)Navigate BioPharma Services, Inc. (a Novartis subsidiary), Carlsbad,
California.
(10)Gustave Roussy and Paris-Sud-Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, France.
(11)Melanoma Institute Australia and Sydney Medical School, The University of
Sydney, and Royal North Shore and Mater Hospitals, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.
(12)Mount Vernon Cancer Centre, Northwood, United Kingdom.
(13)Department of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California.
(14)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts.
(15)Przychodnia Lekarska Komed, Konin, Poland.
(16)The Ella Lemelbaum Institute for Immuno-Oncology and Melanoma, Sheba Medical
Center, Tel Hashomer, and Sackler Medical School, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel.
(17)German Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany.
(18)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, New Jersey.
(19)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. alexander.roesch@uk-essen.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    1078-0432. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.4457.27.16.

PURPOSE: Although patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma can
experience long-term survival with BRAF- and MEK-targeted agents or immune
checkpoint inhibitors over 5 years, resistance develops in most patients. There
is a distinct lack of pretherapeutic biomarkers to identify which patients are
likely to benefit from each therapy type. Most research has focused on the
predictive role of T cells in antitumor responses as opposed to B cells.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted prespecified exploratory biomarker analysis
using gene expression profiling and digital pathology in 146 patients with
previously untreated BRAF V600-mutant metastatic melanoma from the randomized,
phase III COMBI-v trial and treated with dabrafenib plus trametinib who had
available tumor specimens from screening.
RESULTS: Baseline cell-cycle gene expression signature was associated with
progression-free survival (P = 0.007). Patients with high T-cell/low B-cell gene
signatures had improved median overall survival (not reached [95% confidence
interval (CI), 33.8 months-not reached]) compared with patients with high
T-cell/high B-cell signatures (19.1 months; 95% CI, 13.4-38.6 months). Patients
with high B-cell signatures had high B-cell infiltration into the tumor
compartment, corresponding with decreased MAPK activity and increased expression
of immunosuppressive markers.
CONCLUSIONS: B cells may serve as a potential biomarker to predict clinical
outcome in patients with advanced melanoma treated with dabrafenib plus
trametinib. As separate studies have shown an opposite effect for B-cell levels
and response to immunotherapy, B cells may serve as a potential biomarker to
facilitate treatment selection. Further validation in a larger patient cohort is
needed.

©2021 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-3586
PMCID: PMC9401540
PMID: 34108180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
