---
reference_id: "PMID:15675134"
title: "Predictors of left ventricular dysfunction in patients with Takayasu's or giant cell aortitis."
authors:
- Pfizenmaier DH
- Al Atawi FO
- Castillo Y
- Chandrasekaran K
- Cooper LT
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2004'
keywords:
- Adult
- Comorbidity
- Echocardiography
- Female
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/complications, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Minnesota/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Single-Blind Method
- "Takayasu Arteritis/complications, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Ventricular Dysfunction, Left/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of left ventricular dysfunction in patients with Takayasu's or giant cell aortitis.
**Authors:** Pfizenmaier DH, Al Atawi FO, Castillo Y, Chandrasekaran K, Cooper LT
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2004)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2004;22(6 Suppl 36):S41-5.

Predictors of left ventricular dysfunction in patients with Takayasu's or giant
cell aortitis.

Pfizenmaier DH(1), Al Atawi FO, Castillo Y, Chandrasekaran K, Cooper LT.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905,
USA.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine the clinical and angiographic
predictors of left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD) from a relatively
large and angiographically characterized Takayasu's or Giant Cell aortitis
(TA/GCA) population.
BACKGROUND: LVSD in patients with TA/GCA has been described in case reports and
attributed variously to hemodynamic and immunologic factors. The predictors of
LVSD in patients with angiographically confirmed TA/GCA are not known.
METHODS: We identified 78 patients with angiographically confirmed TA/ GCA that
underwent transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) at Mayo Clinic. Echocardiograms
were then reviewed independently by reviewers blinded to clinical and
angiographic data. LVSD was defined as an ejection fraction (LVEF) less than
50%.
RESULTS: The study population was 84% Caucasian (54/78), 91% female (58/78), and
had a mean age of disease onset of 30 years (+/- 15 years). LVSD was present in
14 of 78 patients (18%) with TA/GCA. The mean LVEF in the LVSD group (n = 14)
was 37% +/- 7%, compared to an LVEF of 62% +/- 6% (p < 0.0001) in those without
LVSD (n = 64). LVSD was not associated with hypertension or aortic regurgitation
(p > 0.5). However, LVSD was found in 43% (9/21) of patients with aortic arch
involvement, versus only 9% (5/57) of patients without aortic arch involvement
(p = 0.0013). Patients with LVSD had a median of 2 (range 1-4) involved aortic
segments compared to a median of 1 (range 1-4) among those without LVSD (p =
0.013).
CONCLUSIONS: In TA/GCA aortitis, LVSD is associated with involvement of the
aortic arch and with the greater extent of aortic involvement. The hemodynamic
variables, aortic regurgitation and systemic hypertension, were not associated
with LVSD, consistent with reports that cardiac inflammation is responsible for
LVSD in a majority of cases. Ours is the first study to estimate an incidence of
LVSD in patients with TA/GCA aortitis, which was 18%.

PMID: 15675134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
