---
reference_id: "PMID:38658850"
title: "Clinical and molecular outcomes from the 5-Year natural history study of SSADH Deficiency, a model metabolic neurodevelopmental disorder."
authors:
- Tokatly Latzer I
- Roullet JB
- Afshar-Saber W
- Lee HHC
- Bertoldi M
- McGinty GE
- DiBacco ML
- Arning E
- Tsuboyama M
- Rotenberg A
- Opladen T
- Jeltsch K
- García-Cazorla À
- Juliá-Palacios N
- Gibson KM
- Sahin M
- Pearl PL
journal: J Neurodev Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s11689-024-09538-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/therapy, physiopathology, genetics, complications, metabolism"
- "Brain/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Developmental Disabilities
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- GABAergic Neurons/metabolism
- gamma-Aminobutyric Acid/metabolism
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/metabolism, etiology, genetics"
- "Succinate-Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase/deficiency, metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular outcomes from the 5-Year natural history study of SSADH Deficiency, a model metabolic neurodevelopmental disorder.
**Authors:** Tokatly Latzer I, Roullet JB, Afshar-Saber W, Lee HHC, Bertoldi M, McGinty GE, DiBacco ML, Arning E, Tsuboyama M, Rotenberg A, Opladen T, Jeltsch K, García-Cazorla À, Juliá-Palacios N, Gibson KM, Sahin M, Pearl PL
**Journal:** J Neurodev Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s11689-024-09538-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s11689-024-09538-9)

## Content

1. J Neurodev Disord. 2024 Apr 24;16(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s11689-024-09538-9.

Clinical and molecular outcomes from the 5-Year natural history study of SSADH
Deficiency, a model metabolic neurodevelopmental disorder.

Tokatly Latzer I(1)(2), Roullet JB(3), Afshar-Saber W(4)(5), Lee HHC(4)(5),
Bertoldi M(6), McGinty GE(5), DiBacco ML(1), Arning E(7), Tsuboyama M(1),
Rotenberg A(1)(5), Opladen T(8), Jeltsch K(8), García-Cazorla À(9),
Juliá-Palacios N(9), Gibson KM(3), Sahin M(1)(4)(5), Pearl PL(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
300 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(2)School of Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Pharmacotherapy, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Washington State University, Spokane, WA, USA.
(4)Rosamund Stone Zander Translational Neuroscience Center, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(5)F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA,
02115, USA.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(7)Institute of Metabolic Disease, Baylor Scott & White Research Institute,
Dallas, TX, USA.
(8)Division of Neuropediatrics & Metabolic Medicine, University Children's
Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(9)Neurometabolic Unit, Neurology Department, Institut de Recerca, Hospital Sant
Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
300 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. Phillip.Pearl@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (SSADHD) represents a
model neurometabolic disease at the fulcrum of translational research within the
Boston Children's Hospital Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research
Centers (IDDRC), including the NIH-sponsored natural history study of clinical,
neurophysiological, neuroimaging, and molecular markers, patient-derived induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) characterization, and development of a murine
model for tightly regulated, cell-specific gene therapy.
METHODS: SSADHD subjects underwent clinical evaluations, neuropsychological
assessments, biochemical quantification of γ-aminobutyrate (GABA) and related
metabolites, electroencephalography (standard and high density),
magnetoencephalography, transcranial magnetic stimulation, magnetic resonance
imaging and spectroscopy, and genetic tests. This was parallel to laboratory
molecular investigations of in vitro GABAergic neurons derived from induced
human pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) of SSADHD subjects and biochemical
analyses performed on a versatile murine model that uses an inducible and
reversible rescue strategy allowing on-demand and cell-specific gene therapy.
RESULTS: The 62 SSADHD subjects [53% females, median (IQR) age of 9.6 (5.4-14.5)
years] included in the study had a reported symptom onset at ∼ 6 months and were
diagnosed at a median age of 4 years. Language developmental delays were more
prominent than motor. Autism, epilepsy, movement disorders, sleep disturbances,
and various psychiatric behaviors constituted the core of the disorder's
clinical phenotype. Lower clinical severity scores, indicating worst severity,
coincided with older age (R= -0.302, p = 0.03), as well as age-adjusted lower
values of plasma γ-aminobutyrate (GABA) (R = 0.337, p = 0.02) and
γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB) (R = 0.360, p = 0.05). While epilepsy and psychiatric
behaviors increase in severity with age, communication abilities and motor
function tend to improve. iPSCs, which were differentiated into GABAergic
neurons, represent the first in vitro neuronal model of SSADHD and express the
neuronal marker microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), as well as GABA.
GABA-metabolism in induced GABAergic neurons could be reversed using CRISPR
correction of the pathogenic variants or mRNA transfection and SSADHD iPSCs were
associated with excessive glutamatergic activity and related synaptic
excitation.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings from the SSADHD Natural History Study converge with iPSC
and animal model work focused on a common disorder within our IDDRC, deepening
our knowledge of the pathophysiology and longitudinal clinical course of a
complex neurodevelopmental disorder. This further enables the identification of
biomarkers and changes throughout development that will be essential for
upcoming targeted trials of enzyme replacement and gene therapy.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s11689-024-09538-9
PMCID: PMC11044349
PMID: 38658850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors AR and HHCL are co-founders and have
equity in Galibra Neuroscience, Inc., which develops treatments for SSADHD
including gene replacement therapy discussed in this study.
