---
reference_id: "PMID:20301432"
title: ARSACS.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Vermeer S
- van de Warrenburg BP
- Kamsteeg EJ
- Brais B
- Synofzik M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ARSACS.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Vermeer S, van de Warrenburg BP, Kamsteeg EJ, Brais B, Synofzik M

## Content

1. ARSACS.

Vermeer S(1), van de Warrenburg BP(2), Kamsteeg EJ(2), Brais B(3), Synofzik 
M(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Dec 9 [updated 2020 Jan 2].

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Leuven Center for Human Genetics Leuven, Belgium
(2)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center Nijmegen, The Netherlands
(3)Montreal Neurological Institute McGill University Montreal, Quebec, Canada
(4)Center for Neurology & Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research Tübingen, 
Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of 
Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is clinically characterized by a progressive 
cerebellar ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, and spasticity. Disease onset of 
classic ARSACS is often in early childhood, leading to delayed walking because 
of gait unsteadiness in very young toddlers, while an increasing number of 
individuals with disease onset in teenage or early-adult years are now being 
described. Typically the ataxia is followed by lower-limb spasticity and later 
by peripheral neuropathy – although pronounced peripheral neuropathy has been 
observed as a first sign of ARSACS. Oculomotor disturbances, dysarthria, and 
upper-limb ataxia develop with slower progression than the other findings. Brain 
imaging demonstrates atrophy of the superior vermis and the cerebellar 
hemisphere with additional findings on MRI, such as linear hypointensities in 
the pons and hyperintense rims around the thalami. Many affected individuals 
(though not all) have yellow streaks of hypermyelinated fibers radiating from 
the edges of the optic disc noted on ophthalmologic exam, and thickened retinal 
fibers can be demonstrated by optical coherence tomography. Mild intellectual 
disability, hearing loss, and urinary urgency and incontinence have been 
reported in some individuals.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ARSACS is established in a proband with 
suggestive clinical findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in SACS 
identified on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Physiotherapy and exergames tailored to 
ataxia; physical therapy and oral medications such as baclofen to control 
spasticity in the early phase of the disease may prevent tendon shortening and 
joint contractures and, hence, may help to postpone major functional 
disabilities until severe muscle weakness or cerebellar ataxia occur. As needed, 
services for mild intellectual disability and dysarthria and use of hearing 
aids. Urinary urgency and incontinence may be controlled with low doses of 
amitriptyline, oxybutynin. Surveillance: Annual neurologic examination.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ARSACS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If 
each parent is known to be heterozygous for a SACS pathogenic variant, each sib 
of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 
50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being neither 
affected nor a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk family members and prenatal 
testing for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if both pathogenic 
variants have been identified in an affected family member. Population screening 
for the most common SACS pathogenic variants is an option for individuals with a 
genealogic link to regions of high ARSACS prevalence.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301432