---
reference_id: "PMID:28516284"
title: "Short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: from gene to cell pathology and possible disease mechanisms."
authors:
- Nochi Z
- Olsen RKJ
- Gregersen N
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-017-0047-1
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- Animals
- Genetic Variation/genetics
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, pathology"
- Neonatal Screening/methods
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: from gene to cell pathology and possible disease mechanisms.
**Authors:** Nochi Z, Olsen RKJ, Gregersen N
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-017-0047-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-017-0047-1)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2017 Sep;40(5):641-655. doi: 10.1007/s10545-017-0047-1. 
Epub 2017 May 17.

Short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: from gene to cell pathology and 
possible disease mechanisms.

Nochi Z(1), Olsen RKJ(2), Gregersen N(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus 
University Hospital and Faculty of Health, Aarhus University, Palle Juul-Jensens 
Boulevard 99, Aarhus N, 8200, Denmark. z.nochi@clin.au.dk.
(2)Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus 
University Hospital and Faculty of Health, Aarhus University, Palle Juul-Jensens 
Boulevard 99, Aarhus N, 8200, Denmark.

Short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SCADD) is an inherited disorder 
of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation that is characterized by the presence of 
increased butyrylcarnitine and ethylmalonic acid (EMA) concentrations in plasma 
and urine. Individuals with symptomatic SCADD may show relatively severe 
phenotype, while the majority of those who are diagnosed through newborn 
screening by tandem mass spectrometry may remain asymptomatic. As such, the 
associated clinical symptoms are very diverse, ranging from severe metabolic or 
neuromuscular disabilities to asymptomatic. Molecular analysis of affected 
individuals has identified rare gene variants along with two common gene 
variants, c.511C > T and c.625G > A. In vitro studies have demonstrated that the 
common variants as well as the great majority of rare variants, which are 
missense variants, impair folding, that may lead to toxic accumulation of the 
encoded protein, and/or metabolites, and initiate excessive production of ROS 
and chronic oxidative stress. It has been suggested that this cell toxicity in 
combination with yet unknown factors can trigger disease development. This 
association and the full implications of SCADD are not commonly appreciated. 
Accordingly, there is a worldwide discussion of the relationship of clinical 
manifestation to SCADD, and whether SCAD gene variants are disease associated at 
all. Therefore, SCADD is not part of the newborn screening programs in most 
countries, and consequently many patients with SCAD gene variants do not get a 
diagnosis and the possibilities to be followed up during development.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-017-0047-1
PMID: 28516284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]