---
reference_id: "PMID:27176875"
title: "Strain and strain rate echocardiography in children with Wilson's disease."
authors:
- Karakurt C
- Çelik S
- Selimoğlu A
- Varol I
- Karabiber H
- Yoloğlu S
journal: Cardiovasc J Afr
year: '2016'
doi: 10.5830/CVJA-2016-028
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age Factors
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Early Diagnosis
- Echocardiography/methods
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/complications, diagnosis"
- Humans
- Male
- Myocardial Contraction
- Patient Positioning
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- "Stress, Mechanical"
- "Ventricular Dysfunction, Left/diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Ventricular Function, Left"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Strain and strain rate echocardiography in children with Wilson's disease.
**Authors:** Karakurt C, Çelik S, Selimoğlu A, Varol I, Karabiber H, Yoloğlu S
**Journal:** Cardiovasc J Afr (2016)
**DOI:** [10.5830/CVJA-2016-028](https://doi.org/10.5830/CVJA-2016-028)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc J Afr. 2016 Sep/Oct 23;27(5):307-314. doi: 10.5830/CVJA-2016-028.
Epub 2016 May 13.

Strain and strain rate echocardiography in children with Wilson's disease.

Karakurt C(1), Çelik S(1), Selimoğlu A(2), Varol I(2), Karabiber H(2), Yoloğlu
S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu University,
Malatya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu
University, Malatya, Turkey.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu University, Malatya,
Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate strain and strain rate echocardiography
in children with Wilson's disease to detect early cardiac dysfunction.
METHODS: In this study, 21 patients with Wilson's disease and a control group of
20 age- and gender-matched healthy children were included. All the patients and
the control group were evaluated with two-dimensional (2D) and colour-coded
conventional transthoracic echocardiography by the same paediatric cardiologist
using the same echocardiography machine (Vivid E9, GE Healthcare, Norway) in
standard precordial positions, according to the American Society of
Echocardiography recommendations. 2D strain and strain rate echocardiography
were performed after the ECG probes of the echocardiography machine were
adjusted for ECG monitoring. Longitudinal, transverse and radial strain, and
strain rate were assessed from six basal and six mid-ventricular segments of the
left ventricle, as recommended by the American Society of Echocardiography.
RESULTS: Left ventricular wall thickness, systolic and diastolic diameters, left
ventricular diameters normalised to body surface area, end-systolic and
end-diastolic volumes, cardiac output and cardiac index values were within
normal limits and statistically similar in the patient and control groups (p >
0.05). Global strain and strain rate: the patient group had a statistically
significant lower peak A longitudinal velocity of the left basal point and peak
E longitudinal velocity of the left basal (VAbasR) point, and higher global peak
A longitudinal/circumferential strain rate (GSRa) compared to the corresponding
values of the control group (p < 0.05). Radial strain and strain rate:
end-systolic rotation [ROT (ES)] was statistically significantly lower in the
patient group (p < 0.05). Longitudinal strain and strain rate: end-systolic
longitudinal strain [SLSC (ES)] and positive peak transverse strain (STSR peak
P) were statistically significantly lower in the patient group (p < 0.05).
Segmental analysis showed that rotational strain measurement of the anterior and
lateral segments of the patient group were statistically significantly lower
than the corresponding values of the control group (p < 0.05). Segmental
analysis showed statistically significantly lower values of endsystolic
longitudinal strain [STSR (ES)] of the basal lateral (p < 0.05) and end-systolic
longitudinal strain [SLSC (ES)] of the basal septal segment (p < 0.05) in the
patient group. End-systolic longitudinal strain [SLSC (ES)] and positive peak
transverse strain (STSR peak P) were statistically significantly lower in the
patient group (p < 0.05). Segmental analysis showed statistically significantly
lower values of endsystolic longitudinal strain [SLSC (ES)] of the mid-anterior
and basal anterior segments (p < 0.05), end-systolic longitudinal strain [STSR
(ES)] measurements of the posterior and mid-posterior segments, end-systolic
longitudinal displacement [DLDC (ES)] of the basal posterior, mid-posterior and
mid-antero-septal segments in the patient group.
CONCLUSION: Cardiac arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy and sudden cardiac death are
rare complications but may be seen in children with Wilson's disease due to
copper accumulation in the heart tissue. Strain and strain rate echocardiography
is a relatively new and useful echocardiographic technique to evaluate cardiac
function and cardiac deformation abnormalities. Our study showed that despite
normal systolic function, patients with Wilson's disease showed diastolic
dysfunction and regional deformation abnormalities, especially rotational strain
and strain rate abnormalities.

DOI: 10.5830/CVJA-2016-028
PMCID: PMC5378936
PMID: 27176875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
