---
reference_id: "PMID:38076230"
title: "C3 glomerulopathies: dense deposit disease and C3 glomerulonephritis."
authors:
- Ponticelli C
- Calatroni M
- Moroni G
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1289812
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C3 glomerulopathies: dense deposit disease and C3 glomerulonephritis.
**Authors:** Ponticelli C, Calatroni M, Moroni G
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1289812](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1289812)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Nov 24;10:1289812. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1289812. 
eCollection 2023.

C3 glomerulopathies: dense deposit disease and C3 glomerulonephritis.

Ponticelli C(1), Calatroni M(2)(3), Moroni G(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Independent Researcher, Milan, Italy.
(2)IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy.

Dense deposit disease (DDD) and C3 glomerulonephritis (C3GN) are types of 
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis classified as C3 glomerulopathies. 
These conditions are characterized by an increased number of intraglomerular 
cells and diffuse thickening of the glomerular capillary walls, along with the 
deposition of C3 and minimal or absent immunoglobulin deposits. The underlying 
cause of both DDD and C3Gn is an abnormal activation of the alternative 
complement pathway, which can result from acquired or genetic alteration. In 
acquired forms of DDD and C3GN, the dysregulation of the alternative pathway is 
commonly induced by the presence of C3 nephritic factors (C3NeFs), which are 
autoantibodies that stabilize C3 convertase. Both DDD and C3GN can affect 
individuals of any age, but DDD is primarily diagnosed in children, whereas C3GN 
tends to be diagnosed at a significantly higher age. The presenting features of 
these diseases are variable and may include proteinuria, hematuria, 
hypertension, or kidney failure. A common finding in these diseases is low serum 
C3 levels with normal serum C4 levels. Chronic deterioration of renal function 
is commonly observed in DDD and C3GN, often leading to end-stage renal disease 
(ESRD), especially in DDD. Kidney transplantation outcomes in patients with 
these conditions are characterized by histological recurrence, which may 
contribute to higher rates of allograft failure.

Copyright © 2023 Ponticelli, Calatroni and Moroni.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1289812
PMCID: PMC10704907
PMID: 38076230

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.