---
reference_id: "PMID:36719455"
title: "Biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma with PAX3::MAML3 fusion transforming into high-grade rhabdomyosarcoma: report of an emerging rare phenomenon."
authors:
- Meyer A
- Klubíčková N
- Mosaieby E
- Grossmann P
- Kalmykova A
- Koshyk O
- Michal M
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-023-03501-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Desmin
- Immunohistochemistry
- Myogenin
- Paranasal Sinus Neoplasms/pathology
- PAX3 Transcription Factor/genetics
- Rhabdomyosarcoma/genetics
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Alveolar"
- S100 Proteins
- Sarcoma/genetics
- Soft Tissue Neoplasms/genetics
- Trans-Activators
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma with PAX3::MAML3 fusion transforming into high-grade rhabdomyosarcoma: report of an emerging rare phenomenon.
**Authors:** Meyer A, Klubíčková N, Mosaieby E, Grossmann P, Kalmykova A, Koshyk O, Michal M
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-023-03501-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-023-03501-0)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2023 Apr;482(4):777-782. doi: 10.1007/s00428-023-03501-0. Epub
2023 Jan 31.

Biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma with PAX3::MAML3 fusion transforming into
high-grade rhabdomyosarcoma: report of an emerging rare phenomenon.

Meyer A(1), Klubíčková N(2)(3), Mosaieby E(2)(3), Grossmann P(3), Kalmykova
A(2)(4), Koshyk O(2)(4), Michal M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Kansas, KS, Kansas City, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Medical
Faculty and Charles University Hospital Plzen, Alej Svobody 80, 323 00, Plzen,
Czech Republic.
(3)Bioptical Laboratory, Ltd., Plzen, Czech Republic.
(4)Medical Laboratory CSD Health Care, Ltd., Kyiv, Ukraine.
(5)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Medical
Faculty and Charles University Hospital Plzen, Alej Svobody 80, 323 00, Plzen,
Czech Republic. michael.michal@biopticka.cz.
(6)Bioptical Laboratory, Ltd., Plzen, Czech Republic.
michael.michal@biopticka.cz.

We report a case of a 67-year-old male patient with a sinonasal tumor that
showed areas of classic biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma (BSNS) which in some
sections sharply transitioned into high-grade rhabdomyosarcoma.
Immunohistochemically, the conventional BSNS parts showed S100 protein, SMA,
PAX7, and focal MyoD1 expression, whereas desmin and myogenin were negative. In
contrast, the cells in high-grade areas expressed desmin, MyoD1, myogenin, and
PAX7, while being negative for S100 protein and SMA. Using the Archer FusionPlex
assay, the classical PAX3::MAML3 gene fusion was detected. FISH for PAX3 and
MAML3 confirmed a break of these genes in both components. Despite aggressive
therapy, the tumor progression resulted in the patient's death. The herein
presented case, together with 2 previously published cases of BSNS with
high-grade transformation, helps to better understand this novel phenomenon.
Although the risk for such transformation appears low, it has important clinical
and diagnostic implications which are discussed.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-023-03501-0
PMCID: PMC10067655
PMID: 36719455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
