---
reference_id: "PMID:37943707"
title: "Tick-Borne Encephalitis Vaccine: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, United States, 2023."
authors:
- Hills SL
- Poehling KA
- Chen WH
- Staples JE
journal: MMWR Recomm Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.rr7205a1
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- United States/epidemiology
- "Encephalitis, Tick-Borne/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Advisory Committees
- Vaccination
- Vaccines
- Ixodes
- "Encephalitis Viruses, Tick-Borne"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tick-Borne Encephalitis Vaccine: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, United States, 2023.
**Authors:** Hills SL, Poehling KA, Chen WH, Staples JE
**Journal:** MMWR Recomm Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.15585/mmwr.rr7205a1](https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr7205a1)

## Content

1. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2023 Nov 10;72(5):1-29. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.rr7205a1.

Tick-Borne Encephalitis Vaccine: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices, United States, 2023.

Hills SL, Poehling KA, Chen WH, Staples JE.

TICK-BORNE ENCEPHALITIS (TBE) VIRUS IS FOCALLY ENDEMIC IN PARTS OF EUROPE AND 
ASIA. THE VIRUS IS PRIMARILY TRANSMITTED TO HUMANS BY THE BITES OF INFECTED: 
Ixodes species ticks but can also be acquired less frequently by alimentary 
transmission. Other rare modes of transmission include through breastfeeding, 
blood transfusion, solid organ transplantation, and slaughtering of viremic 
animals. TBE virus can cause acute neurologic disease, which usually results in 
hospitalization, often permanent neurologic or cognitive sequelae, and sometimes 
death. TBE virus infection is a risk for certain travelers and for laboratory 
workers who work with the virus. In August 2021, the Food and Drug 
Administration approved Ticovac TBE vaccine for use among persons aged ≥1 year. 
This report summarizes the epidemiology of and risks for infection with TBE 
virus, provides information on the immunogenicity and safety of TBE vaccine, and 
summarizes the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP) for use of TBE vaccine among U.S. travelers and laboratory 
workers.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.rr7205a1
PMCID: PMC10651317
PMID: 37943707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the 
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of 
potential conflicts of interest. No conflicts of interest were reported.