---
reference_id: "PMID:36709932"
title: "[Analysis of clinical features, biochemical indices and genetic variants among children with Short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency detected by neonatal screening]."
authors:
- Zhao H
- Zhou D
- Miao H
- Chen C
- Yang J
- Yang R
- Huang X
journal: Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511376-20220318-00179
keywords:
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics"
- Carnitine
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Analysis of clinical features, biochemical indices and genetic variants among children with Short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency detected by neonatal screening].
**Authors:** Zhao H, Zhou D, Miao H, Chen C, Yang J, Yang R, Huang X
**Journal:** Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3760/cma.j.cn511376-20220318-00179](https://doi.org/10.3760/cma.j.cn511376-20220318-00179)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2023 Feb 10;40(2):155-160. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.cn511376-20220318-00179.

[Analysis of clinical features, biochemical indices and genetic variants among
children with Short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency detected by
neonatal screening].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao H(1), Zhou D, Miao H, Chen C, Yang J, Yang R, Huang X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital Affiliated to
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for
Child Health, National Children's Regional Medical Center, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310052, China. 6305022@zju.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical manifestations, biochemical abnormalities
and pathogenic variants among children with Short/branched-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase (SBCAD) deficiency detected by neonatal screening.
METHODS: A total of 2 730 852 newborns were screened from January 2016 to
December 2021 with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Suspected
SBCAD deficiency patients were diagnosed by urine organic acid analysis and
high-throughput gene sequencing analysis. The clinical, biochemical and genetic
changes of the confirmed cases were analyzed, in addition with guidance for diet
and life management, L-carnitine supplement, and survey of growth and
intellectual development.
RESULTS: Twelve cases of SBCAD deficiency were diagnosed, which yielded a
prevalence of 1/227 571. The lsovaleryl carnitine (C5) of primary screening
blood samples was between 0.6 and 2.1 µmol/L, all exceeded the normal range.
C5/acety1 carnitine (C2) was between 0.02 and 0.12, with 6 cases exceeding the
normal range. C5/propionyl carnitine (C3) was between 0.1 and 1.16, with 5 cases
exceeding the normal range. Free carnitine (C0) was between 18.89 and 58.12
µmol, with 1 case exceeding the normal range. Three neonates with abnormal
screening results were recommended to have appropriate restriction for protein
intake and two were given L-carnitine. During follow-up, their C5 has ranged
from 0.22 to 2.32 µmol/L, C5/C2 has ranged from 0.01 to 0.31, C5/C3 has ranged
from 0.14 to 1.7. C5 or C5/C2 and C5/C3 were transiently normal in all patients
except for case 8 during the neonatal screening and follow-up. C0 was 17.42 ∼
76.83 µmol/L Urine organic acid analysis was carried out in 9 of the 12 cases,
and 2-methylbutyroglycine was elevated in 8 cases. Urine organic acid analysis
was carried out in 9 cases, and 2-methylbutyrylglycine was increased in 8 cases.
Genetic analysis was carried out for 11 children, and in total 6 ACADSB gene
variants were identified, which included 4 missense variants (c.655G>A,
c.923G>A, c.461G>A, c.1165A>G), 1 frameshift variant (c.746del) and 1 nonsense
variant (c.275C>G). Among these, the C.461G>A variant was unreported previously.
The most common variants were c.1165A>G (40.9%) and C.275C>G (22.7%). The
patients were followed up for 18 days to 55 months. Only one patient had mental
retardation, with the remainders having normal physical and mental development.
CONCLUSION: SBCAD deficiency is a rare disease. The detection rate of newborn
screening in this study was 1/227 571. Early intervention can be attained in
most asymptomatic patients through neonatal screening. In this study, the common
gene variants are c.1165A>G and c.275C>G.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511376-20220318-00179
PMID: 36709932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
