---
reference_id: "PMID:35321494"
title: "Biallelic variants in TAMM41 are associated with low muscle cardiolipin levels, leading to neonatal mitochondrial disease."
authors:
- Thompson K
- Bianchi L
- Rastelli F
- Piron-Prunier F
- Ayciriex S
- Besmond C
- Hubert L
- Barth M
- Barbosa IA
- Deshpande C
- Chitre M
- Mehta SG
- Wever EJM
- Marcorelles P
- Donkervoort S
- Saade D
- Bönnemann CG
- Chao KR
- Cai C
- Iannaccone ST
- Dean AF
- McFarland R
- Vaz FM
- Delahodde A
- Taylor RW
- Rötig A
journal: HGG Adv
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2022.100097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic variants in TAMM41 are associated with low muscle cardiolipin levels, leading to neonatal mitochondrial disease.
**Authors:** Thompson K, Bianchi L, Rastelli F, Piron-Prunier F, Ayciriex S, Besmond C, Hubert L, Barth M, Barbosa IA, Deshpande C, Chitre M, Mehta SG, Wever EJM, Marcorelles P, Donkervoort S, Saade D, Bönnemann CG, Chao KR, Cai C, Iannaccone ST, Dean AF, McFarland R, Vaz FM, Delahodde A, Taylor RW, Rötig A
**Journal:** HGG Adv (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xhgg.2022.100097](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2022.100097)

## Content

1. HGG Adv. 2022 Mar 4;3(2):100097. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2022.100097. eCollection 
2022 Apr 14.

Biallelic variants in TAMM41 are associated with low muscle cardiolipin levels, 
leading to neonatal mitochondrial disease.

Thompson K(1), Bianchi L(2), Rastelli F(1), Piron-Prunier F(3), Ayciriex S(4), 
Besmond C(2), Hubert L(2), Barth M(5), Barbosa IA(6), Deshpande C(7), Chitre 
M(8), Mehta SG(8), Wever EJM(9)(10)(11), Marcorelles P(12), Donkervoort S(13), 
Saade D(13), Bönnemann CG(13), Chao KR(14), Cai C(15), Iannaccone ST(15), Dean 
AF(8)(16), McFarland R(1)(17), Vaz FM(9)(11)(18), Delahodde A(3), Taylor 
RW(1)(17), Rötig A(2).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Clinical and Translational 
Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle 
Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(2)INSERM UMR1163, Université Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, 75015 Paris, France.
(3)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the 
Cell (I2BC), 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(4)Univ Lyon, CNRS, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Institut des Sciences 
Analytiques, UMR 5280, 5 rue de la Doua, 69100 Villeurbanne, France.
(5)Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Angers, Angers, 
France.
(6)Division of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, King's College London School of 
Medicine, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.
(7)Clinical Genetics Unit, Guys and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London SE1 
9RT, UK.
(8)Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(9)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam UMC, University of 
Amsterdam, Departments of Clinical Chemistry and Pediatrics, Amsterdam 
Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(10)Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Epidemiology & Data Science, 
Amsterdam Public Health research institute, 1100 DE Amsterdam UMC, University of 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(11)Core Facility Metabolomics, Amsterdam UMC, 1105 Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Pathology, EA4586 LIEN Université de Brest, CHRU Brest, 29609 
Brest, France.
(13)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(14)Center for Mendelian Genomics, Program in Medical and Population Genetics, 
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(15)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(16)Department of Histopathology, Cambridge University Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, Cambridge, UK.
(17)NHS Highly Specialised Service for Rare Mitochondrial Disorders of Adults 
and Children, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle Upon 
Tyne NE1 4LP, UK.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, 
University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Mitochondrial disorders are clinically and genetically heterogeneous, with 
variants in mitochondrial or nuclear genes leading to varied clinical 
phenotypes. TAMM41 encodes a mitochondrial protein with cytidine 
diphosphate-diacylglycerol synthase activity: an essential early step in the 
biosynthesis of phosphatidylglycerol and cardiolipin. Cardiolipin is a 
mitochondria-specific phospholipid that is important for many mitochondrial 
processes. We report three unrelated individuals with mitochondrial disease that 
share clinical features, including lethargy at birth, hypotonia, developmental 
delay, myopathy, and ptosis. Whole exome and genome sequencing identified 
compound heterozygous variants in TAMM41 in each proband. Western blot analysis 
in fibroblasts showed a mild oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) defect in only 
one of the three affected individuals. In skeletal muscle samples, however, 
there was severe loss of subunits of complexes I-IV and a decrease in fully 
assembled OXPHOS complexes I-V in two subjects as well as decreased TAMM41 
protein levels. Similar to the tissue-specific observations on OXPHOS, 
cardiolipin levels were unchanged in subject fibroblasts but significantly 
decreased in the skeletal muscle of affected individuals. To assess the 
functional impact of the TAMM41 missense variants, the equivalent mutations were 
modeled in yeast. All three mutants failed to rescue the growth defect of the 
Δtam41 strains on non-fermentable (respiratory) medium compared with wild-type 
TAM41, confirming the pathogenicity of the variants. We establish that TAMM41 is 
an additional gene involved in mitochondrial phospholipid biosynthesis and 
modification and that its deficiency results in a mitochondrial disorder, though 
unlike families with pathogenic AGK (Sengers syndrome) and TAFAZZIN (Barth 
syndrome) variants, there was no evidence of cardiomyopathy.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2022.100097
PMCID: PMC8935507
PMID: 35321494

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.