---
reference_id: "PMID:31145187"
title: Emerging Interventional Pulmonary Therapies for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
authors:
- Rabin AS
- Keyes CM
- Oberg CL
- Folch EE
journal: J Thorac Imaging
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/RTI.0000000000000424
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emerging Interventional Pulmonary Therapies for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
**Authors:** Rabin AS, Keyes CM, Oberg CL, Folch EE
**Journal:** J Thorac Imaging (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RTI.0000000000000424](https://doi.org/10.1097/RTI.0000000000000424)

## Content

1. J Thorac Imaging. 2019 Jul;34(4):248-257. doi: 10.1097/RTI.0000000000000424.

Emerging Interventional Pulmonary Therapies for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease.

Rabin AS(1), Keyes CM(2), Oberg CL(2), Folch EE(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Tufts Medical 
Center.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a condition characterized by 
progressive airflow limitation caused by airway and parenchymal inflammation. 
Current medical therapies, including bronchodilators, corticosteroids, and 
anti-inflammatory medications, have been shown to variably improve pulmonary 
function or quality of life without providing a long-term mortality benefit. 
Mortality benefits to therapy have been demonstrated in only 2 therapeutic 
interventions to date: long-term use of daily supplemental oxygen and surgical 
lung volume reduction (LVRS) for upper-lobe-predominant disease in patients with 
a low baseline exercise capacity. Newer bronchoscopic techniques for lung volume 
reduction (bLVR) have attracted interest from clinicians and researchers. To 
achieve successful results, these advanced therapies require an 
interdisciplinary approach between general and interventional pulmonologists and 
thoracic radiologists. In this article, we aim to review the latest 
interventional pulmonary techniques for treatment of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease with an emphasis on bLVR. We will review the bLVR preprocedure 
imaging evaluation, postprocedure imaging findings, and explore the potential 
benefits and risks of therapy based on the most recent clinical trial evidence.

DOI: 10.1097/RTI.0000000000000424
PMID: 31145187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]