---
reference_id: "PMID:37146589"
title: "The functional impact of 1,570 individual amino acid substitutions in human OTC."
authors:
- Lo RS
- Cromie GA
- Tang M
- Teng K
- Owens K
- Sirr A
- Kutz JN
- Morizono H
- Caldovic L
- Ah Mew N
- Gropman A
- Dudley AM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.03.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The functional impact of 1,570 individual amino acid substitutions in human OTC.
**Authors:** Lo RS, Cromie GA, Tang M, Teng K, Owens K, Sirr A, Kutz JN, Morizono H, Caldovic L, Ah Mew N, Gropman A, Dudley AM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.03.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.03.019)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2023 May 4;110(5):863-879. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.03.019.

The functional impact of 1,570 individual amino acid substitutions in human OTC.

Lo RS(1), Cromie GA(1), Tang M(1), Teng K(1), Owens K(2), Sirr A(1), Kutz JN(3), 
Morizono H(4), Caldovic L(4), Ah Mew N(4), Gropman A(5), Dudley AM(6).

Author information:
(1)Pacific Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Pacific Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Applied 
Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 
USA.
(4)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Children's National Research Institute, 
Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA; Department of Genomics and 
Precision Medicine, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, The George 
Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.
(5)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Children's National Research Institute, 
Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA; Department of Genomics and 
Precision Medicine, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, The George 
Washington University, Washington, DC, USA; Department of Neurology, Division of 
Neurogenetics and Neurodevelopmental Disabilities, Children's National Hospital, 
Washington, DC, USA; Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National 
Research Institute, Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA.
(6)Pacific Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: 
aimee.dudley@gmail.com.

Deleterious mutations in the X-linked gene encoding ornithine transcarbamylase 
(OTC) cause the most common urea cycle disorder, OTC deficiency. This rare but 
highly actionable disease can present with severe neonatal onset in males or 
with later onset in either sex. Individuals with neonatal onset appear normal at 
birth but rapidly develop hyperammonemia, which can progress to cerebral edema, 
coma, and death, outcomes ameliorated by rapid diagnosis and treatment. Here, we 
develop a high-throughput functional assay for human OTC and individually 
measure the impact of 1,570 variants, 84% of all SNV-accessible missense 
mutations. Comparison to existing clinical significance calls, demonstrated that 
our assay distinguishes known benign from pathogenic variants and variants with 
neonatal onset from late-onset disease presentation. This functional 
stratification allowed us to identify score ranges corresponding to clinically 
relevant levels of impairment of OTC activity. Examining the results of our 
assay in the context of protein structure further allowed us to identify a 13 
amino acid domain, the SMG loop, whose function appears to be required in human 
cells but not in yeast. Finally, inclusion of our data as PS3 evidence under the 
current ACMG guidelines, in a pilot reclassification of 34 variants with 
complete loss of activity, would change the classification of 22 from variants 
of unknown significance to clinically actionable likely pathogenic variants. 
These results illustrate how large-scale functional assays are especially 
powerful when applied to rare genetic diseases.

Copyright © 2023 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.03.019
PMCID: PMC10183466
PMID: 37146589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests A.M.D. is a scientific 
advisor with a financial interest in Fenologica Biosciences, Inc. H.M. is a 
founding member of Cogthera LLC. A.M.D., R.S.L., G.A.C., A.S., and L.C. are 
listed as inventors on US patents or patent applications that may be relevant to 
this work.