---
reference_id: "PMID:37100867"
title: "Genotype-phenotype correlation of X-linked Alport syndrome observed in both genders: a multicenter study in South Korea."
authors:
- Kim JH
- Lim SH
- Song JY
- Cho MH
- Hyun H
- Yang EM
- Lee JW
- Cho MH
- Park MJ
- Lee JH
- Jung J
- Yoo KH
- Jang KM
- Pai KS
- Suh JS
- Namgoong MK
- Chung WY
- Kim SJ
- Cho EY
- Kim KM
- Kim NH
- Kim M
- Paik JH
- Kang HG
- Ahn YH
- Cheong HI
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-34053-7
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics"
- Phenotype
- Retrospective Studies
- Mutation
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies
- Renal Insufficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype correlation of X-linked Alport syndrome observed in both genders: a multicenter study in South Korea.
**Authors:** Kim JH, Lim SH, Song JY, Cho MH, Hyun H, Yang EM, Lee JW, Cho MH, Park MJ, Lee JH, Jung J, Yoo KH, Jang KM, Pai KS, Suh JS, Namgoong MK, Chung WY, Kim SJ, Cho EY, Kim KM, Kim NH, Kim M, Paik JH, Kang HG, Ahn YH, Cheong HI
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-34053-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-34053-7)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Apr 26;13(1):6827. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-34053-7.

Genotype-phenotype correlation of X-linked Alport syndrome observed in both
genders: a multicenter study in South Korea.

Kim JH(1)(2), Lim SH(3), Song JY(3), Cho MH(4), Hyun H(5), Yang EM(6), Lee
JW(7), Cho MH(8), Park MJ(8), Lee JH(9), Jung J(9), Yoo KH(10), Jang KM(11), Pai
KS(12), Suh JS(13), Namgoong MK(14), Chung WY(15), Kim SJ(16), Cho EY(17), Kim
KM(17), Kim NH(18), Kim M(19), Paik JH(20), Kang HG(2)(21)(22), Ahn
YH(#)(23)(24)(25), Cheong HI(#)(26).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Seongnam, South Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan National University Yangsan Children's
Hospital and School of Medicine, Yangsan, South Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Anyang,
South Korea.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, St. Vincent's Hospital, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Chonnam National University and School of Medicine,
Gwangju, South Korea.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Kyungpook National University, School of Medicine,
Daegu, South Korea.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(10)Department of Nephrology, Woori Children's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Yeungnam University College of Medicine,
Gyeongsan, South Korea.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South
Korea.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Bucheon St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine,
The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Wonju Severance Christian Hospital, Yonsei
University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju, South Korea.
(15)WooYeong Chung Pediatrics Clinic, Busan, South Korea.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Inha University College of Medicine, Inha
University Hospital, Incheon, South Korea.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, Chungnam National University Hospital, Daejeon,
South Korea.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, Inje University Ilsan Paik Hospital, Goyang, South
Korea.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, Jeonbuk National University Medical School,
Jeonju, South Korea.
(20)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital and
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, South Korea.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Children's Hospital,
Seoul, South Korea.
(22)Kidney Research Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea.
(23)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea. yhahn@snu.ac.kr.
(24)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Children's Hospital,
Seoul, South Korea. yhahn@snu.ac.kr.
(25)Kidney Research Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea. yhahn@snu.ac.kr.
(26)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul Red Cross Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
cheonghi@snu.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

The genotype-phenotype correlation of the X-linked Alport syndrome (XLAS) has
been well elucidated in males, whereas it remains unclear in females. In this
multicenter retrospective study, we analyzed the genotype-phenotype correlation
in 216 Korean patients (male:female = 130:86) with XLAS between 2000 and 2021.
The patients were divided into three groups according to their genotypes: the
non-truncating group, the abnormal splicing group, and the truncating group. In
male patients, approximately 60% developed kidney failure at the median age of
25.0 years, and kidney survival showed significant differences between the
non-truncating and truncating groups (P < 0.001, hazard ratio (HR) 2.8) and
splicing and truncating groups (P = 0.002, HR 3.1). Sensorineural hearing loss
was detected in 65.1% of male patients, while hearing survival periods showed a
highly significant difference between the non-truncating and truncating groups
(P < 0.001, HR 5.1). In female patients, approximately 20% developed kidney
failure at the median age of 50.2 years. The kidney survival was significantly
different between the non-truncating and truncating groups (P = 0.006, HR 5.7).
Our findings support the presence of genotype-phenotype correlation not only in
male patients but also in female patients with XLAS.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-34053-7
PMCID: PMC10133262
PMID: 37100867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
