---
reference_id: "PMID:30739754"
title: "[Hypertrophic cardiomyopathies]."
authors:
- Lairez O
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2019.01.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Hypertrophic cardiomyopathies].
**Authors:** Lairez O
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2019.01.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2019.01.001)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2019 Jun;40(6):380-388. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2019.01.001.
Epub  2019 Feb 7.

[Hypertrophic cardiomyopathies].

[Article in French]

Lairez O(1).

Author information:
(1)Fédération médico-chirurgicale de cardiologie, CHU Rangueil, 1, avenue 
Jean-Poulhès, TSA 50032, 31059 Toulouse cedex 9, France; Centre d'imagerie 
cardiaque, CHU de Toulouse, 31000 Toulouse, France; Faculté de médecine 
Toulouse - Purpan, université Paul-Sabatier, 31000 Toulouse, France. Electronic 
address: lairez.o@chu-toulouse.fr.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathies represent a heterogeneous group of 
pathophysiological mechanisms and etiologies (genetic or not), which lead to the 
development of left ventricular hypertrophy. Left ventricular hypertrophy, when 
not explained by a significant and prolonged increase in post-load (such as 
severe poorly controlled arterial hypertension or severe aortic stenosis) 
justifies etiological exploration. The etiology may range from physiological 
adaptation in the athlete to myocardial involvement, isolated or integrated as 
part of a global neuromuscular involvement; metabolic or mitochondrial disease 
to deposition disease. As cardiac signs are non-specific, the clinical 
examination should focus on looking for a syndromic entity. Considering this 
pathophysiological heterogeneity, in addition to the biological assays in search 
of a metabolic or infiltrative cause, the minimum check-up must include an 
electrocardiogram and a transthoracic echocardiography, which will most of the 
time be completed by magnetic resonance imaging, and even bone scintigraphy in 
the event of suspected amyloidosis. The question of genetic analysis and/or 
counselling should be systematically considered. The treatment is mainly 
symptomatic, aimed at controlling congestive signs and/or intraventricular 
obstruction, with the exception of amyloidosis and Fabry disease for which 
dedicated treatments have been developed. The rhythmic risk must be evaluated 
and can justify the implantation of an automatic defibrillator.

Copyright © 2019 Société Nationale Française de Médecine Interne (SNFMI). 
Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2019.01.001
PMID: 30739754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]