---
reference_id: "PMID:17426088"
title: Endocrine abnormalities in patients with Fanconi anemia.
authors:
- Giri N
- Batista DL
- Alter BP
- Stratakis CA
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-0135
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrine abnormalities in patients with Fanconi anemia.
**Authors:** Giri N, Batista DL, Alter BP, Stratakis CA
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2007-0135](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2007-0135)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jul;92(7):2624-31. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-0135.
Epub  2007 Apr 10.

Endocrine abnormalities in patients with Fanconi anemia.

Giri N(1), Batista DL, Alter BP, Stratakis CA.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, 
National Cancer Institute, 6120 Executive Boulevard EPS/7024, Rockville, 
Maryland 20852, USA. girin@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Fanconi anemia (FA) is an inherited disorder with chromosomal 
instability, bone marrow failure, developmental defects, and a predisposition to 
cancer. Systematic and comprehensive endocrine function data in FA are limited.
OBJECTIVE: We studied a cohort of FA patients enrolled in the National Cancer 
Institute's Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndrome study.
STUDY DESIGN AND PATIENTS: Retrospective review of the medical records of 45 FA 
patients (ages 2-49 yr), 23 of whom were intensively evaluated at the National 
Institutes of Health. Anthropometric measurements, GH, IGF-I, IGF binding 
protein-3, thyroid, gonadal hormone, lipid levels, glucose homeostasis, brain 
imaging, and bone mineral density were obtained in these latter patients.
RESULTS: Endocrine abnormalities were present in 73%, including short stature 
and/or GH deficiency (51%), hypothyroidism (37%), midline brain abnormalities 
(17%) (these patients had very short stature and 60% were GH-deficient); 
abnormal glucose/insulin metabolism (39%); obesity (27%); dyslipidemia (55%); 
and metabolic syndrome (21%). Patients with any endocrine abnormality were 
shorter than those without; only GH deficiency correlated significantly with 
short stature (P = 0.01). In addition, 65% of peripubertal or postpubertal 
patients had gonadal dysfunction. Ninety-two percent of the patients 18 yr or 
older had osteopenia or osteoporosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Endocrine dysfunction is widespread in children and adults with FA; 
we expand the FA phenotype to include early onset osteopenia/osteoporosis and 
lipid abnormalities. Despite the reputation of FA as a progressive, lethal 
disease, proper management of the full spectrum of FA-related endocrinopathy 
offers major opportunities to reduce morbidity and improve quality of life. Our 
findings emphasize the need for comprehensive endocrine and metabolic evaluation 
and long-term follow-up in patients with FA.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2007-0135
PMID: 17426088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]