---
reference_id: "PMID:35869167"
title: Dengue virus co-opts innate type 2 pathways to escape early control of viral replication.
authors:
- Fonseka CL
- Hardman CS
- Woo J
- Singh R
- Nahler J
- Yang J
- Chen YL
- Kamaladasa A
- Silva T
- Salimi M
- Gray N
- Dong T
- Malavige GN
- Ogg GS
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-022-03682-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue virus co-opts innate type 2 pathways to escape early control of viral replication.
**Authors:** Fonseka CL, Hardman CS, Woo J, Singh R, Nahler J, Yang J, Chen YL, Kamaladasa A, Silva T, Salimi M, Gray N, Dong T, Malavige GN, Ogg GS
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-022-03682-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03682-5)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2022 Jul 22;5(1):735. doi: 10.1038/s42003-022-03682-5.

Dengue virus co-opts innate type 2 pathways to escape early control of viral 
replication.

Fonseka CL(1)(2), Hardman CS(1), Woo J(1)(3), Singh R(1), Nahler J(1), Yang 
J(1), Chen YL(1), Kamaladasa A(4), Silva T(4)(5), Salimi M(1), Gray N(1)(3), 
Dong T(1)(6), Malavige GN(#)(4), Ogg GS(#)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)MRC Human Immunology Unit, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ruhuna, Galle, Sri 
Lanka.
(3)MRC WIMM Centre for Computational Biology, Medical Research Council (MRC) 
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Allergy Immunology and Cell Biology Unit, Department of Immunology and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Nugegoda, Sri Lanka.
(5)General Sir John Kotelawala Defence University, Rathmalana, Sri Lanka.
(6)Chinese Academy of Medical Science (CAMS) Oxford Institute (COI), University 
of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(7)MRC Human Immunology Unit, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Graham.ogg@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(8)Chinese Academy of Medical Science (CAMS) Oxford Institute (COI), University 
of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Graham.ogg@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Mast cell products and high levels of type 2 cytokines are associated with 
severe dengue disease. Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2) are type-2 
cytokine-producing cells that are activated by epithelial cytokines and mast 
cell-derived lipid mediators. Through ex vivo RNAseq analysis, we observed that 
ILC2 are activated during acute dengue viral infection, and show an impaired 
type I-IFN signature in severe disease. We observed that circulating ILC2 are 
permissive for dengue virus infection in vivo and in vitro, particularly when 
activated through prostaglandin D2 (PGD2). ILC2 underwent productive dengue 
virus infection, which was inhibited through CRTH2 antagonism. Furthermore, 
exogenous IFN-β induced expression of type I-IFN responsive anti-viral genes by 
ILC2. PGD2 downregulated type I-IFN responsive gene and protein expression; and 
urinary prostaglandin D2 metabolite levels were elevated in severe dengue. 
Moreover, supernatants from activated ILC2 enhanced monocyte infection in a 
GM-CSF and mannan-dependent manner. Our results indicate that dengue virus 
co-opts an innate type 2 environment to escape early type I-IFN control and 
facilitate viral dissemination. PGD2 downregulates type I-IFN induced anti-viral 
responses in ILC2. CRTH2 antagonism may be a therapeutic strategy for 
dengue-associated disease.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-022-03682-5
PMCID: PMC9306424
PMID: 35869167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.