---
reference_id: "PMID:22995305"
title: Altered allosteric regulation of muscle 6-phosphofructokinase causes Tarui disease.
authors:
- Brüser A
- Kirchberger J
- Schöneberg T
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.024
keywords:
- "Alanine/chemistry, genetics"
- Allosteric Regulation
- Animals
- "Asparagine/chemistry, genetics"
- Binding Sites/genetics
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type VII/enzymology, genetics"
- Humans
- Ligands
- Mice
- "Muscle, Skeletal/enzymology"
- Mutation
- "Phosphofructokinase-1/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Conformation
- Rabbits
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered allosteric regulation of muscle 6-phosphofructokinase causes Tarui disease.
**Authors:** Brüser A, Kirchberger J, Schöneberg T
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.024)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 12;427(1):133-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.024. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Altered allosteric regulation of muscle 6-phosphofructokinase causes Tarui
disease.

Brüser A(1), Kirchberger J, Schöneberg T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Leipzig, 04103
Leipzig, Germany.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 8;431(2):367.

Tarui disease is a glycogen storage disease (GSD VII) and characterized by
exercise intolerance with muscle weakness and cramping, mild myopathy,
myoglobinuria and compensated hemolysis. It is caused by mutations in the muscle
6-phosphofructokinase (Pfk). Pfk is an oligomeric, allosteric enzyme which
catalyzes one of the rate-limiting steps of the glycolysis: the phosphorylation
of fructose 6-phosphate at position 1. Pfk activity is modulated by a number of
regulators including adenine nucleotides. Recent crystal structures from
eukaryotic Pfk displayed several allosteric adenine nucleotide binding sites.
Functional studies revealed a reciprocal linkage between the activating and
inhibitory allosteric binding sites. Herein, we showed that Asp(543)Ala, a
naturally occurring disease-causing mutation in the activating binding site,
causes an increased efficacy of ATP at the inhibitory allosteric binding site.
The reciprocal linkage between the activating and inhibitory binding sites leads
to reduced enzyme activity and therefore to the clinical phenotype.
Pharmacological blockage of the inhibitory allosteric binding site or highly
efficient ligands for the activating allosteric binding site may be of
therapeutic relevance for patients with Tarui disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.024
PMID: 22995305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
