---
reference_id: "PMID:38800180"
title: "Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review of Genetics, Clinical Features, and Management Approaches."
authors:
- Amru RL
- Dhok A
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.58887
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review of Genetics, Clinical Features, and Management Approaches.
**Authors:** Amru RL, Dhok A
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.58887](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.58887)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Apr 24;16(4):e58887. doi: 10.7759/cureus.58887. eCollection 2024 
Apr.

Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review of Genetics, Clinical Features, 
and Management Approaches.

Amru RL(1), Dhok A(1).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of 
Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

A relatively rare inherited condition known as Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) 
causes mucocutaneous pigmentation and gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyps. 
These polyps are non-cancerous, but the presence of PJS significantly increases 
the chances of developing various types of cancers, such as colorectal, 
pancreatic, gastric, and breast cancer. The purpose of this review article is to 
give an abbreviated summary of what is currently known about this syndrome, 
covering its clinical symptoms, pathophysiology, genetics, and management. PJS 
also raises the risk of getting many malignancies, especially gastrointestinal 
and pelvic cancers. Symptoms of the gastrointestinal tract brought on by 
hamartomatous polyps are frequent and include stool blockage, bleeding, and 
stomach pain. The pigmentation commonly appears as prominent bluish-black 
macules and frequently affects the skin and mucous membranes. Small macules and 
large regions of lentiginous pigmentation are both possible. Numerous areas, 
including the perioral area, buccal mucosa, fingers, and lips, exhibit 
pigmentation. Bowel obstruction and intussusception risk can be decreased by 
early identification and routine surveillance of gastrointestinal polyps. The 
gene serine/threonine kinase 11 (STK11) controls several biological functions, 
including cell polarity, growth, and proliferation. Genetic counseling is 
recommended for the affected individuals and their families. This can help 
assess the risk of passing on the condition to future generations and provide 
information about available reproductive options. Regular surveillance is 
crucial for managing the syndrome and reducing the risk of cancer development. 
Other syndromes and extra-gastrointestinal characteristics, such as somatic 
tumor polyps outside the gastrointestinal tract, are also linked to this 
syndrome.

Copyright © 2024, Amru et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.58887
PMCID: PMC11116740
PMID: 38800180

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.