---
reference_id: "PMID:38598794"
title: Alectinib in Resected ALK-Positive Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Wu YL
- Dziadziuszko R
- Ahn JS
- Barlesi F
- Nishio M
- Lee DH
- Lee JS
- Zhong W
- Horinouchi H
- Mao W
- Hochmair M
- de Marinis F
- Migliorino MR
- Bondarenko I
- Lu S
- Wang Q
- Ochi Lohmann T
- Xu T
- Cardona A
- Ruf T
- Noe J
- Solomon BJ
- ALINA Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2310532
keywords:
- Humans
- Carbazoles/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, surgery"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, surgery"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy"
- Piperidines/therapeutic use
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- "Administration, Oral"
- "Administration, Intravenous"
- Platinum Compounds/therapeutic use
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alectinib in Resected ALK-Positive Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Wu YL, Dziadziuszko R, Ahn JS, Barlesi F, Nishio M, Lee DH, Lee JS, Zhong W, Horinouchi H, Mao W, Hochmair M, de Marinis F, Migliorino MR, Bondarenko I, Lu S, Wang Q, Ochi Lohmann T, Xu T, Cardona A, Ruf T, Noe J, Solomon BJ, ALINA Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2310532](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2310532)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2024 Apr 11;390(14):1265-1276. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2310532.

Alectinib in Resected ALK-Positive Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Wu YL(1), Dziadziuszko R(1), Ahn JS(1), Barlesi F(1), Nishio M(1), Lee DH(1),
Lee JS(1), Zhong W(1), Horinouchi H(1), Mao W(1), Hochmair M(1), de Marinis
F(1), Migliorino MR(1), Bondarenko I(1), Lu S(1), Wang Q(1), Ochi Lohmann T(1),
Xu T(1), Cardona A(1), Ruf T(1), Noe J(1), Solomon BJ(1); ALINA Investigators.

Collaborators: Kao S, Pavlakis N, Solomon BJ, Burghuber O, Hochmair M,
Beliakouski V, Karchmit Y, Noryk D, Ceric T, Chen C, Chen L, Cheng Y, Fu J, Liao
Y, Lu S, Mao W, Song P, Wang Q, Wu YL, Yang L, Zhao J, Zhong W, Holmskov Hansen
K, Kader YA, Barlesi F, Planchard D, Tomasini P, Urban T, Zalcman G, Bischoff H,
Hammerschmidt S, Hoffknecht P, Rittmeyer A, Samantas E, Tsiouda T, Bittner N,
Csoszi T, Nagy T, Daher S, Gottfried M, Wollner M, de Marinis F, Migliorino MR,
Novello S, Piantedosi FV, Roila F, Vitiello F, Daga H, Fujiwara Y, Goto K, Hida
T, Horinouchi H, Ikeda N, Kato T, Kawamura T, Kim YH, Ko R, Nakahara Y, Nishio
M, Oizumi S, Okada M, Okamoto T, Ono A, Sakagami T, Seto T, Shoji F, Shukuya T,
Sugawara S, Takenoyama M, Tanaka H, Yamaguchi M, Yamamoto H, Yoshida H,
Turesheva A, Shalkarbayeva N, Ahn HK, Ahn JS, Choi JH, Han JY, Kim SH, Kim YC,
Lee DH, Lee SY, Lee JS, Park CK, Dziadziuszko R, Głogowski M, Kazarnowicz A,
Kużdżał J, Stencel K, Bryl M, Ciuleanu TE, Popovici D, Akopov A, Fedenko A,
Karaseva N, Laktionov K, Levchenko E, Polyakov I, Stroyakovskii D, Bernabe Caro
R, Carcereny Costa E, De Castro Carpeno J, Insa Molla A, Majem Tarruella M,
Martinez Marti A, Chang GC, Hsia TC, Wang CC, Yang CT, Yang TY, Yu CJ,
Korphaisarn K, Reungwetwattana T, Erdem D, Erman M, Goker E, Harputluoglu H,
Komurcuoglu B, Ozyilkan O, Turna H, Yılmaz U, Kose F, Sumbul A, Summers Y,
Bondarenko I, Kurochkin A, Lisovskaya N, Osinskii D, Shamrai V, Leshchenko I,
Dagogo-Jack I, Fidler M, Finley G, Shaw A, Van Deusen M.

Author information:
(1)From the Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's
Hospital (Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou (Y.-L.W., W.Z.), the Institute of Basic Medicine and Cancer, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou (W.M.), and the Department of Medical Oncology,
Shanghai Lung Cancer Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine (S.L.), the Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University (Q.W.), and the Department of Clinical
Science, Roche (China) Holding (T.X.), Shanghai - all in China; the Department
of Oncology and Radiotherapy and the Early Phase Clinical Trials Center, Medical
University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland (R.D.); the Department of Hematology and
Oncology, Samsung Medical Center (J.S.A.), and Asan Medical Center (D.H.L.),
Seoul, and Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam (J.-S.L.) - all
in South Korea; the Department of Medical Oncology, International Center for
Thoracic Cancers, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, and Paris-Saclay University,
Faculty of Medicine, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre - both in France (F.B.); the Cancer
Institute Hospital, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research (M.N.), and the
Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital (H.H.) - both
in Tokyo; the Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Karl
Landsteiner Institute of Lung Research and Pulmonary Oncology, Klinik
Floridsdorf, Vienna (M.H.); the Thoracic Oncology Division, European Institute
of Oncology, IRCCS, Milan (F.M.); the Pneumo-Oncology Unit, San Camillo
Forlanini Hospital, Rome (M.R.M.); the Oncology and Medical Radiology
Department, Dnipropetrovsk State Medical Academy, Dnipro, Ukraine (I.B.); PD
Oncology (T.O.L.), Data and Statistical Sciences (A.C.), PD Safety Risk
Management (T.R.), and Translational Medicine (J.N.), F. Hoffmann-La Roche,
Basel, Switzerland; and the Department of Medical Oncology, Peter MacCallum
Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia (B.J.S.).

Comment in
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2024 Dec 31;13(12):3815-3818. doi:
10.21037/tlcr-24-844.
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2025 Feb 28;14(2):310-313. doi:
10.21037/tlcr-24-961.

BACKGROUND: Platinum-based chemotherapy is the recommended adjuvant treatment
for patients with resectable, ALK-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Data on the efficacy and safety of adjuvant alectinib as compared with
chemotherapy in patients with resected ALK-positive NSCLC are lacking.
METHODS: We conducted a global, phase 3, open-label, randomized trial in which
patients with completely resected, ALK-positive NSCLC of stage IB (tumors ≥4
cm), II, or IIIA (as classified according to the seventh edition of the Cancer
Staging Manual of the American Joint Committee on Cancer and Union for
International Cancer Control) were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive
oral alectinib (600 mg twice daily) for 24 months or intravenous platinum-based
chemotherapy in four 21-day cycles. The primary end point was disease-free
survival, tested hierarchically among patients with stage II or IIIA disease and
then in the intention-to-treat population. Other end points included central
nervous system (CNS) disease-free survival, overall survival, and safety.
RESULTS: In total, 257 patients were randomly assigned to receive alectinib (130
patients) or chemotherapy (127 patients). The percentage of patients alive and
disease-free at 2 years was 93.8% in the alectinib group and 63.0% in the
chemotherapy group among patients with stage II or IIIA disease (hazard ratio
for disease recurrence or death, 0.24; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.13 to
0.45; P<0.001) and 93.6% and 63.7%, respectively, in the intention-to-treat
population (hazard ratio, 0.24; 95% CI, 0.13 to 0.43; P<0.001). Alectinib was
associated with a clinically meaningful benefit with respect to CNS disease-free
survival as compared with chemotherapy (hazard ratio for CNS disease recurrence
or death, 0.22; 95% CI, 0.08 to 0.58). Data for overall survival were immature.
No unexpected safety findings were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with resected ALK-positive NSCLC of stage IB, II, or
IIIA, adjuvant alectinib significantly improved disease-free survival as
compared with platinum-based chemotherapy. (Funded by F. Hoffmann-La Roche;
ALINA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03456076.).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2310532
PMID: 38598794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
