---
reference_id: "PMID:31630759"
title: Molecular epidemiology of giardiasis from a veterinary perspective.
authors:
- Ryan U
- Zahedi A
journal: Adv Parasitol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/bs.apar.2019.07.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular epidemiology of giardiasis from a veterinary perspective.
**Authors:** Ryan U, Zahedi A
**Journal:** Adv Parasitol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.apar.2019.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.apar.2019.07.002)

## Content

1. Adv Parasitol. 2019;106:209-254. doi: 10.1016/bs.apar.2019.07.002. Epub 2019
Aug  7.

Molecular epidemiology of giardiasis from a veterinary perspective.

Ryan U(1), Zahedi A(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Science, Health, Education and Engineering, Murdoch University, 
Perth, WA, Australia. Electronic address: una.ryan@murdoch.edu.au.
(2)College of Science, Health, Education and Engineering, Murdoch University, 
Perth, WA, Australia.

A total of eight Giardia species are accepted. These include: Giardia duodenalis 
(syn. Giardia intestinalis and Giardia lamblia), which infects humans and 
animals, Giardia agilis, Giardia ardeae, Giardia psittaci, Giardia muris, 
Giardia microti, Giardia peramelis and G. cricetidarum, which infect non-human 
hosts including amphibians, birds, rodents and marsupials. Giardia duodenalis is 
a species complex consisting of eight assemblages (A-H), with assemblages A and 
B the dominant assemblages in humans. Molecular studies to date on the zoonotic 
potential of Giardia in animals are problematic and are hampered by lack of 
concordance between loci. Livestock (cattle, sheep, goats and pigs) are 
predominantly infected with G. duodenalis assemblage E, which has recently been 
shown to be zoonotic, followed by assemblage A. In cats and dogs, assemblages A, 
B, C, D and F are commonly reported but relatively few studies have conducted 
molecular typing of humans and their pets and the results are contradictory with 
some studies support zoonotic transmission but the majority of studies 
suggesting separate transmission cycles. Giardia also infects a broad range of 
wildlife hosts and although much less well studied, host-adapted species as well 
as G. duodenalis assemblages (A-H) have been identified. Fish and other aquatic 
wildlife represent a source of infection for humans with Giardia via water 
contamination and/or consumption of undercooked fish and interestingly, 
assemblage B and A predominated in the two molecular studies conducted to date. 
Our current knowledge of the transmission dynamics of Giardia is still poor and 
the development of more discriminatory typing tools such as whole genome 
sequencing (WGS) of Giardia isolates is therefore essential.

© 2019 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.apar.2019.07.002
PMID: 31630759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]