---
reference_id: "PMID:34158345"
title: "SHP2 Inhibition Enhances the Effects of Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Preclinical Models of Treatment-naïve ALK-, ROS1-, or EGFR-altered Non-small Cell Lung Cancer."
authors:
- Kano H
- Ichihara E
- Watanabe H
- Nishii K
- Ando C
- Nakasuka T
- Ninomiya K
- Kato Y
- Kubo T
- Rai K
- Ohashi K
- Hotta K
- Tabata M
- Maeda Y
- Kiura K
journal: Mol Cancer Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-20-0965
keywords:
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Cell Proliferation
- Drug Synergism
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Rearrangement
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Nude"
- Piperidines/pharmacology
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase, Non-Receptor Type 11/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Pyrimidines/pharmacology
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SHP2 Inhibition Enhances the Effects of Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Preclinical Models of Treatment-naïve ALK-, ROS1-, or EGFR-altered Non-small Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Kano H, Ichihara E, Watanabe H, Nishii K, Ando C, Nakasuka T, Ninomiya K, Kato Y, Kubo T, Rai K, Ohashi K, Hotta K, Tabata M, Maeda Y, Kiura K
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-20-0965](https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-20-0965)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2021 Sep;20(9):1653-1662. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-20-0965.
 Epub 2021 Jun 22.

SHP2 Inhibition Enhances the Effects of Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in
Preclinical Models of Treatment-naïve ALK-, ROS1-, or EGFR-altered Non-small
Cell Lung Cancer.

Kano H(1), Ichihara E(2), Watanabe H(1), Nishii K(1), Ando C(1), Nakasuka T(1),
Ninomiya K(1), Kato Y(3), Kubo T(4), Rai K(5), Ohashi K(5), Hotta K(3), Tabata
M(4), Maeda Y(1), Kiura K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Okayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Allergy and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital,
Okayama, Japan. ichiha-e@md.okayama-u.ac.jp.
(3)Center for Innovative Clinical Medicine, Okayama University Hospital,
Okayama, Japan.
(4)Center for Clinical Oncology, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(5)Department of Allergy and Respiratory Medicine, Okayama University Hospital,
Okayama, Japan.

After molecular-targeted therapy, some cancer cells may remain that are
resistant to therapies targeting oncogene alterations, such as those in the
genes encoding the EGFR and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) as well as c-ros
oncogene 1 (ROS1). The mechanisms underlying this type of resistance are
unknown. In this article, we report the potential role of Src homology 2
domain-containing phosphatase 2 (SHP2) in the residual cells of
ALK/ROS1/EGFR-altered non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Molecular-targeted
therapies failed to inhibit the ERK signaling pathway in the residual cells,
whereas the SHP2 inhibitor SHP099 abolished their remaining ERK activity. SHP099
administered in combination with molecular-targeted therapy resulted in marked
growth inhibition of cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo Thus, treatment
combining an SHP2 inhibitor and a tyrosine kinase inhibitor may be a promising
therapeutic strategy for oncogene-driven NSCLC.

©2021 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-20-0965
PMID: 34158345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
