---
reference_id: "PMID:11369996"
title: A nonsense mutation in MSX1 causes Witkop syndrome.
authors:
- Jumlongras D
- Bei M
- Stimson JM
- Wang WF
- DePalma SR
- Seidman CE
- Felbor U
- Maas R
- Seidman JG
- Olsen BR
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1086/321271
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Anodontia/embryology, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- Heterozygote
- "Homeodomain Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- MSX1 Transcription Factor
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nails, Malformed/embryology, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic/genetics"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis, genetics"
- Syndrome
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A nonsense mutation in MSX1 causes Witkop syndrome.
**Authors:** Jumlongras D, Bei M, Stimson JM, Wang WF, DePalma SR, Seidman CE, Felbor U, Maas R, Seidman JG, Olsen BR
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1086/321271](https://doi.org/10.1086/321271)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Jul;69(1):67-74. doi: 10.1086/321271. Epub 2001 May 16.

A nonsense mutation in MSX1 causes Witkop syndrome.

Jumlongras D(1), Bei M, Stimson JM, Wang WF, DePalma SR, Seidman CE, Felbor U, 
Maas R, Seidman JG, Olsen BR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Witkop syndrome, also known as tooth and nail syndrome (TNS), is a rare 
autosomal dominant disorder. Affected individuals have nail dysplasia and 
several congenitally missing teeth. To identify the gene responsible for TNS, we 
used candidate-gene linkage analysis in a three-generation family affected by 
the disorder. We found linkage between TNS and polymorphic markers surrounding 
the MSX1 locus. Direct sequencing and restriction-enzyme analysis revealed that 
a heterozygous stop mutation in the homeodomain of MSX1 cosegregated with the 
phenotype. In addition, histological analysis of Msx1-knockout mice, combined 
with a finding of Msx1 expression in mesenchyme of developing nail beds, 
revealed that not only was tooth development disrupted in these mice, but nail 
development was affected as well. Nail plates in Msx1-null mice were defective 
and were thinner than those of their wild-type littermates. The resemblance 
between the tooth and nail phenotype in the human family and that of 
Msx1-knockout mice strongly supports the conclusions that a nonsense mutation in 
MSX1 causes TNS and that Msx1 is critical for both tooth and nail development.

DOI: 10.1086/321271
PMCID: PMC1226049
PMID: 11369996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]