---
reference_id: "PMID:17623517"
title: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase--from oxidative stress to cellular functions and degenerative diseases.
authors:
- Ho HY
- Cheng ML
- Chiu DT
journal: Redox Rep
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1179/135100007X200209
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase--from oxidative stress to cellular functions and degenerative diseases.
**Authors:** Ho HY, Cheng ML, Chiu DT
**Journal:** Redox Rep (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1179/135100007X200209](https://doi.org/10.1179/135100007X200209)

## Content

1. Redox Rep. 2007;12(3):109-18. doi: 10.1179/135100007X200209.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase--from oxidative stress to cellular functions 
and degenerative diseases.

Ho HY(1), Cheng ML, Chiu DT.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Biotechnology and Department of Medical 
Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Chang Gung University, Kwei-san, Tao-yuan, 
Taiwan.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), the first and rate-limiting enzyme of 
the pentose phosphate pathway, is indispensable to maintenance of the cytosolic 
pool of NADPH and thus the cellular redox balance. The role of G6PD as an 
antioxidant enzyme has been recognized in erythrocytes for a long time, as its 
deficiency is associated with neonatal jaundice, drug- or infection-mediated 
hemolytic crisis, favism and, less commonly, chronic non-spherocytic hemolytic 
anemia. To a large extent, advances in the field were made on the 
pathophysiology of G6PD-deficient erythrocytes, and the molecular 
characterization of different G6PD variants. Not until recently did numerous 
studies cast light on the importance of G6PD in other aspects of the physiology 
of both cells and organisms. Deficiency in G6PD activity, and hence a 
disturbance in redox homeostasis, can lead to dysregulation of cell growth and 
signaling, anomalous embryonic development, altered susceptibility to viral 
infection as well as increased susceptibility to degenerative diseases. The 
present review covers recent developments in this field. Additionally, molecular 
characterization of G6PD variants, especially those frequently found in Taiwan 
and Southern China, is also addressed.

DOI: 10.1179/135100007X200209
PMID: 17623517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]