---
reference_id: "PMID:24036790"
title: Variable expressivity and clinical heterogeneity can complicate the diagnosis and management of Pfeiffer syndrome.
authors:
- Ettinger N
- Williams M
- Phillips JA 3rd
journal: J Craniofac Surg
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e3182997df5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable expressivity and clinical heterogeneity can complicate the diagnosis and management of Pfeiffer syndrome.
**Authors:** Ettinger N, Williams M, Phillips JA 3rd
**Journal:** J Craniofac Surg (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SCS.0b013e3182997df5](https://doi.org/10.1097/SCS.0b013e3182997df5)

## Content

1. J Craniofac Surg. 2013;24(5):1829-32. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e3182997df5.

Variable expressivity and clinical heterogeneity can complicate the diagnosis 
and management of Pfeiffer syndrome.

Ettinger N(1), Williams M, Phillips JA 3rd.

Author information:
(1)From the *Department of Pediatrics, and †Division of Medical Genetics and 
Genomic Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN.

We report here a newborn female infant with striking features consistent with 
severe Pfeiffer syndrome (PS). Pfeiffer syndrome is a rare craniofacial disorder 
that has an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance (OMIM 101600). Our patient 
had unexpected differences between her clinical features and those predicted 
from her genetic tests. The following clinical features were noted: severe 
exophthalmos, syndactyly, upper extremity contractures, and relative 
macroglossia. A head computed tomography with three-dimensional reconstruction 
showed that she did not have craniosynostosis. Genetic tests included a normal 
46,XX karyotype and a chromosomal microarray that revealed a copy number gain at 
14q23.1 as well as a copy number loss at 16p13.2. FGFR2 sequencing revealed a 
c.870G>T transversion in exon 8, which is predicted to encode a Trp290Cys 
substitution.The clinical features of severe exophthalmos and other features 
typical of PS without craniosynostosis were most consistent with a diagnosis of 
PS type III. However, her Trp290Cys FGFR2 mutation is reported to be associated 
with PS type II that includes kleeblatschädel (or "cloverleaf") skull anomalies 
as a cardinal feature. Our patient's lack of craniosynostosis predicted from 
this mutation is a striking example of variable expressivity. Such discrepancies 
between the physical findings (phenotype) and the mutation identified (genotype) 
and the association of different findings with different mutations in the same 
gene (clinical heterogeneity) can present difficulties in case management. 
Clinicians should be guided by careful phenotyping rather than by genotypic 
predictions alone.

DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e3182997df5
PMID: 24036790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]