---
reference_id: "PMID:22791528"
title: Ciliary disorder of the skeleton.
authors:
- Huber C
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31336
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ciliary disorder of the skeleton.
**Authors:** Huber C, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31336](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31336)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2012 Aug 15;160C(3):165-74. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31336. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Ciliary disorder of the skeleton.

Huber C(1), Cormier-Daire V.

Author information:
(1)Département de génétique, INSERM U 781, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne 
Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades (AP-HP), 75015 
Paris, France.

In the last 10 years, the primary cilia machinery has been implicated in more 
than a dozen disorders united as ciliopathies, including skeletal dysplasias, 
such as Jeune syndrome and short rib-polydactyly type III. Indeed, primary cilia 
play a vital role in transduction of signals in the hedgehog pathway that is 
especially important in skeletal development. In this review, we focus on 
skeletal conditions belonging to the ciliopathy group: the short rib-polydactyly 
group (SRPs) that includes Verma-Naumoff syndrome (SRP type III), Majewski 
syndrome (SRP type II), Jeune syndrome (ATD), as well as Ellis-van Creveld 
syndrome (EVC), the Sensenbrenner syndrome, and, finally, Weyers acrofacial 
dysostosis. Today, 10 different genes have been identified as responsible for 
seven "skeletal" ciliopathies. Mutations have been identified in dynein motor 
(DYNC2H1), in intraflagellar transport (IFT) complexes (IFT80, IFT122, IFT43, 
WDR35, WDR19, and TTC21B) as well as in genes responsible for the basal body 
(NEK1, EVC, and EVC2). The wide clinical variability observed for an individual 
ciliopathy gene supports the development of exome strategy specifically 
dedicated to cilia genes to identify mutations in this particularly 
heterogeneous group of disorders.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31336
PMID: 22791528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]