---
reference_id: "PMID:25795793"
title: Rare variants in SOS2 and LZTR1 are associated with Noonan syndrome.
authors:
- Yamamoto GL
- Aguena M
- Gos M
- Hung C
- Pilch J
- Fahiminiya S
- Abramowicz A
- Cristian I
- Buscarilli M
- Naslavsky MS
- Malaquias AC
- Zatz M
- Bodamer O
- Majewski J
- Jorge AA
- Pereira AC
- Kim CA
- Passos-Bueno MR
- Bertola DR
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103018
keywords:
- Cohort Studies
- Facies
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Male
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/metabolism
- "Noonan Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Signal Transduction
- Son of Sevenless Proteins/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- ras Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare variants in SOS2 and LZTR1 are associated with Noonan syndrome.
**Authors:** Yamamoto GL, Aguena M, Gos M, Hung C, Pilch J, Fahiminiya S, Abramowicz A, Cristian I, Buscarilli M, Naslavsky MS, Malaquias AC, Zatz M, Bodamer O, Majewski J, Jorge AA, Pereira AC, Kim CA, Passos-Bueno MR, Bertola DR
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103018](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103018)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2015 Jun;52(6):413-21. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103018. Epub
2015 Mar 20.

Rare variants in SOS2 and LZTR1 are associated with Noonan syndrome.

Yamamoto GL(1), Aguena M(2), Gos M(3), Hung C(4), Pilch J(5), Fahiminiya S(6),
Abramowicz A(3), Cristian I(7), Buscarilli M(8), Naslavsky MS(2), Malaquias
AC(9), Zatz M(2), Bodamer O(4), Majewski J(6), Jorge AA(9), Pereira AC(10), Kim
CA(8), Passos-Bueno MR(2), Bertola DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidade de Genética, Instituto da Criança, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade
de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil Centro de
Pesquisa sobre o Genoma Humano e Células-Tronco, Instituto de Biociências da
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Centro de Pesquisa sobre o Genoma Humano e Células-Tronco, Instituto de
Biociências da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw,
Poland.
(4)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice,
Poland.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(7)Nemours Children's Hospital Orlando, Orlando, Florida, USA.
(8)Unidade de Genética, Instituto da Criança, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade
de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(9)Departamento de Endocrinologia, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de
Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(10)Instituto de Cardiologia, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Noonan syndrome is an autosomal dominant, multisystemic disorder
caused by dysregulation of the RAS/mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway. Heterozygous, pathogenic variants in 11 known genes account for
approximately 80% of cases. The identification of novel genes associated with
Noonan syndrome has become increasingly challenging, since they might be
responsible for very small fractions of the cases.
METHODS: A cohort of 50 Brazilian probands negative for pathogenic variants in
the known genes associated with Noonan syndrome was tested through whole-exome
sequencing along with the relatives in the familial cases. Families from the USA
and Poland with mutations in the newly identified genes were included
subsequently.
RESULTS: We identified rare, segregating or de novo missense variants in SOS2
and LZTR1 in 4% and 8%, respectively, of the 50 Brazilian probands. SOS2 and
LZTR1 variants were also found to segregate in one American and one Polish
family. Notably, SOS2 variants were identified in patients with marked
ectodermal involvement, similar to patients with SOS1 mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified two novel genes, SOS2 and LZTR1, associated with
Noonan syndrome, thereby expanding the molecular spectrum of RASopathies.
Mutations in these genes are responsible for approximately 3% of all patients
with Noonan syndrome. While SOS2 is a natural candidate, because of its homology
with SOS1, the functional role of LZTR1 in the RAS/MAPK pathway is not known,
and it could not have been identified without the large pedigrees. Additional
functional studies are needed to elucidate the role of LZTR1 in RAS/MAPK
signalling and in the pathogenesis of Noonan syndrome.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103018
PMID: 25795793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
