---
reference_id: "PMID:33852188"
title: Monoallelic mutations in SLCO2A1 cause autosomal dominant primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy.
authors:
- Xu Y
- Zhang Z
- Yue H
- Li S
- Zhang Z
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4310
keywords:
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Etoricoxib
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Organic Anion Transporters/genetics
- "Osteoarthropathy, Primary Hypertrophic/genetics"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monoallelic mutations in SLCO2A1 cause autosomal dominant primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy.
**Authors:** Xu Y, Zhang Z, Yue H, Li S, Zhang Z
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4310](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4310)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2021 Aug;36(8):1459-1468. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4310. Epub 2021 
May 5.

Monoallelic mutations in SLCO2A1 cause autosomal dominant primary hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy.

Xu Y(1), Zhang Z(1), Yue H(1), Li S(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Clinical Research Center of Bone Disease, Department of Osteoporosis 
and Bone Diseases, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO) is a rare disease inherited as a 
recessive or irregular dominant trait and characterized by digital clubbing, 
pachydermia, and periostosis. Biallelic mutations in HPGD and SLCO2A1, 
disturbing prostaglandin E2 (PGE2 ) catabolism and leading to increased 
circulating PGE2 level, cause PHO autosomal recessive 1 (PHOAR1) and PHO 
autosomal recessive 2 (PHOAR2), respectively. However, no causative genes have 
been reported for PHO autosomal dominant (PHOAD). Here, we performed Sanger 
sequencing and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) on DNA samples from seven Chinese 
PHOAD families; after excluding other single-nucleotide variants (SNVs), 
structural variations (SVs), and copy number variations (CNVs) in the genomes, 
we reported six SLCO2A1 monoallelic mutations (c.1660G>A [p.G554R], c.664G>A 
[p.G222R], c.1106G>A [p.G369D], c.1065dupA [p.Q356TfsX77], c.1293delT 
[p.S432AfsX48], and c.1807C>T [p.R603X]) in the probands and affected family 
members. Then, in five other PHO families with probands carrying SLCO2A1 
biallelic mutations, we verified that parents with SLCO2A1 monoallelic mutations 
also displayed PHO manifestations, which further confirmed the pathogenicity of 
SLCO2A1 monoallelic mutations and illustrated the allelic nature of PHOAD and 
PHOAR2. Subsequently, through comparison of seven PHOAD probands and 50 PHOAR2 
patients, we found onset age in puberty and skewed penetrance rate were similar 
in both PHO types, but symptoms and signs of PHOAD were milder, including less 
severe pachydermia (p = .027) and periostosis (p = .005), and less frequent 
cutis verticis gyrata (p = .011), acne (p = .005), arthralgia (p = .037), and 
anemia (p = .023). The median urinary PGE2 level in PHOAD probands was almost 
half that in PHOAR2 patients (PHOAD 277.58 ng/mmoL creatinine, PHOAR2 
473.19 ng/mmoL creatinine; p = .038). Moreover, through the 3-month trial of 
oral administration of etoricoxib, an effective response similar to that we 
reported previously in PHOAR2 patients was observed in PHOAD probands. In 
conclusion, our findings confirm that SLCO2A1 monoallelic mutations are the 
cause of PHOAD and broaden phenotypic spectrum of PHO. © 2021 American Society 
for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

© 2021 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4310
PMID: 33852188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]