---
reference_id: "PMID:23746447"
title: NDUFA4 mutations underlie dysfunction of a cytochrome c oxidase subunit linked to human neurological disease.
authors:
- Pitceathly RD
- Rahman S
- Wedatilake Y
- Polke JM
- Cirak S
- Foley AR
- Sailer A
- Hurles ME
- Stalker J
- Hargreaves I
- Woodward CE
- Sweeney MG
- Muntoni F
- Houlden H
- Taanman JW
- Hanna MG
- UK10K Consortium
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.05.005
keywords:
- "5' Untranslated Regions"
- Base Sequence
- "Blotting, Western"
- Computational Biology
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Exome
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NDUFA4 mutations underlie dysfunction of a cytochrome c oxidase subunit linked to human neurological disease.
**Authors:** Pitceathly RD, Rahman S, Wedatilake Y, Polke JM, Cirak S, Foley AR, Sailer A, Hurles ME, Stalker J, Hargreaves I, Woodward CE, Sweeney MG, Muntoni F, Houlden H, Taanman JW, Hanna MG, UK10K Consortium
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2013.05.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2013.05.005)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2013 Jun 27;3(6):1795-805. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.05.005. Epub 
2013 Jun 6.

NDUFA4 mutations underlie dysfunction of a cytochrome c oxidase subunit linked 
to human neurological disease.

Pitceathly RD(1), Rahman S, Wedatilake Y, Polke JM, Cirak S, Foley AR, Sailer A, 
Hurles ME, Stalker J, Hargreaves I, Woodward CE, Sweeney MG, Muntoni F, Houlden 
H, Taanman JW, Hanna MG; UK10K Consortium.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Institute of Neurology and 
National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, 
UK.

Erratum in
    Cell Rep. 2013 Jul 25;4(2):402.

The molecular basis of cytochrome c oxidase (COX, complex IV) deficiency remains 
genetically undetermined in many cases. Homozygosity mapping and whole-exome 
sequencing were performed in a consanguineous pedigree with isolated COX 
deficiency linked to a Leigh syndrome neurological phenotype. Unexpectedly, 
affected individuals harbored homozygous splice donor site mutations in NDUFA4, 
a gene previously assigned to encode a mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I 
(NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase) subunit. Western blot analysis of denaturing 
gels and immunocytochemistry revealed undetectable steady-state NDUFA4 protein 
levels, indicating that the mutation causes a loss-of-function effect in the 
homozygous state. Analysis of one- and two-dimensional blue-native 
polyacrylamide gels confirmed an interaction between NDUFA4 and the COX enzyme 
complex in control muscle, whereas the COX enzyme complex without NDUFA4 was 
detectable with no abnormal subassemblies in patient muscle. These observations 
support recent work in cell lines suggesting that NDUFA4 is an additional COX 
subunit and demonstrate that NDUFA4 mutations cause human disease. Our findings 
support reassignment of the NDUFA4 protein to complex IV and suggest that 
patients with unexplained COX deficiency should be screened for NDUFA4 
mutations.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.05.005
PMCID: PMC3701321
PMID: 23746447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]