---
reference_id: "PMID:37432316"
title: Dynamic regulation of inter-organelle communication by ubiquitylation controls skeletal muscle development and disease onset.
authors:
- Mansur A
- Joseph R
- Kim ES
- Jean-Beltran PM
- Udeshi ND
- Pearce C
- Jiang H
- Iwase R
- Milev MP
- Almousa HA
- McNamara E
- Widrick J
- Perez C
- Ravenscroft G
- Sacher M
- Cole PA
- Carr SA
- Gupta VA
journal: Elife
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.81966
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dynamic regulation of inter-organelle communication by ubiquitylation controls skeletal muscle development and disease onset.
**Authors:** Mansur A, Joseph R, Kim ES, Jean-Beltran PM, Udeshi ND, Pearce C, Jiang H, Iwase R, Milev MP, Almousa HA, McNamara E, Widrick J, Perez C, Ravenscroft G, Sacher M, Cole PA, Carr SA, Gupta VA
**Journal:** Elife (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.81966](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.81966)

## Content

1. Elife. 2023 Jul 11;12:e81966. doi: 10.7554/eLife.81966.

Dynamic regulation of inter-organelle communication by ubiquitylation controls 
skeletal muscle development and disease onset.

Mansur A(1), Joseph R(1), Kim ES(1), Jean-Beltran PM(2), Udeshi ND(2), Pearce 
C(2), Jiang H(1)(3), Iwase R(1)(4), Milev MP(5), Almousa HA(5), McNamara E(6), 
Widrick J(7), Perez C(8), Ravenscroft G(6), Sacher M(5)(9), Cole PA(1), Carr 
SA(2), Gupta VA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States.
(2)Proteomics Platform, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, United 
States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Boston, United States.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, United States.
(5)Department of Biology, Concordia University of Edmonton, Montreal, Canada.
(6)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Centre of Medical Research, Harry 
Perkins Institute of Medical Research, University of Western Australia, Perth, 
Australia.
(7)Division of Genetics, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, United States.
(8)Department of Anesthesiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, United States.
(9)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Update of
    doi: 10.1101/2022.07.21.501000.

Ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) dysfunction is associated with the pathology 
of a wide range of human diseases, including myopathies and muscular atrophy. 
However, the mechanistic understanding of specific components of the regulation 
of protein turnover during development and disease progression in skeletal 
muscle is unclear. Mutations in KLHL40, an E3 ubiquitin ligase cullin3 (CUL3) 
substrate-specific adapter protein, result in severe congenital nemaline 
myopathy, but the events that initiate the pathology and the mechanism through 
which it becomes pervasive remain poorly understood. To characterize the 
KLHL40-regulated ubiquitin-modified proteome during skeletal muscle development 
and disease onset, we used global, quantitative mass spectrometry-based 
ubiquitylome and global proteome analyses of klhl40a mutant zebrafish during 
disease progression. Global proteomics during skeletal muscle development 
revealed extensive remodeling of functional modules linked with sarcomere 
formation, energy, biosynthetic metabolic processes, and vesicle trafficking. 
Combined analysis of klh40 mutant muscle proteome and ubiquitylome identified 
thin filament proteins, metabolic enzymes, and ER-Golgi vesicle trafficking 
pathway proteins regulated by ubiquitylation during muscle development. Our 
studies identified a role for KLHL40 as a regulator of ER-Golgi anterograde 
trafficking through ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation of 
secretion-associated Ras-related GTPase1a (Sar1a). In KLHL40-deficient muscle, 
defects in ER exit site vesicle formation and downstream transport of 
extracellular cargo proteins result in structural and functional abnormalities. 
Our work reveals that the muscle proteome is dynamically fine-tuned by 
ubiquitylation to regulate skeletal muscle development and uncovers new disease 
mechanisms for therapeutic development in patients.

© 2023, Mansur et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.81966
PMCID: PMC10356137
PMID: 37432316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AM, RJ, EK, PJ, NU, CP, HJ, RI, MM, HA, EM, JW, 
CP, GR, MS, PC, SC, VG No competing interests declared