---
reference_id: "PMID:31606344"
title: Autoimmune polyglandular diseases.
authors:
- Kahaly GJ
- Frommer L
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2019.101344
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Diseases/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Endocrine System Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, therapy"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Interdisciplinary Communication
- Morbidity
- "Patient Care Team/organization & administration"
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune polyglandular diseases.
**Authors:** Kahaly GJ, Frommer L
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2019.101344](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2019.101344)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2019 Dec;33(6):101344. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2019.101344. Epub 2019 Oct 4.

Autoimmune polyglandular diseases.

Kahaly GJ(1), Frommer L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine I, Johannes Gutenberg University Medical Center, 
Mainz, Germany. Electronic address: george.kahaly@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(2)Department of Medicine I, Johannes Gutenberg University Medical Center, 
Mainz, Germany. Electronic address: Lara.Frommer@unimedizin-mainz.de.

Autoimmune polyglandular diseases (APD) are defined as the presence of two 
autoimmune -induced endocrine failures. With respect to the significant 
morbidity and potential mortality of APD, the diagnostic objective is to detect 
APD at an early stage, with the advantage of less frequent complications, 
effective therapy and better prognosis. This requires that patients at risk be 
regularly screened for subclinical endocrinopathies prior to clinical 
manifestation. Regarding the time interval between manifestation of first and 
further endocrinopathies, regular and long-term follow-up is warranted. Quality 
of life and psychosocial status are poor in APD patients and involved relatives. 
Familial clustering is high in patients with APD. Considering the high incidence 
of one or more endocrinopathies in first-degree relatives of patients with APD, 
family members should be regularly screened since they may also develop 
autoimmune endocrinopathies. Multidisciplinary management of these multiplex 
families in specialized centers is warranted.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2019.101344
PMID: 31606344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Both authors 
have nothing to disclose and had no sources of funding.