---
reference_id: "PMID:28573636"
title: Ebola Virus Field Sample Collection.
authors:
- Amman BR
- Schuh AJ
- Towner JS
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7116-9_30
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola Virus Field Sample Collection.
**Authors:** Amman BR, Schuh AJ, Towner JS
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4939-7116-9_30](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7116-9_30)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1628:373-393. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7116-9_30.

Ebola Virus Field Sample Collection.

Amman BR(1), Schuh AJ(1), Towner JS(2).

Author information:
(1)Virus Host Ecology, Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High 
Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic 
Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.
(2)Virus Host Ecology, Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High 
Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic 
Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, 
USA. jit8@cdc.gov.

Sampling wildlife for ebolaviruses presents the researcher with a multitude of 
challenges, foremost of which is safety. Throughout the methods described in 
this chapter, personal safety and personal protective equipment (PPE) will be 
reiterated for each methodology. The methods described here are those used to 
successfully detect and isolate marburgviruses from their natural reservoir, 
Rousettus aegyptiacus, and therefore should be applicable for diagnostic testing 
for ebolaviruses via RT-PCR, ELISA, and IHC techniques.Although an ebolavirus 
natural reservoir has yet to be identified, the majority of disease ecologists 
believe the reservoir to belong to the order Chiroptera (bats). The methods 
presented in this chapter are presented with bats as an example, but all of 
these methods would be applicable to other species of wildlife with few or no 
modifications.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7116-9_30
PMID: 28573636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]