---
reference_id: "PMID:21555948"
title: Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency.
authors:
- Mitchell JJ
- Trakadis YJ
- Scriver CR
journal: Genet Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182141b48
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency.
**Authors:** Mitchell JJ, Trakadis YJ, Scriver CR
**Journal:** Genet Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182141b48](https://doi.org/10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182141b48)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2011 Aug;13(8):697-707. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182141b48.

Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency.

Mitchell JJ(1), Trakadis YJ, Scriver CR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, 
Canada. john.mitchell@muhc.mcgill.ca

Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder that 
results in intolerance to the dietary intake of the essential amino acid 
phenylalanine. It occurs in approximately 1:15,000 individuals. Deficiency of 
this enzyme produces a spectrum of disorders including classic phenylketonuria, 
mild phenylketonuria, and mild hyperphenylalaninemia. Classic phenylketonuria is 
caused by a complete or near-complete deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase 
activity and without dietary restriction of phenylalanine most children will 
develop profound and irreversible intellectual disability. Mild phenylketonuria 
and mild hyperphenylalaninemia are associated with lower risk of impaired 
cognitive development in the absence of treatment. Phenylalanine hydroxylase 
deficiency can be diagnosed by newborn screening based on detection of the 
presence of hyperphenylalaninemia using the Guthrie microbial inhibition assay 
or other assays on a blood spot obtained from a heel prick. Since the 
introduction of newborn screening, the major neurologic consequences of 
hyperphenylalaninemia have been largely eradicated. Affected individuals can 
lead normal lives. However, recent data suggest that homeostasis is not fully 
restored with current therapy. Treated individuals have a higher incidence of 
neuropsychological problems. The mainstay of treatment for hyperphenylalaninemia 
involves a low-protein diet and use of a phenylalanine-free medical formula. 
This treatment must commence as soon as possible after birth and should continue 
for life. Regular monitoring of plasma phenylalanine and tyrosine concentrations 
is necessary. Targets of plasma phenylalanine of 120-360 μmol/L (2-6 mg/dL) in 
the first decade of life are essential for optimal outcome. Phenylalanine 
targets in adolescence and adulthood are less clear. A significant proportion of 
patients with phenylketonuria may benefit from adjuvant therapy with 
6R-tetrahydrobiopterin stereoisomer. Special consideration must be given to 
adult women with hyperphenylalaninemia because of the teratogenic effects of 
phenylalanine. Women with phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency considering 
pregnancy should follow special guidelines and assure adequate energy intake 
with the proper proportion of protein, fat, and carbohydrates to minimize risks 
to the developing fetus. Molecular genetic testing of the phenylalanine 
hydroxylase gene is available for genetic counseling purposes to determine 
carrier status of at-risk relatives and for prenatal testing.

DOI: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182141b48
PMID: 21555948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]