---
reference_id: PMID:38326222
title: Dermatologic manifestations in pediatric patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
authors:
- Afarideh M
- Bartoletta K
- Tollefson MM
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/pde.15538
keywords:
- Adult
- Male
- Adolescent
- Humans
- Child
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Cheilitis/complications
- "Inflammatory Bowel Diseases/complications, epidemiology"
- "Crohn Disease/complications, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- "Colitis, Ulcerative/complications, epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Abscess
- "Skin Diseases/etiology, complications"
- "Psoriasis/complications, epidemiology"
- Skin Neoplasms/complications
- Fistula/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermatologic manifestations in pediatric patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
**Authors:** Afarideh M, Bartoletta K, Tollefson MM
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.15538](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.15538)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2024 Mar-Apr;41(2):234-242. doi: 10.1111/pde.15538. Epub
2024  Feb 7.

Dermatologic manifestations in pediatric patients with inflammatory bowel 
disease.

Afarideh M(1), Bartoletta K(2), Tollefson MM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.

BACKGROUND: Despite studies of dermatologic manifestations in adults with 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), little is known about the prevalence of 
IBD-associated skin lesions and their correlation with IBD severity in children. 
We aimed to address these knowledge gaps in our single-center cohort of children 
with IBD.
METHODS: Retrospective chart review of 528 children and adolescents (≤18 years 
old) with IBD and seen at Mayo Clinic (Rochester, MN) between 1999 and 2017 was 
conducted. The Chi-Square/Fischer's exact test (with p ≤ .05 to signify 
statistical significance) was applied to compare categorical outcomes between 
Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) patients.
RESULTS: In total, 425 IBD patients (64.9% CD, 53% males) and ≥1 dermatologic 
diagnosis were included. Presence of ≥1 cutaneous infection was recorded in 
42.8% of participants. Acne was the most common non-infectious dermatologic 
condition (30.8%), followed by eczema (15.8%) and perianal skin tags (14.6%). 
Angular cheilitis (p = .024), keratosis pilaris (KP, p = .003), and perianal 
skin complications (i.e., skin tags, fistula, and abscesses; all p < .001) were 
more frequently diagnosed among children with CD, while fungal skin infections 
(p = .017) were more frequently diagnosed in UC patients. Severity of IBD 
correlated with higher prevalence of perianal fistula (p = .003), perianal 
abscess (p = .041), psoriasis (p < .001), and pyoderma gangrenosum (PG, 
p = .003).
CONCLUSIONS: Both IBD-specific and IBD-nonspecific dermatologic conditions are 
very prevalent in childhood IBD, the most common being infectious. Children with 
CD are more likely to experience angular cheilitis, KP, and perianal skin 
findings than those with UC. Perianal disease, psoriasis, and PG are associated 
with more severe IBD.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.15538
PMID: 38326222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]