---
reference_id: "PMID:30244270"
title: "Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis in a patient with Crohn's disease: case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Skok P
- Skok K
journal: Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat
year: '2018'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis in a patient with Crohn's disease: case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Skok P, Skok K
**Journal:** Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat (2018)

## Content

1. Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat. 2018 Sep;27(3):161-163.

Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis in a patient with Crohn's disease: case 
report and review of the literature.

Skok P(1)(2), Skok K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, 
Slovenia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia.

Crohn's disease is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease. The disease is 
characterized by acute exacerbations with diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever, 
anorexia, intestinal bleeding, and weight loss. Immune-mediated diseases that 
are frequently associated with Crohn's disease include arthritis, ankylosing 
spondylitis, sacroiliitis, episcleritis, uveitis, and skin lesions, such as 
erythema nodosum and pyoderma gangrenosum. The authors present the case of a 
22-year-old female patient that was admitted to their hospital due to diarrhea, 
fever, arthralgias, and diffuse erythematous papules and plaques with vesicles 
and pustules affecting the patient's face, lips, arms, trunk, and legs. Six 
months prior to onset, the patient was diagnosed with terminal ileitis and 
Crohn's disease of the sigmoid colon. Treatment with mesalazine and budesonide 
had been introduced. In the diagnostic procedure, a skin biopsy was taken from 
the patient. Histology confirmed dense infiltration of neutrophilic 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes, or Sweet's syndrome. This condition is a rare 
manifestation of chronic inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn's disease and 
ulcerative colitis. This syndrome is thought to be a hypersensitivity reaction 
and may be associated with various inflammatory, infectious, or neoplastic 
diseases. The patient was treated with high doses of methylprednisolone (60 mg 
IV), which resulted in rapid improvement of Crohn's disease and skin lesions.

PMID: 30244270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]