---
reference_id: "PMID:29493962"
title: Shigellosis.
authors:
- Samandari T
- Okafor CN
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shigellosis.
**Authors:** Samandari T, Okafor CN

## Content

1. Shigellosis.

Samandari T, Okafor CN(1).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2025 Dec 13.

Author information:
(1)Capefear Valley Health System

Shigellosis is an acute diarrheal infection caused by an enteroinvasive 
gram-negative, facultative anaerobic bacillus of the genus Shigella (see 
Image. Shigellosis). Shigellosis is common in developing countries and is 
transmitted via the fecal-oral route. In high-income countries, reports reveal 
that, in addition to young children, men who have sex with men are at risk for 
Shigella outbreaks via sexual contact. Shigellosis can affect all persons across 
all age groups, but the very young, older adults, and the immunocompromised are 
at significantly increased risk for severe disease.  Shigella are less 
susceptible to destruction by gastric acid than other bacteria when passing 
through the stomach; a small inoculum, as few as 10 to 100 organisms, may cause 
disease. After leaving the stomach, Shigella multiply in the small intestine and 
enter the colon. In the colon, they secrete virulence factors that cause severe 
inflammation and mediate enterotoxic effects, enabling colonization and invasion 
of the colonic epithelium. Shigella produces 3 enterotoxins that cause watery or 
bloody diarrhea and infection-associated symptoms, eg, tenesmus, malaise, and 
fever. The average incubation period of Shigella is 1 to 4 days following 
ingestion of the inoculum. The main symptom of shigellosis is bloody and often 
mucoid diarrhea; abdominal pain and vomiting are common. Shigellosis is 
typically self-limited and resolves within 5 to 7 days. Supportive care may be 
required, and antibiotics could shorten the duration of illness or prevent 
complications, particularly in individuals at increased risk for severe disease 
and complications, eg, hemolytic-uremic syndrome and postreactive 
arthritis. However, antibiotic resistance is rising within the genus, 
and extensively drug-resistant Shigella have been identified. Antimicrobial 
susceptibility testing is critical to ensure appropriate therapeutic selection.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 29493962

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Taraz Samandari declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Chika Okafor 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.