---
reference_id: "PMID:37451886"
title: A novel pathogenic compound heterozygous variant in C12orf57 gene in a child with Temtamy syndrome presenting with overlapping phenotypic features of Kabuki-like syndrome.
authors:
- Nerakh G
- Vasikarla M
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2023.06.008
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Child
- Autism Spectrum Disorder
- Agenesis of Corpus Callosum
- Coloboma/genetics
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Nervous System Malformations
- Syndrome
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel pathogenic compound heterozygous variant in C12orf57 gene in a child with Temtamy syndrome presenting with overlapping phenotypic features of Kabuki-like syndrome.
**Authors:** Nerakh G, Vasikarla M
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2023.06.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2023.06.008)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2023 Oct;45(9):512-516. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2023.06.008. Epub 
2023 Jul 12.

A novel pathogenic compound heterozygous variant in C12orf57 gene in a child 
with Temtamy syndrome presenting with overlapping phenotypic features of 
Kabuki-like syndrome.

Nerakh G(1), Vasikarla M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Fernandez Foundation, Hyderabad, India. Electronic 
address: maildrgayatri@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Genetics, Fernandez Foundation, Hyderabad, India.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder is a major neurodevelopmental disorder. 
Temtamy syndrome is a rare syndromic intellectual developmental disorder that 
presents with global developmental delay, autism, seizures, and 
agenesis/dysgenesis of the corpus callosum.
METHODS: We report a case of a male child who presented with global 
developmental delay, and autism. Additional clinical features in the child were 
prominent eyes, long palpebral fissures with eversion of lateral third of the 
lower eyelid, hypoplastic nipples, and persistent fetal fingertip pads. The 
clinical features were in favor of Kabuki-like syndrome. MRI brain revealed 
corpus callosal dysgenesis, mild cerebellar para-vermian, and vermian atrophy.
RESULTS: Trio exome sequencing has revealed a novel pathogenic compound 
heterozygous variant c.145A >T (p.Lys49Ter) and c.224_242del (p.Val85GlufsTer88) 
in exon 2 of the C12orf57 gene.
CONCLUSION: This is the first case of Temtamy syndrome reported from India with 
additional novel phenotypic features not reported previously and broadens the 
phenotypic spectrum of the disorder. In addition, it expands the spectrum of 
pathogenic variants in the C12orf57 gene.

Copyright © 2023 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2023.06.008
PMID: 37451886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.