---
reference_id: "PMID:39641441"
title: "Does It Run in Your Family? Inherited Truncating PSMD12 Variants Broaden the Phenotypic Spectrum of Stankiewicz-Isidor Syndrome."
authors:
- Feresin A
- Spedicati B
- Zampieri S
- Morgan A
- Magnolato A
- Tesser A
- Tommasini A
- Bonati MT
- Girotto G
- Faletra F
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63953
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics, pathology"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics, pathology"
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, pathology"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does It Run in Your Family? Inherited Truncating PSMD12 Variants Broaden the Phenotypic Spectrum of Stankiewicz-Isidor Syndrome.
**Authors:** Feresin A, Spedicati B, Zampieri S, Morgan A, Magnolato A, Tesser A, Tommasini A, Bonati MT, Girotto G, Faletra F
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63953](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63953)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2025 Apr;197(4):e63953. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63953. Epub 2024
 Dec 6.

Does It Run in Your Family? Inherited Truncating PSMD12 Variants Broaden the 
Phenotypic Spectrum of Stankiewicz-Isidor Syndrome.

Feresin A(1), Spedicati B(1)(2), Zampieri S(2), Morgan A(2), Magnolato A(2), 
Tesser A(2), Tommasini A(1)(2), Bonati MT(2), Girotto G(1)(2), Faletra F(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy.
(2)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, 
Italy.
(3)Institute of Medical Genetics, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Friuli 
Centrale (ASUFC), Udine, Italy.

Alteration in the ubiquitin-proteasome system results in human disorders with 
neurological and/or autoinflammatory presentation. Haploinsufficiency of PSMD12, 
which encodes a subunit of the core component of the proteasome, causes 
Stankiewicz-Isidor syndrome (STISS), characterized by intellectual disability, 
autism spectrum disorder, craniofacial dysmorphisms, with or without other 
congenital anomalies, and autoinflammation. We described six patients (four 
adults) from two unrelated families carrying a known p.(Arg289*) or a novel 
p.(Tyr111*) PSMD12 variant. Portraying a completely penetrant condition with 
inter- and intra-familiar clinical variability, all individuals presented with 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, craniofacial, and skeletal 
anomalies. Novel findings in our cohort included unilateral ectopic fingernail, 
cholesteatoma, oligodontia, and the occurrence of an ovarian teratoma. Most 
subjects had acne, short stature, and developed obesity since late childhood. 
Eating behavior was reported. Good sociality and behavioral concern emerged as 
well. None presented clinical manifestations of autoinflammation and the 
detected IFN-I signature perturbations were not specific. Together with a 
complete literature review, we expanded the clinical spectrum of STISS, 
highlighting the relevance of inherited variants, and discussing challenges in 
diagnosis and management. We finally consider the intriguing role of PSMD12 in 
human development and propose to index "onychoheterotopia" among the Human 
Phenotype Ontology terms.

© 2024 The Author(s). American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63953
PMID: 39641441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]