---
reference_id: "PMID:38501183"
title: "Nationwide Study of the Epidemiology, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis in Korea."
authors:
- Jung HI
- Nam DR
- You SH
- Jung JW
- Gu KM
- Jung SY
journal: J Korean Med Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3346/jkms.2024.39.e96
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Middle Aged
- "Alveolitis, Extrinsic Allergic/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Republic of Korea/epidemiology
- Incidence
- Comorbidity
- "Asthma/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nationwide Study of the Epidemiology, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis in Korea.
**Authors:** Jung HI, Nam DR, You SH, Jung JW, Gu KM, Jung SY
**Journal:** J Korean Med Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3346/jkms.2024.39.e96](https://doi.org/10.3346/jkms.2024.39.e96)

## Content

1. J Korean Med Sci. 2024 Mar 18;39(10):e96. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2024.39.e96.

Nationwide Study of the Epidemiology, Diagnosis, and Treatment of 
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis in Korea.

Jung HI(#)(1)(2), Nam DR(#)(3)(4), You SH(3)(4), Jung JW(1)(2), Gu KM(1)(5), 
Jung SY(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Allergy Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Chung-Ang University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(3)College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Global Innovative Drugs, Graduate School of Chung-Ang 
University, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea. 9kangmo@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Global Innovative Drugs, Graduate School of Chung-Ang 
University, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea. jsyoung@cau.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is a condition with an uncertain 
global incidence, and information on its diagnosis and management is limited. 
This study aimed to address these knowledge gaps.
METHODS: This study utilized customized claims data from the Health Insurance 
Review and Assessment Service (HIRA) in South Korea from January 2010, to 
December 2021. Patients with HP were identified based on the diagnosis code 
(International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision, J67) between 2011 and 
2020. Incident HP cases were defined as new HP claims, excluding those with 
claims in the previous year. The study examined various factors such as age, 
sex, comorbidities, diagnostic methods, and treatment patterns. Additionally, 
multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to identify risk factors 
associated with treatment initiation.
RESULTS: A total of 8,678 HP incident cases were confirmed, with age- and 
sex-adjusted annual incidence rates ranging from 1.14/100,000 in 2020 to 
2.16/100,000 in 2012. The mean age of patients with incident HP was 52 years, 
with a higher incidence observed among males. Additionally, the most common 
comorbidity was asthma. Bronchoscopy was performed on 16.9% of patients, and 
25.4% of patients did not receive treatment within 1 year of diagnosis. Among 
those who received treatment, prednisone was the most used systemic steroid, and 
azathioprine was the most commonly used second-line immunosuppressant. Factors 
associated with treatment initiation included the female sex, having asthma or 
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), and undergoing bronchoscopy.
CONCLUSION: This study provides valuable insights into the incidence, diagnosis, 
and treatment patterns of HP in South Korea using nationwide medical claims 
data.

© 2024 The Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2024.39.e96
PMCID: PMC10948259
PMID: 38501183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.