---
reference_id: "PMID:34085356"
title: Biallelic variants in RNU12 cause CDAGS syndrome.
authors:
- Xing C
- Kanchwala M
- Rios JJ
- Hyatt T
- Wang RC
- Tran A
- Dougherty I
- Tovar-Garza A
- Purnadi C
- Kumar MG
- Berk D
- Shinawi M
- Irvine AD
- Toledo-Bahena M
- Agim NG
- Glass DA 2nd
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24239
keywords:
- Anal Canal/abnormalities
- Craniosynostoses/genetics
- Digestive System Abnormalities
- Humans
- Porokeratosis
- RNA Splicing
- "RNA, Small Nuclear/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic variants in RNU12 cause CDAGS syndrome.
**Authors:** Xing C, Kanchwala M, Rios JJ, Hyatt T, Wang RC, Tran A, Dougherty I, Tovar-Garza A, Purnadi C, Kumar MG, Berk D, Shinawi M, Irvine AD, Toledo-Bahena M, Agim NG, Glass DA 2nd
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24239](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24239)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2021 Aug;42(8):1042-1052. doi: 10.1002/humu.24239. Epub 2021 Jun
15.

Biallelic variants in RNU12 cause CDAGS syndrome.

Xing C(1)(2)(3), Kanchwala M(1), Rios JJ(1)(4)(5), Hyatt T(1), Wang RC(6), Tran
A(6), Dougherty I(6), Tovar-Garza A(6), Purnadi C(6), Kumar MG(7), Berk D(7),
Shinawi M(8), Irvine AD(9)(10), Toledo-Bahena M(11), Agim NG(6)(12), Glass DA
2nd(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Population and Data Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(4)Center for Pediatric Bone Biology and Translational Research, Scottish Rite
for Children, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Washington University School of Medicine in Saint
Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(8)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
Washington University School of Medicine in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri,
USA.
(9)Clinical Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(10)Paediatric Dermatology, Children's Health Ireland at Crumlin, Dublin,
Ireland.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez,
México, D.F., Mexico.
(12)Division of Pediatric Dermatology, Children's Health, Dallas, Texas, USA.

CDAGS Syndrome is a rare congenital disorder characterized by Craniosynostosis,
Delayed closure of the fontanelles, cranial defects, clavicular hypoplasia, Anal
and Genitourinary malformations, and Skin manifestations. We performed whole
exome and Sanger sequencing to identify the underlying molecular cause in five
patients with CDAGS syndrome from four distinct families. Whole exome sequencing
revealed biallelic rare variants that disrupt highly conserved nucleotides
within the RNU12 gene. RNU12 encodes a small nuclear RNA that is a component of
the minor spliceosome and is essential for minor intron splicing. Targeted
sequencing confirmed allele segregation within the four families. All five
patients shared the same rare mutation NC_000022.10:g.43011402C>T, which alters
a highly conserved nucleotide within the precursor U12 snRNA 3' extension. Each
of them also carried a rare variant on the other allele that either disrupts the
secondary structure or the Sm binding site of the RNU12 snRNA. Whole
transcriptome sequencing analysis of lymphoblastoid cells identified 120
differentially expressed genes, and differential alternative splicing analysis
indicated there was an enrichment of alternative splicing events in the patient.
These findings provide evidence of the involvement of RNU12 in craniosynostosis,
anal and genitourinary patterning, and cutaneous disease.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24239
PMID: 34085356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
