---
reference_id: "PMID:27993359"
title: Perioperative management and outcomes of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.
authors:
- Lal DR
- Gadepalli SK
- Downard CD
- Ostlie DJ
- Minneci PC
- Swedler RM
- Chelius T
- Cassidy L
- Rapp CT
- Deans KJ
- Fallat ME
- Finnell SME
- Helmrath MA
- Hirschl RB
- Kabre RS
- Leys CM
- Mak G
- Raque J
- Rescorla FJ
- Saito JM
- St Peter SD
- von Allmen D
- Warner BW
- Sato TT
- Midwest Pediatric Surgery Consortium
journal: J Pediatr Surg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2016.11.046
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/surgery"
- Anastomotic Leak
- Bronchoscopy
- Esophageal Atresia/surgery
- Esophagoplasty
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Perioperative Care
- Postoperative Complications
- Retrospective Studies
- Trachea/surgery
- Tracheoesophageal Fistula/surgery
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perioperative management and outcomes of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.
**Authors:** Lal DR, Gadepalli SK, Downard CD, Ostlie DJ, Minneci PC, Swedler RM, Chelius T, Cassidy L, Rapp CT, Deans KJ, Fallat ME, Finnell SME, Helmrath MA, Hirschl RB, Kabre RS, Leys CM, Mak G, Raque J, Rescorla FJ, Saito JM, St Peter SD, von Allmen D, Warner BW, Sato TT, Midwest Pediatric Surgery Consortium
**Journal:** J Pediatr Surg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2016.11.046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2016.11.046)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Surg. 2017 Aug;52(8):1245-1251. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2016.11.046.
 Epub 2016 Dec 5.

Perioperative management and outcomes of esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Lal DR(1), Gadepalli SK(2), Downard CD(3), Ostlie DJ(4), Minneci PC(5), Swedler
RM(6), Chelius T(7), Cassidy L(8), Rapp CT(6), Deans KJ(5), Fallat ME(3),
Finnell SME(9), Helmrath MA(10), Hirschl RB(2), Kabre RS(11), Leys CM(4), Mak
G(12), Raque J(3), Rescorla FJ(9), Saito JM(13), St Peter SD(14), von Allmen
D(10), Warner BW(13), Sato TT(6); Midwest Pediatric Surgery Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States. Electronic address: dlal@chw.org.
(2)Section of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, United States.
(3)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Hiram C. Polk, Jr., M.D. Department of
Surgery, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States.
(4)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, United States.
(5)Center for Surgical Outcomes Research, The Research Institute at Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Department of Surgery, University of Ohio, Columbus, OH,
United States.
(6)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States.
(7)Division of Epidemiology, Institute for Health and Society, Medical College
of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States.
(8)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States; Division of Epidemiology, Institute for
Health and Society, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States.
(9)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States.
(10)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(11)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Feinberg School of
Medicine of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States.
(12)Section of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, The University of
Chicago Medicine and Biologic Sciences, Chicago, IL, United States.
(13)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.
(14)Department of Surgery, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, United
States.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) is a
rare congenital anomaly lacking contemporary data detailing patient
demographics, medical/surgical management and outcomes. Substantial variation in
the care of infants with EA/TEF may affect both short- and long-term outcomes.
The purpose of this study was to characterize the demographics, management
strategies and outcomes in a contemporary multi-institutional cohort of infants
diagnosed with EA/TEF to identify potential areas for standardization of care.
METHODS: A multi-institutional retrospective cohort study of infants with EA/TEF
treated at 11 children's hospitals between 2009 and 2014 was performed. Over the
5year period, 396 cases were identified in the 11 centers (7±5 per center per
year). All infants with a diagnosis of EA/TEF made within 30days of life who had
surgical repair of their defect defined as esophageal reconstruction with or
without ligation of TEF within the first six months of life were included.
Demographic, operative, and outcome data were collected and analyzed to detect
associations between variables.
RESULTS: Prenatal suspicion or diagnosis of EA/TEF was present in 53 (13%). The
most common anatomy was proximal EA with distal TEF (n=335; 85%) followed by
pure EA (n=27; 7%). Clinically significant congenital heart disease (CHD) was
present in 137 (35%). Mortality was 7.5% and significantly associated with CHD
(p<0.0001). Postoperative morbidity occurred in 62% of the population, including
165 (42%) cases with anastomotic stricture requiring intervention, anastomotic
leak in 89 (23%), vocal cord paresis/paralysis in 26 (7%), recurrent fistula in
19 (5%), and anastomotic dehiscence in 9 (2%). Substantial variation in practice
across our institutions existed: bronchoscopy prior to repair was performed in
64% of cases (range: 0%-100%); proximal pouch contrast study in 21% (0%-69%);
use of interposing material between the esophageal and tracheal suture lines in
38% (0%-69%); perioperative antibiotics ≥24h in 69% (36%-97%); and
transanastomotic tubes in 73% (21%-100%).
CONCLUSION: Contemporary treatment of EA/TEF is characterized by substantial
variation in perioperative management and considerable postoperative morbidity
and mortality. Future studies are planned to establish best practices and
clinical care guidelines for infants with EA/TEF.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Type of study: Treatment study. Level IV.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2016.11.046
PMID: 27993359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
