---
reference_id: "PMID:35862628"
title: Pharmacotherapeutic management of seizures in patients with Angleman Syndrome.
authors:
- Samanta D
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/14656566.2022.2105141
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacotherapeutic management of seizures in patients with Angleman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Samanta D
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14656566.2022.2105141](https://doi.org/10.1080/14656566.2022.2105141)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2022 Sep;23(13):1511-1522. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2022.2105141. Epub 2022 Jul 26.

Pharmacotherapeutic management of seizures in patients with Angleman Syndrome.

Samanta D(1).

Author information:
(1)Child Neurology Section, Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas.

INTRODUCTION: Approximately 80-90% of patients with Angelman syndrome (AS) 
develop childhood-onset intractable seizures with major negative impact on the 
quality of life. Thus adequate management of seizures is the most critical 
priority to improve health-related quality of life in children with AS.
AREAS COVERED: The primary focus of the review is on pharmacotherapeutic 
management of seizures. To better comprehend pharmacotherapeutic 
decision-making, the first section of the paper briefly examines epileptogenesis 
and polymorphic seizure morphologies related to AS. Next, the review explores 
individual antiseizure medications (ASMs) and their potential therapeutic 
utility. Lastly, some future and emerging treatment options are discussed that 
can transform the management of seizures in patients with AS.
EXPERT OPINION: Evidence for treating seizures in AS mainly derives from 
low-quality studies. Levetiracetam and clobazam are the most commonly used ASMs. 
Although the potential utility of several other ASMs(valproate, topiramate, 
lamotrigine, ethosuximide, clonazepam) has been well documented for some time, 
the treatment landscape may rapidly evolve due to the availability of newer and 
better tolerated ASMs(cannabidiol oil, brivaracetam, perampanel). In addition, a 
better understanding of the underlying pathogenesis and the development of 
molecular therapeutics offer hope for precision therapies for seizures.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2022.2105141
PMID: 35862628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]