---
reference_id: "PMID:35250996"
title: Mucosal Defense Against Giardia at the Intestinal Epithelial Cell Interface.
authors:
- Solaymani-Mohammadi S
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.817468
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucosal Defense Against Giardia at the Intestinal Epithelial Cell Interface.
**Authors:** Solaymani-Mohammadi S
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.817468](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.817468)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Feb 17;13:817468. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.817468. 
eCollection 2022.

Mucosal Defense Against Giardia at the Intestinal Epithelial Cell Interface.

Solaymani-Mohammadi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Mucosal Immunology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, School 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND, 
United States.

Human giardiasis, caused by the protozoan parasite Giardia duodenalis (syn. 
Giardia lamblia, Giardia intestinalis, Lamblia intestinalis), is one of the most 
commonly-identified parasitic diseases worldwide. Chronic G. duodenalis 
infections cause a malabsorption syndrome that may lead to failure to thrive 
and/or stunted growth, especially in children in developing countries. 
Understanding the parasite/epithelial cell crosstalk at the mucosal surfaces of 
the small intestine during human giardiasis may provide novel insights into the 
mechanisms underlying the parasite-induced immunopathology and epithelial tissue 
damage, leading to malnutrition. Efforts to identify new targets for intervening 
in the development of intestinal immunopathology and the progression to 
malnutrition are critical. Translating these findings into a clinical setting 
will require analysis of these pathways in cells and tissues from humans and 
clinical trials could be devised to determine whether interfering with unwanted 
mucosal immune responses developed during human giardiasis provide better 
therapeutic benefits and clinical outcomes for G. duodenalis infections in 
humans.

Copyright © 2022 Solaymani-Mohammadi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.817468
PMCID: PMC8891505
PMID: 35250996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.