---
reference_id: PMID:15122254
title: Mutant small heat-shock protein 27 causes axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and distal hereditary motor neuropathy.
authors:
- Evgrafov OV
- Mersiyanova I
- Irobi J
- Van Den Bosch L
- Dierick I
- Leung CL
- Schagina O
- Verpoorten N
- Van Impe K
- Fedotov V
- Dadali E
- Auer-Grumbach M
- Windpassinger C
- Wagner K
- Mitrovic Z
- Hilton-Jones D
- Talbot K
- Martin JJ
- Vasserman N
- Tverskaya S
- Polyakov A
- Liem RK
- Gettemans J
- Robberecht W
- De Jonghe P
- Timmerman V
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/ng1354
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- Female
- HSP27 Heat-Shock Proteins
- Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Chaperones
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Nerve Degeneration/genetics
- Recombinant Proteins/genetics
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant small heat-shock protein 27 causes axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and distal hereditary motor neuropathy.
**Authors:** Evgrafov OV, Mersiyanova I, Irobi J, Van Den Bosch L, Dierick I, Leung CL, Schagina O, Verpoorten N, Van Impe K, Fedotov V, Dadali E, Auer-Grumbach M, Windpassinger C, Wagner K, Mitrovic Z, Hilton-Jones D, Talbot K, Martin JJ, Vasserman N, Tverskaya S, Polyakov A, Liem RK, Gettemans J, Robberecht W, De Jonghe P, Timmerman V
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1354](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1354)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Jun;36(6):602-6. doi: 10.1038/ng1354. Epub 2004 May 2.

Mutant small heat-shock protein 27 causes axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and 
distal hereditary motor neuropathy.

Evgrafov OV(1), Mersiyanova I, Irobi J, Van Den Bosch L, Dierick I, Leung CL, 
Schagina O, Verpoorten N, Van Impe K, Fedotov V, Dadali E, Auer-Grumbach M, 
Windpassinger C, Wagner K, Mitrovic Z, Hilton-Jones D, Talbot K, Martin JJ, 
Vasserman N, Tverskaya S, Polyakov A, Liem RK, Gettemans J, Robberecht W, De 
Jonghe P, Timmerman V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, New York State Psychiatric Institute/Research 
Foundation for Mental Hygiene, Unit 28, 1051 Riverside Drive, New York, New York 
10032, USA. Evgrafo@pi.cpmc.columbia.edu

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common inherited neuromuscular 
disease and is characterized by considerable clinical and genetic heterogeneity. 
We previously reported a Russian family with autosomal dominant axonal CMT and 
assigned the locus underlying the disease (CMT2F; OMIM 606595) to chromosome 
7q11-q21 (ref. 2). Here we report a missense mutation in the gene encoding 
27-kDa small heat-shock protein B1 (HSPB1, also called HSP27) that segregates in 
the family with CMT2F. Screening for mutations in HSPB1 in 301 individuals with 
CMT and 115 individuals with distal hereditary motor neuropathies (distal HMNs) 
confirmed the previously observed mutation and identified four additional 
missense mutations. We observed the additional HSPB1 mutations in four families 
with distal HMN and in one individual with CMT neuropathy. Four mutations are 
located in the Hsp20-alpha-crystallin domain, and one mutation is in the 
C-terminal part of the HSP27 protein. Neuronal cells transfected with mutated 
HSPB1 were less viable than cells expressing the wild-type protein. 
Cotransfection of neurofilament light chain (NEFL) and mutant HSPB1 resulted in 
altered neurofilament assembly in cells devoid of cytoplasmic intermediate 
filaments.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1354
PMID: 15122254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]