---
reference_id: "PMID:12968670"
title: "A missense mutation in the mouse Col2a1 gene causes spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita, hearing loss, and retinoschisis."
authors:
- Donahue LR
- Chang B
- Mohan S
- Miyakoshi N
- Wergedal JE
- Baylink DJ
- Hawes NL
- Rosen CJ
- Ward-Bailey P
- Zheng QY
- Bronson RT
- Johnson KR
- Davisson MT
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.9.1612
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Collagen Type II/genetics, physiology"
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Growth Plate/abnormalities
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred AKR"
- "Mice, Inbred C3H"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/congenital, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Retinoschisis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A missense mutation in the mouse Col2a1 gene causes spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita, hearing loss, and retinoschisis.
**Authors:** Donahue LR, Chang B, Mohan S, Miyakoshi N, Wergedal JE, Baylink DJ, Hawes NL, Rosen CJ, Ward-Bailey P, Zheng QY, Bronson RT, Johnson KR, Davisson MT
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.9.1612](https://doi.org/10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.9.1612)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2003 Sep;18(9):1612-21. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.9.1612.

A missense mutation in the mouse Col2a1 gene causes spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia 
congenita, hearing loss, and retinoschisis.

Donahue LR(1), Chang B, Mohan S, Miyakoshi N, Wergedal JE, Baylink DJ, Hawes NL, 
Rosen CJ, Ward-Bailey P, Zheng QY, Bronson RT, Johnson KR, Davisson MT.

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609, USA. lrd@jax.org

Erratum in
    J Bone Miner Res. 2007 Dec;22(12):2011.

A missense mutation in the mouse Col2a1 gene has been discovered, resulting in a 
mouse phenotype with similarities to human spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (SED) 
congenita. In addition, SED patients have been identified with a similar 
molecular mutation in human COL2A1. This mouse model offers a useful tool for 
molecular and biological studies of bone development and pathology.
INTRODUCTION: A new mouse autosomal recessive mutation has been discovered and 
named spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (gene symbol sedc).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Homozygous sedc mice can be identified at birth by their 
small size and shortened trunk. Adults have shortened noses, dysplastic 
vertebrae, femora, and tibias, plus retinoschisis and hearing loss. The mutation 
was mapped to Chr15, and Col2a1 was identified as a candidate gene.
RESULTS: Sequence analyses revealed that the affected gene is Col2a1, which has 
a missense mutation at exon 48 causing an amino acid change of arginine to 
cysteine at position 1417. Two human patients with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia 
(SED) congenita have been reported with the same amino acid substitution at 
position 789 in the human COL2A1 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, sedc/sedc mice provide a valuable model of human SED 
congenita with molecular and phenotypic homology. Further biochemical analyses, 
molecular modeling, and cell culture studies using sedc/sedc mice could provide 
insight into mechanisms of skeletal development dependent on Col2a1 and its role 
in fibril formation and cartilage template organization.

DOI: 10.1359/jbmr.2003.18.9.1612
PMCID: PMC2862909
PMID: 12968670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]