---
reference_id: "PMID:20946879"
title: "Functional characterization of the zebrafish WHSC1-related gene, a homolog of human NSD2."
authors:
- Yamada-Okabe T
- Imamura K
- Kawaguchi N
- Sakai H
- Yamashita M
- Matsumoto N
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.10.027
keywords:
- Animals
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian/metabolism"
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- "Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- Methylation
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Testis/metabolism
- Tissue Distribution
- "Zebrafish/embryology, genetics"
- "Zebrafish Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional characterization of the zebrafish WHSC1-related gene, a homolog of human NSD2.
**Authors:** Yamada-Okabe T, Imamura K, Kawaguchi N, Sakai H, Yamashita M, Matsumoto N
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.10.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.10.027)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Nov 12;402(2):335-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.10.027. Epub 2010 Oct 12.

Functional characterization of the zebrafish WHSC1-related gene, a homolog of 
human NSD2.

Yamada-Okabe T(1), Imamura K, Kawaguchi N, Sakai H, Yamashita M, Matsumoto N.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Nutritional Science, Sagami Women's University, Japan. 
t-okabe@star_sagami-wu.ac.jp

Methylation of specific lysine residues of histone H3 and H4 has been reported 
to be important in the structuring of chromatin and for the transcription of 
certain genes. Proteins with SET domains have been shown to methylate specific 
lysine residues of histone H3 and H4. We isolated a SET domain-containing gene 
from the zebrafish (Danio rerio). The gene has the highest sequence similarity 
to human NSD2, also known as Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome candidate 1 or WHSC1, and 
therefore, was named DrWhsc1. DrWhsc1 mRNA is expressed in various tissues with 
the highest level in testis. Morpholino oligonucleotides for the DrWhsc1 gene 
affected early embryogenesis in zebrafish, such as endbrain enlargement, 
abnormal cartilage, marked reduction of bone, and incomplete motor neuron 
formation. Such developmental abnormalities are also observed in Wolf-Hirschhorn 
syndrome patients and Whsc1-deficient mice. In addition, suppression of the 
DrWhsc1 gene or defect in the SET domain of DrWhsc1 resulted in impairment of 
di-methylation of histone H3K36 at early embryogenesis. These results indicate 
that DrWhsc1 is a functional homolog of WHSC1 and that the SET domain of DrWhsc1 
is essential for di-methylation of histone H3K36 in zebrafish.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.10.027
PMID: 20946879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]