---
reference_id: "PMID:38221796"
title: "Hao-Fountain syndrome: 32 novel patients reveal new insights into the clinical spectrum."
authors:
- Wimmer MC
- Brennenstuhl H
- Hirsch S
- Dötsch L
- Unser S
- Caro P
- Schaaf CP
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14480
keywords:
- Humans
- Ubiquitin-Specific Peptidase 7/genetics
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, complications"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental"
- Deafness
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hao-Fountain syndrome: 32 novel patients reveal new insights into the clinical spectrum.
**Authors:** Wimmer MC, Brennenstuhl H, Hirsch S, Dötsch L, Unser S, Caro P, Schaaf CP
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14480](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14480)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2024 May;105(5):499-509. doi: 10.1111/cge.14480. Epub 2024 Jan 14.

Hao-Fountain syndrome: 32 novel patients reveal new insights into the clinical 
spectrum.

Wimmer MC(1), Brennenstuhl H(1), Hirsch S(1), Dötsch L(1), Unser S(1), Caro 
P(1), Schaaf CP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.

Hao-Fountain syndrome (HAFOUS, OMIM: #616863) is a neurodevelopmental disorder 
caused by pathogenic variants in the gene USP7 coding for USP7, a protein 
involved in several crucial cellular homeostatic mechanisms and the recently 
described MUST complex. The phenotype of HAFOUS is insufficiently understood, 
yet there is a great need to better understand the spectrum of disease, 
genotype-phenotype correlations, and disease trajectories. We now present a 
larger cohort of 32 additional individuals and provide further clinical 
information about six previously reported individuals. A questionnaire-based 
study was performed to characterize the phenotype of Hao-Fountain syndrome more 
clearly, to highlight new traits, and to better distinguish the disease from 
related neurodevelopmental disorders. In addition to confirming previously 
described features, we report hyperphagia and increased body weight in a subset 
of individuals. HAFOUS patients present an increased rate of birth 
complications, congenital anomalies, and abnormal pain thresholds. Speech 
impairment emerges as a potential hallmark of Hao-Fountain syndrome. Cognitive 
testing reports reveal borderline intellectual functioning on average, although 
some individuals score in the range of intellectual disability. Finally, we 
created a syndrome-specific severity score. This score neither indicates a sex- 
nor age-specific difference of clinical severity, yet highlights a more severe 
outcome when amino acid changes colocalize to the catalytic domain of the USP7 
protein.

© 2024 The Authors. Clinical Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14480
PMID: 38221796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]