---
reference_id: "PMID:34075767"
title: "Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma - Old Disease, New Directions: An Update on Pathology, Molecular Features and Biological Prognostic Markers."
authors:
- Perry AM
- Smith LB
- Bagg A
journal: Acta Med Acad
year: '2021'
doi: 10.5644/ama2006-124.329
keywords:
- "Hodgkin Disease/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- "Pathology, Molecular"
- Prognosis
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma - Old Disease, New Directions: An Update on Pathology, Molecular Features and Biological Prognostic Markers.
**Authors:** Perry AM, Smith LB, Bagg A
**Journal:** Acta Med Acad (2021)
**DOI:** [10.5644/ama2006-124.329](https://doi.org/10.5644/ama2006-124.329)

## Content

1. Acta Med Acad. 2021 Apr;50(1):110-125. doi: 10.5644/ama2006-124.329.

Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma - Old Disease, New Directions: An Update on Pathology,
Molecular Features and Biological Prognostic Markers.

Perry AM(1), Smith LB(2), Bagg A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
anaperry@med.umich.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The aim of this paper is to review morphologic, immunophenotypic, and molecular
features of classic Hodgkin lymphoma, as well as different prognostic markers in
this neoplasm. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL) accounts for 15-25% of all
lymphomas in the Western world. The hallmark of this disease is the neoplastic
Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cell, which is favored to be derived from germinal
center B-cells but has lost many of the B-cell markers. HRS cells are scattered
within a dense inflammatory infiltrate, and through a network of cytokines and
chemokines they shape their microenvironment, evade immune response, survive,
and grow. In the last two decades multiple prognostic markers related to HRS
cells, the microenvironment or both, have been evaluated in patients with CHL.
They include clinical, immunohistochemical, cytogenetic, and molecular markers
that can predict survival and identify high-risk patients who will likely
relapse after therapy. More recently, circulating tumor DNA analysis by
next-generation sequencing has opened new avenues for diagnosis and disease
monitoring after therapy. The increased understanding of molecular mechanisms
underlying CHL pathogenesis has led to successful implementation of novel
therapies, such as anti-PD-1 antibodies, which are becoming a mainstay of
treatment in relapsed/refractory patients. CONCLUSION: Currently, pathologic
prognostic markers are not routinely assessed at initial diagnosis of CHL.
However, as more therapies become available, it will be important to identify
patients with high-risk disease who may benefit from more intense or targeted
therapy upfront.

Copyright © 2021 by Academy of Sciences and Arts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

DOI: 10.5644/ama2006-124.329
PMID: 34075767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
