---
reference_id: "PMID:26433076"
title: An epidemiological study of dengue in Delhi, India.
authors:
- Vikram K
- Nagpal BN
- Pande V
- Srivastava A
- Saxena R
- Anvikar A
- Das A
- Singh H
- Anushrita
- Gupta SK
- Tuli NR
- Telle O
- Yadav NK
- Valecha N
- Paul R
journal: Acta Trop
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.09.025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An epidemiological study of dengue in Delhi, India.
**Authors:** Vikram K, Nagpal BN, Pande V, Srivastava A, Saxena R, Anvikar A, Das A, Singh H, Anushrita, Gupta SK, Tuli NR, Telle O, Yadav NK, Valecha N, Paul R
**Journal:** Acta Trop (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.09.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.09.025)

## Content

1. Acta Trop. 2016 Jan;153:21-7. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.09.025. Epub
2015  Oct 1.

An epidemiological study of dengue in Delhi, India.

Vikram K(1), Nagpal BN(2), Pande V(3), Srivastava A(1), Saxena R(1), Anvikar 
A(1), Das A(1), Singh H(1), Anushrita(1), Gupta SK(1), Tuli NR(4), Telle O(5), 
Yadav NK(4), Valecha N(1), Paul R(5).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research (ICMR), Delhi, India.
(2)National Institute of Malaria Research (ICMR), Delhi, India. Electronic 
address: bnnagpal57@gmail.com.
(3)Kumaun University, Nainital, India.
(4)Municipal Corporation of Delhi, India.
(5)Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Delhi, the capital of India, is an important metropolitan hub for major 
financial and sociocultural exchanges, offering challenging threats to current 
public health infrastructure. In recent past, an upsurge of dengue cases in 
Delhi posed a significant menace to the existing dengue control policies. To 
reform the control strategies and take timely intervention to prevent future 
epidemics, an epidemiological study on the proportion of both asymptomatic and 
symptomatic dengue infections in selected population was conducted. The aim of 
the study was to investigate and assess the epidemiology of dengue infection and 
to estimate the proportion of asymptomatic and symptomatic dengue infections in 
Delhi. In this study, around 50 confirmed dengue cases, a total of 2125 
individuals as household and neighbourhood contacts, with or without dengue 
febrile illness, were finger pricked and serologically detected as dengue 
positive or negative using SD Duo Bioline Rapid Diagnostic Test (SD Inc, Korea) 
with NS1, IgM & IgG combo test, which detected dengue virus antigen and 
antibodies to dengue virus in human blood. Out of 2125 individuals, 768 (36.1%) 
individuals showed positive dengue test with past (25.5%), primary (1.88%) or 
secondary (8.8%) dengue infections. Higher percentage of IgG was found in age 
groups 15-24 years and 25-50 years (36% each). Infants (<1 year) presented 
higher incidence of new infections (22% of NS1+IgM positives) as compared to 
adults. Further analysis revealed that out of the 226 newly infected cases 
(including NS1 and IgM positives), 142 (63%) were asymptomatic and 84 (37%) were 
symptomatic, as per WHO guidelines. Our findings also suggest that out of the 
total population screened, 10.6% dengue infection was either primary or 
secondary. On the basis of these results, it may be hypothesized that there are 
large number of asymptomatic dengue infections in the community as compared to 
reported symptomatic cases in Delhi. For the effective control of dengue 
transmission in such community like Delhi where dengue epidemics have frequently 
been encountered, it is essential to ascertain the proportion of asymptomatic 
dengue infections which may act as a reservoir for dengue transmission, as well 
as threat for developing dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF).

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.09.025
PMID: 26433076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]