---
reference_id: "PMID:18830228"
title: Misleading behavioural phenotype with adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.
authors:
- Gitiaux C
- Ceballos-Picot I
- Marie S
- Valayannopoulos V
- Rio M
- Verrieres S
- Benoist JF
- Vincent MF
- Desguerre I
- Bahi-Buisson N
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.174
keywords:
- "Adenosine/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Aminoimidazole Carboxamide/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- Angelman Syndrome/diagnosis
- Behavior
- Child
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- Consanguinity
- Female
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, psychology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, psychology"
- Ribonucleotides/urine
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Stereotyped Behavior
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Misleading behavioural phenotype with adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.
**Authors:** Gitiaux C, Ceballos-Picot I, Marie S, Valayannopoulos V, Rio M, Verrieres S, Benoist JF, Vincent MF, Desguerre I, Bahi-Buisson N
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2008.174](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2008.174)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Jan;17(1):133-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.174. Epub 2008
Oct  1.

Misleading behavioural phenotype with adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.

Gitiaux C(1), Ceballos-Picot I, Marie S, Valayannopoulos V, Rio M, Verrieres S,
Benoist JF, Vincent MF, Desguerre I, Bahi-Buisson N.

Author information:
(1)Département de Pédiatrie, Hoôpital Necker Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Université
Paris Descartes, Paris, France.

Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency is a rare autosomal disorder of de novo purine
synthesis, which results in the accumulation of succinylpurines in body fluids.
Patients with adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency show a variable combination of
mental retardation, epilepsy and autistic features and are usually discovered
during screens for unexplained encephalopathy using the Bratton-Marshall assay
that reveals the excretion of the succinylaminoimidazolecarboxamide riboside
(SAICAr). Here, we report on two sisters aged 11 and 12 years presented with
global developmental delay, motor apraxia, severe speech deficits, seizures and
behavioural features, which combined excessive laughter, a very happy
disposition, hyperactivity, a short attention span, the mouthing of objects,
tantrums and stereotyped movements that gave a behavioural profile mimicking
Angelman syndrome. Both patients had an increased succinyladenosine/SAICAr ratio
of 1.6, and exhibited a novel homozygous missense mutation (c.674T>C;
p.Met225Thr) in the exon 6 of the ADSL gene. We suggest that these clinical
features might be a new presentation of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency. On
the basis of this observation, although adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency is a
rare disorder, this diagnosis should be considered in patients with mental
retardation and a behavioural profile suggestive of Angelman syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.174
PMCID: PMC2985950
PMID: 18830228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
