---
reference_id: "PMID:40225925"
title: "Genotype/Phenotype Relationship: Lessons From 137 Patients With PMM2-CDG."
authors:
- Pajusalu S
- Vals MA
- Serrano M
- Witters P
- Cechova A
- Honzik T
- Edmondson AC
- Ficicioglu C
- Barone R
- De Lonlay P
- Bérat CM
- Vuillaumier-Barrot S
- Lam C
- Patterson MC
- Janssen MCH
- Martins E
- Quelhas D
- Sykut-Cegielska J
- Mousa J
- Urreizti R
- McWilliams P
- Vernhes F
- Plotkin H
- Morava E
- Õunap K
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1155/2024/8813121
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Young Adult
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, diagnosis"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Phosphotransferases (Phosphomutases)/genetics, chemistry"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype/Phenotype Relationship: Lessons From 137 Patients With PMM2-CDG.
**Authors:** Pajusalu S, Vals MA, Serrano M, Witters P, Cechova A, Honzik T, Edmondson AC, Ficicioglu C, Barone R, De Lonlay P, Bérat CM, Vuillaumier-Barrot S, Lam C, Patterson MC, Janssen MCH, Martins E, Quelhas D, Sykut-Cegielska J, Mousa J, Urreizti R, McWilliams P, Vernhes F, Plotkin H, Morava E, Õunap K
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2024/8813121](https://doi.org/10.1155/2024/8813121)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2024 Oct 3;2024:8813121. doi: 10.1155/2024/8813121. eCollection
2024.

Genotype/Phenotype Relationship: Lessons From 137 Patients With PMM2-CDG.

Pajusalu S(1)(2), Vals MA(2)(3), Serrano M(4)(5), Witters P(6)(7), Cechova A(8),
Honzik T(8), Edmondson AC(9), Ficicioglu C(9), Barone R(10)(11), De Lonlay
P(12), Bérat CM(13), Vuillaumier-Barrot S(13), Lam C(14)(15), Patterson MC(16),
Janssen MCH(17), Martins E(18), Quelhas D(18), Sykut-Cegielska J(19), Mousa
J(20), Urreizti R(5), McWilliams P(21), Vernhes F(21), Plotkin H(21), Morava
E(16)(22)(23), Õunap K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Personalized Medicine Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, L.
Puusepa Street 2, Tartu, Estonia.
(2)Department of Genetics and Personalized Medicine, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Tartu, L. Puusepa Street 2, Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Children's Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, N. Lunini Street 6, Tartu,
Estonia.
(4)Pediatric Neurology Department and Clinical Biochemistry and Genetics Units,
Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona,
Spain.
(5)U-703 Centre for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBER-ER), Instituto
de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Metabolic Disease Center, University Hospitals
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Department of Development and Regeneration, Faculty of Medicine, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.
(8)Department of Pediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague,
Czech Republic.
(9)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(10)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(11)Research Unit of Rare Diseases and Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Oasi
Research Institute-IRCCS, Troina, Italy.
(12)Reference Center for Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Necker Hospital, APHP,
University of Paris, Inserm UMR_S1163, INEM, and Institut Imagine, Filière G2M,
MetabERN, Paris, France.
(13)Biochemistry and Genetics Department, Bichat-Claude Bernard Hospital, AP-HP,
University of Paris and Inserm U1149, Paris, France.
(14)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(15)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(16)Departments of Neurology and Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(18)Centro de Genética Médica, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Santo António,
Porto, Portugal.
(19)Department of Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Paediatrics, The Institute of
Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.
(20)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(21)Glycomine, Inc., San Francisco, California, USA.
(22)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.
(23)Department of Genetics and Genomics Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York City, New York, USA.

We report on the largest single dataset of patients with PMM2-CDG enrolled in an
ongoing international, multicenter natural history study collecting genetic,
clinical, and biological information to evaluate similarities with previous
studies, report on novel findings, and, additionally, examine potential
genotype/phenotype correlations. A total of 137 participants had complete
genotype information, representing 60 unique variants, of which the most common
were found to be p.Arg141His in 58.4% (n = 80) of participants, followed by
p.Pro113Leu (21.2%, n = 29), and p.Phe119Leu (12.4%, n = 17), consistent with
previous studies. Interestingly, six new variants were reported, comprised of
five missense variants (p.Pro20Leu, p.Tyr64Ser, p.Phe68Cys, p.Tyr76His, and
p.Arg238His) and one frameshift (c.696del p.Ala233Argfs∗100). Patient phenotypes
were characterized via the Nijmegen Progression CDG Rating Scale (NPCRS),
together with biochemical parameters, the most consistently dysregulated of
which were coagulation factors, specifically antithrombin (below normal in
79.5%, 93 of 117), in addition to Factor XI and protein C activity. Patient
genotypes were classified based upon the predicted pathogenetic mechanism of
disease-associated mutations, of which most were found in the
catalysis/activation, folding, or dimerization regions of the PMM2 enzyme. Two
different approaches were used to uncover genotype/phenotype relationships. The
first characterized genotype only by the predicted pathogenic mechanisms and
uncovered associated changes in biochemical parameters, not apparent using only
NPCRS, involving catalysis/activation, dimerization, folding, and no protein
variants. The second approach characterized genotype by the predicted pathogenic
mechanism and/or individual variants when paired with a subset of severe
nonfunctioning variants and uncovered correlations with both NPCRS and
biochemical parameters, demonstrating that p.Cys241Ser was associated with
milder disease, while p.Val231Met, dimerization, and folding variants with more
severe disease. Although determining comprehensive genotype/phenotype
relationships has previously proven challenging for PMM2-CDG, the larger sample
size, plus inclusion of biochemical parameters in the current study, has
provided new insights into the interplay of genetics with disease. Trial
Registration: NCT03173300.

Copyright © 2024 Sander Pajusalu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2024/8813121
PMCID: PMC11922042
PMID: 40225925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Peter McWilliams is a full-time employee of
Glycomine, Inc. Frederique Vernhes is a paid statistics consultant for
Glycomine, Inc. Horacio Plotkin was previously a full-time employee of
Glycomine, Inc. The other authors declare no conflicts of interest.
