---
reference_id: "PMID:23378224"
title: K7del is a common TPM2 gene mutation associated with nemaline myopathy and raised myofibre calcium sensitivity.
authors:
- Mokbel N
- Ilkovski B
- Kreissl M
- Memo M
- Jeffries CM
- Marttila M
- Lehtokari VL
- Lemola E
- Grönholm M
- Yang N
- Menard D
- Marcorelles P
- Echaniz-Laguna A
- Reimann J
- Vainzof M
- Monnier N
- Ravenscroft G
- McNamara E
- Nowak KJ
- Laing NG
- Wallgren-Pettersson C
- Trewhella J
- Marston S
- Ottenheijm C
- North KN
- Clarke NF
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/brain/aws348
content_type: abstract_only
---

# K7del is a common TPM2 gene mutation associated with nemaline myopathy and raised myofibre calcium sensitivity.
**Authors:** Mokbel N, Ilkovski B, Kreissl M, Memo M, Jeffries CM, Marttila M, Lehtokari VL, Lemola E, Grönholm M, Yang N, Menard D, Marcorelles P, Echaniz-Laguna A, Reimann J, Vainzof M, Monnier N, Ravenscroft G, McNamara E, Nowak KJ, Laing NG, Wallgren-Pettersson C, Trewhella J, Marston S, Ottenheijm C, North KN, Clarke NF
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/aws348](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws348)

## Content

1. Brain. 2013 Feb;136(Pt 2):494-507. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws348. Epub 2013 Jan
31.

K7del is a common TPM2 gene mutation associated with nemaline myopathy and 
raised myofibre calcium sensitivity.

Mokbel N(1), Ilkovski B, Kreissl M, Memo M, Jeffries CM, Marttila M, Lehtokari 
VL, Lemola E, Grönholm M, Yang N, Menard D, Marcorelles P, Echaniz-Laguna A, 
Reimann J, Vainzof M, Monnier N, Ravenscroft G, McNamara E, Nowak KJ, Laing NG, 
Wallgren-Pettersson C, Trewhella J, Marston S, Ottenheijm C, North KN, Clarke 
NF.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Neuroscience and Muscle Research, Children’s Hospital at 
Westmead, Sydney, NSW 2145, Australia

Mutations in the TPM2 gene, which encodes β-tropomyosin, are an established 
cause of several congenital skeletal myopathies and distal arthrogryposis. We 
have identified a TPM2 mutation, p.K7del, in five unrelated families with 
nemaline myopathy and a consistent distinctive clinical phenotype. Patients 
develop large joint contractures during childhood, followed by slowly 
progressive skeletal muscle weakness during adulthood. The TPM2 p.K7del mutation 
results in the loss of a highly conserved lysine residue near the N-terminus of 
β-tropomyosin, which is predicted to disrupt head-to-tail polymerization of 
tropomyosin. Recombinant K7del-β-tropomyosin incorporates poorly into sarcomeres 
in C2C12 myotubes and has a reduced affinity for actin. Two-dimensional gel 
electrophoresis of patient muscle and primary patient cultured myotubes showed 
that mutant protein is expressed but incorporates poorly into sarcomeres and 
likely accumulates in nemaline rods. In vitro studies using recombinant 
K7del-β-tropomyosin and force measurements from single dissected patient 
myofibres showed increased myofilament calcium sensitivity. Together these data 
indicate that p.K7del is a common recurrent TPM2 mutation associated with mild 
nemaline myopathy. The p.K7del mutation likely disrupts head-to-tail 
polymerization of tropomyosin, which impairs incorporation into sarcomeres and 
also affects the equilibrium of the troponin/tropomyosin-dependent calcium 
switch of muscle. Joint contractures may stem from chronic muscle 
hypercontraction due to increased myofibrillar calcium sensitivity while 
declining strength in adulthood likely arises from other mechanisms, such as 
myofibre decompensation and fatty infiltration. These results suggest that 
patients may benefit from therapies that reduce skeletal muscle calcium 
sensitivity, and we highlight late muscle decompensation as an important cause 
of morbidity.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws348
PMID: 23378224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]