---
reference_id: "PMID:31974671"
title: Clinico-laboratory profile of Kawasaki disease with arthritis in children.
authors:
- Guleria S
- Pilania RK
- Jindal AK
- Singh A
- Vignesh P
- Suri D
- Rawat A
- Gupta A
- Singh S
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-020-03582-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinico-laboratory profile of Kawasaki disease with arthritis in children.
**Authors:** Guleria S, Pilania RK, Jindal AK, Singh A, Vignesh P, Suri D, Rawat A, Gupta A, Singh S
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-020-03582-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-020-03582-y)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2020 Jun;179(6):875-879. doi: 10.1007/s00431-020-03582-y. Epub 
2020 Jan 23.

Clinico-laboratory profile of Kawasaki disease with arthritis in children.

Guleria S(1), Pilania RK(1), Jindal AK(1), Singh A(1), Vignesh P(1), Suri D(1), 
Rawat A(1), Gupta A(1), Singh S(2).

Author information:
(1)Allergy Immunology Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Advances Paediatrics 
Centre, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), 
Chandigarh, 160012, India.
(2)Allergy Immunology Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Advances Paediatrics 
Centre, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), 
Chandigarh, 160012, India. surjitsinghpgi@rediffmail.com.

Kawasaki disease (KD) is associated with several musculoskeletal manifestations. 
Although arthritis has been reported to occur in 2.3-31% of children with KD, 
there is paucity of detailed studies on the subject. We report our experience on 
arthritis in children with KD. Data were collated from a review of records of 
patients diagnosed with KD and arthritis during the period January 1994-June 
2019. Eight hundred sixty-five children (male:female 29:11) were diagnosed with 
KD during this period-of these, 40 (4.6%) had arthritis. Median day of diagnosis 
of KD was 17 days. Twenty-nine (72.5%), 8 (20%), and 3 (8.6%) children developed 
arthritis in acute, subacute, and convalescent phases of KD, respectively. 
Oligoarticular involvement was observed in 32 (80%) children and among these, 7 
(20%) had monoarthritis. Predominant joints involved were knee (74.3%), ankle 
(40%), and hip (28.6%). Thirty-two children (80%) were treated with 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Median duration of arthritis was 
10 days (range, 2-180 days) with uneventful recovery in all cases. Three (7.5%) 
children had coronary artery ectasia which regressed on follow-up.Conclusion: 
Arthritis in KD is usually non-erosive, self-limiting, and responds well to a 
short course of NSAIDs.What is Known:• Arthritis has been reported to occur in 
2.3-31% of children with KD.• Arthritis in KD is usually oligoarticular, 
non-erosive, and responds well to short course of non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs.What is New:• Children with KD and arthritis do not 
appear to be at increased risk of development of coronary artery abnormalities.• 
Arthritis in children with KD can result in diagnostic confusion, and diagnosis 
of KD may get delayed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-020-03582-y
PMID: 31974671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]