---
reference_id: "PMID:11285218"
title: Elevated Cu/Zn-SOD exacerbates radiation sensitivity and hematopoietic abnormalities of Atm-deficient mice.
authors:
- Peter Y
- Rotman G
- Lotem J
- Elson A
- Shiloh Y
- Groner Y
journal: EMBO J
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.7.1538
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/pathology, physiopathology"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Cerebellum/pathology
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Growth Disorders/enzymology
- Hematopoiesis
- Humans
- Kidney/pathology
- Liver/pathology
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
- Radiation Tolerance
- Spleen/pathology
- "Superoxide Dismutase/biosynthesis, physiology"
- Superoxide Dismutase-1
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated Cu/Zn-SOD exacerbates radiation sensitivity and hematopoietic abnormalities of Atm-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Peter Y, Rotman G, Lotem J, Elson A, Shiloh Y, Groner Y
**Journal:** EMBO J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/20.7.1538](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/20.7.1538)

## Content

1. EMBO J. 2001 Apr 2;20(7):1538-46. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.7.1538.

Elevated Cu/Zn-SOD exacerbates radiation sensitivity and hematopoietic
abnormalities of Atm-deficient mice.

Peter Y(1), Rotman G, Lotem J, Elson A, Shiloh Y, Groner Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100.

Patients with the genetic disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) display a
pleiotropic phenotype that includes neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency, cancer
predisposition and hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation. The gene responsible
is ATM, and ATM:-knockout mice recapitulate most features of A-T. In order to
study the involvement of oxidative stress in the A-T phenotype, we examined mice
deficient for Atm and overexpressing human Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1). We
report that elevated levels of SOD1 exacerbate specific features of the murine
Atm- deficient phenotype, including abnormalities in hematopoiesis and
radiosensitivity. The data are consistent with the possibility that oxidative
stress contributes to some of the clinical features associated with the A-T
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.7.1538
PMCID: PMC145498
PMID: 11285218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
