---
reference_id: "PMID:20301493"
title: SLC26A2-Related Atelosteogenesis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Superti-Furga A
- Unger S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLC26A2-Related Atelosteogenesis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Superti-Furga A, Unger S

## Content

1. SLC26A2-Related Atelosteogenesis.

Superti-Furga A(1), Unger S(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Aug 30 [updated 2023 Mar 16].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, Lausanne University 
Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland
(2)Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Clinical features of SLC26A2-related atelosteogenesis 
include rhizomelic limb shortening with normal-sized skull, hitchhiker thumbs, 
small chest, protuberant abdomen, cleft palate, and distinctive facial features 
(midface retrusion, depressed nasal bridge, epicanthus, micrognathia). Other 
typical findings are ulnar deviation of the fingers, gap between the first and 
second toes, and clubfoot. SLC26A2-related atelosteogenesis is usually lethal at 
birth or shortly thereafter due to pulmonary hypoplasia and 
tracheobronchomalacia. However, it exists in a continuous phenotypic spectrum 
with SLC26A2-related diastrophic dysplasia, and long-term survivors have been 
reported.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SLC26A2-related atelosteogenesis is 
established in a proband with characteristic clinical, radiologic, and 
histopathologic features and biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC26A2 identified 
by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: There is no specific treatment 
currently available, and the aim of therapy (supportive versus palliative) will 
depend on clinical status and respiratory prognosis of the individual patient.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SLC26A2-related atelosteogenesis is inherited in an 
autosomal recessive manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an 
SLC26A2 pathogenic variant, each sib of a proband with SLC26A2-related 
atelosteogenesis has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance 
of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a 
carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing for a pregnancy at increased risk are possible if both 
pathogenic variants in the family are known. Ultrasound examination early in 
pregnancy is a reasonable complement or alternative to molecular genetic 
prenatal testing.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301493