---
reference_id: "PMID:36447687"
title: "Homozygous UNC13A Variant in an Infant With Congenital Encephalopathy and Severe Neuromuscular Phenotype: A Case Report With Detailed Central Nervous System Neuropathologic Findings."
authors:
- Mullins JR
- McFadden K
- Snow N
- Oviedo A
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.30774
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous UNC13A Variant in an Infant With Congenital Encephalopathy and Severe Neuromuscular Phenotype: A Case Report With Detailed Central Nervous System Neuropathologic Findings.
**Authors:** Mullins JR, McFadden K, Snow N, Oviedo A
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.30774](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.30774)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Oct 27;14(10):e30774. doi: 10.7759/cureus.30774. eCollection 2022
 Oct.

Homozygous UNC13A Variant in an Infant With Congenital Encephalopathy and Severe 
Neuromuscular Phenotype: A Case Report With Detailed Central Nervous System 
Neuropathologic Findings.

Mullins JR(1), McFadden K(2), Snow N(3), Oviedo A(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Burrell College of Osteopathic Medicine, 
Las Cruces, USA.
(2)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, IWK Health Centre and Dalhousie Medical 
School, Halifax, CAN.
(3)Medical Genetics, IWK Health Centre and Dalhousie Medical School, Halifax, 
CAN.

Uncoordinated 13 (UNC13A) affects movement in Caenorhabditis elegans (C. 
elegans). It is responsible for docking, priming, and stabilizing synaptic 
vesicle fusion complexes in the neuronal synapse and neuromuscular junction 
(NMJ). It also plays an important role in central nervous system development. We 
report the detailed clinical history and central nervous system neuropathologic 
findings in an infantile case with homozygous UNC13A loss of function variant, 
in order to advance the understanding of this critically important synaptic 
vesicle protein. This is the first detailed central nervous system 
neuropathologic report of this rare case of homozygous UNC13A loss.

Copyright © 2022, Mullins et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.30774
PMCID: PMC9701132
PMID: 36447687

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.