---
reference_id: "PMID:19414006"
title: Cortisol assays and diagnostic laboratory procedures in human biological fluids.
authors:
- Gatti R
- Antonelli G
- Prearo M
- Spinella P
- Cappellin E
- De Palo EF
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.04.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cortisol assays and diagnostic laboratory procedures in human biological fluids.
**Authors:** Gatti R, Antonelli G, Prearo M, Spinella P, Cappellin E, De Palo EF
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.04.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.04.011)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 2009 Aug;42(12):1205-17. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.04.011.
 Epub 2009 May 4.

Cortisol assays and diagnostic laboratory procedures in human biological fluids.

Gatti R(1), Antonelli G, Prearo M, Spinella P, Cappellin E, De Palo EF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Diagnostic and Spec. Ther., University of Padova (I), 
Italy.

The overview of cortisol physiology, action and pathology is achieved in 
relation to the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis alteration by laboratory 
investigation. The measurements of cortisol and related compound levels in 
blood, urine and saliva used to study the physiological and pathological 
cortisol involvement, are critically reviewed. The immunoassay and 
chromatographic methods for cortisol measurement in the various biological 
fluids are examined in relation to their analytical performances, reference 
ranges and diagnostic specificity and sensitivity. Moreover, blood, urine and 
saliva cortisol level measurements are described taking into account the 
diagnostic implications. The deduction is that each method requires the 
definition of its own reference range and its related diagnostic cut-off levels. 
Thus, this review, stressing the analysis procedures, could help to understand 
and compare the results of the different assays.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.04.011
PMID: 19414006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]