---
reference_id: "PMID:10211628"
title: "Investigations on the formation of urinary coproporphyrin isomers I-IV in 5-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency porphyria, acute lead intoxication and after oral 5-aminolevulinic acid loading."
authors:
- Jacob K
- Egeler E
- Gross U
- Doss MO
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0009-9120(98)00104-0
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- "Aminolevulinic Acid/administration & dosage"
- "Coproporphyrins/chemistry, urine"
- Humans
- Isomerism
- Lead Poisoning/urine
- Male
- Porphobilinogen Synthase/deficiency
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/urine"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigations on the formation of urinary coproporphyrin isomers I-IV in 5-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency porphyria, acute lead intoxication and after oral 5-aminolevulinic acid loading.
**Authors:** Jacob K, Egeler E, Gross U, Doss MO
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0009-9120(98)00104-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0009-9120(98)00104-0)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 1999 Mar;32(2):119-23. doi: 10.1016/s0009-9120(98)00104-0.

Investigations on the formation of urinary coproporphyrin isomers I-IV in
5-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency porphyria, acute lead intoxication
and after oral 5-aminolevulinic acid loading.

Jacob K(1), Egeler E, Gross U, Doss MO.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Grosshadern, Munich,
Germany. mvogeser@klch.med.uni-muenchen.de

OBJECTIVES: Investigation of the metabolism of the four urinary coproporphyrin
isomers I-IV in the extremely rare 5-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD)
deficiency porphyria (syn.: Doss porphyria), in acute lead intoxication, and
after oral 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) loading.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed the excretion of total urinary coproporphyrins
and the composition of the respective isomers I-IV with ion-pair HPLC methods in
these conditions.
RESULTS: The concentration of total coproporphyrins was about 30-fold increased
in patients with ALAD deficiency porphyria and acute lead intoxication as
compared with controls. In addition, the proportion of coproporphyrin III as
well as that of the atypical isomers II and IV were significantly elevated at
the expense of isomer I. After oral ALA administration to normal volunteers, a
10- to 15-fold increase in the maximal concentration of total urinary
coproporphyrins was observed within 12 to 24 h. Urinary levels were back to
normal after another 24 h. The excretion pattern of the individual urinary
coproporphyrin isomers I-IV after ALA ingestion revealed a dynamic process:
initially isomer III was preferentially formed, followed by a 3-fold increase of
isomers II and IV via non-enzymatic rearrangement of isomer III, and finally
normalization of all four isomers occurred within 48 h.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that oral ALA loading can be used as an
in vivo model to study the metabolism of the four urinary coproporphyrin isomers
I-IV especially in ALAD deficiency porphyria and in acute lead poisoning.

DOI: 10.1016/s0009-9120(98)00104-0
PMID: 10211628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
