---
reference_id: "PMID:10466415"
title: Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome and amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism are genetically distinct conditions.
authors:
- Price JA
- Wright JT
- Walker SJ
- Crawford PJ
- Aldred MJ
- Hart TC
journal: Clin Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.1999.550105.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome and amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism are genetically distinct conditions.
**Authors:** Price JA, Wright JT, Walker SJ, Crawford PJ, Aldred MJ, Hart TC
**Journal:** Clin Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1034/j.1399-0004.1999.550105.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-0004.1999.550105.x)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 1999 Jul;56(1):35-40. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.1999.550105.x.

Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome and amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism are 
genetically distinct conditions.

Price JA(1), Wright JT, Walker SJ, Crawford PJ, Aldred MJ, Hart TC.

Author information:
(1)Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Amelogenesis imperfecta of the hypomaturation-hypoplasia type with taurodontism 
(AIHHT) is inherited as a highly penetrant autosomal dominant trait. These 
dental findings are similar to those of another autosomal dominant condition, 
the tricho-dento-osseous syndrome (TDO), from which AIHHT differs primarily by 
lack of changes in the hair and bones. TDO is characterized by a highly variable 
clinical phenotype. While enamel hypoplasia and taurodontism appear to be 
present in all TDO cases, non-dental features may be absent, with approximately 
half of TDO cases losing the kinky/curly hair phenotype seen in infancy by 
adolescence, and in almost 20% of cases, osseous changes are not evident. The 
genetic basis for AIHHT is unknown and it has been questioned whether AIHHT and 
TDO are separate conditions or a spectrum of disease. The genetic basis for TDO 
has recently been identified as a deletion mutation in the distal-less 3 (DLX3) 
transcription factor gene. To determine if AIHHT and TDO represent variable 
expression of a common DLX3 gene mutation, allelic mutations of the DLX3 gene, 
or mutations in DLX7 (the linked paralogue to DLX3 on chromosome 17), we have 
performed mutational analysis and sequencing studies of the DLX3 and DLX7 genes 
in three individuals (two affected and one unaffected) from a family with AIHHT. 
Results of the analysis demonstrate that AIHHT and TDO are not due to a common 
DLX3 gene mutation. Sequence analyses of the DLX3 and DLX7 genes suggest AIHHT 
is not due to genetic mutations or polymorphisms in the exons of these genes. 
These results suggest that AI-HHT and TDO are two genetically distinct 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.1999.550105.x
PMID: 10466415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]