---
reference_id: "PMID:38843374"
title: FOXG1 Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Brockmann K
- Staudt M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FOXG1 Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Brockmann K, Staudt M

## Content

1. FOXG1 Syndrome.

Brockmann K(1), Staudt M(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2024 Jun 6 [updated 2025 May 1].

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Pediatric Center for Children with Developmental
Disabilities and Severe Chronic Disorders, Children's Hospital,, University
Medical Center, Göttingen, Germany
(2)Center for Pediatric Palliative Care, Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital,
University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: FOXG1 syndrome is characterized by
moderate-to-profound developmental delay and intellectual disability, postnatal
growth deficiency, congenital or postnatal microcephaly, hyperkinetic/dyskinetic
movement disorder, hypotonia, neurobehavioral/psychiatric manifestations (motor
stereotypies, impairment of social interaction, abnormal sleep patterns,
unexplained episodes of crying, restlessness, and bruxism), feeding difficulties
with poor weight gain, strabismus, seizures, spasticity, gastroesophageal
reflux, and aspiration. Some individuals have cortical visual impairment,
kyphosis, scoliosis, and/or abnormal breathing. Characteristic neuroimaging
findings include corpus callosum anomalies (especially a marked, filiform
thinning of the rostrum of the corpus callosum), a simplified gyral pattern, and
hyperplasia of the fornices.
DIAGNOSIS: The diagnosis of FOXG1 syndrome is established in a proband with
clinical and/or characteristic neuroimaging findings and a heterozygous
pathogenic variant in FOXG1 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Developmental and educational support;
consideration of anti-dyskinetic pharmacotherapy; treatment for seizures by an
experienced neurologist; treatment of spasticity per orthopedist; physical
medicine and rehabilitation, physical therapy, and occupational therapy to help
avoid contractures and falls; anti-spasmodic pharmacotherapy; feeding therapy
with gastrostomy tube placement as needed; standard treatment of
gastroesophageal reflux; treatment for refractive errors and strabismus per
ophthalmologist; standard treatments for scoliosis; social work and family
support. Surveillance: At each visit, monitor developmental progress,
educational needs, seizures, changes in tone, movement disorders, growth,
nutritional status, and safety of oral intake; behavioral assessment for
irritability and sleep issues; assess for evidence of gastroesophageal reflux,
aspiration, and/or respiratory insufficiency; physical medicine, occupational
therapy, physical therapy assessment for mobility and self-help skills; monitor
for strabismus and need for low vision services per treating ophthalmologist;
assess family needs.
GENETIC COUNSELING: FOXG1 syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder typically
caused by a de novo pathogenic variant. Risk to future pregnancies is presumed
to be low as the proband most likely has a de novo FOXG1 pathogenic variant.
There is, however, a recurrence risk to sibs based on the possibility of
parental germline mosaicism. Given this risk, prenatal and preimplantation
genetic testing may be considered.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 38843374
