---
reference_id: "PMID:34544473"
title: "Phenotype, genotype and long-term prognosis of 40 Chinese patients with isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency and a review of variant spectra in ACAD8."
authors:
- Feng J
- Yang C
- Zhu L
- Zhang Y
- Zhao X
- Chen C
- Chen QX
- Shu Q
- Jiang P
- Tong F
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-02018-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype, genotype and long-term prognosis of 40 Chinese patients with isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency and a review of variant spectra in ACAD8.
**Authors:** Feng J, Yang C, Zhu L, Zhang Y, Zhao X, Chen C, Chen QX, Shu Q, Jiang P, Tong F
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-021-02018-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-021-02018-6)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021 Sep 20;16(1):392. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-02018-6.

Phenotype, genotype and long-term prognosis of 40 Chinese patients with 
isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency and a review of variant spectra in 
ACAD8.

Feng J(#)(1)(2), Yang C(#)(2), Zhu L(1), Zhang Y(2), Zhao X(1), Chen C(1), Chen 
QX(1), Shu Q(3), Jiang P(4)(5)(6), Tong F(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic and Metabolic Disease, The Children's Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for 
Child Health, 3333 Binsheng Road, Hangzhou, 310052, China.
(2)Institute of Genetics and Department of Human Genetics, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(3)Department of Genetic and Metabolic Disease, The Children's Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for 
Child Health, 3333 Binsheng Road, Hangzhou, 310052, China. shuqiang@zju.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Genetic and Metabolic Disease, The Children's Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for 
Child Health, 3333 Binsheng Road, Hangzhou, 310052, China. ppjiang@zju.edu.cn.
(5)Institute of Genetics and Department of Human Genetics, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310058, China. ppjiang@zju.edu.cn.
(6)Zhejiang Provincial Key Lab of Genetic and Developmental Disorders, Hangzhou, 
310058, China. ppjiang@zju.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Genetic and Metabolic Disease, The Children's Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for 
Child Health, 3333 Binsheng Road, Hangzhou, 310052, China. 194008@zju.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021 Dec 7;16(1):505. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-02132-5.

BACKGROUND: Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (IBDD) is a rare autosomal 
recessive metabolic disorder resulting from variants in ACAD8, and is poorly 
understood, as only dozens of cases have been reported previously. Based on a 
newborn screening program, we evaluated the incidence, phenotype and genotype of 
IBDD as well as the prognosis. Moreover, we reviewed the variant spectrum in 
ACAD8 associated with IBDD.
METHODS: Forty unrelated patients with IBDD were retrospectively screened for 
newborns between Jan 2012 and Dec 2020. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was 
used to determine the concentrations of C4-acylcarnitine, C4/C2 
(acetylcarnitine), and C4/C3 (propionylcarnitine). All suspected cases were 
genetically tested by metabolic genes panel.
RESULTS: The incidence of IBDD here was 1: 62,599. All patients presented 
continuously elevated C4-acylcarnitine levels with higher ratios of C4/C2 and 
C4/C3. Isobutyrylglycine occurred in only 8 patients. During follow-up, four 
patients had a transient motor delay, and two patients had growth delay. 
Notably, one case harbored both ACAD8 compound heterozygous variants and a KMT2A 
de novo variant (c.2739del, p.E914Rfs*35), with IBDD and Wiedemann-Steiner 
syndrome together, had exact severe global developmental delay. All patients 
were regularly monitored once they were diagnosed, and each patient gradually 
had a normal diet after 6 months of age. After 3-108 months of follow-up, most 
individuals were healthy except the case harboring the KMT2A variant. A total of 
16 novel variants in ACAD8, c.4_5delCT, c.109C > T, c.110-2A > T, c.236G > A, 
c.259G > A, c.381-14G > A, c.413delA, c.473A > G, c.500delG, c.758 T > G, 
c.842-1G > A, c.911A > T, c.989G > A, c.1150G > C, c.1157A > G and c.1165C > T, 
were identified. Along with a literature review on 51 ACAD8 variants in 81 IBDD 
patients, we found that the most common variant was c.286G > A (27.2%), which 
has been observed solely in the Chinese population to date, followed by 
c.1000C > T (8.6%), c.1176G > T (3.7%) and c.455 T > C (3.1%).
CONCLUSION: The concentration of C4-acylcarnitine in NBS plus subsequent genetic 
testing is necessary for IBDD diagnosis. Both the genotypes and ACAD8 variants 
in IBDD are highly heterogeneous, and no significant correlations between 
genotype and phenotype are present here in patients with IBDD. Our IBDD cohort 
with detaied clinical characteristics, genotypes and long-term prognosis will be 
helpful for the diagnosis and management of patients with IBDD in the future.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-021-02018-6
PMCID: PMC8454130
PMID: 34544473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.