---
reference_id: "PMID:12149194"
title: "Hemoglobin E: a balanced polymorphism protective against high parasitemias and thus severe P falciparum malaria."
authors:
- Chotivanich K
- Udomsangpetch R
- Pattanapanyasat K
- Chierakul W
- Simpson J
- Looareesuwan S
- White N
journal: Blood
year: '2002'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemoglobin E: a balanced polymorphism protective against high parasitemias and thus severe P falciparum malaria.
**Authors:** Chotivanich K, Udomsangpetch R, Pattanapanyasat K, Chierakul W, Simpson J, Looareesuwan S, White N
**Journal:** Blood (2002)

## Content

1. Blood. 2002 Aug 15;100(4):1172-6.

Hemoglobin E: a balanced polymorphism protective against high parasitemias and 
thus severe P falciparum malaria.

Chotivanich K(1), Udomsangpetch R, Pattanapanyasat K, Chierakul W, Simpson J, 
Looareesuwan S, White N.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Comment in
    Blood. 2002 Aug 15;100(4):1110. doi: 10.1182/blood-2002-06-1745.

Hemoglobin E is very common in parts of Southeast Asia. The possible malaria 
protective effects of this and other inherited hemoglobin abnormalities 
prevalent in Thailand were assessed in a mixed erythrocyte invasion assay. In 
vitro, starting at 1% parasitemia, Plasmodium falciparum preferentially invaded 
normal (HbAA) compared to abnormal hemoglobin (HbH, AE, EE, HCS, 
beta-thalassemia E) red cells (HRBCs). The median (range) ratio of 
parasitization of HRBCs (n = 109) compared to the controls of different major 
blood groups was 0.40 (0.08, 0.98), less than half that of the normal red cells 
(NRBCs) compared to their controls 0.88 (0.53, 1.4; P =.001). The median (range) 
parasitemia in the HRBCs was 2% (0.1%-9%) compared to 5.2% (1.2%-16.3%) in the 
NRBCs (P =.001). The proportion of the RBC population that is susceptible to 
malaria parasite invasion can be described by a selectivity index (SI; observed 
number of multiply invaded RBCs/number predicted). The heterozygote AE cells 
differed markedly from all the other cells tested with invasion restricted to 
approximately 25% of the RBCs; the median (range) SI was 3.8 (1-15) compared 
with 0.75 (0.1-0.9) for EE RBCs (P <.01). Despite their microcytosis, AE cells 
are functionally relatively normal in contrast to the RBCs from the other 
hemoglobinopathies studied. These findings suggest that HbAE erythrocytes have 
an unidentified membrane abnormality that renders the majority of the RBC 
population relatively resistant to invasion by P falciparum. This would not 
protect from uncomplicated malaria infections but would prevent the development 
of heavy parasite burdens and is consistent with the "Haldane" hypothesis of 
heterozygote protection against severe malaria for hemoglobin E.

PMID: 12149194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]