---
reference_id: "PMID:39987489"
title: ClinGen recuration of hearing loss-associated genes demonstrates significant changes in gene-disease validity over time.
authors:
- Tshering KC
- DiStefano MT
- Oza AM
- Ajuyah P
- Webb R
- Edoh E
- Broeren E
- Ratliff J
- Gitau V
- Paris K
- Aburyyan A
- Alexander J
- Albano V
- Bai D
- Booth KTA
- Buonfiglio PI
- Charfeddine C
- Dalamón V
- Castillo ID
- Moreno-Pelayo MA
- Duzkale H
- Dorshorst B
- Faridi R
- Kenna M
- Lewis MA
- Luo M
- Lu Y
- Mkaouar R
- Matsunaga T
- Nara K
- Pandya A
- Redfield S
- Roux I
- Schimmenti LA
- Schrauwen I
- Shaaban S
- Shen J
- Vona B
- Smith RJ
- Rehm HL
- Azaiez H
- Abou Tayoun AN
- Amr SS
- ClinGen Hearing Loss Clinical Domain Working Group
journal: Genet Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2025.101392
keywords:
- Humans
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Genome, Human/genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Data Curation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ClinGen recuration of hearing loss-associated genes demonstrates significant changes in gene-disease validity over time.
**Authors:** Tshering KC, DiStefano MT, Oza AM, Ajuyah P, Webb R, Edoh E, Broeren E, Ratliff J, Gitau V, Paris K, Aburyyan A, Alexander J, Albano V, Bai D, Booth KTA, Buonfiglio PI, Charfeddine C, Dalamón V, Castillo ID, Moreno-Pelayo MA, Duzkale H, Dorshorst B, Faridi R, Kenna M, Lewis MA, Luo M, Lu Y, Mkaouar R, Matsunaga T, Nara K, Pandya A, Redfield S, Roux I, Schimmenti LA, Schrauwen I, Shaaban S, Shen J, Vona B, Smith RJ, Rehm HL, Azaiez H, Abou Tayoun AN, Amr SS, ClinGen Hearing Loss Clinical Domain Working Group
**Journal:** Genet Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2025.101392](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2025.101392)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2025 May;27(5):101392. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2025.101392. Epub 2025
Feb  19.

ClinGen recuration of hearing loss-associated genes demonstrates significant
changes in gene-disease validity over time.

Tshering KC(1), DiStefano MT(2), Oza AM(1), Ajuyah P(1), Webb R(1), Edoh E(1),
Broeren E(1), Ratliff J(1), Gitau V(1), Paris K(1), Aburyyan A(3), Alexander
J(4), Albano V(5), Bai D(6), Booth KTA(7), Buonfiglio PI(8), Charfeddine C(9),
Dalamón V(8), Castillo ID(10), Moreno-Pelayo MA(10), Duzkale H(11), Dorshorst
B(12), Faridi R(13), Kenna M(5), Lewis MA(14), Luo M(15), Lu Y(16), Mkaouar
R(17), Matsunaga T(18), Nara K(18), Pandya A(19), Redfield S(3), Roux I(13),
Schimmenti LA(20), Schrauwen I(21), Shaaban S(22), Shen J(23), Vona B(24), Smith
RJ(25), Rehm HL(2), Azaiez H(25), Abou Tayoun AN(26), Amr SS(27); ClinGen
Hearing Loss Clinical Domain Working Group.

Collaborators: Tayoun AA, Koleilat A, Chapin A, Aburayyan A, Oza A, Giersch AB,
Pandya A, Vona B, Dorshorst B, Choi BY, Charfeddine C, Morton C, Bai D, Broeren
E, Edoh E, Bademci G, He H, Duzkale H, Rehm H, Azaiez H, Mutai H, Xu H, Castillo
ID, Roux I, Schrauwen I, Xiang J, Alexander J, Ratliff J, Shen J, Zhang J, Paris
K, Booth K, Tshering K, Nara K, Poon KS, Kernohan K, Gallagher L, Downie L,
Schimmenti L, Hosoya M, Kenna M, DiStefano M, Morin M, Moreno-Pelayo MA, Luo M,
Lewis M, Tekin M, Rendtorff ND, Robertson PA, Buonfiglio P, Guan Q, Faridi R,
Mkaouar R, Smith R, Webb R, Amr S, Homurlu SN, Redfield S, Shaaban S, Usami SI,
Nishio SY, Matsunaga T, Sivakumaran T, Friedman T, Gitau V, Albano V, Siu V,
Dalamon V, Lu Y, Brownstein Z, Ahmed Z.

Author information:
(1)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA.
(2)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA; Laboratory for
Molecular Medicine, Mass General Brigham Personalized Medicine, Cambridge, MA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(4)Myriad Women's Health, South San Francisco, CA.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology & Communication Enhancement, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA.
(6)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(7)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN; Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN.
(8)Laboratorio de Fisiología y Genética de la Audición. Instituto de
Investigaciones en Ingeniería Genética y Biología Molecular "Dr. Héctor N.
Torres" (INGEBI), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas
(CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(9)Laboratory of Biomedical Genomics and Oncogenetics, Institute Pasteur of
Tunis, University of Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia; Université de la Manouba,
Institut de Biotechnologie de Sidi-Thabet, Ariana, Tunisia.
(10)Servicio de Genética, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, IRYCIS, Madrid,
Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto
de Salud Carlos III (CB06/07/0048; CIBERER-ISCIII), Madrid, Spain.
(11)Color Health, Burlingame, CA.
(12)Prevention Genetics, Marshfield, WI.
(13)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(14)Wolfson Sensory, Pain and Regeneration Centre, King's College London,
London, United Kingdom.
(15)Division of Genomic Diagnostics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(16)Institute of Rare Diseases, West China Hospital of Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.
(17)Laboratory of Biomedical Genomics and Oncogenetics, Institute Pasteur of
Tunis, University of Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia.
(18)Division of Hearing and Balance Research, National Hospital Organization
Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(19)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, UNC School of
Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC.
(20)Departments of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic Enterprise, Rochester, MN.
(21)Department of Translational Neurosciences, University of Arizona College of
Medicine Phoenix, Phoenix, AZ.
(22)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, UT; ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT.
(23)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.
(24)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany; Institute for Auditory Neuroscience and InnerEarLab, University Medical
Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(25)Molecular Otolaryngology and Renal Research Laboratories (MORL), Department
of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA.
(26)Genomics Center of Excellence, Al Jalila Children's Specialty Hospital,
Dubai Health, Dubai, United Arab Emirates; Center for Genomic Discovery,
Mohammed Bin Rashid University, Dubai Health, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
(27)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Mass General Brigham Personalized
Medicine, Cambridge, MA. Electronic address: samr@bwh.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    Genet Med. 2025 Oct;27(10):101500. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2025.101500.

PURPOSE: The Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) Hearing Loss Gene Curation
Expert Panel was assembled in 2016 and has since curated 174 gene-disease
relationships (GDRs) using ClinGen's semiquantitative framework. ClinGen
mandates the timely recuration of all GDRs classified as Disputed, Limited,
Moderate, and Strong every 2 to 3 years.
METHODS: Thirty-five GDRs met the criteria for recuration within 2 years of
original curation. Previous evidence was reevaluated using the latest curation
guidelines, and a comprehensive literature review was performed to obtain new
evidence. Recurations were approved by the Gene Curation Expert Panel and
published on the ClinGen website (www.clinicalgenome.org).
RESULTS: Eight of 35 GDRs (22%) changed their classification. Two Moderate and 5
Strong GDRs were upgraded to Definitive because of new case evidence. One Strong
was subsumed under another Definitive GDR after evaluation of the
lumping/splitting of disease entities. Twenty-seven of 35 patients remained
unchanged, with little to no new evidence reported.
CONCLUSION: Genes classified as Moderate and Strong were likely to build
evidence and change their classification over time, whereas Limited were
unlikely to gain evidence. These findings highlight the critical role of
recuration in ensuring that genetic tests and research studies incorporate the
most recent evidence into their efforts.

Copyright © 2025 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2025.101392
PMCID: PMC12170156
PMID: 39987489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Many authors are
compensated clinical service providers as noted by their affiliations in health
care systems or commercial genetic testing laboratories. The authors declare no
other relevant conflicts of interest.
