---
reference_id: "PMID:19289269"
title: Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency (GAMT).
authors:
- Gordon N
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2009.01.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency (GAMT).
**Authors:** Gordon N
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2009.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2009.01.008)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2010 Feb;32(2):79-81. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2009.01.008. Epub
2009  Mar 16.

Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency (GAMT).

Gordon N(1).

Author information:
(1)Huntlywood, Wilmslow, UK. neil-gordon@doctors.org.uk

An increasing number of disorders of metabolism are becoming amenable to the 
treatment, and GAMT deficiency is one of them. The symptoms and signs are 
reviewed, emphasising that delayed language development is a particular feature. 
Other symptoms include learning disorders, autistic behaviour, epileptic 
seizures, and movement disorders. The condition is inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner, and mutations in the GAMT gene severely affect the activity of 
guanidinoacetate. The MRI scan shows an increased signal in the globus pallidus, 
and the diagnosis is confirmed by finding increased guanidinoacetate in the 
urine and a low plasma creatine. Other methods of diagnosis are discussed. 
Treatment is based on giving creatine supplementation orally and a low-protein 
diet with restricted arginine and increased ornithine. This results in 
improvement of many of the symptoms, especially of the epileptic seizures and 
the abnormal movements. It is justifiable to consider this condition in any 
patient with unexplained learning disorders.

2010. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2009.01.008
PMID: 19289269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]