---
reference_id: "PMID:9867748"
title: Prevalence of hereditary hemochromatosis in 16031 primary care patients.
authors:
- Phatak PD
- Sham RL
- Raubertas RF
- Dunnigan K
- "O'Leary MT"
- Braggins C
- Cappuccio JD
journal: Ann Intern Med
year: '1998'
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-129-11_part_2-199812011-00006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Algorithms
- Biopsy
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Feasibility Studies
- Female
- "Hemochromatosis/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Liver/pathology
- Male
- Mass Screening/methods
- Middle Aged
- New York/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Transferrin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of hereditary hemochromatosis in 16031 primary care patients.
**Authors:** Phatak PD, Sham RL, Raubertas RF, Dunnigan K, O'Leary MT, Braggins C, Cappuccio JD
**Journal:** Ann Intern Med (1998)
**DOI:** [10.7326/0003-4819-129-11_part_2-199812011-00006](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-129-11_part_2-199812011-00006)

## Content

1. Ann Intern Med. 1998 Dec 1;129(11):954-61. doi: 
10.7326/0003-4819-129-11_part_2-199812011-00006.

Prevalence of hereditary hemochromatosis in 16031 primary care patients.

Phatak PD(1), Sham RL, Raubertas RF, Dunnigan K, O'Leary MT, Braggins C, 
Cappuccio JD.

Author information:
(1)Mary M. Gooley Hemophilia Center, Inc., Rochester General Hospital, and the 
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, New York 14621, USA.

BACKGROUND: Despite evidence from screening studies in northern European 
populations, the prevalence of hemochromatosis in primary care populations in 
the United States remains speculative.
OBJECTIVE: To establish the feasibility of screening for hemochromatosis and to 
estimate the prevalence of hemochromatosis in a large primary care population.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional prevalence study.
SETTING: 22 primary care practices in the Rochester, New York, area.
PATIENTS: 16031 ambulatory patients without a previous diagnosis of 
hemochromatosis.
INTERVENTION: Serum transferrin saturation screening tests were offered to all 
adult patients in participating primary care practices.
MEASUREMENTS: Patients with a serum transferrin saturation of 45% or more on 
initial testing had a serum transferrin saturation test done under fasting 
conditions and had serum ferritin levels measured. Those who had a fasting serum 
transferrin saturation of 55% or more and a serum ferritin level of 200 microg/L 
or more with no other apparent cause were presumed to have hemochromatosis and 
were offered liver biopsy to confirm the diagnosis.
RESULTS: 25 patients had biopsy-proven hemochromatosis; 22 patients met the 
clinical criteria for hemochromatosis but declined liver biopsy and were 
classified as having clinically proven hemochromatosis; and 23 patients had a 
serum transferrin saturation of 55% or more with no identifiable cause, 
indicating probable hemochromatosis. The prevalence of clinically proven and 
biopsy-proven hemochromatosis combined was 4.5 per 1000 (95% CI, 3.3 to 5.8 per 
1000) in the total sample and 5.4 per 1000 (CI, 4.0 to 7.1 per 1000) in white 
persons. The prevalence was higher in men than in women (ratio, 1.8:1).
CONCLUSIONS: Hemochromatosis is relatively common among white persons. Routine 
screening of white persons for hemochromatosis should be considered by primary 
care physicians.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-129-11_part_2-199812011-00006
PMID: 9867748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]