---
reference_id: "PMID:22970194"
title: "Msh2 acts in medium-spiny striatal neurons as an enhancer of CAG instability and mutant huntingtin phenotypes in Huntington's disease knock-in mice."
authors:
- Kovalenko M
- Dragileva E
- St Claire J
- Gillis T
- Guide JR
- New J
- Dong H
- Kucherlapati R
- Kucherlapati MH
- Ehrlich ME
- Lee JM
- Wheeler VC
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044273
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Cell Nucleus/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- Huntingtin Protein
- "Huntington Disease/genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- MutS Homolog 2 Protein/metabolism
- Mutant Proteins/metabolism
- "Neostriatum/metabolism, pathology"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- Nuclear Proteins/metabolism
- Phenotype
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Msh2 acts in medium-spiny striatal neurons as an enhancer of CAG instability and mutant huntingtin phenotypes in Huntington's disease knock-in mice.
**Authors:** Kovalenko M, Dragileva E, St Claire J, Gillis T, Guide JR, New J, Dong H, Kucherlapati R, Kucherlapati MH, Ehrlich ME, Lee JM, Wheeler VC
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0044273](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0044273)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44273. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044273. Epub 2012 Sep
7.

Msh2 acts in medium-spiny striatal neurons as an enhancer of CAG instability and
mutant huntingtin phenotypes in Huntington's disease knock-in mice.

Kovalenko M(1), Dragileva E, St Claire J, Gillis T, Guide JR, New J, Dong H,
Kucherlapati R, Kucherlapati MH, Ehrlich ME, Lee JM, Wheeler VC.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

The CAG trinucleotide repeat mutation in the Huntington's disease gene (HTT)
exhibits age-dependent tissue-specific expansion that correlates with disease
onset in patients, implicating somatic expansion as a disease modifier and
potential therapeutic target. Somatic HTT CAG expansion is critically dependent
on proteins in the mismatch repair (MMR) pathway. To gain further insight into
mechanisms of somatic expansion and the relationship of somatic expansion to the
disease process in selectively vulnerable MSNs we have crossed HTT CAG knock-in
mice (HdhQ111) with mice carrying a conditional (floxed) Msh2 allele and D9-Cre
transgenic mice, in which Cre recombinase is expressed specifically in MSNs
within the striatum. Deletion of Msh2 in MSNs eliminated Msh2 protein in those
neurons. We demonstrate that MSN-specific deletion of Msh2 was sufficient to
eliminate the vast majority of striatal HTT CAG expansions in HdhQ111 mice.
Furthermore, MSN-specific deletion of Msh2 modified two mutant huntingtin
phenotypes: the early nuclear localization of diffusely immunostaining mutant
huntingtin was slowed; and the later development of intranuclear huntingtin
inclusions was dramatically inhibited. Therefore, Msh2 acts within MSNs as a
genetic enhancer both of somatic HTT CAG expansions and of HTT CAG-dependent
phenotypes in mice. These data suggest that the selective vulnerability of MSNs
may be at least in part contributed by the propensity for somatic expansion in
these neurons, and imply that intervening in the expansion process is likely to
have therapeutic benefit.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044273
PMCID: PMC3436885
PMID: 22970194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
