---
reference_id: "PMID:11459385"
title: Long-term outcome of anorexia nervosa in a prospective 21-year follow-up study.
authors:
- Löwe B
- Zipfel S
- Buchholz C
- Dupont Y
- Reas DL
- Herzog W
journal: Psychol Med
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1017/s003329170100407x
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anorexia Nervosa/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
- Cause of Death
- Comorbidity
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Germany
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term outcome of anorexia nervosa in a prospective 21-year follow-up study.
**Authors:** Löwe B, Zipfel S, Buchholz C, Dupont Y, Reas DL, Herzog W
**Journal:** Psychol Med (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1017/s003329170100407x](https://doi.org/10.1017/s003329170100407x)

## Content

1. Psychol Med. 2001 Jul;31(5):881-90. doi: 10.1017/s003329170100407x.

Long-term outcome of anorexia nervosa in a prospective 21-year follow-up study.

Löwe B(1), Zipfel S, Buchholz C, Dupont Y, Reas DL, Herzog W.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Internal and Psychosomatic Medicine, University of
Heidelberg, Medical Hospital, Germany.

Comment in
    Evid Based Ment Health. 2002 May;5(2):59. doi: 10.1136/ebmh.5.2.59.

BACKGROUND: Given our poor understanding of the very long-term course of
anorexia nervosa. many questions remain regarding the potential for recovery and
relapse. The purpose of the present study was to investigate long-term outcome
and prognosis in an anorexic sample 21 years after the initial treatment.
METHOD: A multidimensional and prospective design was used to assess outcome in
84 patients 9 years after a previous follow-up and 21 years after admission.
Among the 70 living patients, the follow-up rate was 90%. Causes of death for
the deceased patients were obtained through the attending physician. Predictors
of a poor outcome at the 21-year follow-up were selected based on the results of
a previous 12-year follow-up of these patients.
RESULTS: Fifty-one per cent of the patients were found to be fully recovered at
follow-up, 21% were partially recovered and 10% still met full diagnostic
criteria for anorexia nervosa. Sixteen per cent were deceased, due to causes
related to anorexia nervosa. The standardized mortality rate was 9.8. The three
groups also showed significant differences in psychosocial outcome. A low body
mass index and a greater severity of social and psychological problems were
identified as predictors of a poor outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Recovery is still possible for anorexic patients after a period of
21 years. On the other hand, patients can relapse, becoming symptomatic again
despite previously achieving recovery status. Only a few patients classified as
having a poor outcome were found to seek any form of treatment, therefore, it is
recommended that these patients should be monitored regularly and offered
treatment whenever possible.

DOI: 10.1017/s003329170100407x
PMID: 11459385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
