---
reference_id: "PMID:23255577"
title: Cellular mechanisms of tissue fibrosis. 1. Common and organ-specific mechanisms associated with tissue fibrosis.
authors:
- Zeisberg M
- Kalluri R
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00328.2012
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cicatrix/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Fibrosis/drug therapy, pathology"
- Humans
- "Wound Healing/drug effects, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular mechanisms of tissue fibrosis. 1. Common and organ-specific mechanisms associated with tissue fibrosis.
**Authors:** Zeisberg M, Kalluri R
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.00328.2012](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00328.2012)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Feb 1;304(3):C216-25. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00328.2012. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

Cellular mechanisms of tissue fibrosis. 1. Common and organ-specific mechanisms 
associated with tissue fibrosis.

Zeisberg M(1), Kalluri R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Göttingen University Medical 
Center, Georg August University, Göttingen, Germany. 
mzeisberg@med.uni-goettingen.de

Fibrosis is a pathological scarring process that leads to destruction of organ 
architecture and impairment of organ function. Chronic loss of organ function in 
most organs, including bone marrow, heart, intestine, kidney, liver, lung, and 
skin, is associated with fibrosis, contributing to an estimated one third of 
natural deaths worldwide. Effective therapies to prevent or to even reverse 
existing fibrotic lesions are not yet available in any organ. There is hope that 
an understanding of common fibrosis pathways will lead to development of 
antifibrotic therapies that are effective in all of these tissues in the future. 
Here we review common and organ-specific pathways of tissue fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00328.2012
PMCID: PMC3566435
PMID: 23255577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]