---
reference_id: "PMID:33024305"
title: "Refined diagnosis of hydatidiform moles with p57 immunohistochemistry and molecular genotyping: updated analysis of a prospective series of 2217 cases."
authors:
- Xing D
- Adams E
- Huang J
- Ronnett BM
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41379-020-00691-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p57/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- "Hydatidiform Mole/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Immunohistochemistry
- Middle Aged
- Pregnancy
- Prospective Studies
- "Uterine Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Refined diagnosis of hydatidiform moles with p57 immunohistochemistry and molecular genotyping: updated analysis of a prospective series of 2217 cases.
**Authors:** Xing D, Adams E, Huang J, Ronnett BM
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41379-020-00691-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41379-020-00691-9)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2021 May;34(5):961-982. doi: 10.1038/s41379-020-00691-9. Epub 2020
 Oct 6.

Refined diagnosis of hydatidiform moles with p57 immunohistochemistry and 
molecular genotyping: updated analysis of a prospective series of 2217 cases.

Xing D(#)(1)(2)(3), Adams E(#)(1), Huang J(#)(1), Ronnett BM(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
MD, USA. bronnett@jhmi.edu.
(5)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA. bronnett@jhmi.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Immunohistochemical analysis of p57 expression and molecular genotyping 
accurately subclassify molar specimens into complete hydatidiform mole (CHM) and 
partial hydatidiform mole (PHM) and distinguish these from nonmolar specimens. 
Characteristics of a prospective series of potentially molar specimens analyzed 
in a large gynecologic pathology practice are summarized. Of 2217 cases (2160 
uterine, 57 ectopic), 2080 (94%) were successfully classified: 571 CHMs (570 
uterine, 1 ectopic), 498 PHMs (497 uterine, 1 ectopic), 900 nonmolar (including 
147 trisomies, 19 digynic triploids, and 4 donor egg conceptions), and 56 
androgenetic/biparental mosaics; 137 were complex or unsatisfactory and not 
definitively classified. CHMs dominated in patients aged < 21 and >45 years and 
were the only kind of molar conception found in the latter group. Of 564 
successfully immunostained CHMs, 563 (99.8%) were p57-negative (1 p57-positive 
[retained maternal chromosome 11] androgenetic by genotyping). Of 153 genotyped 
CHMs, 148 (96.7%) were androgenetic (85% monospermic) and 5 were biparental, the 
latter likely familial biparental hydatidiform moles. Of 486 successfully 
immunostained PHMs, 481 (99%) were p57-positive (3 p57-negative [loss of 
maternal chromosome 11], 2 unknown mechanism). Of 497 genotyped PHMs, 484 (97%) 
were diandric triploid (99% dispermic) and 13 were triandric tetraploid (all at 
least dispermic). Of 56 androgenetic/biparental mosaics, 37 had a p57-negative 
complete molar component (16 confirmed as androgenetic by genotyping). p57 
expression is highly correlated with genotyping, serving as a reliable marker 
for CHMs, and identifies molar components and androgenetic cell lines in mosaic 
conceptions. Correlation of morphology, p57 expression, genotyping data, and 
history are required to recognize familial biparental hydatidiform moles and 
donor egg conceptions, as the former can be misclassified as nonmolar and the 
latter can be misclassified as dispermic CHM on the basis of isolated genotyping 
results.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-020-00691-9
PMID: 33024305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]