---
reference_id: PMID:18266856
title: "The penicillin-binding proteins: structure and role in peptidoglycan biosynthesis."
authors:
- Sauvage E
- Kerff F
- Terrak M
- Ayala JA
- Charlier P
journal: FEMS Microbiol Rev
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2008.00105.x
keywords:
- "Bacteria/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Bacterial Proteins/chemistry, classification, metabolism"
- "Glycosyltransferases/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Multienzyme Complexes/chemistry, classification, metabolism"
- "Penicillin-Binding Proteins/chemistry, classification, metabolism"
- "Peptide Hydrolases/chemistry, metabolism"
- Peptidoglycan/biosynthesis
- "Peptidoglycan Glycosyltransferase/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Peptidyl Transferases/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- beta-Lactamases/metabolism
- beta-Lactams/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The penicillin-binding proteins: structure and role in peptidoglycan biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Sauvage E, Kerff F, Terrak M, Ayala JA, Charlier P
**Journal:** FEMS Microbiol Rev (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1574-6976.2008.00105.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6976.2008.00105.x)

## Content

1. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2008 Mar;32(2):234-58. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-6976.2008.00105.x. Epub 2008 Feb 11.

The penicillin-binding proteins: structure and role in peptidoglycan 
biosynthesis.

Sauvage E(1), Kerff F, Terrak M, Ayala JA, Charlier P.

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Ingénierie des Protéines, Institut de Physique B5a et Institut de 
Chimie B6a, University of Liège, Sart Tilman, Belgium. eric.sauvage@ulg.ac.be

Erratum in
    FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2008 May;32(3):556.

Penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) have been scrutinized for over 40 years. 
Recent structural information on PBPs together with the ongoing long-term 
biochemical experimental investigations, and results from more recent techniques 
such as protein localization by green fluorescent protein-fusion 
immunofluorescence or double-hybrid assay, have brought our understanding of the 
last stages of the peptidoglycan biosynthesis to an outstanding level that 
allows a broad outlook on the properties of these enzymes. Details are emerging 
regarding the interaction between the peptidoglycan-synthesizing PBPs and the 
peptidoglycan, their mesh net-like product that surrounds and protects bacteria. 
This review focuses on the detailed structure of PBPs and their implication in 
peptidoglycan synthesis, maturation and recycling. An overview of the content in 
PBPs of some bacteria is provided with an emphasis on comparing the biochemical 
properties of homologous PBPs (orthologues) belonging to different bacteria.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2008.00105.x
PMID: 18266856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]