---
reference_id: "PMID:28506744"
title: Hepatic stellate cells as key target in liver fibrosis.
authors:
- Higashi T
- Friedman SL
- Hoshida Y
journal: Adv Drug Deliv Rev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2017.05.007
keywords:
- Animals
- "Hepatic Stellate Cells/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Liver Cirrhosis/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- "Myofibroblasts/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic stellate cells as key target in liver fibrosis.
**Authors:** Higashi T, Friedman SL, Hoshida Y
**Journal:** Adv Drug Deliv Rev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.addr.2017.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2017.05.007)

## Content

1. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2017 Nov 1;121:27-42. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2017.05.007.
Epub  2017 May 12.

Hepatic stellate cells as key target in liver fibrosis.

Higashi T(1), Friedman SL(2), Hoshida Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Liver Cancer Program,
Tisch Cancer Institute, Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, USA; Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of
Medical Science, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(2)Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Liver Cancer Program,
Tisch Cancer Institute, Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, USA.
(3)Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Liver Cancer Program,
Tisch Cancer Institute, Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, USA. Electronic address: yujin.hoshida@mssm.edu.

Progressive liver fibrosis, induced by chronic viral and metabolic disorders,
leads to more than one million deaths annually via development of cirrhosis,
although no antifibrotic therapy has been approved to date. Transdifferentiation
(or "activation") of hepatic stellate cells is the major cellular source of
matrix protein-secreting myofibroblasts, the major driver of liver fibrogenesis.
Paracrine signals from injured epithelial cells, fibrotic tissue
microenvironment, immune and systemic metabolic dysregulation, enteric
dysbiosis, and hepatitis viral products can directly or indirectly induce
stellate cell activation. Dysregulated intracellular signaling, epigenetic
changes, and cellular stress response represent candidate targets to deactivate
stellate cells by inducing reversion to inactivated state, cellular senescence,
apoptosis, and/or clearance by immune cells. Cell type- and target-specific
pharmacological intervention to therapeutically induce the deactivation will
enable more effective and less toxic precision antifibrotic therapies.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2017.05.007
PMCID: PMC5682243
PMID: 28506744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
