---
reference_id: "PMID:15535337"
title: Pulmonary tuberculosis--a review of clinical features and diagnosis in 232 cases.
authors:
- Ismail Y
journal: Med J Malaysia
year: '2004'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary tuberculosis--a review of clinical features and diagnosis in 232 cases.
**Authors:** Ismail Y
**Journal:** Med J Malaysia (2004)

## Content

1. Med J Malaysia. 2004 Mar;59(1):56-64.

Pulmonary tuberculosis--a review of clinical features and diagnosis in 232 
cases.

Ismail Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Kedah Medical Centre, Pumpong 05250 Alor Setar, Kedah.

Comment in
    Med J Malaysia. 2004 Mar;59(1):1-3.

The diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis is often delayed due to atypical 
clinical features and difficulty in obtaining positive bacteriology. We reviewed 
232 cases of pulmonary tuberculosis diagnosed in Kedah Medical Centre, Alor 
Setar from January 1998 to December 2002. All age groups were affected with a 
male predominance (Male:Female ratio = 60:40). Risk factors include underlying 
diabetes mellitus (17.7%), positive family history (16.8%) and previous 
tuberculosis (5.2%). Nearly half (45.3%) of patients had symptoms for more than 
one year. Only 22% of patients had typical symptoms of tuberculosis (prolonged 
recurrent fever, cough, anorexia and weight loss), whilst others presented with 
haemoptysis, chronic cough, COPD, bronchiectasis, general ill-health, pyrexia of 
unknown origin or pleural effusion without other systemic symptoms. Fifteen 
percent of the patients presented with extrapulmonary diagnosis. Ninety percent 
of the patients had previous medical consultations but 40% had no chest 
radiograph or sputum examination done. The chest radiographs showed 'typical' 
changes of tuberculosis in 62% while in the other 38% the radiological features 
were 'not typical'. Sputum direct smear was positive for acid-fast bacilli in 
only 22.8% of patients and 11.2% were diagnosed base on positive sputum culture. 
Sputum may be negative even in patients with typical clinical presentations and 
chest radiograph changes. Bronchial washing improved the diagnosis rate being 
positive in 49.1% of cases (24.1% by direct smear and the other 25.0% by 
culture). In 16.8% of cases, the diagnosis was based on a good response to 
empirical anti-tuberculosis therapy in patients with clinical and radiological 
features characteristic of tuberculosis. In conclusions, the clinical and 
radiological manifestations of pulmonary tuberculosis may be atypical. Sputum is 
often negative and bronchoscopy with washings for Mycobacterium culture gives a 
higher yield for diagnosis. In highly probable cases, empirical therapy with 
antituberculosis drugs should be considered because it is safe and beneficial.

PMID: 15535337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]