---
reference_id: "PMID:30097731"
title: "The Genetics of Dementia with Lewy Bodies: Current Understanding and Future Directions."
authors:
- Orme T
- Guerreiro R
- Bras J
journal: Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s11910-018-0874-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Genetics of Dementia with Lewy Bodies: Current Understanding and Future Directions.
**Authors:** Orme T, Guerreiro R, Bras J
**Journal:** Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11910-018-0874-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-018-0874-y)

## Content

1. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2018 Aug 10;18(10):67. doi:
10.1007/s11910-018-0874-y.

The Genetics of Dementia with Lewy Bodies: Current Understanding and Future 
Directions.

Orme T(1)(2), Guerreiro R(1)(2)(3), Bras J(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.
(2)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, Institute of Neurology, Wing 1.2, The 
Cruciform Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences and Institute of Biomedicine, iBiMED, 
University of Aveiro, 3810-193, Aveiro, Portugal.
(4)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK. j.bras@ucl.ac.uk.
(5)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, Institute of Neurology, Wing 1.2, The 
Cruciform Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK. j.bras@ucl.ac.uk.
(6)Department of Medical Sciences and Institute of Biomedicine, iBiMED, 
University of Aveiro, 3810-193, Aveiro, Portugal. j.bras@ucl.ac.uk.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a neurodegenerative 
disease that can be clinically and pathologically similar to Parkinson's disease 
(PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Current understanding of DLB genetics is 
insufficient and has been limited by sample size and difficulty in diagnosis. 
The first genome-wide association study (GWAS) in DLB was performed in 2017; a 
time at which the post-GWAS era has been reached in many diseases.
RECENT FINDINGS: DLB shares risk loci with AD, in the APOE E4 allele, and with 
PD, in variation at GBA and SNCA. Interestingly, the GWAS suggested that DLB may 
also have genetic risk factors that are distinct from those in AD and PD. 
Although off to a slow start, recent studies have reinvigorated the field of DLB 
genetics and these results enable us to start to have a more complete 
understanding of the genetic architecture of this disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-018-0874-y
PMCID: PMC6097049
PMID: 30097731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Tatiana Orme reports 
grants from the Lewy Body Society. Rita Guerreiro and Jose Bras report grants 
from the Alzheimer’s Society. HUMAN AND ANIMAL RIGHTS AND INFORMED CONSENT: This 
article does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by 
any of the authors.