---
reference_id: "PMID:33476309"
title: "[Fabry disease in cardiology: Diagnosis and therapeutic approaches]."
authors:
- Çavuşoğlu Y
- Özpelit E
- Arslan N
- Demir M
- Kahveci G
- Onay H
- Ökçün EÖB
- Tufekcioglu O
- Tülüce SY
- Yıldırım GK
journal: Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5543/tkda.2020.38262
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Fabry disease in cardiology: Diagnosis and therapeutic approaches].
**Authors:** Çavuşoğlu Y, Özpelit E, Arslan N, Demir M, Kahveci G, Onay H, Ökçün EÖB, Tufekcioglu O, Tülüce SY, Yıldırım GK
**Journal:** Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5543/tkda.2020.38262](https://doi.org/10.5543/tkda.2020.38262)

## Content

1. Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars. 2020 Dec;48(Suppl 2):1-42. doi:
10.5543/tkda.2020.38262.

[Fabry disease in cardiology: Diagnosis and therapeutic approaches].

[Article in Turkish]

Çavuşoğlu Y, Özpelit E, Arslan N, Demir M, Kahveci G, Onay H, Ökçün EÖB, 
Tufekcioglu O, Tülüce SY, Yıldırım GK.

Fabry disease is a rare, progressive, X-linked inherited storage disorder due to 
absent or deficient of lysosomal alfa galactosidase A activity. Deficient 
activity of alfa-galactosidase A results in progressive accumulation of 
globotriaosylceramide in a variety of tissues and organs including myocardium, 
kidney and nerve system. This disorder predominantly affects males; however, 
female heterozygotes may also be affected with a less severe clinical picture. 
Classic Fabry disease is usually diagnosed in early age of childhood because of 
multiorgan involvement whereas cardiac and renal variants of Fabry are 
manifested in 30-50 years of age because of late onset of clinical picture in 
which other organs involvement are uncommon. Although Fabry is known as a very 
rare disease, its prevalence is reported to be higher in patients with 
ventricular hypertrophy, chronic kidney disease and cryptogenic stroke. From the 
cardiology point of view, the most important key finding of the disease is 
unexplained ventricular hypertrophy. However, in clinical practice, ventricular 
hypertrophy is usually thought to be due to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in the 
absence of hypertension or aortic stenosis and Fabry disease is often 
undiagnosed or overlooked. Early diagnosis and enzyme replacement therapy have 
been shown to significantly improve prognosis. The aim of this paper is to 
provide a comprehensive review including epidemiology, prognosis, clinical 
presentation, diagnosis and therapeutic approaches of cardiac variant of Fabry 
based on the available data in the literature.

DOI: 10.5543/tkda.2020.38262
PMID: 33476309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]