---
reference_id: "PMID:28123718"
title: "Association of CTLA-4 gene polymorphisms -318C/T and +49A/G and Hashimoto's thyroidits in Zahedan, Iran."
authors:
- Narooie-Nejad M
- Taji O
- Kordi Tamandani DM
- Kaykhaei MA
journal: Biomed Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3892/br.2016.813
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of CTLA-4 gene polymorphisms -318C/T and +49A/G and Hashimoto's thyroidits in Zahedan, Iran.
**Authors:** Narooie-Nejad M, Taji O, Kordi Tamandani DM, Kaykhaei MA
**Journal:** Biomed Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3892/br.2016.813](https://doi.org/10.3892/br.2016.813)

## Content

1. Biomed Rep. 2017 Jan;6(1):108-112. doi: 10.3892/br.2016.813. Epub 2016 Nov 17.

Association of CTLA-4 gene polymorphisms -318C/T and +49A/G and Hashimoto's 
thyroidits in Zahedan, Iran.

Narooie-Nejad M(1), Taji O(2), Kordi Tamandani DM(2), Kaykhaei MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Non-Communicable Disease Research Center, Zahedan University of 
Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Sistan and Baluchestan 9816743463, Iran; Department 
of Genetics, School of Medicine, Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, 
Zahedan, Sistan and Baluchestan 9816743463, Iran.
(2)Department of Biology, Sistan and Baluchestan University, Zahedan, Sistan and 
Baluchestan 98155-987, Iran.
(3)Genetics of Non-Communicable Disease Research Center, Zahedan University of 
Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Sistan and Baluchestan 9816743463, Iran; Department 
of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Zahedan University of Medical 
Sciences, Zahedan, Sistan and Baluchestan 9816743463, Iran.

Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) is a chronic inflammation of the thyroid gland and 
is known as the most common autoimmune disease. Development of autoimmune 
destruction of thyroid cells is a multi-step process involving convergence of 
genetic and environmental factors. Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) has 
an important role in homeostasis and negative regulation of immune responses, 
and is therefore considered to be a key element in the development of autoimmune 
diseases. The present study evaluated the association of the CTLA-4 gene 
polymorphisms 318C/T (rs5742909) and +49A/G (rs231775) with HT in an Iranian 
population (including 82 patients with HT and 104 healthy controls who were 
referred for routine premarital blood screenings). Genotyping was performed 
using the tetra-primer amplification refractory mutation system polymerase chain 
reaction technique. No significant differences were observed in genotype and 
allele frequencies in the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between cases 
and controls. In the cases as well as in the controls, the TT genotype in the 
-318C/T polymorphism was absent and the predominant genotype was CC, while the 
predominant genotype for the +49A/G SNP was AA. As only few studies in this 
field have assessed Iranian and even Middle Eastern populations, additional 
studies with a higher number of samples are recommended to further assess the 
impact of -318C/T (rs5742909) and +49A/G (rs231775) polymorphisms of CTLA-4 on 
HT.

DOI: 10.3892/br.2016.813
PMCID: PMC5244793
PMID: 28123718