---
reference_id: "PMID:20923787"
title: Therapeutic modulation of cerebral L-lysine metabolism in a mouse model for glutaric aciduria type I.
authors:
- Sauer SW
- Opp S
- Hoffmann GF
- Koeller DM
- Okun JG
- Kölker S
journal: Brain
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awq269
keywords:
- 2-Aminoadipate Transaminase/metabolism
- "2-Aminoadipic Acid/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diet therapy, metabolism"
- Analysis of Variance
- Animals
- "Arginine/metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Brain/metabolism
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic/diet therapy, metabolism"
- "Carnitine/analogs & derivatives, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Catalase/metabolism
- "Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, metabolism"
- Ketoglutaric Acids/metabolism
- Lysine/metabolism
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic modulation of cerebral L-lysine metabolism in a mouse model for glutaric aciduria type I.
**Authors:** Sauer SW, Opp S, Hoffmann GF, Koeller DM, Okun JG, Kölker S
**Journal:** Brain (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awq269](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awq269)

## Content

1. Brain. 2011 Jan;134(Pt 1):157-70. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq269. Epub 2010 Oct 4.

Therapeutic modulation of cerebral L-lysine metabolism in a mouse model for
glutaric aciduria type I.

Sauer SW(1), Opp S, Hoffmann GF, Koeller DM, Okun JG, Kölker S.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Paediatrics, Division of Inborn Metabolic Diseases,
University Children's Hospital, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany. sven.sauer@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Glutaric aciduria type I, an inherited deficiency of glutaryl-coenzyme A
dehydrogenase localized in the final common catabolic pathway of L-lysine,
L-hydroxylysine and L-tryptophan, leads to accumulation of neurotoxic glutaric
and 3-hydroxyglutaric acid, as well as non-toxic glutarylcarnitine. Most
untreated patients develop irreversible brain damage during infancy that can be
prevented in the majority of cases if metabolic treatment with a low L-lysine
diet and L-carnitine supplementation is started in the newborn period. The
biochemical effect of this treatment remains uncertain, since cerebral
concentrations of neurotoxic metabolites can only be determined by invasive
techniques. Therefore, we studied the biochemical effect and mechanism of
metabolic treatment in glutaryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase-deficient mice, an
animal model with complete loss of glutaryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase activity,
focusing on the tissue-specific changes of neurotoxic metabolites and key
enzymes of L-lysine metabolism. Here, we demonstrate that low L-lysine diet, but
not L-carnitine supplementation, lowered the concentration of glutaric acid in
brain, liver, kidney and serum. L-carnitine supplementation restored the free
L-carnitine pool and enhanced the formation of glutarylcarnitine. The effect of
low L-lysine diet was amplified by add-on therapy with L-arginine, which we
propose to result from competition with L-lysine at system y(+) of the
blood-brain barrier and the mitochondrial L-ornithine carriers. L-lysine can be
catabolized in the mitochondrial saccharopine or the peroxisomal pipecolate
pathway. We detected high activity of mitochondrial 2-aminoadipate semialdehyde
synthase, the rate-limiting enzyme of the saccharopine pathway, in the liver,
whereas it was absent in the brain. Since we found activity of the subsequent
enzymes of L-lysine oxidation, 2-aminoadipate semialdehyde dehydrogenase,
2-aminoadipate aminotransferase and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex as well
as peroxisomal pipecolic acid oxidase in brain tissue, we postulate that the
pipecolate pathway is the major route of L-lysine degradation in the brain and
the saccharopine pathway is the major route in the liver. Interestingly,
treatment with clofibrate decreased cerebral and hepatic concentrations of
glutaric acid in glutaryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase-deficient mice. This finding
opens new therapeutic perspectives such as pharmacological stimulation of
alternative L-lysine oxidation in peroxisomes. In conclusion, this study gives
insight into the discrepancies between cerebral and hepatic L-lysine metabolism,
provides for the first time a biochemical proof of principle for metabolic
treatment in glutaric aciduria type I and suggests that further optimization of
treatment could be achieved by exploitation of competition between L-lysine and
L-arginine at physiological barriers and enhancement of peroxisomal L-lysine
oxidation and glutaric acid breakdown.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq269
PMID: 20923787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
