---
reference_id: "PMID:40983649"
title: Macrophage ferroptosis potentiates GCN2 deficiency induced pulmonary venous arterialization.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Mao P
- Zhou T
- Yue B
- Li Y
- Qiu Y
- Ying K
- Wang F
- Chen J
- Yang J
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-64035-4
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ferroptosis/genetics, drug effects"
- Mice
- Humans
- Male
- Macrophages/metabolism
- "Pulmonary Veno-Occlusive Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Endothelial Cells/metabolism
- Rats
- "Pulmonary Veins/pathology, metabolism"
- Female
- Cyclohexylamines/pharmacology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Heme Oxygenase-1/metabolism
- Iron/metabolism
- Phenylenediamines
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Macrophage ferroptosis potentiates GCN2 deficiency induced pulmonary venous arterialization.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Mao P, Zhou T, Yue B, Li Y, Qiu Y, Ying K, Wang F, Chen J, Yang J
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-64035-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-64035-4)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 Sep 22;16(1):8335. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-64035-4.

Macrophage ferroptosis potentiates GCN2 deficiency induced pulmonary venous 
arterialization.

Zhang J(#)(1)(2), Mao P(#)(1)(2), Zhou T(#)(1)(2), Yue B(2)(3), Li Y(1)(2), Qiu 
Y(4), Ying K(4), Wang F(5), Chen J(2)(3), Yang J(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Department of Cardiology of the Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Transvascular Implantation Devices of the Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Center for Lung Transplantation of the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine of Sir Run Run Shaw 
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Public Health of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, 
Hangzhou, China.
(6)Department of Physiology and Department of Cardiology of the Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China. 
yang_jun@zju.edu.cn.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Transvascular Implantation Devices of the Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China. 
yang_jun@zju.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) is a fatal disease characterized by the 
remodelling of pulmonary veins and haemosiderin accumulation in macrophages. 
Although (General Control Nonderepressible 2) GCN2 deficiency has been reported 
in PVOD patients, the underlying mechanism by which GCN2 deficiency affects the 
pulmonary venous cells and the surrounding cells, remains unclear. Here, we 
perform immunohistochemistry and scRNA-sequencing analyses to show that 
macrophages are the major population affected by GCN2 deficiency and ferroptosis 
pathway-related genes are upregulated in lung macrophages of PVOD patients. 
Treatment with the specific ferroptosis inhibitor ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) reverses 
the changes in haemodynamic indices observed in Eif2ak4K1488X/K1488X hypoxia 
mice and PVOD model rats. Furthermore, GCN2 deficiency increases HMOX1 and iron 
levels to facilitate ferroptosis in macrophages, and enhances arterial marker 
expression in venous endothelial cells (VECs). Specifically, spatial 
transcriptome analysis shows increased expression of NRP1, KDR and EFNB2 through 
ETS1 in VECs from PVOD patients. Our findings suggest the potential of targeting 
macrophage ferroptosis as a therapeutic strategy for treating related vascular 
diseases, and of using NRP1/KDR/EFNB2 expression as a specific marker set for 
venous arterialization.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-64035-4
PMCID: PMC12454641
PMID: 40983649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.