---
reference_id: "PMID:37857763"
title: Oxidative stress and the role of redox signalling in chronic kidney disease.
authors:
- Kishi S
- Nagasu H
- Kidokoro K
- Kashihara N
journal: Nat Rev Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41581-023-00775-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxidative stress and the role of redox signalling in chronic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Kishi S, Nagasu H, Kidokoro K, Kashihara N
**Journal:** Nat Rev Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41581-023-00775-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41581-023-00775-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2024 Feb;20(2):101-119. doi: 10.1038/s41581-023-00775-0. Epub
 2023 Oct 19.

Oxidative stress and the role of redox signalling in chronic kidney disease.

Kishi S(1), Nagasu H(1), Kidokoro K(1), Kashihara N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Kawasaki Medical School, 
Kurashiki, Okayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Kawasaki Medical School, 
Kurashiki, Okayama, Japan. kashinao@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a major public health concern, underscoring a 
need to identify pathogenic mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets. 
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are derivatives of oxygen molecules that are 
generated during aerobic metabolism and are involved in a variety of cellular 
functions that are governed by redox conditions. Low levels of ROS are required 
for diverse processes, including intracellular signal transduction, metabolism, 
immune and hypoxic responses, and transcriptional regulation. However, excess 
ROS can be pathological, and contribute to the development and progression of 
chronic diseases. Despite evidence linking elevated levels of ROS to CKD 
development and progression, the use of low-molecular-weight antioxidants to 
remove ROS has not been successful in preventing or slowing disease progression. 
More recent advances have enabled evaluation of the molecular interactions 
between specific ROS and their targets in redox signalling pathways. Such 
studies may pave the way for the development of sophisticated treatments that 
allow the selective control of specific ROS-mediated signalling pathways.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41581-023-00775-0
PMID: 37857763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]