---
reference_id: "PMID:36746811"
title: Imaging findings of COPA Syndrome.
authors:
- Nguyen HN
- Salman R
- Vogel TP
- Silva-Carmona M
- DeGuzman M
- Guillerman RP
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-023-05600-1
keywords:
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Arthritis/genetics
- Coatomer Protein/genetics
- Fibrosis
- Glomerulonephritis
- Hemorrhage
- Hyperplasia
- Kidney Diseases
- Lung
- "Lung Diseases/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Lymphadenopathy
- Retrospective Studies
- Syndrome
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging findings of COPA Syndrome.
**Authors:** Nguyen HN, Salman R, Vogel TP, Silva-Carmona M, DeGuzman M, Guillerman RP
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-023-05600-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-023-05600-1)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2023 May;53(5):844-853. doi: 10.1007/s00247-023-05600-1. Epub 
2023 Feb 7.

Imaging findings of COPA Syndrome.

Nguyen HN(1), Salman R(2), Vogel TP(3)(4), Silva-Carmona M(5), DeGuzman M(3), 
Guillerman RP(1).

Author information:
(1)Edward B. Singleton Department of Radiology, Texas Children's Hospital, 
Baylor College of Medicine, 6701 Fannin St., Suite 470, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(2)Edward B. Singleton Department of Radiology, Texas Children's Hospital, 
Baylor College of Medicine, 6701 Fannin St., Suite 470, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. 
rxsalman@texaschildrens.org.
(3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(4)Center for Human Immunobiology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, 
77030, USA.
(5)Pulmonary Division, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Autosomal dominant mutations in the coatomer-associated protein 
alpha (COPA) gene cause an immune dysregulation disorder associated with 
pulmonary hemorrhage, lymphoid hyperplasia, arthritis, and glomerulonephritis.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the thoracic, musculoskeletal, and renal imaging findings 
of COPA syndrome with a focus on the evolution of the pulmonary findings.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: With approval of the Institutional Review Board, 
consensus retrospective review of findings on chest radiography and computed 
tomography (CT), musculoskeletal radiography and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), and renal ultrasound (US) was performed for pediatric COPA syndrome 
patients. COPA syndrome patients < 18 years of age presenting between 1992 and 
2019 were identified from an institutional rheumatology registry.
RESULTS: Twelve pediatric COPA syndrome patients (mean age of 6.5 years at first 
imaging exam; 6 females) were identified. Imaging exams available for review 
included 45 chest CT exams on 12 patients, 37 musculoskeletal exams on 4 
patients, and 10 renal US exams on 5 patients. All 12 had abnormal chest CT 
exams, with findings including ground-glass opacities (12/12), cysts (8/12), 
septal thickening (9/12), nodules (8/12), fibrosis (7/12), crazy-paving (2/12), 
consolidation (1/12), hilar/mediastinal lymphadenopathy (11/12), and chest wall 
deformity (5/12). Nine had at least one follow-up chest CT, which showed 
improvement in nodules (7/9), ground-glass opacities (4/9), and lymphadenopathy 
(9/9), but worsening of septal thickening (3/9), cyst formation (3/9), and 
fibrosis (3/9). Four had musculoskeletal imaging revealing synovitis (2/4), bone 
erosions (1/4), tenosynovitis (1/4), enthesitis (1/4), and subcutaneous nodules 
(1/4). Five had at least one renal US, revealing renal size abnormalities (4/5) 
and cortical hyperechogenicity (3/5).
CONCLUSION: The most prevalent imaging finding of COPA syndrome is diffuse lung 
disease related to early childhood-onset recurrent pulmonary hemorrhage and 
lymphoid hyperplasia that may progress to pulmonary fibrosis. Other imaging 
findings manifesting later in childhood or adolescence relate to arthritis and 
glomerulonephritis.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-023-05600-1
PMID: 36746811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]