---
reference_id: "PMID:29519353"
title: Etidronate for Prevention of Ectopic Mineralization in Patients With Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum.
authors:
- Kranenburg G
- de Jong PA
- Bartstra JW
- Lagerweij SJ
- Lam MG
- Ossewaarde-van Norel J
- Risseeuw S
- van Leeuwen R
- Imhof SM
- Verhaar HJ
- de Vries JJ
- Slart RHJA
- Luurtsema G
- den Harder AM
- Visseren FLJ
- Mali WP
- Spiering W
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.12.062
keywords:
- Aged
- Bone Density/drug effects
- "Bone Density Conservation Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacokinetics"
- "Calcium/blood, metabolism"
- Drug Monitoring/methods
- "Etidronic Acid/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacokinetics"
- Female
- Femur/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Peripheral Arterial Disease/blood, diagnosis, etiology, prevention & control"
- Phosphates/blood
- Positron-Emission Tomography/methods
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vascular Calcification/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etidronate for Prevention of Ectopic Mineralization in Patients With Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum.
**Authors:** Kranenburg G, de Jong PA, Bartstra JW, Lagerweij SJ, Lam MG, Ossewaarde-van Norel J, Risseeuw S, van Leeuwen R, Imhof SM, Verhaar HJ, de Vries JJ, Slart RHJA, Luurtsema G, den Harder AM, Visseren FLJ, Mali WP, Spiering W
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2017.12.062](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2017.12.062)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Mar 13;71(10):1117-1126. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2017.12.062.

Etidronate for Prevention of Ectopic Mineralization in Patients With 
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum.

Kranenburg G(1), de Jong PA(2), Bartstra JW(1), Lagerweij SJ(2), Lam MG(2), 
Ossewaarde-van Norel J(3), Risseeuw S(3), van Leeuwen R(3), Imhof SM(3), Verhaar 
HJ(4), de Vries JJ(2), Slart RHJA(5), Luurtsema G(5), den Harder AM(2), Visseren 
FLJ(1), Mali WP(2), Spiering W(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Geriatric Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(5)Medical Imaging Center, Department of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 
University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Vascular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
W.Spiering@umcutrecht.nl.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Mar 13;71(10):1127-1129. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2018.01.018.

BACKGROUND: In pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), low pyrophosphate levels may 
cause ectopic mineralization, leading to skin changes, visual impairment, and 
peripheral arterial disease.
OBJECTIVES: The authors hypothesized that etidronate, a pyrophosphate analog, 
might reduce ectopic mineralization in PXE.
METHODS: In the Treatment of Ectopic Mineralization in Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum 
trial, adults with PXE and leg arterial calcifications (n = 74) were randomly 
assigned to etidronate or placebo (cyclical 20 mg/kg for 2 weeks every 
12 weeks). The primary outcome was ectopic mineralization, quantified with 
18fluoride positron emission tomography scans as femoral arterial wall 
target-to-background ratios (TBRfemoral). Secondary outcomes were computed 
tomography arterial calcification and ophthalmological changes. Safety outcomes 
were bone density, serum calcium, and phosphate.
RESULTS: During 12 months of follow-up, the TBRfemoral increased 6% 
(interquartile range [IQR]: -12% to 25%) in the etidronate group and 7% 
(IQR: -9% to 32%) in the placebo group (p = 0.465). Arterial calcification 
decreased 4% (IQR: -11% to 7%) in the etidronate group and increased 8% 
(IQR: -1% to 20%) in the placebo group (p = 0.001). Etidronate treatment was 
associated with significantly fewer subretinal neovascularization events (1 vs. 
9, p = 0.007). Bone density decreased 4% ± 12% in the etidronate group and 6% ± 
9% in the placebo group (p = 0.374). Hypocalcemia (<2.20 mmol/l) occurred in 3 
versus 1 patient (8.1% vs. 2.7%, p = 0.304). Eighteen patients (48.6%) treated 
with etidronate, compared with 0 patients treated with placebo (p < 0.001), 
experienced hyperphosphatemia (>1.5 mmol/l) and recovered spontaneously.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with PXE, etidronate reduced arterial calcification and 
subretinal neovascularization events but did not lower femoral 18fluoride sodium 
positron emission tomography activity compared with placebo, without important 
safety issues. (Treatment of Ectopic Mineralization in Pseudoxanthoma elasticum; 
NTR5180).

Copyright © 2018 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.12.062
PMID: 29519353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]