---
reference_id: "PMID:29572094"
title: Hepatic-targeted RNA interference provides robust and persistent knockdown of alpha-1 antitrypsin levels in ZZ patients.
authors:
- Turner AM
- Stolk J
- Bals R
- Lickliter JD
- Hamilton J
- Christianson DR
- Given BD
- Burdon JG
- Loomba R
- Stoller JK
- Teckman JH
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.012
keywords:
- Adult
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Double-Blind Method
- Drug Carriers/adverse effects
- Drug Monitoring/methods
- Female
- Healthy Volunteers
- Humans
- "Liver Cirrhosis/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, therapy"
- Male
- Mutation
- RNAi Therapeutics/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- "Trypsin Inhibitors/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/administration & dosage, blood, genetics, pharmacokinetics"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic-targeted RNA interference provides robust and persistent knockdown of alpha-1 antitrypsin levels in ZZ patients.
**Authors:** Turner AM, Stolk J, Bals R, Lickliter JD, Hamilton J, Christianson DR, Given BD, Burdon JG, Loomba R, Stoller JK, Teckman JH
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.012)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2018 Aug;69(2):378-384. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.012. Epub 2018
Mar 21.

Hepatic-targeted RNA interference provides robust and persistent knockdown of
alpha-1 antitrypsin levels in ZZ patients.

Turner AM(1), Stolk J(2), Bals R(3), Lickliter JD(4), Hamilton J(5),
Christianson DR(5), Given BD(5), Burdon JG(6), Loomba R(7), Stoller JK(8),
Teckman JH(9).

Author information:
(1)University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. Electronic address:
A.M.Turner@bham.ac.uk.
(2)Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Saarland University Hospital, Homburg, Germany.
(4)Nucleus Network, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(5)Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, Pasadena, CA, USA.
(6)Saint Vincent's Private Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
(7)University of California at San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(8)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(9)St. Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a genetic disorder
causing pulmonary and liver disease. The PiZ mutation in AAT (SERPINA1) results
in mis-folded AAT protein (Z-AAT) accumulating in hepatocytes, leading to
fibrosis and cirrhosis. RNAi-based therapeutics silencing production of hepatic
Z-AAT might benefit patients with AATD-associated liver disease. This study
evaluated an RNAi therapeutic to silence production of AAT.
METHODS: Part A of this double-blind first-in-human study randomized 54 healthy
volunteers (HVs) into single dose cohorts (two placebo: four active), receiving
escalating doses of the investigational agent ARC-AAT from 0.38 to 8.0 mg/kg or
placebo. Part B randomized 11 patients with PiZZ (homozygous for Z-AAT) genotype
AATD, who received up to 4.0 mg/kg of ARC-AAT or placebo. Patients with baseline
FibroScan® >11 kPa or forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) <60% were
excluded. Assessments included safety, pharmacokinetics, and change in serum AAT
concentrations.
RESULTS: A total of 36 HVs received ARC-AAT and 18 received placebo (part A).
Seven PiZZ individuals received ARC-AAT and four received placebo (part B). A
dose response in serum AAT reduction was observed at doses ≥4 mg/kg with similar
relative reductions in PiZZ patients and HVs at 4 mg/kg and a maximum reduction
of 76.1% (HVs) vs. 78.8% (PiZZ) at this dose. The time it took for serum AAT to
return to baseline was similar for HV and PiZZ. There were no notable
differences between HV and PiZZ safety parameters. The study was terminated
early because of toxicity findings related to the delivery vehicle (ARC-EX1)
seen in a non-human primate study.
CONCLUSION: PiZZ patients and HVs responded similarly to ARC-AAT. Deep and
durable knockdown of hepatic AAT production based on observed reduction in serum
AAT concentrations was demonstrated.
LAY SUMMARY: Accumulation of abnormal proteins in the livers of patients with
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency may lead to decreased liver function and
potentially liver failure. Therapeutics targeting the production of these
abnormal proteins may be used to prevent or treat liver disease in patients with
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02363946.

Copyright © 2018 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2018.03.012
PMID: 29572094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
