---
reference_id: "PMID:18810765"
title: Crohn's disease--defect in innate defence.
authors:
- Gersemann M
- Wehkamp J
- Fellermann K
- Stange EF
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.14.5499
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crohn's disease--defect in innate defence.
**Authors:** Gersemann M, Wehkamp J, Fellermann K, Stange EF
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.14.5499](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.14.5499)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Sep 28;14(36):5499-503. doi: 10.3748/wjg.14.5499.

Crohn's disease--defect in innate defence.

Gersemann M(1), Wehkamp J, Fellermann K, Stange EF.

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine I, Robert Bosch Hospital, Auerbachstrasse 110, Stuttgart, 
Germany.

Crohn's disease may principally involve the whole gastrointestinal tract. Most 
commonly, the inflammation occurs in the small intestine and/or in the colon 
with stable disease location over the years. The pathogenesis of both disease 
phenotypes is complex, the likely primary defect lies in the innate rather than 
adaptive immunity, particularly in the chemical antimicrobial barrier of the 
mucosa. Crohn's ileitis is associated with a reduced expression of the Wnt 
signalling pathway transcription factor T-cell factor 4 (TCF4), which is 
regulating Paneth cell differentiation. As a result, the alpha-defensins and 
principal Paneth cell products HD5 and HD6 are deficiently expressed in ileal 
disease, independent of current inflammation. In contrast, Crohn's colitis is 
typically associated with an impaired induction of the beta-defensins HBD2 and 
HBD3 caused by fewer gene copy numbers in the gene locus of the beta-defensins 
on chromosome 8. This ileal and colonic defect in innate defence mediated by a 
deficiency of the protective alpha- and beta-defensins may enable the luminal 
microbes to invade the mucosa and trigger the inflammation. A better 
understanding of the exact molecular mechanisms behind ileal and colonic Crohn's 
disease may give rise to new therapeutic strategies based on a stimulation of 
the protective innate immune system.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.14.5499
PMCID: PMC2746334
PMID: 18810765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]