---
reference_id: "PMID:40110603"
title: "PCNSV With Spinal Cord Involvement: A 40-Year Single-Center Study."
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Brown RD Jr
- Christianson TJH
- Huston J 3rd
- Giannini C
- Hunder GG
journal: Stroke
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.049547
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Adult
- Aged
- "Spinal Cord/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/diagnostic imaging, pathology, complications, therapy"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Young Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Spinal Cord Diseases/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PCNSV With Spinal Cord Involvement: A 40-Year Single-Center Study.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Brown RD Jr, Christianson TJH, Huston J 3rd, Giannini C, Hunder GG
**Journal:** Stroke (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.049547](https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.049547)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2025 May;56(5):1149-1158. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.049547. Epub 2025
 Mar 20.

PCNSV With Spinal Cord Involvement: A 40-Year Single-Center Study.

Salvarani C(1)(2), Brown RD Jr(1), Christianson TJH(3), Huston J 3rd(4), 
Giannini C(5), Hunder GG(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology (C.S., R.D.B.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(2)Rheumatology Division, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia e Università di 
Modena e Reggio Emilia, Italy (C.S.).
(3)Department of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics (T.J.H.C.), Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN.
(4)Department of Radiology (J.H.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(5)Department of Anatomic Pathology (C.G.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(6)Division of Rheumatology (G.G.H.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

BACKGROUND: Spinal cord involvement is infrequently reported in primary central 
nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV). This study describes the clinical findings, 
therapeutic responses, and outcomes of spinal cord involvement in a large cohort 
of patients with PCNSV.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied 216 consecutive patients with PCNSV 
evaluated at the Mayo Clinic from 1983 to 2023. Spinal cord involvement was 
documented by histological examination or imaging. The clinical, laboratory, 
radiological, and pathological findings, along with management and outcomes, 
were compared between patients with and without spinal cord involvement.
RESULTS: Of 216 patients, 10 (4.6%) had spinal cord involvement, with cerebral 
involvement in 9 cases. One patient (0.5%) had isolated spinal cord vasculitis. 
Histological evidence of vasculitis was found in all 10, with necrotizing 
vasculitis in 5 (50%). Magnetic resonance imaging showed thoracic abnormalities 
in 8 patients, cervical spine involvement in 2, conus medullaris involvement in 
3, and cauda equina enhancement in 4. Compared with the 206 patients without 
spinal cord involvement, those with spinal cord vasculitis were more likely to 
present with paraparesis/tetraparesis (P<0.001) and necrotizing vasculitis 
(P=0.01) and less likely with hemiparesis (P=0.006) and granulomatous vasculitis 
(P=0.03). Patients with spinal cord involvement were more likely to have at 
least 1 relapse (P<0.001) or more (P<0.001). No differences between the 2 groups 
were observed regarding long-term remission, therapy response, and high 
disability scores (modified Rankin Scale score, 4-6) or death at last follow-up. 
Spinal cord involvement was associated with meningeal enhancement on brain 
imaging (odds ratio, 10.50) and the presence of lymphoma (odds ratio, 6.49), 
specifically Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosed simultaneously with PCNSV. Spinal 
involvement was negatively associated with increasing age (odds ratio, 0.64) and 
cerebral infarction on imaging (odds ratio, 0.08).
CONCLUSIONS: Spinal cord involvement defines a distinct subset of patients with 
PCNSV.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.049547
PMID: 40110603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.