---
reference_id: "PMID:35101074"
title: "Novel insights into PORCN mutations, associated phenotypes and pathophysiological aspects."
authors:
- Arlt A
- Kohlschmidt N
- Hentschel A
- Bartels E
- Groß C
- Töpf A
- Edem P
- Szabo N
- Sickmann A
- Meyer N
- Schara-Schmidt U
- Lau J
- Lochmüller H
- Horvath R
- Oktay Y
- Roos A
- Hiz S
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-02068-w
keywords:
- Acyltransferases/genetics
- Female
- "Focal Dermal Hypoplasia/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel insights into PORCN mutations, associated phenotypes and pathophysiological aspects.
**Authors:** Arlt A, Kohlschmidt N, Hentschel A, Bartels E, Groß C, Töpf A, Edem P, Szabo N, Sickmann A, Meyer N, Schara-Schmidt U, Lau J, Lochmüller H, Horvath R, Oktay Y, Roos A, Hiz S
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-021-02068-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-021-02068-w)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Jan 31;17(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-02068-w.

Novel insights into PORCN mutations, associated phenotypes and 
pathophysiological aspects.

Arlt A(1), Kohlschmidt N(1), Hentschel A(2), Bartels E(1), Groß C(1), Töpf A(3), 
Edem P(4), Szabo N(5), Sickmann A(2), Meyer N(6), Schara-Schmidt U(6), Lau J(7), 
Lochmüller H(7)(8)(9)(10), Horvath R(5), Oktay Y(4)(11)(12), Roos A(13)(14), Hiz 
S(11).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Genetics and Tumor Genetics, Bonn, Germany.
(2)Leibniz Institute for Analytical Sciences (ISAS), Dortmund, Germany.
(3)John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Institute of Genetic 
Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(4)Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, Dokuz Eylul University, 
Izmir, Turkey.
(5)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge School of 
Clinical Medicine, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Pediatric Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Duisburg-Essen, 
University Hospital, Essen, Germany.
(7)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(8)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, 
ON, Canada.
(9)Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
(10)Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG-CRG), Center for Genomic 
Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, 
Catalonia, Spain.
(11)Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center, Dokuz Eylul University Health Campus, 
Izmir, Turkey.
(12)Izmir International Biomedicine and Genome Institute, Dokuz Eylul 
University, Izmir, Turkey.
(13)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge School of 
Clinical Medicine, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK. 
roos@andreas-roos.de.
(14)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. roos@andreas-roos.de.

BACKGROUND: Goltz syndrome (GS) is a X-linked disorder defined by defects of 
mesodermal- and ectodermal-derived structures and caused by PORCN mutations. 
Features include striated skin-pigmentation, ocular and skeletal malformations 
and supernumerary or hypoplastic nipples. Generally, GS is associated with in 
utero lethality in males and most of the reported male patients show mosaicism 
(only three non-mosaic surviving males have been described so far). Also, 
precise descriptions of neurological deficits in GS are rare and less severe 
phenotypes might not only be caused by mosaicism but also by less pathogenic 
mutations suggesting the need of a molecular genetics and functional work-up of 
these rare variants.
RESULTS: We report two cases: one girl suffering from typical skin and skeletal 
abnormalities, developmental delay, microcephaly, thin corpus callosum, 
periventricular gliosis and drug-resistant epilepsy caused by a PORCN 
nonsense-mutation (c.283C > T, p.Arg95Ter). Presence of these combined 
neurological features indicates that CNS-vulnerability might be a guiding 
symptom in the diagnosis of GS patients. The other patient is a boy with a 
supernumerary nipple and skeletal anomalies but also, developmental delay, 
microcephaly, cerebral atrophy with delayed myelination and drug-resistant 
epilepsy as predominant features. Skin abnormalities were not observed. 
Genotyping revealed a novel PORCN missense-mutation (c.847G > C, p.Asp283His) 
absent in the Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) but also identified in his 
asymptomatic mother. Given that non-random X-chromosome inactivation was 
excluded in the mother, fibroblasts of the index had been analyzed for PORCN 
protein-abundance and -distribution, vulnerability against additional ER-stress 
burden as well as for protein secretion revealing changes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our combined findings may suggest incomplete penetrance for the 
p.Asp283His variant and provide novel insights into the molecular etiology of GS 
by adding impaired ER-function and altered protein secretion to the list of 
pathophysiological processes resulting in the clinical manifestation of GS.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-021-02068-w
PMCID: PMC8802438
PMID: 35101074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare not to have any competing 
conflict of interest.