---
reference_id: "PMID:32507758"
title: "[Evaluation of Semantic Dementia Patient]."
authors:
- Komori K
journal: Brain Nerve
year: '2020'
doi: 10.11477/mf.1416201570
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Evaluation of Semantic Dementia Patient].
**Authors:** Komori K
**Journal:** Brain Nerve (2020)
**DOI:** [10.11477/mf.1416201570](https://doi.org/10.11477/mf.1416201570)

## Content

1. Brain Nerve. 2020 Jun;72(6):593-610. doi: 10.11477/mf.1416201570.

[Evaluation of Semantic Dementia Patient].

[Article in Japanese]

Komori K(1).

Author information:
(1)Room of Psychology, Juzen-Yurinoki Hospital.

Semantic dementia (SD) is a clinical syndrome characterized by selective and 
progressive semantic memory impairment due to frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
(FTLD). Semantic memory disorders appear in every cognitive fields, be it 
language or recognition of familiar people and objects. Left-right asymmetry 
produces a distinctive clinical symptom of anterior temporal lobe atrophy. 
Progressive gogi (word-meaning) aphasia, i.e., word comprehension deficits with 
severe anomia, is prominent in left-dominant patients, whereas progressive 
prosopagnosia, i.e., difficulty recognizing familiar faces, is prominent in 
right-dominant patients. Loss of semantic memory of objects is observed in 
advanced stages of the disease. Behavioral symptoms are less prominent in the 
early stages; however, behavioral changes in patients with gogi aphasia are 
observed even in their initial visits. In addition to neuroimaging and 
neuropsychological evaluation of semantic memory, it will be useful if 
clinicians pay attention to behavioral changes of patients with gogi aphasia.

DOI: 10.11477/mf.1416201570
PMID: 32507758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]