---
reference_id: "PMID:36740841"
title: "A Case of Reversible Dementia? Dementia vs Delirium in Lyme Disease."
authors:
- Sanchini C
- Papia C
- Cutaia C
- Poloni TE
- Cesari M
journal: Ann Geriatr Med Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4235/agmr.22.0128
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case of Reversible Dementia? Dementia vs Delirium in Lyme Disease.
**Authors:** Sanchini C, Papia C, Cutaia C, Poloni TE, Cesari M
**Journal:** Ann Geriatr Med Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4235/agmr.22.0128](https://doi.org/10.4235/agmr.22.0128)

## Content

1. Ann Geriatr Med Res. 2023 Mar;27(1):80-82. doi: 10.4235/agmr.22.0128. Epub
2023  Feb 6.

A Case of Reversible Dementia? Dementia vs Delirium in Lyme Disease.

Sanchini C(1), Papia C(1)(2), Cutaia C(3), Poloni TE(3), Cesari M(4).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Fellowship Program, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(2)Istituto Golgi Redaelli, Milan, Italy.
(3)Istituto Golgi Redaelli, Abbiategrasso (MI), Italy.
(4)IRCCS Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.

Lyme disease is an uncommon cause of reversible dementia. A 75-year-old male 
patient, with a personal history of mild memory deficit, was admitted to 
Alzheimer's Disease Care Unit due to hallucinations, confusion and aggressive 
behavior unresponsive to antipsychotic therapy. A computed tomography (CT) scan 
of the brain was negative, while blood exams showed a rise in inflammatory 
parameters. A complete screening of infective diseases showed a positive 
serology for Borrelia burgdorferi, confirmed at Western blot. Even though the 
patient refused cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) exam, the brilliant clinical 
improvement after the appropriate antimicrobial therapy is strongly suggestive 
for a diagnosis of neuroborreliosis. This case report underlines the importance 
of a diagnostic approach to dementia, as to find out and treat the reversible 
causes.

DOI: 10.4235/agmr.22.0128
PMCID: PMC10073979
PMID: 36740841

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The researchers claim no 
conflicts of interest.