---
reference_id: "PMID:19427647"
title: "The epidemiology of eating disorders in six European countries: results of the ESEMeD-WMH project."
authors:
- Preti A
- Girolamo Gd
- Vilagut G
- Alonso J
- Graaf Rd
- Bruffaerts R
- Demyttenaere K
- Pinto-Meza A
- Haro JM
- Morosini P
- ESEMeD-WMH Investigators
journal: J Psychiatr Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.04.003
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Disability Evaluation
- Europe/epidemiology
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/classification, complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- Health Surveys
- Humans
- International Cooperation
- Male
- "Mental Disorders/complications, epidemiology"
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The epidemiology of eating disorders in six European countries: results of the ESEMeD-WMH project.
**Authors:** Preti A, Girolamo Gd, Vilagut G, Alonso J, Graaf Rd, Bruffaerts R, Demyttenaere K, Pinto-Meza A, Haro JM, Morosini P, ESEMeD-WMH Investigators
**Journal:** J Psychiatr Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.04.003)

## Content

1. J Psychiatr Res. 2009 Sep;43(14):1125-32. doi:
10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.04.003.  Epub 2009 May 8.

The epidemiology of eating disorders in six European countries: results of the
ESEMeD-WMH project.

Preti A(1), Girolamo Gd, Vilagut G, Alonso J, Graaf Rd, Bruffaerts R,
Demyttenaere K, Pinto-Meza A, Haro JM, Morosini P; ESEMeD-WMH Investigators.

Collaborators: Alonso J, Angermeyer M, Bernert S, Bruffaerts R, Brugha TS, de
Girolamo G, de Graaf R, Demyttenaere K, Gasquet I, Haro JM, Katz SJ, Kessler RC,
Kovess V, Lépine JP, Ormel J, Polidori G, Vilagut G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

Few data are available to estimate the prevalence of eating disorders (EDs) and
their correlates in the community. This paper reports data on EDs obtained in
the framework of the ESEMeD project, aimed at investigating the prevalence of
non-psychotic mental disorders in six European countries (Belgium, France,
Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Spain), using a new version of the Composite
International Diagnostic Interview. The ESEMeD study was a general population
cross-sectional household survey. In total, 21,425 respondents aged 18 or older
provided data for the project between January 2001 and August 2003. A subsample
(N=4139) underwent a detailed investigation on EDs. Lifetime estimated
prevalence of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge eating disorder,
sub-threshold binge eating disorder, and any binge eating were 0.48%, 0.51%,
1.12%, 0.72%, and 2.15%, respectively, and they were 3-8 times higher among
women for all EDs. However, since people under 18 were excluded from this study,
our prevalence should be taken as lower-bound estimate of real frequencies.
Indeed, cumulative lifetime prevalence analysis showed that the majority of
eating disorders had their initial onset between 10 and 20 years of age. Role
impairment and comorbidity with other mental disorders were highly common, yet
only small proportions of patients with a lifetime diagnosis of EDs requested
medical treatment. It still has to be proven whether early diagnostic
identification and access to specialized care can reduce the burden caused by
these disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.04.003
PMID: 19427647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
