---
reference_id: "PMID:22740598"
title: Exome sequencing reveals riboflavin transporter mutations as a cause of motor neuron disease.
authors:
- Johnson JO
- Gibbs JR
- Megarbane A
- Urtizberea JA
- Hernandez DG
- Foley AR
- Arepalli S
- Pandraud A
- Simón-Sánchez J
- Clayton P
- Reilly MM
- Muntoni F
- Abramzon Y
- Houlden H
- Singleton AB
journal: Brain
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/brain/aws161
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Bulbar Palsy, Progressive/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exome
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genotype
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Motor Neuron Disease/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing reveals riboflavin transporter mutations as a cause of motor neuron disease.
**Authors:** Johnson JO, Gibbs JR, Megarbane A, Urtizberea JA, Hernandez DG, Foley AR, Arepalli S, Pandraud A, Simón-Sánchez J, Clayton P, Reilly MM, Muntoni F, Abramzon Y, Houlden H, Singleton AB
**Journal:** Brain (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/aws161](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws161)

## Content

1. Brain. 2012 Sep;135(Pt 9):2875-82. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws161. Epub 2012 Jun
26.

Exome sequencing reveals riboflavin transporter mutations as a cause of motor 
neuron disease.

Johnson JO(1), Gibbs JR, Megarbane A, Urtizberea JA, Hernandez DG, Foley AR, 
Arepalli S, Pandraud A, Simón-Sánchez J, Clayton P, Reilly MM, Muntoni F, 
Abramzon Y, Houlden H, Singleton AB.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Ageing, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome was first described in 1894 as a rare 
neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive sensorineural deafness 
in combination with childhood amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Mutations in the 
gene, SLC52A3 (formerly C20orf54), one of three known riboflavin transporter 
genes, have recently been shown to underlie a number of severe cases of 
Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome; however, cases and families with this disease 
exist that do not appear to be caused by SLC52A3 mutations. We used a 
combination of linkage and exome sequencing to identify the disease causing 
mutation in an extended Lebanese Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere kindred, whose 
affected members were negative for SLC52A3 mutations. We identified a novel 
mutation in a second member of the riboflavin transporter gene family (gene 
symbol: SLC52A2) as the cause of disease in this family. The same mutation was 
identified in one additional subject, from 44 screened. Within this group of 44 
patients, we also identified two additional cases with SLC52A3 mutations, but 
none with mutations in the remaining member of this gene family, SLC52A1. We 
believe this strongly supports the notion that defective riboflavin transport 
plays an important role in Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome. Initial work has 
indicated that patients with SLC52A3 defects respond to riboflavin treatment 
clinically and biochemically. Clearly, this makes an excellent candidate therapy 
for the SLC52A2 mutation-positive patients identified here. Initial riboflavin 
treatment of one of these patients shows promising results.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws161
PMCID: PMC3437022
PMID: 22740598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]