---
reference_id: "PMID:22155431"
title: "Osteoarthritis-like changes in the heterozygous sedc mouse associated with the HtrA1-Ddr2-Mmp-13 degradative pathway: a new model of osteoarthritis."
authors:
- Holt DW
- Henderson ML
- Stockdale CE
- Farrell JT
- Kooyman DL
- Bridgewater LC
- Seegmiller RE
journal: Osteoarthritis Cartilage
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2011.11.008
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arthritis, Experimental/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cartilage, Articular/metabolism"
- Collagen Type II/genetics
- Collagen Type VI/metabolism
- Discoidin Domain Receptors
- Disease Progression
- Femur/pathology
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- High-Temperature Requirement A Serine Peptidase 1
- Male
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 13/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Mutation
- "Osteoarthritis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/congenital, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/metabolism
- "Receptors, Mitogen/metabolism"
- Serine Endopeptidases/metabolism
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Tibia/pathology
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoarthritis-like changes in the heterozygous sedc mouse associated with the HtrA1-Ddr2-Mmp-13 degradative pathway: a new model of osteoarthritis.
**Authors:** Holt DW, Henderson ML, Stockdale CE, Farrell JT, Kooyman DL, Bridgewater LC, Seegmiller RE
**Journal:** Osteoarthritis Cartilage (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.joca.2011.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2011.11.008)

## Content

1. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2012 May;20(5):430-439. doi: 
10.1016/j.joca.2011.11.008. Epub 2011 Nov 26.

Osteoarthritis-like changes in the heterozygous sedc mouse associated with the 
HtrA1-Ddr2-Mmp-13 degradative pathway: a new model of osteoarthritis.

Holt DW(1), Henderson ML(1), Stockdale CE(1), Farrell JT(1), Kooyman DL(1), 
Bridgewater LC(2), Seegmiller RE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham Young University, 
Provo, UT 84602, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University, 
Provo, UT 84602, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham Young University, 
Provo, UT 84602, USA; College of Dental Medicine, Roseman University of Health 
Sciences, South Jordan, UT 84095, USA. Electronic address: 
robert_seegmiller@byu.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that the spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia 
congenita (sedc) heterozygous (sedc/+) mouse, a COL2A1 mutant, is a model for 
the study of osteoarthritis (OA) in the absence of dwarfism and to investigate 
the presence of HtrA1, Ddr2, and Mmp-13 and their possible involvement in a 
universal mechanism leading to OA.
DESIGN: Whole mount skeletons of adult animals were analyzed to determine 
whether sedc/+ mice exhibit dwarfism. To characterize progression of 
osteoarthritic degeneration over time, knee and temporomandibular joints from 
sedc/+ and wild-type mice were analyzed histologically, and severity of 
articular cartilage degradation was graded using the Osteoarthritis Research 
Society International (OARSI) scoring system. Immunohistochemistry was used to 
detect changes in expression of HtrA1, Ddr2, and Mmp-13 in articular cartilage 
of knees.
RESULTS: As previously reported, the sedc/+ skeleton morphology was 
indistinguishable from wild type, and skeletal measurements revealed no 
significant differences. The sedc/+ mouse did, however, show significantly 
higher OARSI scores in knee (9, 12 and 18 months) and temporomandibular joints 
at all ages examined. Histological staining showed regions of proteoglycan 
degradation as early as 2 months in both temporomandibular and knee joints of 
the mutant. Cartilage fissuring and erosion were observed to begin between 2 and 
6 months in temporomandibular joints and 9 months in knee joints from sedc/+ 
mice. Immunohistochemistry of mutant knee articular cartilage showed increased 
expression of HtrA1, Ddr2, and Mmp-13 compared to wild type, which upregulation 
preceded fibrillation and fissuring of the articular surfaces.
CONCLUSIONS: With regard to skeletal morphology, the sedc/+ mouse appears 
phenotypically normal but develops premature OA as hypothesized. We conclude 
that the sedc/+ mouse is a useful model for the study of OA in individuals with 
overtly normal skeletal structure and a predisposition for articular cartilage 
degeneration.

Copyright © 2011 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joca.2011.11.008
PMID: 22155431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]