---
reference_id: "PMID:38864562"
title: Development of a Mouse Cardiac Sarcoidosis Model Using Carbon Nanotubes.
authors:
- Van Remortel S
- Risha Y
- Parent S
- Nair V
- Birnie DH
- Davis DR
journal: Adv Biol (Weinh)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/adbi.202400238
keywords:
- "Nanotubes, Carbon"
- Animals
- Sarcoidosis/pathology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- "Cardiomyopathies/pathology, etiology"
- Myocardium/pathology
- Fibrosis
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of a Mouse Cardiac Sarcoidosis Model Using Carbon Nanotubes.
**Authors:** Van Remortel S, Risha Y, Parent S, Nair V, Birnie DH, Davis DR
**Journal:** Adv Biol (Weinh) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/adbi.202400238](https://doi.org/10.1002/adbi.202400238)

## Content

1. Adv Biol (Weinh). 2024 Sep;8(9):e2400238. doi: 10.1002/adbi.202400238. Epub
2024  Jun 12.

Development of a Mouse Cardiac Sarcoidosis Model Using Carbon Nanotubes.

Van Remortel S(1), Risha Y(1), Parent S(1), Nair V(2), Birnie DH(1), Davis 
DR(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Division of Cardiology, Department of 
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, K1Y4W7, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Ottawa Hospital and Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, K1H8M5, Canada.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
K1H8M5, Canada.

Sarcoidosis, a granulomatous disorder of unknown etiology affecting multiple 
organs. It is often a benign disease but can have significant morbidity and 
mortality when the heart is involved (often presenting with clinical 
manifestations such as conduction irregularities and heart failure). This study 
addresses a critical gap in cardiac sarcoidosis (CS) research by developing a 
robust animal model. The absence of a reliable animal model for cardiac 
sarcoidosis is a significant obstacle in advancing understanding and treatment 
of this condition. The proposed model utilizes carbon nanotube injection and 
transverse aortic constriction as stressors. Intramyocardial injection of carbon 
nanotubes induces histiocytes typical of sarcoid granulomas in the heart but 
shows limited effects on fibrosis or cardiac function. Priming the immune system 
with transverse aortic constriction prior to intramyocardial injection of carbon 
nanotubes enhances cardiac fibrosis, diminishes cardiac function, and impairs 
cardiac conduction. This novel, easily executable model may serve as a valuable 
tool for disease profiling, biomarker identification, and therapeutic 
exploration.

© 2024 The Author(s). Advanced Biology published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/adbi.202400238
PMID: 38864562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]