---
reference_id: "PMID:26279205"
title: Haploinsufficiency of the NF-κB1 Subunit p50 in Common Variable Immunodeficiency.
authors:
- Fliegauf M
- Bryant VL
- Frede N
- Slade C
- Woon ST
- Lehnert K
- Winzer S
- Bulashevska A
- Scerri T
- Leung E
- Jordan A
- Keller B
- de Vries E
- Cao H
- Yang F
- Schäffer AA
- Warnatz K
- Browett P
- Douglass J
- Ameratunga RV
- van der Meer JW
- Grimbacher B
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.07.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haploinsufficiency of the NF-κB1 Subunit p50 in Common Variable Immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Fliegauf M, Bryant VL, Frede N, Slade C, Woon ST, Lehnert K, Winzer S, Bulashevska A, Scerri T, Leung E, Jordan A, Keller B, de Vries E, Cao H, Yang F, Schäffer AA, Warnatz K, Browett P, Douglass J, Ameratunga RV, van der Meer JW, Grimbacher B
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.07.008)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep 3;97(3):389-403. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.07.008.
Epub  2015 Aug 13.

Haploinsufficiency of the NF-κB1 Subunit p50 in Common Variable 
Immunodeficiency.

Fliegauf M(1), Bryant VL(2), Frede N(1), Slade C(3), Woon ST(4), Lehnert K(5), 
Winzer S(1), Bulashevska A(1), Scerri T(2), Leung E(6), Jordan A(7), Keller 
B(1), de Vries E(8), Cao H(9), Yang F(9), Schäffer AA(10), Warnatz K(1), Browett 
P(6), Douglass J(11), Ameratunga RV(4), van der Meer JW(12), Grimbacher B(13).

Author information:
(1)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg and 
University of Freiburg, Freiburg 79108, Germany.
(2)Division of Immunology, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia.
(3)Division of Immunology, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia; Department of Clinical Immunology and 
Allergy, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC 3050, Australia.
(4)Department of Virology and Immunology, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland 1023, 
New Zealand.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New 
Zealand.
(6)Auckland Cancer Society Research Centre and Molecular Medicine and Pathology 
Department, University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand.
(7)Department of Clinical Immunology, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland 1023, New 
Zealand.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Jeroen Bosch Hospital, 's-Hertogenbosch 5200 ME, 
the Netherlands.
(9)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, China.
(10)NCBI, NIH, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA.
(11)Division of Immunology, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia; Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, 
Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC 3050, Australia; Department of 
Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen 
6525 HP, the Netherlands.
(13)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg and 
University of Freiburg, Freiburg 79108, Germany; Institute of Immunity and 
Transplantation, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK. Electronic 
address: bodo.grimbacher@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), characterized by recurrent infections, 
is the most prevalent symptomatic antibody deficiency. In ∼90% of CVID-affected 
individuals, no genetic cause of the disease has been identified. In a 
Dutch-Australian CVID-affected family, we identified a NFKB1 heterozygous 
splice-donor-site mutation (c.730+4A>G), causing in-frame skipping of exon 8. 
NFKB1 encodes the transcription-factor precursor p105, which is processed to p50 
(canonical NF-κB pathway). The altered protein bearing an internal deletion 
(p.Asp191_Lys244delinsGlu; p105ΔEx8) is degraded, but is not processed to 
p50ΔEx8. Altered NF-κB1 proteins were also undetectable in a German 
CVID-affected family with a heterozygous in-frame exon 9 skipping mutation 
(c.835+2T>G) and in a CVID-affected family from New Zealand with a heterozygous 
frameshift mutation (c.465dupA) in exon 7. Given that residual p105 and 
p50—translated from the non-mutated alleles—were normal, and altered p50 
proteins were absent, we conclude that the CVID phenotype in these families is 
caused by NF-κB1 p50 haploinsufficiency.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.07.008
PMCID: PMC4564940
PMID: 26279205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]