---
reference_id: "PMID:24609834"
title: "Mechanisms in endocrinology: autoimmune thyroid disease: old and new players."
authors:
- Effraimidis G
- Wiersinga WM
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1530/EJE-14-0047
keywords:
- Environment
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Life Style
- Risk Factors
- "Stress, Psychological/complications, epidemiology, immunology"
- "Thyroiditis, Autoimmune/epidemiology, etiology, genetics"
- X Chromosome Inactivation/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms in endocrinology: autoimmune thyroid disease: old and new players.
**Authors:** Effraimidis G, Wiersinga WM
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EJE-14-0047](https://doi.org/10.1530/EJE-14-0047)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2014 Jun;170(6):R241-52. doi: 10.1530/EJE-14-0047. Epub 2014
 Mar 7.

Mechanisms in endocrinology: autoimmune thyroid disease: old and new players.

Effraimidis G(1), Wiersinga WM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and MetabolismAcademic Medical Center, Room 
F5-169, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam 1105AZ, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and MetabolismAcademic Medical Center, Room 
F5-169, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam 1105AZ, The 
Netherlands w.m.wiersinga@amc.uva.nl.

The last 10 years have seen some progress in understanding the etiology of 
autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD). The female preponderance can now be explained 
- at least in part - by fetal microchimerism and X-chromosome inactivation. The 
number of identified susceptibility genes for AITD is increasing (among others 
now including TSHR, TG, HLA, CTLA4, PTPN22, CD40, FCRL3, IL2RA, and FOXP3), but 
these genes together probably do not explain more than about 10% of the 
heritability of AITD. As twin studies indicate that genes contribute for 70% of 
AITD, it follows that there must be many more loci, each of them contributing a 
little. While the genetic studies have clarified why various autoimmune diseases 
so often cluster in the same patient, the molecular mechanism of action of these 
genetic polymorphisms (frequently located in introns) has hardly been explained. 
Polymorphisms in AITD susceptibility genes may become helpful in clinical 
practice, e.g. in assessing risk of recurrent Graves' hyperthyroidism (GH) after 
a course of antithyroid drugs. Moderate alcohol intake decreases the risk on 
overt GH and overt Hashimoto's hypothyroidism. Current smokers - as well known - 
are at increased risk for Graves' disease, but - surprisingly - at diminished 
risk for Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Low selenium and low vitamin D levels might 
increase the risk of developing AITD, but data are still inconclusive. Current 
options for preventive interventions in subjects at risk to develop AITD are 
very limited.

© 2014 European Society of Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-14-0047
PMID: 24609834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]