---
reference_id: "PMID:8361022"
title: "[Detection of human parvovirus B19 DNA using PCR and serological test using ELISA for diagnosis of infection]."
authors:
- Saito Y
- Ikegaya K
- Yano S
- Yamauchi T
- Hikiji K
journal: Rinsho Byori
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Detection of human parvovirus B19 DNA using PCR and serological test using ELISA for diagnosis of infection].
**Authors:** Saito Y, Ikegaya K, Yano S, Yamauchi T, Hikiji K
**Journal:** Rinsho Byori (1993)

## Content

1. Rinsho Byori. 1993 Feb;41(2):203-8.

[Detection of human parvovirus B19 DNA using PCR and serological test using 
ELISA for diagnosis of infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Saito Y(1), Ikegaya K, Yano S, Yamauchi T, Hikiji K.

Author information:
(1)SRL, Inc., Hachioji Labs.

The development of a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method for detection of 
human parvovirus B19 DNA and serological test of clinical specimens using ELISA 
is described. Of 43 serum (or plasma) samples, 29 were found to be positive for 
B19 DNA using the PCR, anti-IgM was detected in 16 specimens and anti-IgG in 25. 
In all specimens confirmed to contain B19-specific IgM, the presence of B19 DNA 
was demonstrated. Furthermore, B19 DNA was demonstrated in a patient with B19 
infection for a longer period of time than was anti-IgM. In addition, we discuss 
the diagnosis of B19 infection using anti-IgG, in the acute stage and 
convalescent stage. In fetal infection, the PCR method provides sufficient 
detection of B19 DNA in cord blood, amniotic fluid, ascitic fluid, and fetal 
pericardial effusion and pleural effusion.

PMID: 8361022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]