---
reference_id: "PMID:30602030"
title: The phenotypic landscape of a Tbc1d24 mutant mouse includes convulsive seizures resembling human early infantile epileptic encephalopathy.
authors:
- Tona R
- Chen W
- Nakano Y
- Reyes LD
- Petralia RS
- Wang YX
- Starost MF
- Wafa TT
- Morell RJ
- Cravedi KD
- du Hoffmann J
- Miyoshi T
- Munasinghe JP
- Fitzgerald TS
- Chudasama Y
- Omori K
- Pierpaoli C
- Banfi B
- Dong L
- Belyantseva IA
- Friedman TB
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy445
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Biomarkers
- Brain/metabolism
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "GTPase-Activating Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Loci
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation
- Neurons/metabolism
- Phenotype
- Protein Binding
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- "Spasms, Infantile/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The phenotypic landscape of a Tbc1d24 mutant mouse includes convulsive seizures resembling human early infantile epileptic encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Tona R, Chen W, Nakano Y, Reyes LD, Petralia RS, Wang YX, Starost MF, Wafa TT, Morell RJ, Cravedi KD, du Hoffmann J, Miyoshi T, Munasinghe JP, Fitzgerald TS, Chudasama Y, Omori K, Pierpaoli C, Banfi B, Dong L, Belyantseva IA, Friedman TB
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy445](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy445)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 May 1;28(9):1530-1547. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy445.

The phenotypic landscape of a Tbc1d24 mutant mouse includes convulsive seizures 
resembling human early infantile epileptic encephalopathy.

Tona R(1)(2), Chen W(1), Nakano Y(3), Reyes LD(4), Petralia RS(5), Wang YX(5), 
Starost MF(6), Wafa TT(7), Morell RJ(8), Cravedi KD(9), du Hoffmann J(9), 
Miyoshi T(1), Munasinghe JP(10), Fitzgerald TS(7), Chudasama Y(9)(11), Omori 
K(2), Pierpaoli C(4), Banfi B(3), Dong L(12), Belyantseva IA(1), Friedman TB(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders, Porter Neuroscience Research Center, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(4)Quantitative Medical Imaging Section, National Institute of Biomedical 
Imaging and Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Advanced Imaging Core, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication 
Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)Division of Veterinary Resources, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, USA.
(7)Mouse Auditory Testing Core Facility, National Institute on Deafness and 
Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)Genomics and Computational Biology Core, National Institute on Deafness and 
Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(9)Rodent Behavioral Core, National Institute of Mental Health, Porter 
Neuroscience Research Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(10)Mouse Imaging Facility, In vivo NMR Center, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(11)Section on Behavioral Neuroscience, National Institute of Mental Health, 
Porter Neuroscience Research Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, USA.
(12)Genetic Engineering Core, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Epilepsy, deafness, onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy and intellectual disability 
are associated with a spectrum of mutations of human TBC1D24. The mechanisms 
underlying TBC1D24-associated disorders and the functions of TBC1D24 are not 
well understood. Using CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing, we engineered a mouse with a 
premature translation stop codon equivalent to human S324Tfs*3, a recessive 
mutation of TBC1D24 associated with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 
(EIEE). Homozygous S324Tfs*3 mice have normal auditory and vestibular functions 
but show an abrupt onset of spontaneous seizures at postnatal day 15 
recapitulating human EIEE. The S324Tfs*3 variant is located in an alternatively 
spliced micro-exon encoding six perfectly conserved amino acids incorporated 
postnatally into TBC1D24 protein due to a micro-exon utilization switch. During 
embryonic and early postnatal development, S324Tfs*3 homozygotes produce 
predominantly the shorter wild-type TBC1D24 protein isoform that omits the 
micro-exon. S324Tfs*3 homozygotes show an abrupt onset of seizures at P15 that 
correlates with a developmental switch to utilization of the micro-exon. A mouse 
deficient for alternative splice factor SRRM3 impairs incorporation of the 
Tbc1d24 micro-exon. Wild-type Tbc1d24 mRNA is abundantly expressed in the 
hippocampus using RNAscope in situ hybridization. Immunogold electron microscopy 
using a TBC1D24-specific antibody revealed that TBC1D24 is associated with 
clathrin-coated vesicles and synapses of hippocampal neurons, suggesting a 
crucial role of TBC1D24 in vesicle trafficking important for neuronal signal 
transmission. This is the first characterization of a mouse model of human 
TBC1D24-associated EIEE that can now be used to screen for antiepileptogenic 
drugs ameliorating TBCID24 seizure disorders.

Published by Oxford University Press 2019.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy445
PMCID: PMC6466106
PMID: 30602030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]