---
reference_id: "PMID:36804019"
title: "Acute promyelocytic leukemia in childhood and adolescence: treatment results of a modified AIDA protocol at a Brazilian center."
authors:
- Breviglieri CNM
- de Almeida MTA
- Neto GZ
- Teixeira RAP
- Odone-Filho V
- Cristofani LM
journal: Hematol Transfus Cell Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.htct.2022.09.1276
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute promyelocytic leukemia in childhood and adolescence: treatment results of a modified AIDA protocol at a Brazilian center.
**Authors:** Breviglieri CNM, de Almeida MTA, Neto GZ, Teixeira RAP, Odone-Filho V, Cristofani LM
**Journal:** Hematol Transfus Cell Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.htct.2022.09.1276](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.htct.2022.09.1276)

## Content

1. Hematol Transfus Cell Ther. 2023 Jul;45 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):S126-S130. doi:
10.1016/j.htct.2022.09.1276. Epub 2022 Nov 7.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia in childhood and adolescence: treatment results of
a modified AIDA protocol at a Brazilian center.

Breviglieri CNM(1), de Almeida MTA(2), Neto GZ(2), Teixeira RAP(2), Odone-Filho
V(2), Cristofani LM(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto da Criança do Instituto do Tratamento do Câncer Infantil, Hospital
das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, (ICr ITACI
FMUSP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
carla.nolasco@prestadores.hsamaritano.com.br.
(2)Instituto da Criança do Instituto do Tratamento do Câncer Infantil, Hospital
das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, (ICr ITACI
FMUSP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia currently presents an excellent chance of cure with
protocols based on all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) and anthracycline or only
differentiation agents. However, high early mortality rates continue to be
reported METHODS: Between 2000 and 2018, patients were enrolled and
retrospectively analyzed by medical records. A modified AIDA protocol, with a
1-year shortening of the treatment duration, reduction in the number of drugs
and a strategy to reduce early mortality by the postponement of the initiation
of anthracyclines were employed. Overall and event-free survival rates and
toxicity were analyzed RESULTS: Thirty-two patients were enrolled, of whom 56%
were female, with a median age of 12 years and 34% belonged to the high-risk
group. Two patients had the hypogranular variant and three had another
cytogenetic alteration, in addition to the t(15;17). The median start of the
first anthracycline dose was 7 days. There were two early deaths (6%) due to
central nervous system (CNS) bleeding. All patients achieved molecular remission
after the consolidation phase. Two children relapsed and were rescued by arsenic
trioxide and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The presence of
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) at diagnosis (p = 0.03) was the
only factor with survival impact. The five-year event-free survival (EFS) was
84% and 5-year overall survival (OS) was 90% CONCLUSION: The survival results
were comparable to those found in the AIDA protocol, with a low rate of early
mortality in relation to the Brazilian reality.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier España, S.L.U.

DOI: 10.1016/j.htct.2022.09.1276
PMCID: PMC10433314
PMID: 36804019

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest.
