---
reference_id: "PMID:33068755"
title: "Deficit of human ornithine aminotransferase in gyrate atrophy: Molecular, cellular, and clinical aspects."
authors:
- Montioli R
- Bellezza I
- Desbats MA
- Borri Voltattorni C
- Salviati L
- Cellini B
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2020.140555
keywords:
- Arginine/metabolism
- "Choroid/enzymology, pathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10"
- "Coenzymes/administration & dosage"
- Diet/methods
- Gene Expression
- "Gyrate Atrophy/diet therapy, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Ornithine/metabolism
- "Ornithine-Oxo-Acid Transaminase/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- Protein Multimerization
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Pyridoxal Phosphate/administration & dosage"
- "Retina/enzymology, pathology"
- "Vitamin B 6/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deficit of human ornithine aminotransferase in gyrate atrophy: Molecular, cellular, and clinical aspects.
**Authors:** Montioli R, Bellezza I, Desbats MA, Borri Voltattorni C, Salviati L, Cellini B
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbapap.2020.140555](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2020.140555)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom. 2021 Jan;1869(1):140555. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2020.140555. Epub 2020 Oct 14.

Deficit of human ornithine aminotransferase in gyrate atrophy: Molecular,
cellular, and clinical aspects.

Montioli R(1), Bellezza I(2), Desbats MA(3), Borri Voltattorni C(1), Salviati
L(4), Cellini B(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, Section of
Biological Chemistry, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Physiology and Biochemistry,
University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Woman and Child Health, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Woman and Child Health, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy. Electronic address: leonardo.salviati@unipd.it.
(5)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Physiology and Biochemistry,
University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy. Electronic address:
barbara.cellini@unipg.it.

Gyrate Atrophy (GA) of the choroid and retina (MIM# 258870) is an autosomal
recessive disorder due to mutations of the OAT gene encoding
ornithine-delta-aminotransferase (OAT), associated with progressive retinal
deterioration and blindness. The disease has a theoretical global incidence of
approximately 1:1,500,000. OAT is mainly involved in ornithine catabolism in
adults, thus explaining the hyperornithinemia as hallmark of the disease.
Patients are treated with an arginine-restricted diet, to limit ornithine load,
or the administration of Vitamin B6, a precursor of the OAT coenzyme pyridoxal
phosphate. Although the clinical and genetic aspects of GA are known for many
years, the enzymatic phenotype of pathogenic variants and their response to
Vitamin B6, as well as the molecular mechanisms explaining retinal damage, are
poorly clarified. Herein, we provide an overview of the current knowledge on the
biochemical properties of human OAT and on the molecular, cellular, and clinical
aspects of GA.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2020.140555
PMID: 33068755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
