---
reference_id: "PMID:38470203"
title: Classification of Congenital Leptin Deficiency.
authors:
- von Schnurbein J
- Zorn S
- Nunziata A
- Brandt S
- Moepps B
- Funcke JB
- Hussain K
- Farooqi IS
- Fischer-Posovszky P
- Wabitsch M
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgae149
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leptin/deficiency, genetics, blood"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classification of Congenital Leptin Deficiency.
**Authors:** von Schnurbein J, Zorn S, Nunziata A, Brandt S, Moepps B, Funcke JB, Hussain K, Farooqi IS, Fischer-Posovszky P, Wabitsch M
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgae149](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgae149)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2024 Sep 16;109(10):2602-2616. doi:
10.1210/clinem/dgae149.

Classification of Congenital Leptin Deficiency.

von Schnurbein J(1), Zorn S(1), Nunziata A(1), Brandt S(1), Moepps B(2), Funcke
JB(1)(3), Hussain K(4), Farooqi IS(5), Fischer-Posovszky P(1), Wabitsch M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Paediatrics
and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center Ulm, Ulm, 89075, Germany.
(2)Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Toxicology and
Pharmacology of Natural Products, Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, 89075,
Germany.
(3)Touchstone Diabetes Center, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Sidra Medicine, OPC,
C6-340, PO Box 26999, Doha, Qatar.
(5)Wellcome Trust-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science and NIHR Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.

PURPOSE: Biallelic pathogenic leptin gene variants cause severe early-onset
obesity usually associated with low or undetectable circulating leptin levels.
Recently, variants have been described resulting in secreted mutant forms of the
hormone leptin with either biologically inactive or antagonistic properties.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic literature research supplemented by
unpublished data from patients at our center as well as new in vitro analyses to
provide a systematic classification of congenital leptin deficiency based on the
molecular and functional characteristics of the underlying leptin variants and
investigated the correlation of disease subtype with severity of the clinical
phenotype.
RESULTS: A total of 28 distinct homozygous leptin variants were identified in
148 patients. The identified variants can be divided into 3 different subtypes
of congenital leptin deficiency: classical hormone deficiency (21 variants in
128 patients), biologically inactive hormone (3 variants in 12 patients), and
antagonistic hormone (3 variants in 7 patients). Only 1 variant (n = 1 patient)
remained unclassified. Patients with biological inactive leptin have a higher
percentage of 95th body mass index percentile compared to patients with
classical hormone deficiency. While patients with both classical hormone
deficiency and biological inactive hormone can be treated with the same starting
dose of metreleptin, patients with antagonistic hormone need a variant-tailored
treatment approach to overcome the antagonistic properties of the variant
leptin.
MAIN CONCLUSION: Categorization of leptin variants based on molecular and
functional characteristics helps to determine the most adequate approach to
treatment of patients with congenital leptin deficiency.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgae149
PMCID: PMC11403321
PMID: 38470203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
