---
reference_id: "PMID:36138404"
title: Long-term treatment patterns and survival in metastatic breast cancer by intrinsic subtypes - an observational cohort study in Sweden.
authors:
- Lindman H
- Wiklund F
- Andersen KK
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-022-10098-1
keywords:
- Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- Breast Neoplasms/metabolism
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Prognosis
- Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases/metabolism
- "Receptors, Estrogen/metabolism"
- "Receptors, Progesterone/metabolism"
- Retrospective Studies
- Sweden/epidemiology
- Triple Negative Breast Neoplasms/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term treatment patterns and survival in metastatic breast cancer by intrinsic subtypes - an observational cohort study in Sweden.
**Authors:** Lindman H, Wiklund F, Andersen KK
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-022-10098-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-022-10098-1)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2022 Sep 22;22(1):1006. doi: 10.1186/s12885-022-10098-1.

Long-term treatment patterns and survival in metastatic breast cancer by 
intrinsic subtypes - an observational cohort study in Sweden.

Lindman H(1), Wiklund F(2), Andersen KK(3).

Author information:
(1)Uppsala University Hospital, SE-753 09, Uppsala, Sweden. 
henrik.lindman@igp.uu.se.
(2)Statisticon AB, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)AstraZeneca Nordic, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Longitudinal, real-world data on the management of metastatic breast 
cancer is increasingly relevant to understand breast cancer care in routine 
clinical practice. Yet such data are scarce, particularly beyond second- and 
third-line treatment strategies. This study, therefore, examined both the 
long-term treatment patterns and overall survival (OS) in a regional Swedish 
cohort of female patients with metastatic breast cancer stratified by subtype in 
routine clinical practice during a recent eight-year period and correlation to 
current treatment guidelines.
METHODS: Consecutive female patients with metastatic breast cancer  clinically 
managed at Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden, during 2009-2016 and 
followed until the end of September, 2017 (n = 370) were included and, where 
possible, classified as having one of five, intrinsic subtypes: Luminal A; 
Luminal B; human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive (HER2+)/ estrogen 
receptor-positive (ER+); HER2+/estrogen receptor-negative (ER-); or triple 
negative breast cancer (TNBC). Treatment patterns and OS were estimated by 
subtype using time-to-event methods.
RESULTS: A total of 352/370 patients with metastatic breast cancer (mean age 
67.6 years) could be subtyped: 118 (34%) were Luminal A, 119 (34%) Luminal B, 31 
(8%) HER2+/ER-, 38 (11%) HER2+/Luminal, and 46 (13%) TNBC. The median number of 
metastatic treatment lines was 3. Most patients were on active treatment during 
follow-up (80% of the observation period), except for patients with TNBC who 
were on treatment for 60% of the observation time. Overall, 67% of patients died 
whilst on treatment. Among all patients (n = 370), median OS was 32.5 months 
(95% CI = 28.2-35.7). The 5-year survival rate was highest for HER2+/Luminal 
(46%) patients, followed by Luminal B (29%), Luminal A (28%), HER2+/ER- (21%), 
and TNBC (7%). Increasing age and number of metastatic sites also predicted 
worse survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Metastatic breast cancer patients in Sweden, irrespective of 
subtype, generally receive active treatment until time of death. Survival varies 
considerably across subtypes and is also associated with patient 
characteristics. Regardless of differences in treatment patterns for Luminal A 
and B patients, long-term OS was the same.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-022-10098-1
PMCID: PMC9494782
PMID: 36138404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.L. declares no competing interests. F.W. is an 
employee of Statisticon AB, of which AstraZeneca is a client. K.K.A. was a 
full-time employee of the study sponsor AstraZeneca at the time of the study.