---
reference_id: "PMID:35945798"
title: "Alternating hemiplegia of childhood: a distinct clinical entity and ATP1A3-related disorders: A narrative review."
authors:
- Pavone P
- Pappalardo XG
- Ruggieri M
- Falsaperla R
- Parano E
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000029413
keywords:
- Brain Diseases
- Cerebellar Ataxia
- Child
- Hemiplegia/therapy
- Humans
- Infant
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alternating hemiplegia of childhood: a distinct clinical entity and ATP1A3-related disorders: A narrative review.
**Authors:** Pavone P, Pappalardo XG, Ruggieri M, Falsaperla R, Parano E
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000029413](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000029413)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Aug 5;101(31):e29413. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000029413.

Alternating hemiplegia of childhood: a distinct clinical entity and 
ATP1A3-related disorders: A narrative review.

Pavone P(1), Pappalardo XG(2)(3), Ruggieri M(4), Falsaperla R(5), Parano E(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Clinic, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University Hospital AOU "Policlinico-Vittorio Emanuele", Catania, Italy.
(2)Unit of Catania, National Council of Research, Institute for Research and 
Biomedical Innovation (IRIB), Catania, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences (BIOMETEC), University 
of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(4)Unit of Rare Diseases of the Nervous System in Childhood, Section of 
Pediatrics and Child Neuropsychiatry, Department of Catania, Italy, AOU 
"Policlinico PO San Marco, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(5)Unit of Pediatrics, Neonatology and Neonatal Intensive Care, and Pediatric 
Emergency, AOU "Policlinico", PO "San Marco", University of Catania, Catania, 
Italy.

Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood (AHC) is a rare disorder with onset in the 
first 18 months of life characterized by stereotyped paroxysmal manifestations 
of tonic and dystonic attacks, nystagmus with other oculomotor abnormalities, 
respiratory and autonomic dysfunctions. AHC is often associated with epileptic 
seizures and developmental delay. Hemiplegic paroxysm is the most remarkable 
symptom, although AHC includes a large series of clinical manifestations that 
interfere with the disease course. No cure is available and the treatment 
involves many specialists and therapies. Flunarizine is the most commonly used 
drug for reducing the frequency and intensity of paroxysmal events. Mutations in 
ATP1A2, particularly in ATP1A3, are the main genes responsible for AHC. Some 
disorders caused by ATP1A3 variants have been defined as ATP1A3-related 
disorders, including rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism, cerebellar ataxia, pes 
cavus, optic atrophy, sensorineural hearing loss, early infant epileptic 
encephalopathy, child rapid-onset ataxia, and relapsing encephalopathy with 
cerebellar ataxia. Recently, the term ATP1A3 syndrome has been identified as a 
fever-induced paroxysmal weakness and encephalopathy, slowly progressive 
cerebellar ataxia, childhood-onset schizophrenia/autistic spectrum disorder, 
paroxysmal dyskinesia, cerebral palsy/spastic paraparesis, dystonia, 
dysmorphism, encephalopathy, MRI abnormalities without hemiplegia, and 
congenital hydrocephalus. Herewith, we discussed about historical annotations of 
AHC, symptoms, signs and associated morbidities, diagnosis and differential 
diagnosis, treatment, prognosis, and genetics. We also reported on the 
ATP1A3-related disorders and ATP1A3 syndrome, as 2 recently established and 
expanded genetic clinical entities.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000029413
PMCID: PMC9351909
PMID: 35945798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to declare.