---
reference_id: "PMID:31730477"
title: "Evaluation of earlier versus later dietary management in long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase or mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency: a systematic review."
authors:
- Fraser H
- Geppert J
- Johnson R
- Johnson S
- Connock M
- Clarke A
- Taylor-Phillips S
- Stinton C
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1226-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of earlier versus later dietary management in long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase or mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Fraser H, Geppert J, Johnson R, Johnson S, Connock M, Clarke A, Taylor-Phillips S, Stinton C
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1226-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1226-y)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Nov 15;14(1):258. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1226-y.

Evaluation of earlier versus later dietary management in long-chain 
3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase or mitochondrial trifunctional protein 
deficiency: a systematic review.

Fraser H(1), Geppert J(2), Johnson R(3), Johnson S(4), Connock M(2), Clarke 
A(2), Taylor-Phillips S(2), Stinton C(2).

Author information:
(1)Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK. 
H.Fraser@warwick.ac.uk.
(2)Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK.
(3)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Coventry University, Coventry, CV1 5RW, 
UK.
(4)Warwick Library, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP) and long-chain 
3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiencies are rare fatty acid 
β-oxidation disorders. Without dietary management the conditions are 
life-threatening. We conducted a systematic review to investigate whether 
pre-symptomatic dietary management following newborn screening provides better 
outcomes than treatment following symptomatic detection.
METHODS: We searched Web of Science, Medline, Pre-Medline, Embase and the 
Cochrane Library up to 23rd April 2018. Two reviewers independently screened 
titles, abstracts and full texts for eligibility and quality appraised the 
studies. Data extraction was performed by one reviewer and checked by another.
RESULTS: We included 13 articles out of 7483 unique records. The 13 articles 
reported on 11 patient groups, including 174 people with LCHAD deficiency, 18 
people with MTP deficiency and 12 people with undifferentiated LCHAD/MTP 
deficiency. Study quality was moderate to weak in all studies. Included studies 
suggested fewer heart and liver problems in screen-detected patients, but 
inconsistent results for mortality. Follow up analyses compared long-term 
outcomes of (1) pre-symptomatically versus symptomatically treated patients, (2) 
screened versus unscreened patients, and (3) asymptomatic screen-detected, 
symptomatic screen-detected, and clinically diagnosed patients in each study. 
For follow up analyses 1 and 2, we found few statistically significant 
differences in the long-term outcomes. For follow up analysis 3 we found a 
significant difference for only one comparison, in the incidence of 
cardiomyopathy between the three groups.
CONCLUSIONS: There is some evidence that dietary management following 
screen-detection might be associated with a lower incidence of some LCHAD and 
MTP deficiency-related complications. However, the evidence base is limited by 
small study sizes, quality issues and risk of confounding. An internationally 
collaborative research effort is needed to fully examine the risks and the 
benefits to pre-emptive dietary management with particular attention paid to 
disease severity and treatment group.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1226-y
PMCID: PMC6858661
PMID: 31730477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.