---
reference_id: "PMID:36652172"
title: "Osimertinib for EGFR-Mutant Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Central Nervous System Metastases: Current Evidence and Future Perspectives on Therapeutic Strategies."
authors:
- Popat S
- Ahn MJ
- Ekman S
- Leighl NB
- Ramalingam SS
- Reungwetwattana T
- Siva S
- Tsuboi M
- Wu YL
- Yang JC
journal: Target Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11523-022-00941-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/pathology"
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Aniline Compounds/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/drug therapy, secondary"
- ErbB Receptors
- Central Nervous System/pathology
- Mutation
- Acrylamides
- Indoles
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osimertinib for EGFR-Mutant Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Central Nervous System Metastases: Current Evidence and Future Perspectives on Therapeutic Strategies.
**Authors:** Popat S, Ahn MJ, Ekman S, Leighl NB, Ramalingam SS, Reungwetwattana T, Siva S, Tsuboi M, Wu YL, Yang JC
**Journal:** Target Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11523-022-00941-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11523-022-00941-7)

## Content

1. Target Oncol. 2023 Jan;18(1):9-24. doi: 10.1007/s11523-022-00941-7. Epub 2023
Jan 18.

Osimertinib for EGFR-Mutant Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Central Nervous System
Metastases: Current Evidence and Future Perspectives on Therapeutic Strategies.

Popat S(1)(2), Ahn MJ(3), Ekman S(4)(5), Leighl NB(6), Ramalingam SS(7),
Reungwetwattana T(8), Siva S(9)(10), Tsuboi M(11), Wu YL(12), Yang JC(13).

Author information:
(1)Lung Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK. sanjay.popat@rmh.nhs.uk.
(2)Division of Clinical Studies, Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.
sanjay.popat@rmh.nhs.uk.
(3)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Theme Cancer, Thoracic Oncology Center, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Medical Oncology, Princess Margaret Cancer Center, Toronto, Canada.
(7)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(8)Division of Medical Oncology, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.
(9)Department of Radiation Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne,
Australia.
(10)Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia.
(11)Department of Thoracic Surgery and Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital
East, Kashiwa, Japan.
(12)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital and
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(13)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital Cancer Center,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Target Oncol. 2023 Mar;18(2):311. doi: 10.1007/s11523-023-00947-9.

Central nervous system (CNS) metastases are common in non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) and associated with poor prognosis and high disease burden. Effective
options are needed to treat CNS metastases, and delay or prevent their
formation. For epidermal growth factor receptor mutation-positive (EGFRm)
advanced NSCLC and brain metastases, upfront EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) are recommended by the joint European Association of
Neuro-Oncology-European Society for Medical Oncology and experts. While
early-generation EGFR-TKIs have limited CNS efficacy, the third-generation,
irreversible, EGFR-TKI osimertinib has potent efficacy in NSCLC CNS metastases.
This review discusses the CNS data of osimertinib in the context of therapeutic
strategies and future prospects based on expert review of published literature
and relevant clinical, real-world, and ongoing studies in this setting.
Osimertinib penetrates the blood-brain barrier and achieves greater exposure in
the brain compared with other EGFR-TKIs. Osimertinib has demonstrated CNS
efficacy, including in leptomeningeal metastases, in EGFRm advanced disease. In
EGFRm stage IB-IIIA NSCLC, adjuvant osimertinib reduced CNS disease recurrence
versus placebo. The burden and poor prognosis of CNS metastases necessitate more
therapeutic options for their management and reduced risk of recurrence in
patients with EGFRm NSCLC. Clinical studies are ongoing in advanced disease to
investigate osimertinib combinations with chemotherapy/radiation therapy and
optimal treatment post-CNS progression with osimertinib. Further prospective
research evaluating treatments using CNS-specific endpoints and evaluating CNS
resistance is needed to improve outcomes for patients with CNS metastases.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-022-00941-7
PMID: 36652172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
