---
reference_id: "PMID:34107524"
title: "Effectiveness of Physical Therapy on Ataxia-Telangiectasia: A Case Report."
authors:
- Unes S
- Tuncdemir M
- Eroglu-Ertugrul NG
- Kerem Gunel M
journal: Pediatr Phys Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/PEP.0000000000000813
keywords:
- Ataxia Telangiectasia
- Child
- Exercise Therapy
- Female
- Humans
- Physical Therapy Modalities
- Postural Balance
- Quality of Life
- Video Games
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effectiveness of Physical Therapy on Ataxia-Telangiectasia: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Unes S, Tuncdemir M, Eroglu-Ertugrul NG, Kerem Gunel M
**Journal:** Pediatr Phys Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PEP.0000000000000813](https://doi.org/10.1097/PEP.0000000000000813)

## Content

1. Pediatr Phys Ther. 2021 Jul 1;33(3):E103-E107. doi: 
10.1097/PEP.0000000000000813.

Effectiveness of Physical Therapy on Ataxia-Telangiectasia: A Case Report.

Unes S(1), Tuncdemir M, Eroglu-Ertugrul NG, Kerem Gunel M.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation (Mr Unes, Ms Tuncdemir, and Dr 
Kerem Gunel), Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey; Department of Pediatric 
Neurology (Dr Eroglu-Ertugrul), Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, 
Turkey.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: This case report investigated the benefits of a 12-week 
physical therapy program for a child with ataxia-telangiectasia (AT).
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 9-year-old girl with a diagnosis of AT participated. The 
physical therapy program consisted of balance and strength exercise and Wii Fit 
Balance-based video games training with a pediatric physical therapist for 12 
weeks.
MEASUREMENTS: The motor performance, Gross Motor Function Measurement (GMFM), 
Pediatric Berg Balance Scale (PBBS), Trunk Control Measurement Scale (TCMS), 
participation as measured by the Life Habits Questionnaire (LIFE-H), and the 
Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL).
OUTCOMES: Positive changes were observed in the TCMS, PBBS, GMFM, and motor 
performance, participation, and quality of life.
CONCLUSIONS: Notable improvements were observed in both body structure and 
function, and activities and participation level.
WHAT THIS ADDS TO EVIDENCE: This case report is the first to support the 
effectiveness of physical therapy in a child with AT.

Copyright © 2021 Academy of Pediatric Physical Therapy of the American Physical 
Therapy Association.

DOI: 10.1097/PEP.0000000000000813
PMID: 34107524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.