---
reference_id: "PMID:8595482"
title: Landau-Kleffner syndrome. Treatment with subpial intracortical transection.
authors:
- Morrell F
- Whisler WW
- Smith MC
- Hoeppner TJ
- de Toledo-Morrell L
- Pierre-Louis SJ
- Kanner AM
- Buelow JM
- Ristanovic R
- Bergen D
journal: Brain
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1093/brain/118.6.1529
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cerebral Cortex/surgery
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electroencephalography
- Female
- Humans
- "Landau-Kleffner Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology, surgery"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Magnetoencephalography
- Male
- Methohexital
- Morbidity
- Pia Mater
- Postoperative Period
- Speech
- Time Factors
- Treatment Failure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Landau-Kleffner syndrome. Treatment with subpial intracortical transection.
**Authors:** Morrell F, Whisler WW, Smith MC, Hoeppner TJ, de Toledo-Morrell L, Pierre-Louis SJ, Kanner AM, Buelow JM, Ristanovic R, Bergen D
**Journal:** Brain (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/118.6.1529](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/118.6.1529)

## Content

1. Brain. 1995 Dec;118 ( Pt 6):1529-46. doi: 10.1093/brain/118.6.1529.

Landau-Kleffner syndrome. Treatment with subpial intracortical transection.

Morrell F(1), Whisler WW, Smith MC, Hoeppner TJ, de Toledo-Morrell L, 
Pierre-Louis SJ, Kanner AM, Buelow JM, Ristanovic R, Bergen D, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Science, Rush-Presbyterian-St Luke's Medical 
Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Landau-Kleffner syndrome (LKS) is an acquired epileptic aphasia occurring in 
childhood and associated with a generally poor prognosis for recovery of speech. 
It is thought to be the result of an epileptogenic lesion arising in speech 
cortex during a critical period of development. Utilizing a new surgical 
technique designed to eliminate the capacity of cortical tissue to generate 
seizures while preserving the normal cortical physiological function, we have 
treated 14 children with aphasia, seizures and a severely abnormal EEG by 
multiple subpial transection of the epileptogenic cortex. Seven of the 14 
patients (50%) have recovered age-appropriate speech, are in regular classes in 
school and no longer require speech therapy. Four of the 14 (29%) have shown 
marked improvement, are speaking and understanding verbal instruction but are 
still receiving speech therapy. Thus, 11 of the 14 (79%), none of whom had used 
language to communicate for at least 2 years, are now speaking--a rate of 
sustained improvement considered unusual in this disorder. This study documents 
the value of a treatment modality not previously used in LKS. Success depends on 
selection of cases having severe epileptogenic abnormality that can be 
demonstrated to be unilateral in origin despite a bilateral electrographic 
manifestation.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/118.6.1529
PMID: 8595482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]