---
reference_id: "PMID:21410393"
title: Efficacy and safety of sirolimus in lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
authors:
- McCormack FX
- Inoue Y
- Moss J
- Singer LG
- Strange C
- Nakata K
- Barker AF
- Chapman JT
- Brantly ML
- Stocks JM
- Brown KK
- Lynch JP 3rd
- Goldberg HJ
- Young LR
- Kinder BW
- Downey GP
- Sullivan EJ
- Colby TV
- McKay RT
- Cohen MM
- Korbee L
- Taveira-DaSilva AM
- Lee HS
- Krischer JP
- Trapnell BC
- National Institutes of Health Rare Lung Diseases Consortium
- MILES Trial Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1100391
keywords:
- Adult
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Forced Expiratory Volume/drug effects
- Humans
- Intention to Treat Analysis
- "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Medication Adherence
- Middle Aged
- Observation
- Quality of Life
- "Sirolimus/adverse effects, blood, therapeutic use"
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Vital Capacity/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of sirolimus in lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
**Authors:** McCormack FX, Inoue Y, Moss J, Singer LG, Strange C, Nakata K, Barker AF, Chapman JT, Brantly ML, Stocks JM, Brown KK, Lynch JP 3rd, Goldberg HJ, Young LR, Kinder BW, Downey GP, Sullivan EJ, Colby TV, McKay RT, Cohen MM, Korbee L, Taveira-DaSilva AM, Lee HS, Krischer JP, Trapnell BC, National Institutes of Health Rare Lung Diseases Consortium, MILES Trial Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1100391](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1100391)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2011 Apr 28;364(17):1595-606. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1100391. Epub 
2011 Mar 16.

Efficacy and safety of sirolimus in lymphangioleiomyomatosis.

McCormack FX(1), Inoue Y, Moss J, Singer LG, Strange C, Nakata K, Barker AF, 
Chapman JT, Brantly ML, Stocks JM, Brown KK, Lynch JP 3rd, Goldberg HJ, Young 
LR, Kinder BW, Downey GP, Sullivan EJ, Colby TV, McKay RT, Cohen MM, Korbee L, 
Taveira-DaSilva AM, Lee HS, Krischer JP, Trapnell BC; National Institutes of 
Health Rare Lung Diseases Consortium; MILES Trial Group.

Collaborators: Groft S, Alving B, Collier E, Hunt C, Krischer J, Trapnell B, 
McCormack F, Senior R, Cripe TP, Uber S, McCormack F, Colby T, Meyer C, Brody A, 
McKay R, Young L, Cohen MM, Lee HS, Korbee L, McMahan S, Goldberg H, Jacobson F, 
Peters E, Rosas I, Chapman J, Culver D, Faile D, Meziane M, Strange C, Gitter A, 
Ravenel J, Sahn S, Moss J, Taveira-DaSilva A, Vaughan M, Barnes P, El-Chemaly S, 
Hathaway O, Haughey M, Love C, Starling J, Brown KK, Cosgrove G, Downey G, 
Frankel S, Swigris J, Kervitsky D, Morrison M, Perez E, Schroeder J, Inoue Y, 
Akira M, Kitaichi M, Arai T, Sugimoto C, Hirohata K, Okumizu Y, Inoue Y, Kumagai 
K, Kikuyama A, Ohya A, Tachibana K, Komatsu K, Sato Y, Moriguchi H, Hayashi S, 
Sakatani M, Nakata K, Nakayama H, Sasagawa M, Sato A, Takada T, Tazawa R, Terada 
M, Kaneko C, Barker A, Gold J, Kennie K, Nonas S, Primack S, Lynch J, Callahan 
E, Fishbein M, Golleher S, Lopez P, Saggar R, McCormack F, Trapnell B, Blower W, 
Brody A, Lagory D, McKay R, Kinder B, Meyer C, Roads T, Stamper M, Young L, 
Zhang W, Bailey J, Dahlquist J, Dosani R, Hodgson M, Kaiser P, Korbee L, 
Kuhlmann M, McMahan S, Turner E, Uber S, Brantly M, Gilbert L, Schreck P, Leong 
A, Stocks J, Allen T, Couch L, Hoeft J, Padinjarayweetil J, Taskar V, Singer L, 
Downey G, Sichitu M, Thenganatt J, Krischer J, Abbondondolo M, Badias F, 
Colouris M, Cuthbertson D, Grant K, Lee H, Paulus K, Senior RM, Redmond C, 
Clancy JP, Ryu J, Flaherty K.

Author information:
(1)University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. frank.mccormack@uc.edu

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Apr 28;364(17):1670-1. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1102290.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Jul 21;365(3):271-2; author reply 272. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1106358.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Jul 21;365(3):271; author reply 272. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1106358.

BACKGROUND: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a progressive, cystic lung disease 
in women; it is associated with inappropriate activation of mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR) signaling, which regulates cellular growth and 
lymphangiogenesis. Sirolimus (also called rapamycin) inhibits mTOR and has shown 
promise in phase 1-2 trials involving patients with LAM.
METHODS: We conducted a two-stage trial of sirolimus involving 89 patients with 
LAM who had moderate lung impairment--a 12-month randomized, double-blind 
comparison of sirolimus with placebo, followed by a 12-month observation period. 
The primary end point was the difference between the groups in the rate of 
change (slope) in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)).
RESULTS: During the treatment period, the FEV(1) slope was -12±2 ml per month in 
the placebo group (43 patients) and 1±2 ml per month in the sirolimus group (46 
patients) (P<0.001). The absolute between-group difference in the mean change in 
FEV(1) during the treatment period was 153 ml, or approximately 11% of the mean 
FEV(1) at enrollment. As compared with the placebo group, the sirolimus group 
had improvement from baseline to 12 months in measures of forced vital capacity, 
functional residual capacity, serum vascular endothelial growth factor D 
(VEGF-D), and quality of life and functional performance. There was no 
significant between-group difference in this interval in the change in 6-minute 
walk distance or diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide. After 
discontinuation of sirolimus, the decline in lung function resumed in the 
sirolimus group and paralleled that in the placebo group. Adverse events were 
more common with sirolimus, but the frequency of serious adverse events did not 
differ significantly between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with LAM, sirolimus stabilized lung function, reduced 
serum VEGF-D levels, and was associated with a reduction in symptoms and 
improvement in quality of life. Therapy with sirolimus may be useful in selected 
patients with LAM. (Funded by the National Institutes of Health and others; 
MILES ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00414648.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1100391
PMCID: PMC3118601
PMID: 21410393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]