---
reference_id: "PMID:20301537"
title: Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Forsyth R
- Gunay-Aygun M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Forsyth R, Gunay-Aygun M

## Content

1. Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Overview.

Forsyth R(1), Gunay-Aygun M(2)(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2025.
2003 Jul 14 [updated 2023 Mar 23].

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
(2)Professor of Pediatrics and Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
(3)Section on Human Biochemical Genetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, Office of Rare Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. Describe the clinical characteristics of 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome; 2.. Review the genetic causes of Bardet-Biedl syndrome; 
3.. Provide an evaluation strategy to identify the genetic cause of Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome in a proband (when possible); 4.. Review management of Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome; 5.. Inform genetic counseling of family members of an individual with 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Copyright © 1993-2025, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301537