---
reference_id: "PMID:31386394"
title: Novel Method for the Direct Measurement of the τ Lepton Dipole Moments.
authors:
- Fu J
- Giorgi MA
- Henry L
- Marangotto D
- Vidal FM
- Merli A
- Neri N
- Vidal JR
journal: Phys Rev Lett
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.011801
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Method for the Direct Measurement of the τ Lepton Dipole Moments.
**Authors:** Fu J, Giorgi MA, Henry L, Marangotto D, Vidal FM, Merli A, Neri N, Vidal JR
**Journal:** Phys Rev Lett (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.011801](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.011801)

## Content

1. Phys Rev Lett. 2019 Jul 3;123(1):011801. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.011801.

Novel Method for the Direct Measurement of the τ Lepton Dipole Moments.

Fu J(1), Giorgi MA(2), Henry L(3), Marangotto D(1), Vidal FM(3), Merli A(1), 
Neri N(1), Vidal JR(3).

Author information:
(1)INFN Sezione di Milano and Università di Milano, 20133 Milano, Italy.
(2)INFN Sezione di Pisa and Università di Pisa, 56127 Pisa, Italy.
(3)IFIC, Universitat de València-CSIC, 46980 Valencia, Spain.

A novel method for the direct measurement of the elusive magnetic and electric 
dipole moments of the τ lepton is presented. The experimental approach relies on 
the production of τ^{+} leptons from D_{s}^{+}→τ^{+}ν_{τ} decays, originating in 
fixed-target collisions at the LHC. A sample of polarized τ^{+} leptons is 
kinematically selected and subsequently channeled in a bent crystal. The 
magnetic and electric dipole moments of the τ^{+} lepton are measured by 
determining the rotation of the spin-polarization vector induced by the intense 
electromagnetic field between crystal atomic planes. The experimental technique 
is discussed along with the expected sensitivities.

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.011801
PMID: 31386394