---
reference_id: "PMID:22678561"
title: Immunity to varicella-zoster virus in Croatian women of reproductive age targeted for serology testing.
authors:
- Vilibic-Cavlek T
- Ljubin-Sternak S
- Kolaric B
- Kaic B
- Sviben M
- Kos L
- Mlinaric-Galinovic G
journal: Arch Gynecol Obstet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/s00404-012-2398-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunity to varicella-zoster virus in Croatian women of reproductive age targeted for serology testing.
**Authors:** Vilibic-Cavlek T, Ljubin-Sternak S, Kolaric B, Kaic B, Sviben M, Kos L, Mlinaric-Galinovic G
**Journal:** Arch Gynecol Obstet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00404-012-2398-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00404-012-2398-z)

## Content

1. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2012 Oct;286(4):901-4. doi: 10.1007/s00404-012-2398-z.
Epub  2012 Jun 8.

Immunity to varicella-zoster virus in Croatian women of reproductive age 
targeted for serology testing.

Vilibic-Cavlek T(1), Ljubin-Sternak S, Kolaric B, Kaic B, Sviben M, Kos L, 
Mlinaric-Galinovic G.

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Service, Croatian National Institute of Public Health, Zagreb, 
Croatia. tatjana.vilibic-cavlek@hzjz.hr

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine the immunity to 
varicella-zoster virus (VZV) in Croatian pregnant and non-pregnant women of 
reproductive age.
METHODS: During 2007-2011, a total of 638 women aged 16-45 years were tested for 
the presence of VZV IgM and IgG antibodies using commercial enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. Samples positive for IgG antibodies with positive or 
equivocal IgM antibodies were tested for IgG avidity.
RESULTS: The overall IgG seroprevalence was 84.3 %. There was a significant 
increase in IgG seropositivity with age (OR = 1.04 for 1-year increase in age; 
95 % CI 1.01-1.08). The lowest seroprevalence rate was reported in the 16-20 age 
groups (78.6 %), and the highest was in the 41-45 age groups (94.3 %). There was 
no significant difference in seroprevalence among women residing in urban and 
rural areas (83.6 vs. 87.0 %, OR 0.76, 95 % CI 0.43-1.34).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study have shown that a high proportion of 
Croatian childbearing-aged women (15.7 %) who were referred to the laboratory 
for VZV serology testing are susceptible to VZV and, thus, at risk for 
contracting varicella during pregnancy. Serology testing of adolescent girls and 
adult women who do not have a documented history of varicella is encouraged with 
the aim of vaccinating seronegative girls and women against VZV before 
pregnancy. In addition, testing of pregnant women is advised to identify 
susceptible women and vaccinate them after delivery.

DOI: 10.1007/s00404-012-2398-z
PMID: 22678561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]