---
reference_id: "PMID:36502531"
title: "Report of 2 pediatric cases with atypical Cogan's syndrome and a systematic review."
authors:
- Kasap Cuceoglu M
- Basaran O
- Batu ED
- Kaya Akca U
- Atalay E
- Sener S
- Balik Z
- Bayindir Y
- Aliyev E
- Gocmen R
- Kadayifcilar S
- Akyol U
- Bilginer Y
- Ozen S
journal: Int J Rheum Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.14531
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Report of 2 pediatric cases with atypical Cogan's syndrome and a systematic review.
**Authors:** Kasap Cuceoglu M, Basaran O, Batu ED, Kaya Akca U, Atalay E, Sener S, Balik Z, Bayindir Y, Aliyev E, Gocmen R, Kadayifcilar S, Akyol U, Bilginer Y, Ozen S
**Journal:** Int J Rheum Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1756-185X.14531](https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-185X.14531)

## Content

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2023 Mar;26(3):544-550. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.14531. Epub
2022  Dec 11.

Report of 2 pediatric cases with atypical Cogan's syndrome and a systematic 
review.

Kasap Cuceoglu M(1), Basaran O(1), Batu ED(1), Kaya Akca U(1), Atalay E(1), 
Sener S(1), Balik Z(1), Bayindir Y(1), Aliyev E(1), Gocmen R(2), Kadayifcilar 
S(3), Akyol U(4), Bilginer Y(1), Ozen S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Section of Neuroradiology, Department of Radiology, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.

Cogan's syndrome (CS) is a rare inflammatory disease characterized by 
interstitial keratitis or uveitis, vestibular impairment, and progressive 
hearing loss, commonly bilateral. Although glucocorticoids are fundamental 
treatment options, in most cases, hearing loss gradually worsens. Herein we 
report 2 pediatric cases of CS who were treated with corticosteroids and 
methotrexate. One patient had a cochlear implant, and the hearing of the other 
patient improved with treatment. Also, a systematic literature review was 
conducted for articles including pediatric CS patients. In the literature, 34 
articles describing 44 pediatric patients with CS were identified. Sudden 
hearing loss (95.3%) and ocular symptoms (92.5%) were the most common 
manifestations in these patients. Also, aortic involvement was present in 19.5% 
of patients in the literature. Otorhinolaryngologists, ophthalmologists, and 
pediatricians should collaborate to diagnose and manage CS to prevent 
progressive hearing loss and eye involvement.

© 2022 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1756-185X.14531
PMID: 36502531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]