---
reference_id: "PMID:36149253"
title: What should we do about monkeypox?
authors:
- Chen S
- Li X
- Zhang L
- Ren L
journal: Animal Model Exp Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ame2.12275
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What should we do about monkeypox?
**Authors:** Chen S, Li X, Zhang L, Ren L
**Journal:** Animal Model Exp Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ame2.12275](https://doi.org/10.1002/ame2.12275)

## Content

1. Animal Model Exp Med. 2022 Oct;5(5):482-484. doi: 10.1002/ame2.12275. Epub
2022  Sep 23.

What should we do about monkeypox?

Chen S(1), Li X(1), Zhang L(1), Ren L(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Sciences, Key Lab for Zoonoses Research, Ministry of 
Education, Jilin University, Changchun, China.

Monkeypox virus can infect several animals, including squirrels, Gambian poached 
rats, dormice, prairie dogs, monkeys, humans, etc. As reported, about 52 015 
laboratory-confirmed cases, including 18 deaths, have been reported to WHO from 
102 member states across all 6 WHO regions from 1 Jan 2022 to 2 Sep 2022. WHO 
defined the disease as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern 
(PHEIC) on 21 July 2022. These data showed that monkeypox is novel global 
threat.

© 2022 The Authors. Animal Models and Experimental Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of The Chinese Association for Laboratory 
Animal Sciences.

DOI: 10.1002/ame2.12275
PMCID: PMC9610136
PMID: 36149253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. Linzhu Ren is an Editorial Board member of AMEM and a co‐author of 
this article. To minimize bias, he was excluded from all editorial 
decision‐making related to the acceptance of this article for publication.