---
reference_id: "PMID:9435989"
title: Genetic defects of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase-1 (UGT1) gene that cause familial non-haemolytic unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemias.
authors:
- Clarke DJ
- Moghrabi N
- Monaghan G
- Cassidy A
- Boxer M
- Hume R
- Burchell B
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0009-8981(97)00167-8
keywords:
- "Crigler-Najjar Syndrome/enzymology, genetics, therapy"
- Genetic Variation
- "Gilbert Disease/enzymology, genetics, therapy"
- Glucuronosyltransferase/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic defects of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase-1 (UGT1) gene that cause familial non-haemolytic unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemias.
**Authors:** Clarke DJ, Moghrabi N, Monaghan G, Cassidy A, Boxer M, Hume R, Burchell B
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0009-8981(97)00167-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0009-8981(97)00167-8)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 1997 Oct 9;266(1):63-74. doi: 10.1016/s0009-8981(97)00167-8.

Genetic defects of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase-1 (UGT1) gene that cause 
familial non-haemolytic unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemias.

Clarke DJ(1), Moghrabi N, Monaghan G, Cassidy A, Boxer M, Hume R, Burchell B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, University of Dundee, 
Ninewells Medical School, Scotland, UK. djclarke@ninewells.dundee.ac.uk

Congenital familial non-haemolytic hyperbilirubinaemias are potentially lethal 
syndromes caused by genetic lesions that reduce or abolish hepatic bilirubin 
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase activity. Here we describe genetic defects that 
occur in the UGT1 gene complex that cause three non-haemolytic unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia syndromes. The most severe syndrome, termed Crigler-Najjar 
syndrome type I, is mainly associated with mutations in exons 2 to 5 that affect 
all UGT1 enzymes and many of the mutations result in termination codons and 
frameshifts. Crigler-Najjar type II syndrome which is treatable with 
phenobarbital therapy is associated with less dramatic missense mutations or 
heterozygous expression of mutant and normal alleles. Gilbert's syndrome, the 
most prevalent (2-19% in population studies) and mildest of the three syndromes 
is principally caused by a TA insertion at the TATA promoter region upstream of 
the UGT1A1 exon. Current methods used for the diagnosis and treatment of these 
diseases are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0009-8981(97)00167-8
PMID: 9435989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]