---
reference_id: "PMID:33556265"
title: Current concepts and advances in biomarkers of acute kidney injury.
authors:
- Wen Y
- Parikh CR
journal: Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/10408363.2021.1879000
keywords:
- Acute Kidney Injury/diagnosis
- Biomarkers
- Creatinine
- Humans
- Kidney
- Kidney Function Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current concepts and advances in biomarkers of acute kidney injury.
**Authors:** Wen Y, Parikh CR
**Journal:** Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10408363.2021.1879000](https://doi.org/10.1080/10408363.2021.1879000)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2021 Aug;58(5):354-368. doi: 
10.1080/10408363.2021.1879000. Epub 2021 Feb 8.

Current concepts and advances in biomarkers of acute kidney injury.

Wen Y(1), Parikh CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Despite advancements in standardizing the criteria for acute kidney injury 
(AKI), its definition remains based on changes in serum creatinine and urinary 
output that do not specifically represent tubular function or injury and that 
have significant limitations in the acute hospital setting. Much effort in 
nephrology has centered on identifying biomarkers of AKI to address these 
limitations. This review summarizes recent advances in our knowledge of 
biomarkers involved in pathophysiological processes during AKI and describes 
their potential clinical implications. Blood and urine biomarkers are released 
via various mechanisms during renal tubular injury. Urinary kidney injury 
molecule-1 (KIM-1), liver-type fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP), insulin-like 
growth factor-binding protein-7 (IGFBP-7), and tissue inhibitor of 
metalloprotease-2 (TIMP-2) are released from the proximal tubule while 
uromodulin (UMOD) is secreted from the loop of Henle and neutrophil 
gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) is released from the distal tubule. These 
biomarkers could therefore be used to localize specific segments of injured 
tubules. Biomarkers also have diverse roles in pathophysiological processes in 
AKI, including inflammation, repair, and fibrosis. Current evidence suggests 
that these biomarkers could be used to predict the transition to chronic kidney 
disease (CKD), decrease discard of AKI kidneys, differentiate between kidney 
dysfunction and injury, guide AKI management, and improve diagnosis of diseases 
such as acute interstitial nephritis (AIN). They could differentiate between 
disease phenotypes, facilitate the inclusion of a homogenous patient population 
in future trials of AKI, and shed light on therapeutic pathways to prevent the 
transition from AKI to CKD. However, a major limitation of current biomarker 
research in AKI is the lack of tissue correlation. The Kidney Precision Medicine 
Project, a large-scale national effort, is currently underway to construct a 
kidney tissue atlas and expand the use of biomarkers to assess nephron health. 
Numerous biomarkers are involved in distinct pathophysiological processes after 
kidney injury and have demonstrated potential to improve diagnosis and risk 
stratification as well as provide a prognosis for patients with AKI. Some 
biomarkers are ready for use in clinical trials of AKI and could guide 
management in various clinical settings. Further investigation of these 
biomarkers will provide insight that can be applied to develop novel therapeutic 
agents for AKI.

DOI: 10.1080/10408363.2021.1879000
PMID: 33556265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]