---
reference_id: "PMID:33554498"
title: Advances in diagnosis and management of Pompe disease.
authors:
- Davison JE
journal: J Mother Child
year: '2020'
doi: 10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2001.000002
keywords:
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "alpha-Glucosidases/deficiency, genetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in diagnosis and management of Pompe disease.
**Authors:** Davison JE
**Journal:** J Mother Child (2020)
**DOI:** [10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2001.000002](https://doi.org/10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2001.000002)

## Content

1. J Mother Child. 2020 Oct 2;24(2):3-8. doi:
10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2001.000002.

Advances in diagnosis and management of Pompe disease.

Davison JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Medicine, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK.

Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal glycogen storage disorder
caused by the deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase and subsequent progressive
glycogen accumulation due to mutations in the GAA gene. Pompe disease manifests
with a broad spectrum of disease severity, ranging from severe infantile-onset
diseases such as hypotonia and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy to late-onset
diseases such as myopathy and respiratory compromise. The diagnosis requires
demonstration of deficiency of the lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase enzyme,
which can be assayed in dried blood spot or liquid blood samples, together with
supportive biomarker tests, and confirmed with molecular genetic analysis.
Targeted screening of at-risk populations and universal newborn screening can
result in earlier diagnosis and enable earlier treatment initiation, which
result in the potential improvement of clinical outcomes. Disease-modifying
treatment with enzyme replacement therapy has partially altered the natural
history of the disease, but more efficacious novel therapies are under
evaluation including second-generation enzyme replacement therapies, molecular
chaperones and gene therapy approaches. Long-term survivors with Pompe disease
are now manifesting novel aspects of the disease including widespread vascular
disease, smooth muscle and central nervous system involvement, and these
emerging phenotypes will require additional specific therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.34763/jmotherandchild.20202402si.2001.000002
PMCID: PMC8518093
PMID: 33554498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest JD has received honoraria
from Sanofi Genzyme for educational speaking engagements and is a principal
investigator (unpaid) on the clinical trial of alglucosidase alfa in children
(NCT03019406).
