---
reference_id: "PMID:10667598"
title: The cancer-free phenotype in trichothiodystrophy is unrelated to its repair defect.
authors:
- Berneburg M
- Clingen PH
- Harcourt SA
- Lowe JE
- Taylor EM
- Green MH
- Krutmann J
- Arlett CF
- Lehmann AR
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2000'
keywords:
- Cell Line
- Cell Survival/radiation effects
- Cockayne Syndrome/genetics
- DNA Helicases
- DNA Repair/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Radiation"
- Fibroblasts/radiation effects
- Hair/abnormalities
- Hair Diseases/genetics
- Humans
- Intercellular Adhesion Molecule-1/genetics
- Phenotype
- Proteins/genetics
- Schizosaccharomyces/genetics
- "Skin Neoplasms/complications, genetics"
- Transcription Factors
- Ultraviolet Rays
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/complications, genetics"
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group D Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The cancer-free phenotype in trichothiodystrophy is unrelated to its repair defect.
**Authors:** Berneburg M, Clingen PH, Harcourt SA, Lowe JE, Taylor EM, Green MH, Krutmann J, Arlett CF, Lehmann AR
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2000)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2000 Jan 15;60(2):431-8.

The cancer-free phenotype in trichothiodystrophy is unrelated to its repair 
defect.

Berneburg M(1), Clingen PH, Harcourt SA, Lowe JE, Taylor EM, Green MH, Krutmann 
J, Arlett CF, Lehmann AR.

Author information:
(1)MRC Cell Mutation Unit, Sussex University, Brighton, United Kingdom.

The DNA repair-deficient genetic disorders xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and 
trichothiodystrophy (TTD) can both result from mutations in the XPD gene, the 
sites of the mutations differing between the two disorders. The hallmarks of XP 
are multiple pigmentation changes in the skin and a greatly elevated frequency 
of skin cancers, characteristics that are not seen in TTD. XP-D and most TTD 
patients have reduced levels of DNA repair, but some recent reports have 
suggested that the repair deficiencies in TTD cells are milder than in XP-D 
cells. We reported recently that inhibition of intracellular adhesion molecule-1 
(ICAM-1) expression by UVB irradiation was similar in normal and TTD cells but 
increased in XP-D cells, suggesting a correlation between ICAM-1 inhibition and 
cancer proneness. In the first part of the current work, we have extended these 
studies and found several other examples, including XP-G and Cockayne syndrome 
cells, in which increased ICAM-1 inhibition correlated with cancer proneness. 
However, we also discovered that a subset of TTD cells, in which arg112 in the 
NH2-terminal region of the XPD protein is mutated to histidine, had an ICAM-1 
response similar to that of XP-D cells. In the second part of the work, we have 
shown that TTD cells with this specific NH2-terminal mutation are more sensitive 
to UV irradiation than other TTDs, most of which are mutated in the 
COOH-terminal region, and are indistinguishable from XP-D cells in cell killing, 
incision breaks, and repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. Because the 
clinical phenotypes of these patients do not obviously differ from those of TTDs 
with mutations at other sites, we conclude that the lack of skin abnormalities 
in TTD is independent of the defective cellular responses to UV. It is likely to 
result from a transcriptional defect, which prevents the skin abnormalities from 
being expressed.

PMID: 10667598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]