---
reference_id: "PMID:30074926"
title: "Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency and Malnutrition in Chronic Pancreatitis: Identification, Treatment, and Consequences."
authors:
- Min M
- Patel B
- Han S
- Bocelli L
- Kheder J
- Vaze A
- Wassef W
journal: Pancreas
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000001137
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency and Malnutrition in Chronic Pancreatitis: Identification, Treatment, and Consequences.
**Authors:** Min M, Patel B, Han S, Bocelli L, Kheder J, Vaze A, Wassef W
**Journal:** Pancreas (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPA.0000000000001137](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPA.0000000000001137)

## Content

1. Pancreas. 2018 Sep;47(8):1015-1018. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000001137.

Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency and Malnutrition in Chronic Pancreatitis: 
Identification, Treatment, and Consequences.

Min M, Patel B, Han S(1), Bocelli L(2), Kheder J(2), Vaze A(3), Wassef W(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, UC Denver School of Medicine, Denver, CO.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, and.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to examine the impact of exocrine 
pancreatic insufficiency (EPI) on chronic pancreatitis (CP) patients and to 
identify challenges with its diagnosis and treatment.
METHODS: Ninety-one patients with CP diagnosed with endoscopic ultrasound were 
identified and assessed for symptoms of EPI, fat-soluble vitamin levels, 
dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry scan T-scores, and treatment with pancreatic 
enzyme replacement therapy. All patients were also screened with the 
Malnutrition Universal Screening Test.
RESULTS: Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency was diagnosed in 84.6% (77/91) of 
patients based on symptoms of bloating, steatorrhea, or weight loss. Of these 
patients, 35.2% (19/54) had vitamin A deficiency, 62.5% (55/88) had vitamin D 
deficiency, and 17.7% (9/51) had vitamin E deficiency. Either osteopenia or 
osteoporosis was found in 68.9% (31/45). A medium or higher risk for 
malnutrition based on Malnutrition Universal Screening Test score of 1 or higher 
was found in 31.5% (28/89). Malnutrition Universal Screening Test score of 1 or 
higher was associated with an increased risk for osteopenia and osteoporosis on 
Fisher's exact test (P = 0.0037).
CONCLUSIONS: There is a high prevalence of fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies, 
osteopathy, and malnutrition in CP patients, which is underestimated due to a 
lack of effective diagnosis and suboptimal therapies for EPI.

DOI: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000001137
PMCID: PMC6462188
PMID: 30074926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.