---
reference_id: "PMID:17652088"
title: A critical role of non-active site residues on cyclooxygenase helices 5 and 6 in the control of prostaglandin stereochemistry at carbon 15.
authors:
- Valmsen K
- Boeglin WE
- Järving R
- Järving I
- Varvas K
- Brash AR
- Samel N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M704950200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A critical role of non-active site residues on cyclooxygenase helices 5 and 6 in the control of prostaglandin stereochemistry at carbon 15.
**Authors:** Valmsen K, Boeglin WE, Järving R, Järving I, Varvas K, Brash AR, Samel N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M704950200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M704950200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 21;282(38):28157-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M704950200. Epub 
2007 Jul 25.

A critical role of non-active site residues on cyclooxygenase helices 5 and 6 in 
the control of prostaglandin stereochemistry at carbon 15.

Valmsen K(1), Boeglin WE, Järving R, Järving I, Varvas K, Brash AR, Samel N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, 
Tallinn 12618, Estonia.

The correct stereochemistry of prostaglandins is a prerequisite of their 
biological activity and thus is under a strict enzymatic control. Recently, we 
cloned and characterized two cyclooxygenase (COX) isoforms in the coral Plexaura 
homomalla that share 97% amino acid sequence identity, yet form prostaglandins 
with opposite stereochemistry at carbon 15. The difference in oxygenation 
specificity is only partially accounted for by the single amino acid 
substitution in the active site (Ile or Val at position 349). For further 
elucidation of residues involved in the C-15 stereocontrol, a series of sequence 
swapping and site-directed mutagenesis experiments between 15R- and 15S-COX were 
performed. Our results show that the change in stereochemistry at carbon 15 of 
prostaglandins relates mainly to five amino acid substitutions on helices 5 and 
6 of the coral COX. In COX proteins, these helices form a helix-turn-helix motif 
that traverses through the entire protein, contributing to the second shell of 
residues around the oxygenase active site; it constitutes the most highly 
conserved region where even slight changes result in loss of catalytic activity. 
The finding that this region is among the least conserved between the P. 
homomalla 15S- and 15R-specific COX further supports its significance in 
maintaining the desired prostaglandin stereochemistry at C-15. The results are 
particularly remarkable because, based on its strong conservation, the conserved 
middle of helix 5 is considered as central to the core structure of peroxidases, 
of which COX proteins are derivatives. Now we show that the same parts of the 
protein are involved in the control of oxygenation with 15R or 15S 
stereospecificity in the dioxygenase active site.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M704950200
PMID: 17652088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]