---
reference_id: "PMID:40018427"
title: De Novo Autosomal Dominant Cutis Laxa Type 3 With Global Developmental Delay and Musculoskeletal Features of Refractory Rickets.
authors:
- Chandan S
- Gohri J
- Jolly A
- Chaurasia M
journal: Clin Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/ccr3.70105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De Novo Autosomal Dominant Cutis Laxa Type 3 With Global Developmental Delay and Musculoskeletal Features of Refractory Rickets.
**Authors:** Chandan S, Gohri J, Jolly A, Chaurasia M
**Journal:** Clin Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ccr3.70105](https://doi.org/10.1002/ccr3.70105)

## Content

1. Clin Case Rep. 2025 Feb 26;13(3):e70105. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.70105. eCollection
2025 Mar.

De Novo Autosomal Dominant Cutis Laxa Type 3 With Global Developmental Delay and
Musculoskeletal Features of Refractory Rickets.

Chandan S(1), Gohri J(2), Jolly A(3), Chaurasia M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics Lady Hardinge Medical College Delhi India.
(2)Department of Medicine JSS Medical College Mysore India.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics KMC Mangalore Mangalore Karnataka India.
(4)Department of Pediatrics NIMS Jaipur India.

Cutis laxa is a genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized primarily by
loose, redundant skin with abnormal wrinkling and elasticity. It is an
exceptionally rare condition, with an estimated prevalence of < 1 in 1,000,000
individuals. In addition to the distinctive cutaneous manifestations, cutis laxa
can present with a constellation of other features, including progeroid
appearance, growth retardation, and developmental delays. We report a case of a
26-month-old girl who presented with features similar to nutritional rickets
with global developmental delay and some additional features of joint and skin
hyper-laxity in the backdrop of severely low vitamin D levels. The patient,
however, failed to respond to the conventional treatment for rickets. Subsequent
genetic testing revealed an autosomal dominant form of cutis laxa caused by an
exceedingly rare c.377G>A (p.Arg126His) substitution in the ALDH18A1 gene, which
encodes the bifunctional enzyme catalyzing the final steps of de novo
phospholipid biosynthesis. The present case highlights the diagnostic challenges
posed by cutis laxa, as the clinical manifestations can overlap with other
conditions, leading to potential misdiagnosis or delayed recognition. The rarity
of this disorder, combined with its phenotypic variability, underscores the
importance of raising awareness among clinicians and expanding the literature to
encompass the full spectrum of presentations associated with cutis laxa.

© 2025 The Author(s). Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.70105
PMCID: PMC11865015
PMID: 40018427

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
