---
reference_id: "PMID:3276736"
title: Kniest dysplasia is characterized by an apparent abnormal processing of the C-propeptide of type II cartilage collagen resulting in imperfect fibril assembly.
authors:
- Poole AR
- Pidoux I
- Reiner A
- Rosenberg L
- Hollister D
- Murray L
- Rimoin D
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1172/JCI113356
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kniest dysplasia is characterized by an apparent abnormal processing of the C-propeptide of type II cartilage collagen resulting in imperfect fibril assembly.
**Authors:** Poole AR, Pidoux I, Reiner A, Rosenberg L, Hollister D, Murray L, Rimoin D
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI113356](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI113356)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1988 Feb;81(2):579-89. doi: 10.1172/JCI113356.

Kniest dysplasia is characterized by an apparent abnormal processing of the 
C-propeptide of type II cartilage collagen resulting in imperfect fibril 
assembly.

Poole AR(1), Pidoux I, Reiner A, Rosenberg L, Hollister D, Murray L, Rimoin D.

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children, Department of Experimental Surgery, 
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Epiphyseal and growth plate cartilages from four cases of Kniest dysplasia have 
been studied. In each case collagen fibril organization appeared abnormal by 
electron microscopy compared with age-matched normal cartilages: fibrils were 
much thinner, of irregular shape and did not exhibit the characteristic banding 
pattern. This was associated with the absence (compared with normal cartilage) 
of the C-propeptide of type II collagen (chondrocalcin) from the extracellular 
matrix of epiphyseal cartilages, although it was detected (as in normal 
cartilages) in the lower hypertrophic zone of the growth plate in association 
with calcifying cartilage. The C-propeptide was abnormally concentrated in 
intracellular vacuolar sites in Kniest cartilages and its total content was 
reduced in all cases but not in all cartilages. Moreover, it was not a part of 
the procollagen molecule. In contrast, type II collagen alpha-chain size was 
normal, indicating the formation of a triple helix. Also type II collagen 
content was normal and it was present in extracellular sites and only 
occasionally detected intracellularly. These observations suggest that the 
defect in Kniest dysplasia may result from the secretion of type II procollagen 
lacking the C-propeptide and abnormal fibril formation, and that the 
C-propeptide is normally required for fibril formation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI113356
PMCID: PMC329606
PMID: 3276736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]