---
reference_id: "PMID:36810738"
title: Endogenous retroviruses and TDP-43 proteinopathy form a sustaining feedback driving intercellular spread of Drosophila neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Chang YH
- Dubnau J
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36649-z
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Endogenous Retroviruses/metabolism
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/genetics
- Frontotemporal Dementia/genetics
- Drosophila/metabolism
- Feedback
- TDP-43 Proteinopathies/metabolism
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endogenous retroviruses and TDP-43 proteinopathy form a sustaining feedback driving intercellular spread of Drosophila neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Chang YH, Dubnau J
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-36649-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36649-z)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Feb 21;14(1):966. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36649-z.

Endogenous retroviruses and TDP-43 proteinopathy form a sustaining feedback 
driving intercellular spread of Drosophila neurodegeneration.

Chang YH(1), Dubnau J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Stony Brook School of Medicine, Stony Brook, 
NY, 11794, USA. Yung-Heng.Chang@stonybrook.edu.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Stony Brook School of Medicine, Stony Brook, 
NY, 11794, USA. Joshua.Dubnau@stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(3)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, 
NY, 11794, USA. Joshua.Dubnau@stonybrookmedicine.edu.

Inter-cellular movement of "prion-like" proteins is thought to explain 
propagation of neurodegeneration between cells. For example, propagation of 
abnormally phosphorylated cytoplasmic inclusions of TAR-DNA-Binding protein 
(TDP-43) is proposed to underlie progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). But unlike transmissible prion 
diseases, ALS and FTD are not infectious and injection of aggregated TDP-43 is 
not sufficient to cause disease. This suggests a missing component of a positive 
feedback necessary to sustain disease progression. We demonstrate that 
endogenous retrovirus (ERV) expression and TDP-43 proteinopathy are mutually 
reinforcing. Expression of either Drosophila mdg4-ERV (gypsy) or the human ERV, 
HERV-K (HML-2) are each sufficient to stimulate cytoplasmic aggregation of human 
TDP-43. Viral ERV transmission also triggers TDP-43 pathology in recipient cells 
that express physiological levels of TDP-43, whether they are in contact or at a 
distance. This mechanism potentially underlies the TDP-43 proteinopathy-caused 
neurodegenerative propagation through neuronal tissue.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-36649-z
PMCID: PMC9944888
PMID: 36810738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.