---
reference_id: "PMID:34387706"
title: "Recessive ciliopathy mutations in primary endocardial fibroelastosis: a rare neonatal cardiomyopathy in a case of Alstrom syndrome."
authors:
- Zhao Y
- Wang LK
- Eskin A
- Kang X
- Fajardo VM
- Mehta Z
- Pineles S
- Schmidt RJ
- Nagiel A
- Satou G
- Garg M
- Federman M
- Reardon LC
- Lee SL
- Biniwale R
- Grody WW
- Halnon N
- Khanlou N
- Quintero-Rivera F
- Alejos JC
- Nakano A
- Fishbein GA
- Van Arsdell GS
- Nelson SF
- Touma M
journal: J Mol Med (Berl)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00109-021-02112-z
keywords:
- "Alstrom Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cardiomyopathies/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ciliopathies/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Endocardial Fibroelastosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
- Female
- Fibroblasts
- Humans
- Infant
- Mutation
- "Myocardium/metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- RNA-Seq
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive ciliopathy mutations in primary endocardial fibroelastosis: a rare neonatal cardiomyopathy in a case of Alstrom syndrome.
**Authors:** Zhao Y, Wang LK, Eskin A, Kang X, Fajardo VM, Mehta Z, Pineles S, Schmidt RJ, Nagiel A, Satou G, Garg M, Federman M, Reardon LC, Lee SL, Biniwale R, Grody WW, Halnon N, Khanlou N, Quintero-Rivera F, Alejos JC, Nakano A, Fishbein GA, Van Arsdell GS, Nelson SF, Touma M
**Journal:** J Mol Med (Berl) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00109-021-02112-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-021-02112-z)

## Content

1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2021 Nov;99(11):1623-1638. doi: 10.1007/s00109-021-02112-z.
Epub 2021 Aug 13.

Recessive ciliopathy mutations in primary endocardial fibroelastosis: a rare
neonatal cardiomyopathy in a case of Alstrom syndrome.

Zhao Y(1)(2)(3), Wang LK(4), Eskin A(5), Kang X(1)(2)(3), Fajardo VM(1), Mehta
Z(1)(2)(3), Pineles S(6), Schmidt RJ(7), Nagiel A(8)(9), Satou G(1), Garg M(1),
Federman M(1), Reardon LC(1)(10), Lee SL(1), Biniwale R(1)(11), Grody WW(1)(12),
Halnon N(1), Khanlou N(12), Quintero-Rivera F(13), Alejos JC(1), Nakano A(14),
Fishbein GA(12), Van Arsdell GS(1)(11), Nelson SF(1)(4)(5), Touma
M(15)(16)(17)(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, 3762 MacDonald Research Laboratories, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, 675 Charles E. Young
Dr S, CA, 90095, Los Angeles, USA.
(2)Neonatal/Congenital Heart Laboratory, Cardiovascular Research Laboratory,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Discovery and Innovation Institute,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Institute for Precision Health, David Geffen School of Medicine, University
of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)The Vision Center, Department of Surgery, Children's Hospital Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Roski Eye Institute, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(10)Ahmanson/UCLA Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, Department of Medicine,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(13)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Department of
Pediatrics, University of California Irvine, CA, Irvine, USA.
(14)Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell Research Center, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, 3762 MacDonald Research Laboratories, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, 675 Charles E. Young
Dr S, CA, 90095, Los Angeles, USA. mtouma@mednet.ucla.edu.
(16)Neonatal/Congenital Heart Laboratory, Cardiovascular Research Laboratory,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
mtouma@mednet.ucla.edu.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Discovery and Innovation Institute,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. mtouma@mednet.ucla.edu.
(18)Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell Research Center, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
mtouma@mednet.ucla.edu.
(19)The Molecular Biology Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University
of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. mtouma@mednet.ucla.edu.

Among neonatal cardiomyopathies, primary endocardial fibroelastosis (pEFE)
remains a mysterious disease of the endomyocardium that is poorly genetically
characterized, affecting 1/5000 live births and accounting for 25% of the entire
pediatric dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) with a devastating course and grave
prognosis. To investigate the potential genetic contribution to pEFE, we
performed integrative genomic analysis, using whole exome sequencing (WES) and
RNA-seq in a female infant with confirmed pathological diagnosis of pEFE. Within
regions of homozygosity in the proband genome, WES analysis revealed novel
parent-transmitted homozygous mutations affecting three genes with known roles
in cilia assembly or function. Among them, a novel homozygous variant
[c.1943delA] of uncertain significance in ALMS1 was prioritized for functional
genomic and mechanistic analysis. Loss of function mutations of ALMS1 have been
implicated in Alstrom syndrome (AS) [OMIM 203800], a rare recessive ciliopathy
that has been associated with cardiomyopathy. The variant of interest results in
a frameshift introducing a premature stop codon. RNA-seq of the proband's dermal
fibroblasts confirmed the impact of the novel ALMS1 variant on RNA-seq reads and
revealed dysregulated cellular signaling and function, including the induction
of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and activation of TGFβ signaling.
ALMS1 loss enhanced cellular migration in patient fibroblasts as well as
neonatal cardiac fibroblasts, while ALMS1-depleted cardiomyocytes exhibited
enhanced proliferation activity. Herein, we present the unique pathological
features of pEFE compared to DCM and utilize integrated genomic analysis to
elucidate the molecular impact of a novel mutation in ALMS1 gene in an AS case.
Our report provides insights into pEFE etiology and suggests, for the first time
to our knowledge, ciliopathy as a potential underlying mechanism for this poorly
understood and incurable form of neonatal cardiomyopathy. KEY MESSAGE: Primary
endocardial fibroelastosis (pEFE) is a rare form of neonatal cardiomyopathy that
occurs in 1/5000 live births with significant consequences but unknown etiology.
Integrated genomics analysis (whole exome sequencing and RNA sequencing)
elucidates novel genetic contribution to pEFE etiology. In this case, the
cardiac manifestation in Alstrom syndrome is pEFE. To our knowledge, this report
provides the first evidence linking ciliopathy to pEFE etiology. Infants with
pEFE should be examined for syndromic features of Alstrom syndrome. Our findings
lead to a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of pEFE, paving the
way to potential diagnostic and therapeutic applications.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-021-02112-z
PMCID: PMC8541947
PMID: 34387706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
