---
reference_id: "PMID:38085696"
title: "Hashimoto Encephalopathy Presenting with Acute Psychosis and Inappropriate Secretion of Antidiuretic Hormone: A Rare Case Responding to Steroid Therapy."
authors:
- Okitsu M
- Sugaya K
- Yoneda M
- Takahashi K
journal: Am J Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.12659/AJCR.942297
keywords:
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Male
- Psychotic Disorders
- Methylprednisolone/therapeutic use
- Vasopressins
- Humans
- Hashimoto Disease
- Encephalitis
- "Inappropriate ADH Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hashimoto Encephalopathy Presenting with Acute Psychosis and Inappropriate Secretion of Antidiuretic Hormone: A Rare Case Responding to Steroid Therapy.
**Authors:** Okitsu M, Sugaya K, Yoneda M, Takahashi K
**Journal:** Am J Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.12659/AJCR.942297](https://doi.org/10.12659/AJCR.942297)

## Content

1. Am J Case Rep. 2023 Dec 12;24:e942297. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.942297.

Hashimoto Encephalopathy Presenting with Acute Psychosis and Inappropriate 
Secretion of Antidiuretic Hormone: A Rare Case Responding to Steroid Therapy.

Okitsu M(1), Sugaya K(1), Yoneda M(2), Takahashi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Neurological Hospital, Fuchu, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Nursing and Social Welfare Sciences, Fukui Prefectural University, 
Fukui, Japan.

BACKGROUND Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE) is an autoimmune encephalopathy that 
can involve various symptoms including psychosis. Syndrome of inappropriate 
secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) may be a complication in some 
neurological diseases. However, the simultaneous occurrence of subacute 
psychosis and SIADH as the manifestation of HE, observed in the present case, 
has rarely been reported. CASE REPORT A 72-year-old man was hospitalized with a 
4-month history of abnormal behaviors, including talkativeness, stopping 
consumption of coffee and cigarettes, hoarding garbage, and sleep disorders. On 
physical examination, increased and incoherent speech with flight of idea and 
delusion were observed. The Mini-Mental State Examination score was 28/30. 
Laboratory findings included hyponatremia due to SIADH and a positive result for 
anti-thyroid and anti-NH2 terminal of alpha-enolase antibodies. Cerebrospinal 
fluid examination revealed only elevation of IL-6. Brain magnetic resonance 
imaging was unremarkable; however, (I-123)-iodoamphetamine single-photon 
emission computed tomography showed extensive hyperperfusion involving the 
brainstem and bilateral frontal and medial temporal lobes. 
Electroencephalography showed generalized slow waves, but there were no 
epileptiform discharges. After 2 courses of high-dose intravenous 
methylprednisolone followed by oral prednisolone, his symptoms improved. Based 
on the findings of clinical features and steroid responsiveness, he was 
diagnosed with HE. Oral prednisolone and antipsychotic drugs were decreased 
without a relapse and he was discharged to his home. CONCLUSIONS Although 
psychosis complicating SIADH is rare, HE should be considered in the 
differential diagnosis because of its treatment efficacy.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.942297
PMCID: PMC10728882
PMID: 38085696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared