---
reference_id: "PMID:34847798"
title: "Prevalence of methylmalonic acidemia among newborns and the clinical-suspected population: a meta-analyse."
authors:
- Jin L
- Han X
- He F
- Zhang C
journal: J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/14767058.2021.2008351
keywords:
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Methylmalonic Acid
- Neonatal Screening
- Prevalence
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of methylmalonic acidemia among newborns and the clinical-suspected population: a meta-analyse.
**Authors:** Jin L, Han X, He F, Zhang C
**Journal:** J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14767058.2021.2008351](https://doi.org/10.1080/14767058.2021.2008351)

## Content

1. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2022 Dec;35(25):8952-8967. doi: 
10.1080/14767058.2021.2008351. Epub 2021 Nov 30.

Prevalence of methylmalonic acidemia among newborns and the clinical-suspected 
population: a meta-analyse.

Jin L(1)(2), Han X(3), He F(1)(2), Zhang C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Clinical Laboratories, Institute of Geriatric Medicine, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing Hospital/National Center of 
Gerontology, Beijing, P. R. China.
(2)Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Medical Statistics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 
P. R. China.

IMPORTANCE: Knowing the scale of rare inborn errors is important for screening 
and resource allocation. Evidence on the prevalence of methylmalonic acidemia 
(MMA) among newborns and the clinical-suspected population from large-scale 
screening programs needs to be systematically synthesized.
OBJECTIVE: To estimate the worldwide prevalence of MMA for newborns and the 
clinical-suspected population and explore the differences in different regions, 
periods, and diagnostic technologies.
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE, Embase, CRD, Cochrane Library, Scopus, CINAHL, and 
PROSPERO. Study Selection: All studies reporting the epidemiology 
characteristics of MMA were selected.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Characteristics of study, subjects, and 
epidemiology were extracted, random-effect models were used for meta-analyses.
MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURE: Pooled prevalence of MMA.
RESULTS: This study included 111 studies. The pooled prevalence of MMA worldwide 
was 1.14 per 100,000 newborns (1516/190,229,777 newborns, 95% CI: 0.99-1.29) and 
652.11 per 100,000 clinical-suspected patients (1360/4,805,665 
clinical-suspected individuals, CI: 544.14-760.07). Asia and Africa got a higher 
pooled prevalence of MMA. The prevalence of MMA in newborns increased through 
the years, while that in the clinical-suspected population decreased. Collecting 
blood ≥ 72 h after birth had a higher pooled prevalence of MMA than collecting 
during 24 h-72 h after birth. The combining-use of MS/MS and GC/MS had a higher 
pooled prevalence than the single-use of MS/MS or GC/MS. Prevalence of cbl C, 
mut, cbl B, cbl A, isolated MMA, combined MMA and homocystinuria, vitamin 
B12-responsive MMA was synthesized.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Prevalence of MMA among newborns was extremely low, 
but considerably high in the clinical-suspected population, indicating the need 
for more efficient newborn screening strategies and closer monitoring of the 
high-risk population for the early signs of MMA. Asia and Africa should attach 
importance to the high prevalence of MMA. Further diagnostic tests were 
recommended for the combining-use vs single-use of MS/MS and GC/MS and for 
collecting blood after 72 h vs during 24-72 h after birth.

DOI: 10.1080/14767058.2021.2008351
PMID: 34847798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]