---
reference_id: "PMID:38541619"
title: "Coronary Spasm Testing with Acetylcholine: A Powerful Tool for a Personalized Therapy of Coronary Vasomotor Disorders."
authors:
- Gurgoglione FL
- Vignali L
- Montone RA
- Rinaldi R
- Benatti G
- Solinas E
- Leone AM
- Galante D
- Campo G
- Biscaglia S
- Porto I
- Benenati S
- Niccoli G
journal: Life (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/life14030292
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coronary Spasm Testing with Acetylcholine: A Powerful Tool for a Personalized Therapy of Coronary Vasomotor Disorders.
**Authors:** Gurgoglione FL, Vignali L, Montone RA, Rinaldi R, Benatti G, Solinas E, Leone AM, Galante D, Campo G, Biscaglia S, Porto I, Benenati S, Niccoli G
**Journal:** Life (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/life14030292](https://doi.org/10.3390/life14030292)

## Content

1. Life (Basel). 2024 Feb 22;14(3):292. doi: 10.3390/life14030292.

Coronary Spasm Testing with Acetylcholine: A Powerful Tool for a Personalized 
Therapy of Coronary Vasomotor Disorders.

Gurgoglione FL(1), Vignali L(2), Montone RA(3), Rinaldi R(4), Benatti G(2), 
Solinas E(2), Leone AM(5), Galante D(5), Campo G(6), Biscaglia S(6), Porto 
I(7)(8), Benenati S(7), Niccoli G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Parma University Hospital, University of Parma, 43126 
Parma, Italy.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Parma University Hospital, 43126 Parma, Italy.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario 
A. Gemelli IRCCS, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Sciences, Catholic University of 
the Sacred Heart, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(5)Center of Excellence in Cardiovascular Sciences, Ospedale Isola Tiberina, 
Gemelli Isola Roma, 00186 Rome, Italy.
(6)Cardiology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria di Ferrara, 44124 Ferrara, 
Italy.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genoa, 16126 Genoa, Italy.
(8)Cardiovascular Disease Unit, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino-Italian 
IRCCS Cardiology Network, 16126 Genoa, Italy.

Coronary vasomotor disorders (CVD) are characterized by transient 
hypercontraction of coronary vascular smooth muscle cells, leading to 
hypercontraction of epicardial and/or microvascular coronary circulation. CVDs 
play a relevant role in the pathogenesis of ischemia, angina and myocardial 
infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries. Invasive provocative testing 
with intracoronary Acetylcholine (ACh) administration is the gold standard tool 
for addressing CVD, providing relevant therapeutic and prognostic implications. 
However, safety concerns preclude the widespread incorporation of the ACh test 
into clinical practice. The purpose of this review is to shed light on the 
pathophysiology underlying CVD and on the clinical role of the ACh test, 
focusing on safety profile and prognostic implications. We will also discuss 
contemporary evidence on the management of CVD and the role of the ACh test in 
driving a personalized approach of patients with CVD.

DOI: 10.3390/life14030292
PMCID: PMC10970947
PMID: 38541619

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.