---
reference_id: "PMID:29023086"
title: SATB2-Associated Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Zarate YA
- Bosanko K
- Fish J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SATB2-Associated Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Zarate YA, Bosanko K, Fish J

## Content

1. SATB2-Associated Syndrome.

Zarate YA(1)(2), Bosanko K(1), Fish J(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2017 Oct 12 [updated 2024 Jun 20].

Author information:
(1)Section of Genetics and Metabolism, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas
(2)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
Kentucky
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Massachusetts Lowell, 
Lowell, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SATB2-associated syndrome (SAS) is a multisystem 
disorder in which all affected individuals have developmental delay / 
intellectual disability that can range from mild to profound but is most 
commonly moderate to profound. Speech delay and/or absent speech is observed in 
all affected individuals. Other neurobehavioral manifestations can include 
jovial or friendly personality, autistic tendencies, agitation or aggressive 
outbursts, self-injury, impulsivity, hyperactivity, anxiety, difficulty falling 
asleep or maintaining sleep, and sensory issues. Most affected individuals have 
hypotonia. EEG abnormalities are frequent but may be without clinically 
recognizable seizures. While only about 20% of affected individuals have 
clinical seizures, a subset of affected individuals have electrical status 
epilepticus in sleep. Craniofacial findings can include nonspecific dysmorphic 
features, palatal anomalies (cleft palate, high-arched palate, velopharyngeal 
insufficiency, bifid uvula), and dental anomalies (abnormal shape or size or the 
upper central incisors, dental crowding, hypodontia, and delayed teeth eruption, 
among others). Skeletal anomalies can include scoliosis, tibial bowing, and 
joint contractures. At least one third of individuals have a history of previous 
fractures and about one quarter of affected individuals have documented low bone 
mineral density. Other finding can include pre- and postnatal growth 
restriction, feeding issues, and eye anomalies (strabismus, refractive error). 
In those with a larger deletion involving SATB2 and adjacent genes, 
cardiovascular, genitourinary, and ectodermal findings may also be present.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SAS is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and identification of one of the following by molecular 
genetic testing: a heterozygous intragenic SATB2 pathogenic variant; a 
heterozygous non-recurrent deletion at 2q33.1 that includes SATB2; a chromosome 
translocation or inversion with a 2q33.1 breakpoint that disrupts SATB2; a 
chromosomal duplication with breakpoints that encompass SATB2.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Standard treatment for developmental 
delay / intellectual disability, neurobehavioral issues, cleft palate, 
micrognathia, dental anomalies, scoliosis, tibial bowing, joint contractures, 
spasticity, epilepsy, undescended testes, inguinal hernia, hypospadias, 
refractive error, strabismus, and congenital heart defects. For those with 
feeding issues and/or poor weight gain, feeding therapy is typically 
recommended, with a low threshold for clinical feeding evaluation and/or 
radiographic swallowing study if there are signs or symptoms of dysphagia. A 
gastrostomy tube placement may be required for persistent feeding issues. Sleep 
disturbance may respond to sleep hygiene healthy habits and potential medical 
management, as needed. In those with restless sleep, an overnight EEG to explore 
potential epileptogenic abnormalities may be considered. To address osteopenia / 
frequent fractures, optimize physical activity and calcium / vitamin D levels; 
denosumab and bisphosphonates have also been used with no direct comparison 
between the different options. Surveillance: At each visit, measure growth 
parameters, nutrition status, and safety of oral intake; assess for new 
manifestations, such as seizures or changes in tone; monitor developmental 
progress and educational needs; assess for anxiety, ADHD, ASD, aggression, & 
self-injury; evaluate for scoliosis and spine deformities; and assess for 
signs/symptoms of sleep disturbance. At least annually, dental evaluation with 
consideration of orthodontics; ophthalmology evaluation; obtain a DXA scan for 
bone mineral density if z score is below −1; measure alkaline phosphatase level 
(if previously elevated). Every two years, obtain a DXA scan for bone mineral 
density if z score is above −1; measure alkaline phosphatase level (if 
previously normal).
GENETIC COUNSELING: SAS is an autosomal dominant disorder. Almost all probands 
with SAS reported to date have the disorder as the result of a de novo genetic 
event. In approximately 1% of affected individuals, SAS is the result of a 
genetic alteration inherited from a mosaic parent. To date, individuals with SAS 
are not known to reproduce. Once the genetic alteration has been identified in 
an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are 
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 29023086