---
reference_id: "PMID:39538190"
title: Homozygous splice-site variant in ENPP1 underlies generalized arterial calcification of infancy.
authors:
- Noor Ul Ayan H
- Nitschke Y
- Mughal AR
- Thiele H
- Malik NA
- Hussain I
- Haider SMI
- Rutsch F
- Erdmann J
- Tariq M
- Aherrahrou Z
- Ahmad I
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12887-024-05123-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Homozygote
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Pulmonary Valve Stenosis/genetics
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- Vascular Calcification/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous splice-site variant in ENPP1 underlies generalized arterial calcification of infancy.
**Authors:** Noor Ul Ayan H, Nitschke Y, Mughal AR, Thiele H, Malik NA, Hussain I, Haider SMI, Rutsch F, Erdmann J, Tariq M, Aherrahrou Z, Ahmad I
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12887-024-05123-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-024-05123-0)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2024 Nov 13;24(1):733. doi: 10.1186/s12887-024-05123-0.

Homozygous splice-site variant in ENPP1 underlies generalized arterial
calcification of infancy.

Noor Ul Ayan H(1)(2)(3), Nitschke Y(4), Mughal AR(5), Thiele H(6), Malik NA(2),
Hussain I(7), Haider SMI(1)(3), Rutsch F(4), Erdmann J(1)(3), Tariq M(2),
Aherrahrou Z(1)(3), Ahmad I(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cardiogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, 23562, Germany.
(2)National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering College,
Pakistan Institute of Engineering and Applied Sciences (NIBGE-C, PIEAS),
Faisalabad, 38000, Pakistan.
(3)DZHK (German Research Center for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site
Hamburg/Lübeck/Kiel, Lübeck, 23562, Germany.
(4)Department of General Pediatrics, Muenster University Children's Hospital,
Muenster, 48149, Germany.
(5)Faisalabad Institute of Cardiology, Faisalabad, 38000, Pakistan.
(6)Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine
and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, 50931, Germany.
(7)Peshawar Institute of Cardiology, Peshawar, 25000, Pakistan.
(8)Institute for Cardiogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, 23562, Germany.
ilyas.ahmad@uni-luebeck.de.
(9)DZHK (German Research Center for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site
Hamburg/Lübeck/Kiel, Lübeck, 23562, Germany. ilyas.ahmad@uni-luebeck.de.

ENPP1 (ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1) plays a critical role
by converting extracellular ATP to AMP, generating extracellular PPi, a
potential inhibitor of calcification. Pathogenic variants in the ENPP1 cause
generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI [OMIM 208000]). GACI, is an
ultra-rare disease characterized by early-onset calcification of large and
medium-sized arteries, leading to severe cardiovascular complications such as
heart failure, pulmonary stenosis (PS), hypertension, and more. In this study,
we report a novel homozygous splice-site pathogenic variant in ENPP1 (NM_006208,
c.2230 + 5G > A; p.Asp701Asnfs*2) residing in C-terminal nuclease-like domain
(NLD) of ENPP1 protein in a Pakistani family diagnosed with severe valvular PS
and mild right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH). cDNA assays confirmed the skipping
of exon 21, and the splice product underwent nonsense-mediated decay. Functional
studies on fibroblasts from the patient demonstrated increased calcification and
decreased enzymatic activity of ENPP1, recapitulating the hallmarks of GACI. By
combining genetic analysis with the in vitro study, we substantiate that
ENPP1:c.2230 + 5G > A variant is pathogenic, underscoring its role in the
development of GACI.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-024-05123-0
PMCID: PMC11558987
PMID: 39538190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and consent to
participate This study adhered to the principles outlined in the Declaration of
Helsinki and received formal approval from the Research Ethics Committee of the
National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE),
Faisalabad, Pakistan. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of
the proband. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests The
authors declare no competing interests.
