---
reference_id: "PMID:36519759"
title: Upregulation of non-canonical and canonical inflammasome genes associates with pathological features in Krabbe disease and related disorders.
authors:
- Cachón-González MB
- Zhao C
- Franklin RJ
- Cox TM
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac299
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/genetics"
- Inflammasomes/metabolism
- Up-Regulation
- Gasdermins
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Psychosine/metabolism, pharmacology"
- Caspases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Upregulation of non-canonical and canonical inflammasome genes associates with pathological features in Krabbe disease and related disorders.
**Authors:** Cachón-González MB, Zhao C, Franklin RJ, Cox TM
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddac299](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddac299)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Apr 6;32(8):1361-1379. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac299.

Upregulation of non-canonical and canonical inflammasome genes associates with 
pathological features in Krabbe disease and related disorders.

Cachón-González MB(1), Zhao C(2)(3), Franklin RJ(2)(3), Cox TM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Level 5, PO Box 157, 
Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(2)Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0AW, UK.
(3)Department of Clinical Neuro sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 
2PY, UK.

Infantile Krabbe disease is a rapidly progressive and fatal disorder of myelin, 
caused by inherited deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme β-galactocerebrosidase. 
Affected children lose their motor skills and other faculties; uncontrolled 
seizures are a frequent terminal event. Overexpression of the sphingolipid 
metabolite psychosine is a pathogenic factor, but does not fully account for the 
pleiotropic manifestations and there is a clear need to investigate additional 
pathological mechanisms. We examined innate immunity, caspase-11 and associated 
inflammatory pathways in twitcher mice, an authentic model of Krabbe disease. 
Combined use of molecular tools, RNAscope in situ hybridization and 
immunohistochemical staining established that the expression of pro-inflammatory 
non-canonical caspase-11, canonical caspase-1, gasdermin D and cognate genes is 
induced in nervous tissue. Early onset and progressive upregulation of these 
genes accompany demyelination and gliosis and although the molecules are scant 
in healthy tissue, abundance of the respective translation products is greatly 
increased in diseased animals. Caspase-11 is found in reactive 
microglia/macrophages as well as astrocytes but caspase-1 and gasdermin D are 
restricted to reactive microglia/macrophages. The inflammasome signature is not 
unique to Krabbe disease; to varying degrees, this signature is also prominent 
in other lysosomal diseases, Sandhoff and Niemann-Pick Type-C1, and the 
lysolecithin toxin model of focal demyelination. Given the potent inflammatory 
response here identified in Krabbe disease and the other neurodegenerative 
disorders studied, a broad induction of inflammasomes is likely to be a dominant 
factor in the pathogenesis, and thus represents a platform for therapeutic 
exploration.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac299
PMCID: PMC10077509
PMID: 36519759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]