---
reference_id: "PMID:18165539"
title: "Prevalence of antibodies against orthopoxviruses among residents of Likouala region, Republic of Congo: evidence for monkeypox virus exposure."
authors:
- Lederman ER
- Reynolds MG
- Karem K
- Braden Z
- Learned-Orozco LA
- Wassa-Wassa D
- Moundeli O
- Hughes C
- Harvey J
- Regnery R
- Mombouli JV
- Damon IK
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2007'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of antibodies against orthopoxviruses among residents of Likouala region, Republic of Congo: evidence for monkeypox virus exposure.
**Authors:** Lederman ER, Reynolds MG, Karem K, Braden Z, Learned-Orozco LA, Wassa-Wassa D, Moundeli O, Hughes C, Harvey J, Regnery R, Mombouli JV, Damon IK
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2007)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2007 Dec;77(6):1150-6.

Prevalence of antibodies against orthopoxviruses among residents of Likouala 
region, Republic of Congo: evidence for monkeypox virus exposure.

Lederman ER(1), Reynolds MG, Karem K, Braden Z, Learned-Orozco LA, Wassa-Wassa 
D, Moundeli O, Hughes C, Harvey J, Regnery R, Mombouli JV, Damon IK.

Author information:
(1)Poxvirus Program, Poxvirus and Rabies Branch, Division for Viral and 
Rickettsial Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 
30333, USA. Edith.Lederman@med.navy.mil

Monkeypox virus is a zoonotic orthopoxvirus (OPX) of west and central 
sub-Saharan Africa. We conducted a cross-sectional serosurvey in Likouala 
region, Republic of Congo to assess exposure to OPX. Whole blood was collected 
using Nobuto blood filter strips (NBFS). Titers of IgM and IgG to OPX were 
assessed using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Demographic and clinical 
characteristics were compared with serostatus using the chi-square test or 
Fisher's exact test. Multivariate logistic regression was performed to evaluate 
factors for independent association with serostatus. A total of 994 specimens 
were analyzed; the overall seroprevalence for OPX IgM was 1.7%. Age < 25 years 
reduced the likelihood of OPX exposure, and persons living in Ngangania village 
had independently higher odds (odds ratio = 33.5, 95% confidence interval = 
7.2-166). Blood collection for serosurveys using NBFS is feasible and practical. 
Adult activities such as hunting and carcass preparation may play an important 
role in exposure to Monkeypox virus.

PMID: 18165539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]