---
reference_id: "PMID:28101805"
title: "Ketogenic diet in pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency: short- and long-term outcomes."
authors:
- Sofou K
- Dahlin M
- Hallböök T
- Lindefeldt M
- Viggedal G
- Darin N
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-016-0011-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- "Diet, Ketogenic/methods"
- "Epilepsy/blood, diet therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Ketone Bodies/blood
- "Ketosis/blood, diet therapy"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Mental Status and Dementia Tests
- Motor Activity/physiology
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease/blood, diet therapy"
- Sweden
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ketogenic diet in pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency: short- and long-term outcomes.
**Authors:** Sofou K, Dahlin M, Hallböök T, Lindefeldt M, Viggedal G, Darin N
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-016-0011-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-016-0011-5)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2017 Mar;40(2):237-245. doi: 10.1007/s10545-016-0011-5.
Epub 2017 Jan 18.

Ketogenic diet in pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency: short- and
long-term outcomes.

Sofou K(1), Dahlin M(2), Hallböök T(3), Lindefeldt M(2), Viggedal G(3), Darin
N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, University of
Gothenburg, Smörslottsgatan 1, 41685, Gothenburg, Sweden.
kalliopi.sofou@vgregion.se.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital, Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, University of
Gothenburg, Smörslottsgatan 1, 41685, Gothenburg, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: Our aime was to study the short- and long-term effects of ketogenic
diet on the disease course and disease-related outcomes in patients with
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency, the metabolic factors implicated in
treatment outcomes, and potential safety and compliance issues.
METHODS: Pediatric patients diagnosed with pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
deficiency in Sweden and treated with ketogenic diet were evaluated. Study
assessments at specific time points included developmental and neurocognitive
testing, patient log books, and investigator and parental questionnaires. A
systematic literature review was also performed.
RESULTS: Nineteen patients were assessed, the majority having prenatal disease
onset. Patients were treated with ketogenic diet for a median of 2.9 years. All
patients alive at the time of data registration at a median age of 6 years. The
treatment had a positive effect mainly in the areas of epilepsy, ataxia, sleep
disturbance, speech/language development, social functioning, and frequency of
hospitalizations. It was also safe-except in one patient who discontinued
because of acute pancreatitis. The median plasma concentration of ketone bodies
(3-hydroxybutyric acid) was 3.3 mmol/l. Poor dietary compliance was associated
with relapsing ataxia and stagnation of motor and neurocognitive development.
Results of neurocognitive testing are reported for 12 of 19 patients.
CONCLUSION: Ketogenic diet was an effective and safe treatment for the majority
of patients. Treatment effect was mainly determined by disease phenotype and
attainment and maintenance of ketosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-016-0011-5
PMCID: PMC5306430
PMID: 28101805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.
