---
reference_id: "PMID:16222184"
title: Clinical manifestations of superior semicircular canal dehiscence.
authors:
- Minor LB
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/01.mlg.0000178324.55729.b7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical manifestations of superior semicircular canal dehiscence.
**Authors:** Minor LB
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.mlg.0000178324.55729.b7](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.mlg.0000178324.55729.b7)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2005 Oct;115(10):1717-27. doi:
10.1097/01.mlg.0000178324.55729.b7.

Clinical manifestations of superior semicircular canal dehiscence.

Minor LB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Outpatient Center, Baltimore, MD 
21287, USA.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESES: To determine the symptoms, signs, and findings on 
diagnostic tests in patients with clinical manifestations of superior canal 
dehiscence. To investigate hypotheses about the effects of superior canal 
dehiscence. To analyze the outcomes in patients who underwent surgical repair of 
the dehiscence.
STUDY DESIGN: Review and analysis of clinical data obtained as a part of the 
diagnosis and treatment of patients with superior canal dehiscence at a tertiary 
care referral center.
METHODS: Clinical manifestations of superior semicircular canal dehiscence were 
studied in patients identified with this abnormality over the time period of May 
1995 to July 2004. Criteria for inclusion in this series were identification of 
the dehiscence of bone overlying the superior canal confirmed with a 
high-resolution temporal bone computed tomography and the presence of at least 
one sign on physiologic testing indicative of superior canal dehiscence. There 
were 65 patients who qualified for inclusion in this study on the basis of these 
criteria. Vestibular manifestations were present in 60 and exclusively auditory 
manifestations without vestibular symptoms or signs were noted in 5 patients.
RESULTS: For the 60 patients with vestibular manifestations, symptoms induced by 
loud sounds were noted in 54 patients and pressure-induced symptoms (coughing, 
sneezing, straining) were present in 44. An air-bone on audiometry in these 
patients with vestibular manifestations measured (mean +/- SD) 19 +/- 14 dB at 
250 Hz; 15 +/- 11 dB at 500 Hz; 11 +/- 9 dB at 1,000 Hz; and 4 +/- 6 dB at 2,000 
Hz. An air-bone gap 10 dB or greater was present in 70% of ears with superior 
canal dehiscence tested at 250 Hz, 68% at 500 Hz, 64% at 1,000 Hz, and 21% at 
2,000 Hz. Similar audiometric findings were noted in the five patients with 
exclusively auditory manifestations of dehiscence. The threshold for eliciting 
vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials from affected ears was (mean +/- SD) 81 
+/- 9 dB normal hearing level. The threshold for unaffected ears was 99 +/- 7 
dB, and the threshold for control ears was 98 +/- 4 dB. The thresholds in the 
affected ear were significantly different from both the unaffected ear and 
normal control thresholds (P < .001 for both comparisons). There was no 
difference between thresholds in the unaffected ear and normal control (P = .2). 
There were 20 patients who were debilitated by their symptoms and underwent 
surgical repair of superior canal dehiscence through a middle cranial fossa 
approach. Canal plugging was performed in 9 and resurfacing of the canal without 
plugging of the lumen in 11 patients. Complete resolution of vestibular symptoms 
and signs was achieved in 8 of the 9 patients after canal plugging and in 7 of 
the 11 patients after resurfacing.
CONCLUSIONS: Superior canal dehiscence causes vestibular and auditory symptoms 
and signs as a consequence of the third mobile window in the inner ear created 
by the dehiscence. Surgical repair of the dehiscence can achieve control of the 
symptoms and signs. Canal plugging achieves long-term control more often than 
does resurfacing.

DOI: 10.1097/01.mlg.0000178324.55729.b7
PMID: 16222184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]