---
reference_id: "PMID:30207746"
title: Domestic canaries (Serinus canaria forma domestica) are susceptible to low pathogenic avian influenza virus infections.
authors:
- Marché S
- van den Berg T
- Lambrecht B
journal: Avian Pathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/03079457.2018.1520966
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Domestic canaries (Serinus canaria forma domestica) are susceptible to low pathogenic avian influenza virus infections.
**Authors:** Marché S, van den Berg T, Lambrecht B
**Journal:** Avian Pathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03079457.2018.1520966](https://doi.org/10.1080/03079457.2018.1520966)

## Content

1. Avian Pathol. 2018 Dec;47(6):607-615. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2018.1520966. Epub
 2018 Oct 11.

Domestic canaries (Serinus canaria forma domestica) are susceptible to low 
pathogenic avian influenza virus infections.

Marché S(1)(2), van den Berg T(3), Lambrecht B(1).

Author information:
(1)a Avian Virology & Immunology , Sciensano , Brussels , Belgium.
(2)b Veterinary Bacteriology , Sciensano , Brussels , Belgium.
(3)c Infectious diseases in Animals , Sciensano , Brussels , Belgium.

Avian influenza viruses have been isolated from many bird species; however, 
little is known about the susceptibility of pet birds to low pathogenic avian 
influenza (LPAI) viruses. To address this research gap, domestic canaries 
(Serinus canaria forma domestica) were experimentally infected with H5 and H7 
LPAI viruses to determine susceptibility and to evaluate samples for diagnostic 
purposes. Clinical evidence of infection (e.g. ruffled plumage and apathy) and 
mortality were noted for the canaries inoculated with chicken-adapted LPAI 
viruses. Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RRT-PCR) 
demonstrated higher viral RNA levels in buccal compared to faecal samples. No 
clinical signs or mortality were observed in canaries inoculated with LPAI virus 
originating from wild birds; however, the canaries in this group did have 
evidence of viral RNA in buccal and faecal samples. Overall, this study showed 
that domestic canaries are susceptible to LPAI virus infections and that they 
can shed large amounts of viral RNA, primarily through the respiratory route. 
Thus, buccal swabs might be better samples than faeces for efficient detection 
of some LPAI virus infections in these birds. Although canaries have not been 
identified as a significant reservoir for LPAI viruses, they may be infected by 
LPAI viruses. Thus, the importance of the control of domestic canaries for 
detection of LPAI viruses should not be underestimated, especially in the 
contexts of international commercial exchange and outbreaks. RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS 
Canaries are susceptible to infection with H5/H7 LPAI viruses. Canaries 
inoculated with LPAI viruses excrete large amounts of viral RNA. Buccal swabs 
may be appropriate specimens for AI virus detection in canaries. The control of 
canaries for LPAI virus detection should not be overlooked.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2018.1520966
PMID: 30207746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]