---
reference_id: "PMID:37552752"
title: PTCH/SMO gene mutations in odontogenic keratocysts and drug interventions.
authors:
- Wang S
- Hong Y
- Qu J
- Zhang J
- Zhang Y
- Zhai J
- Li T
journal: J Oral Pathol Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jop.13473
keywords:
- Humans
- Patched-1 Receptor/genetics
- "Odontogenic Cysts/genetics, drug therapy, pathology"
- Mutation
- Pyridines/pharmacology
- Smoothened Receptor/genetics
- Pyrimidines/pharmacology
- Fibroblasts/drug effects
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Anilides/pharmacology
- Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/genetics
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Movement/drug effects
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Female
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PTCH/SMO gene mutations in odontogenic keratocysts and drug interventions.
**Authors:** Wang S, Hong Y, Qu J, Zhang J, Zhang Y, Zhai J, Li T
**Journal:** J Oral Pathol Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jop.13473](https://doi.org/10.1111/jop.13473)

## Content

1. J Oral Pathol Med. 2023 Oct;52(9):867-876. doi: 10.1111/jop.13473. Epub 2023
Aug  8.

PTCH/SMO gene mutations in odontogenic keratocysts and drug interventions.

Wang S(1)(2), Hong Y(3), Qu J(4)(5), Zhang J(6), Zhang Y(7), Zhai J(1)(2), Li
T(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Science, School of Stomatology, Kunming Medical
University, Kunming, China.
(2)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Kunming, China.
(3)First Clinical Division, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology
& National Center of Stomatology & National Clinical Research Center for Oral
Diseases & National Engineering Research Center of Oral Biomaterials and Digital
Medical Devices & Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital Stomatology, Beijing, China.
(4)International VIP Dental Clinic, Tianjin Stomatological Hospital, School of
Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Oral and Maxillofacial
Function Reconstruction, Tianjin, China.
(5)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Oral and Maxillofacial Function Reconstruction,
Tianjin, China.
(6)Department of Oral Pathology, Peking University School and Hospital of
Stomatology & National Center of Stomatology & National Clinical Research Center
for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Laboratory for Digital and Material
Technology of Stomatology & Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital Stomatology,
Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Stomatology, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan Province,
Kunming, China.

BACKGROUND: Odontogenic keratocysts (OKCs) are odontogenic jaw lesions that
cause destruction and dysfunction of the jawbone. OKCs can be sporadic or
associated with nevoid basic cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS). However, the
factors that initiate OKCs and the mechanism of cyst formation remain unclear.
Here, we investigated the impact of PTCH1 and SMO mutations on disease
progression, as well as the effects of sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway
inhibitors GDC-0449 and GANT61 on OKC fibroblasts.
METHODS: Eight sporadic OKC fibroblasts without gene mutations were used as the
control, and six NBCCS-related fibroblasts were cultured in vitro. The effect of
PTCH1 non-truncated mutation 3499G>A (p.G1167R) and SMO c.2081C>G (p.P694R)
mutation on OKC fibroblast proliferation was examined by EdU assay. CCK8 and
wound-healing assays detected the effects of OKC fibroblasts carrying PTCH1
c.3499G>A (p.G1167R) and SMO c.2081C>G (p.P694R) mutations on the proliferation
and migration of HaCaT cells after co-culture. Quantitative real-time PCR
detected the effects of GDC-0449 or GANT61 on the SHH signaling pathway in
NBCCS-related OKCs with PTCH1 truncated mutations and PTCH1 c.3499G>A (p.G1167R)
and/or SMO c.2081C>G (p.P694R) mutations.
RESULTS: PTCH1 c.3499G>A (p.G1167R) and SMO c.2081C>G (p.P694R) promoted the
proliferation of OKC fibroblasts. The proliferation and migration of HaCaT cells
were affected by NBCCS-related OKC fibroblasts carrying PTCH1 c.3499G>A
(p.G1167R) and SMO c.2081C>G (p.P694R) mutations. GDC-0449 significantly
inhibited the SHH signaling pathway in NBCCS-related OKC fibroblasts with PTCH1
truncated mutations. An NBCCS-related OKC carrying PTCH1 c.3499G>A (p.G1167R)
and SMO c.2081C>G (p.P694R) mutations were resistant to GDC-0449 but inhibited
by GANT61.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic mutations in OKC fibroblasts may affect the biological
behavior of epithelial and stromal cells and cause disease. GDC-0449 could be
used to treat OKCs, especially NBCCS-related OKCs with PTCH1 truncated
mutations. SMO c.2081C>G (p.P694R) may lead to resistance to GDC-0449; however,
GANT61 may be used as an alternative inhibitor.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jop.13473
PMID: 37552752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
