---
reference_id: "PMID:23176623"
title: Follow-up recommendations and risk-reduction initiatives for Lynch syndrome.
authors:
- Guillén-Ponce C
- Molina-Garrido MJ
- Carrato A
journal: Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1586/era.12.114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Follow-up recommendations and risk-reduction initiatives for Lynch syndrome.
**Authors:** Guillén-Ponce C, Molina-Garrido MJ, Carrato A
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anticancer Ther (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1586/era.12.114](https://doi.org/10.1586/era.12.114)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2012 Oct;12(10):1359-67. doi: 10.1586/era.12.114.

Follow-up recommendations and risk-reduction initiatives for Lynch syndrome.

Guillén-Ponce C(1), Molina-Garrido MJ, Carrato A.

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, 
Spain. carmenguillenponce@yahoo.es

Lynch syndrome is the most common inherited colon cancer susceptibility 
syndrome. Lynch syndrome is characterized by a significantly increased risk for 
colon cancer and endometrial cancer and a smaller risk for several other 
associated cancers. Some periodic screening strategies, such as colonoscopy, 
reduce the incidence and mortality of Lynch syndrome. The aim of this review is 
to discuss the risks, surveillance tests and guidelines for the management of 
colonic and extracolonic tumors associated with Lynch syndrome. For extracolonic 
cancer, a benefit of surveillance is evident only for endometrial cancer. No 
definitive data show efficacy of chemopreventive drugs, although aspirin is a 
promising drug. In this review, the available evidence on the different 
screening strategies in Lynch syndrome will be discussed. Furthermore, the 
clinical and biological characteristics of this disease and their potential 
impact on prevention in individuals at risk are analyzed.

DOI: 10.1586/era.12.114
PMID: 23176623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]