---
reference_id: "PMID:35646072"
title: "HMG-CoA Lyase Deficiency: A Retrospective Study of 62 Saudi Patients."
authors:
- Alfadhel M
- Abadel B
- Almaghthawi H
- Umair M
- Rahbeeni Z
- Faqeih E
- Almannai M
- Alasmari A
- Saleh M
- Eyaid W
- Alfares A
- Al Mutairi F
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.880464
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HMG-CoA Lyase Deficiency: A Retrospective Study of 62 Saudi Patients.
**Authors:** Alfadhel M, Abadel B, Almaghthawi H, Umair M, Rahbeeni Z, Faqeih E, Almannai M, Alasmari A, Saleh M, Eyaid W, Alfares A, Al Mutairi F
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.880464](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.880464)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 May 13;13:880464. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.880464.
eCollection  2022.

HMG-CoA Lyase Deficiency: A Retrospective Study of 62 Saudi Patients.

Alfadhel M(1)(2), Abadel B(1), Almaghthawi H(1), Umair M(2), Rahbeeni Z(3), 
Faqeih E(4), Almannai M(1), Alasmari A(4), Saleh M(4), Eyaid W(1)(2), Alfares 
A(5)(6), Al Mutairi F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Precision Medicine Department, King Abdullah Specialized 
Children Hospital, King Abdulaziz Medical City MNG-HA, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Medical Genomics Research Department, King Abdullah International Medical 
Research Center (KAIMRC), King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health 
Sciences, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs (MNG-HA), Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(3)Medical Genetics Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Section of Medical Genetics, Children's Specialist Hospital, King Fahad 
Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Qassim University, Qassim, 
Saudi Arabia.
(6)Division of Translational Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, King 
Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A lyase deficiency (HMG-CoA lyase) is a rare 
inborn error of leucine degradation and ketone body synthesis, caused by 
homozygous or compound heterozygous disease-causing variants in HMGCL. To 
understand the natural history of this disease, we reviewed the biochemical, 
clinical, and molecular data of 62 patients from 54 different families with 
confirmed HMG-CoA lyase deficiency (HMGCLD) diagnosis from Saudi Arabia. The 
majority of the affected individuals were symptomatic. At initial diagnosis, 38 
patients (61.29%) presented with hypoglycemia and 49 patients (79.03%) developed 
metabolic acidosis. In 27 patients (43.54%), the disorder manifested in the 
neonatal period, mostly within the first days of life, while 35 (56.45%) 
patients were diagnosed within the first year of life or beyond. All the 
patients were alive and developed long-term neurological complications during 
data collection, which may significantly influence their quality of life. Common 
neurological findings include seizures 17/62 (27.41%), hypotonic 3/62 (4.83%), 
speech delay 7/62 (11.29%), hyperactivity 4/62 (4.83%), developmental delay 6/62 
(9.677%), learning disability 15/62 (24.14%), and ataxic gate 1/62 (1.612%). An 
MRI of the brain exhibited nonspecific periventricular and deep white matter 
hyperintense signal changes in 16 patients (25.80%) and cerebral atrophy was 
found in one (1/62; 1.612%) patient. We identified a founder variant [c.122G>A; 
p.(Arg41Gln)] in 48 affected individuals (77.41%) in the HMGCL gene. This is the 
largest cohort of HMGCLD patients reported from Saudi Arabia, signifying this 
disorder as a likely life-threatening disease, with a high prevalence in the 
region. Our findings suggest that diagnosis at an early stage with careful 
dietary management may avoid metabolic crises.

Copyright © 2022 Alfadhel, Abadel, Almaghthawi, Umair, Rahbeeni, Faqeih, 
Almannai, Alasmari, Saleh, Eyaid, Alfares and Al Mutairi.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.880464
PMCID: PMC9136170
PMID: 35646072

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.