---
reference_id: "PMID:32063397"
title: "The long-term safety and efficacy of vestronidase alfa, rhGUS enzyme replacement therapy, in subjects with mucopolysaccharidosis VII."
authors:
- Wang RY
- da Silva Franco JF
- López-Valdez J
- Martins E
- Sutton VR
- Whitley CB
- Zhang L
- Cimms T
- Marsden D
- Jurecka A
- Harmatz P
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.01.003
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing"
- Blood-Brain Barrier/drug effects
- Child
- Cross-Over Studies
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Female
- "Glucuronidase/administration & dosage, adverse effects, immunology, therapeutic use"
- Glycosaminoglycans/urine
- Humans
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis VII/drug therapy, immunology, physiopathology"
- Rare Diseases/therapy
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The long-term safety and efficacy of vestronidase alfa, rhGUS enzyme replacement therapy, in subjects with mucopolysaccharidosis VII.
**Authors:** Wang RY, da Silva Franco JF, López-Valdez J, Martins E, Sutton VR, Whitley CB, Zhang L, Cimms T, Marsden D, Jurecka A, Harmatz P
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.01.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.01.003)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2020 Mar;129(3):219-227. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.01.003.
Epub  2020 Jan 11.

The long-term safety and efficacy of vestronidase alfa, rhGUS enzyme replacement 
therapy, in subjects with mucopolysaccharidosis VII.

Wang RY(1), da Silva Franco JF(2), López-Valdez J(3), Martins E(4), Sutton 
VR(5), Whitley CB(6), Zhang L(7), Cimms T(8), Marsden D(9), Jurecka A(10), 
Harmatz P(11).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolic Disorders, Children's Hospital of Orange County, 1201 
W. La Veta Ave, Orange, CA 92868, United States; Department of Pediatrics, 
University of California-Irvine, Orange, CA 92868, United States. Electronic 
address: RaWang@choc.org.
(2)Hospital Sabara, Av. Angélica, 1987 Consolação, São Paulo, SP, 01227-200, 
Brazil; Centro de Biotecnologia /Instituto de Pesquisas de Energéticas e 
Nucleares IPEN/USP, Av 11 de junho 364, Casa 3, Vila Clementino, São Paulo, 
04041-001, Brazil.
(3)Centenario Hospital Miguel Hidalgo, Av. Gomez Morin S/N, La estación- La 
Alameda, Aguascalientes, Ags 20259, Mexico.
(4)Centro Hospitalar Do Porto, Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Largo do Prof. 
Abel Salazar, 4099-001 Porto, Portugal.
(5)Department of Molecular & Human Genetics Baylor College of Medicine & Texas 
Children's Hospital, Mail Stop BCM225, Houston, TX 77030, United States. 
Electronic address: vrsutton@texaschildrens.org.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, and Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, 
University of Minnesota, East Building, 2450 Riverside Ave, Minneapolis, MN 
55454, United States. Electronic address: whitley@umn.edu.
(7)Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc., 60 Leveroni Ct, Novato, CA 94949, United 
States. Electronic address: LZhang@ultragenyx.com.
(8)Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc., 60 Leveroni Ct, Novato, CA 94949, United 
States. Electronic address: TCimms@ultragenyx.com.
(9)Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc., 60 Leveroni Ct, Novato, CA 94949, United 
States. Electronic address: DMarsden@ultragenyx.com.
(10)Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc., 60 Leveroni Ct, Novato, CA 94949, United 
States. Electronic address: AJurecka@ultragenyx.com.
(11)UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland, 744 52nd St, Oakland, CA 94609, 
United States. Electronic address: Paul.Harmatz@UCSF.edu.

Erratum in
    Mol Genet Metab. 2020 Sep - Oct;131(1-2):285. doi: 
10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.08.001.

Vestronidase alfa (recombinant human beta-glucuronidase) is an enzyme 
replacement therapy (ERT) for Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) VII, a highly 
heterogeneous, ultra-rare disease. Twelve subjects, ages 8-25 years, completed a 
Phase 3, randomized, placebo-controlled, blind-start, single crossover study 
(UX003-CL301; NCT02377921), receiving 24-48 weeks of vestronidase alfa 4 mg/kg 
IV. All 12 subjects completed the blind-start study, which showed significantly 
reduced urinary glycosaminoglycans (GAG) and clinical improvement in a 
multi-domain responder index, and enrolled in a long-term, open-label, extension 
study (UX003-CL202; NCT02432144). Here, we report the final results of the 
extension study, up to an additional 144 weeks after completion of the 
blind-start study. Three subjects (25%) completed all 144 weeks of study, eight 
subjects (67%) ended study participation before Week 144 to switch to 
commercially available vestronidase alfa, and one subject discontinued due to 
non-compliance after receiving one infusion of vestronidase alfa in the 
extension study. The safety profile of vestronidase alfa in the extension study 
was consistent with observations in the preceding blind-start study, with most 
adverse events mild to moderate in severity. There were no treatment or study 
discontinuations due to AEs and no noteworthy changes in a standard safety 
chemistry panel. Out of the eleven subjects who tested positive for anti-drug 
antibodies at any time during the blind-start or extension study, including the 
baseline assessment in the blind-start study, seven subjects tested positive for 
neutralizing antibodies and all seven continued to demonstrate a reduction in 
urinary GAG levels. There was no association between antibody formation and 
infusion associated reactions. Subjects receiving continuous vestronidase alfa 
treatment showed a sustained urinary GAG reduction and clinical response 
evaluated using a multi-domain responder index that includes assessments in 
pulmonary function, motor function, range of motion, mobility, and visual 
acuity. Reduction in fatigue was also maintained in the overall population. As 
ERT is not expected to cross the blood brain barrier, limiting the impact on 
neurological signs of disease, and not all subjects presented with neurological 
symptoms, outcomes related to central nervous system pathology are not focused 
on in this report. Results from this study show the long-term safety and 
durability of clinical efficacy in subjects with MPS VII with long-term 
vestronidase alfa treatment.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.01.003
PMID: 32063397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]