---
reference_id: "PMID:36788019"
title: "Recurrent, founder and hypomorphic variants contribute to the genetic landscape of Joubert syndrome."
authors:
- Serpieri V
- Mortarini G
- Loucks H
- Biagini T
- Micalizzi A
- Palmieri I
- Dempsey JC
- "D'Abrusco F"
- Mazzotta C
- Battini R
- Bertini ES
- Boltshauser E
- Borgatti R
- Brockmann K
- "D'Arrigo S"
- Nardocci N
- Fischetto R
- Agolini E
- Novelli A
- Romano A
- Romaniello R
- Stanzial F
- Signorini S
- Strisciuglio P
- Gana S
- Mazza T
- Doherty D
- Valente EM
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108725
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent, founder and hypomorphic variants contribute to the genetic landscape of Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Serpieri V, Mortarini G, Loucks H, Biagini T, Micalizzi A, Palmieri I, Dempsey JC, D'Abrusco F, Mazzotta C, Battini R, Bertini ES, Boltshauser E, Borgatti R, Brockmann K, D'Arrigo S, Nardocci N, Fischetto R, Agolini E, Novelli A, Romano A, Romaniello R, Stanzial F, Signorini S, Strisciuglio P, Gana S, Mazza T, Doherty D, Valente EM
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg-2022-108725](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg-2022-108725)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2023 Sep;60(9):885-893. doi: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108725. Epub 2023
Feb  14.

Recurrent, founder and hypomorphic variants contribute to the genetic landscape 
of Joubert syndrome.

Serpieri V(1), Mortarini G(2), Loucks H(3), Biagini T(4), Micalizzi A(5), 
Palmieri I(1), Dempsey JC(3), D'Abrusco F(2), Mazzotta C(2), Battini R(6)(7), 
Bertini ES(8), Boltshauser E(9), Borgatti R(10)(11), Brockmann K(12), D'Arrigo 
S(13), Nardocci N(13), Fischetto R(14), Agolini E(5), Novelli A(5), Romano 
A(15), Romaniello R(11), Stanzial F(16), Signorini S(11), Strisciuglio P(15), 
Gana S(1), Mazza T(4), Doherty D(3), Valente EM(17)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Research Centre, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Bioinformatics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, S. 
Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy.
(5)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Pisa, Italy.
(7)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy.
(8)Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, IRCCS Ospedale 
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy.
(9)Departement of Pediatric Neurology, University Children's Hospital Zürich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(11)Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(12)Interdisciplinary Pediatric Centre for Children with Developmental 
Disabilities and Severe Chronic Disorders, University Medical Centre, Georg 
August University, Göttingen, Germany.
(13)Department of Pediatric Neuroscience, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico 
"C Besta", Milan, Italy.
(14)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatric Medicine, Giovanni XXIII 
Children's Hospital, Bari, Italy.
(15)Section of Pediatrics, Department of Medical Translational Sciences, 
University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(16)Genetic Counseling Service, Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of 
Bozen, Bozen, Italy.
(17)Neurogenetics Research Centre, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy 
enzamaria.valente@unipv.it.

BACKGROUND: Joubert syndrome (JS) is a neurodevelopmental ciliopathy 
characterised by a distinctive mid-hindbrain malformation, the 'molar tooth 
sign'. Over 40 JS-associated genes are known, accounting for two-thirds of 
cases.
METHODS: While most variants are novel or extremely rare, we report on 11 
recurring variants in seven genes, including three known 'founder variants' in 
the Ashkenazi Jewish, Hutterite and Finnish populations. We evaluated variant 
frequencies in ~550 European patients with JS and compared them with controls 
(>15 000 Italian plus gnomAD), and with an independent cohort of ~600 JS 
probands from the USA.
RESULTS: All variants were markedly enriched in the European JS cohort compared 
with controls. When comparing allele frequencies in the two JS cohorts, the 
Ashkenazim founder variant (TMEM216 c.218G>T) was significantly enriched in 
American compared with European patients with JS, while MKS1 c.1476T>G was about 
10 times more frequent among European JS. Frequencies of other variants were 
comparable in the two cohorts. Genotyping of several markers identified four 
novel European founder haplotypes.Two recurrent variants (MKS1 c.1476T>G and 
KIAA0586 c.428delG), have been detected in homozygosity in unaffected 
individuals, suggesting they could act as hypomorphic variants. However, while 
fibroblasts from a MKS1 c.1476T>G healthy homozygote showed impaired ability to 
form primary cilia and mildly reduced ciliary length, ciliary parameters were 
normal in cells from a KIAA0586 c.428delG healthy homozygote.
CONCLUSION: This study contributes to understand the complex genetic landscape 
of JS, explain its variable prevalence in distinct geographical areas and 
characterise two recurrent hypomorphic variants.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108725
PMCID: PMC10447400
PMID: 36788019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.