---
reference_id: "PMID:11843212"
title: Acne inversa (alias hidradenitis suppurativa).
authors:
- Jansen I
- Altmeyer P
- Piewig G
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1046/j.1468-3083.2001.00303.x
keywords:
- "Acne Vulgaris/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- "Adrenal Cortex Hormones/administration & dosage"
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/administration & dosage"
- Chronic Disease
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Epithelium/pathology
- Female
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Humans
- Male
- Prognosis
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acne inversa (alias hidradenitis suppurativa).
**Authors:** Jansen I, Altmeyer P, Piewig G
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1468-3083.2001.00303.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1468-3083.2001.00303.x)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2001 Nov;15(6):532-40. doi: 
10.1046/j.1468-3083.2001.00303.x.

Acne inversa (alias hidradenitis suppurativa).

Jansen I(1), Altmeyer P, Piewig G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany.

Acne inversa is a recurrent, suppurative disease manifested by abscesses, 
fistulas, and scarring. Once considered to be a disease of the apocrine glands, 
it is actually a defect of follicular epithelium. Thus, the term hidradenitis 
suppurativa is a misnomer and should be abandoned. In cases of familial acne 
inversa, the pattern of transmission and number of affected individuals are 
consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance. Aetiological factors such as 
hyperandrogenism, obesity, smoking and chemical irritants are not consistently 
associated with the affection. Bacterial involvement is not a primary event in 
acne inversa, but is secondary to the disease process. Potential complications 
include dermal contraction, local or systemic infection due to the spread of 
microorganisms, systemic amyloidosis, arthropathy, and squamous cell carcinoma. 
As spontaneous resolution is rare and progressive disability is the rule, early 
definitive surgical intervention is advisable. The surgical procedure of choice 
in most cases is wide local excision and healing by secondary intention. 
Pharmacotherapeutic drugs, including synthetic retinoids and antiandrogens, do 
not prevent progression of the disease.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1468-3083.2001.00303.x
PMID: 11843212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]