---
reference_id: "PMID:36619566"
title: "Diabetes mellitus with a duration of 26 years combined with IgA nephropathy: A case report and literature review."
authors:
- Gou YL
- Zhang YP
- Xu Y
- Li JD
- Huang Y
- Chen H
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2022.992933
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetes mellitus with a duration of 26 years combined with IgA nephropathy: A case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Gou YL, Zhang YP, Xu Y, Li JD, Huang Y, Chen H
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2022.992933](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2022.992933)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Dec 23;13:992933. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.992933. eCollection 2022.

Diabetes mellitus with a duration of 26 years combined with IgA nephropathy: A 
case report and literature review.

Gou YL(1), Zhang YP(1), Xu Y(1), Li JD(1), Huang Y(2), Chen H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Affiliated Hospital of Hebei University, Baoding, 
China.
(2)Hebei University, Baoding, China.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of diabetes mellitus (DM) in China is increasing 
yearly and has become a major problem plaguing national public health. The 
diagnosis of diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is based primarily on clinical 
criteria, and most patients do not receive a formal evaluation by renal biopsy; 
thus, misdiagnosis and underdiagnosis are common. The incidence of non-diabetic 
kidney disease (NDKD) is also higher in those with DM. To date, many cases of 
IgA nephropathy (IgAN) among those with DKD have been reported, while cases of 
IgAN in patients with long-duration DM who did not develop DKD are less commonly 
reported.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 70-year-old male patient with a diabetes duration of 26 
years had proteinuria for one year. The clinical manifestations of nephrotic 
syndrome and IgAN were confirmed by renal biopsy. The patient received targeted 
treatment for three years with partial alleviation of proteinuria.
CONCLUSION: Renal biopsy might aid in the definitive diagnosis of DKD, NDKD, and 
NDKD combined with DKD. Precise therapy based on renal pathology might help to 
improve outcomes in the kidney.

Copyright © 2022 Gou, Zhang, Xu, Li, Huang and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.992933
PMCID: PMC9816133
PMID: 36619566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.