---
reference_id: "PMID:36990420"
title: Pathogenic Variants in CEP290 or IQCB1 Cause Earlier-Onset Retinopathy in Senior-Loken Syndrome Compared to Those in INVS, NPHP3, or NPHP4.
authors:
- Wang J
- Li S
- Jiang Y
- Wang Y
- Ouyang J
- Yi Z
- Sun W
- Jia X
- Xiao X
- Wang P
- Zhang Q
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2023.03.025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic Variants in CEP290 or IQCB1 Cause Earlier-Onset Retinopathy in Senior-Loken Syndrome Compared to Those in INVS, NPHP3, or NPHP4.
**Authors:** Wang J, Li S, Jiang Y, Wang Y, Ouyang J, Yi Z, Sun W, Jia X, Xiao X, Wang P, Zhang Q
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajo.2023.03.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajo.2023.03.025)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2023 Aug;252:188-204. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2023.03.025. Epub
2023  Mar 27.

Pathogenic Variants in CEP290 or IQCB1 Cause Earlier-Onset Retinopathy in 
Senior-Loken Syndrome Compared to Those in INVS, NPHP3, or NPHP4.

Wang J(1), Li S(1), Jiang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Ouyang J(1), Yi Z(1), Sun W(1), Jia 
X(1), Xiao X(1), Wang P(1), Zhang Q(2).

Author information:
(1)From the The State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic 
Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Guangzhou 510060, China.
(2)From the The State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic 
Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Guangzhou 510060, China. Electronic address: 
zhangqji@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: Senior-Loken syndrome (SLSN) is an autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by retinopathy and nephronophthisis. This study aimed to evaluate 
whether different phenotypes are associated with different variants or subsets 
of 10 SLSN-associated genes based on an in-house data set and a literature 
review.
DESIGN: Retrospective case series.
METHODS: Patients with biallelic variants in SLSN-associated genes, including 
NPHP1, INVS, NPHP3, NPHP4, IQCB1, CEP290, SDCCAG8, WDR19, CEP164, and TRAF3IP1, 
were recruited. Ocular phenotypes and nephrology medical records were collected 
for comprehensive analysis.
RESULTS: Variants in 5 genes were identified in 74 patients from 70 unrelated 
families, including CEP290 (61.4%), IQCB1 (28.6%), NPHP1 (4.2%), NPHP4 (2.9%), 
and WDR19 (2.9%). The median age at the onset of retinopathy was approximately 1 
month (since birth). Nystagmus was the most common initial sign in patients with 
CEP290 (28 of 44, 63.6%) or IQCB1 (19 of 22, 86.4%) variants. Cone and rod 
responses were extinguished in 53 of 55 patients (96.4%). Characteristic fundus 
changes were observed in CEP290- and IQCB1-associated patients. During 
follow-up, 70 of the 74 patients were referred to nephrology, among whom 
nephronophthisis was not detected in 62 patients (88.6%) at a median age of 6 
years but presented in 8 patients (11.4%) aged approximately 9 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with pathogenic variants in CEP290 or IQCB1 presented 
early with retinopathy, whereas other patients with INVS, NPHP3, or NPHP4 
variants first developed nephropathy. Therefore, awareness of the genetic and 
clinical features may facilitate the clinical management of SLSN, especially 
early intervention of kidney problems for patients with eyes affected first.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2023.03.025
PMID: 36990420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]