---
reference_id: "PMID:36113118"
title: Multimodal ocular imaging in Proteus syndrome.
authors:
- Salerni A
- Scartozzi L
- Piccinni F
- Mosca L
- Mattei R
- Leoni C
- Onesimo R
- Zampino G
- Rizzo S
journal: Eur J Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/11206721221125852
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multimodal ocular imaging in Proteus syndrome.
**Authors:** Salerni A, Scartozzi L, Piccinni F, Mosca L, Mattei R, Leoni C, Onesimo R, Zampino G, Rizzo S
**Journal:** Eur J Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/11206721221125852](https://doi.org/10.1177/11206721221125852)

## Content

1. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2023 Sep;33(5):NP5-NP10. doi: 10.1177/11206721221125852.
Epub  2022 Sep 13.

Multimodal ocular imaging in Proteus syndrome.

Salerni A(1)(2), Scartozzi L(1)(2), Piccinni F(1)(2), Mosca L(1)(2), Mattei 
R(1)(2), Leoni C(3), Onesimo R(3), Zampino G(3), Rizzo S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli 
IRCSS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, "Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore", Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Center for Rare Diseases and Birth Defects, Department of Woman and Child 
Health and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario "A. Gemelli" 
IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

In this report we illustrate the ophthalmologic assessment of two patients 
affected by Proteus Syndrome (PS), an extremely rare genetic disorder. Case #1 
describes a 26 year old male patient followed for multiple ophthalmic anomalies: 
a limbal dermoid cyst, a unilateral cataract, bilateral nystagmus, severe myopia 
and unilateral optic nerve head drusen. Case #2 describes a 20 year old female 
patient referred to our Ophthalmology Department for a routine ophthalmologic 
evaluation after being treated for 3 years with Miransertib (an experimental 
AKT-pathway inhibitor). Both patients underwent a complete ophthalmologic 
examination and a multimodal imaging evaluation. The multimodal imaging approach 
has revealed useful to evaluate both cases in detail and to keep track of 
disease evolution over time, moreover providing helpful features to further 
characterize this rare syndrome.

DOI: 10.1177/11206721221125852
PMCID: PMC10469497
PMID: 36113118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.