---
reference_id: "PMID:38969274"
title: Discovery of novel FGF trap small molecules endowed with anti-myeloma activity.
authors:
- Taranto S
- Castelli R
- Marseglia G
- Scalvini L
- Vacondio F
- Gianoncelli A
- Ribaudo G
- Faletti J
- Gazzaroli G
- Rocca E
- Ronca R
- Rusnati M
- Sacco A
- Roccaro AM
- Presta M
- Mor M
- Giacomini A
- Rivara S
journal: Pharmacol Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107291
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Discovery of novel FGF trap small molecules endowed with anti-myeloma activity.
**Authors:** Taranto S, Castelli R, Marseglia G, Scalvini L, Vacondio F, Gianoncelli A, Ribaudo G, Faletti J, Gazzaroli G, Rocca E, Ronca R, Rusnati M, Sacco A, Roccaro AM, Presta M, Mor M, Giacomini A, Rivara S
**Journal:** Pharmacol Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107291](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107291)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Res. 2024 Aug;206:107291. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107291. Epub 2024
 Jul 3.

Discovery of novel FGF trap small molecules endowed with anti-myeloma activity.

Taranto S(1), Castelli R(2), Marseglia G(2), Scalvini L(2), Vacondio F(2), 
Gianoncelli A(3), Ribaudo G(3), Faletti J(3), Gazzaroli G(3), Rocca E(2), Ronca 
R(3), Rusnati M(3), Sacco A(4), Roccaro AM(4), Presta M(3), Mor M(2), Giacomini 
A(5), Rivara S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of 
Brescia, Brescia, Italy; Clinical Trial Center, Translational Research and Phase 
I Unit, ASST Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Food and Drug, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of 
Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Clinical Trial Center, Translational Research and Phase I Unit, ASST Spedali 
Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(5)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of 
Brescia, Brescia, Italy. Electronic address: arianna.giacomini@unibs.it.
(6)Department of Food and Drug, University of Parma, Parma, Italy. Electronic 
address: silvia.rivara@unipr.it.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) act as proangiogenic and mitogenic cytokines in 
several cancers, including multiple myeloma (MM). Indeed, corrupted FGF 
autocrine and paracrine secretion induces an aberrant activation of the FGF 
receptor (FGFR) signaling sustaining cancer cell spreading and resistance to 
pharmacological treatments. Thus, FGF traps may represent a promising 
anti-cancer strategy to hamper the ligand-dependent activation of the FGF/FGFR 
system. We previously identified NSC12 as the first orally available small 
molecule FGF trap able to inhibit the growth and progression of several 
FGF-dependent tumor models. NSC12 is a pregnenolone derivative carrying a 
1,1-bis-trifluoromethyl-1,3-propanediol chain in position 17 of the steroid 
nucleus. Investigation of structure-activity relationships (SARs) provided more 
potent and specific NSC12 steroid derivatives and highlighted that the C17-side 
chain is pivotal for the FGF trap activity. Here, a scaffold hopping approach 
allowed to obtain two FGF trap compounds (22 and 57) devoid of the steroid 
nucleus and able to efficiently bind FGF2 and to inhibit FGFR activation in MM 
cells. Accordingly, these compounds exert a potent anti-tumor activity on MM 
cell lines both in vitro and in vivo and on MM patient-derived primary cells, 
strongly affecting the survival of both proteasome-inhibitor sensitive and 
resistant MM cells. These results propose a new therapeutic option for 
relapsed/refractory MM patients and set the bases for the development of novel 
FGF traps prone to chemical diversification to be used in the clinic for the 
treatment of those tumors in which the FGF/FGFR system plays a pivotal role, 
including MM.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107291
PMID: 38969274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.