---
reference_id: "PMID:30665554"
title: Parathyroid hormone resistance syndromes - Inactivating PTH/PTHrP signaling disorders (iPPSDs).
authors:
- Elli FM
- Pereda A
- Linglart A
- Perez de Nanclares G
- Mantovani G
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2018.09.008
keywords:
- "Bone Diseases, Metabolic/genetics, metabolism"
- Drug Resistance/genetics
- "Dysostoses/genetics, metabolism"
- "Endocrine System Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ossification, Heterotopic/genetics, metabolism"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, metabolism"
- Parathyroid Hormone/physiology
- "Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pseudohypoparathyroidism/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/genetics, metabolism"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parathyroid hormone resistance syndromes - Inactivating PTH/PTHrP signaling disorders (iPPSDs).
**Authors:** Elli FM, Pereda A, Linglart A, Perez de Nanclares G, Mantovani G
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2018.09.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2018.09.008)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018 Dec;32(6):941-954. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2018.09.008. Epub 2018 Sep 28.

Parathyroid hormone resistance syndromes - Inactivating PTH/PTHrP signaling 
disorders (iPPSDs).

Elli FM(1), Pereda A(2), Linglart A(3), Perez de Nanclares G(4), Mantovani G(5).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Endocrinology 
Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: francesca.elli@unimi.it.
(2)Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Institute, OSI 
Araba University Hospital, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Electronic address: 
arrate.peredaaguirre@osakidetza.eus.
(3)APHP, Department of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes for Children, 
Bicêtre Paris-Sud Hospital, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France; APHP, Reference Center 
for Rare Disorders of Calcium and Phosphate Metabolism, Filière OSCAR and 
Plateforme d'Expertise Maladies Rares Paris-Sud, Bicêtre Paris-Sud Hospital, Le 
Kremlin Bicêtre, France. Electronic address: agnes.linglart@aphp.fr.
(4)Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Institute, OSI 
Araba University Hospital, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Electronic address: 
gnanclares@osakidetza.eus.
(5)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Endocrinology 
Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy. Electronic address: giovanna.mantovani@unimi.it.

Metabolic disorders caused by impairments of the Gsα/cAMP/PKA pathway affecting 
the signaling of PTH/PTHrP lead to features caused by non-responsiveness of 
target organs, in turn leading to manifestations similar to the deficiency of 
the hormone itself. Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) and related disorders derive 
from a defect of the α subunit of the stimulatory G protein (Gsα) or of 
downstream effectors of the same pathway, such as the PKA regulatory subunit 1A 
and the phosphodiesterase type 4D. The increasing knowledge on these diseases 
made the actual classification of PHP outdated as it does not include related 
conditions such as acrodysostosis (ACRDYS) or progressive osseous heteroplasia 
(POH), so that a new nomenclature and classification has been recently proposed 
grouping these disorders under the term "inactivating PTH/PTHrP signaling 
disorder" (iPPSD). This review will focus on the pathophysiology, clinical and 
molecular aspects of these rare, heterogeneous but closely related diseases.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2018.09.008
PMID: 30665554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]