---
reference_id: "PMID:33117025"
title: "Spaceflight Associated Neuro-Ocular Syndrome (SANS): A Systematic Review and Future Directions."
authors:
- Martin Paez Y
- Mudie LI
- Subramanian PS
journal: Eye Brain
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2147/EB.S234076
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spaceflight Associated Neuro-Ocular Syndrome (SANS): A Systematic Review and Future Directions.
**Authors:** Martin Paez Y, Mudie LI, Subramanian PS
**Journal:** Eye Brain (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2147/EB.S234076](https://doi.org/10.2147/EB.S234076)

## Content

1. Eye Brain. 2020 Oct 19;12:105-117. doi: 10.2147/EB.S234076. eCollection 2020.

Spaceflight Associated Neuro-Ocular Syndrome (SANS): A Systematic Review and 
Future Directions.

Martin Paez Y(1)(2), Mudie LI(1), Subramanian PS(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Sue Anschutz-Rodgers/UCHealth Eye Center and Departments of Ophthalmology, 
Aurora, CO, 80045, USA.
(2)Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(3)Neurosurgery, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, 
USA.

PURPOSE: To present a systematic review of the current body of literature 
surrounding spaceflight associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS) and highlight 
priorities for future research.
METHODS: Three major biomedical databases were searched with the following 
terms: ((neuro ocular) OR ((brain) AND (eye))) AND ((spaceflight) OR (astronaut) 
OR (microgravity)) AND (ENGLISH[Language]). Once duplicates were removed, 283 
papers were left. Articles were excluded if they were not written in English or 
conference abstracts only. We avoided including review papers which did not 
provide any new information; however, two reviews on the pathophysiology of SANS 
were included for completeness. No limitations on date of publication were used. 
All included entries were then summarized for their contribution to knowledge 
about SANS.
RESULTS: Four main themes among the publications emerged: papers defining the 
clinical entity of SANS, its pathophysiology, technology used to study SANS, and 
publications on possible prevention of SANS. The key clinical features of SANS 
include optic nerve head elevation, hyperopic shifts, globe flattening, 
choroidal folds, and increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) volume in optic nerve 
sheaths. Two main hypotheses are proposed for the pathophysiology of SANS. The 
first being elevated intracranial pressure and the second compartmentalization 
of CSF to the globe. These hypotheses are not mutually exclusive, and our 
understanding of the pathophysiology of SANS is still evolving. The use of 
optical coherence tomography (OCT) has greatly furthered our knowledge about 
SANS, and with the deployment of OCT to the International Space Station, we now 
have ability to collect intraflight data. No effective prevention for SANS has 
been found, although fortunately, even with persistent anatomic and physiologic 
neuro-ocular changes, any functional impact has been correctable with 
spectacles.
CONCLUSION: This is the first systematic review of SANS. Despite the limitations 
of studying a syndrome that can only occur in a small, discrete population, we 
present a thorough overview of the literature surrounding SANS and several key 
areas important for future research are identified.

© 2020 Martin Paez et al.

DOI: 10.2147/EB.S234076
PMCID: PMC7585261
PMID: 33117025

Conflict of interest statement: Prem S Subramanian reports grants from Research 
to Prevent Blindness, Inc., during the conduct of the study; In addition, Dr 
Prem S Subramanian has a patent on novel therapeutics for lowering intracranial 
pressure pending. The authors report no other potential conflicts of interest in 
this work. This study was supported in part by an unrestricted grant from 
Research To Prevent Blindness, Inc. to the Department of Ophthalmology, 
University of Colorado School of Medicine.