---
reference_id: "PMID:19171080"
title: Two sequential outbreaks in two villages illustrate the various modes of transmission of cholera.
authors:
- DAS A
- Manickam P
- Hutin Y
- Pattanaik B
- Pal BB
- Chhotray GP
- Kar SK
- Gupte MD
journal: Epidemiol Infect
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1017/S0950268808001611
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two sequential outbreaks in two villages illustrate the various modes of transmission of cholera.
**Authors:** DAS A, Manickam P, Hutin Y, Pattanaik B, Pal BB, Chhotray GP, Kar SK, Gupte MD
**Journal:** Epidemiol Infect (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0950268808001611](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268808001611)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Infect. 2009 Jun;137(6):906-12. doi: 10.1017/S0950268808001611. Epub
 2009 Jan 27.

Two sequential outbreaks in two villages illustrate the various modes of 
transmission of cholera.

DAS A(1), Manickam P, Hutin Y, Pattanaik B, Pal BB, Chhotray GP, Kar SK, Gupte 
MD.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Epidemiology (ICMR), Chennai, India. dramitav@gmail.com

We investigated two sequential outbreaks of severe diarrhoea in two neighbouring 
villages of Orissa, in 2005. We conducted descriptive and matched case-control 
studies. The attack rates were 5.6% (n=62) and 5.2% (n=51), respectively, in the 
first and second villages. One death was reported in the second village (case 
fatality 2%). We identified that consumption of milk products prepared in the 
household of the index case [matched odds ratio (mOR) 5.7, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) 1.7-30] in the first village, and drinking well water in the 
second village were associated with the illness (mOR 4.7, 95% CI 1.6-19). We 
isolated Vibrio cholerae El Tor O1 Ogawa from stool samples from both the 
villages. Mishandling of milk products led to a cholera outbreak in the first 
village, which led to sewerage contamination of a well and another outbreak in 
the second village. Environmental contamination should be expected and prevented 
during cholera outbreaks.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268808001611
PMID: 19171080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]