---
reference_id: "PMID:41498078"
title: "A comparison of upper versus lower extremity rhabdomyosarcoma survival: A SEER database analysis."
authors:
- Tupper CJ
- Cogua LM
- Wang HY
- Silberstein PT
journal: Rep Pract Oncol Radiother
year: '2025'
doi: 10.5603/rpor.108577
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A comparison of upper versus lower extremity rhabdomyosarcoma survival: A SEER database analysis.
**Authors:** Tupper CJ, Cogua LM, Wang HY, Silberstein PT
**Journal:** Rep Pract Oncol Radiother (2025)
**DOI:** [10.5603/rpor.108577](https://doi.org/10.5603/rpor.108577)

## Content

1. Rep Pract Oncol Radiother. 2025 Dec 31;30(6):796-803. doi:
10.5603/rpor.108577.  eCollection 2025.

A comparison of upper versus lower extremity rhabdomyosarcoma survival: A SEER
database analysis.

Tupper CJ(1)(2), Cogua LM(2), Wang HY(2), Silberstein PT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Hofstra/Northwell Health Zucker School of
Medicine, Long Island Jewish/North Shore University, New Hyde Park, NY, United
States.
(2)Creighton University School of Medicine, Phoenix Regional Campus, Phoenix,
AZ, United States.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Creighton
University Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) of the extremities has a particularly poor
prognosis compared to other primary sites due to an increased rate of alveolar
histology, higher rate of metastasis, and the extent of regional lymph node
involvement. To date there are few assessments comparing upper extremity (UE) to
lower extremity (LE) RMS of the extremities using population-based registry, so
we sought to compare survival between UE and LE RMS.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) database, cases of RMS of the UE and LE diagnosed between 2000-2020 were
collected. Descriptive statistics and chi-square analyses were completed for
one-and five-year survival. Log-rank and Cox regression analyses were completed
to compare UE versus LE survival.
RESULTS: A total of 641 cases were included, of which 221 (34.5%) were UE and
420 (65.5%) were LE. On log-rank tests, UE survival was longer than LE survival
(p = 0.021). The one-year survival rate was greater for the UE (88.7%) compared
to the LE (81.4%) (p = 0.020) but similar at five-years. Cox regression analysis
showed no difference in survival between UE and LE primary site (hazard ratio =
1.172, p = 0.322).
CONCLUSIONS: In comparing UE and LE RMS survival, UE survival was greater at
one-year, but not on adjusted analyses. These findings contribute to the few
prior assessments of outcomes between UE and LE RMS, though direct comparisons
between UE and LE should be included in future prospective studies.

© 2025 Greater Poland Cancer Centre.

DOI: 10.5603/rpor.108577
PMCID: PMC12767979
PMID: 41498078

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors report no
conflicts of interest relevant to this work.
