---
reference_id: "PMID:7684601"
title: "Hydrocephalus in Apert syndrome: a retrospective review."
authors:
- Murovic JA
- Posnick JC
- Drake JM
- Humphreys RP
- Hoffman HJ
- Hendricks EB
journal: Pediatr Neurosurg
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1159/000120720
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hydrocephalus in Apert syndrome: a retrospective review.
**Authors:** Murovic JA, Posnick JC, Drake JM, Humphreys RP, Hoffman HJ, Hendricks EB
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurosurg (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000120720](https://doi.org/10.1159/000120720)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurosurg. 1993 May-Jun;19(3):151-5. doi: 10.1159/000120720.

Hydrocephalus in Apert syndrome: a retrospective review.

Murovic JA(1), Posnick JC, Drake JM, Humphreys RP, Hoffman HJ, Hendricks EB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, N.Y.

A retrospective evaluation was carried out to define the incidence of 
hydrocephalus and associated factors in 44 patients with Apert syndrome treated 
at The Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto over a 22-year period. Forty-three 
of these patients underwent cranioorbital decompressive procedures within 1 year 
of birth. Fifteen of 25 (60%) patients who had either a computed tomography scan 
or pneumoencephalogram had ventriculomegaly, and 3 of the 25 (12%) had 
associated brain anomalies. Ten of the 44 (23%) patients had cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) shunts placed, 7 lumboperitoneal and 3 ventriculoperitoneal. Six of the 
shunts were placed early after cranioorbital procedures (CSF leaks in 5 cases 
and a subgaleal fluid collection in 1 case). The average IQ of 15 patients 
evaluated by the Wechsler Intelligence Scale was 72.5, indicative of significant 
intellectual impairment. There was no correlation between IQ and ventricular 
size. Although hydrocephalus characterized by progressive ventricular dilatation 
is uncommon in Apert syndrome, postoperative problems related to impaired CSF 
circulation are common and may indicate an underlying CSF absorptive deficit.

DOI: 10.1159/000120720
PMID: 7684601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]