---
reference_id: "PMID:29191162"
title: "Severe congenital microcephaly with 16p13.11 microdeletion combined with NDE1 mutation, a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Tan L
- Bi B
- Zhao P
- Cai X
- Wan C
- Shao J
- He X
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-017-0501-9
keywords:
- Brain/physiopathology
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16/genetics"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Humans
- Infant
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- "Microcephaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe congenital microcephaly with 16p13.11 microdeletion combined with NDE1 mutation, a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Tan L, Bi B, Zhao P, Cai X, Wan C, Shao J, He X
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-017-0501-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-017-0501-9)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2017 Dec 1;18(1):141. doi: 10.1186/s12881-017-0501-9.

Severe congenital microcephaly with 16p13.11 microdeletion combined with NDE1
mutation, a case report and literature review.

Tan L(1), Bi B(2), Zhao P(1), Cai X(1), Wan C(1), Shao J(3), He X(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Center, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, 430016, China.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of CT/MRI Center, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China.
shaojb2002@sina.com.
(4)Clinical Research Center, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, 430016, China.
hexuelian2013@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Microcephaly is a disorder characterized by severe impairment in
brain development, reduced brain and head size. Congenital severe microcephaly
is very rare, and NDE1 deletion and genetic mutations are important
contributors.
CASE PRESENTATION: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chromosomal microarray
analysis (CMA) and muation screening of NDE1 gene were performed in an 8-month
patient with severe congenital microcephaly, and/or his parents. Genetic studies
found a 16p13.11 deletion containing NDE1 gene, and a novel NDE1 mutation
c.555_556GC > CT on the non-deleted homolog, inherited from his phenotypically
normal parents, respectively. The 2 bp nucleotide change results in a missense
mutation p.K185 N and a nonsense mutation p.Q186X. We also conducted literaturte
review to compare the clinical phenotypes of our patient to those of cases
previously reported with NDE1 mutations, and found all patients had mental
retardation, severe microcephaly, and corpus callosum agenesis.
CONCLUSION: This is the first Chinese reported with microcephaly caused by NDE1
mutations. NDE1 is a critical pathogenetic gene in severe congenital
microcephaly. Sequencing NDE1 and CMA in patients with severe congenital
microcephaly may be warranted.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-017-0501-9
PMCID: PMC5709987
PMID: 29191162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE:
Informed consent was obtained from the parents and the study protocols were
approved by the medical ethics committee of Wuhan Children’s Hospital. CONSENT
FOR PUBLICATION: Written consent was obtained from the parents of patient for
the publication, including child’s data and images. COMPETING INTERESTS: The
author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE:
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
