---
reference_id: "PMID:40529477"
title: Investigating the Utility of Leukocyte Sialic Acid Measurements in Lysosomal Free Sialic Acid Storage Disorder.
authors:
- Sabir MS
- Pollard L
- Wolfe L
- Adams DR
- Ciccone C
- Leoyklang P
- Platt FM
- Huizing M
- Gahl WA
- Malicdan MCV
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.70029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigating the Utility of Leukocyte Sialic Acid Measurements in Lysosomal Free Sialic Acid Storage Disorder.
**Authors:** Sabir MS, Pollard L, Wolfe L, Adams DR, Ciccone C, Leoyklang P, Platt FM, Huizing M, Gahl WA, Malicdan MCV
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.70029](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.70029)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2025 Jun 16;66(4):e70029. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.70029. eCollection 2025 
Jul.

Investigating the Utility of Leukocyte Sialic Acid Measurements in Lysosomal 
Free Sialic Acid Storage Disorder.

Sabir MS(1)(2), Pollard L(3), Wolfe L(1), Adams DR(1)(4), Ciccone C(5), 
Leoyklang P(5), Platt FM(6), Huizing M(5), Gahl WA(1)(5), Malicdan MCV(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health Bethesda Maryland USA.
(2)NIH Oxford-Cambridge Scholars Program University of Oxford Oxford UK.
(3)Biochemical Genetics Laboratory Greenwood Genetic Center Greenwood South 
Carolina USA.
(4)Office of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health Bethesda Maryland USA.
(5)Human Biochemical Genetics Section, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human 
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health Bethesda Maryland USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacology University of Oxford Oxford UK.

Lysosomal free sialic acid storage disorder (FSASD) is a rare, multisystem 
neurodegenerative disease caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in SLC17A5, 
encoding sialin. FSASD is characterized by aberrant accumulation of unconjugated 
"free" sialic acid (Neu5Ac) within lysosomes. Depending on the specific genetic 
variants, affected individuals may present with either a rapidly fatal disease 
or progressive neurodegeneration. While skin fibroblasts have traditionally been 
used for diagnosis and research, the use of leukocytes in FSASD remains 
underexplored. This study examined Neu5Ac levels in leukocytes from three 
individuals with FSASD carrying distinct SLC17A5 variants. The levels in 
affected individuals were compared to three different groups: (1) the unaffected 
biological parents of each case; (2) subjects for whom 14 distinct lysosomal 
storage disorders (LSDs) were excluded based on enzyme analysis (n = 11); and 
(3) participants with a confirmed LSD diagnosis, as determined by enzyme 
analysis (n = 9). Individuals with FSASD exhibited significantly higher levels 
of free Neu5Ac compared to their unaffected biological parents (36-fold), 
LSD-negative subjects (22-fold), and individuals with other LSDs (49-fold). 
Although total Neu5Ac levels showed a non-significant trend toward an increase 
in FSASD (1.3-fold), this was primarily due to elevated free Neu5Ac, as bound 
Neu5Ac was slightly decreased in the leukocytes of FSASD cases relative to their 
unaffected parents. Overall, these findings highlight leukocytes as a valuable, 
minimally invasive cellular model for FSASD, offering an alternative, reliable 
diagnostic tool and a potential platform for monitoring therapeutic responses in 
future intervention trials.

© 2025 The Author(s). JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.70029
PMCID: PMC12171062
PMID: 40529477

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.