---
reference_id: "PMID:23598976"
title: Brain and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural stem cells as an in vitro model of neurodegeneration in ataxia-telangiectasia.
authors:
- Carlessi L
- Fusar Poli E
- Delia D
journal: Exp Biol Med (Maywood)
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1177/1535370213480703
keywords:
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/pathology
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- Brain/cytology
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA Damage
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "Models, Biological"
- "Myocardium/metabolism, pathology"
- Nerve Degeneration/pathology
- Neural Stem Cells/cytology
- Oxidation-Reduction
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural stem cells as an in vitro model of neurodegeneration in ataxia-telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Carlessi L, Fusar Poli E, Delia D
**Journal:** Exp Biol Med (Maywood) (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1535370213480703](https://doi.org/10.1177/1535370213480703)

## Content

1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2013 Mar;238(3):301-7. doi: 10.1177/1535370213480703.

Brain and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural stem cells as an in vitro
model of neurodegeneration in ataxia-telangiectasia.

Carlessi L(1), Fusar Poli E, Delia D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale
Tumori, Via Amadeo 42, 20133 Milan, Italy.

The ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase is a key transducer of the
cellular response to DNA double strand breaks and its deficiency causes
ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), a pleiotropic genetic disorder primarily
characterized by cerebellar neuropathy, immunodeficiency and cancer
predisposition. While enormous progress has been achieved in elucidating the
biochemical and functional regulation of ATM in DNA damage response, and more
recently in redox signalling and antioxidant defence, the factors that make
neurons in A-T extremely vulnerable remain unclear. Given also that ATM knockout
mice do not recapitulate the central nervous system phenotype, a number of human
neural stem cell (hNSC) model systems have been developed to provide insights
into the mechanisms of neurodegeneration associated with ATM dysfunction. Here
we review the hNSC systems developed by us an others to model A-T.

DOI: 10.1177/1535370213480703
PMID: 23598976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
