---
reference_id: "PMID:26008863"
title: Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency presenting as isolated paroxysmal exercise induced dystonia successfully reversed with thiamine supplementation. Case report and mini-review.
authors:
- Castiglioni C
- Verrigni D
- Okuma C
- Diaz A
- Alvarez K
- Rizza T
- Carrozzo R
- Bertini E
- Miranda M
journal: Eur J Paediatr Neurol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2015.04.008
keywords:
- Brain/pathology
- Dietary Supplements
- Dystonic Disorders/etiology
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Thiamine/therapeutic use
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency presenting as isolated paroxysmal exercise induced dystonia successfully reversed with thiamine supplementation. Case report and mini-review.
**Authors:** Castiglioni C, Verrigni D, Okuma C, Diaz A, Alvarez K, Rizza T, Carrozzo R, Bertini E, Miranda M
**Journal:** Eur J Paediatr Neurol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpn.2015.04.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2015.04.008)

## Content

1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2015 Sep;19(5):497-503. doi:
10.1016/j.ejpn.2015.04.008.  Epub 2015 May 14.

Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency presenting as isolated paroxysmal exercise
induced dystonia successfully reversed with thiamine supplementation. Case
report and mini-review.

Castiglioni C(1), Verrigni D(2), Okuma C(3), Diaz A(4), Alvarez K(5), Rizza
T(2), Carrozzo R(2), Bertini E(2), Miranda M(6).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Neurology, Dept. of Pediatrics and Dept. of Neurology, Clínica las
Condes, Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: ccastiglioni@clc.cl.
(2)Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Laboratory of
Molecular Medicine, Bambino Gesu' Children's Hospital IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Dept. of Radiology, Clínica las Condes, Santiago, Chile.
(4)National Institute of Rehabilitation, INRPAC, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Oncology, Clínica las Condes, Santiago,
Chile.
(6)Unit of Neurology, Dept. of Pediatrics and Dept. of Neurology, Clínica las
Condes, Santiago, Chile.

BACKGROUND: Pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) deficiency is a disorder of energy
metabolism with variable clinical presentations, ranging from severe infantile
lactic acidosis to milder chronic neurological disorders. The spectrum of
clinical manifestations is continuously expanding.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report on a 19-year-old intelligent female with PDH
deficiency caused by a Leu216Ser mutation in PDHA1. She presented with recurrent
hemidystonic attacks, triggered by prolonged walking or running, as the unique
clinical manifestation that manifested since childhood. Laboratory workup and
neuroimages were initially normal but bilateral globus pallidum involvement
appeared later on brain MRI. Dystonia completely remitted after high doses of
thiamine, remaining free of symptoms after 3 years of follow up. We reviewed the
literature for similar observations.
CONCLUSIONS: Dystonia precipitated by exercise may be the only symptom of a PDH
deficiency, and the hallmark of the disease as high serum lactate or bilateral
striatal necrosis at neuroimaging may be absent. A high index of suspicion and
follow up is necessary for diagnosis. The clinical presentation of this patient
meets the criteria for a Paroxysmal Exercise induced Dystonia, leading us to add
this entity as another potential etiology for this type of paroxysmal
dyskinesia, which is besides a treatable condition that responds to thiamine
supplementation.

Copyright © 2015 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2015.04.008
PMID: 26008863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
