---
reference_id: "PMID:11868160"
title: A mutation in the SOS1 gene causes hereditary gingival fibromatosis type 1.
authors:
- Hart TC
- Zhang Y
- Gorry MC
- Hart PS
- Cooper M
- Marazita ML
- Marks JM
- Cortelli JR
- Pallos D
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1086/339689
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Blotting, Western"
- Brazil
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/classification, genetics"
- "Genes, Dominant/genetics"
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- Humans
- Introns/genetics
- Lod Score
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis, genetics"
- "SOS1 Protein/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in the SOS1 gene causes hereditary gingival fibromatosis type 1.
**Authors:** Hart TC, Zhang Y, Gorry MC, Hart PS, Cooper M, Marazita ML, Marks JM, Cortelli JR, Pallos D
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1086/339689](https://doi.org/10.1086/339689)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Apr;70(4):943-54. doi: 10.1086/339689. Epub 2002 Feb 26.

A mutation in the SOS1 gene causes hereditary gingival fibromatosis type 1.

Hart TC(1), Zhang Y, Gorry MC, Hart PS, Cooper M, Marazita ML, Marks JM, 
Cortelli JR, Pallos D.

Author information:
(1)Center For Craniofacial and Dental Genetics, Division of Oral Biology and 
Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Dental Medicine, 614 Salk Hall, 
3501 Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. hart@sdmgenetics.pitt.edu

Hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) is a rare, autosomal dominant form of 
gingival overgrowth. Affected individuals have a benign, slowly progressive, 
nonhemorrhagic, fibrous enlargement of the oral masticatory mucosa. Genetic loci 
for autosomal dominant forms of HGF have been localized to chromosome 2p21-p22 
(HGF1) and chromosome 5q13-q22 (HGF2). To identify the gene responsible for 
HGF1, we extended genetic linkage studies to refine the chromosome 2p21-p22 
candidate interval to approximately 2.3 Mb. Development of an integrated 
physical and genetic map of the interval identified 16 genes. Sequencing of 
these genes, in affected and unaffected HGF1 family members, identified a 
mutation in the Son of sevenless-1 (SOS1) gene in affected individuals. In this 
report, we describe the genomic structure of the SOS1 gene and present evidence 
that insertion of a cytosine between nucleotides 126,142 and 126,143 in codon 
1083 of the SOS1 gene is responsible for HGF1. This insertion mutation, which 
segregates in a dominant manner over four generations, introduces a frameshift 
and creates a premature stop codon, abolishing four functionally important 
proline-rich SH3 binding domains normally present in the carboxyl-terminal 
region of the SOS1 protein. The resultant protein chimera contains the wild-type 
SOS1 protein for the N-terminal amino acids 1-1083 fused to a novel 22-amino 
acid carboxyl terminus. Similar SOS1 deletion constructs are functional in 
animal models, and a transgenic mouse construct with a comparable SOS1 chimera 
produces a phenotype with skin hypertrophy. Clarification of the functional role 
of this SOS1 mutant has implications for understanding other forms of gingival 
fibromatosis and corrective gingival-tissue management.

DOI: 10.1086/339689
PMCID: PMC379122
PMID: 11868160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]