---
reference_id: "PMID:30076494"
title: "Neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction in multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica, and related disorders."
authors:
- Sakakibara R
journal: Clin Auton Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s10286-018-0551-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms/epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Multiple Sclerosis/epidemiology, therapy"
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Quality of Life
- "Urinary Bladder, Neurogenic/epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction in multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica, and related disorders.
**Authors:** Sakakibara R
**Journal:** Clin Auton Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10286-018-0551-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10286-018-0551-x)

## Content

1. Clin Auton Res. 2019 Jun;29(3):313-320. doi: 10.1007/s10286-018-0551-x. Epub 
2018 Aug 3.

Neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction in multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis 
optica, and related disorders.

Sakakibara R(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurology, Internal Medicine, Sakura Medical Center, Toho University, 564-1 
Shimoshizu, Sakura, 285-8741, Japan. sakakibara@sakura.med.toho-u.ac.jp.

PURPOSE: Multiple sclerosis (MS), neuromyelitis optica (NMO), and related 
disorders are major immune-mediated central nervous system diseases affecting 
the spinal cord. We reviewed the occurrence of neurogenic lower urinary tract 
dysfunction (NLUTD) in these categories of diseases.
METHODS: We systematically reviewed the literature regarding bladder dysfunction 
in MS, NMO spectrum disorder (NMOSD), and related disorders (acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis, acute immune-mediated myelopathy, and meningitis-retention 
syndrome).
RESULTS: The literature, although somewhat limited for diseases other than MS, 
suggests that bladder dysfunction is not uncommon in these diseases, presumably 
reflecting lesions in the spinal descending and ascending pathways. The pattern 
of bladder dysfunction is a combination of overactive bladder and large 
post-void residuals/urinary retention. Post-void residual is measured by 
portable ultrasound devices.
CONCLUSIONS: Because of the complexity of bladder behavior, careful 
consideration of bladder management is necessary in MS, NMO, and related 
disorders: e.g., antimuscarinics, etc., for overactive bladder and clean, 
intermittent self-catheterization for urinary retention. These management 
practices should help improve patients' quality of life.

DOI: 10.1007/s10286-018-0551-x
PMID: 30076494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]