---
reference_id: "PMID:16120155"
title: Molecular basis of hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy in two siblings.
authors:
- Indelman M
- Leibu R
- Jammal A
- Bergman R
- Sprecher E
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2005.06734.x
keywords:
- Arabs/genetics
- "Cadherins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Fundus Oculi
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Israel
- "Macular Degeneration/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular basis of hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy in two siblings.
**Authors:** Indelman M, Leibu R, Jammal A, Bergman R, Sprecher E
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2005.06734.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2005.06734.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2005 Sep;153(3):635-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2005.06734.x.

Molecular basis of hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy in two 
siblings.

Indelman M(1), Leibu R, Jammal A, Bergman R, Sprecher E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Laboratory of Molecular Dermatology, Rambam 
Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Hypotrichosis with juvenile macular dystrophy (HJMD) is a rare 
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by sparse and short scalp hair from 
birth, followed within a few years by progressive macular degeneration leading 
to blindness. HJMD was shown to result from mutations in CDH3 encoding 
P-cadherin.
OBJECTIVES: In the present study, we attempted to identify the molecular basis 
of abnormal hair growth in two siblings of Arab Muslim origin with hypotrichosis 
but no visual symptoms.
METHODS: Mutation analysis was performed using direct sequencing and polymerase 
chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis.
RESULTS: Patients displayed sparse and short hair since birth. Significant 
macular degenerative pigmentary changes were noticed in the face of normal 
visual acuity. Despite the fact that a single CDH3 mutation had previously been 
described in several families of Israeli Arab Muslim origin, the two affected 
patients were found to be homozygous carriers of a novel nonsense mutation 
(Y615X) predicted to result in premature termination of P-cadherin translation.
CONCLUSIONS: The present results indicate that all patients with congenital 
hypotrichosis should undergo thorough fundus examination, which, when revealing 
pigmentary macular changes, can be considered as indicative of an underlying 
CDH3 causative mutation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2005.06734.x
PMID: 16120155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]