---
reference_id: "PMID:37802748"
title: Dried blood spot-based newborn screening for bile acid synthesis disorders, Zellweger spectrum disorder, and Niemann-Pick type C1 by detection of bile acid metabolites.
authors:
- Muto Y
- Suzuki M
- Takei H
- Saito N
- Mori J
- Sugimoto S
- Imagawa K
- Nambu R
- Oguri S
- Itonaga T
- Ihara K
- Hayashi H
- Murayama K
- Kakiyama G
- Nittono H
- Shimizu T
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107703
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dried blood spot-based newborn screening for bile acid synthesis disorders, Zellweger spectrum disorder, and Niemann-Pick type C1 by detection of bile acid metabolites.
**Authors:** Muto Y, Suzuki M, Takei H, Saito N, Mori J, Sugimoto S, Imagawa K, Nambu R, Oguri S, Itonaga T, Ihara K, Hayashi H, Murayama K, Kakiyama G, Nittono H, Shimizu T
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107703](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107703)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2023 Sep-Oct;140(1-2):107703. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107703.  Epub 2023 Sep 28.

Dried blood spot-based newborn screening for bile acid synthesis disorders, 
Zellweger spectrum disorder, and Niemann-Pick type C1 by detection of bile acid 
metabolites.

Muto Y(1), Suzuki M(2), Takei H(3), Saito N(1), Mori J(4), Sugimoto S(5), 
Imagawa K(6), Nambu R(7), Oguri S(8), Itonaga T(8), Ihara K(8), Hayashi H(9), 
Murayama K(10), Kakiyama G(11), Nittono H(3), Shimizu T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 
2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 
2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. Electronic address: 
msuzuki@juntendo.ac.jp.
(3)Junshin Clinic Bile Acid Institute, 2-1-24 Haramachi, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 
152-0011, Japan.
(4)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Children's Medical 
Center, Osaka City General Hospital, 2-13-22 Miyakojima-hondori, Miyakojima-ku, 
Osaka 534-0021, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, 465 Kajii-cho, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, 
Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.
(6)Department of Child Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 
Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Saitama Children's Medical Center, 
1-2 Shintoshin, Chuo-ku, Saitama-city 330-8777, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, 1-1 
Oji-shinmachi, Oita 870-0819, Japan.
(9)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(10)Diagnostics and Therapeutics of Intractable Diseases, Intractable Disease 
Research Center, Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo University, 2-1-1 Hongo, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University School of 
Medicine, 1101 E. Marshall St., Richmond, VA 23298, USA; Central Virginia VA 
Healthcare System, 1201 Broad Rock Blvd., Richmond, VA 23249, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine whether it is possible to screen for bile acid synthesis 
disorders (BASDs) including peroxisome biogenesis disorder 1a (PBD1A) and 
Niemann-Pick type C1 (NPC1) at the time of newborn mass screening by measuring 
the intermediary metabolites of bile acid (BA) synthesis.
METHODS: Patients with 3β-hydroxy-ΔSuchy et al. (2021)5-C27-steroid 
dehydrogenase/isomerase (HSD3B7) deficiency (n = 2), 3-oxo-ΔPandak and Kakiyama 
(n.d.)4-steroid 5β-reductase (SRD5B1) deficiency (n = 1), oxysterol 
7α-hydroxylase (CYP7B1) deficiency (n = 1), PBD1A (n = 1), and NPC1 (n = 2) with 
available dried blood spot (DBS) samples collected in the neonatal period were 
included. DBSs from healthy neonates at 4 days of age (n = 1055) were also 
collected for the control. Disease specific BAs were measured by newly optimized 
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry with short run cycle (5-min/run). 
The results were validated by comparing with those obtained by the conventional 
condition with longer run cycle (76-min/run).
RESULTS: In healthy specimens, taurocholic acid and cholic acid were the two 
major BAs which constituted approximately 80% in the measured BAs. The disease 
marker BAs presented <10%. In BASDs, the following BAs were determined for the 
disease specific markers: Glyco/tauro 3β,7α,12α-trihydroxy-5-cholenoic acid 
3-sulfate for HSD3B7 deficiency (>70%); glyco/tauro 
7α,12α-dihydroxy-3-oxo-4-cholenoic acid for SRD5B1 deficiency (54%); tauro 
3β-hydroxy-5-cholenoic acid 3-sulfate for CYP7B1 deficiency (94%); 
3α,7α,12α-trihydroxy-5β-cholestanoic acid for PBD1A (78%); and tauro 
3β,7β-dihydroxy-5-cholenoic acid 3-sulfate for NPC1 (26%). *The % in the 
parenthesis indicates the portion found in the patient's specimen.
CONCLUSIONS: Early postnatal screening for BASDs, PBD1A and NPC1 is feasible 
with the described DBS-based method by measuring disease specific BAs. The 
present method is a quick and affordable test for screening for these inherited 
diseases.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107703
PMID: 37802748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to disclose.