---
reference_id: "PMID:34055437"
title: Neuroophthalmic Manifestations of Intracranial Tumours in Children.
authors:
- Kotecha M
- Gotecha S
- Chugh A
- Punia P
journal: Case Rep Ophthalmol Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1155/2021/7793382
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroophthalmic Manifestations of Intracranial Tumours in Children.
**Authors:** Kotecha M, Gotecha S, Chugh A, Punia P
**Journal:** Case Rep Ophthalmol Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2021/7793382](https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/7793382)

## Content

1. Case Rep Ophthalmol Med. 2021 May 15;2021:7793382. doi: 10.1155/2021/7793382. 
eCollection 2021.

Neuroophthalmic Manifestations of Intracranial Tumours in Children.

Kotecha M(1), Gotecha S(2), Chugh A(2), Punia P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Dr. D.Y. Patil Medical College and Hospital, 
Pimpri, Pune, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Dr. D.Y. Patil Medical College and Hospital, 
Pimpri, Pune, Maharashtra, India.

BACKGROUND: All children between 0 and 16 years presenting with brain tumours 
confirmed by Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and treated surgically in our 
institute were included in this study.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to evaluate the neuroophthalmic and clinical 
characteristics of intracranial space occupying lesions in children.
METHODS: Neuroophthalmic manifestations along with location of the tumour by 
contrast-enhanced MRI, type of surgical intervention, and postoperative 
histopathological diagnosis were evaluated.
RESULTS: In pediatric brain tumours, male preponderance was seen and 
supratentorial location was more common in general, while in older children, 
infratentorial tumours were more common than supratentorial tumours. Headache, 
vomiting, and cerebellar signs were the commonest neurological features. 
Diminution of vision, diplopia, and strabismus were the commonest ophthalmic 
symptoms. Papilledema, ophthalmoparesis, and nystagmus were the most frequent 
ophthalmological signs. Neurological manifestations of seizures, altered 
sensorium and motor deficits were more frequently seen in supratentorial 
tumours, while cranial nerve involvement and ataxia were seen in infratentorial 
tumours. Ophthalmological manifestations including diplopia, strabismus, 
ophthalmoparesis, and nystagmus were more frequently seen in infratentorial 
tumours. Astrocytoma was the most frequent histopathological diagnosis followed 
by medulloblastoma.
CONCLUSION: Diagnosis of pediatric intracranial tumours is complex and requires 
a multidisciplinary approach for prompt management. An ophthalmologist should 
have a high index of suspicion for brain tumours especially in patients 
presenting with common ocular symptoms like diminution of vision, diplopia, and 
strabismus without any neurological symptoms.

Copyright © 2021 Megha Kotecha et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/7793382
PMCID: PMC8147545
PMID: 34055437

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.