---
reference_id: "PMID:30711676"
title: Clinical and biomarker changes in presymptomatic genetic frontotemporal dementia.
authors:
- Benussi A
- Gazzina S
- Premi E
- Cosseddu M
- Archetti S
- "Dell'Era V"
- Cantoni V
- Cotelli MS
- Alberici A
- Micheli A
- Benussi L
- Ghidoni R
- Padovani A
- Borroni B
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.12.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and biomarker changes in presymptomatic genetic frontotemporal dementia.
**Authors:** Benussi A, Gazzina S, Premi E, Cosseddu M, Archetti S, Dell'Era V, Cantoni V, Cotelli MS, Alberici A, Micheli A, Benussi L, Ghidoni R, Padovani A, Borroni B
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.12.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.12.018)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Aging. 2019 Apr;76:133-140. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.12.018.  Epub 2019 Jan 7.

Clinical and biomarker changes in presymptomatic genetic frontotemporal 
dementia.

Benussi A(1), Gazzina S(1), Premi E(2), Cosseddu M(2), Archetti S(3), Dell'Era 
V(1), Cantoni V(4), Cotelli MS(5), Alberici A(2), Micheli A(6), Benussi L(7), 
Ghidoni R(7), Padovani A(1), Borroni B(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Neurology Unit, University 
of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurological Sciences and Vision, Neurology Unit, Brescia 
Hospital, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Department of Laboratory Diagnostics, III Laboratory of Analysis, Brescia 
Hospital, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Neurology Unit, University 
of Brescia, Brescia, Italy; Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug 
Research and Child Health, University of Florence, Italy.
(5)Neurology Unit, Valle Camonica Hospital, Brescia, Italy.
(6)Casa di Cura San Francesco, Bergamo, Italy.
(7)Molecular Markers Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di 
Dio-Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.
(8)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Neurology Unit, University 
of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. Electronic address: bborroni@inwind.it.

Presymptomatic carriers of GRN and C9orf72 mutations, the most frequent genetic 
causes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration, represent the optimal target 
population for the development of disease-modifying drugs. Preclinical 
biomarkers are needed to monitor the effect of therapeutic interventions in this 
population. We assessed clinical, functional, and neurophysiological measures in 
113 GRN or C9orf72 carriers and in 73 noncarrier first-degree relatives. For 73 
patients, follow-up longitudinal data were available. Differences between 
carriers and noncarriers were assessed using linear mixed-effects models. We 
observed that biological changes and intracortical facilitation transmission 
abnormalities significantly antecede the emergence of clinical symptoms of at 
least 3 decades. These are followed by intracortical inhibition transmission 
deficits, detected approximately 2 decades before expected symptom onset and 
then followed by an increase of white matter lesions, structural brain atrophy, 
and cognitive impairment. These results highlight how several biomarkers can 
show different aspects and rates of decline, possibly correlated with the 
underlying physiopathological process, that arise decades before the onset of 
clinical symptoms.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.12.018
PMID: 30711676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]