---
reference_id: "PMID:35717210"
title: Long-term clinical course and outcomes in patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
authors:
- Yoon HY
- Kim HJ
- Song JW
journal: Respir Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12931-022-02079-6
keywords:
- Adult
- Disease Progression
- Forced Expiratory Volume
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/chemically induced, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Respiratory Function Tests
- Retrospective Studies
- Sirolimus/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term clinical course and outcomes in patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
**Authors:** Yoon HY, Kim HJ, Song JW
**Journal:** Respir Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12931-022-02079-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12931-022-02079-6)

## Content

1. Respir Res. 2022 Jun 18;23(1):158. doi: 10.1186/s12931-022-02079-6.

Long-term clinical course and outcomes in patients with 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis.

Yoon HY(1), Kim HJ(2), Song JW(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Seoul North Municipal Hospital, 38, 
Yangwonyeok-ro, Jungnang-gu, Seoul, 02062, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88, Olympic-Ro 43-Gil, Songpa-Gu, 
Seoul, 05505, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88, Olympic-Ro 43-Gil, Songpa-Gu, 
Seoul, 05505, Republic of Korea. jwsongasan@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a rare multisystemic disorder with 
various clinical manifestations. Despite the recognition of several prognostic 
factors, the long-term clinical course and prognosis of patients with LAM in the 
era of sirolimus therapy are not established.
METHODS: The clinical data of 104 patients with LAM were retrospectively 
analyzed. Death or lung transplantation was defined as the primary outcome. 
Disease progression (DP) was defined as a 10% absolute decline in forced 
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1).
RESULTS: The mean age of all patients was 40.3 years. Over a median follow-up 
period of 7.1 years, of all patients, 6.7% died and 1.9% underwent lung 
transplantation, while of 92 patients with serial lung function data, 35.9% 
experienced DP. The 5-year and 10-year overall survival rates were 93.0% and 
90.9%, respectively. The multivariable Cox analysis revealed that older age 
(hazard ratio [HR]: 1.136, P = 0.025), lower FEV1 (HR: 0.956, P = 0.026) or 
diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (HR: 0.914, P = 0.003), and shorter 
distance during the 6-min walk test (HR: 0.993, P = 0.020) were independent 
prognostic factors for mortality. A propensity score-matched comparative 
analysis performed between patients who received sirolimus therapy and those who 
did not, found no differences in survival, DP, complications, and lung function 
decline rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Over a follow-up period of approximately 7 years, one-tenth of all 
patients experienced death, while one-third experienced DP. Older age, lower 
lung function, and reduced exercise capacity were associated with a poor 
prognosis in patients with LAM.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-022-02079-6
PMCID: PMC9206248
PMID: 35717210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interests.