---
reference_id: "PMID:38645965"
title: Vasoproliferative Tumor Secondary to Sarcoidosis-Associated Intermediate Uveitis.
authors:
- Jalil SA
- Jaouni T
- Amer R
journal: Turk J Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4274/tjo.galenos.2024.36926
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vasoproliferative Tumor Secondary to Sarcoidosis-Associated Intermediate Uveitis.
**Authors:** Jalil SA, Jaouni T, Amer R
**Journal:** Turk J Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4274/tjo.galenos.2024.36926](https://doi.org/10.4274/tjo.galenos.2024.36926)

## Content

1. Turk J Ophthalmol. 2024 Apr 19;54(2):108-111. doi: 
10.4274/tjo.galenos.2024.36926.

Vasoproliferative Tumor Secondary to Sarcoidosis-Associated Intermediate 
Uveitis.

Jalil SA(1), Jaouni T(1), Amer R(1).

Author information:
(1)Hadassah Medical Center, Department of Ophthalmology, Jerusalem, Israel.

We report the visual and clinical outcomes of a middle-aged woman who presented 
with exudative retinal detachment (ERD) secondary to a vasoproliferative tumor 
(VPT) in an eye with sarcoidosis-associated intermediate uveitis. A 55-year-old 
woman previously diagnosed with sarcoidosis presented with decreased vision in 
the left eye (LE). Visual acuity in the LE was counting fingers. She had active 
vitritis, and a peripheral retinal vascular mass was noted in the superotemporal 
periphery. The mass was associated with ERD involving the posterior pole. The 
patient was managed with systemic and intravitreal steroids, and cyclosporine 
was subsequently added as a steroid-sparing agent. Because of recurrence of ERD, 
the patient underwent pars plana vitrectomy, and cryotherapy and laser 
photocoagulation were applied to the VPT. Two months postoperatively, visual 
acuity in the LE improved to 6/10. There was marked regression of the VPT and 
total resolution of the ERD. In conclusion, we report a favorable visual and 
clinical outcome in a patient with VPT-associated ERD who responded to a 
combination of medical therapy and surgical intervention. VPT may lead to 
different remote complications, so timely diagnosis of these tumors and proper 
management of their complications is warranted.

©Copyright 2024 by the Turkish Ophthalmological Association / Turkish Journal of 
Ophthalmology published by Galenos Publishing House.

DOI: 10.4274/tjo.galenos.2024.36926
PMCID: PMC11034545
PMID: 38645965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No conflict of interest 
was declared by the authors.