---
reference_id: "PMID:35312075"
title: "Chronic Rhinosinusitis: T2r38 Genotyping and Nasal Cytology in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia."
authors:
- Piatti G
- Ambrosetti U
- Aldè M
- Girotto G
- Concas MP
- Torretta S
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/lary.30112
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Rhinosinusitis: T2r38 Genotyping and Nasal Cytology in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Piatti G, Ambrosetti U, Aldè M, Girotto G, Concas MP, Torretta S
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.30112](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.30112)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2023 Feb;133(2):248-254. doi: 10.1002/lary.30112. Epub 2022 Mar 
21.

Chronic Rhinosinusitis: T2r38 Genotyping and Nasal Cytology in Primary Ciliary 
Dyskinesia.

Piatti G(1), Ambrosetti U(2), Aldè M(2), Girotto G(3), Concas MP(4), Torretta 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan and 
Unit of Bronchopneumology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan and 
Division of Otolaryngology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Institute for Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, Italy.
(4)Institute for Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, 
Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is a major hallmark of primary ciliary 
dyskinesia (PCD). We investigated the possible correlation between some severity 
markers of CRS and several clinical features of the disease. We further studied 
the bitter taste receptor TAS2R38 polymorphisms to identify the genotypes 
associated with more severe disease.
METHODS: We included 39 adult PCD patients with (CRSwNP) and without nasal 
polyposis (CRSsNP); a sample for nasal cytology was obtained and clinical 
cytological grading (CCG) was determined. The SNOT-22 and Lund-Mackay scores 
were recorded. A sample of DNA was extracted from peripheral blood to 
investigate TAS2R38 polymorphisms.
RESULTS: CRSwNP patients had features of more severe disease: indeed, they had 
statistically significantly higher frequency of previous sinus surgery, higher 
SNOT-22, LM scores, and CCG than CRSsNP patients. Upon genotyping of TAS2R38 
polymorphisms, we observed that the AVI-AVI genotype, associated to homozygous 
nonfunctional bitter TAS2R38 receptor, was more prevalent among CRSwNP (100%) 
than in CRSsNP patients (0%); furthermore, AVI-AVI subjects showed statistically 
significantly worse SNOT-22 and CCG scores than PAV-PAV and PAV-AVI subjects. 
The group of AVI-AVI patients also had more frequent respiratory exacerbations, 
Gram-negative infections, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonization than PAV-PAV 
and PAV-AVI patients.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate for the first time that PCD patients with 
CRSwNP display a more severe disease than those with CRSsNP. Genotyping of 
TAS2R38 polymorphisms demonstrated that in PCD patients, the AVI-AVI genotype is 
strikingly more prevalent among CRSwNP than in CRSsNP, while the PAV-PAV 
genotype might be protective against Gram-negative infections and respiratory 
exacerbations.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 3 Laryngoscope, 133:248-254, 2023.

© 2022 The Authors. The Laryngoscope published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.30112
PMCID: PMC10078746
PMID: 35312075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]