---
reference_id: "PMID:26455322"
title: PDGFRB mutants found in patients with familial infantile myofibromatosis or overgrowth syndrome are oncogenic and sensitive to imatinib.
authors:
- Arts FA
- Chand D
- Pecquet C
- Velghe AI
- Constantinescu S
- Hallberg B
- Demoulin JB
journal: Oncogene
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.383
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- Cell Line
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cell Proliferation/drug effects, genetics"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Growth Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Imatinib Mesylate/pharmacology
- MCF-7 Cells
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Mutation
- "Myofibromatosis/congenital, genetics, metabolism"
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- "Neoplasms, Experimental/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Oncogenes/genetics
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/genetics, metabolism"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PDGFRB mutants found in patients with familial infantile myofibromatosis or overgrowth syndrome are oncogenic and sensitive to imatinib.
**Authors:** Arts FA, Chand D, Pecquet C, Velghe AI, Constantinescu S, Hallberg B, Demoulin JB
**Journal:** Oncogene (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2015.383](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2015.383)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2016 Jun 23;35(25):3239-48. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.383. Epub 2015 Oct
 12.

PDGFRB mutants found in patients with familial infantile myofibromatosis or 
overgrowth syndrome are oncogenic and sensitive to imatinib.

Arts FA(1), Chand D(2)(3), Pecquet C(1)(4), Velghe AI(1), Constantinescu 
S(1)(4), Hallberg B(2), Demoulin JB(1).

Author information:
(1)De Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute of 
Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Brussels, Belgium.

Recently, germline and somatic heterozygous mutations in the platelet-derived 
growth factor receptor β (PDGFRB) have been associated with familial infantile 
myofibromatosis (IM), which is characterized by soft tissue tumors, and 
overgrowth syndrome, a disease that predisposes to cancer. These mutations have 
not been functionally characterized. In the present study, the activity of three 
PDGFRB mutants associated with familial IM (R561C, P660T and N666K) and one 
PDGFRB mutant found in patients with overgrowth syndrome (P584R) was tested in 
various models. The P660T mutant showed no difference with the wild-type 
receptor, suggesting that it might represent a polymorphic variant unrelated to 
the disease. By contrast, the three other mutants were constitutively active and 
able to transform NIH3T3 and Ba/F3 cells to different extents. In particular, 
the germline mutant identified in overgrowth syndrome, P584R, was a stronger 
oncogene than the germline R561C mutant associated with myofibromatosis. The 
distinct phenotypes associated with these two mutations could be related to this 
difference of potency. Importantly, all activated mutants were sensitive to 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as imatinib, nilotinib and ponatinib. In 
conclusion, the PDGFRB mutations previously identified in familial IM and 
overgrowth syndrome activate the receptor in the absence of ligand, supporting 
the hypothesis that these mutations cause the diseases. Moreover, imatinib seems 
to be a promising treatment for patients carrying these mutations. To our 
knowledge, these are the first confirmed gain-of-function point mutations of 
PDGFRB in human cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2015.383
PMID: 26455322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]