---
reference_id: "PMID:31159884"
title: Orthostatic intolerance in chronic fatigue syndrome.
authors:
- Garner R
- Baraniuk JN
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-019-1935-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orthostatic intolerance in chronic fatigue syndrome.
**Authors:** Garner R, Baraniuk JN
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-019-1935-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-019-1935-y)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2019 Jun 3;17(1):185. doi: 10.1186/s12967-019-1935-y.

Orthostatic intolerance in chronic fatigue syndrome.

Garner R(1), Baraniuk JN(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine, 
Georgetown University Medical Center, 3900 Reservoir Rd NW Preclinical Science 
LD03, Washington, DC, 20007, USA. rsg66@georgetown.edu.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine, 
Georgetown University Medical Center, 3900 Reservoir Rd NW Preclinical Science 
LD03, Washington, DC, 20007, USA.

BACKGROUND: Orthostatic intolerance (OI) is a significant problem for those with 
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). We aimed to characterize orthostatic intolerance 
in CFS and to study the effects of exercise on OI.
METHODS: CFS (n = 39) and control (n = 25) subjects had recumbent and standing 
symptoms assessed using the 20-point, anchored, ordinal Gracely Box Scale before 
and after submaximal exercise. The change in heart rate (ΔHR ≥ 30 bpm) 
identified Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS) before and after 
exercise, and the transient, exercise-induced postural tachycardia Stress Test 
Activated Reversible Tachycardia (START) phenotype only after exercise.
RESULTS: Dizziness and lightheadedness were found in 41% of recumbent CFS 
subjects and in 72% of standing CFS subjects. Orthostatic tachycardia did not 
account for OI symptoms in CFS. ROC analysis with a threshold ≥ 2/20 on the 
Gracely Box Scale stratified CFS subjects into three groups: No OI 
(symptoms < 2), Postural OI (only standing symptoms ≥ 2), and Persistent OI 
(recumbent and standing symptoms ≥ 2).
CONCLUSIONS: Dizziness and Lightheadedness symptoms while recumbent are an 
underreported finding in CFS and should be measured when doing a clinical 
evaluation to diagnose orthostatic intolerance. POTS was found in 6 and START 
was found in 10 CFS subjects. Persistent OI had symptoms while recumbent and 
standing, highest symptom severity, and lability in symptoms after exercise. 
Trial registration The trial was registered at the following: 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03567811.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-019-1935-y
PMCID: PMC6547462
PMID: 31159884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.