---
reference_id: "PMID:38821640"
title: Molecular Pathology of Urothelial Carcinoma.
authors:
- Al-Ahmadie H
- Netto GJ
journal: Clin Lab Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.cll.2023.08.010
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Transitional Cell/pathology, genetics, diagnosis"
- Mutation
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/pathology, genetics, diagnosis"
- "Urologic Neoplasms/pathology, genetics, diagnosis"
- Urothelium/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Pathology of Urothelial Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Al-Ahmadie H, Netto GJ
**Journal:** Clin Lab Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cll.2023.08.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cll.2023.08.010)

## Content

1. Clin Lab Med. 2024 Jun;44(2):181-198. doi: 10.1016/j.cll.2023.08.010.

Molecular Pathology of Urothelial Carcinoma.

Al-Ahmadie H(1), Netto GJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York 
Avenue, New York, NW 10065, USA. Electronic address: alahmadh@mskcc.org.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, WP Building, Suite P230, 619 19th 
Street South, Birmingham, AL 35249-7331, USA. Electronic address: 
gnetto@uab.edu.

Urothelial carcinoma is characterized by the presence of a wide spectrum of 
histopathologic features and molecular alterations that contribute to its 
morphologic and genomic heterogeneity. It typically harbors high rates of 
somatic mutations with considerable genomic and transcriptional complexity and 
heterogeneity that is reflective of its varied histomorphologic and clinical 
features. This review provides an update on the recent advances in the molecular 
characterization and novel molecular taxonomy of urothelial carcinoma and 
variant histologies.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cll.2023.08.010
PMID: 38821640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]