---
reference_id: "PMID:11329578"
title: "Internal anal sphincter achalasia: outcome after internal sphincter myectomy."
authors:
- De Caluwé D
- Yoneda A
- Akl U
- Puri P
journal: J Pediatr Surg
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1053/jpsu.2001.22949
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Internal anal sphincter achalasia: outcome after internal sphincter myectomy.
**Authors:** De Caluwé D, Yoneda A, Akl U, Puri P
**Journal:** J Pediatr Surg (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1053/jpsu.2001.22949](https://doi.org/10.1053/jpsu.2001.22949)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Surg. 2001 May;36(5):736-8. doi: 10.1053/jpsu.2001.22949.

Internal anal sphincter achalasia: outcome after internal sphincter myectomy.

De Caluwé D(1), Yoneda A, Akl U, Puri P.

Author information:
(1)Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children, Crumlin, 
Dublin 12, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Internal anal sphincter achalasia (IASA), also referred to as 
ultrashort segment Hirschsprung's disease (HD), is a clinical condition with 
presentation similar to HD, but with the presence of ganglion cells on rectal 
biopsy. The diagnosis of IASA is made on anorectal manometry, which shows the 
absence of rectosphincteric reflex on rectal balloon inflation. Altered 
intramuscular innervation has been reported in IASA. The purpose of this study 
was to review the outcome after internal sphincter myectomy in patients with 
IASA.
METHODS: Fifteen consecutive patients (age range, 2 years to 12 years) with IASA 
underwent posterior internal sphincter myectomy. All patients presented with 
severe constipation with or without soiling. The diagnosis of IASA was made by 
anorectal manometry. HD was excluded in these cases by the presence of ganglion 
cells and normal acetylcholinesterase activity on suction rectal biopsies. 
Internal sphincter (IS) specimens were examined using immunohistochemistry for 
the general neuronal marker PGP 9.5 and synapsin 1 (a presynaptic marker) and 
using general histochemistry for NADPH-diaphorase. All patients underwent 
follow-up for periods from 2 years to 6 years.
RESULTS: PGP 9.5, synapsin 1 and NADPH-diaphorase positive nerve fibers were 
either absent or markedly reduced in IASA specimens compared with controls, 
confirming previous reports of defective intramuscular innervation in IASA. At 
the time of follow-up, 7 patients have regular bowel motions and are not on any 
laxatives. Six patients have normal bowel habits but are on small doses of 
laxatives. One patient is able to stay clean with regular enema regimen. One 
patient required resection of dilated and redundant sigmoid colon and now has 
normal bowel habits with laxatives.
CONCLUSION: The majority of patients with internal anal sphincter achalasia can 
be treated successfully by internal sphincter myectomy.

Copyright 2001 by W.B. Saunders Company.

DOI: 10.1053/jpsu.2001.22949
PMID: 11329578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]