---
reference_id: "PMID:32888683"
title: Update on the Management of Kawasaki Disease.
authors:
- Friedman KG
- Jone PN
journal: Pediatr Clin North Am
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.pcl.2020.06.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on the Management of Kawasaki Disease.
**Authors:** Friedman KG, Jone PN
**Journal:** Pediatr Clin North Am (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pcl.2020.06.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcl.2020.06.002)

## Content

1. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2020 Oct;67(5):811-819. doi: 10.1016/j.pcl.2020.06.002.
 Epub 2020 Aug 11.

Update on the Management of Kawasaki Disease.

Friedman KG(1), Jone PN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: Kevin.Friedman@cardio.chboston.org.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Cardiology, Children's Hospital Colorado, 
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.

Treatment of Kawasaki disease (KD) with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 
administered within the initial 10 days of fever onset decreases the risk of 
coronary artery aneurysms (CAAs) from ∼ 25% to less than 5%. However, patients 
with IVIG resistance, young infants, men, highly inflamed patients, and/or those 
with coronary changes at diagnosis remain at high risk for CAA. High-risk 
patients may benefit from acute, adjunctive antiinflammatory treatment in 
addition to IVIG. Optimal therapy remains unknown. This article reviews the 
acute pharmacologic management of patients with KD, focusing on adjunctive 
primary therapy options and treatment of patients with IVIG resistance.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcl.2020.06.002
PMID: 32888683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure No disclosures.