---
reference_id: "PMID:17805350"
title: "Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: assessment of medication risks with emphasis on recently marketed drugs. The EuroSCAR-study."
authors:
- Mockenhaupt M
- Viboud C
- Dunant A
- Naldi L
- Halevy S
- Bouwes Bavinck JN
- Sidoroff A
- Schneck J
- Roujeau JC
- Flahault A
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5701033
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/adverse effects
- Adult
- Aged
- Analgesics/adverse effects
- Case-Control Studies
- Humans
- Lamotrigine
- Middle Aged
- Nevirapine/adverse effects
- Risk
- Sertraline/adverse effects
- Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/etiology
- Time Factors
- Triazines/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: assessment of medication risks with emphasis on recently marketed drugs. The EuroSCAR-study.
**Authors:** Mockenhaupt M, Viboud C, Dunant A, Naldi L, Halevy S, Bouwes Bavinck JN, Sidoroff A, Schneck J, Roujeau JC, Flahault A
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.jid.5701033](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jid.5701033)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2008 Jan;128(1):35-44. doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5701033. Epub
2007  Sep 6.

Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: assessment of 
medication risks with emphasis on recently marketed drugs. The EuroSCAR-study.

Mockenhaupt M(1), Viboud C, Dunant A, Naldi L, Halevy S, Bouwes Bavinck JN, 
Sidoroff A, Schneck J, Roujeau JC, Flahault A.

Author information:
(1)Dokumentationszentrum schwerer Hautreaktionen, Department of Dermatology, 
University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany. dzh@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are rare but 
severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCAR) related to a variety of medications. 
They have a significant public health impact because of high mortality and 
morbidity. A multinational case-control study conducted in Europe between 1997 
and 2001 evaluated the risk of medications to induce SCAR. Cases were actively 
detected through a hospital network covering more than 100 million inhabitants. 
Three hospitalized patients per case matched on age, gender, and date of 
interview were enrolled as controls. After validation by an expert committee 
blinded to exposures, 379 SCAR cases and 1,505 controls were included. Among 
drugs recently introduced into the market, strong associations were documented 
for nevirapine (relative risk (RR)>22) and lamotrigine (RR>14), and weaker 
associations for sertraline (RR=11 [2.7-46]), pantoprazole (RR=18 [3.9-85]), and 
tramadol (RR=20 [4.4-93]). Strong associations were confirmed for anti-infective 
sulfonamides, allopurinol, carbamazapine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, and 
oxicam-NSAIDs , with some changes in relative numbers of exposed cases. Thus, 
many cases were still related to a few "old" drugs with a known high risk. Risk 
was restricted to the first few weeks of drug intake. The use of such drugs as 
first-line therapies should be considered carefully, especially when safer 
alternative treatments exist. A number of widely used drugs did not show any 
risk for SJS and TEN.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.jid.5701033
PMID: 17805350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]