---
reference_id: "PMID:37596524"
title: "Transcranial magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound pallidothalamic tractotomy for patients with X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism: a study protocol."
authors:
- Jamora RDG
- Khu KJO
- Sy MCC
- Pascual JSG
- Legaspi GD
- Aguilar JA
journal: BMC Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12883-023-03344-x
keywords:
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked"
- Philippines
- Dystonia
- Movement Disorders
- Dystonic Disorders
- Prospective Studies
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcranial magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound pallidothalamic tractotomy for patients with X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism: a study protocol.
**Authors:** Jamora RDG, Khu KJO, Sy MCC, Pascual JSG, Legaspi GD, Aguilar JA
**Journal:** BMC Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12883-023-03344-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12883-023-03344-x)

## Content

1. BMC Neurol. 2023 Aug 18;23(1):306. doi: 10.1186/s12883-023-03344-x.

Transcranial magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound pallidothalamic 
tractotomy for patients with X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism: a study protocol.

Jamora RDG(#)(1), Khu KJO(#)(2), Sy MCC(3), Pascual JSG(2), Legaspi GD(2), 
Aguilar JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Adult Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, College of 
Medicine, Philippine General Hospital, University of the Philippines Manila, 
Manila, Philippines. rgjamora@up.edu.ph.
(2)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Neurosciences, College of Medicine 
and Philippine General Hospital, University of the Philippines Manila, Manila, 
Philippines.
(3)Division of Adult Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, College of 
Medicine, Philippine General Hospital, University of the Philippines Manila, 
Manila, Philippines.
(#)Contributed equally

Transcranial magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound (MRgFUS) is a 
noninvasive method for controlling tremor and has recently been used in patients 
with X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (XDP). This study aims to determine the 
improvement in dystonia and parkinsonism in patients with XDP after MRgFUS 
pallidothalamic tractotomy. This prospective study will be conducted at the 
Philippine General Hospital, University of the Philippines Manila. The primary 
outcome measure is the change in the pre- and post-treatment XDP-Movement 
Disorder Society of the Philippines Scale scores. In addition, demographic and 
clinical data will be collected, including the Burke-Fahn-Marsden Dystonia 
Rating Scale, Part III of the Movement Disorder Society-Unified Parkinson's 
disease Rating Scale score, XDP clinical and functional stage, the five-level 
EuroQol five-dimensional questionnaire, Montreal Cognitive Assessment scores, 
MRgFUS treatment parameters, and adverse events. Patients will be assessed 
within 24 hours of treatment, then at 2 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 9 months, and 
12 months post-treatment. This protocol was approved by the University of the 
Philippines Manila Research Ethics Board (UPMREB 2022-0271-01). Data collection 
began in January 2023. This protocol has been registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov: Trial Registration number: NCT05592028.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-023-03344-x
PMCID: PMC10436542
PMID: 37596524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.