---
reference_id: "PMID:38661449"
title: Exagamglogene Autotemcel for Severe Sickle Cell Disease.
authors:
- Frangoul H
- Locatelli F
- Sharma A
- Bhatia M
- Mapara M
- Molinari L
- Wall D
- Liem RI
- Telfer P
- Shah AJ
- Cavazzana M
- Corbacioglu S
- Rondelli D
- Meisel R
- Dedeken L
- Lobitz S
- de Montalembert M
- Steinberg MH
- Walters MC
- Eckrich MJ
- Imren S
- Bower L
- Simard C
- Zhou W
- Xuan F
- Morrow PK
- Hobbs WE
- Grupp SA
- CLIMB SCD-121 Study Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2309676
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exagamglogene Autotemcel for Severe Sickle Cell Disease.
**Authors:** Frangoul H, Locatelli F, Sharma A, Bhatia M, Mapara M, Molinari L, Wall D, Liem RI, Telfer P, Shah AJ, Cavazzana M, Corbacioglu S, Rondelli D, Meisel R, Dedeken L, Lobitz S, de Montalembert M, Steinberg MH, Walters MC, Eckrich MJ, Imren S, Bower L, Simard C, Zhou W, Xuan F, Morrow PK, Hobbs WE, Grupp SA, CLIMB SCD-121 Study Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2309676](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2309676)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2024 May 9;390(18):1649-1662. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2309676. Epub 
2024 Apr 24.

Exagamglogene Autotemcel for Severe Sickle Cell Disease.

Frangoul H(1), Locatelli F(1), Sharma A(1), Bhatia M(1), Mapara M(1), Molinari 
L(1), Wall D(1), Liem RI(1), Telfer P(1), Shah AJ(1), Cavazzana M(1), 
Corbacioglu S(1), Rondelli D(1), Meisel R(1), Dedeken L(1), Lobitz S(1), de 
Montalembert M(1), Steinberg MH(1), Walters MC(1), Eckrich MJ(1), Imren S(1), 
Bower L(1), Simard C(1), Zhou W(1), Xuan F(1), Morrow PK(1), Hobbs WE(1), Grupp 
SA(1); CLIMB SCD-121 Study Group.

Collaborators: Molinari L, Herrera C, Rondelli D, Krauz L, Dedeken L, Van 
Puyvelde M, Mapara M, Shelton E, Bhatia M, Brivett C, Frangoul H, Riggins C, 
Sharma A, Hildebrand R, Shah A, Bartolome R, Grupp S, Gallagher D, Cavazzana M, 
Marouene J, Liem R, King K, Telfer P, Dobson K, Corbacioglu S, Spachtholz R, 
Locatelli F, Algeri M, Cefalo MG, Laurieri C, de la Fuente J, Gururaj J, Wall D, 
Moon J, Meisel R, Schiefer S, de Montalembert M, Grupp SA, Lobitz S, Steinberg 
MH, Walters MC.

Author information:
(1)From Sarah Cannon Research Institute at the Children's Hospital at TriStar 
Centennial (H.F.), Nashville, and Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cellular 
Therapy, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis (A.S.) - both in 
Tennessee; IRCCS, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Catholic University of the 
Sacred Heart, Rome (F.L.); the Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University 
Irving Medical Center, New York-Presbyterian-Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital 
(M.B.), and the Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, 
Columbia University (M. Mapara) - both in New York; Sarah Cannon Pediatric 
Transplant and Cellular Therapy Program at Methodist Children's Hospital, San 
Antonio, TX (L.M., M.J.E.); the Hospital for Sick Children and the University of 
Toronto, Toronto (D.W.); Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago 
(R.I.L.) and the University of Illinois at Chicago (D.R.) - both in Chicago; 
Royal London Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust, London (P.T.); Stanford 
University, Palo Alto (A.J.S.), and University of California San Francisco 
Benioff Children's Hospital, Oakland (M.C.W.) - both in California; the 
Biotherapy Department and Biotherapy Clinical Investigation Center (M.C.), 
Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, 
Université Paris-Cité (M. de Montalembert), Paris; the University of Regensburg, 
Regensburg (S.C.), the Division of Pediatric Stem Cell Therapy, Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Hematology, and Clinical Immunology, Medical Faculty, 
Heinrich Heine University, Duesseldorf (R.M.), and Gemeinschaftsklinikum 
Mittelrhein, Koblenz (S.L.) - all in Germany; Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants 
Reine Fabiola, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels (L.D.); Boston University 
Chobanian and Avedisian School of Medicine (M.H.S.) and Vertex Pharmaceuticals 
(S.I., L.B., C.S., W.Z., F.X., W.E.H.), Boston, and CRISPR Therapeutics, 
Cambridge (P.K.M.) - all in Massachusetts; and the Division of Oncology, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (S.A.G.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Aug 8;391(6):571-572. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2407381.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Aug 8;391(6):572. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2407381.

BACKGROUND: Exagamglogene autotemcel (exa-cel) is a nonviral cell therapy 
designed to reactivate fetal hemoglobin synthesis by means of ex vivo clustered 
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-Cas9 gene editing of 
autologous CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) at the 
erythroid-specific enhancer region of BCL11A.
METHODS: We conducted a phase 3, single-group, open-label study of exa-cel in 
patients 12 to 35 years of age with sickle cell disease who had had at least two 
severe vaso-occlusive crises in each of the 2 years before screening. CD34+ 
HSPCs were edited with the use of CRISPR-Cas9. Before the exa-cel infusion, 
patients underwent myeloablative conditioning with pharmacokinetically 
dose-adjusted busulfan. The primary end point was freedom from severe 
vaso-occlusive crises for at least 12 consecutive months. A key secondary end 
point was freedom from inpatient hospitalization for severe vaso-occlusive 
crises for at least 12 consecutive months. The safety of exa-cel was also 
assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 44 patients received exa-cel, and the median follow-up was 
19.3 months (range, 0.8 to 48.1). Neutrophils and platelets engrafted in each 
patient. Of the 30 patients who had sufficient follow-up to be evaluated, 29 
(97%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 83 to 100) were free from vaso-occlusive 
crises for at least 12 consecutive months, and all 30 (100%; 95% CI, 88 to 100) 
were free from hospitalizations for vaso-occlusive crises for at least 12 
consecutive months (P<0.001 for both comparisons against the null hypothesis of 
a 50% response). The safety profile of exa-cel was generally consistent with 
that of myeloablative busulfan conditioning and autologous HSPC transplantation. 
No cancers occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with exa-cel eliminated vaso-occlusive crises in 97% of 
patients with sickle cell disease for a period of 12 months or more. (CLIMB 
SCD-121; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03745287.).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2309676
PMID: 38661449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]