---
reference_id: "PMID:35327965"
title: Variable Anterior Segment Dysgenesis and Cardiac Anomalies Caused by a Novel Truncating Variant of FOXC1.
authors:
- Ahmed MR
- Sethna S
- Krueger LA
- Yang MB
- Hufnagel RB
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13030411
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable Anterior Segment Dysgenesis and Cardiac Anomalies Caused by a Novel Truncating Variant of FOXC1.
**Authors:** Ahmed MR, Sethna S, Krueger LA, Yang MB, Hufnagel RB
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13030411](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13030411)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Feb 24;13(3):411. doi: 10.3390/genes13030411.

Variable Anterior Segment Dysgenesis and Cardiac Anomalies Caused by a Novel 
Truncating Variant of FOXC1.

Ahmed MR(1)(2), Sethna S(2), Krueger LA(3), Yang MB(3), Hufnagel RB(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics and Ophthalmic Genomics Unit, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Abrahamson 
Pediatric Eye Institute, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD) encompasses a wide spectrum of developmental 
abnormalities of the anterior ocular segment, including congenital cataract, 
iris hypoplasia, aniridia, iridocorneal synechiae, as well as Peters, Axenfeld, 
and Rieger anomalies. Here, we report a large five-generation Caucasian family 
exhibiting atypical syndromic ASD segregating with a novel truncating variant of 
FOXC1. The family history is consistent with highly variable autosomal dominant 
symptoms including isolated glaucoma, iris hypoplasia, aniridia, cataract, 
hypothyroidism, and congenital heart anomalies. Whole-exome sequencing revealed 
a novel variant [c.313_314insA; p.(Tyr105*)] in FOXC1 that disrupts the 
α-helical region of the DNA-binding forkhead box domain. In vitro studies using 
a heterologous cell system revealed aberrant cytoplasmic localization of FOXC1 
harboring the Tyr105* variant, likely precluding downstream transcription 
function. Meta-analysis of the literature highlighted the intrafamilial 
variability related to FOXC1 truncating alleles. This study highlights the 
clinical variability in ASD and signifies the importance of combining both 
clinical and molecular analysis approaches to establish a complete diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13030411
PMCID: PMC8949076
PMID: 35327965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.