---
reference_id: "PMID:12559848"
title: Imbalanced substrate specificity of mutant beta-galactosidase in patients with Morquio B disease.
authors:
- Okumiya T
- Sakuraba H
- Kase R
- Sugiura T
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s1096-7192(02)00199-3
keywords:
- "Antigens, Tumor-Associated, Carbohydrate/metabolism, pharmacology"
- Cell Line
- "Fibroblasts/drug effects, enzymology"
- "Glycosaminoglycans/chemistry, metabolism, pharmacology"
- Humans
- Hydrolysis
- "Keratan Sulfate/analogs & derivatives, metabolism, pharmacology"
- Kinetics
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis IV/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Substrate Specificity
- "beta-Galactosidase/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imbalanced substrate specificity of mutant beta-galactosidase in patients with Morquio B disease.
**Authors:** Okumiya T, Sakuraba H, Kase R, Sugiura T
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1096-7192(02)00199-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1096-7192(02)00199-3)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2003 Jan;78(1):51-8. doi: 10.1016/s1096-7192(02)00199-3.

Imbalanced substrate specificity of mutant beta-galactosidase in patients with 
Morquio B disease.

Okumiya T(1), Sakuraba H, Kase R, Sugiura T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kochi Medical School, 
Oko-cho, Nankoku, Kochi 783-8505, Japan. okumiyat@med.kochi-ms.ac.jp

G(M1)-gangliosidosis and Morquio B disease are distinct in clinical and 
biochemical features, but both disorders are caused by genetic defects of the 
same enzyme, acid beta-galactosidase (beta-Gal). We analyzed the kinetic 
properties of mutant beta-Gals from patients with G(M1)-gangliosidosis and 
Morquio B disease to examine the clinical and biochemical differences between 
both disorders. Five skin fibroblast lines from patients with 
G(M1)-gangliosidosis (2 cases; R201C/R201C and I51T/I51T), Morquio B disease (2 
cases; W273L/W273L and Y83H/R482C), and galactosialidosis (1 case; Y395C/S90L) 
were used as enzyme sources. Residual enzyme activity in the cells was subjected 
to kinetic analysis. Substrate analogs including Galbeta1-3GalNAc, as an analog 
for G(M1)-ganglioside, and Galbeta1-4GlcNAc, as an analog for keratan sulfate, 
were used to determine IC(50) and K(i) for beta-Gals with an artificial 
substrate (4-methylumbelliferyl beta-D-galactopyranoside). Enzymatic assay 
method was established to examine the hydrolytic activity with the mutant 
beta-Gal for the substrate analogs. The mutant beta-Gal activities were 
inhibited by Galbeta1-3GalNAc and Galbeta1-4GlcNAc in a concentration-dependent 
manner. Remarkable increase in IC(50) ratio and K(i) ratio 
(Galbeta1-4GlcNAc/Galbeta1-3GalNAc) was observed in Morquio B disease. Relative 
hydrolytic activity (Galbeta1-4GlcNAc/Galbeta1-3GalNAc) was markedly decreased 
in Morquio B disease as compared with other subjects; controls (means+/-SD, 
n=4), 1.00+/-0.02; galactosialidosis, 1.03; G(M1)-gangliosidosis, 1.15 and 1.00; 
and Morquio B disease, 0.27 and 0.32. The mutant beta-Gals from the patients 
with Morquio B disease exhibited lower affinity and lower hydrolytic activity 
toward Galbeta1-4GlcNAc rather than Galbeta1-3GalNAc. These findings suggest 
that imbalanced substrate specificity of the mutant beta-Gals induces 
predominant accumulation of keratan sulfate and a rationale for performing 
differential diagnostic analysis for both disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/s1096-7192(02)00199-3
PMID: 12559848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]