---
reference_id: "PMID:39418569"
title: "Melanoma: Diagnosis and Treatment."
authors:
- Lauters R
- Brown AD
- Harrington KA
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2024'
keywords:
- Humans
- Biopsy/methods
- "Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Melanoma: Diagnosis and Treatment.
**Authors:** Lauters R, Brown AD, Harrington KA
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2024)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2024 Oct;110(4):367-377.

Melanoma: Diagnosis and Treatment.

Lauters R(1), Brown AD(2), Harrington KA(3).

Author information:
(1)Eglin Family Medicine Residency, Eglin Air Force Base, Fla.
(2)Offutt Air Force Base/University of Nebraska Medical Center Family Medicine
Residency, Omaha.
(3)Prisma Health/USC Family Medicine Residency Program, Columbia, S.C.

Cutaneous malignant melanoma accounts for 5% of cancer diagnoses and is the
fifth most common cancer diagnosed in the United States. Risk factors for
cutaneous malignant melanoma include ultraviolet radiation from sun exposure,
Fitzpatrick skin type I or II, a history of dysplastic nevi, indoor tanning,
older age, and a personal or family history of melanoma. The U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommends counseling with patient education on minimizing
early ultraviolet radiation exposure, including the use of protective clothing
and sunscreen, especially for patients 6 months to 24 years of age. Tools to aid
in the diagnosis of cutaneous malignant melanoma and the decision to biopsy
include the ABCDE mnemonic, ugly duckling sign, and dermoscopy. Any suspicious
pigmented lesion should be biopsied. Biopsy with a deep scoop shave,
saucerization, punch biopsy, or full-thickness excision is preferred to ensure
the entire lesion is removed to obtain an accurate measurement of Breslow depth.
Breslow depth is important in staging, treatment consideration, and prognosis.
Wide local excision by a dermatologist or surgeon with appropriate margins is
the primary treatment of choice. Thin lesions with a Breslow depth of less than
0.8 mm usually do not need further treatment after wide local excision and have
an excellent prognosis. Lesions with a Breslow depth greater than 0.8 mm may
need further diagnostic tests or procedures, including sentinel lymph node
biopsy, complete lymph node dissection, gene mutation analysis, and possible
treatment with systemic immunotherapy. Use of systemic immunotherapies has
improved the prognosis for advanced melanoma (stages III and IV), with 5-year
survival rates of 74.8% and 35%, respectively, compared with 62.6% and 16% from
1975 to 2011 before immunotherapy was available.

PMID: 39418569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
