---
reference_id: "PMID:37254237"
title: "Feasibility Analysis of the Bone Cement-Gelatine Sponge Composite Intravertebral Prefilling Technique for Reducing Bone Cement Leakage in Stage I and II Kümmell's Disease: A Prospective Randomized Controlled Trial."
authors:
- Zhou C
- Huang S
- Liao Y
- Zhang F
- Meng X
- Tang Z
- Zhang X
- Li H
- Zhang Y
- Zhao S
- Wang Y
journal: Orthop Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/os.13764
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Feasibility Analysis of the Bone Cement-Gelatine Sponge Composite Intravertebral Prefilling Technique for Reducing Bone Cement Leakage in Stage I and II Kümmell's Disease: A Prospective Randomized Controlled Trial.
**Authors:** Zhou C, Huang S, Liao Y, Zhang F, Meng X, Tang Z, Zhang X, Li H, Zhang Y, Zhao S, Wang Y
**Journal:** Orthop Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/os.13764](https://doi.org/10.1111/os.13764)

## Content

1. Orthop Surg. 2023 Jul;15(7):1763-1771. doi: 10.1111/os.13764. Epub 2023 May
30.

Feasibility Analysis of the Bone Cement-Gelatine Sponge Composite Intravertebral 
Prefilling Technique for Reducing Bone Cement Leakage in Stage I and II 
Kümmell's Disease: A Prospective Randomized Controlled Trial.

Zhou C(1)(2)(3), Huang S(1)(2)(3), Liao Y(1)(2), Zhang F(1)(3), Meng X(1)(2), 
Tang Z(1)(2), Zhang X(1)(2), Li H(2), Zhang Y(2), Zhao S(3), Wang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical 
University, Xuzhou, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical 
University, Xuzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: Bone cement leakage is a major complication of percutaneous 
vertebroplasty (PVP) while treating Kümmell's disease and it is a focus of close 
attention during the surgical procedure. The study aimed to investigate whether 
pre-injecting a composite of bone cement and gelatine sponge (the "bone 
cement-gelatine sponge composite") before injecting bone cement during PVP aids 
in lowering the leakage rate in stage I and II Kümmell's disease.
METHODS: This prospective analysis evaluated 74 patients with stage I and II 
Kümmell's disease who underwent PVP treatment at our hospital from December 2019 
to December 2021. The participants were divided randomly into groups based on 
whether the bone cement-gelatine sponge composite was used during the surgery. 
The two groups were the bone cement-gelatine sponge composite group (GS group, 
comprising 37 patients) and the no bone cement-gelatine sponge composite group 
(N-GS group, comprising 37 patients). The independent samples t-test and 
chi-square test were employed to compare general information, operative time, 
cement injection volume, intraoperative bleeding, and bone cement leakage 
between the two groups. Additionally, the visual analogue scale (VAS) score, 
Oswestry disability index (ODI), anterior vertebral height ratio (AVHR), and the 
kyphotic Cobb angle were compared between the two groups at the preoperative, 
2 days postoperative, and 6 months postoperative stages using repeated measures 
analysis of variance.
RESULTS: All patients were followed up for more than 6 months, with an average 
of (11.19 ± 2.21) months. No significant differences were observed in terms of 
the operative time, cement injection volume, and intraoperative bleeding between 
the two groups (P > 0.05). The incidence of bone cement leakage in the N-GS 
group (32.43%) was significantly higher than that in the GS group (5.41%), and 
the difference was statistically significant (P < 0.05). The VAS score and ODI 
of the two groups at postoperative 2 days and 6 months improved significantly (P 
< 0.05). The AVHR and kyphotic Cobb angle were corrected to a certain extent (P 
< 0.05); however, no significant difference was observed between the two groups 
(P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The bone cement-gelatine sponge composite intravertebral prefilling 
technique can lower bone cement leakage in stage I and II Kümmell's disease and 
can also relieve pain and improve vertebral body height.

© 2023 The Authors. Orthopaedic Surgery published by Tianjin Hospital and John 
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/os.13764
PMCID: PMC10350386
PMID: 37254237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.