---
reference_id: "PMID:40301324"
title: Autophagy disruption and mitochondrial stress precede photoreceptor necroptosis in multiple mouse models of inherited retinal disorders.
authors:
- Newton F
- Halachev M
- Nguyen L
- McKie L
- Mill P
- Megaw R
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-59165-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Autophagy/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- Mice
- Necroptosis/genetics
- Humans
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/pathology, metabolism"
- "Retinal Diseases/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autophagy disruption and mitochondrial stress precede photoreceptor necroptosis in multiple mouse models of inherited retinal disorders.
**Authors:** Newton F, Halachev M, Nguyen L, McKie L, Mill P, Megaw R
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-59165-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-59165-8)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 Apr 29;16(1):4024. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-59165-8.

Autophagy disruption and mitochondrial stress precede photoreceptor necroptosis 
in multiple mouse models of inherited retinal disorders.

Newton F(1), Halachev M(1), Nguyen L(1), McKie L(1), Mill P(1), Megaw R(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of 
Edinburgh, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK.
(2)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of 
Edinburgh, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK. roly.megaw@ed.ac.uk.
(3)Princess Alexandra Eye Pavilion, NHS Lothian, Edinburgh, EH3 9HA, UK. 
roly.megaw@ed.ac.uk.

Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are a leading cause of blindness worldwide. 
One of the greatest barriers to developing treatments for IRDs is the 
heterogeneity of these disorders, with causative mutations identified in over 
280 genes. It is therefore a priority to find therapies applicable to a broad 
range of genetic causes. To do so requires a greater understanding of the common 
or overlapping molecular pathways that lead to photoreceptor death in IRDs and 
the molecular processes through which they converge. Here, we characterise the 
contribution of different cell death mechanisms to photoreceptor degeneration 
and loss throughout disease progression in humanised mouse models of IRDs. Using 
single-cell transcriptomics, we identify common transcriptional signatures in 
degenerating photoreceptors. Further, we show that in genetically and 
functionally distinct IRD models, common early defects in autophagy and 
mitochondrial damage exist, triggering photoreceptor cell death by necroptosis 
in later disease stages. These results suggest that, regardless of the 
underlying genetic cause, these pathways likely contribute to cell death in 
IRDs. These insights provide potential therapeutic targets for novel, 
gene-agnostic treatments for IRDs applicable to the majority of patients.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-59165-8
PMCID: PMC12041483
PMID: 40301324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.