---
reference_id: "PMID:27649541"
title: Growth Hormone Stimulation Tests in Children with Kabuki Syndrome.
authors:
- Schott DA
- Gerver WJ
- Stumpel CT
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000449221
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/blood, pathology, physiopathology"
- Body Mass Index
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Face/abnormalities, pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Hematologic Diseases/blood, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Human Growth Hormone/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor Binding Protein 3/blood
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/metabolism
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- "Vestibular Diseases/blood, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth Hormone Stimulation Tests in Children with Kabuki Syndrome.
**Authors:** Schott DA, Gerver WJ, Stumpel CT
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000449221](https://doi.org/10.1159/000449221)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2016;86(5):319-324. doi: 10.1159/000449221. Epub 2016 Sep
21.

Growth Hormone Stimulation Tests in Children with Kabuki Syndrome.

Schott DA(1), Gerver WJ, Stumpel CT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Zuyderland Medical Centre, Heerlen, The 
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Kabuki syndrome is a multiple congenital malformation syndrome 
with a variety of clinical features including short stature. The cause of this 
postnatal short stature remains unknown.
METHODS: Eighteen children with genetically proven Kabuki syndrome (8 boys and 
10 girls; ages 3.3-9.9 years, with a mean of 6.7 years) who underwent growth 
hormone (GH) stimulation tests were evaluated in a prospective study. Two GH 
stimulation tests were conducted, including insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) 
and IGF-binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) serum levels. GH stimulation peaks in 
relation to age, sex, height, body mass index (BMI), IGF-I, and IGFBP-3 SD 
scores (SDS) were analyzed.
RESULTS: Five of the 18 children (27.8%) were biochemically GH deficient. This 
was not correlated with BMI SDS. Of all patients, only 1 had an IGF-I below -2 
SD and did not fulfill the GH deficiency criteria. The mean IGF-I level was 
below normal (-0.8 SD). All subjects had normal IGFBP-3 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The utility of performing GH stimulation tests on Kabuki syndrome 
children as an indication of GH status in short stature is questionable. IGF-I 
levels did correlate neither with the GH stimulation peak nor consequently with 
the diagnosis of GH deficiency.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000449221
PMID: 27649541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]