---
reference_id: "PMID:7947444"
title: Lacrimal sac tumors.
authors:
- Stefanyszyn MA
- Hidayat AA
- "Pe'er JJ"
- Flanagan JC
journal: Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1097/00002341-199409000-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lacrimal sac tumors.
**Authors:** Stefanyszyn MA, Hidayat AA, Pe'er JJ, Flanagan JC
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00002341-199409000-00005](https://doi.org/10.1097/00002341-199409000-00005)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 1994 Sep;10(3):169-84. doi: 
10.1097/00002341-199409000-00005.

Lacrimal sac tumors.

Stefanyszyn MA(1), Hidayat AA, Pe'er JJ, Flanagan JC.

Author information:
(1)Wills Eye Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

This is a clinicopathologic study of 115 lacrimal sac neoplasms in adults (mean 
52 years). The most common presenting signs and symptoms were epiphora (53%), 
recurrent dacryocystitis (38%), and/or lacrimal sac mass (36%). The tumors were 
divided into epithelial (82 cases) and nonepithelial (33 cases) neoplasms. 
Benign epithelial tumors included squamous and transitional cell papillomas 
(32), oncocytomas (4), and benign mixed tumors (2). The malignant epithelial 
neoplasms included squamous cell carcinoma (22), transitional cell carcinoma 
(5), adenocarcinoma (4), mucoepidermoid (3), adenoid cystic (3), and poorly 
differentiated carcinoma (1). The nonepithelial tumors consisted of fibrous 
histiocytoma (13), lymphoid lesions (10), malignant melanoma (6), 
hemangiopericytoma (1), lipoma (1), granulocytic sarcoma (1), and neurofibroma 
(1). Review of the literature, including our own series, discloses a 55% 
malignancy rate for tumors originating in the lacrimal sac. Malignant epithelial 
neoplasms, especially invasive transitional cell carcinoma, often recur locally 
and can metastasize and be fatal. Epithelial malignancies tend to grow along the 
epithelium of the lacrimal drainage system, and thus cure is dependent on a wide 
surgical excision of the tumor and of the entire lacrimal drainage system 
(canaliculi, sac, and nasolacrimal duct) combined with a lateral rhinostomy and 
radiation therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/00002341-199409000-00005
PMID: 7947444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]