---
reference_id: "PMID:39105373"
title: Neurodevelopmental profiles of 14 individuals with phosphomannomutase deficiency (PMM2-CDG).
authors:
- Weixel T
- Adedipe D
- Muldoon G
- Lam C
- Krasnewich D
- Thurm A
- Wolfe L
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12782
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Young Adult
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Developmental Disabilities/etiology, genetics"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, etiology"
- Phenotype
- "Phosphotransferases (Phosphomutases)/deficiency, genetics"
- Prospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurodevelopmental profiles of 14 individuals with phosphomannomutase deficiency (PMM2-CDG).
**Authors:** Weixel T, Adedipe D, Muldoon G, Lam C, Krasnewich D, Thurm A, Wolfe L
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12782](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12782)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2025 Jan;48(1):e12782. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12782. Epub 2024
 Aug 6.

Neurodevelopmental profiles of 14 individuals with phosphomannomutase deficiency
(PMM2-CDG).

Weixel T(1)(2), Adedipe D(3)(4), Muldoon G(3)(5), Lam C(6), Krasnewich D(7),
Thurm A(3), Wolfe L(1).

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio, USA.
(3)Neurodevelopmental and Behavioral Phenotyping Service, Intramural Research
Program, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Nisonger Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(5)Social Work, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(7)National Institute of General Medical Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

PMM2-CDG (formerly CDG-1a), the most common type of congenital disorders of
glycosylation, is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. PMM2-CDG
frequently presents in infancy with multisystemic clinical involvement, and it
has been diagnosed in over 1000 people worldwide. There have been few natural
history studies reporting neurodevelopmental characterization of PMM2-CDG. Thus,
a prospective study was conducted that included neurodevelopmental assessments
as part of deep phenotyping. This study, Clinical and Basic Investigations into
Known and Suspected Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (NCT02089789),
included 14 participants (8 males and 6 females ages 2-33 years) with a
confirmed molecular diagnosis of PMM2-CDG. Clinical features of PMM2-CDG in this
cohort were neurodevelopmental disorders, faltering growth, hypotonia,
cerebellar atrophy, peripheral neuropathy, movement disorders, ophthalmological
abnormalities, and auditory function differences. All PMM2-CDG participants met
criteria for intellectual disability (or global developmental delay if younger
than age 5). The majority never attained certain gross motor and language
milestones. Only two participants were ambulatory, and almost all were
considered minimally verbal. Overall, individuals with PMM2-CDG present with a
complex neurodevelopmental profile characterized by intellectual disability and
multisystemic presentations. This systematic quantification of the
neurodevelopmental profile of PMM2-CDG expands our understanding of the range in
impairments associated with PMM2-CDG and will help guide management strategies.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12782
PMCID: PMC11670447
PMID: 39105373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
