---
reference_id: "PMID:38815804"
title: "Pseudoxanthoma elasticum - Genetics, pathophysiology, and clinical presentation."
authors:
- Pfau K
- Lengyel I
- Ossewaarde-van Norel J
- van Leeuwen R
- Risseeuw S
- Leftheriotis G
- Scholl HPN
- Feltgen N
- Holz FG
- Pfau M
journal: Prog Retin Eye Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2024.101274
keywords:
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/genetics"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pseudoxanthoma elasticum - Genetics, pathophysiology, and clinical presentation.
**Authors:** Pfau K, Lengyel I, Ossewaarde-van Norel J, van Leeuwen R, Risseeuw S, Leftheriotis G, Scholl HPN, Feltgen N, Holz FG, Pfau M
**Journal:** Prog Retin Eye Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preteyeres.2024.101274](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2024.101274)

## Content

1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2024 Sep;102:101274. doi:
10.1016/j.preteyeres.2024.101274.  Epub 2024 May 28.

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum - Genetics, pathophysiology, and clinical presentation.

Pfau K(1), Lengyel I(2), Ossewaarde-van Norel J(3), van Leeuwen R(3), Risseeuw 
S(3), Leftheriotis G(4), Scholl HPN(5), Feltgen N(6), Holz FG(7), Pfau M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; 
Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. Electronic 
address: Kristina.Pfau@usb.ch.
(2)Wellcome-Wolfson Institute for Experimental Medicine, School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Biomedical Science, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, Northern 
Ireland, United Kingdom; Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical 
Engineering, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, the Netherlands.
(4)University Hospital Nice, Vascular Physiology and Medicine Unit, 06000, Nice, 
France.
(5)University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; 
Institute of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel, Basel, Basel-Stadt, 
Switzerland.

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an autosomal-recessively inherited multisystem 
disease. Mutations in the ABCC6-gene are causative, coding for a transmembrane 
transporter mainly expressed in hepatocytes, which promotes the efflux of 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). This results in low levels of plasma inorganic 
pyrophosphate (PPi), a critical anti-mineralization factor. The clinical 
phenotype of PXE is characterized by the effects of elastic fiber calcification 
in the skin, the cardiovascular system, and the eyes. In the eyes, calcification 
of Bruch's membrane results in clinically visible lesions, including peau 
d'orange, angioid streaks, and comet tail lesions. Frequently, patients must be 
treated for secondary macular neovascularization. No effective therapy is 
available for treating the cause of PXE, but several promising approaches are 
emerging. Finding appropriate outcome measures remains a significant challenge 
for clinical trials in this slowly progressive disease. This review article 
provides an in-depth summary of the current understanding of PXE and its 
multi-systemic manifestations. The article offers a detailed overview of the 
ocular manifestations, including their morphological and functional 
consequences, as well as potential complications. Lastly, previous and future 
clinical trials of causative treatments for PXE are discussed.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2024.101274
PMCID: PMC12004504
PMID: 38815804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]