---
reference_id: "PMID:40679585"
title: Clinical features and fusion gene analysis of two Torque Teno Mini virus associated acute promyelocytic leukemia cases.
authors:
- Liu D
- Chen J
- Luo Y
- Yan S
- Nan H
- Chen X
- Lin Z
- Jiang L
- Tang H
- Ma H
- Niu Y
- Fang J
- Cao P
- Yuan L
- Ma X
- Zhou X
- Lv F
- Dai Y
- Liu H
journal: Ann Hematol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00277-025-06501-z
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Male
- "DNA Virus Infections/complications, genetics"
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/genetics, virology, therapy, diagnosis"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Retinoic Acid Receptor alpha/genetics
- Torque teno virus/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and fusion gene analysis of two Torque Teno Mini virus associated acute promyelocytic leukemia cases.
**Authors:** Liu D, Chen J, Luo Y, Yan S, Nan H, Chen X, Lin Z, Jiang L, Tang H, Ma H, Niu Y, Fang J, Cao P, Yuan L, Ma X, Zhou X, Lv F, Dai Y, Liu H
**Journal:** Ann Hematol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00277-025-06501-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00277-025-06501-z)

## Content

1. Ann Hematol. 2025 Aug;104(8):4251-4255. doi: 10.1007/s00277-025-06501-z. Epub
2025 Jul 18.

Clinical features and fusion gene analysis of two Torque Teno Mini virus
associated acute promyelocytic leukemia cases.

Liu D(#)(1), Chen J(#)(2)(3), Luo Y(#)(4), Yan S(1), Nan H(1), Chen X(2)(3), Lin
Z(4), Jiang L(4), Tang H(5), Ma H(5), Niu Y(6), Fang J(2), Cao P(2)(3), Yuan
L(2), Ma X(2), Zhou X(3), Lv F(6), Dai Y(7), Liu H(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation, Hebei Yanda Lu Daopei Hospital,
Langfang, 065201, China.
(2)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Hebei Yanda Lu Daopei Hospital, Langfang,
065201, China.
(3)Precision Medicine Center, Beijing Lu Daopei Institute of Hematology,
Beijing, 100176, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang
Autonomous Region, Guangxi Academy of Medical Sciences, Nanning, 530000, China.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, The People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous
Region, Guangxi Academy of Medical Sciences, Nanning, 530000, China.
(6)Department of Hematology, Beijing Lu Daopei Hospital, Beijing, 100176, China.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, The People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous
Region, Guangxi Academy of Medical Sciences, Nanning, 530000, China.
3677458@qq.com.
(8)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Hebei Yanda Lu Daopei Hospital, Langfang,
065201, China. starliu@pku.edu.cn.
(9)Precision Medicine Center, Beijing Lu Daopei Institute of Hematology,
Beijing, 100176, China. starliu@pku.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Torque Teno Mini Virus (TTMV), a member of the Anelloviridae family, is a
commensal component of the human virome. Since the initial identification of the
TTMV::RARA fusion gene as a novel driver of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL),
15 cases have been reported in retrospective studies. With advancements in
diagnostic methods and increased awareness, the number of newly diagnosed cases
has risen, and the clinical and molecular characteristics of TTMV::RARA-APL are
becoming clearer. We systematically identified the clinical characteristics,
fusion gene analysis, and treatment protocols of two pediatric APL patients
harboring the TTMV::RARA fusion on this basis. While the detection of TTMV::RARA
contributes to defining pathogenic fusion gene and MRD monitoring indicators in
non-PML::RARA-APL cases, the precise pathogenic mechanisms of this ubiquitous
symbiotic virus warrant further investigation.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-025-06501-z
PMCID: PMC12432083
PMID: 40679585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical statement: This study was
approved by the Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee of Hebei Yanda Lu
Daopei Hospital. Written informed consent was obtained from the guardian for
publication of this case report and accompanying data. Competing interests: The
authors declare no competing interests.
