---
reference_id: "PMID:32166444"
title: Dengue NS1 detection in pediatric serum using microfluidic paper-based analytical devices.
authors:
- Prabowo MH
- Chatchen S
- Rijiravanich P
- Limkittikul K
- Surareungchai W
journal: Anal Bioanal Chem
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00216-020-02527-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue NS1 detection in pediatric serum using microfluidic paper-based analytical devices.
**Authors:** Prabowo MH, Chatchen S, Rijiravanich P, Limkittikul K, Surareungchai W
**Journal:** Anal Bioanal Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00216-020-02527-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-020-02527-6)

## Content

1. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2020 May;412(12):2915-2925. doi:
10.1007/s00216-020-02527-6.  Epub 2020 Mar 12.

Dengue NS1 detection in pediatric serum using microfluidic paper-based 
analytical devices.

Prabowo MH(1)(2), Chatchen S(3), Rijiravanich P(4), Limkittikul K(3), 
Surareungchai W(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Bioresources and Technology, King Mongkut's University of 
Technology Thonburi, Bang Khun Thian, Bangkok, 10150, Thailand.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, 
Universitas Islam Indonesia, Sleman, Yogyakarta, 55584, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Tropical Pediatrics, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol 
University, Ratchathewi, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.
(4)Biosciences and Systems Biology Research Team, National Center for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, National Sciences and Technology Development 
Agency at King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Bang Khun Thian, 
Bangkok, 10150, Thailand. patsamon.rij@biotec.or.th.
(5)School of Bioresources and Technology, King Mongkut's University of 
Technology Thonburi, Bang Khun Thian, Bangkok, 10150, Thailand. 
werasak.sur@kmutt.ac.th.

The diagnosis of dengue infection is still a critical factor determining success 
in the clinical management and treatment of patients. Here, the development of 
microfluidic paper-based analytical devices (μPADs) utilizing a sandwich 
immunoassay on wax patterned paper functionalized with anti-dengue NS1 
monoclonal antibodies for point-of-care detection of dengue NS1 (DEN-NS1-PAD) is 
reported. Various assay conditions, including the length of the channel and 
diluent, were optimized, and the response detected by the naked eye and 
digitized images within 20-30 min. The DEN-NS1-PAD was successfully tested in 
the field for detecting dengue NS1 in buffer, cell culture media, and human 
serum. The limit of detection (LoD) of the DEN-NS1-PAD obtained with the naked 
eye, scanner, and a smartphone camera was 200, 46.7, and 74.8 ng mL-1, 
respectively. The repeatability, reproducibility, and stability of the 
DEN-NS1-PAD were also evaluated. High true specificity and sensitivity in the 
serum of pediatric patients were observed. These evaluation results confirm that 
the DEN-NS1-PAD can potentially be used in point-of-care dengue diagnostics, 
which can significantly impact on the spreading of mosquito-borne diseases, 
which are likely to become more prevalent with the effects of global warming. 
Graphical Abstract.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-020-02527-6
PMID: 32166444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]