---
reference_id: "PMID:25685306"
title: A pilot controlled trial of insulin-like growth factor-1 in children with Phelan-McDermid syndrome.
authors:
- Kolevzon A
- Bush L
- Wang AT
- Halpern D
- Frank Y
- Grodberg D
- Rapaport R
- Tavassoli T
- Chaplin W
- Soorya L
- Buxbaum JD
journal: Mol Autism
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-54
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A pilot controlled trial of insulin-like growth factor-1 in children with Phelan-McDermid syndrome.
**Authors:** Kolevzon A, Bush L, Wang AT, Halpern D, Frank Y, Grodberg D, Rapaport R, Tavassoli T, Chaplin W, Soorya L, Buxbaum JD
**Journal:** Mol Autism (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2040-2392-5-54](https://doi.org/10.1186/2040-2392-5-54)

## Content

1. Mol Autism. 2014 Dec 12;5(1):54. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-54. eCollection
2014.

A pilot controlled trial of insulin-like growth factor-1 in children with 
Phelan-McDermid syndrome.

Kolevzon A(1), Bush L(2), Wang AT(3), Halpern D(2), Frank Y(4), Grodberg D(2), 
Rapaport R(5), Tavassoli T(2), Chaplin W(6), Soorya L(7), Buxbaum JD(8).

Author information:
(1)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1230, New York, NY 10029 USA ; 
Friedman Brain Institute, New York, NY USA ; Mindich Child Health Institute, New 
York, NY USA ; Departments of Psychiatry, New York, NY USA ; Departments of 
Pediatrics, New York, NY USA ; Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY USA.
(2)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1230, New York, NY 10029 USA ; 
Departments of Psychiatry, New York, NY USA ; Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY USA.
(3)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1230, New York, NY 10029 USA ; 
Friedman Brain Institute, New York, NY USA ; Departments of Psychiatry, New 
York, NY USA ; Departments of Neuroscience, New York, NY USA ; Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY USA.
(4)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1230, New York, NY 10029 USA ; 
Departments of Psychiatry, New York, NY USA ; Departments of Pediatrics, New 
York, NY USA ; Departments of Neurology, New York, NY USA ; Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY USA.
(5)Departments of Pediatrics, New York, NY USA ; Departments of Endocrinology 
and Diabetes, New York, NY USA ; Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY USA.
(6)Department of Psychology, St John's University, New York, NY USA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL USA.
(8)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1230, New York, NY 10029 USA ; 
Friedman Brain Institute, New York, NY USA ; Mindich Child Health Institute, New 
York, NY USA ; Departments of Psychiatry, New York, NY USA ; Departments of 
Neuroscience, New York, NY USA ; Departments of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, 
New York, NY USA ; Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Autism. 2015 Jun 02;6:31. doi: 10.1186/s13229-015-0025-0.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is now understood to have multiple 
genetic risk genes and one example is SHANK3. SHANK3 deletions and mutations 
disrupt synaptic function and result in Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS), which 
causes a monogenic form of ASD with a frequency of at least 0.5% of ASD cases. 
Recent evidence from preclinical studies with mouse and human neuronal models of 
SHANK3 deficiency suggest that insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) can reverse 
synaptic plasticity and motor learning deficits. The objective of this study was 
to pilot IGF-1 treatment in children with PMS to evaluate safety, tolerability, 
and efficacy for core deficits of ASD, including social impairment and 
restricted and repetitive behaviors.
METHODS: Nine children with PMS aged 5 to 15 were enrolled in a 
placebo-controlled, double-blind, crossover design study, with 3 months of 
treatment with IGF-1 and 3 months of placebo in random order, separated by a 
4-week wash-out period.
RESULTS: Compared to the placebo phase, the IGF-1 phase was associated with 
significant improvement in both social impairment and restrictive behaviors, as 
measured by the Aberrant Behavior Checklist and the Repetitive Behavior Scale, 
respectively. IGF-1 was found to be well tolerated and there were no serious 
adverse events in any participants.
CONCLUSIONS: This study establishes the feasibility of IGF-1 treatment in PMS 
and contributes pilot data from the first controlled treatment trial in the 
syndrome. Results also provide proof of concept to advance knowledge about 
developing targeted treatments for additional causes of ASD associated with 
impaired synaptic development and function.

DOI: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-54
PMCID: PMC4326443
PMID: 25685306