---
reference_id: "PMID:37915380"
title: "Biallelic pathogenic variants in POLR3D alter tRNA transcription and cause a hypomyelinating leukodystrophy: A case report."
authors:
- Macintosh J
- Perrier S
- Pinard M
- Tran LT
- Guerrero K
- Prasad C
- Prasad AN
- Pastinen T
- Thiffault I
- Coulombe B
- Bernard G
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1254140
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic pathogenic variants in POLR3D alter tRNA transcription and cause a hypomyelinating leukodystrophy: A case report.
**Authors:** Macintosh J, Perrier S, Pinard M, Tran LT, Guerrero K, Prasad C, Prasad AN, Pastinen T, Thiffault I, Coulombe B, Bernard G
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1254140](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1254140)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Oct 13;14:1254140. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1254140. 
eCollection 2023.

Biallelic pathogenic variants in POLR3D alter tRNA transcription and cause a 
hypomyelinating leukodystrophy: A case report.

Macintosh J(1)(2), Perrier S(1)(2), Pinard M(3), Tran LT(1)(2), Guerrero 
K(1)(2), Prasad C(4)(5)(6), Prasad AN(4)(6), Pastinen T(7)(8)(9), Thiffault 
I(7)(8)(10), Coulombe B(3)(11), Bernard G(1)(2)(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(2)Child Health and Human Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, London Health Sciences Center and Western 
University, London, ON, Canada.
(5)Medical Genetics Program of Southwestern Ontario, London Health Sciences 
Center, London, ON, Canada.
(6)Children's Health Research Institute, London, ON, Canada.
(7)Genomic Medicine Center, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, United 
States.
(8)University of Missouri Kansas City School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO, 
United States.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, United 
States.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Mercy Hospital, 
Kansas City, MO, United States.
(11)Département de Biochimie et Médecine Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine, 
Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(13)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(14)Department of Specialized Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.

RNA polymerase III-related leukodystrophy (POLR3-related leukodystrophy) is a 
rare, genetically determined hypomyelinating disease arising from biallelic 
pathogenic variants in genes encoding subunits of RNA polymerase III (Pol III). 
Here, we describe the first reported case of POLR3-related leukodystrophy caused 
by biallelic pathogenic variants in POLR3D, encoding the RPC4 subunit of Pol 
III. The individual, a female, demonstrated delays in walking and expressive and 
receptive language as a child and later cognitively plateaued. Additional 
neurological features included cerebellar signs (e.g., dysarthria, ataxia, and 
intention tremor) and dysphagia, while non-neurological features included 
hypodontia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and dysmorphic facial features. Her 
MRI was notable for diffuse hypomyelination with myelin preservation of early 
myelinating structures, characteristic of POLR3-related leukodystrophy. Exome 
sequencing revealed the biallelic variants in POLR3D, a missense variant 
(c.541C > T, p.P181S) and an intronic splice site variant (c.656-6G > A, p.?). 
Functional studies of the patient's fibroblasts demonstrated significantly 
decreased RNA-level expression of POLR3D, along with reduced expression of other 
Pol III subunit genes. Notably, Pol III transcription was also shown to be 
aberrant, with a significant decrease in 7SK RNA and several distinct tRNA genes 
analyzed. Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry of the POLR3D 
p.P181S variant showed normal assembly of Pol III subunits yet altered 
interaction of Pol III with the PAQosome chaperone complex, indicating the 
missense variant is likely to alter complex maturation. This work identifies 
biallelic pathogenic variants in POLR3D as a novel genetic cause of 
POLR3-related leukodystrophy, expanding the molecular spectrum associated with 
this disease, and proposes altered tRNA homeostasis as a factor in the 
underlying biology of this hypomyelinating disorder.

Copyright © 2023 Macintosh, Perrier, Pinard, Tran, Guerrero, Prasad, Prasad, 
Pastinen, Thiffault, Coulombe and Bernard.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1254140
PMCID: PMC10616956
PMID: 37915380

Conflict of interest statement: GB was a consultant for Passage Bio Inc 
(2020–2022) and Ionis (2019). She is/was a site investigator for the Alexander’s 
disease trial of Ionis (2021–present), Metachromatic leukodystrophy of 
Shire/Takeda (2020–2021), Krabbe and GM1 gene therapy trials of Passage Bio 
(2021–present), GM1 natural history study from the University of Pennsylvania 
sponsored by Passage Bio (2021-present), and Adrenoleukodystrophy/Hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation natural history study of Bluebird Bio (2019), a site 
sub-investigator for the MPS II gene therapy trial of Regenxbio (2021–present) 
and the MPS II clinical trial of Denali (2022–present). She has received 
unrestricted educational grants from Takeda (2021–2022). LT currently manages 
sponsored clinical trials at the site level for Ionis Pharmaceuticals (Alexander 
disease clinical trial, 2021–present), Passage Bio (Krabbe disease and GM1 
gangliosidosis clinical trials, 2021–present), and Teva Pharmaceuticals (chronic 
and episodic migraine clinical trials, 2022–present), and also manages a GM1 
gangliosidosis natural history study sponsored by the University of Pennsylvania 
with funding from Passage Bio. The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.