---
reference_id: "PMID:40885187"
title: Macrophages orchestrate elimination of Shigella from the intestinal epithelial cell niche via TLR-induced IL-12 and IFN-γ.
authors:
- Eislmayr KD
- Nichols CA
- Liu FL
- Yuvaraj S
- Babirye JP
- Roncaioli JL
- Vickery J
- Barton GM
- Lesser CF
- Vance RE
journal: Cell Host Microbe
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2025.08.001
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Macrophages/immunology, microbiology"
- "Dysentery, Bacillary/immunology, microbiology"
- "Interferon-gamma/metabolism, immunology"
- Shigella/immunology
- "Intestinal Mucosa/microbiology, immunology"
- "Interleukin-12/metabolism, immunology"
- "Epithelial Cells/microbiology, immunology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Toll-Like Receptors/metabolism, immunology"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Neutrophils/immunology
- Intestines/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Macrophages orchestrate elimination of Shigella from the intestinal epithelial cell niche via TLR-induced IL-12 and IFN-γ.
**Authors:** Eislmayr KD, Nichols CA, Liu FL, Yuvaraj S, Babirye JP, Roncaioli JL, Vickery J, Barton GM, Lesser CF, Vance RE
**Journal:** Cell Host Microbe (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chom.2025.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2025.08.001)

## Content

1. Cell Host Microbe. 2025 Sep 10;33(9):1535-1549.e7. doi:
10.1016/j.chom.2025.08.001. Epub 2025 Aug 29.

Macrophages orchestrate elimination of Shigella from the intestinal epithelial
cell niche via TLR-induced IL-12 and IFN-γ.

Eislmayr KD(1), Nichols CA(1), Liu FL(1), Yuvaraj S(1), Babirye JP(1), Roncaioli
JL(1), Vickery J(1), Barton GM(2), Lesser CF(3), Vance RE(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology & Molecular Medicine, Department of Molecular & Cell
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Immunology & Molecular Medicine, Department of Molecular & Cell
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA; Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, USA; Tufts Stuart B Levy Center for Integrated Management of
Antimicrobial Resistance, Tufts University, Boston, USA.
(4)Division of Immunology & Molecular Medicine, Department of Molecular & Cell
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA; Center for
Emerging and Neglected Diseases, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley,
CA, USA; Cancer Research Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Electronic address: rvance@berkeley.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2025 Jan 22:2025.01.20.633976. doi: 10.1101/2025.01.20.633976.

Bacteria of the genus Shigella replicate in intestinal epithelial cells and
cause shigellosis, a severe diarrheal disease that resolves spontaneously in
most healthy individuals. During shigellosis, neutrophils are abundantly
recruited to the gut and have long been thought to be central to Shigella
control and pathogenesis. However, how shigellosis resolves remains poorly
understood due to the longstanding lack of a tractable and physiological animal
model. Here, using our newly developed Nlrc4-/-Casp11-/- mouse model of
shigellosis, we unexpectedly find no major role for neutrophils in limiting
Shigella or in disease pathogenesis. Instead, we uncover an essential role for
macrophages in the host control of Shigella. Macrophages respond to Shigella via
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) to produce IL-12, which then induces IFN-γ, a
cytokine that is essential to control Shigella replication in intestinal
epithelial cells. Collectively, our findings reshape our understanding of the
innate immune response to Shigella.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2025.08.001
PMCID: PMC12471108
PMID: 40885187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests R.E.V. and G.M.B. are
SAB members of X-biotix.
