---
reference_id: "PMID:34573374"
title: "Treacher Collins Syndrome: Genetics, Clinical Features and Management."
authors:
- Marszałek-Kruk BA
- Wójcicki P
- Dowgierd K
- Śmigiel R
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12091392
keywords:
- "Choanal Atresia/etiology, genetics, surgery"
- DNA-Directed RNA Polymerases/genetics
- Humans
- "Mandibulofacial Dysostosis/etiology, genetics, surgery, therapy"
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phosphoproteins/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treacher Collins Syndrome: Genetics, Clinical Features and Management.
**Authors:** Marszałek-Kruk BA, Wójcicki P, Dowgierd K, Śmigiel R
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12091392](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12091392)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Sep 9;12(9):1392. doi: 10.3390/genes12091392.

Treacher Collins Syndrome: Genetics, Clinical Features and Management.

Marszałek-Kruk BA(1), Wójcicki P(2), Dowgierd K(3), Śmigiel R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life 
Sciences, 51-631 Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Plastic Surgery, Wroclaw Medical University, 50-367 Wroclaw, 
Poland.
(3)Head and Neck Surgery Clinic for Children and Young Adults, Department of 
Clinical Pediatrics, University of Warmia and Mazury, 10-561 Olsztyn, Poland.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division Pediatric Propedeutics and Rare Disorders, 
Wroclaw Medical University, 51-618 Wroclaw, Poland.

Erratum in
    Genes (Basel). 2025 Nov 20;16(11):1391. doi: 10.3390/genes16111391.

Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) is associated with abnormal differentiation of 
the first and second pharyngeal arches, occurring during fetal development. 
Features of TCS include microtia with conductive hearing loss, slanting 
palpebral fissures with possibly coloboma of the lateral part of lower eyelids, 
midface hypoplasia, micrognathia as well as sporadically cleft palate and 
choanal atresia or stenosis. TCS occurs in the general population at a frequency 
of 1 in 50,000 live births. Four subtypes of Treacher Collins syndrome exist. 
TCS can be caused by pathogenic variants in the TCOF1, POLR1D, POLR1C and POLR1B 
genes. Genetically, the TCOF1 gene contains 27 exons which encodes the Treacle 
protein. In TCOF1, over 200 pathogenic variants have been identified, of which 
most are deletions leading to a frame-shift, that result in the formation of a 
termination codon. In the presented article, we review the genetics and 
phenotype of TCS as well as the management and surgical procedures utilized for 
treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12091392
PMCID: PMC8470852
PMID: 34573374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.