---
reference_id: "PMID:39232784"
title: A novel variant of biallelic MME gene associated with autosomal recessive late-onset distal hereditary motor neuropathy in Chinese families.
authors:
- Zhang B
- Gang Q
- Meng L
- Li Z
- Chu X
- Wu H
- Yang J
- Huang B
- Du K
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-01996-3
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Age of Onset
- Alleles
- China
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- East Asian People/genetics
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/genetics
- Pedigree
- Neprilysin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel variant of biallelic MME gene associated with autosomal recessive late-onset distal hereditary motor neuropathy in Chinese families.
**Authors:** Zhang B, Gang Q, Meng L, Li Z, Chu X, Wu H, Yang J, Huang B, Du K
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-024-01996-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-024-01996-3)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2024 Sep 4;17(1):223. doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-01996-3.

A novel variant of biallelic MME gene associated with autosomal recessive 
late-onset distal hereditary motor neuropathy in Chinese families.

Zhang B(#)(1), Gang Q(#)(1), Meng L(1), Li Z(1), Chu X(1), Wu H(2), Yang J(2), 
Huang B(3), Du K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, 8 Xishiku Street, 
Xicheng District, Beijing, 100034, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Qujing First People's Hospital, Yunnan, 655000, 
Qujing, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Qujing First People's Hospital, Yunnan, 655000, 
Qujing, China. huangbaogangxf@126.com.
(4)Department of Neurology, Qujing First People's Hospital, Yunnan, 655000, 
Qujing, China. dukangyn@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Distal hereditary motor neuropathies (dHMN) are a group of heterogeneous 
diseases and previous studies have reported that the compound heterozygous 
recessive MME variants cause dHMN. Our study found a novel homozygous MME 
variant and a reported compound heterozygous MME variant in two Chinese 
families, respectively. Next-generation sequencing and nerve conduction studies 
were performed for two probands. The probands in two families presented with the 
muscle weakness and wasting of both lower limbs and carried a c.2122 A > T 
(p.K708*) and c.1342 C > T&c.2071_2072delinsTT (p.R448*&p.A691L) variant, 
respectively. Prominently axonal impairment of motor nerves and slight 
involvement of sensory nerves were observed in nerve conduction study. Our study 
reported a "novel" nonsense mutation and a missense variant of autosomal 
recessive late-onset dHMN and reviewed reported MME variants associated with 
dHMN phenotype.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-024-01996-3
PMCID: PMC11373294
PMID: 39232784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.