---
reference_id: "PMID:38390974"
title: "Newborn Screening for Krabbe Disease: Status Quo and Recommendations for Improvements."
authors:
- Matern D
- Basheeruddin K
- Klug TL
- McKee G
- Edge PU
- Hall PL
- Kurtzberg J
- Orsini JJ
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijns10010010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newborn Screening for Krabbe Disease: Status Quo and Recommendations for Improvements.
**Authors:** Matern D, Basheeruddin K, Klug TL, McKee G, Edge PU, Hall PL, Kurtzberg J, Orsini JJ
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns10010010](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns10010010)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2024 Jan 28;10(1):10. doi: 10.3390/ijns10010010.

Newborn Screening for Krabbe Disease: Status Quo and Recommendations for 
Improvements.

Matern D(1), Basheeruddin K(2), Klug TL(3), McKee G(4), Edge PU(5), Hall PL(1), 
Kurtzberg J(6), Orsini JJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(2)Illinois Department of Public Health, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
(3)Missouri State Public Health Laboratory, Jefferson City, MO 65101, USA.
(4)Tennessee Department of Health, Division of Laboratory Services, Nashville, 
TN 37243, USA.
(5)Pennsylvania Department of Health, Harrisburg, PA 17120, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27705, 
USA.
(7)Newborn Screening Program, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of 
Health, Albany, NY 12208, USA.

Krabbe disease (KD) is part of newborn screening (NBS) in 11 states with at 
least one additional state preparing to screen. In July 2021, KD was 
re-nominated for addition to the federal Recommended Uniform Screening Panel 
(RUSP) in the USA with a two-tiered strategy based on psychosine (PSY) as the 
determinant if an NBS result is positive or negative after a first-tier test 
revealed decreased galactocerebrosidase activity. Nine states currently 
screening for KD include PSY analysis in their screening strategy. However, the 
nomination was rejected in February 2023 because of perceived concerns about a 
high false positive rate, potential harm to newborns with an uncertain 
prognosis, and inadequate data on presymptomatic treatment benefit or harm. To 
address the concern about false positive NBS results, a survey was conducted of 
the eight NBS programs that use PSY and have been screening for KD for at least 
1 year. Seven of eight states responded. We found that: (1) the use of PSY is 
variable; (2) when modeling the data based on the recommended screening strategy 
for KD, and applying different cutoffs for PSY, each state could virtually 
eliminate false positive results without major impact on sensitivity; (3) the 
reason for the diverse strategies appears to be primarily the difficulty of 
state programs to adjust screening algorithms due to the concern of possibly 
missing even an adult-onset case following a change that focuses on infantile 
and early infantile KD. Contracts with outside vendors and the effort/cost of 
making changes to a program's information systems can be additional obstacles. 
We recommend that programs review their historical NBS outcomes for KD with 
their advisory committees and make transparent decisions on whether to accept 
false positive results for such a devastating condition or to adjust their 
procedures to ensure an efficient, effective, and manageable NBS program for KD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns10010010
PMCID: PMC10885092
PMID: 38390974

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.