---
reference_id: PMID:34536900
title: Clinical Characterization of Epilepsy in Children With Angelman Syndrome.
authors:
- Cassater D
- Bustamante M
- Sach-Peltason L
- Rotenberg A
- Nespeca M
- Tan WH
- Bird LM
- Hipp JF
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.08.007
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Angelman Syndrome/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Epilepsy/etiology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characterization of Epilepsy in Children With Angelman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Cassater D, Bustamante M, Sach-Peltason L, Rotenberg A, Nespeca M, Tan WH, Bird LM, Hipp JF
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.08.007)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2021 Nov;124:42-50. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.08.007. 
Epub 2021 Aug 31.

Clinical Characterization of Epilepsy in Children With Angelman Syndrome.

Cassater D(1), Bustamante M(2), Sach-Peltason L(2), Rotenberg A(3), Nespeca 
M(4), Tan WH(5), Bird LM(6), Hipp JF(7).

Author information:
(1)Roche Pharma Product Development, Immunology, Infectious Diseases and 
Ophthalmology (I2O), F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, pRED Informatics, Roche 
Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, 
Genetics/Dysmorphology, Rady Children's Hospital San Diego, San Diego, 
California; Department of Neuroscience, University of California, San Diego, 
Genetics/Dysmorphology, Rady Children's Hospital San Diego, San Diego, 
California.
(5)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, 
Genetics/Dysmorphology, Rady Children's Hospital San Diego, San Diego, 
California.
(7)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Neuroscience and Rare Diseases, 
Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: joerg.hipp@roche.com.

BACKGROUND: Epilepsy is highly prevalent in children with Angelman syndrome 
(AS), and its detailed characterization and relationship to the genotype 
(deletion vs nondeletion) is important both for medical practice and for 
clinical trial design.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: We retrospectively analyzed the main clinical features of 
epilepsy in 265 children with AS who were enrolled in the AS Natural History 
Study, a multicenter, observational study conducted at six centers in the United 
States. Participants were prospectively followed up and classified by genotype.
RESULTS: Epilepsy was reported in a greater proportion of individuals with a 
deletion than a nondeletion genotype (171 of 187 [91%] vs. 48 of 78 [61%], 
P < 0.001). Compared with participants with a nondeletion genotype, those with 
deletions were younger at the time of the first seizure (age: median [95% 
confidence interval]: 24 [21-24] months vs. 57 [36-85] months, P < 0.001) and 
had a higher prevalence of generalized motor seizures. Hospitalization following 
a seizure was reported in more children with a deletion than a nondeletion 
genotype (92 of 171 [54%] vs. 17 of 48 [36%], P = 0.04). The overall prevalence 
of absence seizures was not significantly different between genotype groups. 
Forty-six percent (102/219) of the individuals reporting epilepsy were diagnosed 
with AS concurrently or after their first seizure.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant differences exist in the clinical expression of 
epilepsy in AS according to the underlying genotype, with earlier age of onset 
and more severe epilepsy in individuals with AS due to a chromosome 15 deletion.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.08.007
PMCID: PMC8500934
PMID: 34536900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST Mariana Bustamante, Lisa 
Sach-Peltason and Joerg Hipp are full-time employees of Roche. Daiana Cassater 
was full-time employee of Roche at the time of writing. Lynne Bird and Wen-Hann 
Tan have been paid consultants of Roche and have received funding to conduct 
clinical trials from Roche. Alexander Rotenberg has been a paid consultant of 
Roche and has received funding to conduct clinical trials from Roche; he is also 
co-founder of PrevEp and Neuromotion, has consulted for Cavion and Praxis, and 
has received research funding from Brainsway, CRE Medical, Encoded, Epihunter 
and Takeda.