---
reference_id: "PMID:25179809"
title: High prevalence of primary adrenal insufficiency in Zellweger spectrum disorders.
authors:
- Berendse K
- Engelen M
- Linthorst GE
- van Trotsenburg AS
- Poll-The BT
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0133-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High prevalence of primary adrenal insufficiency in Zellweger spectrum disorders.
**Authors:** Berendse K, Engelen M, Linthorst GE, van Trotsenburg AS, Poll-The BT
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-014-0133-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-014-0133-5)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Sep 2;9:133. doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0133-5.

High prevalence of primary adrenal insufficiency in Zellweger spectrum 
disorders.

Berendse K, Engelen M, Linthorst GE, van Trotsenburg AS, Poll-The BT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Emma Children's Hospital/Academic Medical 
Centre, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands. 
b.t.pollthe@amc.uva.nl.

Zellweger spectrum disorders are a group of autosomal recessive disorders 
characterized by impaired peroxisome functions. The clinical spectrum is broad, 
ranging from the classical most severe Zellweger syndrome to patients with a 
relatively mild phenotype. Treatment options are limited to symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. During routine follow-up we discovered patients with 
asymptomatic primary adrenal insufficiency. It is important to detect impaired 
adrenal function because it has treatment implications. Primary adrenal 
insufficiency was found in 7/24 patients examined, with 4/7 being asymptomatic. 
Systematic evaluation of adrenal function, through a Synacthen test, should be 
included in the clinical management of these patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-014-0133-5
PMCID: PMC4164755
PMID: 25179809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]