---
reference_id: "PMID:28043685"
title: Medium- or Higher-Dose Acetylsalicylic Acid for Acute Kawasaki Disease and Patient Outcomes.
authors:
- Kim GB
- Yu JJ
- Yoon KL
- Jeong SI
- Song YH
- Han JW
- Hong YM
- Joo CU
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.12.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medium- or Higher-Dose Acetylsalicylic Acid for Acute Kawasaki Disease and Patient Outcomes.
**Authors:** Kim GB, Yu JJ, Yoon KL, Jeong SI, Song YH, Han JW, Hong YM, Joo CU
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.12.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.12.019)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2017 May;184:125-129.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.12.019. Epub
2016  Dec 30.

Medium- or Higher-Dose Acetylsalicylic Acid for Acute Kawasaki Disease and 
Patient Outcomes.

Kim GB(1), Yu JJ(2), Yoon KL(3), Jeong SI(4), Song YH(1), Han JW(5), Hong YM(6), 
Joo CU(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jjyu@amc.seoul.kr.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic 
of Korea.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Chonbuk National University Medical School, Jeonju, 
Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2017 May;184:7-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.01.072.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of medium- or higher-dose acetylsalicylic 
acid (ASA) for treating acute-phase Kawasaki disease to prevent coronary artery 
aneurysm (CAA).
STUDY DESIGN: Among the children with acute Kawasaki disease investigated in the 
eighth nationwide survey in the Republic of Korea, 8456 children with adequate 
data were included in this study. The subjects were divided into 2 groups 
according to the use of medium- or higher-dose ASA (≥30 mg/kg/day), or-low dose 
ASA (3-5 mg/kg/day) during the acute febrile phase. Both z- score-based criteria 
and Japanese criteria for CAA were used.
RESULTS: The prevalence of CAA based on z-score (24.8% vs 18.3%; P = .001) and 
on the Japanese criteria (19.0% vs 10.4%; P < .001) was higher in the 7947 
patients who received medium- or higher-dose ASA compared with the 509 patients 
who received low-dose ASA. The use of medium- or higher-dose ASA was a 
significant predictor of CAA based on both sets of criteria by univariate 
analysis (based on z-score: OR, 1.472, 95% CI, 1.169-1.854, P = .001; based on 
Japanese criteria: OR, 2.013, 95% CI, 1.507-2.690, P < .001) and multivariate 
logistic regression analysis (OR, 1.527, 95% CI, 1.166-2.0, P = .003 and OR, 
2.198, 95% CI, 1.563-3.092, P < .001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of medium- or higher-dose ASA in acute Kawasaki disease did 
not prevent CAA. A future randomized controlled trial is needed to determine the 
optimum dose of ASA.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.12.019
PMID: 28043685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]