---
reference_id: "PMID:39788978"
title: Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia.
authors:
- Hermann R
- Shovlin CL
- Kasthuri RS
- Serra M
- Eker OF
- Bailly S
- Buscarini E
- Dupuis-Girod S
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00585-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Hermann R, Shovlin CL, Kasthuri RS, Serra M, Eker OF, Bailly S, Buscarini E, Dupuis-Girod S
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-024-00585-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-024-00585-z)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2025 Jan 9;11(1):1. doi: 10.1038/s41572-024-00585-z.

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia.

Hermann R(1)(2), Shovlin CL(3)(4), Kasthuri RS(5), Serra M(6), Eker OF(7), 
Bailly S(8), Buscarini E(2)(9), Dupuis-Girod S(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)ENT department, Hôpital E Herriot, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(2)European Reference Network for Rare Multisystemic Vascular Disease (VASCERN), 
HHT Rare Disease Working Group, Paris, France.
(3)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(4)Respiratory Medicine, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(5)Division of Hematology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.
(6)Internal Medicine department, HHT Unit, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(7)Department of Neuroradiology, Hôpital Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices Civils de 
Lyon, Bron, France.
(8)Biosanté Unit U1292, Grenoble Alpes University, INSERM, CEA, Grenoble, 
France.
(9)Gastroenterology Department, ASST Ospedale Maggiore, Crema, Italy.
(10)European Reference Network for Rare Multisystemic Vascular Disease 
(VASCERN), HHT Rare Disease Working Group, Paris, France. 
sophie.dupuis-girod@chu-lyon.fr.
(11)Biosanté Unit U1292, Grenoble Alpes University, INSERM, CEA, Grenoble, 
France. sophie.dupuis-girod@chu-lyon.fr.
(12)HHT National Reference Center and Genetic Department, Hôpital 
Femme-Mère-Enfants, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France. 
sophie.dupuis-girod@chu-lyon.fr.

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is a vascular dysplasia inherited 
as an autosomal dominant trait and caused by loss-of-function pathogenic 
variants in genes encoding proteins of the BMP signalling pathway. Up to 90% of 
disease-causal variants are observed in ENG and ACVRL1, with SMAD4 and GDF2 less 
frequently responsible for HHT. In adults, the most frequent HHT manifestations 
relate to iron deficiency and anaemia owing to recurrent epistaxis (nosebleeds) 
or bleeding from gastrointestinal telangiectases. Arteriovenous malformations 
(AVMs) in the lungs, liver and the central nervous system cause additional major 
complications and often complex symptoms, primarily due to vascular shunting, 
which is right-to-left through pulmonary AVMs (causing ischaemic stroke or 
cerebral abscess) and left-to-right through systemic AVMs (causing high cardiac 
output). Children usually experience isolated epistaxis; in rare cases, 
childhood complications occur from large AVMs in the lungs or central nervous 
system. Management goals encompass control of epistaxis and intestinal bleeding 
from telangiectases, screening for and treatment of iron deficiency (with or 
without anaemia) and AVMs, genetic counselling and evaluation of at-risk family 
members. Novel therapeutics, such as systemic antiangiogenic therapies, are 
actively being investigated. Although HHT is associated with increased 
morbidity, the appropriate screening and treatment of visceral AVMs, and the 
effective management of bleeding and anaemia, improves quality of life and 
overall survival.

© 2025. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-024-00585-z
PMID: 39788978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: C.L.S. is listed as the 
inventor in the patent application filed by Imperial College London for the use 
of MEK1 inhibitors to treat telangiectasia in HHT (European Patent Application 
23705641.1). O.F.E. is a consultant for Microvention, CERENOVUS and Balt, and is 
also a member of DSMB and on the advisory board for STREAM Study. All other 
authors declare no competing interests.