---
reference_id: "PMID:16015582"
title: "Should chromosome breakage studies be performed in patients with VACTERL association?"
authors:
- Faivre L
- Portnoï MF
- Pals G
- Stoppa-Lyonnet D
- Le Merrer M
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Huet F
- Mathew CG
- Joenje H
- Verloes A
- Baumann C
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30853
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Should chromosome breakage studies be performed in patients with VACTERL association?
**Authors:** Faivre L, Portnoï MF, Pals G, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Le Merrer M, Thauvin-Robinet C, Huet F, Mathew CG, Joenje H, Verloes A, Baumann C
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30853](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30853)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Aug 15;137(1):55-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30853.

Should chromosome breakage studies be performed in patients with VACTERL 
association?

Faivre L(1), Portnoï MF, Pals G, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Le Merrer M, Thauvin-Robinet 
C, Huet F, Mathew CG, Joenje H, Verloes A, Baumann C.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d'Enfants, Dijon, France. 
laurence.faivre@chu-dijon.fr

The VACTERL association is characterized as a non-random pattern of defects 
including at least three of the following cardinal features: vertebral 
anomalies, anal atresia, cardiovascular malformations, tracheoesophageal 
fistula, renal and limb anomalies, and is postulated to be a very heterogeneous 
disorder. These defects can also be seen as part of the Fanconi anemia (FA) 
spectrum. Although VACTERL with hydrocephaly has clearly been associated with 
FA, the indication for chromosome breakage studies is not clear in VACTERL 
without hydrocephaly. We report on three unrelated patients with the VACTERL 
phenotype and the confirmed diagnosis of FA. Together with the data of 13 
similar cases extracted from a European genotype-phenotype correlation study for 
FA and those from the four reported cases of the literature, we show that (i) in 
a series of individuals proven to have FA, 5% (13/245) also have the VACTERL 
phenotype, (ii) all have radial ray anomalies and 12 of these 13 subjects show 
at least 1 other feature of FA (café au lait spots, growth retardation, 
microcephaly, dysmorphism), and (iii) the VACTERL phenotype appears to be over 
represented in the FA complementation groups D1, E, and F. Since the diagnosis 
of FA is important for genetic counseling and early therapeutic intervention in 
patients, we conclude that chromosomal breakage studies should be performed, not 
only in cases of VACTERL with hydrocephaly, but also in cases VACTERL with 
radial-ray anomalies and especially if the individual has additional FA 
associated manifestations such as skin pigmentation abnormalities, growth 
retardation, microcephaly, or microphthalmia.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30853
PMID: 16015582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]