---
reference_id: "PMID:40225330"
title: "Case report: Reversible Fanconi syndrome due to vitamin D deficiency in a patient with epilepsy harbouring a pathogenic variant in the SLC34A1 gene."
authors:
- Improda N
- Rosanio FM
- Annicchiarico Petruzzelli L
- Ambrosio G
- Malgieri G
- Mandato C
- Licenziati MR
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2025.1553032
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Male
- "Epilepsy/complications, genetics"
- "Fanconi Syndrome/etiology, genetics"
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- Mutation
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type IIa/genetics"
- "Vitamin D Deficiency/complications, genetics"
- Infant
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Reversible Fanconi syndrome due to vitamin D deficiency in a patient with epilepsy harbouring a pathogenic variant in the SLC34A1 gene.
**Authors:** Improda N, Rosanio FM, Annicchiarico Petruzzelli L, Ambrosio G, Malgieri G, Mandato C, Licenziati MR
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2025.1553032](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2025.1553032)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2025 Mar 28;16:1553032. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2025.1553032. eCollection 2025.

Case report: Reversible Fanconi syndrome due to vitamin D deficiency in a 
patient with epilepsy harbouring a pathogenic variant in the SLC34A1 gene.

Improda N(#)(1), Rosanio FM(#)(2), Annicchiarico Petruzzelli L(3), Ambrosio 
G(4), Malgieri G(3), Mandato C(4), Licenziati MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuro-Endocrine Diseases and Obesity Unit, Department of Neurosciences, 
Santobono-Pausilipon Children's Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Emergency, Santobono-Pausilipon Children's Hospital, Naples, 
Italy.
(3)Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Department of Emergency, Santobono-Pausilipon 
Children's Hospital, Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry "Scuola Medica Salernitana", 
University of Salerno, Baronissi, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

We report on a 3-year and 5-month-old boy who was referred for suspected 
rickets, due to knee valgus deformity developed over the previous year. The 
child had a history of epilepsy well-controlled with phenobarbital. His 
psychomotor development and growth metrics were appropriate for his age. On 
admission, laboratory work-up revealed elevated alkaline phosphatase (1289 U/L) 
and parathyroid hormone (PTH) (417 pg/ml), normal corrected calcium (9,3 mg/dl) 
and creatinine (0,21 mg/dl), low phosphate (3,2 mg/dl), 25-hydroxy vitamin D (6 
ng/ml) and 1-25 hydroxy vitamin D (13.4 pg/mL, nv 20-80) concentrations. 
Urinalysis indicated low tubular reabsorption of phosphate (TRP % 10,7), along 
with bicarbonate, uric acid and amino acid loss, consistent with renal Fanconi 
syndrome. Based on these results, a genetic form of renal tubular dysfunction 
was suspected, and thus a clinical exome sequencing was requested. In the 
meanwhile, the child was commenced on Joulie solution (70 mg/kg/day of 
phosphate), calcitriol (0.03 mcg/kg/die), and ergocalciferol (1000 IU daily). 
FGF-23 concentrations were found to be within the normal range, thus ruling out 
FGF23-dependent forms of rickets. Surprisingly, we observed a dramatic 
improvement in laboratory parameters within two weeks from the treatment 
initiation, including normalisation of phosphate and PTH concentrations and 
resolution of Fanconi syndrome, prompting discontinuation of phosphate 
supplements. Molecular analysis identified a de novo monoallelic mutation 
(C.1006 + 1 G>A) in the solute carrier family 34 member 1(SLC34A1) gene encoding 
a protein involved in actively transporting phosphate into cells via Na+ 
cotransport in the renal brush border membrane. However, even without phosphate 
substitution no further drops in serum phosphate concentrations and persistently 
normal proximal renal tubular function were observed. Moreover the rickets 
changes had almost healed six months after starting vitamin D supplementation. 
This case provides further evidence that vitamin D deficiency may rarely cause 
renal Fanconi syndrome, reversible upon vitamin D replacement. This is 
particularly relevant in children with risk factors for vitamin D deficiency, 
including use of anticonvulsants.

Copyright © 2025 Improda, Rosanio, Annicchiarico Petruzzelli, Ambrosio, 
Malgieri, Mandato and Licenziati.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2025.1553032
PMCID: PMC11985418
PMID: 40225330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.