---
reference_id: "PMID:31319654"
title: "Two cases of cholera O1 in South Batinah, Oman, April 2019: lessons learned."
authors:
- Al Mayahi ZK
- Al-Shaqsi N
- Elmutashi HA
- Al-Dhoyani A
- Al Hattali A
- Salim K
- Al Fulaiti IS
- Al Subhi MS
journal: Epidemiol Health
year: '2019'
doi: 10.4178/epih.e2019033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two cases of cholera O1 in South Batinah, Oman, April 2019: lessons learned.
**Authors:** Al Mayahi ZK, Al-Shaqsi N, Elmutashi HA, Al-Dhoyani A, Al Hattali A, Salim K, Al Fulaiti IS, Al Subhi MS
**Journal:** Epidemiol Health (2019)
**DOI:** [10.4178/epih.e2019033](https://doi.org/10.4178/epih.e2019033)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Health. 2019;41:e2019033. doi: 10.4178/epih.e2019033. Epub 2019 Jul 
12.

Two cases of cholera O1 in South Batinah, Oman, April 2019: lessons learned.

Al Mayahi ZK(1), Al-Shaqsi N(1), Elmutashi HA(2), Al-Dhoyani A(1), Al Hattali 
A(1), Salim K(1), Al Fulaiti IS(3), Al Subhi MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Disease Surveillance and Control Department, Ministry of Health, South 
Batinah Governorate, Rustaq, Oman.
(2)Al Rustaq Hospital, Ministry of Health, Rustaq, Oman.
(3)Barka Extended Health Center, Ministry of Health, Barka, Oman.

Cholera represents an ongoing threat to many low-income and middle-income 
countries, but some cases of cholera even occur in high-income countries. 
Therefore, to prevent or combat cholera outbreaks, it is necessary to maintain 
the capacity to rapidly detect cholera cases, implement infection control 
measures, and improve general hygiene in terms of the environment, water, and 
food. The 2 cases, 1 imported and 1 secondary, described herein are broadly 
indicative of areas that require improvement. These cases were missed at the 
primary health care stage, which should be the first detection point even for 
unusual diseases such as cholera, and the absence of strict infection control 
practices at the primary care level is believed to contribute to secondary cases 
of infection. This report also encourages countries to ensure that rapid 
diagnostic stool tests are available to enable quick detection, as well as to 
provide information to people travelling to areas where cholera is endemic.

DOI: 10.4178/epih.e2019033
PMCID: PMC6713851
PMID: 31319654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare for this study.