---
reference_id: "PMID:24268659"
title: Identification of KLHL41 Mutations Implicates BTB-Kelch-Mediated Ubiquitination as an Alternate Pathway to Myofibrillar Disruption in Nemaline Myopathy.
authors:
- Gupta VA
- Ravenscroft G
- Shaheen R
- Todd EJ
- Swanson LC
- Shiina M
- Ogata K
- Hsu C
- Clarke NF
- Darras BT
- Farrar MA
- Hashem A
- Manton ND
- Muntoni F
- North KN
- Sandaradura SA
- Nishino I
- Hayashi YK
- Sewry CA
- Thompson EM
- Yau KS
- Brownstein CA
- Yu TW
- Allcock RJ
- Davis MR
- Wallgren-Pettersson C
- Matsumoto N
- Alkuraya FS
- Laing NG
- Beggs AH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of KLHL41 Mutations Implicates BTB-Kelch-Mediated Ubiquitination as an Alternate Pathway to Myofibrillar Disruption in Nemaline Myopathy.
**Authors:** Gupta VA, Ravenscroft G, Shaheen R, Todd EJ, Swanson LC, Shiina M, Ogata K, Hsu C, Clarke NF, Darras BT, Farrar MA, Hashem A, Manton ND, Muntoni F, North KN, Sandaradura SA, Nishino I, Hayashi YK, Sewry CA, Thompson EM, Yau KS, Brownstein CA, Yu TW, Allcock RJ, Davis MR, Wallgren-Pettersson C, Matsumoto N, Alkuraya FS, Laing NG, Beggs AH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.020)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Dec 5;93(6):1108-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.020.
Epub  2013 Nov 21.

Identification of KLHL41 Mutations Implicates BTB-Kelch-Mediated Ubiquitination 
as an Alternate Pathway to Myofibrillar Disruption in Nemaline Myopathy.

Gupta VA(1), Ravenscroft G, Shaheen R, Todd EJ, Swanson LC, Shiina M, Ogata K, 
Hsu C, Clarke NF, Darras BT, Farrar MA, Hashem A, Manton ND, Muntoni F, North 
KN, Sandaradura SA, Nishino I, Hayashi YK, Sewry CA, Thompson EM, Yau KS, 
Brownstein CA, Yu TW, Allcock RJ, Davis MR, Wallgren-Pettersson C, Matsumoto N, 
Alkuraya FS, Laing NG, Beggs AH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease 
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

Nemaline myopathy (NM) is a rare congenital muscle disorder primarily affecting 
skeletal muscles that results in neonatal death in severe cases as a result of 
associated respiratory insufficiency. NM is thought to be a disease of 
sarcomeric thin filaments as six of eight known genes whose mutation can cause 
NM encode components of that structure, however, recent discoveries of mutations 
in non-thin filament genes has called this model in question. We performed 
whole-exome sequencing and have identified recessive small deletions and 
missense changes in the Kelch-like family member 41 gene (KLHL41) in four 
individuals from unrelated NM families. Sanger sequencing of 116 unrelated 
individuals with NM identified compound heterozygous changes in KLHL41 in a 
fifth family. Mutations in KLHL41 showed a clear phenotype-genotype correlation: 
Frameshift mutations resulted in severe phenotypes with neonatal death, whereas 
missense changes resulted in impaired motor function with survival into late 
childhood and/or early adulthood. Functional studies in zebrafish showed that 
loss of Klhl41 results in highly diminished motor function and myofibrillar 
disorganization, with nemaline body formation, the pathological hallmark of NM. 
These studies expand the genetic heterogeneity of NM and implicate a critical 
role of BTB-Kelch family members in maintenance of sarcomeric integrity in NM.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.020
PMCID: PMC3852928
PMID: 24268659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]