---
reference_id: "PMID:17994563"
title: "A familial case of achondrogenesis type II caused by a dominant COL2A1 mutation and \"patchy\" expression in the mosaic father."
authors:
- Forzano F
- Lituania M
- Viassolo A
- Superti-Furga V
- Wildhardt G
- Zabel B
- Faravelli F
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32047
keywords:
- Adult
- Base Sequence
- Collagen Type II/genetics
- DNA Primers
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mosaicism
- Mutation
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- Pregnancy
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A familial case of achondrogenesis type II caused by a dominant COL2A1 mutation and "patchy" expression in the mosaic father.
**Authors:** Forzano F, Lituania M, Viassolo A, Superti-Furga V, Wildhardt G, Zabel B, Faravelli F
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.32047](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32047)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Dec 1;143A(23):2815-20. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32047.

A familial case of achondrogenesis type II caused by a dominant COL2A1 mutation
and "patchy" expression in the mosaic father.

Forzano F(1), Lituania M, Viassolo A, Superti-Furga V, Wildhardt G, Zabel B,
Faravelli F.

Author information:
(1)S.C. Genetica Umana, Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy. forzanof@galliera.it

Achondrogenesis type II (ACG2) is the most severe disorder that can be produced
by dominant mutations in COL2A1. We report on four pregnancies of an apparently
healthy, nonconsanguineous young couple. The father had scoliosis as a child,
and has slight body disproportion with short trunk. The first child was born at
32 weeks and died neonatally. In the second pregnancy, short limbs and fetal
hygroma were noted on ultrasound at 17 weeks' gestation. Similar findings were
observed in the third fetus. Clinical, radiological, and histological evaluation
of the fetuses after termination of the pregnancies showed findings consistent
with ACG2. Molecular analysis of genomic DNA extracted from amniotic cells of
the second and third fetuses revealed heterozygosity for a 10370G > T missense
mutation (G346V) in the COL2A1 gene. This mutation was also found in the father,
as a mosaic. The couple had a fourth pregnancy, and at 11 weeks fetal hydrops
with a septated cystic hygroma were obvious. DNA from CVS demonstrated the same
COL2A1 mutation.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32047
PMID: 17994563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
