---
reference_id: "PMID:34454268"
title: Prognostic value of EMG genioglossus involvement in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Vacchiano V
- Di Stasi V
- Rizzo G
- Giannoccaro MP
- Donadio V
- Bartolomei I
- Capellari S
- Salvi F
- Avoni P
- Liguori R
journal: Clin Neurophysiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2021.07.011
keywords:
- Aged
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Electromyography/methods
- "Facial Muscles/innervation, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Motor Neurons/physiology
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tongue/innervation, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic value of EMG genioglossus involvement in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Vacchiano V, Di Stasi V, Rizzo G, Giannoccaro MP, Donadio V, Bartolomei I, Capellari S, Salvi F, Avoni P, Liguori R
**Journal:** Clin Neurophysiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinph.2021.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2021.07.011)

## Content

1. Clin Neurophysiol. 2021 Oct;132(10):2416-2421. doi: 
10.1016/j.clinph.2021.07.011. Epub 2021 Jul 24.

Prognostic value of EMG genioglossus involvement in amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

Vacchiano V(1), Di Stasi V(2), Rizzo G(2), Giannoccaro MP(3), Donadio V(2), 
Bartolomei I(2), Capellari S(3), Salvi F(2), Avoni P(3), Liguori R(3).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Bologna, Italy; 
Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Neuromotorie, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy. Electronic address: veria.vacchiano@ausl.bologna.it.
(2)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Bologna, Italy; 
Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Neuromotorie, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prognostic value of needle electromyography (EMG) 
genioglossus involvement in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) at 
diagnosis.
METHODS: We separately explored the prognostic value of clinical bulbar lower 
motor neuron (LMN) signs and EMG genioglossus involvement using Cox proportional 
hazard models adjusted for age, gender, diagnostic delay, presence of bulbar 
upper motor neuron (UMN) signs, EMG cervical and lumbosacral region involvement, 
ALSFRS-R score and C9Orf72 gene status. Then, we compared the prognostic value 
of EMG masseter and genioglossus abnormalities in a subset of patients in whom 
both muscles were analysed.
RESULTS: 103 ALS patients were included in the study. Neurophysiological 
genioglossus involvement was associated with a shorter survival (p = 0.002), a 
shorter time to moderate dysphagia (p = 0.0001) and to severe dysarthria 
(p = 0.012). Its prognostic value was still evident in patients without clinical 
bulbar LMN signs. Bulbar clinical LMN signs were only associated with an earlier 
onset of moderate dysphagia (p = 0.0001). EMG masseter abnormalities did not 
reach statistical significance with regard to all the clinical milestones.
CONCLUSIONS: Genioglossus EMG at diagnosis could provide important information 
about ALS progression rate. The masseter muscle seems to be less involved in 
ALS.
SIGNIFICANCE: EMG genioglossus involvement is a prognostic factor in ALS.

Copyright © 2021 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published 
by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinph.2021.07.011
PMID: 34454268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.