---
reference_id: "PMID:28951247"
title: Genetics and mechanisms leading to human cortical malformations.
authors:
- Romero DM
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Francis F
journal: Semin Cell Dev Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2017.09.031
keywords:
- Humans
- "Malformations of Cortical Development, Group I/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics and mechanisms leading to human cortical malformations.
**Authors:** Romero DM, Bahi-Buisson N, Francis F
**Journal:** Semin Cell Dev Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semcdb.2017.09.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2017.09.031)

## Content

1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2018 Apr;76:33-75. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2017.09.031.
Epub  2017 Oct 11.

Genetics and mechanisms leading to human cortical malformations.

Romero DM(1), Bahi-Buisson N(2), Francis F(3).

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR-S 839, 17 Rue du Fer à Moulin, Paris 75005, France; Sorbonne
Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 4 Place Jussieu, Paris 75005,
France; Institut du Fer à Moulin, 17 Rue du Fer à Moulin, Paris 75005, France.
(2)Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris,
France; INSERM UMR 1163, Embryology and Genetics of Congenital Malformations,
France.
(3)INSERM UMR-S 839, 17 Rue du Fer à Moulin, Paris 75005, France; Sorbonne
Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 4 Place Jussieu, Paris 75005,
France; Institut du Fer à Moulin, 17 Rue du Fer à Moulin, Paris 75005, France.
Electronic address: fiona.francis@inserm.fr.

Cerebral cortical development involves a complex series of highly regulated
steps to generate the laminated structure of the adult neocortex. Neuronal
migration is a key part of this process. We provide here a detailed review of
cortical malformations thought to be linked to abnormal neuronal migration. We
have focused on providing updated views related to perturbed mechanisms based on
the wealth of genetic information currently available, as well as the study of
mutant genes in animal models. We discuss mainly type 1 lissencephaly,
periventricular heterotopia, type II lissencephaly and polymicrogyria. We also
discuss functional classifications such as the tubulinopathies, and emphasize
how modern genetics is revealing genes mutated in atypical cases, as well as
unexpected genes for classical cases. A role in neuronal migration is revealed
for many mutant genes, although progenitor abnormalities also predominate,
depending on the disorder. We finish by describing the advantages of human in
vitro cell culture models, to examine human-specific cells and transcripts, and
further mention non-genetic mechanisms leading to cortical malformations.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2017.09.031
PMID: 28951247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
