---
reference_id: "PMID:39856351"
title: A network of interacting ciliary tip proteins with opposing activities imparts slow and processive microtubule growth.
authors:
- Saunders HAJ
- van den Berg CM
- Hoogebeen RA
- Schweizer D
- Stecker KE
- Roepman R
- Howes SC
- Akhmanova A
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41594-025-01483-y
keywords:
- "Microtubules/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Cilia/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Microtubule-Associated Proteins/metabolism, chemistry, genetics"
- Humans
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- Protein Binding
- Axoneme/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A network of interacting ciliary tip proteins with opposing activities imparts slow and processive microtubule growth.
**Authors:** Saunders HAJ, van den Berg CM, Hoogebeen RA, Schweizer D, Stecker KE, Roepman R, Howes SC, Akhmanova A
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41594-025-01483-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-025-01483-y)

## Content

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2025 Jun;32(6):979-994. doi: 10.1038/s41594-025-01483-y. 
Epub 2025 Jan 24.

A network of interacting ciliary tip proteins with opposing activities imparts 
slow and processive microtubule growth.

Saunders HAJ(#)(1), van den Berg CM(#)(1), Hoogebeen RA(1), Schweizer D(1), 
Stecker KE(2)(3), Roepman R(4), Howes SC(5), Akhmanova A(6).

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, Faculty of 
Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for 
Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Netherlands Proteomics Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Research Institute for Medical Innovation, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Structural Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Bijvoet Centre for 
Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, Faculty of 
Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. a.akhmanova@uu.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

Cilia are motile or sensory organelles present on many eukaryotic cells. Their 
formation and function rely on axonemal microtubules, which exhibit very slow 
dynamics, but the underlying mechanisms are largely unexplored. Here we 
reconstituted in vitro the individual and collective activities of the ciliary 
tip module proteins CEP104, CSPP1, TOGARAM1, ARMC9 and CCDC66, which interact 
with each other and with microtubules and, when mutated in humans, cause 
ciliopathies such as Joubert syndrome. We show that CEP104, a protein with a 
tubulin-binding TOG domain, and its luminal partner CSPP1 inhibit microtubule 
growth and shortening. Another TOG-domain protein, TOGARAM1, overcomes growth 
inhibition imposed by CEP104 and CSPP1. CCDC66 and ARMC9 do not affect 
microtubule dynamics but act as scaffolds for their partners. Cryo-electron 
tomography demonstrated that, together, ciliary tip module members form 
plus-end-specific cork-like structures that reduce protofilament flaring. The 
combined effect of these proteins is very slow processive microtubule 
elongation, which recapitulates axonemal dynamics in cells.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41594-025-01483-y
PMCID: PMC12170345
PMID: 39856351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.