---
reference_id: "PMID:35576473"
title: "Is noma a neglected/overlooked tropical disease?"
authors:
- Feller L
- Lemmer J
- Khammissa RAG
journal: Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/trstmh/trac043
keywords:
- Africa South of the Sahara
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Global Health
- Humans
- "Malnutrition/complications, epidemiology"
- "Neglected Diseases/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Noma/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is noma a neglected/overlooked tropical disease?
**Authors:** Feller L, Lemmer J, Khammissa RAG
**Journal:** Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/trstmh/trac043](https://doi.org/10.1093/trstmh/trac043)

## Content

1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2022 Oct 2;116(10):884-888. doi:
10.1093/trstmh/trac043.

Is noma a neglected/overlooked tropical disease?

Feller L(1), Lemmer J(2), Khammissa RAG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of periodontics and Oral Medicine, Corner Dr Savage and Steve Biko
Road, Pretoria, 0001, South Africa.
(2)Department of Oral Medicine and Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry,
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(3)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, School of Dentistry, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, 0001, South Africa.

Noma is a debilitating orofacial necrotizing bacterial disease that
disproportionately affects impoverished malnourished persons, particularly young
children, the vast majority of whom live in tropical and subtropical areas in
sub-Saharan Africa. It has a very high mortality rate; causes significant
physical and psychological morbidity, stigmatization and social discrimination;
could be prevented, controlled and indeed eliminated by common public health
interventions; and is overlooked with regard to public health awareness,
in-depth scientific research activities and allocation of funding for
prevention, treatment and research. According to the WHO, noma comprises five
sequential 'stages': (1) necrotizing gingivitis, (2) edema, (3) gangrene, (4)
scarring and (5) sequelae. This WHO staging of noma is contentious, leading to
diagnostic confusion with misestimation of the number of noma cases reported in
epidemiological studies. We therefore suggest a simpler, more practical and
scientifically valid two-stage classification comprising only (1) acute noma and
(2) arrested noma. Noma meets all the WHO criteria for classification as a
neglected tropical disease (NTD). Most survivors of noma live with gross
physical disfigurement and disability, and with impaired psychosocial
functioning, so they are very often stigmatized and unjustifiably discriminated
against. Owing to the paucity of evidence-based epidemiological data on noma,
the relatively low number of people affected worldwide, and its apparently
limited geographic distribution, noma does not yet feature on the WHO's list of
NTDs, or on any global health agenda, and thus has not become a health priority
for global action. We strongly support the inclusion of noma within the WHO list
of NTDs. Without doubt this will increase the awareness of noma among healthcare
providers and promote the systematic international accumulation and recording of
data about noma.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.1093/trstmh/trac043
PMCID: PMC9526837
PMID: 35576473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
