---
reference_id: "PMID:32550677"
title: Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Prasun P
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Prasun P

## Content

1. Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Prasun P(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2020 Jun 18.

Author information:
(1)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD)
represents a clinical spectrum in which presentations can be divided into type I
(neonatal onset with congenital anomalies), type II (neonatal onset without
congenital anomalies), and type III (late onset). Individuals with type I or II
MADD typically become symptomatic in the neonatal period with severe metabolic
acidosis, which may be accompanied by profound hypoglycemia and hyperammonemia.
Many affected individuals die in the newborn period despite metabolic treatment.
In those who survive the neonatal period, recurrent metabolic decompensation
resembling Reye syndrome and the development of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can
occur. Congenital anomalies may include dysmorphic facial features, large cystic
kidneys, hypospadias and chordee in males, and neuronal migration defects
(heterotopias) on brain MRI. Individuals with type III MADD, the most common
presentation, can present from infancy to adulthood. The most common symptoms
are muscle weakness, exercise intolerance, and/or muscle pain, although
metabolic decompensation with episodes of rhabdomyolysis can also be seen.
Rarely, individuals with late-onset MADD (type III) may develop severe sensory
neuropathy in addition to proximal myopathy.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MADD is established in a proband with
elevation of several acylcarnitine species in blood in combination with
increased excretion of multiple organic acids in urine and/or by identification
of biallelic pathogenic variants in ETFA, ETFB, or ETFDH.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Routine daily treatment includes
limitation of protein and fat in the diet, avoidance of prolonged fasting,
high-dose riboflavin (100-300 mg daily), carnitine supplementation (50-100 mg/kg
daily in 3 divided doses) in those with carnitine deficiency, and coenzyme Q10
supplements (60-240 mg daily in 2 divided doses). Further treatments include
feeding therapy with consideration of gastrostomy tube for those with failure to
thrive, as well as standard treatment for developmental delay, cardiac
dysfunction, and sensory neuropathy. Emergency outpatient treatment for mild
decompensation includes decreasing the fasting interval, administration of
antipyretics for fever, and antiemetics for vomiting. Acute treatment includes
hospitalization with intravenous fluid containing at least 10% dextrose, and
bicarbonate therapy depending on the metabolic status. Prevention of primary
manifestations: Avoidance of fasting and supplementation with riboflavin,
L-carnitine, and coenzyme Q10; a diet restricted in fat and protein is
prescribed for some affected individuals based on the severity of the disorder.
Prevention of secondary complications: Education of parents and caregivers such
that diligent observation and management can be administered expediently in the
setting of intercurrent illness or other catabolic stressors. Prompt initiation
of dextrose containing intravenous fluids is essential to avoid complications
such as liver failure, rhabdomyolysis, encephalopathy, and coma. Written
protocols for emergency treatment should be provided to parents and primary care
providers/pediatricians, and to teachers and school staff. Surveillance:
Measurement of plasma free and total carnitine, acylcarnitine profile, serum
creatine kinase (CK), urine organic acids, head circumference (in infants and
children), and growth and developmental milestones at each visit;
neuropsychological testing and standardized quality-of-life assessment tools for
affected individuals and parents/caregivers as needed; EKG and echocardiogram
annually for individuals with severe forms of MADD and less frequently for
individuals with milder presentations. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Inadequate
caloric provision during stressors (including following vaccination); prolonged
fasting; dehydration; high-fat, high-protein diet; volatile anesthetics and
those that contain high doses of long-chain fatty acids; administration of
intravenous intralipids during an acute metabolic crisis. Evaluation of
relatives at risk: Testing of all at-risk sibs of any age is warranted (targeted
molecular genetic testing if the familial pathogenic variants are known in
parallel with plasma acylcarnitine profile, plasma free and total carnitine, and
urine organic acid assay) to allow for early diagnosis and treatment of MADD.
Pregnancy management: Successful pregnancy with low-fat, high-carbohydrate diet
in late-onset MADD has been published. There is no evidence to suggest that
taking supplemental carnitine during pregnancy leads to adverse fetal effects.
Riboflavin is a B vitamin and is considered an essential nutrient that is likely
eliminated through feces and urine and does not result in excessive tissue
absorption.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MADD is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% change of being
affected, a 50% chance of being unaffected and a carrier, and a 25% change of
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and
prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the
pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 32550677
