---
reference_id: "PMID:37364616"
title: "Erythromelalgia. Part II: Differential diagnoses and management."
authors:
- Caldito EG
- Caldito NG
- Kaul S
- Piette W
- Mehta S
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.070
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Erythromelalgia/diagnosis, therapy, complications"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Genital Diseases, Male"
- Syndrome
- "Amputation, Surgical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythromelalgia. Part II: Differential diagnoses and management.
**Authors:** Caldito EG, Caldito NG, Kaul S, Piette W, Mehta S
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.070](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.070)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2024 Mar;90(3):465-474. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.070. 
Epub 2023 Jun 24.

Erythromelalgia. Part II: Differential diagnoses and management.

Caldito EG(1), Caldito NG(2), Kaul S(1), Piette W(3), Mehta S(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, John H Stroger Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(2)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Division of Dermatology, John H Stroger Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, 
Illinois; Department of Dermatology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(4)Division of Dermatology, John H Stroger Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, 
Illinois. Electronic address: shilpaderm@gmail.com.

The management of erythromelalgia is challenging and requires multidisciplinary 
effort. Patient education is crucial as unsafe self-administered cooling 
techniques can lead to significant morbidity, including acral necrosis, 
infection, and amputation. The goal of management is pain control, reduction of 
flare frequency, and prevention of complications. This text is focused on the 
management of erythromelalgia and several other incompletely understood and 
under-recognized neurovascular disorders such as red scrotum syndrome, red ear 
syndrome, facial flushing, and complex regional pain syndrome.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.070
PMID: 37364616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None disclosed.