---
reference_id: "PMID:39006639"
title: "One-Hour Bundle Protocols for Surgical Sepsis and Septic Shock in Surgical Intensive Care Unit: Clinical Outcome Aspects in the Thai Context."
authors:
- Boontoterm P
- Sakoolnamarka S
- Urasyanandana K
- Fuengfoo P
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.62215
content_type: abstract_only
---

# One-Hour Bundle Protocols for Surgical Sepsis and Septic Shock in Surgical Intensive Care Unit: Clinical Outcome Aspects in the Thai Context.
**Authors:** Boontoterm P, Sakoolnamarka S, Urasyanandana K, Fuengfoo P
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.62215](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.62215)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jun 12;16(6):e62215. doi: 10.7759/cureus.62215. eCollection 2024
Jun.

One-Hour Bundle Protocols for Surgical Sepsis and Septic Shock in Surgical
Intensive Care Unit: Clinical Outcome Aspects in the Thai Context.

Boontoterm P(1), Sakoolnamarka S(1), Urasyanandana K(1), Fuengfoo P(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurological Surgery, Phramongkutklao Hospital, Bangkok, THA.
(2)Surgery, Phramongkutklao Hospital, Bangkok, THA.

BACKGROUND: Surgical sepsis is a syndrome occurring during the perioperative
period with a high mortality rate. Since the one-hour bundle protocol was
recommended to decrease sepsis-related morbidity and mortality in clinical
practice, the protocol has been applied to surgical patients with sepsis and
septic shock. However, clinical outcomes in these surgical patients remain
unknown. Thus, this study aimed to compare survival outcomes in patients before
and after the implementation of one-hour bundle care in clinical practice.
METHODS: In this prospective cohort study, 401 surgical patients with sepsis
were divided into two groups, with 195 patients undergoing the one-hour bundle
from December 25, 2021, to March 31, 2024, and 206 patients undergoing usual
care from January 1, 2018, to December 24, 2021, before the one-hour bundle
protocol was implemented by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC). Demographic
data, treatment processes, and clinical outcomes were recorded.
RESULTS: After the one-hour bundle protocol was applied in surgical practice,
the median survival time was significantly increased in surgical patients who
underwent one-hour bundle care (95% confidence interval (CI): 12.32-19.68) (p=
0.016). Factors influencing the increase in the mortality rate were delays in
fluid resuscitation of >2 hours, vasopressor initiation of >2 hours, and
empirical antibiotics of >5 hours (p= 0.017, 0.028, and 0.008, respectively).
CONCLUSION: One-hour bundle care for surgical patients with sepsis resulted in
an increased median survival time. Delays in fluid resuscitation (>2 hours),
vasopressor initiation (>2 hours), and empirical antibiotics (>5 hours) were
factors associated with mortality.

Copyright © 2024, Boontoterm et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.62215
PMCID: PMC11240193
PMID: 39006639

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived
by all participants in this study. The Ethics Committee of the Institutional
Review Board of the Royal Thai Army Medical Department issued approval S068h/64.
The Thai Clinical Trials Registry Committee approved the study under their
opinion number TCTR20240509003 on May 9, 2024, and the Ethics Committee of the
Institutional Review Board of the Royal Thai Army Medical Department approved
this study on December 24, 2021. Research number S068h/64 followed the Council
for International Organization of Medical Science (CIOMS) Guidelines 2012 and
Good Clinical Practice of International Conference on Harmonization statement
number IRBRTA 1861/2564. Since this is a prospective study with no specific
intervention but only a review of medical records, inpatient department data,
and other hospital clinical data that generated results in a specific manner,
not allowing the identification of patients, written informed consent was
obtained according to the Council for International Organizations of Medical
Science (CIOMS) Guidelines 2012 and Good Clinical Practice of International
Conference on Harmonization. Animal subjects: All authors have confirmed that
this study did not involve animal subjects or tissue. Conflicts of interest: In
compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the
following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial
support was received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial
relationships: All authors have declared that they have no financial
relationships at present or within the previous three years with any
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
