---
reference_id: "PMID:18423521"
title: TFAP2A mutations result in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.
authors:
- Milunsky JM
- Maher TA
- Zhao G
- Roberts AE
- Stalker HJ
- Zori RT
- Burch MN
- Clemens M
- Mulliken JB
- Smith R
- Lin AE
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.005
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Branchio-Oto-Renal Syndrome/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Transcription Factor AP-2/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TFAP2A mutations result in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.
**Authors:** Milunsky JM, Maher TA, Zhao G, Roberts AE, Stalker HJ, Zori RT, Burch MN, Clemens M, Mulliken JB, Smith R, Lin AE
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.005)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 May;82(5):1171-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.005.

TFAP2A mutations result in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.

Milunsky JM(1), Maher TA, Zhao G, Roberts AE, Stalker HJ, Zori RT, Burch MN, 
Clemens M, Mulliken JB, Smith R, Lin AE.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 
02118-2526, USA. jmilunsk@bu.edu

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Feb;84(2):301.

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is a rare autosomal-dominant cleft 
palate-craniofacial disorder with variable expressivity. The major features 
include cutaneous anomalies (cervical, infra- and/or supra-auricular defects, 
often with dermal thymus), ocular anomalies, characteristic facial appearance 
(malformed pinnae, oral clefts), and, less commonly, renal and ectodermal 
(dental and hair) anomalies. The molecular basis for this disorder is heretofore 
unknown. We detected a 3.2 Mb deletion by 500K SNP microarray in an affected 
mother and son with BOFS at chromosome 6p24.3. Candidate genes in this region 
were selected for sequencing on the basis of their expression patterns and 
involvement in developmental pathways associated with the clinical findings of 
BOFS. Four additional BOFS patients were found to have de novo missense 
mutations in the highly conserved exons 4 and 5 (basic region of the DNA binding 
domain) of the TFAP2A gene in the candidate deleted region. We conclude BOFS is 
caused by mutations involving TFAP2A. More patients need to be studied to 
determine possible genetic heterogeneity and to establish whether there are 
genotype-phenotype correlations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.005
PMCID: PMC2427243
PMID: 18423521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]