---
reference_id: "PMID:39457428"
title: "Chromosome 15q11-q13 Duplication Syndrome: A Review of the Literature and 14 New Cases."
authors:
- Bisba M
- Malamaki C
- Constantoulakis P
- Vittas S
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/genes15101304
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Chromosome Duplication/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Phenotype
- Trisomy/genetics
- Chromosome Aberrations
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chromosome 15q11-q13 Duplication Syndrome: A Review of the Literature and 14 New Cases.
**Authors:** Bisba M, Malamaki C, Constantoulakis P, Vittas S
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes15101304](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes15101304)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Oct 8;15(10):1304. doi: 10.3390/genes15101304.

Chromosome 15q11-q13 Duplication Syndrome: A Review of the Literature and 14 New 
Cases.

Bisba M(1), Malamaki C(2), Constantoulakis P(2), Vittas S(1).

Author information:
(1)MicroGenome, 25th Martiou 55 Str., 564 29 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Genotypos Science Labs Medical SA, 3-5 Ilision Str., 115 28 Athens, Greece.

The 15q11.2q13 chromosomal region is particularly susceptible to chromosomal 
rearrangements due to low-copy repeats (LCRs) located inside this area. Specific 
breakpoints (BP1-BP5) that lead to deletions and duplications of variable size 
have been identified. Additionally, this specific region contains several 
imprinted genes, giving rise to complex syndromes (Prader-Willi, Angelman and 
15q11-q13 duplication syndromes). 15q11.2-q13 duplication syndrome has been 
associated with neurodevelopmental disorders (hypotonia, developmental delay, 
speech delay and seizures) and ASD but is characterized by variable expressivity 
and reduced penetrance, features that make genetic counseling a complex 
procedure especially in prenatal cases. In the present study, a total of 14 pre- 
and postnatal cases were diagnosed as 15q11.2q13 duplication carriers using 
Affymetrix CytoScan 750 K array-CGH, and our analysis combined these with 120 
cases existing in the literature. The inheritance pattern of the cases of this 
study is unknown, but as a review of the literature revealed, 62.96% of the 
affected carriers inherited the duplicated area from their mother. The combined 
results of this analysis (the present study and the literature) show that in the 
majority of the cases, the phenotype is a compound phenotype, with clinical 
characteristics that include ASD, intellectual disability, developmental delay 
and an absence of speech. The aim of this paper is to deliver new possibilities 
to genetic counseling that can be provided in prenatal and postnatal cases as 
the phenotype of 15q11.2q13 microduplication carriers cannot be fully predicted; 
so, clinical diagnoses should be a combination of molecular findings and 
clinical manifestations that are present.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15101304
PMCID: PMC11507414
PMID: 39457428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.