---
reference_id: "PMID:37544134"
title: Cytokine profile in patients with acute bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Kalchev Y
- Argirova P
- Boev I
- Yaneva A
- Vatev N
- Stoycheva M
- Murdjeva M
journal: Cytokine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2023.156315
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytokine profile in patients with acute bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Kalchev Y, Argirova P, Boev I, Yaneva A, Vatev N, Stoycheva M, Murdjeva M
**Journal:** Cytokine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cyto.2023.156315](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cyto.2023.156315)

## Content

1. Cytokine. 2023 Oct;170:156315. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2023.156315. Epub 2023 Aug
5.

Cytokine profile in patients with acute bacterial meningitis.

Kalchev Y(1), Argirova P(2), Boev I(2), Yaneva A(3), Vatev N(4), Stoycheva M(5), 
Murdjeva M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology "Prof. Dr. Elissay Yanev", 
Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University - Plovdiv, Bulgaria; Laboratory of 
Microbiology, University Hospital St. George, Plovdiv, Bulgaria; Research 
Institute at Medical University - Plovdiv, Bulgaria. Electronic address: 
yordan.kalchev@mu-plovdiv.bg.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Medical University - Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
(3)Department of Medical Informatics, Biostatistics, and eLearning, Faculty of 
Public Health, Medical University - Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Disaster Medicine, Faculty of Public Health, 
Medical University - Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Medical University - Plovdiv, Bulgaria; Clinic of Infectious Diseases, 
University Hospital St. George, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology "Prof. Dr. Elissay Yanev", 
Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University - Plovdiv, Bulgaria; Laboratory of 
Microbiology, University Hospital St. George, Plovdiv, Bulgaria; Research 
Institute at Medical University - Plovdiv, Bulgaria.

BACKGROUND: Bacterial meningitis is a life-threatening disease with high 
mortality and common long-term sequelae. The inflammatory response in the 
subarachnoid space, modulated by different cytokines, plays a major role in the 
pathogenesis of acute central nervous system infections. We aimed to examine 
correlations of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12(p40), and tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF)-α levels with disease severity, complications, and outcome in 
patients with acute bacterial meningitis.
METHODS: The study involved 30 patients with bacterial 
meningitis/meningoencephalitis admitted to the University Hospital St. George, 
Plovdiv over a period of 4 years. Patients were selected based on clinical 
presentation and laboratory abnormalities, consistent with a neuroinfection. 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to measure the studied cytokines in 
both cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum in parallel. For microbiological 
diagnosis multiplex, polymerase chain reaction, and CSF culture were used.
RESULTS: In patients with acute bacterial meningitis CSF levels of IL-6, IL-8, 
IL-10, and TNF-α are significantly increased than in serum. CSF TNF-α, CSF IL-8, 
and CSF IL-10 had a moderate negative correlation to CSF glucose. It was found 
that serum IL-8 is significantly elevated in patients who experienced 
neurological complications, have severe clinical course, and in deceased 
patients. CSF IL-10 is increased only in patients with severe acute bacterial 
meningitis.
CONCLUSION: Among patients with acute bacterial meningitis serum IL-8 could 
delineate these with increased risk of neurological complications, severe 
clinical course, and fatal outcome. Serum IL-8 and CSF IL-10 could be used as 
indicators of disease severity.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2023.156315
PMID: 37544134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.