---
reference_id: "PMID:31163209"
title: FBN1 gene mutations in 26 Hungarian patients with suspected Marfan syndrome or related fibrillinopathies.
authors:
- Madar L
- Szakszon K
- Pfliegler G
- Szabó GP
- Brúgós B
- Ronen N
- Papp J
- Zahuczky K
- Szakos E
- Fekete G
- Oláh É
- Koczok K
- Balogh I
journal: J Biotechnol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2019.05.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FBN1 gene mutations in 26 Hungarian patients with suspected Marfan syndrome or related fibrillinopathies.
**Authors:** Madar L, Szakszon K, Pfliegler G, Szabó GP, Brúgós B, Ronen N, Papp J, Zahuczky K, Szakos E, Fekete G, Oláh É, Koczok K, Balogh I
**Journal:** J Biotechnol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbiotec.2019.05.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2019.05.012)

## Content

1. J Biotechnol. 2019 Aug 10;301:105-111. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2019.05.012.
Epub  2019 Jun 1.

FBN1 gene mutations in 26 Hungarian patients with suspected Marfan syndrome or 
related fibrillinopathies.

Madar L(1), Szakszon K(2), Pfliegler G(3), Szabó GP(4), Brúgós B(5), Ronen N(6), 
Papp J(7), Zahuczky K(8), Szakos E(9), Fekete G(10), Oláh É(11), Koczok K(12), 
Balogh I(13).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: 
madar.laszlo@med.unideb.hu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 
Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: szakszon.katalin@med.unideb.hu.
(3)Division of Rare Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: 
pfliegler@med.unideb.hu.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 
Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: gabsza@med.unideb.hu.
(5)Division of Rare Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: 
brugosb@med.unideb.hu.
(6)Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: 
ronennatali@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Borsod- Abaúj -Zemplén County University Hospital, 
Miskolc, Hungary. Electronic address: pappjudit51@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Borsod- Abaúj -Zemplén County University Hospital, 
Miskolc, Hungary. Electronic address: zahuczky.katalin@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Borsod- Abaúj -Zemplén County University Hospital, 
Miskolc, Hungary. Electronic address: szakose1@t-online.hu.
(10)2nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. 
Electronic address: fekete.gyorgy@med.semmelweis-univ.hu.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 
Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: eolah@med.unideb.hu.
(12)Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: 
koczok@med.unideb.hu.
(13)Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address: 
balogh@med.unideb.hu.

Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder mainly 
affecting the cardiovascular, ocular and musculo-skeletal systems. FBN1 gene 
mutations lead to MFS and related connective tissue disorders. In this work we 
described clinical and molecular data of 26 unrelated individuals with suspected 
MFS who were referred for FBN1 mutation analysis. FBN1 gene sequencing was 
performed by next generation sequencing and Sanger sequencing methods. We 
identified 23 causal or potentially causal (including variants of uncertain 
significance) FBN1 variants, seven of them was novel (˜30%). About 30% of the 
cases were sporadic. FBN1 mutations were associated with MFS in the majority of 
the patients, in two cases with severe and early onset manifestation of the 
syndrome. Missense mutations were detected in 69.6% (16/23), the majority of 
them were located in one of the cbEGF motifs and ˜70% of them substituted 
conserved cystein residues. Small deletions/duplications were identified in 13% 
of the cases (3/23), while splice site variants were detected in 17.4% (4/23). 
In three unrelated patients a low frequency recurrent silent variant 
(c.3294C > T (p.Asp1098=) was identified. FBN1 mRNA analysis showed that the 
mutation does not lead to aberrant splicing, based on available data the 
mutation was classified as benign.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2019.05.012
PMID: 31163209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]