---
reference_id: "PMID:24094835"
title: Isolation of bacterial cerebrospinal fluid culture contaminants at a major military medical center.
authors:
- Wong PH
- Maranich AM
- Muench DF
journal: Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2013.08.019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolation of bacterial cerebrospinal fluid culture contaminants at a major military medical center.
**Authors:** Wong PH, Maranich AM, Muench DF
**Journal:** Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2013.08.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2013.08.019)

## Content

1. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2013 Dec;77(4):357-61. doi: 
10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2013.08.019. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Isolation of bacterial cerebrospinal fluid culture contaminants at a major 
military medical center.

Wong PH(1), Maranich AM, Muench DF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Madigan Healthcare System, Joint-Base 
Lewis-McChord, WA, USA. Electronic address: priscilla.wong@us.af.mil.

In recent decades, bacterial meningitis rates have decreased secondary to the 
success of routine vaccinations. Ironically, the decreased incidence may 
contribute to the challenge of establishing accurate and timely diagnoses. 
Studies have suggested that in immunocompetent patients with normal 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) white blood cell counts (WBC), positive CSF cultures 
may be disregarded as presumed contaminants, making the initial CSF WBC 
increasingly relevant. This single-institution retrospective study sought to 
integrate clinical data with positive cultures in an era when CSF contaminants 
may be more commonly isolated in culture than true pathogens. A total of 7715 
adult and pediatric CSF samples from 1995 to 2009 were obtained at a major 
military medical center. Clinical and laboratory data from 121 positive 
bacterial cultures were reviewed. Our bacterial CSF contamination rate (false 
positives) was 0.91% (70/7715). True-positive (TP) CSF cultures totaled 51 
(0.66%). Among TPs, 16% (8/51) demonstrated normal CSF cell counts. The notably 
low 15-year CSF contamination rate of 0.91%, suggests that positive cultures are 
likely to represent true infection in our institution. We believe efforts to 
decrease the contamination rate are among the most cost-effective, while 
targeted clinical re-evaluation for all patients with positive CSF cultures 
remains vital. In light of this data, a targeted approach to re-evaluating 
positive cultures while incorporating the clinical context remains prudent.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2013.08.019
PMID: 24094835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]