---
reference_id: "PMID:39835466"
title: "Genetics, manifestations, and management of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia."
authors:
- Desai S
- Moore OM
- Wehrens XHT
journal: Curr Opin Cardiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000001202
keywords:
- Humans
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/genetics, therapy, diagnosis"
- Polymorphic Catecholaminergic Ventricular Tachycardia
- Mutation
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/prevention & control, etiology"
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- Genetic Testing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics, manifestations, and management of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
**Authors:** Desai S, Moore OM, Wehrens XHT
**Journal:** Curr Opin Cardiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HCO.0000000000001202](https://doi.org/10.1097/HCO.0000000000001202)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2025 May 1;40(3):150-157. doi:
10.1097/HCO.0000000000001202.  Epub 2025 Jan 20.

Genetics, manifestations, and management of catecholaminergic polymorphic 
ventricular tachycardia.

Desai S(1)(2), Moore OM(1)(2)(3), Wehrens XHT(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute.
(2)Department of Integrative Physiology.
(3)Department of Neuroscience.
(4)Department of Medicine (in Cardiology).
(5)Department of Pediatrics (in Cardiology).
(6)Center for Space Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) 
is a devastating heritable channelopathy that can lead to sudden cardiac death 
in children and young adults. This review aims to explore genetics, the cardiac 
and extracardiac manifestations of mutations associated with CPVT, and the 
challenges involved with managing phenotypically variable variants.
RECENT FINDINGS: The understanding of the genetics and mechanisms of CPVT 
continues to grow with recent discoveries including alternative splicing of 
cardiac TRDN and calmodulin gene variants. Additionally, there is an increasing 
recognition of the extra-cardiac manifestations such as epilepsy, 
neurodevelopmental delay, and glucose homeostasis abnormalities in RyR2 variant 
carriers. Advances in precision medicine, including the development of 
iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes, are valuable models for developing targeted 
therapeutics.
SUMMARY: CPVT remains a complex disorder with cardiac and neurological 
manifestations impacting management. Early genetic testing and personalized 
treatment, including beta-blockers, flecainide, and ICDs, is important in 
improving outcomes. Ongoing research into the mechanism of each mutation will 
help in developing more effective, personalized therapeutics.

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000001202
PMCID: PMC11968211
PMID: 39835466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: N/A