---
reference_id: "PMID:29368538"
title: The bone remodelling cycle.
authors:
- Kenkre JS
- Bassett J
journal: Ann Clin Biochem
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1177/0004563218759371
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use
- Bone Remodeling
- Bone Resorption/metabolism
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- "Osteoporosis/drug therapy, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Osteoprotegerin/metabolism
- RANK Ligand/physiology
- Receptor Activator of Nuclear Factor-kappa B/metabolism
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The bone remodelling cycle.
**Authors:** Kenkre JS, Bassett J
**Journal:** Ann Clin Biochem (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0004563218759371](https://doi.org/10.1177/0004563218759371)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Biochem. 2018 May;55(3):308-327. doi: 10.1177/0004563218759371. Epub 
2018 Mar 4.

The bone remodelling cycle.

Kenkre JS(1), Bassett J(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Section of Investigative Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)2 Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Imperial 
College London, London, UK.

The bone remodelling cycle replaces old and damaged bone and is a highly 
regulated, lifelong process essential for preserving bone integrity and 
maintaining mineral homeostasis. During the bone remodelling cycle, osteoclastic 
resorption is tightly coupled to osteoblastic bone formation. The remodelling 
cycle occurs within the basic multicellular unit and comprises five co-ordinated 
steps; activation, resorption, reversal, formation and termination. These steps 
occur simultaneously but asynchronously at multiple different locations within 
the skeleton. Study of rare human bone disease and animal models have helped to 
elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate the bone 
remodelling cycle. The key signalling pathways controlling osteoclastic bone 
resorption and osteoblastic bone formation are receptor activator of nuclear 
factor-κB (RANK)/RANK ligand/osteoprotegerin and canonical Wnt signalling. 
Cytokines, growth factors and prostaglandins act as paracrine regulators of the 
cycle, whereas endocrine regulators include parathyroid hormone, vitamin D, 
calcitonin, growth hormone, glucocorticoids, sex hormones, and thyroid hormone. 
Disruption of the bone remodelling cycle and any resulting imbalance between 
bone resorption and formation leads to metabolic bone disease, most commonly 
osteoporosis. The advances in understanding the cellular and molecular 
mechanisms underlying bone remodelling have also provided targets for 
pharmacological interventions which include antiresorptive and anabolic 
therapies. This review will describe the remodelling process and its regulation, 
discuss osteoporosis and summarize the commonest pharmacological interventions 
used in its management.

DOI: 10.1177/0004563218759371
PMID: 29368538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]