---
reference_id: "PMID:37048066"
title: "Rapamycin Alleviates Protein Aggregates, Reduces Neuroinflammation, and Rescues Demyelination in Globoid Cell Leukodystrophy."
authors:
- Lin DS
- Huang YW
- Lee TH
- Chang L
- Huang ZD
- Wu TY
- Wang TJ
- Ho CS
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12070993
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- "Leukodystrophy, Globoid Cell/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Galactosylceramidase/metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Protein Aggregates
- Neuroinflammatory Diseases
- "Sirolimus/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Demyelinating Diseases/drug therapy
- Ubiquitins
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapamycin Alleviates Protein Aggregates, Reduces Neuroinflammation, and Rescues Demyelination in Globoid Cell Leukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Lin DS, Huang YW, Lee TH, Chang L, Huang ZD, Wu TY, Wang TJ, Ho CS
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12070993](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12070993)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Mar 24;12(7):993. doi: 10.3390/cells12070993.

Rapamycin Alleviates Protein Aggregates, Reduces Neuroinflammation, and Rescues 
Demyelination in Globoid Cell Leukodystrophy.

Lin DS(1)(2), Huang YW(3), Lee TH(3), Chang L(1)(2), Huang ZD(3), Wu TY(3), Wang 
TJ(4), Ho CS(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei 10449, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, New Taipei 25245, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medical Research, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei 10449, 
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei 10449, 
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Neurology, MacKay Children's Hospital, Taipei 10449, Taiwan.

We have shown in vivo and in vitro previously that psychosine causes dysfunction 
of autophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome system underlying the pathogenesis of 
globoid cell leukodystrophy (GLD), a devastating lysosomal storage disease 
complicated by global demyelination. Here, we investigated the therapeutic 
efficacy of the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin in twitcher mice, a murine model of 
infantile GLD, in biochemical, histochemical, and clinical aspects. 
Administration of rapamycin to twitcher mice inhibited mTOR signaling in the 
brains, and significantly reduced the accumulation of insoluble ubiquitinated 
protein and the formation of ubiquitin aggregates. The astrocytes and microglia 
reactivity were attenuated in that reactive astrocytes, ameboid microglia, and 
globoid cells were reduced in the brains of rapamycin-treated twitcher mice. 
Furthermore, rapamycin improved the cortical myelination, neurite density, and 
rescued the network complexity in the cortex of twitcher mice. The therapeutic 
action of rapamycin on the pathology of the twitcher mice's brains prolonged the 
longevity of treated twitcher mice. Overall, these findings validate the 
therapeutic efficacy of rapamycin and highlight enhancing degradation of 
aggregates as a therapeutic strategy to modulate neuroinflammation, 
demyelination, and disease progression of GLD and other leukodystrophies 
associated with intracellular aggregates.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12070993
PMCID: PMC10093124
PMID: 37048066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.