---
reference_id: "PMID:38791291"
title: The Functional Roles of the Src Homology 2 Domain-Containing Inositol 5-Phosphatases SHIP1 and SHIP2 in the Pathogenesis of Human Diseases.
authors:
- Müller SM
- Jücker M
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25105254
keywords:
- Humans
- "Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-Trisphosphate 5-Phosphatases/metabolism, genetics"
- "Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- src Homology Domains
- Signal Transduction
- "Inositol Polyphosphate 5-Phosphatases/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Functional Roles of the Src Homology 2 Domain-Containing Inositol 5-Phosphatases SHIP1 and SHIP2 in the Pathogenesis of Human Diseases.
**Authors:** Müller SM, Jücker M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25105254](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25105254)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 11;25(10):5254. doi: 10.3390/ijms25105254.

The Functional Roles of the Src Homology 2 Domain-Containing Inositol 
5-Phosphatases SHIP1 and SHIP2 in the Pathogenesis of Human Diseases.

Müller SM(1), Jücker M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

The src homology 2 domain-containing inositol 5-phosphatases SHIP1 and SHIP2 are 
two proteins involved in intracellular signaling pathways and have been linked 
to the pathogenesis of several diseases. Both protein paralogs are well known 
for their involvement in the formation of various kinds of cancer. SHIP1, which 
is expressed predominantly in hematopoietic cells, has been implicated as a 
tumor suppressor in leukemogenesis especially in myeloid leukemia, whereas 
SHIP2, which is expressed ubiquitously, has been implicated as an oncogene in a 
wider variety of cancer types and is suggested to be involved in the process of 
metastasis of carcinoma cells. However, there are numerous other diseases, such 
as inflammatory diseases as well as allergic responses, Alzheimer's disease, and 
stroke, in which SHIP1 can play a role. Moreover, SHIP2 overexpression was shown 
to correlate with opsismodysplasia and Alzheimer's disease, as well as metabolic 
diseases. The SHIP1-inhibitor 3-α-aminocholestane (3AC), and SHIP1-activators, 
such as AQX-435 and AQX-1125, and SHIP2-inhibitors, such as K161 and AS1949490, 
have been developed and partly tested in clinical trials, which indicates the 
importance of the SHIP-paralogs as possible targets in the therapy of those 
diseases. The aim of this article is to provide an overview of the current 
knowledge about the involvement of SHIP proteins in the pathogenesis of cancer 
and other human diseases and to create awareness that SHIP1 and SHIP2 are more 
than just tumor suppressors and oncogenes.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25105254
PMCID: PMC11121230
PMID: 38791291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.