---
reference_id: "PMID:31981823"
title: Contribution of astrocytes and macrophage migration inhibitory factor to immune-mediated canine encephalitis caused by the distemper virus.
authors:
- De Nardo TFS
- Bertolo PHL
- Bernardes PA
- Munari DP
- Machado GF
- Jardim LS
- Moreira PRR
- Rosolem MC
- Vasconcelos RO
journal: Vet Immunol Immunopathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2020.110010
keywords:
- Animals
- "Astrocytes/chemistry, immunology"
- Distemper/immunology
- "Distemper Virus, Canine"
- "Dog Diseases/immunology, virology"
- Dogs
- "Encephalitis/immunology, veterinary, virology"
- Histological Techniques
- Macrophage Migration-Inhibitory Factors/immunology
- Paraffin Embedding
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of astrocytes and macrophage migration inhibitory factor to immune-mediated canine encephalitis caused by the distemper virus.
**Authors:** De Nardo TFS, Bertolo PHL, Bernardes PA, Munari DP, Machado GF, Jardim LS, Moreira PRR, Rosolem MC, Vasconcelos RO
**Journal:** Vet Immunol Immunopathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vetimm.2020.110010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vetimm.2020.110010)

## Content

1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2020 Mar;221:110010. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2020.110010. Epub 2020 Jan 20.

Contribution of astrocytes and macrophage migration inhibitory factor to
immune-mediated canine encephalitis caused by the distemper virus.

De Nardo TFS(1), Bertolo PHL(1), Bernardes PA(1), Munari DP(1), Machado GF(2),
Jardim LS(3), Moreira PRR(1), Rosolem MC(1), Vasconcelos RO(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Agrarian and Veterinary Sciences (FCAV), São Paulo State University
(UNESP), Via de Acesso Paulo Donato Castellane s/n, 14884-900, Jaboticabal, SP,
Brazil.
(2)School of Veterinary Medicine of Araçatuba (FMVA), UNESP, Araçatuba, SP,
Brazil.
(3)Autonomous Veterinarian, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
(4)School of Agrarian and Veterinary Sciences (FCAV), São Paulo State University
(UNESP), Via de Acesso Paulo Donato Castellane s/n, 14884-900, Jaboticabal, SP,
Brazil. Electronic address: rosemeri.vasconcelos@unesp.br.

Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a pleiotropic cytokine that is
produced by many cell types in situations of homeostasis or disease. One of its
functions is to act as a proinflammatory molecule. In humans, several studies
have shown that MIF levels become elevated in the serum, urine, cerebrospinal
fluid and tissues of patients with chronic inflammatory diseases (systemic lupus
erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, sepsis, atheromas,
diabetes and cancer). In dogs, distemper is a viral infectious condition that
may lead to demyelination and inflammation in the central nervous system (CNS).
In addition to the action of the virus, the inflammatory process may give rise
to lesions in the white matter. Therefore, the objectives of the present study
were to evaluate the role of MIF in the encephalitis that the canine distemper
virus causes and to compare this with immunodetection of major
histocompatibility complex-II (MHC-II), CD3 T lymphocytes, MMP-9 and glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; astrocytes) in demyelinated areas of the
encephalon, in order to ascertain whether these findings might be related to the
severity of the encephalic lesions. To this end, a retrospective study on
archived paraffinized blocks was conducted, in which 21 encephala from dogs that
had been naturally infected with the canine distemper virus (infected group) and
five from dogs that had been free from systemic or CNS-affecting diseases
(control group) were used. In the immunohistochemical analysis on the samples,
the degree of marking by GFAP, MHC-II, MMP-9 and MIF was greater in the
demyelinated areas and in the adjacent neuropil, and this was seen particularly
in astrocytes. Detection of CD3 was limited to perivascular cuffs. In areas of
liquefactive necrosis, Gitter cells were positive for MMP-9, MIF and MHC-II.
Hence, it was concluded that activated astrocytes influenced the afflux of T
lymphocytes to the encephalon (encephalitis). In the more advanced phases,
activated phagocytes in the areas of liquefactive necrosis (Gitter cells)
continued to produce inflammatory mediators even after the astrocytes in these
localities had died, thereby worsening the encephalic lesions. Distemper
virus-activated astrocytes and microglia produce MIF that results in
proinflammatory stimulus on glial cells and brain-infiltrating leukocytes.
Therefore, the effect of the inflammatory response is potentiated on the
neuropil, resulting in neurological clinical signs.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2020.110010
PMID: 31981823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they did not have any conflict of interest.
