---
reference_id: "PMID:33983835"
title: Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Approaches to Cardiac Amyloidosis.
authors:
- Griffin JM
- Rosenblum H
- Maurer MS
journal: Circ Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.121.318187
keywords:
- Aging
- Alkylating Agents/therapeutic use
- "Amyloid/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Amyloid Neuropathies, Familial/diagnosis"
- "Amyloidosis/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- Benzoates/therapeutic use
- Benzoxazoles/therapeutic use
- "Bridged Bicyclo Compounds, Heterocyclic/therapeutic use"
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnosis, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Catechol O-Methyltransferase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Heart Transplantation
- Humans
- Immunomodulating Agents/therapeutic use
- Oligonucleotides/therapeutic use
- Proteasome Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Protein Folding
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- "RNA, Small Interfering/therapeutic use"
- Stem Cell Transplantation
- Sulfonamides/therapeutic use
- Tolcapone/therapeutic use
- Benzoic Acid
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Approaches to Cardiac Amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Griffin JM, Rosenblum H, Maurer MS
**Journal:** Circ Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.121.318187](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.121.318187)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2021 May 14;128(10):1554-1575. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.121.318187. 
Epub 2021 May 13.

Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Approaches to Cardiac Amyloidosis.

Griffin JM(1), Rosenblum H(1), Maurer MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Research Laboratory for the Elderly, 
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, NY.

Often considered a rare disease, cardiac amyloidosis is increasingly recognized 
by practicing clinicians. The increased rate of diagnosis is in part due the 
aging of the population and increasing incidence and prevalence of cardiac 
amyloidosis with advancing age, as well as the advent of noninvasive methods 
using nuclear scintigraphy to diagnose transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis due to 
either variant or wild type transthyretin without a biopsy. Perhaps the most 
important driver of the increased awareness is the elucidation of the biologic 
mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of cardiac amyloidosis which have led to 
the development of several effective therapies with differing mechanisms of 
actions. In this review, the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of cardiac 
amyloidosis due to light chain (AL) or transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis are 
delineated as well as the rapidly evolving therapeutic landscape that has 
emerged from a better pathophysiologic understanding of disease development.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.121.318187
PMCID: PMC8561842
PMID: 33983835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]