---
reference_id: "PMID:35784784"
title: "Ludwig's angina: An alarming radiology challenge."
authors:
- Gunawan F
- Ferriastuti W
journal: Radiol Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2022.05.085
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ludwig's angina: An alarming radiology challenge.
**Authors:** Gunawan F, Ferriastuti W
**Journal:** Radiol Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.radcr.2022.05.085](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radcr.2022.05.085)

## Content

1. Radiol Case Rep. 2022 Jun 24;17(9):3103-3106. doi:
10.1016/j.radcr.2022.05.085.  eCollection 2022 Sep.

Ludwig's angina: An alarming radiology challenge.

Gunawan F(1), Ferriastuti W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine Universitas Airlangga - Dr. 
Soetomo Academic General Hospital, Jalan Mayjen. Prof. Dr. Moestopo 47Surabaya - 
60131, Surabaya, Indonesia.

Ludwig's angina is a cellulitis that affects the submandibular, sublingual, and 
submental regions, fast-spreading along the fascial plane. Ludwig's angina has 
been classified as a fast-moving, frequently fatal gangrenous cellulitis or 
necrotizing fasciitis of the neck and mouth floor over the previous 2 centuries. 
A 60-years old male patient came with a chief complaint of swelling and pain in 
the neck that radiated to the chest with fever, headache, nausea, and history of 
toothache, poor oral hygiene, and diabetes mellitus. Ludwig's angina with 
mediastinitis complication was established by a computed tomography (CT) scan, 
which was promptly treated and he recovered completely. Imaging is used as one 
of the tools to help physicians diagnose Ludwig's angina. A trained, 
multidisciplinary team is required for the treatment of Ludwig's angina because 
it involves surgical and antibiotic treatment and also resuscitation. A more 
accurate and timely diagnosis can lead to a better prognosis. In an emergency, a 
CT scan may be the best imaging choice, although magnetic resonance imaging is 
superior to a CT scan since it evaluates soft tissue and compartment involvement 
better.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of University of 
Washington.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2022.05.085
PMCID: PMC9240957
PMID: 35784784