---
reference_id: PMID:20301686
title: Cleidocranial Dysplasia Spectrum Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Machol K
- Mendoza-Londono R
- Lee B
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cleidocranial Dysplasia Spectrum Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Machol K, Mendoza-Londono R, Lee B

## Content

1. Cleidocranial Dysplasia Spectrum Disorder.

Machol K(1), Mendoza-Londono R(2)(3), Lee B(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2006 Jan 3 [updated 2023 Apr 13].

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
(2)Associate Professor of Paediatrics and Genetics, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada
(3)Associate Staff Physician, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada
(4)Robert and Janice McNair Endowed Chair and Professor, Molecular and Human 
Genetics;, Chair, Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) spectrum disorder is a 
skeletal dysplasia that represents a clinical continuum ranging from classic CCD 
(triad of delayed closure of the cranial sutures, hypoplastic or aplastic 
clavicles, and dental abnormalities), to mild CCD, to isolated dental anomalies 
without other skeletal features. Individuals with classic CCD spectrum disorder 
typically have abnormally large, wide-open fontanelles at birth that may remain 
open throughout life. Clavicular hypoplasia can result in narrow, sloping 
shoulders that can be opposed at the midline. Moderate short stature may be 
observed, with most affected individuals being shorter than their unaffected 
sibs. Dental anomalies may include delayed eruption of secondary dentition, 
failure to shed the primary teeth, and supernumerary teeth. Individuals with CCD 
spectrum disorder are at increased risk of developing recurrent sinus 
infections, recurrent ear infections leading to conductive hearing loss, and 
upper airway obstruction. Intelligence is typically normal.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CCD spectrum disorder is established in an 
individual with typical clinical and radiographic findings and/or a heterozygous 
pathogenic variant in RUNX2 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: If the cranial vault defect is 
significant, the head needs protection from blunt trauma; helmets may be used 
for high-risk activities. Surgical cosmesis for depressed forehead or 
lengthening of hypoplastic clavicles can be considered. Careful planning of 
anesthetic management due to craniofacial and dental abnormalities. Consultation 
with an otolaryngologist to assist in securing the airway. Consideration of 
alternative anesthetic approaches, including neuraxial block, taking into 
account possible spine abnormalities. If bone density is below normal, treatment 
with calcium and vitamin D supplementation. Dental procedures to address 
retention of primary dentition, presence of supernumerary teeth, and 
non-eruption of secondary dentition. Such procedures may include prosthetic 
replacements, removal of the supernumerary teeth followed by surgical 
repositioning of the secondary teeth, and a combination of surgical and 
orthodontic measures for actively erupting and aligning the impacted secondary 
teeth. Speech therapy as needed. Aggressive treatment of sinus and middle ear 
infections; consideration of tympanostomy tubes for recurrent middle ear 
infections; regular immunizations including influenza. Sleep study in those with 
manifestations of obstructive sleep apnea; surgical intervention may be required 
for upper airway obstruction. Surveillance: Monitor children for orthopedic 
complications, dental abnormalities, sinus and ear infections, upper airway 
obstruction, hearing loss, and speech issues. DXA scan to assess bone mineral 
density beginning in early adolescence and every five to ten years thereafter. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Helmets and protective devices should be worn 
when participating in high-risk activities. Pregnancy management: Monitor 
affected women during pregnancy for cephalopelvic disproportion.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CCD spectrum disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner. The proportion of individuals with CCD spectrum disorder caused by a de 
novo pathogenic variant is high. Each child of an individual with CCD spectrum 
disorder has a 50% chance of inheriting the RUNX2 pathogenic variant. Once the 
RUNX2 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for CCD spectrum disorder are 
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301686