---
reference_id: "PMID:34417628"
title: "Is IgA nephropathy the same disease in different parts of the world?"
authors:
- Zhang H
- Barratt J
journal: Semin Immunopathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00281-021-00884-7
keywords:
- Biomarkers
- Disease Progression
- Glomerulonephritis
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin A
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is IgA nephropathy the same disease in different parts of the world?
**Authors:** Zhang H, Barratt J
**Journal:** Semin Immunopathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00281-021-00884-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00281-021-00884-7)

## Content

1. Semin Immunopathol. 2021 Oct;43(5):707-715. doi: 10.1007/s00281-021-00884-7. 
Epub 2021 Aug 20.

Is IgA nephropathy the same disease in different parts of the world?

Zhang H(1)(2)(3)(4), Barratt J(5).

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, 
Beijing, China. hongzh@bjmu.edu.cn.
(2)Institute of Nephrology, Peking University, Beijing, China. 
hongzh@bjmu.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Renal Disease, Ministry of Health of China, Beijing, China. 
hongzh@bjmu.edu.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Chronic Kidney Disease Prevention and Treatment (Peking 
University), Ministry of Education, Beijing, China. hongzh@bjmu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester and Leicester 
General Hospital, Leicester, UK. jb81@leicester.ac.uk.

Since it was first described in 1968, immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) is 
understood to be the most common form of glomerulonephritis worldwide. The 
diagnosis of IgAN depends on the presence of dominant mesangial IgA1 deposition 
by renal biopsy. To date, a wide spectrum of clinical and pathologic features of 
IgAN have been observed, implying that IgAN might not be the same disease across 
the world. Here, we review the characteristics of IgAN from perspectives of 
epidemiology, clinical-pathological patterns, disease pathogenesis, and 
treatment response across different ethnic populations. Overall, IgAN is most 
prevalent in Asians, followed by Caucasians, and relatively rare in Africans. 
More severe clinical presentation and higher risk of disease progression have 
been reported in Asians than Europeans. Moreover, active lesions, such as 
endocapillary hypercellularity and crescents, are more commonly reported in 
Asians than Europeans. Response to corticosteroid/immunosuppression therapy is 
variably reported, with greater apparent efficacy reported in Asian than 
European studies. Although a multi-hit hypothesis has been suggested for IgAN, 
the relative importance of each "hit" may vary in different ethnic populations 
and this variation underlies the differences in presentation of IgAN. In the 
future, a better understanding of pathogenic pathways operating in different 
ethnic populations may help provide better biomarkers of disease and more 
precise targeting of treatment strategies for IgAN.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00281-021-00884-7
PMID: 34417628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]