---
reference_id: "PMID:7665141"
title: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy--pathology and pathogenesis.
authors:
- Davies MJ
- McKenna WJ
journal: Histopathology
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb00267.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy--pathology and pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Davies MJ, McKenna WJ
**Journal:** Histopathology (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb00267.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb00267.x)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 1995 Jun;26(6):493-500. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb00267.x.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy--pathology and pathogenesis.

Davies MJ(1), McKenna WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiological Sciences, St George's Hospital Medical School, 
London, UK.

Genes on five loci on separate chromosomes are responsible for a familial 
disease in which all or part of the ventricular muscle undergoes thickening with 
a histological picture of irregular hypertrophy and disorganized arrangement of 
myocytes (disarray). The three genes identified so far encode for beta heavy 
chain myosin (chromosome 14), troponin T (chromosome 1) and alpha tropomyosin 
(chromosome 15). It is postulated that the phenotype within the heart is 
produced by abnormal myofibril formation and alignment leading to an abnormal 
cell shape and, thus, disarray. While all the myocytes carry the gene, the 
regional selectivity of the hypertrophy is unexplained. The phenotypic 
expression of the disease within affected members of one family, all of whom are 
heterozygous for the same gene abnormality, is very varied. Asymptomatic 
carriers are common, and new mutations do not account for most apparently 
isolated cases. The phenotypic expression of the disease was studied in 75 
hearts. The increase in total heart weight ranged from near normal to over 800 
g. Ventricular involvement was diffuse and symmetric in 42%. The commonest 
asymmetric form involved the anteroseptal region (31%) but sporadic cases 
involved only the posterior or lateral wall. A minority of cases (9.5%) did not 
show macroscopic wall thickening. Fibrosis is often associated with dysplastic 
changes in the media of small intramyocardial arteries and may lead to the 
ventricular wall simulating a dilated cardiomyopathy. A subaortic patch of 
endocardial thickening on the ventricular septum due to contact with the 
anterior cusp of the mitral valve was found in a third of cases.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.1995.tb00267.x
PMID: 7665141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]