---
reference_id: "PMID:31543403"
title: Fatty Liver Disease Caused by High-Alcohol-Producing Klebsiella pneumoniae.
authors:
- Yuan J
- Chen C
- Cui J
- Lu J
- Yan C
- Wei X
- Zhao X
- Li N
- Li S
- Xue G
- Cheng W
- Li B
- Li H
- Lin W
- Tian C
- Zhao J
- Han J
- An D
- Zhang Q
- Wei H
- Zheng M
- Ma X
- Li W
- Chen X
- Zhang Z
- Zeng H
- Ying S
- Wu J
- Yang R
- Liu D
journal: Cell Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2019.08.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatty Liver Disease Caused by High-Alcohol-Producing Klebsiella pneumoniae.
**Authors:** Yuan J, Chen C, Cui J, Lu J, Yan C, Wei X, Zhao X, Li N, Li S, Xue G, Cheng W, Li B, Li H, Lin W, Tian C, Zhao J, Han J, An D, Zhang Q, Wei H, Zheng M, Ma X, Li W, Chen X, Zhang Z, Zeng H, Ying S, Wu J, Yang R, Liu D
**Journal:** Cell Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmet.2019.08.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2019.08.018)

## Content

1. Cell Metab. 2019 Oct 1;30(4):675-688.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2019.08.018. Epub
 2019 Sep 19.

Fatty Liver Disease Caused by High-Alcohol-Producing Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Yuan J(1), Chen C(2), Cui J(3), Lu J(4), Yan C(3), Wei X(4), Zhao X(4), Li N(3), 
Li S(3), Xue G(3), Cheng W(4), Li B(4), Li H(4), Lin W(4), Tian C(4), Zhao J(4), 
Han J(5), An D(4), Zhang Q(2), Wei H(6), Zheng M(7), Ma X(8), Li W(9), Chen 
X(3), Zhang Z(3), Zeng H(2), Ying S(10), Wu J(3), Yang R(11), Liu D(12).

Author information:
(1)Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing 100020, China; Chinese PLA Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 100071, China. Electronic address: 
yuanjing6216@163.com.
(2)Beijing key laboratory of emerging infectious diseases, Institute of 
Infectious Diseases, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 
100015, China.
(3)Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing 100020, China.
(4)Chinese PLA Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 100071, China.
(5)Institute of Hepatology, PLA Army General Hospital, Beijing 100700, China.
(6)College of Animal Sciences and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, 
Wuhan 430070, China.
(7)NAFLD Research Center, the First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou 325015, China.
(8)National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 102206, China.
(9)Computational Virology Group, Center for Bacteria and Virus Resources and 
Application, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 
430071, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China; 
Institue of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(10)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing 100069, China.
(11)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of 
Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, China. Electronic address: 
13801034560@163.com.
(12)Computational Virology Group, Center for Bacteria and Virus Resources and 
Application, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 
430071, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China. 
Electronic address: liud@wh.iov.cn.

Erratum in
    Cell Metab. 2019 Dec 3;30(6):1172. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2019.11.006.

The underlying etiology of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is believed 
to be quite varied. Changes in the gut microbiota have been investigated and are 
believed to contribute to at least some cases of the disease, though a causal 
relationship remains unclear. Here, we show that high-alcohol-producing 
Klebsiella pneumoniae (HiAlc Kpn) is associated with up to 60% of individuals 
with NAFLD in a Chinese cohort. Transfer of clinical isolates of HiAlc Kpn by 
oral gavage into mice induced NAFLD. Likewise, fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) 
into mice using a HiAlc-Kpn-strain-containing microbiota isolated from an 
individual with NASH induced NAFLD. However, selective elimination of the HiAlc 
Kpn strain before FMT prevented NAFLD in the recipient mice. These results 
suggest that at least in some cases of NAFLD an alteration in the gut microbiome 
drives the condition due to excess endogenous alcohol production.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2019.08.018
PMID: 31543403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]