---
reference_id: "PMID:20301490"
title: Calpainopathy.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Angelini C
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calpainopathy.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Angelini C

## Content

1. Calpainopathy.

Angelini C(1)(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 May 10 [updated 2025 May 1].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
(2)IRCCS San Camillo Hospital, Venice, Italy

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Calpainopathy is characterized by symmetric and 
progressive weakness of proximal limb-girdle muscles. Clinical findings of 
calpainopathy include the tendency to walk on tiptoe, difficulty in running, 
scapular winging, waddling gait, laxity of the abdominal muscles, Achilles 
tendon shortening, and scoliosis. Affected individuals typically do not have 
cardiac involvement or intellectual disability. Three autosomal recessive 
calpainopathy phenotypes have been identified based on the distribution of 
muscle weakness and age at onset: (1) pelvifemoral limb-girdle muscular 
dystrophy (LGMD) (Leyden-Möbius LGMD) phenotype, the most frequently observed 
calpainopathy phenotype, in which muscle weakness is first evident in the pelvic 
girdle and later in the shoulder girdle, with onset that may occur as early as 
before age 12 years or as late as after age 30 years; (2) scapulohumeral LGMD 
(Erb LGMD) phenotype, usually a milder phenotype with infrequent early onset, in 
which muscle weakness is first evident in the shoulder girdle and later in the 
pelvic girdle; (3) hyperCKemia, usually observed in children or young 
individuals, in which individuals are asymptomatic and have high serum creatine 
kinase (CK) concentrations. The autosomal dominant form of calpainopathy is 
clinically variable, ranging from almost asymptomatic to wheelchair dependence 
after age 60 years in a few individuals; phenotype is generally milder than the 
recessive form.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of calpainopathy is established by 
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in CAPN3 or a dominantly acting 
heterozygous CAPN3 pathogenic variant by molecular genetic testing. Muscle 
biopsy showing absent or severely reduced calpain-3 on immunoblot analysis can 
confirm the diagnosis if molecular testing is inconclusive.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Physical therapy and stretching 
exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures; supervised strengthening 
and gentle low-impact aerobic exercise; nutrition management as needed to 
maintain appropriate weight for height; mobility aids such as canes, walkers, 
orthotics, and wheelchairs to help maintain independence; knee-ankle-foot 
orthoses while sleeping to prevent contractures; positioning and seating devices 
to prevent scoliosis; surgery for foot deformities, scoliosis, and Achilles 
tendon contractures as needed; scapular fixation as needed for scapular winging; 
annual influenza vaccine; prompt treatment of chest and respiratory infections; 
nocturnal ventilator assistance as needed; respiratory aids to treat chronic 
respiratory insufficiency in late stages of the disease; social, emotional, and 
family support for care decisions. Surveillance: Monitor muscle strength, joint 
range of motion, and orthopedic complications annually; assess for nocturnal 
hypoventilation annually; pulmonary evaluation as needed with forced vital 
capacity assessed in the sitting and supine position; examination of cardiac 
function in those with advanced disease as needed; assess need for social work 
support at each visit. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Strenuous and excessive 
muscle exercise; obesity and excessive weight loss; physical trauma, bone 
fractures, and prolonged immobility. Avoid succinylcholine and halogenated 
anesthetic agents when possible; avoid cholesterol-lowering agents (e.g., 
statins) when possible. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to 
clarify the status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk 
relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible 
those who would benefit from initiation of evaluation and subsequent 
surveillance.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Calpainopathy is typically inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner. Less commonly, calpainopathy is inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. Autosomal recessive inheritance: If both parents are known to 
be heterozygous for a pathogenic variant associated with autosomal recessive 
calpainopathy, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance 
of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% 
chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the CAPN3 pathogenic variants 
have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives is possible. Autosomal dominant inheritance: Each child of an 
individual with autosomal dominant calpainopathy has a 50% chance of inheriting 
the CAPN3 pathogenic variant. Once the CAPN3 pathogenic variant(s) have been 
identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic 
testing for calpainopathy are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301490