---
reference_id: "PMID:10528373"
title: Cervical kyphosis in diastrophic dysplasia.
authors:
- Remes V
- Marttinen E
- Poussa M
- Kaitila I
- Peltonen J
journal: Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1097/00007632-199910010-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cervical kyphosis in diastrophic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Remes V, Marttinen E, Poussa M, Kaitila I, Peltonen J
**Journal:** Spine (Phila Pa 1976) (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00007632-199910010-00005](https://doi.org/10.1097/00007632-199910010-00005)

## Content

1. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1999 Oct 1;24(19):1990-5. doi: 
10.1097/00007632-199910010-00005.

Cervical kyphosis in diastrophic dysplasia.

Remes V(1), Marttinen E, Poussa M, Kaitila I, Peltonen J.

Author information:
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki University Central Hospital, 
Finland. ville.remes@helsinki.fi

STUDY DESIGN: An evaluation of cervical kyphosis in diastrophic dysplasia from 
newborn to adult life.
OBJECTIVES: To discover the prevalence and natural history of cervical kyphosis 
in diastrophic dysplasia.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Typical findings in this rare skeletal dysplasia are 
sport-limbed short stature, multiple joint contractures, early degeneration of 
joints, and spinal deformities such as cervical kyphosis, scoliosis, and 
exaggerated lumbar lordosis. In diastrophic dysplasia, spontaneous resolution of 
cervical kyphosis has been reported, but so have severe forms causing medullar 
compression leading to quadriplegia and death. The prevalence and clinical 
outcome of the kyphosis are not known.
METHODS: The radiographic natural history of the cervical spine was studied in 
120 patients. They varied in age from newborns to 63-year-olds. The average 
follow-up time in 26 living patients with cervical kyphosis was 10.0 years.
RESULTS: Midcervical kyphosis was noted in 29 patients (24%) in their first 
radiograph. In 25 patients, the first radiographs were taken before the age of 
18 months, and 24 of these patients (96%) had cervical kyphosis. The most severe 
case was that of a 32-year-old patient with a 165 degrees kyphosis. In the 24 
patients, the kyphosis resolved spontaneously at an average age of 7.1 years. 
Three patients with a severe kyphosis died; one patient is alive. One patient, a 
4-year-old child has mild resolving deformity.
CONCLUSIONS: Cervical kyphosis in diastrophic dysplasia usually is shown at the 
time of birth. It resolves spontaneously during growth and seldom needs 
treatment. Careful follow-up study and treatment, if necessary, are important 
tools for avoiding the neurologic problems and fatal outcome.

DOI: 10.1097/00007632-199910010-00005
PMID: 10528373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]