---
reference_id: "PMID:31724515"
title: Assessment of Memory Impairment in Early Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease.
authors:
- Vyhnálek M
- Marková H
- Laczó J
- De Beni R
- Di Nuovo S
journal: Curr Alzheimer Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2174/1567205016666191113125303
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of Memory Impairment in Early Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Vyhnálek M, Marková H, Laczó J, De Beni R, Di Nuovo S
**Journal:** Curr Alzheimer Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1567205016666191113125303](https://doi.org/10.2174/1567205016666191113125303)

## Content

1. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2019;16(11):975-985. doi:
10.2174/1567205016666191113125303.

Assessment of Memory Impairment in Early Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease.

Vyhnálek M(1)(2), Marková H(1)(2), Laczó J(1)(2), De Beni R(3), Di Nuovo S(4).

Author information:
(1)Memory Clinic, Department of Neurology, Charles University, 2nd Faculty of 
Medicine and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)International Clinical Research Center, St. Anne's University Hospital Brno, 
Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(4)Department of Education, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.

Memory impairment has been considered as one of the earliest clinical hallmarks 
of Alzheimer's disease. This paper summarizes recent progress in the assessment 
of memory impairment in predementia stages. New promising approaches of memory 
assessment include evaluation of longitudinal cognitive changes, assessment of 
long-term memory loss, evaluation of subjective cognitive concerns and testing 
of other memory modalities, such as spatial memory. In addition, we describe new 
challenging memory tests based on memory binding paradigms that have been 
recently developed and are currently being validated.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1567205016666191113125303
PMID: 31724515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]