---
reference_id: "PMID:10958762"
title: "Neonatal and fetal methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase genetic polymorphisms: an examination of C677T and A1298C mutations."
authors:
- Isotalo PA
- Wells GA
- Donnelly JG
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1086/303082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal and fetal methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase genetic polymorphisms: an examination of C677T and A1298C mutations.
**Authors:** Isotalo PA, Wells GA, Donnelly JG
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1086/303082](https://doi.org/10.1086/303082)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Oct;67(4):986-90. doi: 10.1086/303082. Epub 2000 Aug 24.

Neonatal and fetal methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase genetic polymorphisms: an 
examination of C677T and A1298C mutations.

Isotalo PA(1), Wells GA, Donnelly JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1Y 4E9.

Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) mutations are commonly associated 
with hyperhomocysteinemia, and, through their defects in homocysteine 
metabolism, they have been implicated as risk factors for neural tube defects 
and unexplained, recurrent embryo losses in early pregnancy. Folate sufficiency 
is thought to play an integral role in the phenotypic expression of MTHFR 
mutations. Samples of neonatal cord blood (n=119) and fetal tissue (n=161) were 
analyzed for MTHFR C677T and A1298C mutations to determine whether certain MTHFR 
genotype combinations were associated with decreased in utero viability. 
Mutation analysis revealed that all possible MTHFR genotype combinations were 
represented in the fetal group, demonstrating that 677T and 1298C alleles could 
occur in both cis and trans configurations. Combined 677CT/1298CC and 
677TT/1298CC genotypes, which contain three and four mutant alleles, 
respectively, were not observed in the neonatal group (P=.0402). This suggests 
decreased viability among fetuses carrying these mutations and a possible 
selection disadvantage among fetuses with increased numbers of mutant MTHFR 
alleles. This is the first report that describes the existence of human MTHFR 
677CT/1298CC and 677TT/1298CC genotypes and demonstrates their potential role in 
compromised fetal viability.

DOI: 10.1086/303082
PMCID: PMC1287901
PMID: 10958762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]