---
reference_id: "PMID:20301374"
title: Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Tokatly Latzer I
- Pearl PL
- Roullet JB
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Tokatly Latzer I, Pearl PL, Roullet JB

## Content

1. Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Tokatly Latzer I(1)(2), Pearl PL(3), Roullet JB(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2004 May 5 [updated 2025 Jan 9].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Assistant Professor, School of Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Health
Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
(3)Professor of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts
(4)Professor, College of Pharmacology, Washington State University, Spokane,
Washington

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency
is characterized by a relatively non-progressive encephalopathy typically
presenting with hypotonia and delayed acquisition of motor and language
developmental milestones in the first two years of life. Common clinical
features include an almost universal intellectual disability and adaptive
function deficits, as well as epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder, movement
disorders (such as ataxia, dystonia, and exertional dyskinesia), sleep
disturbances, attention problems, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive behaviors.
Notably, seizures, autism spectrum disorder features, and behavioral problems
tend to worsen around the time of late childhood or early adolescence. Affected
individuals do not usually have episodic decompensation following metabolic
stressors, as is typical of other organic acidemias and metabolic
encephalopathies, although some have been diagnosed after having unanticipated
difficulty recovering from otherwise ordinary childhood illnesses. Clinical
presentation with acute onset of generalized hypotonia and choreiform movement
following upper-respiratory tract infection has been observed.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Increased gamma-hydroxybutyric aciduria (GHB) on a urinary
organic acid analysis is suggestive of the condition; however, the diagnosis of
SSADH deficiency is established in a proband with consistent analyte findings
and/or suggestive clinical features by identification of biallelic pathogenic
variants in ALDH5A1 by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Many anti-seizure medications (ASMs)
may be effective for seizures; none has been demonstrated effective specifically
for this disorder. In general, valproate is avoided except in circumstances such
as drug-resistant generalized spike-wave EEG pattern when other ASMs are
ineffective. Vigabatrin is not generally recommended. Standard treatment for
ataxia/movement disorder, sleep disturbance, developmental delay / cognitive
issues, and neurobehavioral and psychiatric issues. Surveillance: At each visit,
monitor those with seizures as clinically indicated; assess for new
manifestations such as seizures, ataxia, or movement disorders; monitor
developmental progress and educational needs; assess for anxiety, ADHD, OCD, and
aggression; monitor for evidence of sleep disturbances, such as excessive
daytime sleepiness. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Vigabatrin may result in
elevated gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and exacerbation of manifestations, and
its clinical utility has been inconsistent. Tiagabine could also lead to an
increase in GABA levels and is not recommended for individuals with SSADH
deficiency. Valproate is not recommended as a first-line ASM in people with
SSADH deficiency, but it may be considered in drug-resistant epilepsy or
generalized spike-wave epilepsy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SSADH deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an ALDH5A1 pathogenic
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of
being affected, a 50% chance of being a carrier, and a 25% chance of being
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the ALDH5A1 pathogenic variants have been
identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic carrier testing for
at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing for SSADH
deficiency are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301374
