---
reference_id: "PMID:36081870"
title: "Hashimoto's encephalopathy with cerebellar ataxia as the main symptom: A case report and literature review."
authors:
- Wei C
- Shen Y
- Zhai W
- Shang T
- Wang Z
- Wang Y
- Li M
- Zhao Y
- Sun L
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.970141
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hashimoto's encephalopathy with cerebellar ataxia as the main symptom: A case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Wei C, Shen Y, Zhai W, Shang T, Wang Z, Wang Y, Li M, Zhao Y, Sun L
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.970141](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.970141)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Aug 23;13:970141. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.970141.
eCollection  2022.

Hashimoto's encephalopathy with cerebellar ataxia as the main symptom: A case 
report and literature review.

Wei C(1), Shen Y(1), Zhai W(1), Shang T(1), Wang Z(1), Wang Y(1), Li M(1), Zhao 
Y(1), Sun L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience Center, The First Hospital of Jilin 
University, Jilin University, Changchun, China.

Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE), also known as steroid responsive encephalopathy 
associated with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT), has a variety of clinical 
manifestations, with various neuropsychiatric characteristics, including 
tremors, transient aphasia, seizures, altered consciousness, myoclonus, 
cognitive impairment, and psychiatric manifestations. The hallmark presenting 
feature is a non-specific encephalopathy characterized by alteration of mental 
status and consciousness ranging from confusion to coma and impaired cognitive 
function, while those with cerebellar ataxia as the main manifestation is rare. 
We reported a case of Hashimoto's encephalopathy with cerebellar ataxia as the 
main manifestation, elevated anti-thyroid antibodies (anti-TPO/TG), and normal 
thyroid function. The symptoms of cerebellar ataxia improved after steroid 
treatment. Meanwhile, we reviewed the clinical features of 20 representative 
cases of HE with cerebellar ataxia as the core symptoms. In conclusion, based on 
our case findings and literature review, the diagnosis of HE should be suspected 
in cases of encephalopathy without an obvious cause, to quickly start an 
effective treatment.

Copyright © 2022 Wei, Shen, Zhai, Shang, Wang, Wang, Li, Zhao and Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.970141
PMCID: PMC9445579
PMID: 36081870

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.