---
reference_id: "PMID:39926433"
title: Previous treatment decreases efficacy of pralsetinib in RET fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Wang L
- You Y
- He W
- Hou Y
- Li L
- Wang L
- Jiang C
- Yi J
- Xia Y
- Xia L
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2025.1467871
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Previous treatment decreases efficacy of pralsetinib in RET fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Wang L, You Y, He W, Hou Y, Li L, Wang L, Jiang C, Yi J, Xia Y, Xia L
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2025.1467871](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2025.1467871)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2025 Jan 24;12:1467871. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2025.1467871.
eCollection 2025.

Previous treatment decreases efficacy of pralsetinib in RET fusion-positive
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Wang L(#)(1), You Y(#)(2), He W(3), Hou Y(1), Li L(1), Wang L(1), Jiang C(3), Yi
J(3), Xia Y(1), Xia L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical
University, Yunnan Cancer Hospital, Pecking University Cancer Hospital Yunnan,
Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)The Department of Clinical Oncology, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of VIP Region, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Pralsetinib is a selective RET inhibitor. The ARROW trial revealed
that RET fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) can benefit from
pralsetinib with tolerable adverse events (AEs). However, the efficacy and
safety of pralsetinib in real world has rarely been reported.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study reviewed the efficacy and safety of
pralsetinib in RET fusion-positive NSCLC patients between March 2021 and
December 2021. Progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were
evaluated by a Kaplan-Meier analysis and log-rank test. A Cox regression model
was performed to identify independent prognostic factors.
RESULTS: A total of 28 patients were enrolled, and the median follow-up time was
18.1 months. The objective response rate and disease control rate of the whole
cohort were 57.2% and 71.4%, respectively, and the median PFS and OS were 8.1
months [95% confidence interval (CI), 3.1-13.2] and 13.8 months (95% CI,
2.8-24.8), respectively. Baseline characteristics of the treatment naive group
and pre-treated group were listed. The median PFS tended to be better in
treatment naive group (18.3 vs. 8.0 months, P = 0.067), while the median OS were
similar between the two groups (28.4 vs. 11.6 months, P = 0.308). Patients with
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS) score of 2 had
worse median PFS comparing with those with ECOG PS score of 0-1 (3.8 vs. 12.6
months, P = 0.004). Besides, patients previously treated with platinum-based
chemotherapy (PBC) also revealed worse median PFS comparing with those without
previous PBC (8.0 vs. 18.6 months, P = 0.023). Furthermore, patients previously
treated with anti-programmed death-1 (PD-1) antibody or multikinase inhibitors
(MKIs) showed worse median OS compared with those without previous anti-PD-1
antibody (5.0 vs. 22.0 months, P = 0.002) or MKIs (6.2 vs. 28.4 months, P =
0.015). The most common AEs was increased aspartate aminotransferase (39.3%).
CONCLUSION: Pralsetinib was effective in RET fusion-positive NSCLC with
tolerable AEs in real-world practice. Efficacy of pralsetinib was decreased in
patients previously treated with PBC, immunotherapy, or MKIs.

Copyright © 2025 Wang, You, He, Hou, Li, Wang, Jiang, Yi, Xia and Xia.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2025.1467871
PMCID: PMC11804255
PMID: 39926433

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
