---
reference_id: "PMID:28906088"
title: "Bullous cutaneous larva migrans: case series and review of atypical clinical presentations."
authors:
- Veraldi S
- Çuka E
- Pontini P
- Vaira F
journal: G Ital Dermatol Venereol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.23736/S0392-0488.16.04832-X
keywords:
- Adult
- Albendazole/therapeutic use
- Anthelmintics/therapeutic use
- Female
- "Hookworm Infections/diagnosis, drug therapy, parasitology"
- Humans
- "Larva Migrans/diagnosis, drug therapy, parasitology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pruritus/parasitology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bullous cutaneous larva migrans: case series and review of atypical clinical presentations.
**Authors:** Veraldi S, Çuka E, Pontini P, Vaira F
**Journal:** G Ital Dermatol Venereol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S0392-0488.16.04832-X](https://doi.org/10.23736/S0392-0488.16.04832-X)

## Content

1. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2017 Oct;152(5):516-519. doi: 
10.23736/S0392-0488.16.04832-X.

Bullous cutaneous larva migrans: case series and review of atypical clinical 
presentations.

Veraldi S(1), Çuka E(2), Pontini P(2), Vaira F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, I.R.C.C.S. Foundation Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, 
Italy - stefano.veraldi@unimi.it.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, I.R.C.C.S. Foundation Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, 
Italy.

Hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans (HRCLM) is caused by the penetration 
and migration in the epidermis of larvae of Ancylostoma braziliense and 
Ancylostoma caninum. It is characterized by slightly raised and erythematous 
tracks, located especially on the feet. These tracks may be single or multiple, 
serpiginous or linear, ramified and intertwined, accompanied by pruritus. 
Atypical clinical presentations of HRCLM are currently more frequent than in the 
past. We present six patients with bullous HRCLM and discuss the possible 
pathogenetic factors. Furthermore, we present a review of atypical clinical 
presentations of HRCLM. From 1998 to 2013 we observed approximately 180 patients 
with HRCLM. In all patients race, nationality, sex, age, country of infestation, 
location of the disease, clinical picture, laboratory and instrumental 
examinations and therapy were collected. In six patients (4 males and 2 
females), we made a diagnosis, based on the history and clinical picture, of 
bullous HRCLM. The infestation was characterized by single or multiple blisters, 
round or oval in shape, of different size, with a clear serous fluid. Some 
tracks were also visible. All patients complained of pruritus. General physical 
examination and laboratory and instrumental examinations were normal or 
negative. Cytological examinations of the blisters showed the presence of 
lymphocytes and neutrophils, with numerous eosinophils. All patients were 
successfully treated with oral albendazole. Blisters appear because of the 
release by the larvae of lytic enzymes (metalloproteases and hyaluronidases). 
Furthermore, blisters might be the final clinical result of a delayed 
hypersensitivity reaction due to the release by larvae of unknown antigens. 
Finally, only in some patients, bullous HRCLM might represent an acute 
irritant/allergic contact dermatitis caused by topical drugs applied on the 
lesions. This hypothesis has been excluded in our patients because no topical 
treatment was made before our observation.

DOI: 10.23736/S0392-0488.16.04832-X
PMID: 28906088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]