---
reference_id: "PMID:35991568"
title: "Case Report: Lack of Response to Givosiran in a Case of ALAD Porphyria."
authors:
- Graff E
- Anderson KE
- Levy C
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.867856
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Lack of Response to Givosiran in a Case of ALAD Porphyria.
**Authors:** Graff E, Anderson KE, Levy C
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.867856](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.867856)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Aug 4;13:867856. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.867856. eCollection
 2022.

Case Report: Lack of Response to Givosiran in a Case of ALAD Porphyria.

Graff E(1), Anderson KE(2), Levy C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hospital Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL, United States.
(2)Galveston Porphyria Laboratory and Center, Department of Internal Medicine,
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, United States.
(3)Division of Digestive Health and Liver Diseases, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States.
(4)Schiff Center for Liver Diseases, University of Miami, Miami, FL, United
States.

Introduction: 5-Aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD) porphyria (ADP) is an
autosomal recessive disease characterized by a profound deficiency in ALAD, the
second enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway, and acute neurovisceral attacks
with abdominal pain and peripheral neuropathy. Hemin infusions are often
effective in treating and preventing such attacks. Givosiran was recently
approved for prevention of attacks of acute hepatic porphyrias (AHPs), including
ADP, but, to our knowledge, has not yet been applied in patients with this
ultrarare disease. Case Description: We update the clinical course and report
new treatment outcomes of a 32-year-old man with ADP managed for many years with
weekly prophylactic hemin infusions. He has developed evidence of iron overload
and was more recently found to have compensated cirrhosis. The patient was
started on givosiran (Givlaari™, Alnylam), a small interfering RNA (siRNA)
therapeutic that is effective in preventing frequently recurring attacks of
acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), the most common type of AHP. Discussion: No
adverse effects of givosiran on the liver were observed in this patient with
cirrhosis during 6 months of treatment with givosiran. The patient has continued
to have recurrent attacks, with transient decreases in ALA levels only as
related to treatment of his attacks with hemin. Our experience limited to one
patient with ADP suggests that givosiran may not be effective in this type of
acute porphyria. Since ADP may have an erythropoietic component, treatment with
hydroxyurea, which was beneficial in one previous case, is planned.

Copyright © 2022 Graff, Anderson and Levy.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.867856
PMCID: PMC9386060
PMID: 35991568

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
