---
reference_id: "PMID:19211713"
title: A mouse model for Meckel syndrome type 3.
authors:
- Cook SA
- Collin GB
- Bronson RT
- Naggert JK
- Liu DP
- Akeson EC
- Davisson MT
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008040412
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model for Meckel syndrome type 3.
**Authors:** Cook SA, Collin GB, Bronson RT, Naggert JK, Liu DP, Akeson EC, Davisson MT
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2008040412](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2008040412)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Apr;20(4):753-64. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008040412. Epub
2009  Feb 11.

A mouse model for Meckel syndrome type 3.

Cook SA(1), Collin GB, Bronson RT, Naggert JK, Liu DP, Akeson EC, Davisson MT.

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609, USA.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome type 3 (MKS3; OMIM 607361) is a severe autosomal 
recessive disorder characterized by bilateral polycystic kidney disease. Other 
malformations associated with MKS3 include cystic changes in the liver, 
polydactyly, and brain abnormalities (occipital encephalocele, hydrocephalus, 
and Dandy Walker-type cerebellar anomalies). The disorder is hypothesized to be 
caused by defects in primary cilia. In humans, the underlying mutated gene, 
TMEM67, encodes transmembrane protein 67, also called meckelin (OMIM 609884), 
which is an integral protein of the renal epithelial cell and membrane of the 
primary cilium. Here, we describe a spontaneous deletion of the mouse ortholog, 
Tmem67, which results in polycystic kidney disease and death by 3 wk after 
birth. Hydrocephalus also occurs in some mutants. We verified the mutated gene 
by transgenic rescue and characterized the phenotype with microcomputed 
tomography, histology, scanning electron microscopy, and immunohistochemistry. 
This mutant provides a mouse model for MKS3 and adds to the growing set of 
mammalian models essential for studying the role of the primary cilium in kidney 
function.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2008040412
PMCID: PMC2663826
PMID: 19211713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]