---
reference_id: "PMID:30690602"
title: A review of innate and adaptive immunity to coccidioidomycosis.
authors:
- Hung CY
- Hsu AP
- Holland SM
- Fierer J
journal: Med Mycol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/mmy/myy146
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of innate and adaptive immunity to coccidioidomycosis.
**Authors:** Hung CY, Hsu AP, Holland SM, Fierer J
**Journal:** Med Mycol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/mmy/myy146](https://doi.org/10.1093/mmy/myy146)

## Content

1. Med Mycol. 2019 Feb 1;57(Supplement_1):S85-S92. doi: 10.1093/mmy/myy146.

A review of innate and adaptive immunity to coccidioidomycosis.

Hung CY(1), Hsu AP(2), Holland SM(2), Fierer J(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and South Texas Center for Emerging Infectious 
Diseases, University of Texas, San Antonio, Texas, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(3)Infectious Diseases Section, VA Healthcare San Diego, California, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of 
California San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego, California, USA.

Coccidioidomycosis is a human fungal disease cause by inhalation of aerosol 
spores produced by Coccidioides posadasii or Coccidioides immitis. This disease 
is a common cause of community-acquired pneumonia in the endemic areas of the 
Southwestern United States. It also can present as a life-threatening disease as 
the fungal cells disseminate to skin, bone, and central nervous system. The 
outcome of coccidioidomycosis is largely determined by the nature of host immune 
response to the infection. Escalation of symptomatic infections and increased 
cost of long-term antifungal treatment warrant a concerted effort to better 
understand the innate and adaptive immune responses and the genetics associated 
with coccidioidomycosis susceptibility. This knowledge can be harnessed for 
development of a human vaccine against Coccidioides and advance clinic 
management of this disease. This review discusses recently reported studies on 
innate and adaptive immunity to Coccidioides infection, Mendelian susceptibility 
to disseminated disease and progress toward a human vaccine against this 
formidable disease.

DOI: 10.1093/mmy/myy146
PMCID: PMC6347076
PMID: 30690602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]