---
reference_id: "PMID:15720245"
title: "Pharmacological and clinical basis of treatment of Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) with colchicine or analogues: an update."
authors:
- Cerquaglia C
- Diaco M
- Nucera G
- La Regina M
- Montalto M
- Manna R
journal: Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy
year: '2005'
doi: 10.2174/1568010053622984
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacological and clinical basis of treatment of Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) with colchicine or analogues: an update.
**Authors:** Cerquaglia C, Diaco M, Nucera G, La Regina M, Montalto M, Manna R
**Journal:** Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy (2005)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1568010053622984](https://doi.org/10.2174/1568010053622984)

## Content

1. Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy. 2005 Feb;4(1):117-24. doi: 
10.2174/1568010053622984.

Pharmacological and clinical basis of treatment of Familial Mediterranean Fever 
(FMF) with colchicine or analogues: an update.

Cerquaglia C(1), Diaco M, Nucera G, La Regina M, Montalto M, Manna R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Catholic University, Largo F. Vito 1, 00168 
Rome, Italy.

Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF), an autosomal recessive disorder, is 
characterised by recurrent attacks of fever and serositis, lasting 24-72 hours. 
Since 1972 colchicine has become the drug of choice for prophylaxis against FMF 
attacks and amyloidosis FMF-associated. Colchicine, an alkaloid neutral, is 
absorbed in the jejunum and ileum. It metabolised by liver and only small 
amounts are recovered unchanged in the urine. Really plasma half-life is 
prolonged in patients with liver or renal failure. Colchicine is able to prevent 
activation of neutrophils, binding beta-tubulin and making 
beta-tubulin-colchicine complexes; this way inhibits assembly of microtubules 
and mitotic spindle formation; moreover its mode of action includes modulation 
of chemokines, prostanoids production, inhibition of neutrophil and endothelial 
cell adhesion molecules. The minimal daily dose in adults is 1.0 mg/die, but in 
children there is not a definite dose. Since in vitro high dosages of colchicine 
stop mitosis, this drug might interfere with male and female fertility and with 
children growth, but, according to current guidelines and because of rare side 
effects of the drug, FMF patients are recommended to take colchicine. Since 
colchicine treatment is often complicated by frequent gastrointestinal side 
effects, by our experience, in order to improve colchicine tolerance we 
recommend: lactose-free diet and treatment of intestinal bacterial overgrowth 
and/or Hp-infection, assessed by breath tests. Since our data showed that 10-15% 
of FMF patients seem are non-responders or intolerant to colchicine, today we 
are working in the design of colchicine analogues which may have lesser 
toxicities and a larger therapeutic window.

DOI: 10.2174/1568010053622984
PMID: 15720245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]