---
reference_id: "PMID:24954675"
title: Hepatitis B virus infection.
authors:
- Trépo C
- Chan HL
- Lok A
journal: Lancet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60220-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B virus infection.
**Authors:** Trépo C, Chan HL, Lok A
**Journal:** Lancet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60220-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60220-8)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2014 Dec 6;384(9959):2053-63. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60220-8. Epub
 2014 Jun 18.

Hepatitis B virus infection.

Trépo C(1), Chan HL(2), Lok A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology, Croix-Rousse Hospital, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 
Lyon, France; INSERM U1052, Lyon, France. Electronic address: 
christian.trepo@chu-lyon.fr.
(2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Institute of Digestive Disease and 
State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, China.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Michigan Health 
System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Hepatitis B virus infection is a major public health problem worldwide; roughly 
30% of the world's population show serological evidence of current or past 
infection. Hepatitis B virus is a partly double-stranded DNA virus with several 
serological markers: HBsAg and anti-HBs, HBeAg and anti-HBe, and anti-HBc IgM 
and IgG. It is transmitted through contact with infected blood and semen. A safe 
and effective vaccine has been available since 1981, and, although variable, the 
implementation of universal vaccination in infants has resulted in a sharp 
decline in prevalence. Hepatitis B virus is not cytopathic; both liver damage 
and viral control--and therefore clinical outcome--depend on the complex 
interplay between virus replication and host immune response. Overall, as much 
as 40% of men and 15% of women with perinatally acquired hepatitis B virus 
infection will die of liver cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma. In addition 
to decreasing hepatic inflammation, long-term antiviral treatment can reverse 
cirrhosis and reduce hepatocellular carcinoma. Development of new therapies that 
can improve HBsAg clearance and virological cure is warranted.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60220-8
PMID: 24954675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]