---
reference_id: "PMID:37788487"
title: Genetics of Dilated Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Eldemire R
- Mestroni L
- Taylor MRG
journal: Annu Rev Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-med-052422-020535
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of Dilated Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Eldemire R, Mestroni L, Taylor MRG
**Journal:** Annu Rev Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-med-052422-020535](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-med-052422-020535)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Med. 2024 Jan 29;75:417-426. doi: 10.1146/annurev-med-052422-020535. 
Epub 2023 Oct 3.

Genetics of Dilated Cardiomyopathy.

Eldemire R(1), Mestroni L(1)(2), Taylor MRG(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, Colorado, USA; email: luisa.mestroni@cuanschutz.edu.
(2)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(3)Adult Medical Genetics Program, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is defined as dilation and/or reduced function of 
one or both ventricles and remains a common disease worldwide. An estimated 40% 
of cases of familial DCM have an identifiable genetic cause. Accordingly, there 
is a fast-growing interest in the field of molecular genetics as it pertains to 
DCM. Many gene mutations have been identified that contribute to phenotypically 
significant cardiomyopathy. DCM genes can affect a variety of cardiomyocyte 
functions, and particular genes whose function affects the cell-cell junction 
and cytoskeleton are associated with increased risk of arrhythmias and sudden 
cardiac death. Through advancements in next-generation sequencing and cardiac 
imaging, identification of genetic DCM has improved over the past couple 
decades, and precision medicine is now at the forefront of treatment for these 
patients and their families. In addition to standard treatment of heart failure 
and prevention of arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death, patients with genetic 
cardiomyopathy stand to benefit from gene mechanism-specific therapies.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-med-052422-020535
PMCID: PMC10842880
PMID: 37788487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]