---
reference_id: "PMID:11868686"
title: Update on the pathology of AIDS.
authors:
- Lucas S
journal: Intensive Crit Care Nurs
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1054/iccn.2000.1541
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on the pathology of AIDS.
**Authors:** Lucas S
**Journal:** Intensive Crit Care Nurs (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1054/iccn.2000.1541](https://doi.org/10.1054/iccn.2000.1541)

## Content

1. Intensive Crit Care Nurs. 2001 Jun;17(3):155-66. doi: 10.1054/iccn.2000.1541.

Update on the pathology of AIDS.

Lucas S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Histopathology, Guy's, King's and St Thomas' School of 
Medicine, London, UK. Sebastian.lucas@kc.ac.uk

The acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is the result of a human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection damaging the cell-mediated immune system. 
HIV infection is a zoonosis that has affected man for at least 50 years, though 
the disease has become pandemic only in the last 2 decades. A wide range of 
opportunistic infections (Ols) and tumours develop; additionally, HIV directly 
damages some organs. The patterns of opportunistic diseases (ODs) are 
significantly different in different parts of the world, depending on the local 
prevalences of latent and acquired infections and on the survival of 
HIV-infected patients. OD patterns change as peoples migrate. Recent highly 
active anti-retroviral (HIV) chemotherapy prevents many of the common Ols, but 
also induces a new range of toxic pathological damage, e.g. the liver, and lipid 
metabolism. Longer survival permits development of new HIV-related diseases, 
e.g. the lymphoproliferative disorders. The pathology of HIV/AIDS is not static 
but changing.

DOI: 10.1054/iccn.2000.1541
PMID: 11868686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]