---
reference_id: "PMID:22727994"
title: "Good gene, bad gene: new APP variant may be both."
authors:
- Di Fede G
- Catania M
- Morbin M
- Giaccone G
- Moro ML
- Ghidoni R
- Colombo L
- Messa M
- Cagnotto A
- Romeo M
- Stravalaci M
- Diomede L
- Gobbi M
- Salmona M
- Tagliavini F
journal: Prog Neurobiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.06.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Good gene, bad gene: new APP variant may be both.
**Authors:** Di Fede G, Catania M, Morbin M, Giaccone G, Moro ML, Ghidoni R, Colombo L, Messa M, Cagnotto A, Romeo M, Stravalaci M, Diomede L, Gobbi M, Salmona M, Tagliavini F
**Journal:** Prog Neurobiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.06.004)

## Content

1. Prog Neurobiol. 2012 Dec;99(3):281-92. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.06.004. 
Epub 2012 Jun 19.

Good gene, bad gene: new APP variant may be both.

Di Fede G(1), Catania M, Morbin M, Giaccone G, Moro ML, Ghidoni R, Colombo L, 
Messa M, Cagnotto A, Romeo M, Stravalaci M, Diomede L, Gobbi M, Salmona M, 
Tagliavini F.

Author information:
(1)Neurology V & Neuropathology, IRCCS Foundation Carlo Besta Neurological 
Institute, Via Celoria 11, 20133 Milan, Italy.

APP mutations cause Alzheimer disease (AD) with virtually complete penetrance. 
We found a novel APP mutation (A673V) in the homozygous state in a patient with 
early-onset AD-type dementia and in his younger sister showing initial signs of 
cognitive decline. It is noteworthy that the heterozygous relatives were not 
affected, suggesting that this mutation is inherited as an autosomal recessive 
trait. Studies on molecular events for the recessive mutation in causing disease 
revealed a double synergistic effect: the A673V APP variant shifts APP 
processing towards the amyloidogenic pathway with increased production of Aβ 
peptides and it markedly enhances the aggregation and fibrillogenic properties 
of both Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42. However, co-incubation of mutated and wild-type (wt) 
Aβ species resulted in inhibition of amyloidogenesis, consistent with the 
observation that heterozygous carriers do not develop the disease. The opposite 
effects of the A673V mutation in the homozygous and heterozygous state on 
amyloidogenesis account for the autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, 
revealing a new scenario in AD genetics and pathogenesis. The anti-amyloidogenic 
properties of this novel human Aβ variant may offer grounds for the development 
of therapeutic strategies for AD based on modified Aβ peptides. Indeed, the 
interaction between mutated Aβ1-6 and wt full-length Aβ prevents amyloid fibril 
formation. The anti-amyloidogenic effect is further amplified by the use of a 
mutated six-mer peptide, constructed entirely from D-amino acids to increase the 
its stability in vivo. Here we reviewed the studies on pathogenic mechanisms 
associated with the A673V mutation and the first experimental steps toward the 
development of a novel disease-modifying therapy for AD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.06.004
PMID: 22727994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]