---
reference_id: "PMID:40446848"
title: "Acute annular outer retinopathy: initial insights into clinical course variations with multimodal imaging."
authors:
- Chen C
- Cheng Y
- Zhou H
- Zhang Y
- Peng X
journal: Can J Ophthalmol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcjo.2025.05.011
keywords:
- Humans
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Adult
- Multimodal Imaging/methods
- Fluorescein Angiography/methods
- Male
- Female
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- Acute Disease
- Visual Acuity
- Fundus Oculi
- Retrospective Studies
- Retinal Diseases/diagnosis
- Follow-Up Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute annular outer retinopathy: initial insights into clinical course variations with multimodal imaging.
**Authors:** Chen C, Cheng Y, Zhou H, Zhang Y, Peng X
**Journal:** Can J Ophthalmol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcjo.2025.05.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcjo.2025.05.011)

## Content

1. Can J Ophthalmol. 2025 Dec;60(6):e946-e954. doi: 10.1016/j.jcjo.2025.05.011.
Epub 2025 Jun 6.

Acute annular outer retinopathy: initial insights into clinical course
variations with multimodal imaging.

Chen C(1), Cheng Y(2), Zhou H(1), Zhang Y(1), Peng X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China; Beijing Ophthalmology and Visual Science Key
Laboratory, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China; Beijing Ophthalmology and Visual Science Key
Laboratory, Beijing, China; State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory
of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research
Center for Ocular Diseases, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China; Beijing Ophthalmology and Visual Science Key
Laboratory, Beijing, China. Electronic address: 74000041@ccmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical course and provide initial imaging
perspectives in acute annular outer retinopathy (AAOR) by reviewing multimodal
imaging (MMI) findings.
DESIGN: Observational case series study.
PARTICIPANTS: Nine patients (12 eyes) with AAOR.
METHODS: Review clinical charts and MMI findings.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical medical records and multimodal imaging features
via fundus photographs, optical coherence tomography (OCT), fundus
autofluorescence (AF) and OCT angiography (OCTA), as applicable.
RESULTS: Twelve eyes of nine patients (18-39 years) were identified. The
clinical course was subdivided acutely progressive stage (APS), stationary stage
(SS) and atrophic stage (AS) (1-3 weeks, 3 weeks to 3 months and >3 months,
respectively). During APS, advancement of peripapillary annular band was noted
in all eyes, accompanied by absent ellipsoid zone, increased choroidal thickness
(ChT) and thinned outer nuclear layer (ONL) within the affected area. During SS,
annular band disappeared on fundus photograph with improved ONL with improved
ONL. During AS, affected area became depigmented with scattered pigmentation,
exhibiting hyper-AF or mixed AF. Other manifestations included retinal atrophy
and decreased ChT. OCTA revealed an enlarged foveal avascular zone in each
stage, especially in AS. Seven eyes of 5 patients showed no macular involvement
with best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/20, while 5 eyes of 5 patients
showed macular involvement with poorer BCVA of HM-20/400 at the last visit.
CONCLUSIONS: AAOR mostly occurs in young individuals with unilateral
involvement, especially in those with mild to moderate myopia. The observed
variations in the clinical course of AAOR, documented through MMI, aid in the
prompt recognition and understanding of this rare entity.

Copyright © 2025 Canadian Ophthalmological Society. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcjo.2025.05.011
PMID: 40446848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Footnotes and Disclosure The authors have no
proprietary or commercial interest in any materials discussed in this article.
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(82171073). The funding organization had no role in the design or conduct of
this research. Data availability: The datasets used for the current study are
available upon reasonable request. Please contact the corresponding author,
Xiaoyan Peng, for data requests.
