---
reference_id: "PMID:12718695"
title: "Magnitude of arsenic toxicity in tube-well drinking water in Bangladesh and its adverse effects on human health including cancer: evidence from a review of the literature."
authors:
- Khan MM
- Sakauchi F
- Sonoda T
- Washio M
- Mori M
journal: Asian Pac J Cancer Prev
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Magnitude of arsenic toxicity in tube-well drinking water in Bangladesh and its adverse effects on human health including cancer: evidence from a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Khan MM, Sakauchi F, Sonoda T, Washio M, Mori M
**Journal:** Asian Pac J Cancer Prev (2003)

## Content

1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2003 Jan-Mar;4(1):7-14.

Magnitude of arsenic toxicity in tube-well drinking water in Bangladesh and its 
adverse effects on human health including cancer: evidence from a review of the 
literature.

Khan MM(1), Sakauchi F, Sonoda T, Washio M, Mori M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, 060-8556, 
Japan. khan@sapmed.ac.jp

Only after a decade from 1993, arsenic contamination of groundwater in 
Bangladesh has been reported as the biggest arsenic catastrophe in the world. It 
is a burning public health issue in this country. More than 50 percent of the 
total population is estimated at risk of contamination. Already thousands of 
people have been affected by the disease arsenicosis. Many more may be on the 
way to manifest lesions in future. We conducted a review of previous studies and 
published articles including MEDLINE database on this issue. We found that 59 
districts out of 64 have been already affected by arsenic in underground 
drinking water, where this particular source of drinking water is the main 
source for 97 percent of the rural people. The water is unfortunately now a 
great threat for the human being due to high level of arsenic. Continuous 
arsenic exposure can lead people to develop arsenicosis, which in turn elevates 
the risk of cancer. Skin lesions are the most common manifestations in 
arsenicosis patients. Relatively poor rural people and other socio-economically 
disadvantaged groups are more affected by this exposure. Until now cancer 
patients have been relatively limited in Bangladesh. One of the reasons may be 
that several years are needed to show cancer manifestations from the beginning 
of arsenic exposure. But it is suspected that after some years a large number of 
patients will appear with cancer in different sites for arsenic exposure in 
drinking water. Various studies have been conducted in arsenic affected 
countries - notably in Argentina, Chile, China, Japan, and Taiwan -to find the 
potential of arsenic exposure to cause development of cancer. Among the arsenic 
related cancers, liver, lung, skin, bladder and kidney cancers are reported to 
be prevalent in these countries. Unfortunately no scientific study has been yet 
conducted in Bangladesh to find the relationship between arsenic exposure and 
cancers in different sites of the body. So our aim is to conduct an ecological 
as well as a case-control study in the country in the future.

PMID: 12718695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]