---
reference_id: "PMID:35368703"
title: "Novel Loss-of-Function Mutations in NPR2 Cause Acromesomelic Dysplasia, Maroteaux Type."
authors:
- Wu J
- Wang M
- Jiao Z
- Dou B
- Li B
- Zhang J
- Zhang H
- Sun Y
- Tu X
- Kong X
- Bai Y
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.823861
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Loss-of-Function Mutations in NPR2 Cause Acromesomelic Dysplasia, Maroteaux Type.
**Authors:** Wu J, Wang M, Jiao Z, Dou B, Li B, Zhang J, Zhang H, Sun Y, Tu X, Kong X, Bai Y
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.823861](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.823861)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2022 Mar 16;13:823861. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.823861.
eCollection  2022.

Novel Loss-of-Function Mutations in NPR2 Cause Acromesomelic Dysplasia, 
Maroteaux Type.

Wu J(1), Wang M(2), Jiao Z(3), Dou B(1), Li B(4), Zhang J(1), Zhang H(5), Sun 
Y(6), Tu X(2), Kong X(6), Bai Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, College 
of Life Science and Technology and Center for Human Genome Research, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(4)Department of Physiology and Neurobiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(6)Genetic and Prenatal Diagnosis Center, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

Acromesomelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type (AMDM) is a rare skeletal dysplasia 
characterized by severe disproportionate short stature, short hands and feet, 
normal intelligence, and facial dysmorphism. Homozygous or compound heterozygous 
mutations in the natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR2) gene produce 
growth-restricted phenotypes. The current study was designed to identify and 
characterize NPR2 loss-of-function mutations in patients with AMDM and to 
explore therapeutic responses to recombinant growth hormone (rhGH). NPR2 was 
sequenced in two Chinese patients with AMDM via next generation sequencing, and 
in silico structural analysis or transcript analysis of two novel variants was 
performed to examine putative protein changes. rhGH treatment was started for 
patient 1. Three NPR2 mutations were identified in two unrelated cases: two 
compound heterozygous mutations c.1112G>A p.(Arg371Gln) and c.2887+2T>C in 
patient 1 and a homozygous mutation c.329G>A p.(Arg110His) in patient 2, 
yielding distinct phenotypes. RNA extracted from peripheral blood cells of 
patient 1 showed alternatively spliced transcripts not present in control cells. 
Homology modeling analyses suggested that the c.1112G>A p.(Arg371Gln) mutation 
disrupted the binding of NPR-B homodimer to its ligand (C-type natriuretic 
peptide) in the extracellular domain as a result of global allosteric effects on 
homodimer formation. Thus, c.2887+2T>C and c.1112G>A p.(Arg371Gln) in NPR2 were 
loss-of-function mutations. Furthermore, rhGH therapy in patient 1 increased the 
patient's height by 0.6SDS over 15 months without adversely affecting the 
trunk-leg proportion. The short-term growth-promoting effect was equivalent to 
that reported for idiopathic short stature. Overall, our findings broadened the 
genotypic spectrum of NPR2 mutations in individuals with AMDM and provided 
insights into the efficacy of rhGH in these patients.

Copyright © 2022 Wu, Wang, Jiao, Dou, Li, Zhang, Zhang, Sun, Tu, Kong and Bai.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.823861
PMCID: PMC8967736
PMID: 35368703

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.