---
reference_id: "PMID:24316281"
title: Pathophysiology of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Berger J
- Forss-Petter S
- Eichler FS
journal: Biochimie
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.11.023
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily D, Member 1"
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Adrenal Glands/physiopathology
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Hair/physiopathology
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Oxidative Stress/genetics
- Testis/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Berger J, Forss-Petter S, Eichler FS
**Journal:** Biochimie (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biochi.2013.11.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2013.11.023)

## Content

1. Biochimie. 2014 Mar;98(100):135-42. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.11.023. Epub
2013  Dec 4.

Pathophysiology of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.

Berger J(1), Forss-Petter S(2), Eichler FS(3).

Author information:
(1)Pathobiology of the Nervous System, Center for Brain Research, Medical 
University of Vienna, Spitalgasse 4, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
johannes.berger@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)Pathobiology of the Nervous System, Center for Brain Research, Medical 
University of Vienna, Spitalgasse 4, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department for Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, 55 Fruit Street ACC 708, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Currently the molecular basis for the clinical heterogeneity of X-linked 
adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is poorly understood. The genetic bases for all 
different phenotypic variants of X-ALD are mutations in the gene encoding the 
peroxisomal ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter, ABCD1 (formerly 
adrenoleukodystrophy protein, ALDP). ABCD1 transports CoA-activated very 
long-chain fatty acids from the cytosol into the peroxisome for degradation. The 
phenotypic variability is remarkable ranging from cerebral inflammatory 
demyelination of childhood onset, leading to death within a few years, to adults 
remaining pre-symptomatic through more than five decades. There is no general 
genotype-phenotype correlation in X-ALD. The default manifestation of mutations 
in ABCD1 is adrenomyeloneuropathy, a slowly progressive dying-back axonopathy 
affecting both ascending and descending spinal cord tracts as well as in some 
cases, a peripheral neuropathy. In about 60% of male X-ALD patients, either in 
childhood (35-40%) or in adulthood (20%), an initial, clinically silent, myelin 
destabilization results in conversion to a devastating, rapidly progressive form 
of cerebral inflammatory demyelination. Here, ABCD1 remains a susceptibility 
gene, necessary but not sufficient for inflammatory demyelination to occur. 
Although the accumulation of very long-chain fatty acids appears to be essential 
for the pathomechanism of all phenotypes, the molecular mechanisms underlying 
these phenotypes are fundamentally different. Cell autonomous processes such as 
oxidative stress and energy shortage in axons as well as non-cell autonomous 
processes involving axon-glial interactions seem pertinent to the dying-back 
axonopathy. Various dynamic mechanisms may underlie the initiation of 
inflammation, the altered immune reactivity, the propagation of inflammation, as 
well as the mechanisms leading to the arrest of inflammation after hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation. An improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms 
involved in these events is required for the development of urgently needed 
therapeutics.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.11.023
PMCID: PMC3988840
PMID: 24316281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]