---
reference_id: PMID:33083526
title: Quantitative magnetic resonance image assessment of the optic nerve and surrounding sheath after spaceflight.
authors:
- Rohr JJ
- Sater S
- Sass AM
- Marshall-Goebel K
- Ploutz-Snyder RJ
- Ethier CR
- Stenger MB
- Martin BA
- Macias BR
journal: NPJ Microgravity
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41526-020-00119-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative magnetic resonance image assessment of the optic nerve and surrounding sheath after spaceflight.
**Authors:** Rohr JJ, Sater S, Sass AM, Marshall-Goebel K, Ploutz-Snyder RJ, Ethier CR, Stenger MB, Martin BA, Macias BR
**Journal:** NPJ Microgravity (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41526-020-00119-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-020-00119-3)

## Content

1. NPJ Microgravity. 2020 Oct 8;6:30. doi: 10.1038/s41526-020-00119-3.
eCollection  2020.

Quantitative magnetic resonance image assessment of the optic nerve and 
surrounding sheath after spaceflight.

Rohr JJ(1), Sater S(1), Sass AM(1), Marshall-Goebel K(2), Ploutz-Snyder RJ(3), 
Ethier CR(4), Stenger MB(5), Martin BA(1), Macias BR(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurophysiological Imaging and Modeling Laboratory, University of Idaho, 875 
Perimeter Drive MC1122, Moscow, ID 83844-1122 USA.
(2)KBR, Houston, TX USA.
(3)Applied Biostatistics Laboratory, School of Nursing, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI USA.
(4)Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology and Emory University, Atlanta, GA USA.
(5)Cardiovascular and Vision Laboratory, Johnson Space Center, National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration, Houston, TX USA.

A subset of long-duration spaceflight astronauts have experienced ophthalmic 
abnormalities, collectively termed spaceflight-associated neuro-ocular syndrome 
(SANS). Little is understood about the pathophysiology of SANS; however, 
microgravity-induced alterations in intracranial pressure (ICP) due to headward 
fluid shifts is the primary hypothesized contributor. In particular, potential 
changes in optic nerve (ON) tortuosity and ON sheath (ONS) distension may 
indicate altered cerebrospinal fluid dynamics during weightlessness. The present 
longitudinal study aims to provide a quantitative analysis of ON and ONS 
cross-sectional areas, and ON deviation, an indication of tortuosity, before and 
after spaceflight. Ten astronauts undergoing ~6-month missions on the 
International Space Station (ISS) underwent high-resolution magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) preflight and at five recovery time points extending to 1 year 
after return from the ISS. The mean changes in ON deviation, ON cross-sectional 
area, and ONS cross-sectional area immediately post flight were -0.14 mm (95% 
CI: -0.36 to 0.08, Bonferroni-adjusted P = 1.00), 0.13 mm2 (95% CI -0.66 to 
0.91, Bonferroni-adjusted P = 1.00), and -0.22 mm2 (95% CI: -1.78 to 1.34, 
Bonferroni-adjusted P = 1.00), respectively, and remained consistent during the 
recovery period. Terrestrially, ONS distension is associated with increased ICP; 
therefore, these results suggest that, on average, ICP was not pathologically 
elevated immediately after spaceflight. However, a subject diagnosed with optic 
disc edema (Frisen Grade 1, right eye) displayed increased ONS area post flight, 
although this increase is relatively small compared to clinical populations with 
increased ICP. Advanced quantitative MRI-based assessment of the ON and ONS 
could help our understanding of SANS and the role of ICP.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1038/s41526-020-00119-3
PMCID: PMC7545196
PMID: 33083526

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsB.A.M. has received grant 
support from Genentech, Minnetronix Neuro, Biogen, Voyager Therapeutics, and 
Alcyone Lifesciences. B.A.M. is a scientific advisory board member for Alcyone 
Lifesciences and the Chiari and Syringomyelia Foundation, and serves as a 
consultant to SwanBio Therapeutics, Cerebral Therapeutics, Minnetronix Neuro, 
and CereVasc.