---
reference_id: "PMID:16344627"
title: "Familial Mediterranean fever and the other autoinflammatory syndromes: evaluation of the patient with recurrent fever."
authors:
- Samuels J
- Ozen S
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1097/01.bor.0000198006.65697.5b
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean fever and the other autoinflammatory syndromes: evaluation of the patient with recurrent fever.
**Authors:** Samuels J, Ozen S
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.bor.0000198006.65697.5b](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.bor.0000198006.65697.5b)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2006 Jan;18(1):108-17. doi: 
10.1097/01.bor.0000198006.65697.5b.

Familial Mediterranean fever and the other autoinflammatory syndromes: 
evaluation of the patient with recurrent fever.

Samuels J(1), Ozen S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY 10021, 
USA. samuelsj@hss.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The aim of this article is to summarize recent clinical, 
genetic and pathophysiologic findings of familial Mediterranean fever and 
several of the other systemic autoinflammatory diseases, a recently recognized 
group of disorders characterized by seemingly unprovoked inflammation but 
lacking high-titer autoantibodies. Genetic and clinical tools are improving the 
ability of the clinician to better approach patients with periodic fever and 
inflammation.
RECENT FINDINGS: The spectrum of reported genetic mutations and susceptible 
ethnicities for the hereditary periodic fever subset of the autoinflammatory 
diseases has continued to expand. At the same time, the pathogeneses of many of 
these diseases are now understood to involve different aspects of a common 
pathway, largely affecting inflammatory cascades related to IL-1 or tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha. Three of these diseases which have been grouped as the 
cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes result from defects in the same gene, 
and all three appear to respond well to anti-IL-1 therapy although controlled 
trials are still in progress. In addition, cytokine-based therapies are also now 
under investigation for hyperimmunoglobulinemia D with periodic fever syndrome 
and pyogenic sterile arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne syndrome.
SUMMARY: The identification of the genes and proteins mutated in many of the 
autoinflammatory diseases has broadened our understanding of the regulation of 
inflammation and the immune system, and provided the basis for the use of 
targeted therapies in these syndromes. We propose an algorithm for the 
evaluation of a patient with periodic fever, taking into account the patient's 
age, ethnicity, symptoms and signs, and results from laboratory and genetic 
testing.

DOI: 10.1097/01.bor.0000198006.65697.5b
PMID: 16344627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]