---
reference_id: "PMID:37065507"
title: Neurological involvement, immune response, and biomarkers in Kawasaki disease along with its pathogenesis, therapeutic and diagnostic updates.
authors:
- Amir O
- Prajjwal P
- Inban P
- Gadam S
- Aleti S
- Sunasra RR
- Gupta K
- Elhag M
- Mahmoud M
- Alsir O
journal: F1000Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.12688/f1000research.130169.2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological involvement, immune response, and biomarkers in Kawasaki disease along with its pathogenesis, therapeutic and diagnostic updates.
**Authors:** Amir O, Prajjwal P, Inban P, Gadam S, Aleti S, Sunasra RR, Gupta K, Elhag M, Mahmoud M, Alsir O
**Journal:** F1000Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.12688/f1000research.130169.2](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.130169.2)

## Content

1. F1000Res. 2023 Mar 2;12:235. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.130169.2. eCollection
 2023.

Neurological involvement, immune response, and biomarkers in Kawasaki disease 
along with its pathogenesis, therapeutic and diagnostic updates.

Amir O(1), Prajjwal P(2), Inban P(3), Gadam S(4), Aleti S(5), Sunasra RR(6), 
Gupta K(7), Elhag M(1), Mahmoud M(1), Alsir O(1).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Almanhal academy, Khartoum, Sudan.
(2)Neurology, Bharati Vidyapeeth University Medical College and Hospital, Pune, 
India.
(3)Medicine, Government Medical College Omandurar, Chennai, India.
(4)Postdoctoral Research Fellow, Mayo Clinic, USA, USA.
(5)Internal Medicine, Berkshire Medical Center, Pittsfield, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Medicine, Hinduhriday Samrat Balasaheb Thackeray Medical College, Mumbai, 
India.
(7)Orthopedics, Government medical college, Patiala, India.

Kawasaki disease is an acute, febrile disease that is not typically fatal if 
treated and affects infants and children more commonly. More than 80% of the 
afflicted patients are under the age of four. This disease most commonly affects 
coronary arteries. In a minority of cases, Aneurysms can burst or produce 
thrombosis, and they can cause infarction. The distinctive redness in the palms 
and soles of the feet might result from a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction 
to a cross-reactive or recently discovered antigen (s). Autoantibodies against 
epithelial cells and smooth muscle cells are produced as a result of subsequent 
macromolecule synthesis and polyclonal white blood cell activation, which 
intensifies the redness. Kawasaki disease's clinical manifestations range from 
oral skin disease to the blistering of the mucosa, symptoms involving the hands 
and the feet, skin disease of the palms and soles, a desquamative rash, and 
cervical lymphatic tissue enlargement (so it is also referred to as tissue layer 
lymphatic tissue syndrome). Most untreated patients develop some vessel 
sequelae, from well-organized coronary inflammation to severe arterial blood 
vessel dilatation to giant artery aneurysms with rupture or occlusion, 
infarction, and thrombosis. With human gamma globulin administration, reasonable 
standards of medical care, and the use of analgesics, the speed of symptomatic 
progression and inflammatory artery changes are reduced. In this review, we have 
covered the immunology of Kawasaki disease, its biomarkers, and the neurological 
manifestations of this multisystem illness. We have also included a discussion 
on its pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment.

Copyright: © 2023 Amir O et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.130169.2
PMCID: PMC10102713
PMID: 37065507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.