---
reference_id: "PMID:19407457"
title: "Schneckenbecken dysplasia in fetus: report of four cases."
authors:
- Lahmar-Boufaroua A
- Yacoubi MT
- Belaid L
- Delezoide AL
journal: Fetal Diagn Ther
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1159/000214860
keywords:
- "Aborted Fetus/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Adult
- Consanguinity
- Female
- Humans
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Pregnancy
- Radiography
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schneckenbecken dysplasia in fetus: report of four cases.
**Authors:** Lahmar-Boufaroua A, Yacoubi MT, Belaid L, Delezoide AL
**Journal:** Fetal Diagn Ther (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000214860](https://doi.org/10.1159/000214860)

## Content

1. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2009;25(2):216-9. doi: 10.1159/000214860. Epub 2009 Apr 29.

Schneckenbecken dysplasia in fetus: report of four cases.

Lahmar-Boufaroua A(1), Yacoubi MT, Belaid L, Delezoide AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Farhat Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. 
aboufaroua@yahoo.fr

Several different types of lethal short-limbed skeletal dysplasia with 
platyspondylia have been recognized with a different mode of inheritance. 
Schneckenbecken dysplasia, a very rare lethal osteochondrodysplasia, is included 
in these entities, with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. We describe 
4 new Tunisian cases with clinical, radiographic and histopathological features. 
The fetuses were of consanguineous parents. Prenatal diagnostics of short limbs 
were carried out on ultrasounds at 20, 22, 23 and 28 weeks of gestation. The 
radiographic findings were typical, showing especially the small ilia with 
medial snail-like projection. The chondro-osseous histology of the 4 cases was 
compatible with the diagnostics demonstrating cartilage anomalies characterized 
by hypercellularity, hypervascularisation and chondrocytes with central large 
round nucleus. Schneckenbecken dysplasia should be considered when the phenotype 
of dwarfism and snail feature of iliac bone associated with histological finding 
are presented. Frozen fetal samples should be taken in order to look for 
candidate genes.

Copyright (c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000214860
PMID: 19407457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]