---
reference_id: "PMID:24557875"
title: "Mitochondrial dysfunctions in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome explained by activated immuno-inflammatory, oxidative and nitrosative stress pathways."
authors:
- Morris G
- Maes M
journal: Metab Brain Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s11011-013-9435-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial dysfunctions in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome explained by activated immuno-inflammatory, oxidative and nitrosative stress pathways.
**Authors:** Morris G, Maes M
**Journal:** Metab Brain Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11011-013-9435-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-013-9435-x)

## Content

1. Metab Brain Dis. 2014 Mar;29(1):19-36. doi: 10.1007/s11011-013-9435-x. Epub
2013  Sep 10.

Mitochondrial dysfunctions in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
explained by activated immuno-inflammatory, oxidative and nitrosative stress 
pathways.

Morris G(1), Maes M.

Author information:
(1)Tir Na Nog, Pembrey, Llanelli, UK.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/cfs) is classified by the 
World Health Organization as a disorder of the central nervous system. ME/cfs is 
an neuro-immune disorder accompanied by chronic low-grade inflammation, 
increased levels of oxidative and nitrosative stress (O&NS), O&NS-mediated 
damage to fatty acids, DNA and proteins, autoimmune reactions directed against 
neoantigens and brain disorders. Mitochondrial dysfunctions have been found in 
ME/cfs, e.g. lowered ATP production, impaired oxidative phosphorylation and 
mitochondrial damage. This paper reviews the pathways that may explain 
mitochondrial dysfunctions in ME/cfs. Increased levels of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, such as interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor-α, and elastase, and 
increased O&NS may inhibit mitochondrial respiration, decrease the activities of 
the electron transport chain and mitochondrial membrane potential, increase 
mitochondrial membrane permeability, interfere with ATP production and cause 
mitochondrial shutdown. The activated O&NS pathways may additionally lead to 
damage of mitochondrial DNA and membranes thus decreasing membrane fluidity. 
Lowered levels of antioxidants, zinc and coenzyme Q10, and ω3 polyunsaturated 
fatty acids in ME/cfs may further aggravate the activated immuno-inflammatory 
and O&NS pathways. Therefore, it may be concluded that immuno-inflammatory and 
O&NS pathways may play a role in the mitochondrial dysfunctions and consequently 
the bioenergetic abnormalities seen in patients with ME/cfs. Defects in ATP 
production and the electron transport complex, in turn, are associated with an 
elevated production of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide in mitochondria creating 
adaptive and synergistic damage. It is argued that mitochondrial dysfunctions, 
e.g. lowered ATP production, may play a role in the onset of ME/cfs symptoms, 
e.g. fatigue and post exertional malaise, and may explain in part the central 
metabolic abnormalities observed in ME/cfs, e.g. glucose hypometabolism and 
cerebral hypoperfusion.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-013-9435-x
PMID: 24557875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]