---
reference_id: "PMID:16353241"
title: Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome.
authors:
- Graham JM Jr
- Lee J
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31039
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Facial Bones/abnormalities
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- Microphthalmos/pathology
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Nose/abnormalities
- PAX6 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors/genetics
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Syndrome
- Homeobox Protein SIX3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome.
**Authors:** Graham JM Jr, Lee J
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.31039](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.31039)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Jan 15;140(2):189-93. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31039.

Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome.

Graham JM Jr(1), Lee J.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Steven Spielberg Pediatric Research Center,
Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, USA.

Bosma et al. [1981] delineated a syndrome affecting two unrelated males with
severe hypoplasia of the nose and eyes, palatal abnormalities, deficient taste
and smell, inguinal hernias, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with cryptorchidism,
and normal intelligence. Other patients with this syndrome have been reported as
cases of arhinia with associated defects. During embryonic development, the
nasal placodes form 28 days after conception shortly after the optic vesicles
makes contact with the overlying surface ectoderm at 26-27 days, and both layers
invaginate to form the eyes between 34 and 44 days. Mice with homozygous
mutations of Pax6, manifest underdevelopment of ocular and nasal structures, and
a network of developmentally regulated genes function downstream of Pax6 to form
nasal, ocular, and pituitary structures. These genes represent candidate genes
for this disorder, and familial recurrence of Bosma syndrome has been reported
to occur. This report describes two sporadic unrelated cases of this rare
syndrome and briefly reviews the findings in previously reported cases.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31039
PMID: 16353241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
