---
reference_id: "PMID:11455558"
title: Clinical significance of E-cadherin-catenin complex expression in metastatic foci of colorectal carcinoma.
authors:
- Ikeguchi M
- Makino M
- Kaibara N
journal: J Surg Oncol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1002/jso.1095
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical significance of E-cadherin-catenin complex expression in metastatic foci of colorectal carcinoma.
**Authors:** Ikeguchi M, Makino M, Kaibara N
**Journal:** J Surg Oncol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jso.1095](https://doi.org/10.1002/jso.1095)

## Content

1. J Surg Oncol. 2001 Jul;77(3):201-7. doi: 10.1002/jso.1095.

Clinical significance of E-cadherin-catenin complex expression in metastatic 
foci of colorectal carcinoma.

Ikeguchi M(1), Makino M, Kaibara N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery I, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, 
Japan. surgery1@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Reduced expressions of cell adhesion molecules 
(E-cadherin, alpha-catenin, and beta-catenin) has been reported to be associated 
with tumor metastasis. However, the clinical significance of such adhesion 
molecules in the metastatic foci remains unclear. In this study, we evaluated 
the prognostic significance of E-cadherin, alpha-catenin, and beta-catenin 
expressions in the metastatic foci of patients with colorectal carcinoma.
METHODS: The expressions of E-cadherin, alpha-catenin, and beta-catenin were 
detected immunohistochemically in 105 primary tumors, in 30 metastatic lymph 
nodes, and 13 metastatic liver tumors from consecutive patients with colorectal 
carcinoma.
RESULTS: Reduced normal expression of E-cadherin, alpha-catenin, and 
beta-catenin in comparison with normal epithelium was detected in 78 primary 
tumors, respectively. Patients who had tumors with reduced expression of 
adhesion molecules showed unfavorable prognosis and the reduced expression of 
adhesion molecules was detected as one of the independent prognostic factors for 
patients with colorectal carcinoma. In 30 patients with lymph node metastasis, 
the increased expression of adhesion molecules in metastatic lymph nodes 
compared with primary tumors was detected in 13 patients. The prognosis of these 
13 patients was poorer than that of remaining 17 patients (P = 0.0296). Also, in 
13 patients with liver metastasis, even no significant difference was observed, 
the mean survival time of 6 patients who had metastatic liver tumors with 
increased expression of adhesion molecules (10 months) was shorter than that of 
the remaining 7 patients (16 months; P = 0.1718).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that increased expression of the 
cadherin-catenin cell-cell adhesion system in metastatic foci may play an 
important role in progression of metastatic colorectal carcinomas.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jso.1095
PMID: 11455558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]