---
reference_id: "PMID:37627314"
title: "The Molecular and Genetic Mechanisms of Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes: The Role of Inflammatory Cytokines in Their Pathogenesis."
authors:
- Kawashima N
- Bezzerri V
- Corey SJ
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biom13081249
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Molecular and Genetic Mechanisms of Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes: The Role of Inflammatory Cytokines in Their Pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Kawashima N, Bezzerri V, Corey SJ
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom13081249](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13081249)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2023 Aug 16;13(8):1249. doi: 10.3390/biom13081249.

The Molecular and Genetic Mechanisms of Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes: 
The Role of Inflammatory Cytokines in Their Pathogenesis.

Kawashima N(1), Bezzerri V(2), Corey SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Cancer Biology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 
44195, USA.
(2)Cystic Fibrosis Center, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata, 37126 
Verona, Italy.

Inherited bone marrow failure syndromes (IBMFSs) include Fanconi anemia, 
Diamond-Blackfan anemia, Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, dyskeratosis congenita, 
severe congenital neutropenia, and other rare entities such as GATA2 deficiency 
and SAMD9/9L mutations. The IBMFS monogenic disorders were first recognized by 
their phenotype. Exome sequencing has validated their classification, with 
clusters of gene mutations affecting DNA damage response (Fanconi anemia), 
ribosome structure (Diamond-Blackfan anemia), ribosome assembly 
(Shwachman-Diamond syndrome), or telomere maintenance/stability (dyskeratosis 
congenita). The pathogenetic mechanisms of IBMFSs remain to be characterized 
fully, but an overarching hypothesis states that different stresses elicit 
TP53-dependent growth arrest and apoptosis of hematopoietic stem, progenitor, 
and precursor cells. Here, we review the IBMFSs and propose a role for 
pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TGF-β, IL-1β, and IFN-α, in mediating the 
cytopenias. We suggest a pathogenic role for cytokines in the transformation to 
myeloid neoplasia and hypothesize a role for anti-inflammatory therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13081249
PMCID: PMC10452082
PMID: 37627314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.