---
reference_id: "PMID:32381384"
title: "Expression of novel neuroendocrine marker insulinoma-associated protein 1 (INSM1) in genitourinary high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas: An immunohistochemical study with specificity analysis and comparison to chromogranin, synaptophysin, and CD56."
authors:
- Chen JF
- Yang C
- Sun Y
- Cao D
journal: Pathol Res Pract
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2020.152993
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- "CD56 Antigen/analysis, biosynthesis"
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine/pathology"
- "Chromogranins/analysis, biosynthesis"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- "Repressor Proteins/analysis, biosynthesis"
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Synaptophysin/analysis, biosynthesis"
- Urogenital Neoplasms/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression of novel neuroendocrine marker insulinoma-associated protein 1 (INSM1) in genitourinary high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas: An immunohistochemical study with specificity analysis and comparison to chromogranin, synaptophysin, and CD56.
**Authors:** Chen JF, Yang C, Sun Y, Cao D
**Journal:** Pathol Res Pract (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.prp.2020.152993](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prp.2020.152993)

## Content

1. Pathol Res Pract. 2020 Jun;216(6):152993. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2020.152993. Epub
 2020 Apr 26.

Expression of novel neuroendocrine marker insulinoma-associated protein 1 
(INSM1) in genitourinary high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas: An 
immunohistochemical study with specificity analysis and comparison to 
chromogranin, synaptophysin, and CD56.

Chen JF(1), Yang C(2), Sun Y(3), Cao D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA. Electronic address: dengfengcao@wustl.edu.

Confirmation of genitourinary high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas (GU-HGNECs) 
often requires immunohistochemical staining. Here we evaluated a novel 
neuroendocrine marker, insulinoma-associated protein 1 (INSM1), in GU-HGNECs 
with comparison to chromogranin, synaptophysin and CD56. Immunohistochemical 
expression of INSM1, chromogranin, synaptophysin, and CD56 was evaluated in 39 
GU-HGNECs using full tissue sections [4 in kidney, 28 in urinary bladder, and 7 
in prostate; 31 small cell carcinomas (SmCCs), 6 large cell neuroendocrine 
carcinomas (LCNECs), 2 mixed SmCC-LCNECs]. In 33 SmCCs/components, INSM1 showed 
similar sensitivity (93.9 %) to chromogranin (87.8 %), synaptophysin (93.9 %) 
and CD56 (87.8 %), and stained a similar percentage of tumor cells (52 %) to 
chromogranin (49 %) and CD56 (52 %), but lower than synaptophysin (87 %) 
(p < 0.0001). In 8 LCNECs/components, INSM1 is similar to chromogranin, 
synaptophysin or CD56 in sensitivity (62.5 %, 62.5 %, 75 %, 62.5 %, 
respectively) and the mean percentage of positively stained tumor cells (21 %, 
44 %, 48 %, 37 %, respectively). INSM1 is more sensitive for SmCCs than LCNECs 
(93.9 % vs. 62.5 %, p = 0.015). INSM1 showed 97.4 % specificity upon analyzing 
273 genitourinary non-neuroendocrine tumors on tissue microarrays. Our study 
indicates that INSM1 is a sensitive marker for genitourinary HGNECs with high 
specificity. For genitourinary SmCCs, INSM1 shows similar sensitivity to 
chromogranin, synaptophysin and CD56 but stains a lower percentage of tumor 
cells than synaptophysin. For genitourinary LCNECs, INSM1 showed similar 
sensitivity to chromogranin, synaptophysin and CD56. INSM1 is more sensitive for 
genitourinary SmCCs than LCNECs. Our result and literature review indicate that 
whether INSM1 is more sensitive than conventional neuroendocrine markers for 
HGNECs depends on the tumor primary sites.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2020.152993
PMID: 32381384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]