---
reference_id: "PMID:36362356"
title: "The Role of MicroRNAs in Dilated Cardiomyopathy: New Insights for an Old Entity."
authors:
- Alonso-Villa E
- Bonet F
- Hernandez-Torres F
- Campuzano Ó
- Sarquella-Brugada G
- Quezada-Feijoo M
- Ramos M
- Mangas A
- Toro R
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232113573
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of MicroRNAs in Dilated Cardiomyopathy: New Insights for an Old Entity.
**Authors:** Alonso-Villa E, Bonet F, Hernandez-Torres F, Campuzano Ó, Sarquella-Brugada G, Quezada-Feijoo M, Ramos M, Mangas A, Toro R
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232113573](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232113573)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Nov 5;23(21):13573. doi: 10.3390/ijms232113573.

The Role of MicroRNAs in Dilated Cardiomyopathy: New Insights for an Old Entity.

Alonso-Villa E(1)(2), Bonet F(1)(2), Hernandez-Torres F(3)(4), Campuzano 
Ó(5)(6)(7), Sarquella-Brugada G(8)(9), Quezada-Feijoo M(10)(11), Ramos 
M(10)(11), Mangas A(1)(2)(12), Toro R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit, Biomedical Research and Innovation Institute of Cadiz 
(INiBICA), Puerta del Mar University Hospital, 11009 Cádiz, Spain.
(2)Medicine Department, School of Medicine, University of Cadiz, 11002 Cádiz, 
Spain.
(3)Medina Foundation, Technology Park of Health Sciences, 18016 Granada, Spain.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology III and Immunology, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Granada, 18016 Granada, Spain.
(5)Cardiology Service, Hospital Josep Trueta, University of Girona, 17007 
Girona, Spain.
(6)Cardiovascular Genetics Center, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Girona 
(IdIBGi), 17190 Salt, Spain.
(7)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red, Enfermedades Cardiovasculares 
(CIBERCV), 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(8)Medical Science Department, School of Medicine, University of Girona, 17003 
Girona, Spain.
(9)Arrhythmias Unit, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, University of Barcelona, 08950 
Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Cardiology Department, Hospital Central de la Cruz Roja, 28003 Madrid, 
Spain.
(11)Medicine School, Alfonso X el Sabio University, 28007 Madrid, Spain.
(12)Internal Medicine Department, Puerta del Mar University Hospital, School of 
Medicine, University of Cadiz, 11009 Cadiz, Spain.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a clinical diagnosis characterized by left 
ventricular or biventricular dilation and systolic dysfunction. In most cases, 
DCM is progressive, leading to heart failure (HF) and death. This cardiomyopathy 
has been considered a common and final phenotype of several entities. DCM occurs 
when cellular pathways fail to maintain the pumping function. The etiology of 
this disease encompasses several factors, such as ischemia, infection, 
autoimmunity, drugs or genetic susceptibility. Although the prognosis has 
improved in the last few years due to red flag clinical follow-up, early 
familial diagnosis and ongoing optimization of treatment, due to its 
heterogeneity, there are no targeted therapies available for DCM based on each 
etiology. Therefore, a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying the 
pathophysiology of DCM will provide novel therapeutic strategies against this 
cardiac disease and their different triggers. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a group of 
small noncoding RNAs that play key roles in post-transcriptional gene silencing 
by targeting mRNAs for translational repression or, to a lesser extent, 
degradation. A growing number of studies have demonstrated critical functions of 
miRNAs in cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), including DCM, by regulating 
mechanisms that contribute to the progression of the disease. Herein, we 
summarize the role of miRNAs in inflammation, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, 
oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, autophagy, cardiomyocyte apoptosis 
and fibrosis, exclusively in the context of DCM.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232113573
PMCID: PMC9659086
PMID: 36362356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.