---
reference_id: "PMID:21917775"
title: "GFAP mutations, age at onset, and clinical subtypes in Alexander disease."
authors:
- Prust M
- Wang J
- Morizono H
- Messing A
- Brenner M
- Gordon E
- Hartka T
- Sokohl A
- Schiffmann R
- Gordish-Dressman H
- Albin R
- Amartino H
- Brockman K
- Dinopoulos A
- Dotti MT
- Fain D
- Fernandez R
- Ferreira J
- Fleming J
- Gill D
- Griebel M
- Heilstedt H
- Kaplan P
- Lewis D
- Nakagawa M
- Pedersen R
- Reddy A
- Sawaishi Y
- Schneider M
- Sherr E
- Takiyama Y
- Wakabayashi K
- Gorospe JR
- Vanderver A
journal: Neurology
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182309f72
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Age of Onset
- "Alexander Disease/classification, genetics, mortality"
- Bayes Theorem
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/genetics
- Humans
- Logistic Models
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Analysis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GFAP mutations, age at onset, and clinical subtypes in Alexander disease.
**Authors:** Prust M, Wang J, Morizono H, Messing A, Brenner M, Gordon E, Hartka T, Sokohl A, Schiffmann R, Gordish-Dressman H, Albin R, Amartino H, Brockman K, Dinopoulos A, Dotti MT, Fain D, Fernandez R, Ferreira J, Fleming J, Gill D, Griebel M, Heilstedt H, Kaplan P, Lewis D, Nakagawa M, Pedersen R, Reddy A, Sawaishi Y, Schneider M, Sherr E, Takiyama Y, Wakabayashi K, Gorospe JR, Vanderver A
**Journal:** Neurology (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182309f72](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182309f72)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2011 Sep 27;77(13):1287-94. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182309f72. Epub
 2011 Sep 14.

GFAP mutations, age at onset, and clinical subtypes in Alexander disease.

Prust M(1), Wang J, Morizono H, Messing A, Brenner M, Gordon E, Hartka T, Sokohl 
A, Schiffmann R, Gordish-Dressman H, Albin R, Amartino H, Brockman K, Dinopoulos 
A, Dotti MT, Fain D, Fernandez R, Ferreira J, Fleming J, Gill D, Griebel M, 
Heilstedt H, Kaplan P, Lewis D, Nakagawa M, Pedersen R, Reddy A, Sawaishi Y, 
Schneider M, Sherr E, Takiyama Y, Wakabayashi K, Gorospe JR, Vanderver A.

Author information:
(1)Children's National Medical Center, 111 Michigan Ave. NW, Washington, DC 
20010, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize Alexander disease (AxD) phenotypes and determine 
correlations with age at onset (AAO) and genetic mutation. AxD is an 
astrogliopathy usually characterized on MRI by leukodystrophy and caused by 
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) mutations.
METHODS: We present 30 new cases of AxD and reviewed 185 previously reported 
cases. We conducted Wilcoxon rank sum tests to identify variables scaling with 
AAO, survival analysis to identify predictors of mortality, and χ(2) tests to 
assess the effects of common GFAP mutations. Finally, we performed latent class 
analysis (LCA) to statistically define AxD subtypes.
RESULTS: LCA identified 2 classes of AxD. Type I is characterized by early 
onset, seizures, macrocephaly, motor delay, encephalopathy, failure to thrive, 
paroxysmal deterioration, and typical MRI features. Type II is characterized by 
later onset, autonomic dysfunction, ocular movement abnormalities, bulbar 
symptoms, and atypical MRI features. Survival analysis predicted a nearly 2-fold 
increase in mortality among patients with type I AxD relative to those with type 
II. R79 and R239 GFAP mutations were most common (16.6% and 20.3% of all cases, 
respectively). These common mutations predicted distinct clinical outcomes, with 
R239 predicting the most aggressive course.
CONCLUSIONS: AAO and the GFAP mutation site are important clinical predictors in 
AxD, with clear correlations to defined patterns of phenotypic expression. We 
propose revised AxD subtypes, type I and type II, based on analysis of 
statistically defined patient groups.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182309f72
PMCID: PMC3179649
PMID: 21917775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]