---
reference_id: "PMID:17904886"
title: Deficiencies in subunits of the Conserved Oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex define a novel group of Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation.
authors:
- Zeevaert R
- Foulquier F
- Jaeken J
- Matthijs G
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.08.118
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- Animals
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/etiology, genetics"
- Genotype
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- Phenotype
- "Protein Subunits/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deficiencies in subunits of the Conserved Oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex define a novel group of Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation.
**Authors:** Zeevaert R, Foulquier F, Jaeken J, Matthijs G
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.08.118](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.08.118)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Jan;93(1):15-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.08.118. Epub 
2007 Sep 29.

Deficiencies in subunits of the Conserved Oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex define 
a novel group of Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation.

Zeevaert R(1), Foulquier F, Jaeken J, Matthijs G.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, 
B3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Processing of the glycan structures on glycoproteins by different glycosylation 
enzymes depends on, among other, the non-uniform distribution of these enzymes 
within the Golgi stacks. This compartmentalization is achieved by a balance 
between anterograde and retrograde vesicular trafficking. If the balance is 
disturbed, the glycosylation machinery is mislocalized, which can cause 
Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation type II (CDG-II), as illustrated by the 
identification of congenital defects in the Conserved Oligomeric Golgi (COG) 
complex in humans. We collected findings from different COG deficient cell 
types, such as CHO, yeast and human fibroblasts to hypothesize about structure 
and function of the COG complex, and compared the phenotypes and genotypes of 
the patients known with a COG deficiency. Among 35 CDG-II patients we found 5 
patients with a COG defect. COG defects are a novel group of CDG-II with 
deficient N- as well as O-glycosylation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.08.118
PMID: 17904886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]