---
reference_id: PMID:12692097
title: Parainfluenza viruses.
authors:
- Henrickson KJ
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.16.2.242-264.2003
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Parainfluenza Virus 1, Human/immunology, physiology"
- "Parainfluenza Virus 2, Human/immunology, physiology"
- "Respirovirus Infections/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parainfluenza viruses.
**Authors:** Henrickson KJ
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.16.2.242-264.2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.16.2.242-264.2003)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2003 Apr;16(2):242-64. doi: 10.1128/CMR.16.2.242-264.2003.

Parainfluenza viruses.

Henrickson KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 
53226, USA. kellyj@mcw.edu

Human parainfluenza viruses (HPIV) were first discovered in the late 1950s. Over 
the last decade, considerable knowledge about their molecular structure and 
function has been accumulated. This has led to significant changes in both the 
nomenclature and taxonomic relationships of these viruses. HPIV is genetically 
and antigenically divided into types 1 to 4. Further major subtypes of HPIV-4 (A 
and B) and subgroups/genotypes of HPIV-1 and HPIV-3 have been described. HPIV-1 
to HPIV-3 are major causes of lower respiratory infections in infants, young 
children, the immunocompromised, the chronically ill, and the elderly. Each 
subtype can cause somewhat unique clinical diseases in different hosts. HPIV are 
enveloped and of medium size (150 to 250 nm), and their RNA genome is in the 
negative sense. These viruses belong to the Paramyxoviridae family, one of the 
largest and most rapidly growing groups of viruses causing significant human and 
veterinary disease. HPIV are closely related to recently discovered 
megamyxoviruses (Hendra and Nipah viruses) and metapneumovirus.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.16.2.242-264.2003
PMCID: PMC153148
PMID: 12692097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]