---
reference_id: "PMID:28063190"
title: Prognostic impact of specific molecular profiles in pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in non-Down syndrome.
authors:
- Hara Y
- Shiba N
- Ohki K
- Tabuchi K
- Yamato G
- Park MJ
- Tomizawa D
- Kinoshita A
- Shimada A
- Arakawa H
- Saito AM
- Kiyokawa N
- Tawa A
- Horibe K
- Taga T
- Adachi S
- Taki T
- Hayashi Y
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.22444
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Down Syndrome/genetics
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Leukemia, Megakaryoblastic, Acute/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic impact of specific molecular profiles in pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in non-Down syndrome.
**Authors:** Hara Y, Shiba N, Ohki K, Tabuchi K, Yamato G, Park MJ, Tomizawa D, Kinoshita A, Shimada A, Arakawa H, Saito AM, Kiyokawa N, Tawa A, Horibe K, Taga T, Adachi S, Taki T, Hayashi Y
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.22444](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.22444)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2017 May;56(5):394-404. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22444. Epub
 2017 Feb 14.

Prognostic impact of specific molecular profiles in pediatric acute 
megakaryoblastic leukemia in non-Down syndrome.

Hara Y(1)(2)(3), Shiba N(1)(2)(3), Ohki K(1)(4), Tabuchi K(5), Yamato 
G(1)(2)(3), Park MJ(1), Tomizawa D(6), Kinoshita A(7), Shimada A(8), Arakawa 
H(2), Saito AM(3), Kiyokawa N(4), Tawa A(9), Horibe K(3), Taga T(10), Adachi 
S(11), Taki T(12), Hayashi Y(1)(3)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Gunma Children's Medical Center, 
Shibukawa, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Maebashi, Japan.
(3)Clinical Research Center, National Hospital Organization Nagoya Medical 
Center, Nagoya, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Research, National Research 
Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases 
Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Division of Leukemia and Lymphoma, Children's Cancer Center, National Center 
for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, St Marianna University School of Medicine, 
Kawasaki, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Osaka National 
Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan.
(11)Department of Human Health Sciences Kyoto University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(12)Department of Molecular Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Kyoto Prefectural 
University of Medicine Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto, Japan.
(13)Gunma Red Cross Blood Center, Maebashi, Japan.

Pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in non-Down syndrome (AMKL) is a 
unique subtype of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Novel CBFA2T3-GLIS2 and 
NUP98-KDM5A fusions recurrently found in AMKL were recently reported as poor 
prognostic factors. However, their detailed clinical and molecular 
characteristics in patients treated with recent improved therapies remain 
uncertain. We analyzed molecular features of 44 AMKL patients treated on two 
recent Japanese AML protocols, the AML99 and AML-05 trials. We identified 
CBFA2T3-GLIS2, NUP98-KDM5A, RBM15-MKL1, and KMT2A rearrangements in 12 (27%), 4 
(9%), 2 (5%), and 3 (7%) patients, respectively. Among 459 other AML patients, 
NUP98-KDM5A was identified in 3 patients, whereas CBFA2T3-GLIS2 and RBM15-MKL1 
were only present in AMKL. GATA1 mutations were found in 5 patients (11%). 
Four-year overall survival (OS) and event-free survival (EFS) rates of 
CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive patients in AMKL were 41.7% and 16.7%, respectively. 
Three-year cumulative incidence of relapse in CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive patients 
was significantly higher than that of CBFA2T3-GLIS2-negative patients (75.0% vs. 
35.7%, P = 0.024). In multivariate analyses, CBFA2T3-GLIS2 was an independent 
poor prognostic factor for OS (HR, 4.34; 95% CI, 1.31-14.38) and EFS (HR, 2.95; 
95% CI, 1.20-7.23). Furthermore, seven (54%) of 13 infant AMKL patients were 
CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive. Notably, out of 7 CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive infants, six 
(86%) relapsed and five (71%) died. Moreover, all of CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive 
patients who experienced induction failure (n = 3) were infants, indicating 
worse prognosis of CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive infants. These findings indicated the 
significance of CBFA2T3-GLIS2 as a poor prognostic factor in AMKL patients, 
particularly in infants.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.22444
PMID: 28063190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]