---
reference_id: "PMID:15326622"
title: "Marked phenotypic variability in progressive diaphyseal dysplasia (Camurati-Engelmann disease): report of a four-generation pedigree, identification of a mutation in TGFB1, and review."
authors:
- Wallace SE
- Lachman RS
- Mekikian PB
- Bui KK
- Wilcox WR
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30148
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Marked phenotypic variability in progressive diaphyseal dysplasia (Camurati-Engelmann disease): report of a four-generation pedigree, identification of a mutation in TGFB1, and review.
**Authors:** Wallace SE, Lachman RS, Mekikian PB, Bui KK, Wilcox WR
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30148](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30148)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Sep 1;129A(3):235-47. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30148.

Marked phenotypic variability in progressive diaphyseal dysplasia 
(Camurati-Engelmann disease): report of a four-generation pedigree, 
identification of a mutation in TGFB1, and review.

Wallace SE(1), Lachman RS, Mekikian PB, Bui KK, Wilcox WR.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Steven Spielberg Pediatric Research Center, 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA.

Progressive diaphyseal dysplasia (PDD) (Camurati-Engelmann disease) is an 
autosomal dominant craniotubular dysplasia characterized by hyperostosis and 
sclerosis of the diaphyses of the long bones and the skull. Mutations in 
transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGFB1) were recently found in patients with 
PDD. We report on a four-generation pedigree with seven individuals affected by 
PDD, linkage and mutational analysis results, and review the literature. This 
pedigree demonstrates the autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, remarkable 
variation in expressivity, and reduced penetrance. The most severely affected 
individual had progression of mild skull hyperostosis to severe skull thickening 
and cranial nerve compression over 30 years. His carrier father remained 
asymptomatic into his ninth decade and had no radiographic hyperostosis or 
sclerosis of the bones. Symptomatic relatives presented with lower limb pain and 
weakness. They were initially diagnosed with a variety of other conditions. Two 
of the symptomatic individuals were treated successfully with prednisone. We 
genotyped 7 markers from chromosome region 19q13.1-13.3 in 15 relatives and 
confirmed linkage to this region in this family. We screened the TGFB1 gene for 
mutations and identified a missense mutation resulting in an R218H substitution 
in the affected individuals, the asymptomatic obligate carrier, and another 
unaffected relative. We genotyped the family for seven known TGFB1 polymorphisms 
and a novel TAAA tetranucleotide repeat in intron 1. These polymorphisms did not 
appear to account for the variability in disease severity in this family. Our 
review illustrates how the disorder can significantly compromise health. Cranial 
involvement, which occurs in 61% of patients, can be severe, entrapping cranial 
nerves or causing increased intracranial pressure. Therapy with corticosteroids 
should be attempted in all symptomatic patients.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30148
PMID: 15326622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]