---
reference_id: "PMID:26515619"
title: Primary Lateral Sclerosis.
authors:
- Statland JM
- Barohn RJ
- Dimachkie MM
- Floeter MK
- Mitsumoto H
journal: Neurol Clin
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2015.07.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Lateral Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Statland JM, Barohn RJ, Dimachkie MM, Floeter MK, Mitsumoto H
**Journal:** Neurol Clin (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ncl.2015.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ncl.2015.07.007)

## Content

1. Neurol Clin. 2015 Nov;33(4):749-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2015.07.007. Epub 2015 
Sep 8.

Primary Lateral Sclerosis.

Statland JM(1), Barohn RJ(2), Dimachkie MM(2), Floeter MK(3), Mitsumoto H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow 
Boulevard, Mailstop 2012, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. Electronic address: 
jstatland@kumc.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow 
Boulevard, Mailstop 2012, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.
(3)Human Spinal Physiology Unit, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, Building 10, Room 7-5680, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, 710 West 168th 
Street, New York City, NY 10032, USA.

Primary lateral sclerosis is characterized by insidious onset of progressive 
upper motor neuron dysfunction in the absence of clinical signs of lower motor 
neuron involvement. Patients experience stiffness; decreased balance and 
coordination; mild weakness; and, if the bulbar region is affected, difficulty 
speaking and swallowing, and emotional lability. The diagnosis is made based on 
clinical history, typical examination findings, and diagnostic testing negative 
for other causes of upper motor neuron dysfunction. Electromyogram is normal, or 
only shows mild neurogenic findings in a few muscles, not meeting El Escorial 
criteria. Treatment is largely supportive.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ncl.2015.07.007
PMCID: PMC4628724
PMID: 26515619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]