---
reference_id: PMID:37928900
title: Stem cell models of Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Camões Dos Santos J
- Appleton C
- Cazaux Mateus F
- Covas R
- Bekman EP
- da Rocha ST
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1274040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stem cell models of Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Camões Dos Santos J, Appleton C, Cazaux Mateus F, Covas R, Bekman EP, da Rocha ST
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2023.1274040](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2023.1274040)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Oct 19;11:1274040. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1274040. 
eCollection 2023.

Stem cell models of Angelman syndrome.

Camões Dos Santos J(#)(1)(2), Appleton C(#)(1)(2)(3), Cazaux Mateus F(#)(1)(2), 
Covas R(#)(1)(2), Bekman EP(1)(2)(4), da Rocha ST(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)iBB-Institute for Bioengineering and Biosciences, Department of 
Bioengineering, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, 
Portugal.
(2)Associate Laboratory i4HB Institute for Health and Bioeconomy, Instituto 
Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Department of Animal Biology, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de 
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)The Egas Moniz Center for Interdisciplinary Research (CiiEM), Caparica, 
Portugal.
(#)Contributed equally

Angelman syndrome (AS) is an imprinted neurodevelopmental disorder that lacks a 
cure, characterized by developmental delay, intellectual impairment, seizures, 
ataxia, and paroxysmal laughter. The condition arises due to the loss of the 
maternally inherited copy of the UBE3A gene in neurons. The paternally inherited 
UBE3A allele is unable to compensate because it is silenced by the expression of 
an antisense transcript (UBE3A-ATS) on the paternal chromosome. UBE3A, encoding 
enigmatic E3 ubiquitin ligase variants, regulates target proteins by either 
modifying their properties/functions or leading them to degradation through the 
proteasome. Over time, animal models, particularly the Ube3a mat-/pat+ Knock-Out 
(KO) mice, have significantly contributed to our understanding of the molecular 
mechanisms underlying AS. However, a shift toward human pluripotent stem cell 
models (PSCs), such as human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced pluripotent 
stem cells (iPSCs), has gained momentum. These stem cell models accurately 
capture human genetic and cellular characteristics, offering an alternative or a 
complement to animal experimentation. Human stem cells possess the remarkable 
ability to recapitulate neurogenesis and generate "brain-in-a-dish" models, 
making them valuable tools for studying neurodevelopmental disorders like AS. In 
this review, we provide an overview of the current state-of-the-art human stem 
cell models of AS and explore their potential to become the preclinical models 
of choice for drug screening and development, thus propelling AS therapeutic 
advancements and improving the lives of affected individuals.

Copyright © 2023 Camões dos Santos, Appleton, Cazaux Mateus, Covas, Bekman and 
da Rocha.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1274040
PMCID: PMC10620611
PMID: 37928900

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.