---
reference_id: "PMID:36129270"
title: "CHOROIDAL AMYLOID DEPOSITION: A Multicenter Study of Amyloid Lesions Identified in Late Indocyanine Green Angiography."
authors:
- Mano F
- Yonekawa Y
- Kakihara S
- Fortun J
- Borrelli E
- Bandello F
- Murata T
- Kusaka S
- Dispenzieri A
- Pulido JS
journal: Retina
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000003551
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHOROIDAL AMYLOID DEPOSITION: A Multicenter Study of Amyloid Lesions Identified in Late Indocyanine Green Angiography.
**Authors:** Mano F, Yonekawa Y, Kakihara S, Fortun J, Borrelli E, Bandello F, Murata T, Kusaka S, Dispenzieri A, Pulido JS
**Journal:** Retina (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IAE.0000000000003551](https://doi.org/10.1097/IAE.0000000000003551)

## Content

1. Retina. 2022 Oct 1;42(10):1989-1994. doi: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000003551.

CHOROIDAL AMYLOID DEPOSITION: A Multicenter Study of Amyloid Lesions Identified 
in Late Indocyanine Green Angiography.

Mano F(1), Yonekawa Y(2), Kakihara S(3), Fortun J(4), Borrelli E(5), Bandello 
F(5), Murata T(3), Kusaka S(1), Dispenzieri A(6), Pulido JS(2)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, 
Osakasayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Wills Eye Hospital, Jefferson Kimmel Medical 
School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Matsumoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Palm Beach Gardens, 
Florida.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, University Vita Salute San Raffaele, Milan, 
Italy; and.
(6)Departments of Hematology.
(7)Ophthalmology, and.
(8)Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

PURPOSE: To characterize choroidal amyloid angiopathy (CAA) using late-phase 
indocyanine green angiography (ICGA).
METHODS: This was a multicenter retrospective observational case series on 
patients with transthyretin (ATTR) and AL amyloidosis who underwent ICGA. The 
timing of hyperfluorescence and longitudinal changes were analyzed.
RESULTS: Thirty-two patients (27 with ATTR and 5 with AL) with mean age of 58.9 
± 17.4 years were included. Hyperfluorescent spots in the very late phases of 
ICGA, corresponding to CAA, were observed in 49 of 55 eyes (89%). The median 
time to maximal staining was 672 (95% confidence interval, 644-752) seconds, 
which was significantly later than the initial staining (503 [95% confidence 
interval, 447-521], P < 0.0001; Wilcoxon signed rank test). In seven patients 
with ATTR amyloidosis who underwent follow-up of ICGA, the CAA was stable in two 
patients and improved in five patients during treatment. However, 3 patients 
(43%) had worsening vitreous opacities in both eyes, and 4 patients (57%) 
developed secondary open-angle glaucoma.
CONCLUSION: Most patients with amyloidosis were found to have CAA on ICGA. Up to 
12.5 minutes is required for maximal ICG staining. Choroidal amyloid angiopathy 
improved in most patients with systemic treatment and may serve as a marker of 
systemic disease status.

DOI: 10.1097/IAE.0000000000003551
PMID: 36129270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]