---
reference_id: "PMID:38861245"
title: "Clinical and diagnostic characteristics of Hashimoto's encephalopathy: a single-center, retrospective study."
authors:
- Lee JJ
- Park SM
- Park KI
- Kang K
- Lee WW
- Kim BK
- Kim YS
- Yoo I
journal: Acta Neurol Belg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s13760-024-02520-1
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hashimoto Disease/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Female
- Encephalitis/diagnosis
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Adult
- Electroencephalography/methods
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Autoantibodies/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and diagnostic characteristics of Hashimoto's encephalopathy: a single-center, retrospective study.
**Authors:** Lee JJ, Park SM, Park KI, Kang K, Lee WW, Kim BK, Kim YS, Yoo I
**Journal:** Acta Neurol Belg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13760-024-02520-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13760-024-02520-1)

## Content

1. Acta Neurol Belg. 2024 Dec;124(6):1839-1846. doi: 10.1007/s13760-024-02520-1. 
Epub 2024 Jun 11.

Clinical and diagnostic characteristics of Hashimoto's encephalopathy: a 
single-center, retrospective study.

Lee JJ(#)(1), Park SM(#)(1), Park KI(2), Kang K(1), Lee WW(1), Kim BK(1), Kim 
YS(1), Yoo I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Nowon Eulji Medical Center, Eulji University School 
of Medicine, 68 Hangeulbisekro, Noweongu, Seoul, 01830, Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University Hospital Healthcare System 
Gangnam Center, 152 Teheran-Ro, Gangnam-Gu, Seoul, 06236, Korea. 
kipark@snuh.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Diagnosing Hashimoto's encephalopathy (HE) is 
challenging. In contrast to other types of autoimmune encephalitis, HE shows an 
excellent response to steroid treatment. We aimed to investigate the rates of 
antithyroid antibodies (ATAs) and probable HE in patients with unexplained 
mental dysfunction and compare the clinical characteristics between the good- 
and poor-outcome groups.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records and 
electroencephalography (EEG) and neuroimaging findings of patients admitted to 
the Department of Neurology of our hospital from March 1, 2006, to February 28, 
2023. Using our proposed diagnostic criteria for probable HE, we compared the 
clinical characteristics between the good- and poor-outcome groups. We also 
investigated the rates of ATA positivity and probable HE.
RESULTS: In total, 198 patients exhibited altered mentation, rapidly progressive 
cognitive decline, or myoclonus. ATA tests were performed on 86 patients, and 
the detection rates of ATAs and probable HE were 29.1% and 25.6%, respectively. 
Of the 22 patients enrolled, the good- and poor-outcome groups comprised 19 and 
3 patients, respectively. Clinical seizures occurred in seven patients. 
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus on EEG was observed in six patients, all of 
whom were intractable to antiepileptic drugs. Nineteen of 21 patients (90.5%) 
treated with immunosuppressants showed good outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: HE is a rare clinical disorder, but not as rare as previously 
thought. When HE is suspected, steroids should be considered the first-line 
treatment. Early diagnosis and adequate treatment are critical to achieve good 
outcomes in HE.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13760-024-02520-1
PMCID: PMC11614988
PMID: 38861245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: Not 
applicable. Ethical approval: This study was approved by the Institutional 
Review Board of Nowon Eulji Medical Center, Eulji University (IRB No. 
2023-05-013-002). Informed consent: Not applicable.