---
reference_id: "PMID:33175207"
title: "The global prevalence of rheumatoid arthritis: a meta-analysis based on a systematic review."
authors:
- Almutairi K
- Nossent J
- Preen D
- Keen H
- Inderjeeth C
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-020-04731-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The global prevalence of rheumatoid arthritis: a meta-analysis based on a systematic review.
**Authors:** Almutairi K, Nossent J, Preen D, Keen H, Inderjeeth C
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-020-04731-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-020-04731-0)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2021 May;41(5):863-877. doi: 10.1007/s00296-020-04731-0. Epub 
2020 Nov 11.

The global prevalence of rheumatoid arthritis: a meta-analysis based on a 
systematic review.

Almutairi K(1)(2), Nossent J(3)(4), Preen D(5), Keen H(3)(6), Inderjeeth 
C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. 
khalid.almutairi@research.uwa.edu.au.
(2)King Fahd Specialist Hospital, Burydah, Saudi Arabia. 
khalid.almutairi@research.uwa.edu.au.
(3)School of Medicine, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.
(4)Sir Charles Gairdner and Osborne Park Health Care Group, Perth, Australia.
(5)School of Population and Global Health, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia.
(6)Fiona Stanley Hospital, Murdoch, WA, Australia.

The objective is to determine the global population prevalence of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) based on population-based studies and assess factors that 
influence RA prevalence estimates. Four electronic databases were searched 
(ProQuest Central, MEDLINE, Web of Science, and EMBASE) for peer-reviewed 
English publications that report prevalence estimates of RA from 1980 and 2019. 
We included case-control studies, cross-sectional studies, and prospective or 
retrospective cohort studies in our search strategy. A random-effect 
meta-analysis model was used to produce the pooled prevalence estimates. The 
potential between-study heterogeneity was identified using sensitivity analysis, 
sub-group and meta-regression analyses. A total of 67 studies were included in 
the meta-analysis, containing 742,246 RA patients and 211,592,925 healthy 
controls in the study period. The global RA prevalence estimate was 0.46% (95% 
confidence interval [CI] 0.39-0.54; I2 = 99.9%) with a 95% prediction interval 
(0.06-1.27). The RA point-prevalence was 0.45% (95% CI 0.38-0.53%) between 1986 
and 2014, while the pooled period-prevalence was 0.46% (95% CI 0.36% and 0.57%) 
from 1955 to 2015. The highest RA pooled prevalence (0.69%; 95% CI 0.47-0.95) 
was derived from linked data source studies. Based on meta-regression, the 
factors that explain the studies' heterogeneity of RA prevalence, including 
geographical location, the risk bias assessment of studies and sample size. The 
global prevalence of RA between 1980 and 2019 was 460 per 100,000 population, 
with variations due to geographical location and study methodology. Linked data 
are the preferred method to estimate RA population prevalence as they provide 
the best case ascertainment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-020-04731-0
PMID: 33175207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]