---
reference_id: "PMID:27643675"
title: HCV NS5A replication complex inhibitors.
authors:
- Gao M
- "O'Boyle DR 2nd"
- Roberts S
journal: Curr Opin Pharmacol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2016.07.014
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- "Antiviral Agents/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Carbamates
- Drug Design
- Hepacivirus/drug effects
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/drug therapy, virology"
- Humans
- "Imidazoles/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- Pyrrolidines
- "Valine/analogs & derivatives"
- "Viral Nonstructural Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Virus Replication/drug effects
- RNA-Dependent RNA Polymerase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HCV NS5A replication complex inhibitors.
**Authors:** Gao M, O'Boyle DR 2nd, Roberts S
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pharmacol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coph.2016.07.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coph.2016.07.014)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2016 Oct;30:151-157. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2016.07.014.

HCV NS5A replication complex inhibitors.

Gao M(1), O'Boyle DR 2nd(2), Roberts S(2).

Author information:
(1)Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Wallingford, CT 06492, USA. Electronic address: 
mgao@arbutisbio.com.
(2)Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Wallingford, CT 06492, USA.

The development of anti-HCV drugs is one of the most successful stories of 
antiviral therapy. In fact, for the first time in human history we have the 
potential to eradicate a chronic viral infection using only orally administered 
direct antiviral agents (DAAs). HCV NS5A replication complex inhibitors, 
exemplified by Daclatasvir (DCV, BMS-790052, Daklinza®), are a new class of DAA. 
The astonishing in vitro potency of DCV (pM to low nM range) translated to 
remarkable efficacy in clinical trials, and 2nd generation NS5A inhibitors have 
become essential components of HCV combination therapies. The current cure rate 
of effective combination therapies exceeds 90% in most clinical trials. The 
extraordinary potency of NS5A inhibitors promoted significant efforts to 
understand their mechanism(s) of inhibition.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coph.2016.07.014
PMID: 27643675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]