---
reference_id: "PMID:27588581"
title: "Inhaled short-acting bronchodilators for managing emergency childhood asthma: an overview of reviews."
authors:
- Pollock M
- Sinha IP
- Hartling L
- Rowe BH
- Schreiber S
- Fernandes RM
journal: Allergy
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/all.13039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhaled short-acting bronchodilators for managing emergency childhood asthma: an overview of reviews.
**Authors:** Pollock M, Sinha IP, Hartling L, Rowe BH, Schreiber S, Fernandes RM
**Journal:** Allergy (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/all.13039](https://doi.org/10.1111/all.13039)

## Content

1. Allergy. 2017 Feb;72(2):183-200. doi: 10.1111/all.13039. Epub 2016 Oct 5.

Inhaled short-acting bronchodilators for managing emergency childhood asthma: an 
overview of reviews.

Pollock M(1), Sinha IP(2), Hartling L(1), Rowe BH(3), Schreiber S(1), Fernandes 
RM(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Alberta Research Centre for Health Evidence, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)Institute of Child Health, Alder Hey Children's Hospital, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine and School of Public Health, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(4)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, University of 
Lisbon, Lisboa, Portugal.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Lisbon Academic Medical Centre, Santa Maria 
Hospital, Lisboa, Portugal.

International guidelines provide conflicting recommendations on how to use 
bronchodilators to manage childhood acute wheezing conditions in the emergency 
department (ED), and there is variation within and among countries in how these 
conditions are managed. This may be reflective of uncertainty about the 
evidence. This overview of systematic reviews (SRs) aimed to synthesize, 
appraise, and present all SR evidence on the efficacy and safety of inhaled 
short-acting bronchodilators to treat asthma and wheeze exacerbations in 
children 0-18 years presenting to the ED. Searching, review selection, data 
extraction and analysis, and quality assessments were conducted using methods 
recommended by The Cochrane Collaboration. Thirteen SRs containing 56 relevant 
trials and 5526 patients were included. Results demonstrate the efficacy of 
short-acting beta-agonist (SABA) delivered by metered-dose inhaler as first-line 
therapy for younger and older children (hospital admission decreased by 44% in 
younger children, and ED length of stay decreased by 33 min in older children). 
Short-acting anticholinergic (SAAC) should be added to SABA for older children 
in severe cases (hospital admission decreased by 27% and 74% when compared to 
SABA and SAAC alone, respectively). Continuous nebulization, addition of 
magnesium sulfate to SABA, and levosalbutamol compared to salbutamol cannot be 
recommended in routine practice.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/all.13039
PMID: 27588581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]