---
reference_id: PMID:24265237
title: Steatosis in the liver.
authors:
- Wang DQ
- Portincasa P
- Neuschwander-Tetri BA
journal: Compr Physiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/cphy.c130001
keywords:
- Animals
- Digestion
- "Fatty Liver/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Intestinal Absorption
- Lipid Metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Steatosis in the liver.
**Authors:** Wang DQ, Portincasa P, Neuschwander-Tetri BA
**Journal:** Compr Physiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cphy.c130001](https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c130001)

## Content

1. Compr Physiol. 2013 Oct;3(4):1493-532. doi: 10.1002/cphy.c130001.

Steatosis in the liver.

Wang DQ(1), Portincasa P, Neuschwander-Tetri BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.

Accumulation of triacylglycerols within the cytoplasm of hepatocytes to the 
degree that lipid droplets are visible microscopically is called liver 
steatosis. Most commonly, it occurs when there is an imbalance between the 
delivery or synthesis of fatty acids in the liver and their disposal through 
oxidative pathways or secretion into the blood as a component of 
triacylglycerols in very low density lipoprotein. This disorder is called 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in the absence of alcoholic abuse and 
viral hepatitis, and it is often associated with insulin resistance, obesity and 
type 2 diabetes. Also, liver steatosis can be induced by many other causes 
including excessive alcohol consumption, infection with genotype 3 hepatitis C 
virus and certain medications. Whereas hepatic triacylglycerol accumulation was 
once considered the ultimate effector of hepatic lipotoxicity, triacylglycerols 
per se are quite inert and do not induce insulin resistance or cellular injury. 
Rather, lipotoxic injury in the liver appears to be mediated by the global 
ongoing fatty acid enrichment in the liver, paralleling the development of 
insulin resistance. A considerable number of fatty acid metabolites may be 
responsible for hepatic lipotoxicity and liver injury. Additional key 
contributors include hepatic cytosolic lipases and the "lipophagy" of lipid 
droplets, as sources of hepatic fatty acids. The specific origin of the lipids, 
mainly triacylglycerols, accumulating in liver has been unraveled by recent 
kinetic studies, and identifying the origin of the accumulated triacylglycerols 
in the liver of patients with NAFLD may direct the prevention and treatment of 
this condition.

© 2013 American Physiological Society. Compr Physiol 3:1493-1532, 2013.

DOI: 10.1002/cphy.c130001
PMID: 24265237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]