---
reference_id: "PMID:37227088"
title: TOPORS as a novel causal gene for Joubert syndrome.
authors:
- Strong A
- Qu HQ
- Cullina S
- McManus ML
- Zackai EH
- Glessner J
- Kenny EE
- Hakonarson H
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63303
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TOPORS as a novel causal gene for Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Strong A, Qu HQ, Cullina S, McManus ML, Zackai EH, Glessner J, Kenny EE, Hakonarson H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63303](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63303)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Aug;191(8):2156-2163. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63303. Epub 
2023 May 25.

TOPORS as a novel causal gene for Joubert syndrome.

Strong A(1)(2)(3), Qu HQ(2), Cullina S(4)(5), McManus ML(1), Zackai EH(1)(3), 
Glessner J(2)(3), Kenny EE(4)(5)(6), Hakonarson H(1)(2)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)The Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)The Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Institute for Genomic Health, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(6)Division of Genomic Medicine, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Joubert syndrome (JBTS) is a Mendelian disorder of the primary cilium defined by 
the clinical triad of hypotonia, developmental delay, and a distinct cerebellar 
malformation called the molar tooth sign. JBTS is inherited in an autosomal 
recessive, autosomal dominant, or X-linked recessive manner. Though over 40 
genes have been identified as causal for JBTS, molecular diagnosis is not made 
in 30%-40% of individuals who meet clinical criteria. TOPORS encodes 
topoisomerase I-binding arginine/serine-rich protein, and homozygosity for a 
TOPORS missense variant (c.29C > A; p.(Pro10Gln)) was identified in individuals 
with the ciliopathy oral-facial-digital syndrome in two families of Dominican 
descent. Here, we report an additional proband of Dominican ancestry with JBTS 
found by exome sequencing to be homozygous for the identical p.(Pro10Gln) TOPORS 
missense variant. Query of the Mount Sinai BioMe biobank, which includes 1880 
individuals of Dominican ancestry, supports a high carrier frequency of the 
TOPORS p.(Pro10Gln) variant in individuals of Dominican descent. Our data 
nominates TOPORS as a novel causal gene for JBTS and suggests that TOPORS 
variants should be considered in the differential of ciliopathy-spectrum disease 
in individuals of Dominican ancestry.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63303
PMCID: PMC10449431
PMID: 37227088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Other authors declare no 
financial or competing interests related to this manuscript.