---
reference_id: "PMID:37944298"
title: "Beyond the symptoms: Personalizing giant cell arteritis care through multidimensional patient reported outcome measure."
authors:
- El Miedany Y
- El Gaafary M
- Toth M
- Palmer D
- Ali A
- Bahlas S
- Mahran S
- Hassan W
- Abu-Zaid MH
- Saber S
- Elwakil W
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2023.152285
keywords:
- Humans
- Giant Cell Arteritis
- Quality of Life
- Reproducibility of Results
- Patient Reported Outcome Measures
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beyond the symptoms: Personalizing giant cell arteritis care through multidimensional patient reported outcome measure.
**Authors:** El Miedany Y, El Gaafary M, Toth M, Palmer D, Ali A, Bahlas S, Mahran S, Hassan W, Abu-Zaid MH, Saber S, Elwakil W
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2023.152285](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2023.152285)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2023 Dec;63:152285. doi:
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2023.152285. Epub 2023 Oct 28.

Beyond the symptoms: Personalizing giant cell arteritis care through
multidimensional patient reported outcome measure.

El Miedany Y(1), El Gaafary M(2), Toth M(3), Palmer D(4), Ali A(5), Bahlas S(6),
Mahran S(7), Hassan W(8), Abu-Zaid MH(9), Saber S(10), Elwakil W(11).

Author information:
(1)Professor Canterbury Christ Church University, England; H. Senior Clinical
Lecturer, King's College London, England. Electronic address:
secretary@rheumatology4u.com.
(2)Professor Community and Public Health, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)H. Senior Clinical Lecturer, King's College London, England; Darent Valley
Hospital, Kent, England.
(4)North Middlesex University Hospital, London, England.
(5)Darent Valley Hospital, Kent, England.
(6)Professor of Internal Medicine/Rheumatology, College of Medicine, King
Abdulaziz University, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Professor Rheumatology, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Assiut
University, Egypt.
(8)Professor Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Benha University, Benha, Egypt.
(9)Assistant Professor Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Tanta University, Tanta,
Egypt.
(10)Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.
(11)Lectuer Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Alexandria University, Alexanrdia,
Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA) is the commonest form of systemic
vasculitis in people over the age of 50. Published research highlighted the lack
of a disease-specific patient reported outcomes (PROMs) for GCA.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the validity, reliability and responsiveness to change of
a devised disease specific patient self-reported outcome measures questionnaire
for Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA).
METHODS: The GCA-PROMs was conceptualized based on frameworks outlined in the
OMERACT developed core set of Outcome Measures for Large-Vessel Vasculitis and
the guiding principles of the FDA guidance. Initially, cognitive interviews were
conducted to identify item pool of questions. Item selection and reduction was
achieved based on patients as well as an interdisciplinary group of specialists.
Rasch and internal consistency reliability analyses were implemented.
RESULTS: A total of 54 GCA patients completed the questionnaire. The GCA-PROMs
questionnaire was reliable as demonstrated by a high standardized alpha
(0.878-0.983). Content construct assessment of the GCA-PROMs functional
disability and QoL revealed significant correlation (p< 0.01) with both HAQ and
EQ-5D. Changes in functional disability, QoL showed significant (p< 0.01)
variation with diseases activity status in response to therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The developed GCA-PROMs questionnaire is a reliable and valid
instrument for assessment of GCA patients. A stratified treatment regimen
depending on the individual patient's risk factors as well as preferences and
associated comorbidities is the best approach to tailored patient management.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2023.152285
PMID: 37944298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Authors
declare no conflicts of interest.
