---
reference_id: "PMID:30182907"
title: Towards the elimination of hepatitis B and hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Spearman CW
journal: S Afr Med J
year: '2018'
doi: 10.7196/SAMJ.2018.v108i8b.13496
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Towards the elimination of hepatitis B and hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Spearman CW
**Journal:** S Afr Med J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.7196/SAMJ.2018.v108i8b.13496](https://doi.org/10.7196/SAMJ.2018.v108i8b.13496)

## Content

1. S Afr Med J. 2018 Aug 8;108(8b):13-16. doi: 10.7196/SAMJ.2018.v108i8b.13496.

Towards the elimination of hepatitis B and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Spearman CW(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Cape Town, South Africa. wendy.spearman@uct.ac.za.

Hepatitis B (HBV) remains a global health problem despite the availability of 
effective vaccines since 1982 and effective antiviral therapy. The global burden 
of disease is substantial, with HBV resulting in 887 220 deaths in 2015: acute 
hepatitis (87 076), cirrhosis (462 690) and hepatocellular carcinoma (337 454). 
The World Health Organization has a vision to eliminate viral hepatitis as a 
public health threat by 2030. Although HBV and its associated complications of 
cirrhosis, liver failure and hepatocellular carcinoma are entirely vaccine 
preventable, there is no cure for chronic hepatitis B as yet. HBV elimination 
strategies will need to focus on effective and implementable preventive and 
therapeutic strategies such as upscaling HBV birth-dose vaccination, full HBV 
vaccine coverage, vaccination of high-risk groups, prevention of mother-to-child 
transmission, and identification of HBV-infected individuals and linkage to care 
with sustainable access to antiviral therapy.

DOI: 10.7196/SAMJ.2018.v108i8b.13496
PMID: 30182907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]