---
reference_id: "PMID:1139039"
title: Clinical staging of chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Rai KR
- Sawitsky A
- Cronkite EP
- Chanana AD
- Levy RN
- Pasternack BS
journal: Blood
year: '1975'
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Anemia/etiology, pathology"
- Blood Cell Count
- Bone Marrow Examination
- Chlorambucil/therapeutic use
- Female
- Hematocrit
- "Hepatomegaly/etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Lymphoid/complications, pathology, therapy"
- Lymph Nodes/pathology
- Lymphocytosis/pathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Sex Factors
- "Splenomegaly/etiology, pathology"
- Statistics as Topic
- "Thrombocytopenia/diagnosis, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical staging of chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Rai KR, Sawitsky A, Cronkite EP, Chanana AD, Levy RN, Pasternack BS
**Journal:** Blood (1975)

## Content

1. Blood. 1975 Aug;46(2):219-34.

Clinical staging of chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Rai KR, Sawitsky A, Cronkite EP, Chanana AD, Levy RN, Pasternack BS.

A method of clinical staging of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) has been 
proposed which is based on the concept that CLL is a disease of progressive 
accumulation of nonfunctioning lymphocytes: stage O, bone marrow and blood 
lymphocytosis only; stage 1, lymphocytosis with enlarged nodes; stage II, 
lymphocytosis with enlarged spleen or liver or both; stage III, lymphocytosis 
with anemia; and stage IV:lymphocytosis with thrombocytopenia. Analysis of 125 
patients. in the present series showed the following median survival times (in 
months) from diagnosis: stage 0, is greater than 150; stage I 101; stage II, 71; 
stage III, 19; stage IV, 19, The median survival for the entire series was 71 
mo. The prognostic significance of the stage remained even after adjustment was 
made for age and sex. However, both sex and age were shown to be poor predictors 
of survival after adjustment for stage. The method of staging proved to be a 
reliable predictor of survival whether used at diagnosis or during the course of 
the disease. The proposed staging system was an equally accurate indicator for 
survival when applied to two other previously published studies of large series 
of patients

PMID: 1139039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]