---
reference_id: "PMID:36405827"
title: "Case report: Lingering post-concussive symptoms in a pediatric patient with presumed Ehlers-Danlos syndrome."
authors:
- Curry TM
- Esfandiarei M
- Thomas TC
- Rastogi RG
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.937223
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report: Lingering post-concussive symptoms in a pediatric patient with presumed Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Curry TM, Esfandiarei M, Thomas TC, Rastogi RG
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2022.937223](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.937223)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2022 Nov 4;10:937223. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.937223.
eCollection  2022.

Case report: Lingering post-concussive symptoms in a pediatric patient with 
presumed Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Curry TM(1)(2), Esfandiarei M(3)(4), Thomas TC(1)(2), Rastogi RG(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Health, College of Medicine-Phoenix, University of 
Arizona, Phoenix, AZ, United States.
(2)Neurotrauma and Neurochemistry Research Laboratory, Barrow Neurological 
Institute, Phoenix Children's Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, United States.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Graduate Studies, Midwestern 
University, Glendale, AZ, United States.
(4)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine-Phoenix, University 
of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ, United States.
(5)Pediatric Headache Program, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix Children's 
Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, United States.

BACKGROUND: Connective tissue disorders such as Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) can 
affect collagen and elastin content and structure, including weakening of 
tissues and vasculature, thus contributing to multiple systemic manifestations. 
Prior research has successfully focused on peripheral life-threatening 
manifestations resulting in increased life expectancy, yet clinical observations 
have warranted investigation of neurological vulnerability, where little is 
known. Compromised brain tissues and cerebrovasculature could leave these 
patients vulnerable to mild traumatic brain injury (TBI), with increased 
severity and duration of post-concussive symptoms and delayed recovery. Clinical 
reports in adults indicate that higher severity of symptoms after a mild TBI, 
such as a concussion, can unmask connective tissues disorders leading toward 
diagnosis. This clinical case report is an example of a pediatric patient with 
presumed Ehlers-Danlos syndrome who demonstrates increased vulnerability to mild 
TBI/concussion.
PATIENT: A pediatric female patient presents with unexplained lingering 
post-concussive symptoms, including trouble sleeping, nausea, frontal headaches, 
dizziness, visual changes, fatigue, and left-sided weakness more than 6 months 
post-mild concussion. Patient history of hypermobility, joint derangement, soft 
tissue mobility, and bruising suggests a potential diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome, which may explain symptom severity and length of recovery.
DISCUSSION: This case is the first documented instance of increased 
vulnerability to TBI in a pediatric patient with presumed Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome. It highlights the need for awareness and prevention of injury in this 
vulnerable patient population, suggests more targeted therapeutic intervention 
for recovery, and demonstrates the need for preclinical research evaluating the 
influence of genetic mutations associated with connective tissue disorders on 
the central nervous system.

© 2022 Curry, Esfandiarei, Thomas and Rastogi.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.937223
PMCID: PMC9672464
PMID: 36405827

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.