---
reference_id: "PMID:27440848"
title: Unusual presentation of disseminated Nocardia abscessus infection in a patient with AIDS.
authors:
- Sherbuk J
- Saly D
- Barakat L
- Ogbuagu O
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2016-215649
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unusual presentation of disseminated Nocardia abscessus infection in a patient with AIDS.
**Authors:** Sherbuk J, Saly D, Barakat L, Ogbuagu O
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2016-215649](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2016-215649)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2016 Jul 20;2016:bcr2016215649. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2016-215649.

Unusual presentation of disseminated Nocardia abscessus infection in a patient 
with AIDS.

Sherbuk J(1), Saly D(1), Barakat L(2), Ogbuagu O(2).

Author information:
(1)Yale-New Haven Hospital, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(2)Section of Infectious Diseases, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA.

A 40-year-old man with AIDS presented with symptoms of a chronic cough, subacute 
headache, generalised weakness with falls, urinary and faecal incontinence, and 
acute onset subcutaneous nodules. A chest CT scan showed multiple cavitary and 
nodular pulmonary infiltrates. MRI of his brain and spinal cord revealed 
innumerable ring-enhancing lesions. Pathological examination of the purulent 
material obtained from his subcutaneous lesions, as well as transbronchial 
tissue specimens obtained by biopsy, revealed beaded and branching Gram-positive 
rods, subsequently identified by 16S RNA sequencing to be Nocardia abscessus 
species. We observed an excellent therapeutic response to a combination 
antimicrobial therapy with resolution of the subcutaneous, pulmonary and central 
nervous system (CNS) lesions. Infections caused by N. abscessus are rare and 
typically occur in immunocompromised patients. In this article, we will review 
the presentation, diagnosis and treatment of N. abscessus infection.

2016 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2016-215649
PMCID: PMC4964189
PMID: 27440848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]