---
reference_id: "PMID:27812777"
title: "Acromegaly: clinical features at diagnosis."
authors:
- Vilar L
- Vilar CF
- Lyra R
- Lyra R
- Naves LA
journal: Pituitary
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s11102-016-0772-8
keywords:
- "Acromegaly/diagnosis, pathology"
- Female
- "Gigantism/diagnosis, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acromegaly: clinical features at diagnosis.
**Authors:** Vilar L, Vilar CF, Lyra R, Lyra R, Naves LA
**Journal:** Pituitary (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11102-016-0772-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11102-016-0772-8)

## Content

1. Pituitary. 2017 Feb;20(1):22-32. doi: 10.1007/s11102-016-0772-8.

Acromegaly: clinical features at diagnosis.

Vilar L(1), Vilar CF(2), Lyra R(3), Lyra R(2), Naves LA(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Hospital das Clínicas, Federal University of
Pernambuco, Rua Heitor Maia Filho, 100/502, Madalena, Recife, CEP 50.720-525,
Brazil. lvilarf@gmail.com.
(2)Endocrine Research Center of Pernambuco, Recife, Brazil.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Hospital das Clínicas, Federal University of
Pernambuco, Rua Heitor Maia Filho, 100/502, Madalena, Recife, CEP 50.720-525,
Brazil.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Brasilia University Hospital, Brasilia, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Acromegaly is a rare and underdiagnosed disorder caused, in more
than 95% of cases, by a growth hormone (GH)-secreting pituitary adenoma. The GH
hypersecretion leads to overproduction of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1)
which results in a multisystem disease characterized by somatic overgrowth,
multiple comorbidities, physical disfigurement, and increased mortality.
OBJECTIVE: This article aims to review the clinical features of acromegaly at
diagnosis.
DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION: Acromegaly affects both males and females equally and the
average age at diagnosis ranges from 40 to 50 years (up to 5% of cases < the age
20). Due to insidious onset and slow progression, acromegaly is often diagnosed
five to more than ten years after its onset. The typical coarsening of facial
features include furrowing of fronthead, pronounced brow protrusion, enlargement
of the nose and the ears, thickening of the lips, skin wrinkles and nasolabial
folds, as well as mandibular prognathism that leads to dental malocclusion and
increased interdental spacing. Excessive growth of hands and feet (predominantly
due to soft tissue swelling) is present in the vast majority of acromegalic
patients. Gigantism accounts for up to 5% of cases and occurs when the excess of
GH becomes manifest in the young, before the epiphyseal fusion. The disease also
has rheumatologic, cardiovascular, respiratory, neoplastic, neurological, and
metabolic manifestations which negatively impact its prognosis and patients
quality of life. Less than 15% of acromegalic patients actively seek medical
attention for change in appearance or enlargement of the extremities. The
presentation of acromegaly is more often related to its systemic comorbidities
or to local tumor effects.

DOI: 10.1007/s11102-016-0772-8
PMID: 27812777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
