---
reference_id: "PMID:19208260"
title: Intradural squamous cell carcinoma in the sacrum.
authors:
- Fukushima T
- Kasai Y
- Kato K
- Fujisawa K
- Uchida A
journal: World J Surg Oncol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-7-16
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intradural squamous cell carcinoma in the sacrum.
**Authors:** Fukushima T, Kasai Y, Kato K, Fujisawa K, Uchida A
**Journal:** World J Surg Oncol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1477-7819-7-16](https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-7819-7-16)

## Content

1. World J Surg Oncol. 2009 Feb 11;7:16. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-7-16.

Intradural squamous cell carcinoma in the sacrum.

Fukushima T(1), Kasai Y, Kato K, Fujisawa K, Uchida A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Mie University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Tsu City, Mie, Japan. q7apiynn@za.ztv.ne.jp

BACKGROUND: Leptomeningeal carcinomatosis occurs in patients with cancer at the 
rate of approximately 5%; it develops particularly in patients with breast 
cancer, lung cancer, melanoma, leukemia, or malignant lymphoma. We describe a 
rare case of leptomeningeal carcinomatosis in which spinal intradural squamous 
cell carcinoma with no lesions in the cerebral meninges and leptomeninx, was the 
primary lesion.
METHODS: A 64-year-old man complained of sacral pain. Although the patient was 
treated with analgesics, epidural block and nerve root block, sacral pain 
persisted. Since acute urinary retention occurred, he was operated on. The 
patient was diagnosed as having an intradural squamous cell carcinoma of unknown 
origin.
RESULTS: Since the patient presented with a slightly decreased level of 
consciousness 2 months after surgery, he was subjected to MRI scanning of the 
brain and spinal cord, which revealed disseminated lesions in the medulla 
oblongata. The patient died of pneumonia and sepsis caused by 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 5 months after surgery.
CONCLUSION: We report the first case of a patient with intradural squamous cell 
carcinoma with unknown origin that developed independently in the sacrum.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-7819-7-16
PMCID: PMC2644692
PMID: 19208260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]