---
reference_id: "PMID:20808146"
title: "Elevated cortisol in older adults with generalized anxiety disorder is reduced by treatment: a placebo-controlled evaluation of escitalopram."
authors:
- Lenze EJ
- Mantella RC
- Shi P
- Goate AM
- Nowotny P
- Butters MA
- Andreescu C
- Thompson PA
- Rollman BL
journal: Am J Geriatr Psychiatry
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181ec806c
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated cortisol in older adults with generalized anxiety disorder is reduced by treatment: a placebo-controlled evaluation of escitalopram.
**Authors:** Lenze EJ, Mantella RC, Shi P, Goate AM, Nowotny P, Butters MA, Andreescu C, Thompson PA, Rollman BL
**Journal:** Am J Geriatr Psychiatry (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181ec806c](https://doi.org/10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181ec806c)

## Content

1. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2011 May;19(5):482-90. doi: 
10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181ec806c.

Elevated cortisol in older adults with generalized anxiety disorder is reduced 
by treatment: a placebo-controlled evaluation of escitalopram.

Lenze EJ(1), Mantella RC, Shi P, Goate AM, Nowotny P, Butters MA, Andreescu C, 
Thompson PA, Rollman BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO 63110, USA. lenzee@wustl.edu

BACKGROUND: Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a common disorder in older 
adults, which has been linked to hyperactivity of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis in this age group. The authors 
examined whether treatment of GAD in older adults with a selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) corrects this HPA axis hyperactivity.
METHODS: The authors examined adults aged 60 years and older with GAD in a 
12-week randomized controlled trial comparing the SSRI escitalopram with 
placebo. The authors collected salivary cortisol at six daily time points for 2 
consecutive days to assess peak and total (area under the curve) cortisol, both 
at baseline and posttreatment.
RESULTS: Compared with placebo-treated patients, SSRI-treated patients had a 
significantly greater reduction in both peak and total cortisol. This reduction 
in cortisol was limited to patients with elevated (above the median) baseline 
cortisol, in whom SSRI-treated patients showed substantially greater reduction 
in cortisol than did placebo-treated patients. Reductions in cortisol were 
associated with improvements in anxiety. Additionally, genetic variability at 
the serotonin transporter promoter predicted cortisol changes.
CONCLUSIONS: SSRI treatment of GAD in older adults reduces HPA axis 
hyperactivity. Further research should determine whether these 
treatment-attributable changes are sustained and beneficial.

DOI: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181ec806c
PMCID: PMC3424606
PMID: 20808146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]