---
reference_id: "PMID:37743730"
title: "Incidence, risk factors, and management of alpelisib-associated hyperglycemia in metastatic breast cancer."
authors:
- Shen S
- Chen Y
- Carpio A
- Chang C
- Iyengar NM
journal: Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.34928
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence, risk factors, and management of alpelisib-associated hyperglycemia in metastatic breast cancer.
**Authors:** Shen S, Chen Y, Carpio A, Chang C, Iyengar NM
**Journal:** Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.34928](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.34928)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2023 Dec 15;129(24):3854-3861. doi: 10.1002/cncr.34928. Epub 2023 Sep 
25.

Incidence, risk factors, and management of alpelisib-associated hyperglycemia in 
metastatic breast cancer.

Shen S(1), Chen Y(1), Carpio A(1), Chang C(1), Iyengar NM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.

PURPOSE: The combination of fulvestrant with alpelisib, a PI3K inhibitor, 
improves progression-free survival in metastatic hormone receptor-positive, 
PIK3CA-mutant breast cancer. This study describes the incidence, risk factors, 
and treatment of alpelisib-associated hyperglycemia.
METHODS: Patients with metastatic breast cancer who received alpelisib from 2013 
to 2021 at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center were included in this 
retrospective study. Alpelisib prescription dates and patient/tumor 
characteristics were abstracted from medical records. Risk factors associated 
with hyperglycemia and alpelisib dose reduction/discontinuation were evaluated 
using Pearson's χ2 tests.
RESULTS: Among 247 patients, baseline median body mass index was 25.4 kg/m2 and 
median hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 5.5%. A total of 152 patients (61.5%) 
developed any-grade hyperglycemia and 72 patients (29.2%) developed grade 3-4 
hyperglycemia; median time to onset was 16 days. A total of 100 patients (40.5%) 
received alpelisib on a clinical trial; rates of hyperglycemia were 
significantly higher in patients treated as standard care versus on a clinical 
trial (any-grade hyperglycemia 80.3% vs. 34.0%, grade 3-4 hyperglycemia 40.2% 
vs. 13.0%, p < .001). Baseline HbA1c was significantly associated with 
development of hyperglycemia (p < .001) and alpelisib dose 
reduction/discontinuation (p = .015). Among those who developed hyperglycemia, 
101 (40.9%) received treatment, most commonly with metformin. A total of 49 
patients (19.8%) were referred to an endocrinologist, which was associated with 
SGLT2 inhibitor prescription (p = .007).
CONCLUSIONS: Rates of hyperglycemia among patients treated with alpelisib as 
standard care were significantly higher than patients treated on clinical 
trials. Elevated baseline HbA1c is associated with alpelisib-induced 
hyperglycemia and requiring dose modification. Optimization of glycemic status 
before alpelisib initiation should become routine practice.

© 2023 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.34928
PMCID: PMC10863751
PMID: 37743730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.