---
reference_id: "PMID:35547380"
title: "Long-Term Outcome of Temporal Lobe Epilepsy Surgery in 621 Patients With Hippocampal Sclerosis: Clinical and Surgical Prognostic Factors."
authors:
- Pereira Dalio MTR
- Velasco TR
- Feitosa IDF
- Assirati Junior JA
- Carlotti Junior CG
- Leite JP
- Dos Santos AC
- Alexandre V
- Nakano FN
- Saute RL
- Wichert-Ana L
- Sakamoto AC
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.833293
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Outcome of Temporal Lobe Epilepsy Surgery in 621 Patients With Hippocampal Sclerosis: Clinical and Surgical Prognostic Factors.
**Authors:** Pereira Dalio MTR, Velasco TR, Feitosa IDF, Assirati Junior JA, Carlotti Junior CG, Leite JP, Dos Santos AC, Alexandre V, Nakano FN, Saute RL, Wichert-Ana L, Sakamoto AC
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2022.833293](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2022.833293)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2022 Apr 25;13:833293. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.833293.
eCollection  2022.

Long-Term Outcome of Temporal Lobe Epilepsy Surgery in 621 Patients With
Hippocampal Sclerosis: Clinical and Surgical Prognostic Factors.

Pereira Dalio MTR(1), Velasco TR(1), Feitosa IDF(1), Assirati Junior JA(2),
Carlotti Junior CG(2), Leite JP(1), Dos Santos AC(3), Alexandre V(1), Nakano
FN(1), Saute RL(1), Wichert-Ana L(1), Sakamoto AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy Surgery Center (CIREP), Department of Neurosciences and Behavioral
Sciences, Hospital of Clinics of the Medical School of Ribeirão Preto of the
University of São Paulo (HCFMRP-USP), Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(2)Department of Surgery and Neurosurgery, Hospital of Clinics of the Medical
School of Ribeirão Preto of the University of São Paulo (HCFMRP-USP), Ribeirão
Preto, Brazil.
(3)Department of Radiology, Hospital of Clinics of the Medical School of
Ribeirão Preto of the University of São Paulo (HCFMRP-USP), Ribeirão Preto,
Brazil.

Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most common type of focal epilepsy and is
frequently drug-resistant (DR) to antiseizure medication (ASM), corresponding to
approximately one-third of the cases. When left inadequately treated, it can
worsen the quality of life, cognitive deficits, and risk of death. The standard
treatment for drug-resistant TLE is the surgical removal of the structures
involved, with good long-term outcome rates of 60-70 % and a low rate of adverse
effects. The goal of successful treatment is sustained seizure freedom. In our
study, we evaluated sustained long-term (up to 23 years) surgical outcomes in
621 patients with DR-TLE associated with hippocampal sclerosis, who underwent a
temporal lobectomy. We analyzed the main predictive factors that influence the
surgical outcome related to seizure control, through a longitudinal and
retrospective study, using a multivariable regression model. We found that 73.6%
of the patients were free from disabling seizures (Engel Class I), maintained
over time in 65% of patients followed up to 23 years after surgery. We found
that four independent variables predicted seizure outcomes. The presence of
dysmnesic and olfactory aura predicted a less favorable outcome. The history of
febrile seizure and the surgical technique predicted a good outcome. Regarding
the type of surgical technique, the standard anteromesial temporal lobectomy
(ATL) led to significantly better outcomes (78.6% Engel Class I) when compared
to the selective amygdalohippocampectomy via subtemporal approach (67.2% Engel
Class I; p = 0.002), suggesting that the neuronal networks involved in the
epileptogenic zone may be beyond mesial temporal structures. The multivariable
regression model with the above-mentioned predictor variables revealed an ExpB =
3.627 (N = 621, p < 0.001), indicating that the model was able to distinguish
between patients with a seizure-free. We conclude that epilepsy surgery is a
safe procedure, with low rates of postoperative complications and good long-term
results.

Copyright © 2022 Pereira Dalio, Velasco, Feitosa, Assirati Junior, Carlotti
Junior, Leite, dos Santos, Alexandre, Nakano, Saute, Wichert-Ana and Sakamoto.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.833293
PMCID: PMC9084624
PMID: 35547380

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
