---
reference_id: "PMID:18794389"
title: "Aortic valve bypass surgery: midterm clinical outcomes in a high-risk aortic stenosis population."
authors:
- Gammie JS
- Krowsoski LS
- Brown JM
- Odonkor PN
- Young CA
- Santos MJ
- Gottdiener JS
- Griffith BP
journal: Circulation
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.790030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aortic valve bypass surgery: midterm clinical outcomes in a high-risk aortic stenosis population.
**Authors:** Gammie JS, Krowsoski LS, Brown JM, Odonkor PN, Young CA, Santos MJ, Gottdiener JS, Griffith BP
**Journal:** Circulation (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.790030](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.790030)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2008 Sep 30;118(14):1460-6. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.790030.  Epub 2008 Sep 15.

Aortic valve bypass surgery: midterm clinical outcomes in a high-risk aortic 
stenosis population.

Gammie JS(1), Krowsoski LS, Brown JM, Odonkor PN, Young CA, Santos MJ, 
Gottdiener JS, Griffith BP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Maryland Medical Center, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. jgammie@smail.umaryland.edu

BACKGROUND: Aortic valve bypass (AVB; apicoaortic conduit) surgery relieves 
aortic stenosis (AS) by shunting blood from the apex of the left ventricle to 
the descending thoracic aorta through a valved conduit. We have performed AVB 
surgery as an alternative to conventional aortic valve replacement for high-risk 
AS patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Between 2003 and 2007, 31 high-risk AS patients were 
treated with AVB surgery. Twenty-two patients (71%) were undergoing reoperation 
with patent coronary bypass grafts, and 5 (16%) had a porcelain ascending aorta. 
The average age was 81 years. Cardiopulmonary bypass was used for 19 of 31 
patients (61%); the median duration of cardiopulmonary bypass was 19 minutes. 
Cross-clamp time for all patients was 0 minutes. Perioperative mortality was 13% 
(4 of 31 patients); no perioperative deaths occurred in the last 16 consecutive 
patients. One patient experienced a stroke related to intraoperative 
hypotension. No strokes have occurred during follow-up. Renal function was 
unchanged after AVB (preoperative creatinine, 1.3+/-0.5 mg/dL; postoperative 
creatinine, 1.2+/-0.5 mg/dL). The mean gradient across the native aortic valve 
decreased from 43.5+/-15 to 10.4+/-5.4 mm Hg. Echocardiographically determined 
conduit flow expressed as a percentage of total cardiac output was 72+/-12%.
CONCLUSIONS: AVB surgery is an important therapeutic option for high-risk 
patients with symptomatic AS. Ventricular outflow is distributed in a 
predictable fashion between the conduit and the left ventricular outflow tract, 
and AVB surgery reliably relieves AS. Stroke and renal dysfunction were 
uncommon.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.790030
PMID: 18794389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]