---
reference_id: "PMID:16648377"
title: Mutations responsible for Larsen syndrome cluster in the FLNB protein.
authors:
- Zhang D
- Herring JA
- Swaney SS
- McClendon TB
- Gao X
- Browne RH
- Rathjen KE
- Johnston CE
- Harris S
- Cain NM
- Wise CA
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.038695
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations responsible for Larsen syndrome cluster in the FLNB protein.
**Authors:** Zhang D, Herring JA, Swaney SS, McClendon TB, Gao X, Browne RH, Rathjen KE, Johnston CE, Harris S, Cain NM, Wise CA
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2005.038695](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2005.038695)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2006 May;43(5):e24. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.038695.

Mutations responsible for Larsen syndrome cluster in the FLNB protein.

Zhang D(1), Herring JA, Swaney SS, McClendon TB, Gao X, Browne RH, Rathjen KE, 
Johnston CE, Harris S, Cain NM, Wise CA.

Author information:
(1)Seay Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for 
Children, Dallas, TX 75219, USA.

BACKGROUND: A gene for Larsen syndrome was recently described, and mutations 
were reported in five cases.
OBJECTIVE: To test whether mutations in this gene, FLNB, could explain the 
disease in our independent collection of sporadic and dominant Larsen syndrome 
cases; and to test whether mutations occurred in a non-random pattern.
RESULTS: Missense mutations were found in each of five cases. Four of the five 
were new; one was reported in a sporadic case in the original Larsen syndrome 
study of five cases. All mutations from the two studies were compiled. Clustered 
mutations were observed within three filamin B protein domains: the calponin 
homology 2 domain, repeat 14, and repeat 15. This suggested that as few as five 
(of the total of 46) coding exons of FLNB could be screened to detect Larsen 
syndrome mutations. Four of these exons were screened in a sixth (sporadic) case 
and a previously reported G1691S substitution mutation detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in FLNB may be responsible for all cases of Larsen 
syndrome. They appear to occur in specific functional domains of the filamin B 
protein. This should simplify diagnostic screening of the FLNB gene. Analyses in 
larger patient series are warranted to quantify this. The study confirmed the 
extreme variability in clinical presentation and the presence of unaffected 
carriers. A molecular screen would be valuable for diagnosis and genetic 
counselling.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2005.038695
PMCID: PMC2564529
PMID: 16648377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None declared