---
reference_id: "PMID:20301662"
title: X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Evidente VGH
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Evidente VGH

## Content

1. X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism.

Evidente VGH(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Dec 13 [updated 2018 Feb 15].

Author information:
(1)Director, Movement Disorders Center of Arizona Scottsdale, Arizona

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Individuals with X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (XDP) 
have dystonia of varying severity and parkinsonism. XDP afflicts primarily 
Filipino men and, rarely, women. The mean age of onset in men is 39 years; the 
clinical course is highly variable with parkinsonism as the initial presenting 
sign, overshadowed by dystonia as the disease progresses. Features of 
parkinsonism include resting tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity, postural 
instability, and severe shuffling gait. The dystonia develops focally, most 
commonly in the jaw, neck, trunk, and eyes, and less commonly in the limbs, 
tongue, pharynx, and larynx, the most characteristic being jaw dystonia often 
progressing to neck dystonia. Individuals with pure parkinsonism have 
non-disabling symptoms that are only slowly progressive; those who develop a 
combination of parkinsonism and dystonia can develop multifocal or generalized 
symptoms within a few years and die prematurely from pneumonia or intercurrent 
infections. Female carriers are mostly asymptomatic, though a small minority may 
manifest dystonia, parkinsonism, or chorea.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of XDP is suspected in a male with typical 
clinical findings, family history consistent with X-linked inheritance, and 
maternal ancestral roots from the Panay Islands in the Philippines. Molecular 
genetic testing for variants that tag a disease-associated haplotype of the 
multilocus transcript system termed TAF/DYT3 is required to confirm the 
diagnosis in those with no known family history of XDP, very early symptoms, 
and/or a phenotype of pure parkinsonism, pure tremor, or chorea without 
dystonia. Olfactory testing indicates olfactory dysfunction early in the disease 
and may be used to support the diagnosis when molecular genetic testing is not 
available.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Pharmacologic agents are used to treat 
dystonia or parkinsonism or both. Anticholinergic agents, benzodiazepines, and 
sometimes neuroleptics are used in the early stages of dystonia; zolpidem and 
tetrabenazine are used after dystonia becomes multifocal or generalized. 
Botulinum toxin injections improve focal dystonia but may worsen swallowing in 
individuals with preexisting dysphagia. Parkinsonism is treated with levodopa 
and dopamine agonists to control tremor. Bilateral pallidal deep brain 
stimulation may be used to treat advanced disease and medically refractory 
dystonia, although it may have less effect on parkinsonism. Prevention of 
secondary complications: Swallowing evaluation to guide diet modification and 
swallowing techniques to minimize risk of aspiration. Physical therapy, coupled 
with maximal medical and surgical therapy, may help delay immobility and its 
complications. Surveillance: Annual clinical evaluations in males with the 
disease-related haplotype who are not yet symptomatic, biannual evaluation for 
symptomatic males to monitor medications, and periodic swallowing evaluation, 
especially in those with subjective dysphagia.
GENETIC COUNSELING: XDP is inherited in an X-linked manner. Approximately 94% of 
affected individuals have a known family history of the condition. De novo 
occurrence of the disease-related haplotype associated with the disorder has not 
been observed to date. Males with XDP pass the TAF1/DYT3 disease-associated 
haplotype to all of their daughters and none of their sons. Women who are 
carriers have a 50% chance of transmitting the TAF1/DYT3 disease-associated 
haplotype in each pregnancy: males who inherit the TAF1/DYT3 disease-associated 
haplotype will be affected; females who inherit the TAF1/DYT3 disease-associated 
haplotype are mostly asymptomatic, although a small percentage may manifest 
symptoms. Carrier evaluation of at-risk female relatives is possible if the 
TAF1/DYT3 disease-associated haplotype has been identified in the family. Once 
the TAF1/DYT3 disease-associated haplotype has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and 
preimplantation genetic diagnosis for XDP are possible. Caution should be 
exercised in interpreting the results of prenatal testing as the c.94C>T 
(p.Arg32Cys) variant that marks the disease haplotype has not been proven to be 
the molecular cause of XDP.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301662