---
reference_id: "PMID:32951650"
title: "The Utilization of Nerve Transfer for Reestablishing Shoulder Function in the Setting of Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Single-Institution Review."
authors:
- Paziuk TM
- Tadley M
- Aversano M
- Kozin SH
- Zlotolow DA
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.06.016
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/physiopathology, surgery"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- "Myelitis/physiopathology, surgery"
- Nerve Transfer/methods
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/physiopathology, surgery"
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- Peripheral Nerves/transplantation
- Retrospective Studies
- "Shoulder/innervation, physiopathology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Utilization of Nerve Transfer for Reestablishing Shoulder Function in the Setting of Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Single-Institution Review.
**Authors:** Paziuk TM, Tadley M, Aversano M, Kozin SH, Zlotolow DA
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.06.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.06.016)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2020 Oct;111:17-22. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.06.016.
Epub 2020 Jul 8.

The Utilization of Nerve Transfer for Reestablishing Shoulder Function in the
Setting of Acute Flaccid Myelitis: A Single-Institution Review.

Paziuk TM(1), Tadley M(2), Aversano M(3), Kozin SH(3), Zlotolow DA(3).

Author information:
(1)Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Electronic address:
Paziuk14@gmail.com.
(2)Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)Shriners Hospital for Children, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a rare disease of young children.
The typical presentation involves acute-onset flaccid paralysis in one or more
extremities with a nonspecific viral prodrome. Long-term outcomes demonstrate
that functional recovery plateaus around six to nine months. The purpose of this
study was to evaluate the efficacy of nerve transfers for restoring shoulder
function in these patients.
METHODS: A retrospective review of all patients diagnosed with AFM at a single
institution. Shoulder function was evaluated using the active movement scale
(AMS). Children at a minimum of six months after diagnosis with plateaued
shoulder AMS scores of 4 or less were indicated for surgery.
RESULTS: Eleven patients were identified with a mean time from symptom onset to
surgery of 12 months. Average follow-up was 19 months. The mean AMS score at
follow-up for shoulder external rotation and abduction was 4.6 and 2.8,
respectively. A total of six different nerve transfers with five different donor
nerves were used individually or in conjunction with each other. The most common
transfers were from the spinal accessory nerve to the suprascapular nerve (n =
8) and from the intercostal nerves ×3 to the axillary nerve (n = 5). Patients
who received a transfer from the radial nerve to the axillary nerve (n = 2) had
the best functional returns, with the mean AMS score of 6.5 in both external
rotation and abduction at follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Nerve transfer procedures may help restore shoulder function in the
setting of AFM. Combination procedures that involve a transfer from the radial
nerve to the axillary nerve may provide the best functional results.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2020.06.016
PMID: 32951650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
