---
reference_id: "PMID:35221873"
title: "Kosaki Overgrowth Syndrome: Report of a Family with a Novel PDGFRB Variant."
authors:
- Mutlu Albayrak H
- Calder AD
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000517978
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kosaki Overgrowth Syndrome: Report of a Family with a Novel PDGFRB Variant.
**Authors:** Mutlu Albayrak H, Calder AD
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000517978](https://doi.org/10.1159/000517978)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2022 Feb;13(1):38-44. doi: 10.1159/000517978. Epub 2021 Sep 29.

Kosaki Overgrowth Syndrome: Report of a Family with a Novel PDGFRB Variant.

Mutlu Albayrak H(1), Calder AD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara Bilkent City Hospital, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Radiology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Mol Syndromol. 2022 Feb;13(2):171-173. doi: 10.1159/000522192.

Heterozygous activating missense variants of PDGFRB are associated with the 
phenotype of Kosaki overgrowth syndrome (KOGS). Here, we present a family 
including a father and 2 siblings with a novel variant, c.2567A>T (p.Asn856Ile), 
localized in the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domain, exhibiting a KOGS 
phenotype. The coarsening of the facial features, enlargement of the hands/feet, 
and progressive scoliosis started to appear after an average age of 6. There 
were no signs of thin/fragile skin, premature aging appearance, myofibroma, 
white matter findings, and intellectual disability in any of them. Corneal 
pterygium and evidence of cerebral vasculopathy were only detected in the 
father. One sibling exhibited café-au-lait spots. Posterior fossa enlargement 
was revealed only in one sibling. KOGS is an extremely rare overgrowth syndrome. 
No familial cases of KOGS have been reported so far. Hereby, we demonstrated 
that the features of KOGS can show mild intrafamilial variability, and the risk 
of vascular complications may arise with age.

Copyright © 2021 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000517978
PMCID: PMC8832207
PMID: 35221873

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.