---
reference_id: "PMID:24166856"
title: "Look here, eye movements play a functional role in memory retrieval."
authors:
- Johansson R
- Johansson M
journal: Psychol Sci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1177/0956797613498260
keywords:
- Adult
- Eye Movements/physiology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Memory, Episodic"
- Mental Recall/physiology
- Spatial Memory/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Look here, eye movements play a functional role in memory retrieval.
**Authors:** Johansson R, Johansson M
**Journal:** Psychol Sci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0956797613498260](https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613498260)

## Content

1. Psychol Sci. 2014 Jan;25(1):236-42. doi: 10.1177/0956797613498260. Epub 2013
Oct  28.

Look here, eye movements play a functional role in memory retrieval.

Johansson R(1), Johansson M.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Cognitive Science, Lund University.

Research on episodic memory has established that spontaneous eye movements occur 
to spaces associated with retrieved information even if those spaces are blank 
at the time of retrieval. Although it has been claimed that such looks to 
"nothing" can function as facilitatory retrieval cues, there is currently no 
conclusive evidence for such an effect. In the present study, we addressed this 
fundamental issue using four direct eye manipulations in the retrieval phase of 
an episodic memory task: (a) free viewing on a blank screen, (b) maintaining 
central fixation, (c) looking inside a square congruent with the location of the 
to-be-recalled objects, and (d) looking inside a square incongruent with the 
location of the to-be-recalled objects. Our results provide novel evidence of an 
active and facilitatory role of gaze position during memory retrieval and 
demonstrate that memory for the spatial relationship between objects is more 
readily affected than memory for intrinsic object features.

DOI: 10.1177/0956797613498260
PMID: 24166856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]