---
reference_id: "PMID:8703060"
title: "Pycnodysostosis, a lysosomal disease caused by cathepsin K deficiency."
authors:
- Gelb BD
- Shi GP
- Chapman HA
- Desnick RJ
journal: Science
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1126/science.273.5279.1236
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pycnodysostosis, a lysosomal disease caused by cathepsin K deficiency.
**Authors:** Gelb BD, Shi GP, Chapman HA, Desnick RJ
**Journal:** Science (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.273.5279.1236](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.273.5279.1236)

## Content

1. Science. 1996 Aug 30;273(5279):1236-8. doi: 10.1126/science.273.5279.1236.

Pycnodysostosis, a lysosomal disease caused by cathepsin K deficiency.

Gelb BD(1), Shi GP, Chapman HA, Desnick RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Pycnodysostosis, an autosomal recessive osteochondrodysplasia characterized by 
osteosclerosis and short stature, maps to chromosome 1q21. Cathepsin K, a 
cysteine protease gene that is highly expressed in osteoclasts, localized to the 
pycnodysostosis region. Nonsense, missense, and stop codon mutations in the gene 
encoding cathepsin K were identified in patients. Transient expression of 
complementary DNA containing the stop codon mutation resulted in messenger RNA 
but no immunologically detectable protein. Thus, pycnodysostosis results from 
gene defects in a lysosomal protease with highest expression in osteoclasts. 
These findings suggest that cathepsin K is a major protease in bone resorption, 
providing a possible rationale for the treatment of disorders such as 
osteoporosis and certain forms of arthritis.

DOI: 10.1126/science.273.5279.1236
PMID: 8703060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]