---
reference_id: "PMID:33583696"
title: Making Sense of the Biodiversity and Virulence of Listeria monocytogenes.
authors:
- Disson O
- Moura A
- Lecuit M
journal: Trends Microbiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.01.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Making Sense of the Biodiversity and Virulence of Listeria monocytogenes.
**Authors:** Disson O, Moura A, Lecuit M
**Journal:** Trends Microbiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tim.2021.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2021.01.008)

## Content

1. Trends Microbiol. 2021 Sep;29(9):811-822. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.01.008. Epub
 2021 Feb 11.

Making Sense of the Biodiversity and Virulence of Listeria monocytogenes.

Disson O(1), Moura A(2), Lecuit M(3).

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Biology of Infection Unit, Paris, France; Inserm U1117, 
Paris, France. Electronic address: olivier.disson@pasteur.fr.
(2)Institut Pasteur, Biology of Infection Unit, Paris, France; Inserm U1117, 
Paris, France; Institut Pasteur, French National Reference Center and World 
Health Organization Collaborating Center for Listeria, Paris, France.
(3)Institut Pasteur, Biology of Infection Unit, Paris, France; Inserm U1117, 
Paris, France; Institut Pasteur, French National Reference Center and World 
Health Organization Collaborating Center for Listeria, Paris, France; Université 
de Paris, Service des Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales, Hôpital Universitaire 
Necker-Enfants Malades, Institut Imagine, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Paris, France. Electronic address: marc.lecuit@pasteur.fr.

Listeria monocytogenes is a foodborne pathogen responsible for listeriosis, an 
infection that can manifest in humans as bacteremia, meningoencephalitis in 
immunocompromised patients and the elderly, and fetal-placental infection in 
pregnant women. Reference strains from this facultative intracellular bacterium 
have been instrumental in the investigation of basic mechanisms in microbiology, 
immunology, and cell biology. The integration of bacterial population genomics 
with environmental, epidemiological, and clinical data allowed the uncovering of 
new factors involved in the virulence of L. monocytogenes and its adaptation to 
different environments. This review illustrates how these investigations have 
led to a better understanding of the bacterium's virulence and the driving 
forces that shaped it.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.01.008
PMID: 33583696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests There are no interests 
to declare.