---
reference_id: "PMID:38282752"
title: Targeting FGFR3 signaling and drug repurposing for the treatment of SLC26A2-related chondrodysplasia in mouse model.
authors:
- Li P
- Wang D
- Lu W
- He X
- Hu J
- Yun H
- Zhao C
- Yang L
- Jie Q
- Luo Z
journal: J Orthop Translat
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jot.2023.09.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting FGFR3 signaling and drug repurposing for the treatment of SLC26A2-related chondrodysplasia in mouse model.
**Authors:** Li P, Wang D, Lu W, He X, Hu J, Yun H, Zhao C, Yang L, Jie Q, Luo Z
**Journal:** J Orthop Translat (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jot.2023.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jot.2023.09.003)

## Content

1. J Orthop Translat. 2024 Jan 6;44:88-101. doi: 10.1016/j.jot.2023.09.003. 
eCollection 2024 Jan.

Targeting FGFR3 signaling and drug repurposing for the treatment of 
SLC26A2-related chondrodysplasia in mouse model.

Li P(1)(2), Wang D(1)(3), Lu W(1), He X(3), Hu J(4), Yun H(1), Zhao C(1), Yang 
L(1)(2), Jie Q(5), Luo Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Orthopedic Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Medical Research Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an, 
China.
(3)Department of Medicine Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Analysis, School of 
Pharmacy, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(4)Department of Biology, Northwestern University, Xi'an, China.
(5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, HongHui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, College of Medicine, Xi'an, China.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in Slc26a2 cause a spectrum of autosomal-recessive 
chondrodysplasia with a significant and negligible influence on the quality of 
life. It has been reported that Slc26a2 deficiency triggers the ATF6 branch of 
the UPR, which may, in turn, activate the negative regulator of the FGFR3 
signaling pathway. However, the correlation between the deletion of Slc26a2 and 
the augmentation of downstream phosphorylation of FGFR3 has not been 
investigated in vivo.
METHODS: First, we constructed Slc26a2 and Fgfr3 double knockout mouse lines and 
observed gross views of the born mice and histological staining of the tibial 
growth plates. The second approach was to construct tamoxifen-inducible Cre-ERT2 
mouse models to replicate SLC26A2-related non-lethal dysplastic conditions. 
Pharmacological intervention was performed by administering the FGFR3 inhibitor 
NVP-BGJ398. The effect of NVP-BGJ398 on chondrocytes was assessed by Alcian blue 
staining, proliferation, apoptosis, and chondrocyte-specific markers and then 
verified by western blotting for variations in the downstream markers of FGFR3. 
The growth process was detected using X-rays, micro-CT examination, 
histomorphometry staining of growth plates, and immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Genetic ablation of Fgfr3 in embryonic Slc26a2-deficient chondrocytes 
slightly attenuated chondrodysplasia. Subsequently, in the constructed mild 
dysplasia model, we found that postnatal intervention with Fgfr3 gene in 
Slc26a2-deficient chondrocytes partially alleviated chondrodysplasia. In 
chondrocyte assays, NVP-BGJ398 suppressed the defective phenotype of 
Slc26a2-deficient chondrocytes and restored the phosphorylation downstream of 
FGFR3 in a concentration-dependent manner. In addition, in vivo experiments 
showed significant alleviation of impaired chondrocyte differentiation, and 
micro-CT analysis showed a clear improvement in trabecular bone 
microarchitectural parameters.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggested that inhibition of FGFR3 signaling pathway 
overactivation and NVP-BGJ398 has promising therapeutic implications for the 
development of SLC26A2-related skeletal diseases in humans.
THE TRANSLATIONAL POTENTIAL OF THIS ARTICLE: Our data provide genetic and 
pharmacological evidence that targeting FGFR3 signaling via NVP-BGJ398 could be 
a route for the treatment of SLC26A2-associated skeletal disorders, which 
promisingly advances translational applications and therapeutic development.

© 2023 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Chinese Speaking Orthopaedic 
Society.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jot.2023.09.003
PMCID: PMC10818158
PMID: 38282752

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interests to report, and 
all authors have conformed to all the editorial policies of Journal of 
Orthopaedic Translation.