---
reference_id: "PMID:24706027"
title: Ketone body metabolism and its defects.
authors:
- Fukao T
- Mitchell G
- Sass JO
- Hori T
- Orii K
- Aoyama Y
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-014-9704-9
keywords:
- "Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Acidosis/genetics, metabolism"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Coenzyme A-Transferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- "Ketone Bodies/biosynthesis, metabolism"
- Ketosis/etiology
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ketone body metabolism and its defects.
**Authors:** Fukao T, Mitchell G, Sass JO, Hori T, Orii K, Aoyama Y
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-014-9704-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-014-9704-9)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2014 Jul;37(4):541-51. doi: 10.1007/s10545-014-9704-9.
Epub  2014 Apr 8.

Ketone body metabolism and its defects.

Fukao T(1), Mitchell G, Sass JO, Hori T, Orii K, Aoyama Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, 1-1
Yanagido, Gifu, 501-1194, Japan, toshi-gif@umin.net.

Acetoacetate (AcAc) and 3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB), the two main ketone bodies of
humans, are important vectors of energy transport from the liver to extrahepatic
tissues, especially during fasting, when glucose supply is low. Blood total
ketone body (TKB) levels should be evaluated in the context of clinical history,
such as fasting time and ketogenic stresses. Blood TKB should also be evaluated
in parallel with blood glucose and free fatty acids (FFA). The FFA/TKB ratio is
especially useful for evaluation of ketone body metabolism. Defects in
ketogenesis include mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase (mHS) deficiency and HMG-CoA
lyase (HL) deficiency. mHS deficiency should be considered in non-ketotic
hypoglycemia if a fatty acid beta-oxidation defect is suspected, but cannot be
confirmed. Patients with HL deficiency can develop hypoglycemic crises and
neurological symptoms even in adolescents and adults. Succinyl-CoA-3-oxoacid CoA
transferase (SCOT) deficiency and beta-ketothiolase (T2) deficiency are two
defects in ketolysis. Permanent ketosis is pathognomonic for SCOT deficiency.
However, patients with "mild" SCOT mutations may have nonketotic periods.
T2-deficient patients with "mild" mutations may have normal blood acylcarnitine
profiles even in ketoacidotic crises. T2 deficient patients cannot be detected
in a reliable manner by newborn screening using acylcarnitines. We review recent
data on clinical presentation, metabolite profiles and the course of these
diseases in adults, including in pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-014-9704-9
PMID: 24706027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
