---
reference_id: "PMID:24318488"
title: "An unusual case of transient neonatal pustular melanosis: a diagnostic puzzle."
authors:
- Brazzelli V
- Grasso V
- Croci G
- Figar T
- Borroni G
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-013-2227-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An unusual case of transient neonatal pustular melanosis: a diagnostic puzzle.
**Authors:** Brazzelli V, Grasso V, Croci G, Figar T, Borroni G
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-013-2227-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-013-2227-9)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2014 Dec;173(12):1655-8. doi: 10.1007/s00431-013-2227-9. Epub 
2013 Dec 7.

An unusual case of transient neonatal pustular melanosis: a diagnostic puzzle.

Brazzelli V(1), Grasso V, Croci G, Figar T, Borroni G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical-Surgical, Diagnostic and Paediatric Sciences, 
Institute of Dermatology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, University of 
Pavia, Pavia, Italy, vbrazzelli@libero.it.

A newborn's skin may exhibit a variety of changes during the first weeks of 
life, and rashes are extremely common in the neonatal period, representing a 
significant source of parental concern. In particular, a variety of skin 
eruptions can present as pustules. Most of them are innocuous and self-limiting, 
while others can be the manifestation of an infectious disease or even 
indicative of serious underlying disorders. Transient neonatal pustular 
melanosis is an uncommon vesiculopustular rash characterized by small pustules 
on a non-erythematous base, noted at birth or during the first day of life, 
without systemic symptoms. The lesions rupture spontaneously, leaving 
hyperpigmented macules that usually fade within few weeks. Clinical recognition 
of this disease can help physicians avoid unnecessary diagnostic testing and 
treatment for infectious etiologies because no specific therapy is recommended. 
The clinical aspect and time of onset are generally sufficient to make the 
correct diagnosis. Nevertheless, peculiar clinical presentations may require 
additional work-up to rule out life-threatening conditions, and dermatological 
consultation and histological examination are required for the final diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: We report an exceedingly unusual presentation of transient neonatal 
pustular melanosis, suggesting the importance of a systematic diagnostic 
approach to allow a confident recognition of this benign condition.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-013-2227-9
PMID: 24318488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]