---
reference_id: "PMID:15690372"
title: Ocular phenotypes of three genetic variants of Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Héon E
- Westall C
- Carmi R
- Elbedour K
- Panton C
- Mackeen L
- Stone EM
- Sheffield VC
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30466
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular phenotypes of three genetic variants of Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Héon E, Westall C, Carmi R, Elbedour K, Panton C, Mackeen L, Stone EM, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30466](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30466)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jan 30;132A(3):283-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30466.

Ocular phenotypes of three genetic variants of Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Héon E(1), Westall C, Carmi R, Elbedour K, Panton C, Mackeen L, Stone EM, 
Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. eheon@attglobal.net

Bardet-Biedl syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous multisystem disorder that 
causes severe visual impairment. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP), hypogonadism, digit 
and renal anomalies, obesity, and a variable degree of mental retardation 
characterize the disorder. Eight different loci have been identified on 
2q31(BBS5), 3p13 (BBS3), 4q27 (BBS7), 11q13 (BBS1), 14q32 (BBS8), 15q22.3 
(BBS4), 16q21 (BBS2), and 20p12 (BBS6). The ocular manifestations of 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome include an early and severe rod-cone dystrophy causing 
legal blindness in the second decade. Features of systemic phenotypic 
variability were proposed to distinguish patients mapped to either the BBS2, 
BBS3, or BBS4 loci but no phenotype-genotype correlation has been established 
for the ocular phenotype. We studied the three original families used for the 
identification of BBS2, BBS3, and BBS4 loci to define the ocular phenotypes of 
patients (n = 34) and obligate carriers (n = 32) using clinical examination and 
electroretinography (ERG). RP was severe and early in all cases. Myopia was 
associated with BBS3 and BBS4, but not BBS2. One patient with Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome also had iris and chorioretinal colobomata, features suggestive of 
Biemond syndrome.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30466
PMID: 15690372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]