---
reference_id: "PMID:26166264"
title: Effect of Sativex on spasticity-associated symptoms in patients with multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Meuth SG
- Vila C
- Dechant KL
journal: Expert Rev Neurother
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1586/14737175.2015.1067607
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Sativex on spasticity-associated symptoms in patients with multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Meuth SG, Vila C, Dechant KL
**Journal:** Expert Rev Neurother (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1586/14737175.2015.1067607](https://doi.org/10.1586/14737175.2015.1067607)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2015;15(8):909-18. doi: 10.1586/14737175.2015.1067607. 
Epub 2015 Jul 11.

Effect of Sativex on spasticity-associated symptoms in patients with multiple 
sclerosis.

Meuth SG(1), Vila C, Dechant KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Münster, Albert-Schweitzer Campus 1, 
48149 Münster, Germany.

Individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS) spasticity may experience a range of 
symptoms, such as bladder dysfunction, pain, impaired sleep quality and mobility 
restrictions that worsen as spasticity severity increases. In this review, the 
effects of Sativex(®) oromucosal spray on symptoms and functional impairment 
associated with MS-related spasticity were examined. Across Sativex studies, 
there was a clear trend for improvement in spasticity-associated symptoms that 
was more pronounced and sustained over time in Sativex responders. Meaningful 
symptomatic improvement was achieved within the recommended dosage limit of ≤12 
sprays per day. In appropriate patients, Sativex has the potential to minimize 
the consequences of spasticity-related symptoms on quality of life and reduce 
the economic burden on healthcare systems.

DOI: 10.1586/14737175.2015.1067607
PMID: 26166264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]