---
reference_id: "PMID:25007099"
title: "Crystal structure of Schistosoma mansoni arginase, a potential drug target for the treatment of schistosomiasis."
authors:
- Hai Y
- Edwards JE
- Van Zandt MC
- Hoffmann KF
- Christianson DW
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1021/bi5004519
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arginase/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Drug Delivery Systems
- "Enzyme Inhibitors/chemistry, therapeutic use"
- "Helminth Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry"
- Humans
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Schistosoma mansoni/enzymology, genetics"
- "Schistosomiasis mansoni/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics"
- "Structural Homology, Protein"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Crystal structure of Schistosoma mansoni arginase, a potential drug target for the treatment of schistosomiasis.
**Authors:** Hai Y, Edwards JE, Van Zandt MC, Hoffmann KF, Christianson DW
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi5004519](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi5004519)

## Content

1. Biochemistry. 2014 Jul 22;53(28):4671-84. doi: 10.1021/bi5004519. Epub 2014
Jul  9.

Crystal structure of Schistosoma mansoni arginase, a potential drug target for
the treatment of schistosomiasis.

Hai Y(1), Edwards JE, Van Zandt MC, Hoffmann KF, Christianson DW.

Author information:
(1)Roy and Diana Vagelos Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6323, United States.

The X-ray crystal structure of arginase from Schistosoma mansoni (SmARG) and the
structures of its complexes with several amino acid inhibitors have been
determined at atomic resolution. SmARG is a binuclear manganese metalloenzyme
that catalyzes the hydrolysis of l-arginine to form l-ornithine and urea, and
this enzyme is upregulated in all forms of the parasite that interact with the
human host. Current hypotheses suggest that parasitic arginases could play a
role in host immune evasion by depleting pools of substrate l-arginine that
would otherwise be utilized for NO biosynthesis and NO-dependent processes in
the immune response. Although the amino acid sequence of SmARG is only 42%
identical with that of human arginase I, residues important for substrate
binding and catalysis are strictly conserved. In general, classical amino acid
inhibitors such as 2(S)-amino-6-boronohexanoic acid (ABH) tend to bind more
weakly to SmARG than to human arginase I despite identical inhibitor binding
modes in each enzyme active site. The identification of a patch on the enzyme
surface capable of accommodating the additional Cα substitutent of an
α,α-disubstituted amino acid inhibitor suggests that such inhibitors could
exhibit higher affinity and biological activity. The structures of SmARG
complexed with two different α,α-disubstituted derivatives of ABH are presented
and provide a proof of concept for this approach in the enhancement of
enzyme-inhibitor affinity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi5004519
PMCID: PMC4138072
PMID: 25007099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Schistosomiasis, also known
as bilharzia or snail fever, is a neglected tropical disease caused
by parasitic schistosomes (also known as blood flukes) indigenous
to tropical and subtropical regions of the developing world.1−4Biomphalaria freshwater snails serve as intermediate
hosts for Schistosoma mansoni and release infectious
larvae (cercariae), which burrow into human skin upon contact with
contaminated water sources. After definitive host penetration, the
parasite transforms into a schistosomulum that enters the circulation
and migrates to the hepatic portal and mesenteric veins surrounding
the liver. Here, schistosomula develop into sexually mature adults
(male and female forms) that can evade immunity and thrive for many
years.5−7 Intravascular adult females produce hundreds of eggs
daily during this time, which either cross the intestinal lumen to
continue the lifecycle or circulate to the liver where they induce
a robust host immunological response.5 Chronic
inflammation of the liver ultimately results, leading to portal vein
hypertension and severe hepatic fibrosis. Although schistosomiasis
is usually treated effectively with praziquantel, currently believed
to target schistosomal voltage-gated Ca2+ channels,8 the continuous threat of praziquantel-resistant
schistosomes portends an urgent need for alternative drug targets.9−12

The binuclear manganese metalloenzyme arginase may comprise
just
such an alternative. Although arginase activity was first discovered
in S. mansoni 50 years ago13 and implicated in l-proline biosynthesis,14S. mansoni arginase (SmARG) was not enzymatically
characterized until recently.15 The full-length
mRNA for SmARG encodes a 364-residue protein with an amino acid sequence
that is 42 and 40% identical with those of human arginases I and II,
respectively, which catalyze the hydrolysis of l-arginine
to yield l-ornithine and urea (Figure 1a).16,17 All residues important for catalysis by
the human isozymes, including two histidine and four aspartate ligands
to the binuclear manganese cluster, are strictly conserved in SmARG.
Interestingly, SmARG exhibits a relatively high turnover number of
537 s–1, approximately 2-fold higher than that measured
for human arginase II and 20% higher than that reported for human
arginase I.18,19 Using a homology model of SmARG
based on the crystal structure of human arginase I,16 Fitzpatrick and colleagues predicted the formation of a
disulfide linkage between proximal residues C291 and C332 in the active
site; the enzyme activity is significantly reduced in the presence
of reducing agents, consistent with the potential functional relevance
of a disulfide linkage.15

(a) Reaction catalyzed
by arginase. (b) Arginase inhibitors 2(S)-amino-6-boronohexanoic
acid (ABH), S-(boronoethyl)-l-cysteine (BEC), N-hydroxy-l-arginine (NOHA), nor-N-hydroxy-l-arginine (nor-NOHA), (R)-2-amino-6-borono-2-[2-(piperidin-1-yl)ethyl]hexanoic
acid (ABHPE), and (R)-2-amino-6-borono-2-[1-(3,4-dichlorobenzyl)piperidin-4-yl]hexanoic
acid (ABHDP). Although ABHDP is shown as the
single stereoisomer that binds to SmARG, the racemic mixture was utilized
for the experiments described herein.

SmARG is expressed in all life stages of the parasite that
interact
with the human host15 and is hypothesized
to play a role in immune evasion. By depleting the l-arginine
substrate otherwise utilized for nitric oxide (NO) biosynthesis, SmARG
can attenuate the anti-schistosomula NO-mediated immune response of
classically activated macrophages.20 A
similar strategy of arginase-facilitated immune evasion is exploited
by Leishmania parasites in leishmaniasis,21−23Helicobacter pylori in peptic ulcer disease,24,25 and certain cancer tumor cells.26−29 Accordingly, inhibition of SmARG
might render the parasite more susceptible to the immune response.
If so, then SmARG may comprise a new target for structure-based drug
design in the treatment of schistosomiasis.15

As the first step in exploring the “druggability”
of SmARG, we now report the X-ray crystal structures of the unliganded
enzyme and its complexes with selected inhibitors (Figure 1b), including the classical boronic acid amino acid
inhibitors 2(S)-amino-6-boronohexanoic acid (ABH)30 and S-(boronoethyl)-l-cysteine (BEC).31 Additionally, we report
crystal structures of SmARG complexes with the N-hydroxyguanidinium
amino acids N-hydroxy-l-arginine (NOHA)32 and nor-N-hydroxy-l-arginine (nor-NOHA),33 as well as the
simple amino acids l-ornithine (the catalytic product), l-lysine, and l-valine. Finally, to advance beyond
classical amino acid inhibitor designs, we report the crystal structures
of SmARG complexed with two novel α,α-disubstituted amino
acid derivatives of ABH: (R)-2-amino-6-borono-2-[2-(piperidin-1-yl)ethyl]hexanoic
acid (ABHPE)34 and (R)-2-amino-6-borono-2-[1-(3,4-dichlorobenzyl)piperidin-4-yl]hexanoic
acid (ABHDP).35 The additional
α-substituents of ABHPE and ABHDP make
new interactions that enhance enzyme–inhibitor affinity. These
studies illuminate structure–function relationships relevant
to the understanding of catalysis by SmARG and provide a foundation
for exploring the design of next-generation inhibitors targeting a
distinctive new region of the protein surface.

Manganese(II) chloride tetrahydrate (≥99%), l-arginine,
and α-isonitrosopropiophenone were purchased
from Sigma. Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (98%, TCEP)
was purchased from Gold Biotechnology. ABH was purchased from Enzo
Life Sciences (Farmingdale, NY). NOHA, nor-NOHA, and BEC were purchased
from Cayman Chemical Co. (Ann Arbor, MI). ABHPE and ABHDP were the generous gifts of New England Discovery Partners.
A 30% (w/v) PEG 20000 solution, a 50% (w/v) PEG 3350 solution, a 50%
(w/v) PEG 10000 solution, and a 100% Tacsimate (pH 7.0) solution were
purchased from Hampton Research. All other chemicals were purchased
from Fisher Scientific.

A silent mutation
was introduced into the gene encoding wild-type SmARG prepared in
a TOPO vector to eliminate a native NdeI site by using the QuickChange
method (Stratagene) with the following oligonucleotide primers [sense,
5′-GGT AAT ATG AGT CGG GCG GCA CAC ATG
CAG CAG ACA AAA CAA TAA TCG-3′; antisense, 5′-CGA TTA
TTG TTT TGT CTG CAT GTG TGC CGC CCG ACT CAT
AAT ACC-3′ (underlined bases indicate the silent mutation)].
The coding sequence for SmARG was then amplified by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) using oligonucleotide primers [sense, 5′-GCA
GCA CATATG ATG TTG
AAA TCA GTC GCG ACC-3′; antisense, 5′-GCA GCA CTCGAG TTA TTG TTT TGT CTG CAT
GTG TGC-3′ (underlined bases represent the restriction enzyme
recognition sites)]. The PCR product was subcloned into NdeI and XhoI
sites of the pET-28a vector (Novagen Inc.), yielding an N-terminal
hexahistidine tag, a thrombin cleavage site, and a linker (MGSSHHHHHHSSGLVPRGSHM).
All DNA constructs were verified by DNA sequencing at the Perelman
School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania.

SmARG
was overexpressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cells.
Transformed cell cultures were grown in Lysogeny-Broth (LB) medium
supplemented with 50 μg/L kanamycin. Expression was induced
by 1 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG)
(Carbosynth) for 16 h at 20 °C when the OD600 reached
0.6–0.7. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 6000g for 10 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in buffer
A [50 mM K2HPO4 (pH 8.0), 300 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v)
glycerol, and 1 mM TCEP]. Cells were lysed by sonication on ice using
a Sonifer 450 (Branson), and the cell lysate was clarified by centrifugation
at 26895g for 1 h. Proteins were isolated from lysate
by affinity chromatography with a Talon column (Clontech Laboratories,
Mountain View, CA). After being washed with 10 column volumes of 20
mM imidazole in buffer A, SmARG was eluted with a 200 mL gradient
from 20 to 300 mM imidazole. Pooled fractions were concentrated and
applied to a Superdex 200 preparative grade 26/60 size exclusion column
(GE Healthcare) with buffer B [50 mM bicine (pH 8.5) and 100 μM
MnCl2]. The estimated purity of SmARG was >95% on the
basis
of sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Although the N-terminal hexahistidine tag and linker segment contained
a thrombin cleavage site, the recombinant enzyme was not treated with
thrombin and hence contained a full-length N-terminus. The enzyme
was concentrated to 40 mg/mL, flash-frozen with liquid nitrogen, and
stored at −80 °C.

The C291A and C332A mutants of
SmARG were prepared by PCR mutagenesis
with the following primers (underlined bases indicate mutated codons):
C291A, 5′-GAA GGT TTG AGA ATA GCT GAA
GAA GTT TC-3′ (sense) and 5′-GAA ACT TCT TCAGCT ATT CTC AAA CCT TC-3′
(antisense); C332A, 5′-CAT ATT TTA AGA GCA GCT TTA GGC CAT TGT CG-3′ (sense) and 5′-CGA CAA TGG CCT
AAAGCT GCT CTT AAA
ATA TG-3′ (antisense). Each mutant was purified as described
above for the wild-type enzyme.

Arginase activity was assayed by a
colorimetric assay developed by Archibald with slight modifications.36 Briefly, 0.5–50 mM l-arginine
(pH 8.5) was added to a solution of 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-propanesulfonic
acid (EPPS) (pH 8.5) and 100 μM MnCl2, and the reaction
was initiated by adding 1 μM SmARG in a total volume of 200
μL at 21 °C. The reaction was terminated after 1 min using
30 μL of a 3:1 (v/v) concentrated acid/dye solution {H2SO4/H3PO4/H2O [1:3:1
(v/v/v)] mixture with 245 mM α-isonitrosopropiophenone in ethanol}.
Samples were heated to 90 °C for 1 h in a thermocycler to ensure
complete reaction of urea with the dye. To quantify urea formation,
the absorbance of each sample was assessed at a λ of 550 nm
using a Tecan Infinite M1000 Pro Microplate Reader. Kinetic parameters
were determined with Graphpad Prism (2008). The Ki values for ABH and NOHA were calculated using the modified
Michaelis–Menten equation for competitive inhibition. All measurements
were performed in triplicate.

A MicroCal iTC200 calorimeter (GE Healthcare)
was used to measure the dissociation
constants of SmARG–inhibitor complexes using previously reported
procedures.16,31 Briefly, SmARG was exhaustively
dialyzed against 50 mM Bicine (pH 8.5), 100 μM MnCl2, and 1.0 mM TCEP [5% (v/v) DMSO was included in the dialysis buffer
when SmARG was titrated with ABHPE and ABHDP]. The inhibitor (ABH, 0.547 mM; NOHA, 1.097 mM; nor-NOHA, 0.443
mM; ABHPE, 0.410 mM; ABHDP, 0.436 mM) was dissolved
in dialysis buffer. The inhibitor was titrated into the sample cell
(0.2 mL) overfilled with SmARG (typically 20–40 μM) with
sequential injections. An initial 0.2 μL injection was not used
in the data analysis. Data analysis was performed using Origin version
7.0. For SmARG complexes with nor-NOHA, ABH, ABHPE, and
ABHDP, data were best fit assuming a single binding site.
For the SmARG–NOHA complex, data were best fit with the equation
describing two sets of independent sites, i.e., a model in which binding
to one site (association constant K1)
has a higher affinity than binding to the second site (association
constant K2):where Q is the heat evolved
during the course of the reaction, [E]t is the total enzyme
concentration, V is the cell volume, n1 is the number of inhibitor equivalents required to saturate
the first binding site, n2 is the number
of equivalents to saturate the second site, ΔH1 and ΔH2 are the enthalpies
per mole of ligand of binding to the first and second sites, respectively,
and [L] is the inhibitor concentration. Note that dissociation constants Kd1 = 1/K1 and Kd2 = 1/K2.

Unliganded SmARG crystals were prepared
by the sitting drop vapor diffusion method at 4 °C. Typically,
a 4 μL drop of a protein solution [10 mg/mL SmARG, 50 mM bicine
(pH 8.5), and 100 μM MnCl2] was mixed with a 4 μL
drop of a precipitant solution [12% (w/v) PEG 20000 and 0.1 M imidazole
(pH 7.0)] and equilibrated against a 500 μL reservoir of a precipitant
solution. Cubic crystals first appeared after 2 days and grew to maximal
size in 3 days. To obtain crystals of the SmARG–l-ornithine,
SmARG–l-valine, and SmARG–l-lysine
complexes, unliganded SmARG crystals were soaked with each ligand
(50 mM) in a 20 μL drop of a soaking solution [14% PEG 20000
and 0.1 M imidazole (pH 7.0)] equilibrated against a 500 μL
reservoir of a soaking solution for 24 h. To cocrystallize SmARG with
the higher-affinity arginase inhibitors ABH, BEC, NOHA, and nor-NOHA,
as well as the α,α-disubstituted amino acid inhibitors
ABHPE and ABHDP, SmARG was incubated with each
inhibitor (10 mM) on ice for 1 h before the crystallization experiment.
Typically, a 1 μL drop of protein solution (9 mg/mL SmARG, 45
mM bicine, 90 μM MnCl2, and 10 mM inhibitor) was
added to a 1 μL drop of a precipitant solution [4% (v/v) Tacsimate
(pH 7.0) and 12% (w/v) PEG 3350 for SmARG–ABH and SmARG–BEC
complexes; 0.2 M potassium sodium tartrate tetrahydrate, 0.1 M Bis-Tris
(pH 6.5), and 10% (w/v) PEG 10000 for the SmARG–NOHA complex;
0.2 M l-proline, 0.1 M HEPES (pH 7.5), and 10% (w/v) PEG
3350 for the SmARG–norNOHA complex; 0.1 M HEPES (pH 7.4) and
12% (w/v) PEG 3350 for the SmARG–ABHPE complex;
and 0.15 M CsCl and 13% (w/v) PEG 3350 for the SmARG–ABHDP complex] and equilibrated against a 100 μL reservoir
of a precipitant solution. Cubic crystals appeared overnight and grew
to maximal size in 3 days. All crystals were flash-cooled in liquid
nitrogen after being transferred to a cryoprotectant solution consisting
of mother liquor supplemented with 15–20% (v/v) glycerol.

X-ray diffraction data were collected on beamline X29 at the National
Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton,
NY). Diffraction data were integrated and scaled with HKL2000.37 Data collection and reduction statistics are
listed in Table 1. All crystals belonged to
space group P213 with four molecules in
the asymmetric unit, each belonging to a separate SmARG trimer in
the unit cell. The structure of unliganded SmARG was determined by
molecular replacement using PHASER38 as
implemented in the CCP4 suite of programs39 with the atomic coordinates of unliganded human arginase I (PDB
entry 2ZAV)40 utilized as a search probe for rotation and
translation function calculations. Iterative cycles of refinement
and model building were performed using PHENIX and COOT, respectively.41,42 The structures of SmARG–inhibitor complexes were determined
thereafter by molecular replacement using the atomic coordinates of
unliganded SmARG as a search probe. Solvent molecules and inhibitors
were added in the final stages of refinement for each structure. The
quality of each final model was verified with PROCHECK, and the secondary
structure was defined with DSSP.43,44 Disordered
segments excluded from the final models include the N-terminal hexahistidine
tag and its linker segment, residues M1–P17, surface loop K111–S119,
and T362–Q364 at the C-terminus. Refinement statistics are
listed in Table 1. Protein structure figures
were prepared with PyMol (http://www.pymol.org) and PhotoshopCS.

Values in parentheses refer to data
for the highest-resolution shell.

Rsym = ∑h∑i|I(h)i – ⟨I(h)⟩|/∑h∑iI(h)i, where I(h) is the intensity of reflection h, ∑h is the sum over
all reflections, and ∑i is the
sum over i measurements of reflection h.

Rpim = ∑(1/n – 1)1/2|I – ⟨I⟩|/∑I, where n is the number of observations
(redundancy) and ⟨I⟩ is the average
intensity calculated from replicate data.

Rwork = ∑||Fo| – |Fc||/∑|Fo| for reflections
contained in the working set. Rfree =
∑||Fo| – |Fc||/∑|Fo| for reflections
contained in the test set held aside during refinement. |Fo| and |Fc| are the observed
and calculated structure factor amplitudes, respectively.

Per asymmetric unit.

Data
from the 37632-element S. mansoni long-oligonucleotide
DNA microarray studies of
Fitzpatrick and colleagues45 were interrogated
to find the expression profile of SmARG across 14 different life cycle
stages. Raw and normalized fluorescence intensity values are available
via Array Express under experimental accession number E-MEXP-2094.

Mechanically transformed S. mansoni schistosomula were treated with the arginase
inhibitors ABH (Enzo Life Sciences), NOHA (Sigma), and nor-NOHA (Enzo
Life Sciences) at a final concentration of 100 μM and incubated
for 24 h at 37 °C in a humidified environment containing 5% CO2. The viability of S. mansoni schistosomula
subsequent to treatment was determined using the helminth fluorescence
bioassay as previously described.46 All
assays were performed in duplicate.

The transcription profile
of SmARG across 14 different S. mansoni life cycle
stages (Figure 2) confirms previously published
semiquantitative reverse transcription PCR data showing that SmARG
is maximally expressed in all life stages that interact with the definitive
mammalian host but minimally expressed in life stages that interact
with the intermediate snail host.45 Thus,
the upregulation of SmARG is specific to human infection by S. mansoni. If SmARG plays an important role during human
infection, it could serve as a new target for the treatment of schistosomal
infections.

Expression profile of SmARG across 14 different life cycle stages
of S. mansoni shown following interrogation of the
37632-element DNA microarray. Raw and normalized fluorescence intensity
values are available via Array Express under experimental accession
number E-MEXP-2094. Histograms represent the normalized mean fluorescence
intensity ± the standard deviation of the mean.

Our measurements
show that wild-type SmARG exhibits a turnover number (kcat) of 330 ± 60 s–1 and a KM value of 12 ± 5 mM at pH 8.5 using Archibald’s
colorimetric assay36 to quantify urea production
in steady-state kinetic assays (Table 2). These
values are in reasonable agreement with previously reported values
of 537 s–1 and 17 mM, respectively, for a slightly
different SmARG construct at pH 9.7 containing the remnant of an N-terminal
glutathione S-transferase fusion tag15 instead of the hexahistidine tag and linker utilized herein.
These values are also comparable to those measured for human arginase
I, although the KM values of SmARG are
slightly larger (4–6-fold) than the KM value reported for the human enzyme (Table 2).

This study; determined by an enzyme
assay at pH 8.5.

From ref (15); determined by an enzyme
assay at pH 9.7.

From ref (63); determined by an enzyme
assay at pH 8.5.

From ref (64); determined by an enzyme
assay at pH 9.5.

From ref (16); Kd determined at
pH 8.5 by isothermal titration calorimetry.

From ref (47); Kd determined at
pH 8.5 by surface plasmon resonance.

From ref (47); Kd determined at
pH 8.5 by surface plasmon resonance; however, isothermal titration
calorimetry yielded a Kd of ∼50
nM.

Steady-state kinetic
analysis yields an inhibition constant (Ki) of 1.8 ± 0.6 μM for the SmARG–ABH
complex, which is consistent with the ITC measurement of 1.3 ±
0.2 μM for the dissociation constant (Kd) of this complex (Figure S1 of the Supporting
Information). Interestingly, ITC measurements indicate 260-fold
tighter binding of ABH to human arginase I, but the inhibitory potencies
of ABH against SmARG and human arginase I are comparable (Table 2). The origin of the difference between Ki and Kd values
is unknown.

ITC measurements indicate that Kd =
0.36 ± 0.08 μM for the SmARG–nor-NOHA complex (Figure
S1 of the Supporting Information). The
binding of NOHA is slightly more complex, and ITC data are best fit
by a model in which the binding affinity for the first site is higher
(Kd = 0.33 ± 0.09 μM) than
the binding affinity for the second site (Kd = 13 ± 4 μM). The location of the weaker binding site
is unknown, because only the higher-affinity binding site is occupied
in the crystal structure of the SmARG–NOHA complex (vide infra). Taken together, these data suggest that the N-hydroxyguanidinium moiety of nor-NOHA is ∼4-fold
more effective as an inhibitor functional group targeting metal ion
coordination than the tetrahedral boronate anion of ABH in binding
to SmARG. This contrasts with human arginase I, which is preferentially
inhibited (at least 10-fold) by ABH compared with nor-NOHA.16,47 Possibly, these selectivity differences (summarized in Table 2) could be exploited in developing inhibitors that
preferentially block the parasitic enzyme.

Finally, ITC measurements
indicate Kd values of 0.26 ± 0.02
and 0.54 ± 0.08 μM for SmARG–ABHPE and
−ABHDP complexes, respectively (Figure
S1 of the Supporting Information). Notably,
the additional α-substituent of these α,α-disubstituted
amino acid inhibitors provides 2–5-fold enhancement of the
affinity compared with that of the parent SmARG–ABH complex.

The overall fold of the
SmARG monomer is generally similar to that of unliganded human aginase
I (PDB entry 2ZAV)40 with an rmsd of 1.1 Å for 271
Cα atoms, which is consistent with the modest amino acid sequence
identity of 42% between SmARG and human arginase I. SmARG oligomerizes
to form a homotrimer (Figure 3a) with a total
buried surface area of 10980 Å2 (31% of the total
solvent-accessible surface area) as determined by PISA.48 As indicated by the sequence alignment with
human arginase I, SmARG contains a 20-residue extension at the N-terminus
and a 13-residue extension at the C-terminus, and a 12-residue insertion
in the loop connecting α-helix B and β-strand 3.15 The N-terminal extension (17 residues with the
hexahistidine tag and its linker segment) and the inserted loop lack
clearly defined electron density and are presumed to be disordered.
Most of the C-terminal extension is fully ordered and contains two
additional short α-helices previously unobserved in the crystal
structures of arginases from other species. The S-shaped C-terminus
is suggested to be important for oligomerization and mediates 54%
of the intermonomer contact surface area in rat arginase I,49 although mutagenesis studies suggest that mutations
in the C-terminus destabilize but do not necessarily prevent the trimerization
of rat arginase I or human arginase I.50−52 The unusually long C-terminal
tail of SmARG is similarly responsible for the majority of subunit–subunit
interactions; the 13-residue extension alone contributes ∼3900
Å2 of total buried surface area (36% of the total
buried surface area) to trimer assembly.

(a) Structure of the
SmARG homotrimer. α-Helices are colored
salmon, β-strands blue, and Mn2+ ions purple. The
elongated S-shaped C-terminus is colored magenta, and the disordered
K111–S119 loop appears as a yellow dotted line. (b) Simulated
annealing omit map contoured at 4.0σ of the metal-bound solvent
molecules in unliganded SmARG. Atoms are color-coded as follows: white
for C, blue for N, red for O, purple spheres for Mn2+ ions,
and red spheres for solvent molecules. Metal coordination and hydrogen
bond interactions are represented by red and green dashed lines, respectively.
(c) Superposition of unliganded SmARG (color-coded as in panel b,
with black residue labels) and human arginase I (PDB entry 2ZAV; yellow for C, blue
for N, red for O, pink spheres for Mn2+ ions, and yellow
spheres for solvent molecules with red residue labels).

The structure of the binuclear manganese cluster
(Figure 3b) is essentially identical to that
observed in
unliganded arginases from other species, such as human arginase I
(Figure 3c). Each Mn2+ ion is coordinated
in octahedral or distorted octahedral fashion by two nonprotein ligands
and conserved metal binding residues. The metal-bridging nonprotein
ligand is expected to be a hydroxide ion in the catalytically active
state, and the Mn2+A-bound nonprotein ligand
is interpreted as a water molecule. This is similar to the identification
of nonprotein metal ligands in unliganded human arginase I,40Bacillus caldovelox arginase,53 and Leishmania mexicana arginase.54 Most other inner active site residues are conserved
in SmARG, except that T135 in human arginase I is conserved as S165
in SmARG (Figure 3c).

Although Fitzpatrick
and colleagues suggest that the SmARG activity
is dependent on a disulfide bond formed between C291 and C332 on the
basis of homology modeling,15 no disulfide
bond is observed in the crystal structure, even though the Sγ
atoms of C291 and C332 are only 3.5 Å apart and no reducing agents
were included in crystallization buffers (Figure S2a of the Supporting Information). It is clear, however,
that SmARG activity is severely attenuated in the presence of reducing
reagents such as TCEP (Figure S2b of the Supporting
Information). Our modeling studies indicate that side chain
torsion angle χ2 of C291 could be rotated by 54°
to allow the formation of a disulfide bond with C332. The geometry
of this disulfide linkage would be classified as -RHStaple, which
corresponds to the geometry of allosteric disulfide linkages that
regulate protein function by triggering reversible changes in protein
tertiary structure.55 Even so, the side
chain conformations of C291 and C332 would be unfavorable if this
disulfide bond were formed.

To probe the functional importance
of a possible disulfide linkage
between C291 and C332, we prepared the C291A and C332A mutants of
SmARG and measured their steady-state kinetics (Table 2). These mutants are chemically incapable of forming a covalent
linkage between residues 291 and 332; notably, however, these mutants
exhibit significant residual activity (∼30% based on kcat). Catalytic efficiencies (kcat/KM) are compromised 25-fold
for C291A SmARG and only 9-fold for C332A SmARG. Thus, formation of
a disulfide linkage between C291 and C332 is not required for catalysis
but might be required for maximal catalytic function.

The overall
structure of SmARG in each complex with the amino acid
inhibitors l-ornithine, l-valine, and l-lysine is essentially identical to the structure of unliganded SmARG;
the rmsds between liganded and unliganded structures are 0.17 Å
for 322 Cα atoms in the SmARG–l-ornithine complex,
0.17 Å for 319 Cα atoms in the SmARG–l-valine
complex, and 0.30 Å for 316 Cα atoms in the SmARG–l-lysine complex. As is evident in Figure 4, the molecular recognition of the catalytic product l-ornithine,
the product analogue l-lysine, and the weak inhibitor l-valine is dominated by three direct and four water-mediated
hydrogen bonds that selectively accommodate the α-amino and
α-carboxyl groups of an amino acid with l-stereochemistry.
This hydrogen bond network comprises the l-amino acid recognition
motif, as first observed in the rat arginase I–ABH complex.56

Simulated annealing omit maps of amino acids bound in
the active
site of SmARG: (a) l-ornithine, contoured at 3.0σ;
(b) l-valine, contoured at 3.0σ; and (c) l-lysine, contoured at 5.5σ. Atoms are color-coded as follows:
white (protein) or yellow (inhibitor) for C, blue for N, red for O,
green for B, purple spheres for Mn2+ ions, and red spheres
for solvent molecules. Metal coordination and hydrogen bond interactions
are represented by red and green dashed lines, respectively. The α-amino
and α-carboxyl groups of each amino acid make an array of direct
and water-mediated hydrogen bonds with conserved protein residues
D213, E216, N160, S165, S167, N169, and H171. These residues comprise
the l-amino acid recognition motif.

The overall structure of the SmARG–NOHA
complex is essentially identical to that of unliganded SmARG, with
an rmsd of 0.23 Å for 316 Cα atoms. The α-amino and
α-carboxyl groups of NOHA hydrogen bond with the l-amino
acid recognition motif, and the Nη-OH group interacts with the
binuclear manganese cluster (Figure 5a). Intriguingly,
however, the electron density map indicates that the N-hydroxyguanidinium group binds with two alternative conformations.
In the major conformation (refined with 75% occupancy), the Nη-OH
group of NOHA displaces the metal-bridging hydroxide ion and symmetrically
bridges the binuclear manganese cluster with an average Mn2+···O coordination distance of 1.8 Å, and the
Mn2+A–Mn2+B separation
increases from 3.1 to 3.3 Å. The η-NH2 group
of NOHA is oriented toward Mn2+A (but does not
coordinate) and donates a hydrogen bond to E307. This conformation
is similar to that observed in the 2.9 Å resolution crystal structure
of the rat arginase I–NOHA complex (PDB entry 1HQF).57

(a) Simulated annealing omit map (contoured at 3.0σ) of the
inhibitor NOHA that reveals that the hydroxyguanidinium group adopts
two alternate conformations. Atoms are color-coded as in Figure 4. Metal coordination and hydrogen bond interactions
are represented by red and green dashed lines, respectively. Note
that residue D213 adopts two alternate conformations. (b) Simulated
annealing omit map (contoured at 3.0σ) of the inhibitor nor-NOHA.
Atoms are color-coded as in Figure 4. Metal
coordination and hydrogen bond interactions are represented by red
and green dashed lines, respectively.

In the minor conformation (refined with 25% occupancy), the
Nη-OH
group of NOHA displaces the Mn2+A-bound water
molecule with an average Mn2+A···O
coordination distance of 2.0 Å. The metal-bridging hydroxide
ion must also be displaced to accommodate NOHA binding in this conformation,
so both Mn2+A and Mn2+B exhibit square bipyramidal coordination geometry. Two hydrogen bonds
are observed between SmARG and NOHA in its minor conformation: the
Nη-H group of NOHA donates a hydrogen bond to D158, and the
η-NH2 group donates a hydrogen bond to T276. These
interactions are similar to those observed in the 2.04 Å resolution
crystal structure of the human arginase I–NOHA complex (PDB
entry 3LP7)
(Figure S3 of the Supporting Information).47

Finally, the overall structure
of SmARG in its complex with nor-NOHA
is essentially identical to that of unliganded SmARG, with an rmsd
of 0.19 Å for 331 Cα atoms. The amino acid moiety of nor-NOHA
is accommodated by the l-amino acid recognition motif, as
observed for NOHA. However, in contrast with the binding of NOHA,
the N-hydroxyguanidinium group of nor-NOHA binds
with just a single conformation in which the Nζ-OH group displaces
the metal-bridging hydroxide ion and bridges the binuclear manganese
cluster with average MnA2+···O
and MnB2+···O coordination distances
of 1.9 and 2.2 Å, respectively (Figure 5b). The ζ-NH group of nor-NOHA donates a hydrogen bond to D158,
and the ζ-NH2 group is oriented toward Mn2+B (but does not coordinate) and donates a hydrogen bond
to T276.

The crystal structure of the SmARG–ABH
complex reveals that no significant conformational changes are triggered
upon inhibitor binding, and the rmsd is 0.15 Å for 318 Cα
atoms in comparison with the unliganded enzyme. The simulated annealing
omit map in Figure 6 reveals that the boronic
acid group of ABH undergoes nucleophilic attack, presumably by the
metal-bridging hydroxide ion of the native enzyme, to form the tetrahedral
boronate anion, which mimics the tetrahedral intermediate and its
flanking transition states in the arginase reaction.30 The α-carboxylate group and α-amino group of
ABH hydrogen bond with the l-amino acid recognition motif,
as first observed in the crystal structure of the rat arginase I–ABH
complex.56 This structure serves as a starting
point for understanding structure–activity relationships for
α,α-disubstituted ABH derivatives described below.

Simulated annealing
omit map (contoured at 3.0σ) of boronic
acid inhibitor ABH. Atoms are color-coded as in Figure 4. Metal coordination and hydrogen bond interactions are represented
by red and green dashed lines, respectively.

The crystal structure of the SmARG–BEC complex, although
determined at a lower resolution of 2.7 Å, similarly reveals
the binding of the tetrahedral boronate anion and an array of hydrogen
bonds with the α-amino acid moiety (Figure S4 of the Supporting Information). No significant conformational
changes are triggered upon inhibitor binding, and the rmsd is 0.26
Å for 320 Cα atoms in comparison with the unliganded enzyme.
Although fewer water molecules are observed in the active site because
of the modest resolution, the structure of the SmARG–BEC complex
is similar to that first observed in the rat arginase I–BEC
complex.31

The structure of the SmARG–ABH
complex reveals that the Cα-H group of ABH can be substituted
with an additional side chain capable of making additional interactions
on the protein surface. To demonstrate the proof of concept, we have
determined the crystal structures of SmARG complexes with the novel
α,α-disubstituted amino acid inhibitors ABHPE and ABHDP (Figure 1b). The overall
structures of SmARG complexed with ABHPE and ABHDP are essentially identical to the structure of unliganded SmARG,
with rmsds of 0.19 Å for 332 Cα atoms and 0.17 Å for
330 Cα atoms, respectively. Although racemic ABHDP was used in the crystallization experiment with SmARG, the electron
density map clearly shows that the stereoisomer corresponding to l-ABH binds exclusively in the active site. As shown in Figure 7, the boronic acid moiety of each inhibitor undergoes
nucleophilic attack by the metal-bridging hydroxide ion to form a
tetrahedral boronate anion, as observed in the crystal structure of
the parent SmARG–ABH complex (Figure 6). However, in contrast with the SmARG–ABH complex, the additional
α-substituents of ABHPE and ABHDP block
the binding of water molecule W4; this water molecule ordinarily mediates
a hydrogen bond between the inhibitor α-amino group and D213
(Figure 7c). Therefore, the l-amino
acid recognition motif in the active site of SmARG is slightly compromised
by the binding of α,α-disubstituted amino acid inhibitors.
Regardless, the additional α-substituents of both ABHPE and ABHDP make additional interactions in the active
site of SmARG, which presumably accounts for the affinity of these
inhibitors being higher than that of ABH.

Simulated annealing omit
maps of α,α-disubstituted
amino acid inhibitors: (a) ABHPE, contoured at 5.0σ,
and (b) ABHDP, contoured at 3.0σ. Atoms are color-coded
as in Figure 4 (dark green for Cl). Metal coordination
and hydrogen bond interactions are represented by red and green dashed
lines, respectively. Note that residue E58 from an adjacent monomer
of the homotrimer adopts two alternate conformations (highlighted
in cyan). (c) Superposition of the SmARG–ABH complex (white
for C and Mn2+), the SmARG–ABHPE complex
(salmon for C and Mn2+), and the SmARG–ABHDP complex (yellow for C and Mn2+).

In each enzyme–inhibitor complex, the piperidine ring
exclusively
adopts a chair conformation and its protonated tertiary amino group
donates a hydrogen bond to D213 (purple dashed lines in panels a and
b of Figure 7; average N···O
separations of 2.7 Å in the SmARG–ABHPE complex
and 2.9 Å in the SmARG–ABHDP complex). Additionally,
the dichlorobenzyl group of ABHDP interacts with E58 from
an adjacent monomer (panels b and c of Figure 7). Incomplete electron density for the dichlorobenzyl group of ABHDP and a higher average temperature factor (∼55 Å2) compared with that of the piperidine ring (∼30 Å2) suggest increased flexibility.

Structural comparison
of the SmARG–ABHPE complex
with the 1.30 Å resolution crystal structure of the human arginase
I–ABHPE complex (PDB entry 4HWW)34 reveals striking differences in the conformation of the
piperidine α-substituent of ABHPE, even though the
parent ABH scaffold retains the same conformation in both structures
(Figure 8a). Van Zandt and colleagues note
that the piperidine ring of ABHPE adopts two alternate
conformations in the human arginase I–ABHPE complex:
distorted boat (66%) and chair (33%).34 With the piperidine ring of ABHPE shifted farther from
D183 in the human arginase I–ABHPE complex (D183
of human arginase I corresponds to D213 of SmARG), it makes water-mediated
hydrogen bonds with D183 and D181 through water molecules W1 and W4,
instead of making a direct hydrogen bond as observed in the SmARG–ABHPE complex. More importantly, because of the conservation of
water molecule W4, the l-amino acid recognition motif is
intact in the human arginase I–ABHPE complex.

(a) Superposition
of the SmARG–ABHPE complex
[white (protein) or yellow (inhibitor) for C] with the human arginase
I–ABHPE complex (cyan for C; PDB entry 4HWW). (b) Superposition
of the SmARG–ABHDP complex [white (protein) or yellow
(inhibitor) for C] with the human arginase II–ABHDP1 complex (cyan for C; PDB entry 4IXV). Selected hydrogen bonds are shown as
purple dashed lines (SmARG) or black dashed lines (human arginases).
Solvent molecules are shown as small red spheres; Mn2+ ions
are shown as purple and orange spheres in SmARG and human arginases,
respectively. Black residue labels correspond to SmARG, and red labels
correspond to the human arginases.

Structural differences in the binding of an α,α-disubstituted
amino acid are also revealed in the comparison of the SmARG–ABHDP complex with the complex between human arginase II and (R)-2-amino-6-borono-2-[1-(4-chlorobenzyl)piperidin-4-yl]hexanoate
(ABHDP1, which differs from ABHDP by one chlorine
atom on the pendant aromatic ring; PDB entry 4IXV)35 (Figure 8b). Here, too, the parent
ABH structures adopt similar conformations; however, significant conformational
differences are observed for the additional α-substituents of
ABHDP and ABHDP1. The piperidine ring of ABHDP1 in the human arginase II–ABHDP1 complex
adopts a distorted boat conformation, with the piperidine amino group
forming a water-mediated hydrogen bond with S155 (equivalent to T136
in human arginases I and II), instead of hydrogen bonding with D213,
as observed in the SmARG–ABHDP1 complex. Additionally,
the chlorobenzyl ring of ABHDP1 does not interact with
the protein.

Active site comparisons reveal that A166 (equivalent
to T136 in
human arginase I and S155 in human arginase II) is another nonconserved
residue in SmARG (besides S165) that can interact with α,α-disubstituted
amino acid inhibitors (Figure 8). Interestingly,
the corresponding residue is similarly nonpolar in two other parasitic
arginases: P228 in Plasmodium falciparum arginase58 and V149 in L. mexicana arginase.54 Differences in polarity and size at this position
between parasitic arginases and human arginases may be a contributing
factor to the alternative binding modes of α,α-disubstituted
amino acid inhibitors.

The helminth fluorescence bioassay was utilized
to assess the effect
of SmARG inhibitors on schistosomula viability during continuous in vitro cocultivation. Despite the ability of these inhibitors
to effectively bind to SmARG, no significant difference in parasite
viability or morphology was observed during treatment with 100 μM
ABH, NOHA, or nor-NOHA for 24 h (Figure S5 of the Supporting Information) or 72 h (data not shown). If the uptake
of amino acid inhibitors is facile, this result suggests that any
effect of SmARG inhibitors on parasite viability would require the
presence of the human host.

Using
a 37632-element long-oligonucleotide DNA microarray, new S.
mansoni anthelmintic drug targets were revealed through
parasite life cyle transcriptomic profiling.45 Here, we show that one putative drug target, SmARG,15 is maximally expressed in all life stages that interact
with the definitive mammalian host but minimally expressed in life
stages that interact with the intermediate snail host (Figure 2). These data confirm previously published semiquantitative
reverse transcription PCR data and indicate that the upregulation
of SmARG is specific to human infection by S. mansoni. Curiously, however, SmARG is not secreted by cercariae or schistosomula,15 so the influence of S. mansoni infection on l-arginine concentrations in infected human
tissues presumably arises from the facile transport of l-arginine
into the parasite. The resultant depletion of host l-arginine
pools allows immune evasion, because depressed l-arginine
concentrations can result in lower NO concentrations produced by classically
activated macrophages with known anti-schistosomula function.59

In principle, then, the inhibition of
SmARG might possibly render the parasite more susceptible to host
immunity during infection. Consistent with this hypothesis, the classical
arginase inhibitors ABH, NOHA, and nor-NOHA do not affect parasite
viability in the absence of the host (Figure S5 of the Supporting Information). The host immune response in vivo is presumably required for the maximal anthelmintic
effect of an arginase inhibitor, as is the case for praziquantel.60

Although the affinities
of the classical arginase inhibitors ABH, NOHA, and nor-NOHA are in
the low micromolar range (Table 2), it is somewhat
surprising that these affinities fall short of the nanomolar binding
affinities reported for complexes with human arginase I.16,47 The structural basis of the weaker affinity is not clear on the
basis of analysis of the crystal structures, because each inhibitor
makes essentially identical metal coordination and hydrogen bond interactions
in the active site of SmARG compared with the active sites of mammalian
enzymes. It is clear, however, that the best inhibitors of arginase
from any species will bear side chains capable of metal ion coordination.
This accounts for the generally weaker binding affinity of simple
amino acids such as l-valine, l-ornithine, and l-lysine, which do not interact directly with the active site
Mn2+ ions (Figure 4). Parenthetically,
we note that this feature facilitates release of the l-ornithine
product during catalysis.

The crystal structures of complexes
of SmARG with ABH and nor-NOHA reveal that the tetrahedral boronate
anion and the N-hydroxyguanidinium moiety serve as
ideal functional groups for metal ion coordination and active site
hydrogen bond interactions (Figures 5b and 6). The α-carboxylate and α-amino group
of each inhibitor also make an array of hydrogen bond interactions
with the l-amino acid recognition motif, and these hydrogen
bonds similarly make an important contribution to enzyme–inhibitor
affinity.61 Thus, in the quest to improve
SmARG–inhibitor affinity and selectivity, these conserved features
of enzyme–inhibitor recognition cannot be perturbed.

Inspection of the crystal structure of the SmARG–ABH complex
(Figure 6) revealed that the l-amino
acid moiety is oriented such that the Cα-H group could be substituted
with a longer side chain to generate an α,α-disubstituted
amino acid capable of maintaining active site interactions with its
“l-side chain” while engaging in new interactions
on the protein surface with its “d-side chain”.
The binding of ABHPE and ABHDP (Figure 7) with 2- and 5-fold higher affinity, respectively
(Figure S1 of the Supporting Information), demonstrates the success of this strategy. Furthermore, structural
comparisons of the region that accommodates the d-side chains
of ABHPE and ABHDP indicate that this region,
designated the “d-cleft” or “T136 region”,62 differs between SmARG and human arginase I.
Specifically, the d-cleft of SmARG is much more nonpolar
and perhaps would better accommodate hydrophobic d-side chains
even longer than that of ABHDP. Therefore, α,α-disubstituted
amino acid inhibitors based on the ABH or nor-NOHA scaffoldings with d-side chains even more extensive than that of ABHDP could be designed to further enhance binding affinity as well as
selectivity against SmARG. Future studies in this regard will be reported
in due course.
