---
reference_id: "PMID:30030150"
title: Generation and Validation of a Complete Knockout Model of abcc6a in Zebrafish.
authors:
- Van Gils M
- Willaert A
- De Vilder EYG
- Coucke PJ
- Vanakker OM
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2018.06.183
keywords:
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Animals
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- "Calcification, Physiologic/genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- Humans
- Morpholinos/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/genetics
- Ribs/physiology
- Scoliosis/genetics
- Spine/physiology
- Zebrafish
- Zebrafish Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation and Validation of a Complete Knockout Model of abcc6a in Zebrafish.
**Authors:** Van Gils M, Willaert A, De Vilder EYG, Coucke PJ, Vanakker OM
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jid.2018.06.183](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2018.06.183)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2018 Nov;138(11):2333-2342. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2018.06.183.
 Epub 2018 Jul 17.

Generation and Validation of a Complete Knockout Model of abcc6a in Zebrafish.

Van Gils M(1), Willaert A(1), De Vilder EYG(2), Coucke PJ(1), Vanakker OM(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium;
Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
Electronic address: Olivier.vanakker@ugent.be.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2018 Nov;138(11):2301-2304. doi:
10.1016/j.jid.2018.07.007.

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum is an ectopic mineralization disease due to biallelic
ABCC6 mutations. As no treatment options are currently available, a reliable
zebrafish model is invaluable for high throughput compound screening. However,
data from previously reported knockdown and mutant zebrafish models for abcc6a,
the functional orthologue of ABCC6, showed phenotypic discrepancies. To address
this, we developed a complete abcc6a knockout model using Clustered Regularly
Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats/Cas9 and compared its phenotype to that of
a mutant model (Sa963) and a splice junction morpholino model. Our data showed
that abcc6a is not required for embryonic survival, but rather that it has an
essential role in controlling mineralization. The three models developed very
similar hypermineralization of spine and ribs starting embryonically and
progressing in adulthood with development of scoliosis. Our results indicate a
direct relation between loss of abcc6a expression and dysregulated osteogenesis.
As such, our models recapitulate part of the human phenotype in which ectopic
mineralization and pro-osteogenic signaling have been reported. Because of its
reproducibility in three models and its ease of quantification, we consider this
phenotype to be unequivocally the result of abcc6 deficiency and, as such, an
excellent readout for drug screening purposes and multiplex mutagene analysis.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2018.06.183
PMID: 30030150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
