---
reference_id: "PMID:27884168"
title: "Ataxia telangiectasia: a review."
authors:
- Rothblum-Oviatt C
- Wright J
- Lefton-Greif MA
- McGrath-Morrow SA
- Crawford TO
- Lederman HM
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-016-0543-7
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Cerebellum/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Lung Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Purkinje Cells/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia telangiectasia: a review.
**Authors:** Rothblum-Oviatt C, Wright J, Lefton-Greif MA, McGrath-Morrow SA, Crawford TO, Lederman HM
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-016-0543-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-016-0543-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2016 Nov 25;11(1):159. doi: 10.1186/s13023-016-0543-7.

Ataxia telangiectasia: a review.

Rothblum-Oviatt C(1), Wright J(2), Lefton-Greif MA(3), McGrath-Morrow SA(3), 
Crawford TO(4), Lederman HM(5).

Author information:
(1)A-T Children's Project, Coconut Creek, Florida, USA. cynthia@atcp.org.
(2)The Ataxia Telangiectasia Clinical Center, Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)The Ataxia Telangiectasia Clinical Center, Departments of Pediatrics and 
Pediatric Respiratory Sciences, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(4)The Ataxia Telangiectasia Clinical Center, Departments of Pediatrics and 
Neurology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(5)The Ataxia Telangiectasia Clinical Center, Departments of Pediatrics, 
Medicine and Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, 
USA.

DEFINITION OF THE DISEASE: Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive 
disorder primarily characterized by cerebellar degeneration, telangiectasia, 
immunodeficiency, cancer susceptibility and radiation sensitivity. A-T is often 
referred to as a genome instability or DNA damage response syndrome.
EPIDEMIOLOGY: The world-wide prevalence of A-T is estimated to be between 1 in 
40,000 and 1 in 100,000 live births.
CLINICAL DESCRIPTION: A-T is a complex disorder with substantial variability in 
the severity of features between affected individuals, and at different ages. 
Neurological symptoms most often first appear in early childhood when children 
begin to sit or walk. They have immunological abnormalities including 
immunoglobulin and antibody deficiencies and lymphopenia. People with A-T have 
an increased predisposition for cancers, particularly of lymphoid origin. 
Pulmonary disease and problems with feeding, swallowing and nutrition are 
common, and there also may be dermatological and endocrine manifestations.
ETIOLOGY: A-T is caused by mutations in the ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia, Mutated) 
gene which encodes a protein of the same name. The primary role of the ATM 
protein is coordination of cellular signaling pathways in response to DNA double 
strand breaks, oxidative stress and other genotoxic stress.
DIAGNOSIS: The diagnosis of A-T is usually suspected by the combination of 
neurologic clinical features (ataxia, abnormal control of eye movement, and 
postural instability) with one or more of the following which may vary in their 
appearance: telangiectasia, frequent sinopulmonary infections and specific 
laboratory abnormalities (e.g. IgA deficiency, lymphopenia especially affecting 
T lymphocytes and increased alpha-fetoprotein levels). Because certain 
neurological features may arise later, a diagnosis of A-T should be carefully 
considered for any ataxic child with an otherwise elusive diagnosis. A diagnosis 
of A-T can be confirmed by the finding of an absence or deficiency of the ATM 
protein or its kinase activity in cultured cell lines, and/or identification of 
the pathological mutations in the ATM gene.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS: There are several other neurologic and rare disorders 
that physicians must consider when diagnosing A-T and that can be confused with 
A-T. Differentiation of these various disorders is often possible with clinical 
features and selected laboratory tests, including gene sequencing.
ANTENATAL DIAGNOSIS: Antenatal diagnosis can be performed if the pathological 
ATM mutations in that family have been identified in an affected child. In the 
absence of identifying mutations, antenatal diagnosis can be made by haplotype 
analysis if an unambiguous diagnosis of the affected child has been made through 
clinical and laboratory findings and/or ATM protein analysis.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Genetic counseling can help family members of a patient with 
A-T understand when genetic testing for A-T is feasible, and how the test 
results should be interpreted.
MANAGEMENT AND PROGNOSIS: Treatment of the neurologic problems associated with 
A-T is symptomatic and supportive, as there are no treatments known to slow or 
stop the neurodegeneration. However, other manifestations of A-T, e.g. 
immunodeficiency, pulmonary disease, failure to thrive and diabetes can be 
treated effectively.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-016-0543-7
PMCID: PMC5123280
PMID: 27884168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]