---
reference_id: "PMID:12552564"
title: "Spectrum of sequence variation in the FANCG gene: an International Fanconi Anemia Registry (IFAR) study."
authors:
- Auerbach AD
- Greenbaum J
- Pujara K
- Batish SD
- Bitencourt MA
- Kokemohr I
- Schneider H
- Lobitzc S
- Pasquini R
- Giampietro PF
- Hanenberg H
- Levran O
- International Fanconi Anemia Registry
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/humu.10166
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spectrum of sequence variation in the FANCG gene: an International Fanconi Anemia Registry (IFAR) study.
**Authors:** Auerbach AD, Greenbaum J, Pujara K, Batish SD, Bitencourt MA, Kokemohr I, Schneider H, Lobitzc S, Pasquini R, Giampietro PF, Hanenberg H, Levran O, International Fanconi Anemia Registry
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.10166](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.10166)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2003 Feb;21(2):158-68. doi: 10.1002/humu.10166.

Spectrum of sequence variation in the FANCG gene: an International Fanconi 
Anemia Registry (IFAR) study.

Auerbach AD(1), Greenbaum J, Pujara K, Batish SD, Bitencourt MA, Kokemohr I, 
Schneider H, Lobitzc S, Pasquini R, Giampietro PF, Hanenberg H, Levran O; 
International Fanconi Anemia Registry.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics and Hematology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021-6399, USA. auerbac@mail.rockefeller.edu

Erratum in
    Hum Mutat. 2003 Sep;22(3):255.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetically heterogeneous autosomal recessive syndrome 
associated with chromosomal instability, hypersensitivity to DNA cross-linking 
agents, and predisposition to malignancy. The gene for FA complementation group 
G (FANCG) was the third FA gene to be cloned, and was found to be identical with 
human XRCC9, which maps to 9p13. The cDNA is predicted to encode a polypeptide 
of 622 amino acids, with no sequence similarities to any other known protein or 
motifs that could point to a molecular function for FANCG/XRCC9. We used single 
strand conformational polymorphism analysis (SSCP) to screen genomic DNA from a 
panel of 307 racially and ethnically diverse unrelated FA patients from the 
International Fanconi Anemia Registry (IFAR) for variants in FANCG. Twenty-seven 
abnormal SSCP patterns were found; 18 of these variants appear to be pathogenic 
mutations while nine are likely to be nonpathogenic polymorphisms. Direct 
sequencing of genomic DNA from seven FA-G probands with one mutant allele not 
detected in the SSCP study and three additional probands assigned to the FA-G 
complementation group by retroviral correction with FANCG resulted in the 
detection of nine additional pathogenic mutations and two common SNPs. 
Conditions for rapid screening for these mutations by DHPLC for use in a 
clinical laboratory setting were established. The most common FANCG mutations in 
the IFAR population were: IVS8-2A>G (seven Portuguese-Brazilian probands), 
IVS11+1G>C (seven French-Acadian probands), 1794_1803del10 (seven European 
probands), and IVS3+1G>C (five Korean or Japanese probands). Our data suggest 
that the Portuguese-Brazilian, French-Acadian, and Korean/Japanese mutations 
were likely to have been present in a founding member of each of these 
populations.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.10166
PMID: 12552564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]