---
reference_id: "PMID:31378869"
title: Bacterial Infections of the Central Nervous System.
authors:
- LaPenna PA
- Roos KL
journal: Semin Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1693159
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial Infections of the Central Nervous System.
**Authors:** LaPenna PA, Roos KL
**Journal:** Semin Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0039-1693159](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0039-1693159)

## Content

1. Semin Neurol. 2019 Jun;39(3):334-342. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1693159. Epub 2019
Aug  2.

Bacterial Infections of the Central Nervous System.

LaPenna PA(1), Roos KL(2).

Author information:
(1)Bon Secours Mercy Health, Greenville, South Carolina.
(2)IUH Neuroscience Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
Indiana.

Acute bacterial meningitis and spinal epidural abscess are neurological 
emergencies. Acute bacterial meningitis may present with symptoms as nonspecific 
as headache and fever, but rapid progression to an altered level of 
consciousness is not unusual. Spinal epidural abscess manifests initially as 
back pain, followed by radicular pain, then weakness, and finally paraplegia. 
Brain abscess may initially present only with headache, or as a new-onset 
seizure or with a focal neurological deficit. Bacterial infections of the 
central nervous system require emergent diagnosis and management. In this 
article, the pathogenesis, etiological organisms, diagnostic studies, 
differential diagnosis and management of acute bacterial meningitis, spinal 
epidural abscess, and brain abscess are discussed.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1693159
PMID: 31378869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.