---
reference_id: "PMID:38681799"
title: "Developing a pathway to clinical trials for CACNA1A-related epilepsies: A patient organization perspective."
authors:
- Fox PM
- Malepati S
- Manaster L
- Rossignol E
- Noebels JL
journal: Ther Adv Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/26330040241245725
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developing a pathway to clinical trials for CACNA1A-related epilepsies: A patient organization perspective.
**Authors:** Fox PM, Malepati S, Manaster L, Rossignol E, Noebels JL
**Journal:** Ther Adv Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/26330040241245725](https://doi.org/10.1177/26330040241245725)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Rare Dis. 2024 Apr 25;5:26330040241245725. doi: 
10.1177/26330040241245725. eCollection 2024 Jan-Dec.

Developing a pathway to clinical trials for CACNA1A-related epilepsies: A 
patient organization perspective.

Fox PM(1), Malepati S(2), Manaster L(2), Rossignol E(2)(3), Noebels JL(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)CACNA1A Foundation, Inc., 31 Pt Road, Norwalk, CT 06854, USA.
(2)CACNA1A Foundation, Inc., Norwalk, CT, USA.
(3)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Departments of Neurosciences and 
Pediatrics, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(4)Blue Bird Circle Developmental Neurogenetics Laboratory, Department of 
Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX, USA.

CACNA1A-related disorders are rare neurodevelopmental disorders linked to 
variants in the CACNA1A gene. This gene encodes the α1 subunit of the P/Q-type 
calcium channel Cav2.1, which is globally expressed in the brain and crucial for 
fast synaptic neurotransmission. The broad spectrum of CACNA1A-related 
neurological disorders includes developmental and epileptic encephalopathies, 
familial hemiplegic migraine type 1, episodic ataxia type 2, spinocerebellar 
ataxia type 6, together with unclassified presentations with developmental 
delay, ataxia, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, and language 
impairment. The severity of each disorder is also highly variable. The spectrum 
of CACNA1A-related seizures is broad across both loss-of-function and 
gain-of-function variants and includes absence seizures, focal seizures with 
altered consciousness, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, tonic seizures, status 
epilepticus, and infantile spasms. Furthermore, over half of CACNA1A-related 
epilepsies are refractory to current therapies. To date, almost 1700 CACNA1A 
variants have been reported in ClinVar, with over 400 listed as Pathogenic or 
Likely Pathogenic, but with limited-to-no clinical or functional data. Robust 
genotype-phenotype studies and impacts of variants on protein structure and 
function have also yet to be established. As a result, there are few definitive 
treatment options for CACNA1A-related epilepsies. The CACNA1A Foundation has set 
out to change the landscape of available and effective treatments and improve 
the quality of life for those living with CACNA1A-related disorders, including 
epilepsy. Established in March 2020, the Foundation has built a robust 
preclinical toolbox that includes patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells 
and novel disease models, launched clinical trial readiness initiatives, and 
organized a global CACNA1A Research Network. This Research Network is currently 
composed of over 60 scientists and clinicians committed to collaborating to 
accelerate the path to CACNA1A-specific treatments and one day, a cure.

Plain Language Summary: Designing a plan to find treatments for epilepsies 
linked to the CACNA1A gene and test them in clinical trials for FDA approval 
CACNA1A-related disorders are rare conditions that affect brain development and 
are caused by changes in the CACNA1A gene. This gene provides instructions for 
making a protein called Cav2.1, which plays a crucial role in fast communication 
between nerve cells. The disorders can lead to various neurological problems 
such as seizures, epilepsy, developmental delays, intellectual disability, and 
autism. The severity of these disorders varies, and individuals may experience a 
broad range of seizures. More than 1700 different genetic changes in the CACNA1A 
gene have been identified, with over 400 considered likely to cause the 
disorders. However, there is limited information on the clinical and molecular 
aspects of these changes. Despite the significant impact on individuals’ lives, 
there are currently no definitive treatments for CACNA1A-related epilepsies. To 
address this gap, the CACNA1A Foundation was established in March 2020. The 
Foundation aims to improve the lives of individuals with CACNA1A-related 
disorders, including epilepsy. It has developed a comprehensive set of tools, 
including patient-derived cells and new disease models, to advance research. 
Additionally, the Foundation has initiated initiatives to prepare for clinical 
trials and has formed a global CACNA1A Research Network with over 60 scientists 
and clinicians collaborating to develop specific treatments and, ultimately, 
find a cure.

© The Author(s), 2024.

DOI: 10.1177/26330040241245725
PMCID: PMC11047245
PMID: 38681799

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.