---
reference_id: "PMID:20425484"
title: "Nontriglyceride hepatic lipotoxicity: the new paradigm for the pathogenesis of NASH."
authors:
- Neuschwander-Tetri BA
journal: Curr Gastroenterol Rep
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s11894-009-0083-6
keywords:
- Animals
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Dicarboxylic Acids/metabolism
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- Fatty Liver/etiology
- Humans
- Lipogenesis/physiology
- Lipolysis
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Triglycerides/biosynthesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nontriglyceride hepatic lipotoxicity: the new paradigm for the pathogenesis of NASH.
**Authors:** Neuschwander-Tetri BA
**Journal:** Curr Gastroenterol Rep (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11894-009-0083-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11894-009-0083-6)

## Content

1. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2010 Feb;12(1):49-56. doi: 10.1007/s11894-009-0083-6.

Nontriglyceride hepatic lipotoxicity: the new paradigm for the pathogenesis of 
NASH.

Neuschwander-Tetri BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Saint Louis University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. tetriba@slu.edu

Lipid droplet accumulation and oxidant stress, once thought to play essential 
roles in the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), may actually 
represent parallel epiphenomena. Emerging data now point to nontriglyceride 
lipotoxicity and complex mechanisms of hepatocyte injury and apoptosis as the 
major contributors to the disease phenotype currently recognized as NASH. 
Although specific mediators of hepatic lipotoxicity have not been identified 
with certainty, abundant evidence from animal studies and recent data in humans 
indicate that free fatty acids in the liver can serve as substrates for 
formation of nontriglyceride lipotoxic metabolites that cause liver injury. The 
accumulation of triglyceride in droplets may actually be protective, and thus 
therapeutic efforts directed at fat accumulation as a sole endpoint may be 
misguided. This review examines the new evidence supporting the role of 
nontriglyceride fatty acid metabolites in causing NASH and how adipose and 
muscle insulin resistance contribute to hepatic lipotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1007/s11894-009-0083-6
PMID: 20425484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]