---
reference_id: "PMID:37938118"
title: Urea cycle disorders in critically Ill adults.
authors:
- Long MT
- Kruser JM
- Quinonez SC
journal: Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MCO.0000000000000992
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Urea cycle disorders in critically Ill adults.
**Authors:** Long MT, Kruser JM, Quinonez SC
**Journal:** Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCO.0000000000000992](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCO.0000000000000992)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2024 Mar 1;27(2):184-191. doi: 
10.1097/MCO.0000000000000992. Epub 2023 Nov 6.

Urea cycle disorders in critically Ill adults.

Long MT(1), Kruser JM(2), Quinonez SC(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Anesthesiology & Internal Medicine, University of Wisconsin 
Hospitals and Clinics.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin Hospitals and Clinics, 
Madison, Wisconsin.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Urea cycle disorders (UCDs) cause elevations in ammonia 
which, when severe, cause irreversible neurologic injury. Most patients with 
UCDs are diagnosed as neonates, though mild UCDs can present later - even into 
adulthood - during windows of high physiologic stress, like critical illness. It 
is crucial for clinicians to understand when to screen for UCDs and appreciate 
how to manage these disorders in order to prevent devastating neurologic injury 
or death.
RECENT FINDINGS: Hyperammonemia, particularly if severe, causes time- and 
concentration-dependent neurologic injury. Mild UCDs presenting in adulthood are 
increasingly recognized, so broader screening in adults is recommended. For 
patients with UCDs, a comprehensive, multitiered approach to management is 
needed to prevent progression and irreversible injury. Earlier exogenous 
clearance is increasingly recognized as an important complement to other 
therapies.
SUMMARY: UCDs alter the core pathway for ammonia metabolism. Screening for mild 
UCDs in adults with unexplained neurologic symptoms can direct care and prevent 
deterioration. Management of UCDs emphasizes decreasing ongoing ammonia 
production, avoiding catabolism, and supporting endogenous and exogenous ammonia 
clearance. Core neuroprotective and supportive critical care supplements this 
focused therapy.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MCO.0000000000000992
PMID: 37938118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]