---
reference_id: "PMID:34051898"
title: "Craniosynostosis: Posterior Cranial Vault Remodeling."
authors:
- Humphries LS
- Swanson JW
- Bartlett SP
- Taylor JA
journal: Clin Plast Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.cps.2021.03.001
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/surgery"
- Craniosynostoses/surgery
- Female
- Humans
- Intracranial Pressure
- Male
- "Osteogenesis, Distraction/methods"
- Skull/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Craniosynostosis: Posterior Cranial Vault Remodeling.
**Authors:** Humphries LS, Swanson JW, Bartlett SP, Taylor JA
**Journal:** Clin Plast Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cps.2021.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cps.2021.03.001)

## Content

1. Clin Plast Surg. 2021 Jul;48(3):455-471. doi: 10.1016/j.cps.2021.03.001. Epub 
2021 May 11.

Craniosynostosis: Posterior Cranial Vault Remodeling.

Humphries LS(1), Swanson JW(2), Bartlett SP(2), Taylor JA(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University of Mississippi 
Medical Center, Children's of Mississippi Hospital, 2500 N. State Street, 
Jackson, MS 39216, USA. Electronic address: https://twitter.com/ls_humphries.
(2)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, 3401 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, 3401 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 
Electronic address: jataylor@gmail.com.

Posterior cranial vault distraction osteogenesis is a powerful, reliable, 
low-morbidity method to achieve intracranial expansion. It is particularly 
useful in treating turribrachycephaly seen in syndromic craniosynostosis, 
allowing for gradual expansion of the bone while stretching the soft tissues 
over several weeks allowing greater volumetric expansion than conventional 
techniques. Posterior cranial vault distraction osteogenesis constitutes a more 
gradual remodeling modality, with infrequent complications. As a first step in 
intracranial expansion, it preserves the frontal cranium for future frontofacial 
procedures. A drawback is the need for a second surgery to remove the device, 
and this must be taken into account during counseling.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cps.2021.03.001
PMID: 34051898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have nothing to disclose.