---
reference_id: "PMID:37633900"
title: "Dorsal visual stream and LIMK1: hemideletion, haplotype, and enduring effects in children with Williams syndrome."
authors:
- Kippenhan JS
- Gregory MD
- Nash T
- Kohn P
- Mervis CB
- Eisenberg DP
- Garvey MH
- Roe K
- Morris CA
- Kolachana B
- Pani AM
- Sorcher L
- Berman KF
journal: J Neurodev Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s11689-023-09493-x
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adult
- Humans
- Child
- Haplotypes
- "Williams Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- Cerebral Cortex
- Cognition
- Gray Matter
- Lim Kinases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dorsal visual stream and LIMK1: hemideletion, haplotype, and enduring effects in children with Williams syndrome.
**Authors:** Kippenhan JS, Gregory MD, Nash T, Kohn P, Mervis CB, Eisenberg DP, Garvey MH, Roe K, Morris CA, Kolachana B, Pani AM, Sorcher L, Berman KF
**Journal:** J Neurodev Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s11689-023-09493-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s11689-023-09493-x)

## Content

1. J Neurodev Disord. 2023 Aug 26;15(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s11689-023-09493-x.

Dorsal visual stream and LIMK1: hemideletion, haplotype, and enduring effects in 
children with Williams syndrome.

Kippenhan JS(1)(2), Gregory MD(3)(4), Nash T(3)(4), Kohn P(3)(4), Mervis CB(5), 
Eisenberg DP(3)(4), Garvey MH(3)(4), Roe K(3)(4), Morris CA(6), Kolachana B(4), 
Pani AM(7), Sorcher L(3)(4), Berman KF(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Section on Integrative Neuroimaging, Intramural Research Program, National 
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, 
USA. shane.kippenhan@nih.gov.
(2)Clinical and Translational Neuroscience Branch, Intramural Research Program, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, 20892, USA. shane.kippenhan@nih.gov.
(3)Section on Integrative Neuroimaging, Intramural Research Program, National 
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, 
USA.
(4)Clinical and Translational Neuroscience Branch, Intramural Research Program, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, 20892, USA.
(5)Neurodevelopmental Sciences Laboratory, Department of Psychological and Brain 
Sciences, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV, Las 
Vegas, NV, 89102, USA.
(7)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 22903, 
USA.
(8)Section on Integrative Neuroimaging, Intramural Research Program, National 
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, 
USA. bermank@mail.nih.gov.
(9)Clinical and Translational Neuroscience Branch, Intramural Research Program, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, 20892, USA. bermank@mail.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Williams syndrome (WS), a rare neurodevelopmental disorder caused by 
hemizygous deletion of ~ 25 genes from chromosomal band 7q11.23, affords an 
exceptional opportunity to study associations between a well-delineated genetic 
abnormality and a well-characterized neurobehavioral profile. Clinically, WS is 
typified by increased social drive (often termed "hypersociability") and severe 
visuospatial construction deficits. Previous studies have linked visuospatial 
problems in WS with alterations in the dorsal visual processing stream. We 
investigated the impacts of hemideletion and haplotype variation of LIMK1, a 
gene hemideleted in WS and linked to neuronal maturation and migration, on the 
structure and function of the dorsal stream, specifically the intraparietal 
sulcus (IPS), a region known to be altered in adults with WS.
METHODS: We tested for IPS structural and functional changes using longitudinal 
MRI in a developing cohort of children with WS (76 visits from 33 participants, 
compared to 280 visits from 94 typically developing age- and sex-matched 
participants) over the age range of 5-22. We also performed MRI studies of 12 
individuals with rare, shorter hemideletions at 7q11.23, all of which included 
LIMK1. Finally, we tested for effects of LIMK1 variation on IPS structure and 
imputed LIMK1 expression in two independent cohorts of healthy individuals from 
the general population.
RESULTS: IPS structural (p < 10-4 FDR corrected) and functional (p < .05 FDR 
corrected) anomalies previously reported in adults were confirmed in children 
with WS, and, consistent with an enduring genetic mechanism, were stable from 
early childhood into adulthood. In the short hemideletion cohort, IPS deficits 
similar to those in WS were found, although effect sizes were smaller than those 
found in WS for both structural and functional findings. Finally, in each of the 
two general population cohorts stratified by LIMK1 haplotype, IPS gray matter 
volume (pdiscovery < 0.05 SVC, preplication = 0.0015) and imputed LIMK1 
expression (pdiscovery = 10-15, preplication = 10-23) varied according to LIMK1 
haplotype.
CONCLUSIONS: This work offers insight into neurobiological and genetic 
mechanisms responsible for the WS phenotype and also more generally provides a 
striking example of the mechanisms by which genetic variation, acting by means 
of molecular effects on a neural intermediary, can influence human cognition 
and, in some cases, lead to neurocognitive disorders.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s11689-023-09493-x
PMCID: PMC10464045
PMID: 37633900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.