---
reference_id: "PMID:38792950"
title: "Insights into Clinical Disorders in Cowden Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Pîrlog LM
- Pătrășcanu AA
- Militaru MS
- Cătană A
journal: Medicina (Kaunas)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/medicina60050767
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Proteus Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis"
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights into Clinical Disorders in Cowden Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Pîrlog LM, Pătrășcanu AA, Militaru MS, Cătană A
**Journal:** Medicina (Kaunas) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medicina60050767](https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina60050767)

## Content

1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2024 May 6;60(5):767. doi: 10.3390/medicina60050767.

Insights into Clinical Disorders in Cowden Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review.

Pîrlog LM(1), Pătrășcanu AA(1), Militaru MS(1)(2), Cătană A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy "Iuliu Hațieganu", 400012 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(2)Regional Laboratory Cluj-Napoca, Department of Medical Genetics, Regina Maria 
Health Network, 400363 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(3)Department of Oncogenetics, "Prof. Dr. I. Chiricuță" Institute of Oncology, 
400015 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.

PTEN Hamartoma Tumour Syndrome (PHTS) encompasses diverse clinical phenotypes, 
including Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), 
Proteus syndrome (PS), and Proteus-like syndrome. This autosomal dominant 
genetic predisposition with high penetrance arises from heterozygous germline 
variants in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene, leading to dysregulation of the 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signalling pathway, which promotes the overgrowth of multiple and 
heterogenous tissue types. Clinical presentations of CS range from benign and 
malignant disorders, affecting nearly every system within the human body. CS is 
the most diagnosed syndrome among the PHTS group, notwithstanding its weak 
incidence (1:200,000), for which it is considered rare, and its precise 
incidence remains unknown among other important factors. The literature is 
notably inconsistent in reporting the frequencies and occurrences of these 
disorders, adding an element of bias and uncertainty when looking back at the 
available research. In this review, we aimed to highlight the significant 
disparities found in various studies concerning CS and to review the clinical 
manifestations encountered in CS patients. Furthermore, we intended to emphasize 
the great significance of early diagnosis as patients will benefit from a longer 
lifespan while being unceasingly advised and supported by a multidisciplinary 
team.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina60050767
PMCID: PMC11123368
PMID: 38792950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.