---
reference_id: "PMID:1353940"
title: Osteogenesis imperfecta type I is commonly due to a COL1A1 null allele of type I collagen.
authors:
- Willing MC
- Pruchno CJ
- Atkinson M
- Byers PH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1992'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta type I is commonly due to a COL1A1 null allele of type I collagen.
**Authors:** Willing MC, Pruchno CJ, Atkinson M, Byers PH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1992)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1992 Sep;51(3):508-15.

Osteogenesis imperfecta type I is commonly due to a COL1A1 null allele of type I 
collagen.

Willing MC(1), Pruchno CJ, Atkinson M, Byers PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

Dermal fibroblasts from most individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type 
I produce about half the normal amount of type I procollagen, as a result of 
decreased synthesis of one of its constituent chains, pro alpha 1 (I). To test 
the hypothesis that decreased synthesis of pro alpha (I) chains results from 
mutations in the COL1A1 gene, we used primer extension with nucleotide-specific 
chain termination to measure the contribution of individual COL1A1 alleles to 
the mRNA pool in fibroblasts from affected individuals. A polymorphic MnlI 
restriction endonuclease site in the 3'-untranslated region of COL1A1 was used 
to distinguish the transcripts of the two alleles in heterozygous individuals. 
Twenty-three individuals from 21 unrelated families were studied. In each case 
there was marked diminution in steady-state mRNA levels from one COL1A1 allele. 
Loss of an allele through deletion or rearrangement was not the cause of the 
diminished COL1A1 mRNA levels. Primer extension with nucleotide-specific chain 
termination allows identification of the mutant COL1A1 allele in cell strains 
that are heterozygous for an expressed polymorphism. It is applicable to 
sporadic cases, to small families, and to large families in whom key individuals 
are uninformative at the polymorphic sites used in linkage analysis, making it a 
useful adjunct to the biochemical screening of collagenous proteins for OI.

PMCID: PMC1682712
PMID: 1353940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]