---
reference_id: "PMID:3539811"
title: "Transmission of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV/HTLV-III/LAV): a review."
authors:
- van der Graaf M
- Diepersloot RJ
journal: Infection
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1007/BF01644263
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transmission of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV/HTLV-III/LAV): a review.
**Authors:** van der Graaf M, Diepersloot RJ
**Journal:** Infection (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01644263](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01644263)

## Content

1. Infection. 1986 Sep-Oct;14(5):203-11. doi: 10.1007/BF01644263.

Transmission of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV/HTLV-III/LAV): a review.

van der Graaf M, Diepersloot RJ.

The literature on the transmission of human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV/HTLV-III/LAV) is reviewed. HIV spreads by vertical transmission and by 
iatrogenic transmission (transfer of blood or blood-containing products), by 
infected needles among i.v. drug users and, more rarely, among health care 
workers, but mainly by sexual contact. In Western countries the virus is mainly 
spread by passive anal intercourse among homosexuals and seldom by heterosexual 
intercourse. In African countries, however, the virus is mainly spread by 
heterosexual intercourse, probably because of other, concurring sexually 
transmitted diseases. Some preventive measures are discussed.

PIP: The literature on the transmission of human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV/HTLV-III/LAV) is reviewed. HIV spreads by vertical transmission (transfer 
of blood or blood-containing products), by infected needles among iv drug users, 
and, more rarely, among healthcare workers, but mainly by sexual contact. In 
Western countries, the virus is spread mainly by passive anal intercourse among 
homosexuals and seldom by heterosexual intercourse. In African countries, 
however, the virus is mainly spread by heterosexual intercourse, probably 
because of other, concurring, sexually transmitted diseases. Some preventive 
measures are discussed. (author's)

DOI: 10.1007/BF01644263
PMID: 3539811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]