---
reference_id: "PMID:33734027"
title: Pathogenicity and Virulence of Ebolaviruses with Species- and Variant-specificity.
authors:
- Yamaoka S
- Ebihara H
journal: Virulence
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1898169
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenicity and Virulence of Ebolaviruses with Species- and Variant-specificity.
**Authors:** Yamaoka S, Ebihara H
**Journal:** Virulence (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21505594.2021.1898169](https://doi.org/10.1080/21505594.2021.1898169)

## Content

1. Virulence. 2021 Dec;12(1):885-901. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1898169.

Pathogenicity and Virulence of Ebolaviruses with Species- and 
Variant-specificity.

Yamaoka S(1), Ebihara H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, USA.

Ebola virus (EBOV), belonging to the species Zaire ebolavirus in the genus 
Ebolavirus, causes a severe febrile illness in humans with case fatality rates 
(CFRs) up to 90%. While there have been six virus species classified, which each 
have a single type virus in the genus Ebolavirus, CFRs of ebolavirus infections 
vary among viruses belonging to each distinct species. In this review, we aim to 
define the ebolavirus species-specific virulence on the basis of currently 
available laboratory and experimental findings. In addition, this review will 
also cover the variant-specific virulence of EBOV by referring to the unique 
biological and pathogenic characteristics of EBOV variant Makona, a new EBOV 
variant isolated from the 2013-2016 EBOV disease outbreak in West Africa. A 
better definition of species-specific and variant-specific virulence of 
ebolaviruses will facilitate our comprehensive knowledge on genus Ebolavirus 
biology, leading to the development of therapeutics against well-focused 
pathogenic mechanisms of each Ebola disease.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1898169
PMCID: PMC7993122
PMID: 33734027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.