---
reference_id: "PMID:21098507"
title: Phenylbutyrate therapy for maple syrup urine disease.
authors:
- Brunetti-Pierri N
- Lanpher B
- Erez A
- Ananieva EA
- Islam M
- Marini JC
- Sun Q
- Yu C
- Hegde M
- Li J
- Wynn RM
- Chuang DT
- Hutson S
- Lee B
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq507
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenylbutyrate therapy for maple syrup urine disease.
**Authors:** Brunetti-Pierri N, Lanpher B, Erez A, Ananieva EA, Islam M, Marini JC, Sun Q, Yu C, Hegde M, Li J, Wynn RM, Chuang DT, Hutson S, Lee B
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddq507](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq507)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Feb 15;20(4):631-40. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq507. Epub 2010
Nov  23.

Phenylbutyrate therapy for maple syrup urine disease.

Brunetti-Pierri N(1), Lanpher B, Erez A, Ananieva EA, Islam M, Marini JC, Sun Q, 
Yu C, Hegde M, Li J, Wynn RM, Chuang DT, Hutson S, Lee B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Therapy with sodium phenylacetate/benzoate or sodium phenylbutyrate in urea 
cycle disorder patients has been associated with a selective reduction in 
branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) in spite of adequate dietary protein intake. 
Based on this clinical observation, we investigated the potential of 
phenylbutyrate treatment to lower BCAA and their corresponding α-keto acids 
(BCKA) in patients with classic and variant late-onset forms of maple syrup 
urine disease (MSUD). We also performed in vitro and in vivo experiments to 
elucidate the mechanism for this effect. We found that BCAA and BCKA are both 
significantly reduced following phenylbutyrate therapy in control subjects and 
in patients with late-onset, intermediate MSUD. In vitro treatment with 
phenylbutyrate of control fibroblasts and lymphoblasts resulted in an increase 
in the residual enzyme activity, while treatment of MSUD cells resulted in the 
variable response which did not simply predict the biochemical response in the 
patients. In vivo phenylbutyrate increases the proportion of active hepatic 
enzyme and unphosphorylated form over the inactive phosphorylated form of the 
E1α subunit of the branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC). 
Using recombinant enzymes, we show that phenylbutyrate prevents phosphorylation 
of E1α by inhibition of the BCKDC kinase to activate BCKDC overall activity, 
providing a molecular explanation for the effect of phenylbutyrate in a subset 
of MSUD patients. Phenylbutyrate treatment may be a valuable treatment for 
reducing the plasma levels of neurotoxic BCAA and their corresponding BCKA in a 
subset of MSUD patients and studies of its long-term efficacy are indicated.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq507
PMCID: PMC3024040
PMID: 21098507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]