---
reference_id: "PMID:27813063"
title: "D-dimers in malignant melanoma: Association with prognosis and dynamic variation in disease progress."
authors:
- Desch A
- Gebhardt C
- Utikal J
- Schneider SW
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ijc.30498
content_type: abstract_only
---

# D-dimers in malignant melanoma: Association with prognosis and dynamic variation in disease progress.
**Authors:** Desch A, Gebhardt C, Utikal J, Schneider SW
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.30498](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.30498)

## Content

1. Int J Cancer. 2017 Feb 15;140(4):914-921. doi: 10.1002/ijc.30498. Epub 2016
Nov  14.

D-dimers in malignant melanoma: Association with prognosis and dynamic variation 
in disease progress.

Desch A(1), Gebhardt C(2)(3), Utikal J(2)(3), Schneider SW(4).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Dermatology, Department of Dermatology, Venereology, and 
Allergology, University Medical Center Mannheim, Ruprecht-Karl University of 
Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Venereology, and Allergology, University Medical 
Center Mannheim, Ruprecht-Karl University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(3)Skin Cancer Unit, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, University Hospital 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Malignant cells elicit a chronic hemostatic activation in disease progress. This 
procoagulant activity does not only bear a risk for thromboembolism but also 
facilitates tumor growth and dissemination. An elevated plasma D-dimer level 
indicates an activated coagulation and fibrinolysis. In this study, the 
association of D-dimer levels with clinicopathological parameters and patients 
outcome in melanoma was investigated analyzing in total 533 melanoma patients 
retrospectively. Using the cut-off point of 0.6 mg/L D-dimer 145 of the total 
533 patients (27.2%) were identified with elevated plasma D-dimer levels. This 
increased D-dimer level positively correlated with tumor thickness (p = 0.0003), 
lymph node invasion (p = 0.0004) and metastatic state (p <0.0001). To assess the 
association of D-dimer levels with progression-free survival (PFS) and overall 
survival (OS), long-rank test and the Cox proportional hazard model was 
performed. Univariate analyses revealed that elevated D-dimer levels were 
significantly associated with decreased PFS (HR:2.89, 95% CI (2.07-7.56), 
p < 0.0001) and OS (HR:2.22, 95% CI (1.06-4.57), p = 0.035). Moreover, 
multivariate analyses identified elevated D-dimer levels being associated with 
poor disease outcome (PFS:HR:2.47, 95% CI (1.23-4.98), p = 0.012; OS:HR:2.01, 
95% CI (0.09-4.45), p = 0.087). Additionally, D-dimer levels were significantly 
increased in terminal stage patients when comparing plasma levels 0-8 versus 
24-48 weeks before death (p = 0.0003). In summary, this study presents multiple 
evidence that elevated D-dimer levels in melanoma patients associate with poor 
prognosis and therefore plasma levels of D-dimers could reveal a more aggressive 
phenotype of melanoma and may guide the management of anti-melanoma treatment 
including the concept of an anti-coagulatory therapy in tumor patients.

© 2016 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.30498
PMID: 27813063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]