---
reference_id: "PMID:23824674"
title: Clinical and radiographic features of the autosomal recessive form of brachyolmia caused by PAPSS2 mutations.
authors:
- Iida A
- Simsek-Kiper PÖ
- Mizumoto S
- Hoshino T
- Elcioglu N
- Horemuzova E
- Geiberger S
- Yesil G
- Kayserili H
- Utine GE
- Boduroglu K
- Watanabe S
- Ohashi H
- Alanay Y
- Sugahara K
- Nishimura G
- Ikegawa S
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22377
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- Enzyme Activation
- Exons
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Introns
- Male
- "Multienzyme Complexes/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- "Sulfate Adenylyltransferase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and radiographic features of the autosomal recessive form of brachyolmia caused by PAPSS2 mutations.
**Authors:** Iida A, Simsek-Kiper PÖ, Mizumoto S, Hoshino T, Elcioglu N, Horemuzova E, Geiberger S, Yesil G, Kayserili H, Utine GE, Boduroglu K, Watanabe S, Ohashi H, Alanay Y, Sugahara K, Nishimura G, Ikegawa S
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22377](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22377)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Oct;34(10):1381-6. doi: 10.1002/humu.22377. Epub 2013 Jul 26.

Clinical and radiographic features of the autosomal recessive form of 
brachyolmia caused by PAPSS2 mutations.

Iida A(1), Simsek-Kiper PÖ, Mizumoto S, Hoshino T, Elcioglu N, Horemuzova E, 
Geiberger S, Yesil G, Kayserili H, Utine GE, Boduroglu K, Watanabe S, Ohashi H, 
Alanay Y, Sugahara K, Nishimura G, Ikegawa S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Bone and Joint Diseases, Center for Integrative Medical 
Science, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan.

Brachyolmia is a heterogeneous skeletal dysplasia characterized by generalized 
platyspondyly without significant long-bone abnormalities. Based on the mode of 
inheritance and radiographic features, at least three types of brachyolmia have 
been postulated. We recently identified an autosomal recessive form of 
brachyolmia that is caused by loss-of-function mutations of PAPSS2, the gene 
encoding PAPS (3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate) synthase 2. To understand 
brachyolmia caused by PAPSS2 mutations (PAPSS2-brachyolmia), we extended our 
PAPSS2 mutation analysis to 13 patients from 10 families and identified 
homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in all. Nine different mutations 
were found: three splice donor-site mutations, three missense mutations, and 
three insertion or deletion mutations within coding regions. In vitro enzyme 
assays showed that the missense mutations were also loss-of-function mutations. 
Phenotypic characteristics of PAPSS2-brachyolmia include short-trunk short 
stature, normal intelligence and facies, spinal deformity, and broad proximal 
interphalangeal joints. Radiographic features include platyspondyly with 
rectangular vertebral bodies and irregular end plates, broad ilia, metaphyseal 
changes of the proximal femur, including short femoral neck and striation, and 
dysplasia of the short tubular bones. PAPSS2-brachyolmia includes phenotypes of 
the conventional clinical concept of brachyolmia, the Hobaek and Toledo types, 
and is associated with abnormal androgen metabolism.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22377
PMID: 23824674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]