---
reference_id: "PMID:33772704"
title: The patient journey to diagnosis and treatment of congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency.
authors:
- Smith H
- Romero B
- Flood E
- Boney A
journal: Qual Life Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s11136-021-02819-z
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Child
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Quality of Life/psychology
- "Sucrase-Isomaltase Complex/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The patient journey to diagnosis and treatment of congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency.
**Authors:** Smith H, Romero B, Flood E, Boney A
**Journal:** Qual Life Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11136-021-02819-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11136-021-02819-z)

## Content

1. Qual Life Res. 2021 Aug;30(8):2329-2338. doi: 10.1007/s11136-021-02819-z. Epub
 2021 Mar 27.

The patient journey to diagnosis and treatment of congenital sucrase-isomaltase 
deficiency.

Smith H(1), Romero B(2), Flood E(3), Boney A(1).

Author information:
(1)QOL Medical, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(2)ICON Plc, Gaithersburg, MD, USA. Beverly.Romero@iconplc.com.
(3)ICON Plc, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

PURPOSE: Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency (CSID) is a rare genetic 
disorder characterized by a deficiency of the sucrase-isomaltase (SI) enzyme 
complex within the brush border membrane of the small intestine. Mutations in 
the SI gene result in abnormal synthesis and/or incorrect transport of the SI 
enzyme. Patients with CSID generally have reduced sucrase activity, but levels 
of isomaltase activity range from absent to almost normal. This study sought to 
better understand the experience of patients with CSID prior to, during, and 
after their diagnosis and its subsequent treatment with sacrosidase.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional interview study conducted in conjunction 
with a longitudinal, observational study of US patients prescribed and taking 
sacrosidase for at least three consecutive months as treatment for CSID. The 
observational study included both children and adults.
RESULTS: This qualitative interview study explored the experiences of 43 adult 
and pediatric patients (n = 8 adults and n = 35 children/adolescents) with CSID 
pre-, during, and post-diagnosis. Findings suggest that a CSID diagnosis is 
particularly problematic given the disparate range of more commonly understood 
gastrointestinal (GI) disorders. After diagnosis and treatment with sacrosidase, 
participants reported considerable improvement in symptoms and health-related 
quality of life (HRQL), yet symptoms persist that continue to affect daily life, 
indicating areas of potential unmet need.
CONCLUSION: Educating clinicians about CSID may help improve the overall 
diagnosis experience. As this research is the first of its kind in CSID, 
additional research, qualitative and quantitative, will be important to 
furthering the understanding of HRQL impact and unmet need experienced by this 
population and identifying ways to best meet those needs.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-021-02819-z
PMCID: PMC8298246
PMID: 33772704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: At the time of the study, Heather Smith and Anne 
Boney were employees of QOL Medical. At the time of the study, Emuella Flood was 
an employee of ICON, plc., which was contracted by QOL Medical to conduct the 
qualitative interview study. Beverly Romero is a current employee of ICON, plc.