---
reference_id: "PMID:39263415"
title: Device Closure of Hemodynamically Significant Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Premature Infants.
authors:
- Baruteau AE
- Méot M
- Benbrik N
- Grunenwald C
- Lwin N
- Patkai J
- Rozé JC
- Bonnet D
- Malekzadeh-Milani S
journal: JACC Adv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacadv.2024.101211
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Device Closure of Hemodynamically Significant Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Premature Infants.
**Authors:** Baruteau AE, Méot M, Benbrik N, Grunenwald C, Lwin N, Patkai J, Rozé JC, Bonnet D, Malekzadeh-Milani S
**Journal:** JACC Adv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacadv.2024.101211](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacadv.2024.101211)

## Content

1. JACC Adv. 2024 Aug 24;3(10):101211. doi: 10.1016/j.jacadv.2024.101211. 
eCollection 2024 Oct.

Device Closure of Hemodynamically Significant Patent Ductus Arteriosus 
in Premature Infants.

Baruteau AE(1)(2)(3)(4), Méot M(5), Benbrik N(1), Grunenwald C(1), Lwin N(1)(2), 
Patkai J(6), Rozé JC(2), Bonnet D(5)(7), Malekzadeh-Milani S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Pediatric Cardiac Surgery, Nantes 
Université, CHU Nantes, FHU PreciCare, Nantes, France.
(2)Nantes Université, CHU Nantes, INSERM, CIC FEA 1413, Nantes, France.
(3)Nantes Université, CHU Nantes, CNRS, INSERM, l'institut du thorax, Nantes, 
France.
(4)Nantes Université, INRAE, UMR 1280, PhAN, Nantes, France.
(5)M3C-Necker, Department of Pediatric and Congenital Cardiology, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, 
France.
(6)Department of Neonatal Medicine, Cochin-Port Royal Hospital, FHU PREMA, APHP, 
Paris, France.
(7)University Paris Cité, Paris, France.

The patent ductus arteriosus is a very common condition in preterm infants, and 
a hemodynamically significant patent ductus arteriosus increases morbidity and 
mortality in these vulnerable patients. However, despite numerous randomized 
controlled trials, there is no consensus regarding management. Medical therapy 
is typically offered as first-line treatment, although it yields limited success 
and carries the potential for severe adverse events. In recent years, there has 
been rapid development in transcatheter patent ductus arteriosus closure primary 
with the use of the Amplatzer Piccolo Occluder, and this has gained widespread 
acceptance as a safe and effective alternative to surgical ligation in extremely 
low-birth-weight infants weighing over 700 g. This article aims to provide an 
appraisal of the patient selection process, a step-by-step procedural guide, and 
a comprehensive review of the outcomes associated with this approach.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacadv.2024.101211
PMCID: PMC11388744
PMID: 39263415

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Alban-Elouen Baruteau is supported by the 
French Government as part of the “Investments of the Future” program managed by 
the National Research Agency (grant reference ANR-16-IDEX-0007); and is a 
consultant and proctor for Abbott. All other authors have reported that they 
have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.