---
reference_id: "PMID:29437028"
title: Changes in the Peripheral Endocannabinoid System as a Risk Factor for the Development of Eating Disorders.
authors:
- Capasso A
- Milano W
- Cauli O
journal: Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2174/1871530318666180213112406
keywords:
- "Adipose Tissue/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Animals
- Body Weight
- "Brain/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Endocannabinoids/metabolism
- Energy Metabolism
- Feeding Behavior
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/metabolism, physiopathology, psychology"
- Humans
- "Islets of Langerhans/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Liver/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Nutritional Status
- "Receptor, Cannabinoid, CB1/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Changes in the Peripheral Endocannabinoid System as a Risk Factor for the Development of Eating Disorders.
**Authors:** Capasso A, Milano W, Cauli O
**Journal:** Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1871530318666180213112406](https://doi.org/10.2174/1871530318666180213112406)

## Content

1. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets. 2018;18(4):325-332. doi:
10.2174/1871530318666180213112406.

Changes in the Peripheral Endocannabinoid System as a Risk Factor for the
Development of Eating Disorders.

Capasso A(1), Milano W(2), Cauli O(3).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Farmacia, Universita di Salerno, Fisciano, Italy.
(2)Unita Operativa di Salute Mentale Distretto 24 ASL Napoli 1 Centro, Napoli,
Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Infermieristica, Universita di Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Eating Disorder (ED) is characterized by persistently
and severely disturbed eating behaviours. They arise from a combination of
long-standing behavioural, emotional, psychological, interpersonal, and social
factors and result in insufficient nutrient ingestion and/or adsorption. The
three main EDs are: anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating
disorder. We review the role of peripheral endocannabinoids in eating behaviour.
DISCUSSION: The neuronal pathways involved in feeding behaviours are closely
related to catecholaminergic, serotoninergic and peptidergic systems.
Accordingly, feeding is promoted by serotonin, dopamine, and prostaglandin and
inhibited by neuropeptide Y, norepinephrine, GABA, and opioid peptides. The
endocannabinoid system plays a role in EDs, and multiple lines of evidence
indicate that the cannabinoid signalling system is a key modulatory factor of
the activity in the brain areas involved in EDs as well as in reward processes.
CONCLUSION: Besides their central role in controlling food behaviours,
peripheral cannabinoids are also involved in regulating adipose tissue and
insulin signalling as well as cell metabolism in peripheral tissues such as
liver, pancreas, fatty tissue, and skeletal muscle. Altogether, these data
indicate that peripheral cannabinoids can provide new therapeutic targets not
only for EDs but also for metabolic disease.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1871530318666180213112406
PMID: 29437028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
