---
reference_id: "PMID:35299962"
title: HNF1A：From Monogenic Diabetes to Type 2 Diabetes and Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.
authors:
- Li LM
- Jiang BG
- Sun LL
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2022.829565
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HNF1A：From Monogenic Diabetes to Type 2 Diabetes and Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.
**Authors:** Li LM, Jiang BG, Sun LL
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2022.829565](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2022.829565)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Mar 1;13:829565. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.829565. eCollection 2022.

HNF1A：From Monogenic Diabetes to Type 2 Diabetes and Gestational Diabetes 
Mellitus.

Li LM(1), Jiang BG(2), Sun LL(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Translational Medicine, Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias of 
the Ministry of Education of China, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Third Department of Hepatic Surgery, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, 
Naval Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Changzheng Hospital, Naval 
Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Diabetes, a disease characterized by hyperglycemia, has a serious impact on the 
lives and families of patients as well as on society. Diabetes is a group of 
highly heterogeneous metabolic diseases that can be classified as type 1 
diabetes (T1D), type 2 diabetes (T2D), gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), or 
other according to the etiology. The clinical manifestations are more or less 
similar among the different types of diabetes, and each type is highly 
heterogeneous due to different pathogenic factors. Therefore, distinguishing 
between various types of diabetes and defining their subtypes are major 
challenges hindering the precise treatment of the disease. T2D is the main type 
of diabetes in humans as well as the most heterogeneous. Fortunately, some 
studies have shown that variants of certain genes involved in monogenic diabetes 
also increase the risk of T2D. We hope this finding will enable breakthroughs 
regarding the pathogenesis of T2D and facilitate personalized treatment of the 
disease by exploring the function of the signal genes involved. Hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 1 homeobox A (HNF1α) is widely expressed in pancreatic β cells, 
the liver, the intestines, and other organs. HNF1α is highly polymorphic, but 
lacks a mutation hot spot. Mutations can be found at any site of the gene. Some 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) cause maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young type 3 (MODY3) while some others do not cause MODY3 but increase the 
susceptibility to T2D or GDM. The phenotypes of MODY3 caused by different SNPs 
also differ. MODY3 is among the most common types of MODY, which is a form of 
monogenic diabetes mellitus caused by a single gene mutation. Both T2D and GDM 
are multifactorial diseases caused by both genetic and environmental factors. 
Different types of diabetes mellitus have different clinical phenotypes and 
treatments. This review focuses on HNF1α gene polymorphisms, HNF1A-MODY3, 
HNF1A-associated T2D and GDM, and the related pathogenesis and treatment 
methods. We hope this review will provide a valuable reference for the precise 
and individualized treatment of diabetes caused by abnormal HNF1α by summarizing 
the clinical heterogeneity of blood glucose abnormalities caused by HNF1α 
mutation.

Copyright © 2022 Li, Jiang and Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.829565
PMCID: PMC8921476
PMID: 35299962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.