---
reference_id: "PMID:35486194"
title: Identification of a new splice-acceptor mutation in HFM1 and functional analysis through molecular docking in nonobstructive azoospermia.
authors:
- Saebnia N
- Ebrahimzadeh-Vesal R
- Haddad-Mashhadrizeh A
- Gholampour-Faroji N
- Schinzel A
- Neshati Z
- Azimi-Nezhad M
journal: J Assist Reprod Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10815-022-02433-z
keywords:
- Adenosine Diphosphate/metabolism
- Azoospermia/diagnosis
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Docking Simulation
- Mutation/genetics
- Testis/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a new splice-acceptor mutation in HFM1 and functional analysis through molecular docking in nonobstructive azoospermia.
**Authors:** Saebnia N, Ebrahimzadeh-Vesal R, Haddad-Mashhadrizeh A, Gholampour-Faroji N, Schinzel A, Neshati Z, Azimi-Nezhad M
**Journal:** J Assist Reprod Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10815-022-02433-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-022-02433-z)

## Content

1. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2022 May;39(5):1195-1203. doi: 
10.1007/s10815-022-02433-z. Epub 2022 Apr 29.

Identification of a new splice-acceptor mutation in HFM1 and functional analysis 
through molecular docking in nonobstructive azoospermia.

Saebnia N(1), Ebrahimzadeh-Vesal R(2), Haddad-Mashhadrizeh A(3), 
Gholampour-Faroji N(4), Schinzel A(5), Neshati Z(6)(7), Azimi-Nezhad M(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, 
Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Center, Neyshabur University of Medical 
Sciences, Neyshabur, Iran.
(3)Industrial Biotechnology Research Group, Institute of Biotechnology, Ferdowsi 
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)Biotechnology Department, Iranian Research Organization for Science and 
Technology (IROST), Tehran, Iran.
(5)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, 
Mashhad, Iran. neshati@um.ac.ir.
(7)Novel Diagnostics and Therapeutics Research Group, Institute of 
Biotechnology, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. neshati@um.ac.ir.
(8)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Center, Neyshabur University of Medical 
Sciences, Neyshabur, Iran. aziminm@gmail.com.
(9)UMR INSERM U 1122, IGE-PCV, Interactions Gène-Environment En Physiopathologie 
Cardiovascular Université De Lorraine, Nancy, France. aziminm@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: To investigate the genetic cause of nonobstructive azoospermia (NOA).
METHODS: We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) on the proband who had three 
relatives suffering from NOA. We used a list of candidate genes which have high 
expression level in testis and their mutations have been reported in NOA. Sanger 
sequencing verified the identified variant and its structural and functional 
consequence was evaluated by protein three-dimensional (3D) structure prediction 
and protein-ligand docking.
RESULTS: WES revealed a novel splice-acceptor mutation (c.1832-2A>T) in helicase 
for meiosis 1 (HFM1) gene, which co-segregated with the NOA in this family. 3D 
structural models were generated and verified. Molecular docking indicated that 
the c.1832-2A>T mutation affects not only the ADP binding residues but also the 
hydrogen bond interactions. The ADP binding site will be lost in the mutant 
protein, potentially causing defective crossover and synapsis.
CONCLUSION: We report that the c.1832-2A>T mutation is the likely cause of NOA 
in the family studied. Regarding that many reported NOA genes are involved in 
the formation of crossovers and synapsis and have critical roles in the 
production of germ cells, we suggest that such genes should be considered for 
screening of infertility among large cohorts of infertile individuals.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10815-022-02433-z
PMCID: PMC9107553
PMID: 35486194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.