---
reference_id: "PMID:25944380"
title: "Genetic epidemiology, prevalence, and genotype-phenotype correlations in the Swedish population with osteogenesis imperfecta."
authors:
- Lindahl K
- Åström E
- Rubin CJ
- Grigelioniene G
- Malmgren B
- Ljunggren Ö
- Kindmark A
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.81
keywords:
- Adult
- Bone Density/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Genetics, Population"
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Epidemiology
- Mutation
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Sweden
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic epidemiology, prevalence, and genotype-phenotype correlations in the Swedish population with osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Lindahl K, Åström E, Rubin CJ, Grigelioniene G, Malmgren B, Ljunggren Ö, Kindmark A
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2015.81](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2015.81)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Aug;23(8):1042-50. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.81. Epub 2015 
May 6.

Genetic epidemiology, prevalence, and genotype-phenotype correlations in the 
Swedish population with osteogenesis imperfecta.

Lindahl K(1), Åström E(2), Rubin CJ(3), Grigelioniene G(4), Malmgren B(5), 
Ljunggren Ö(1), Kindmark A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)1] Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden [2] Neuropediatric Unit, Astrid Lindgren's Children's 
Hospital, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)1] Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden [2] Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University 
Hospital Stockholm, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)1] Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden [2] Division of Paediatrics, Department of Clinical 
Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, 
Sweden.
(6)1] Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden [2] 
Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University 
Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Aug;23(8):1112. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.129.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare hereditary bone fragility disorder, 
caused by collagen I mutations in 90% of cases. There are no comprehensive 
genotype-phenotype studies on >100 families outside North America, and no 
population-based studies determining the genetic epidemiology of OI. Here, 
detailed clinical phenotypes were recorded, and the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes were 
analyzed in 164 Swedish OI families (223 individuals). Averages for bone mineral 
density (BMD), height and yearly fracture rate were calculated and related to OI 
and mutation type. N-terminal helical mutations in both the α1- and α2-chains 
were associated with the absence of dentinogenesis imperfecta (P<0.0001 vs 
0.0049), while only those in the α1-chain were associated with blue sclera 
(P=0.0110). Comparing glycine with serine substitutions, α1-alterations were 
associated with more severe phenotype (P=0.0031). Individuals with type I OI 
caused by qualitative vs quantitative mutations were shorter (P<0.0001), but did 
not differ considering fractures or BMD. The children in this cohort were 
estimated to represent >95% of the complete Swedish pediatric OI population. The 
prevalence of OI types I, III, and IV was 5.16, 0.89, and 1.35/100 000, 
respectively (7.40/100 000 overall), corresponding to what has been estimated 
but not unequivocally proven in any population. Collagen I mutation analysis was 
performed in the family of 97% of known cases, with causative mutations found in 
87%. Qualitative mutations caused 32% of OI type I. The data reported here may 
be helpful to predict phenotype, and describes for the first time the genetic 
epidemiology in >95% of an entire OI population.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.81
PMCID: PMC4795106
PMID: 25944380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]