---
reference_id: "PMID:28460155"
title: "Mechanism of Generation of Oxidative Stress and Pathophysiology of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: How Are They Interlinked?"
authors:
- Rehman K
- Akash MSH
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/jcb.26097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of Generation of Oxidative Stress and Pathophysiology of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: How Are They Interlinked?
**Authors:** Rehman K, Akash MSH
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.26097](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.26097)

## Content

1. J Cell Biochem. 2017 Nov;118(11):3577-3585. doi: 10.1002/jcb.26097. Epub 2017 
May 31.

Mechanism of Generation of Oxidative Stress and Pathophysiology of Type 2 
Diabetes Mellitus: How Are They Interlinked?

Rehman K(1), Akash MSH(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacy, Physiology and Pharmacology, University of 
Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Government College University 
Faisalabad, Faisalabad, Pakistan.

Oxidative stress has been considered as a major hallmark for the pathogenesis 
and development of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), but still it is debatable 
whether it is a mere aggregation of inflammatory-induced responses or clinical 
entity that underlies with various pathophysiological factors. In this regard, 
the latest studies have shown the increasing trends for the involvement of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress in the pathogenesis and 
development of T2DM. ROS are highly reactive species and almost all cellular 
components are chemically changed due to the influence of ROS that ultimately 
results in the production of lipid peroxidation. Lipid peroxidation is a major 
causative factor for the development of oxidative stress that leads to overt 
T2DM and its associated micro- and macro-vascular complications. In this 
article, we have briefly described the role of various causative factors, 
transcriptional and metabolic pathways which are responsible to increase the 
production of oxidative stress, a most pivotal factor for the pathogenesis and 
development of T2DM. Therefore, we conclude that measurement of oxidative stress 
biomarkers may be one of the optional tool for the diagnosis and prediction of 
T2DM. Moreover, the key findings described in this article also provides a new 
conceptual framework for forthcoming investigations on the role of oxidative 
stress in pathogenesis of T2DM and drug discovery. J. Cell. Biochem. 118: 
3577-3585, 2017. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.26097
PMID: 28460155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]