---
reference_id: "PMID:34493284"
title: "The prevalence of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) variants in patients with breast cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Moslemi M
- Vafaei M
- Khani P
- Soheili M
- Nedaeinia R
- Manian M
- Moradi Y
- Sohrabi E
journal: Cancer Cell Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12935-021-02172-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prevalence of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) variants in patients with breast cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Moslemi M, Vafaei M, Khani P, Soheili M, Nedaeinia R, Manian M, Moradi Y, Sohrabi E
**Journal:** Cancer Cell Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12935-021-02172-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12935-021-02172-8)

## Content

1. Cancer Cell Int. 2021 Sep 8;21(1):474. doi: 10.1186/s12935-021-02172-8.

The prevalence of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) variants in patients with
breast cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Moslemi M(1), Vafaei M(2), Khani P(3), Soheili M(4), Nedaeinia R(5), Manian
M(6)(7), Moradi Y(8)(9), Sohrabi E(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
Iran University of Medical Sciences Tehran (IUMS), Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Sadoughi University of
Medical Sciences, Yazd, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah,
Iran.
(5)Pediatric Inherited Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for
Primordial Prevention of Non-Communicable Disease, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(6)Department of Medical Laboratory Science, Faculty of Medicine, Kermanshah
Branch, Islamic Azad University, Kermanshah, Iran.
(7)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Social Determinants of Health Research Center, Research Institute for Health
Development, Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran.
Yousef.Moradi@muk.ac.ir.
(9)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, Kurdistan
University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. Yousef.Moradi@muk.ac.ir.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
Iran University of Medical Sciences Tehran (IUMS), Tehran, Iran.
e.sohrabi95@gmail.com.

Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women, and its high mortality has
become one of the biggest health problems globally. Several studies have
reported an association between breast cancer and ATM gene variants. This study
aimed to demonstrate and analyze the relationship between ATM gene polymorphisms
and breast cancer prevalence rate. A systematic literature review was undertaken
using the following databases: Medline (PubMed), Web of sciences, Scopus,
EMBASE, Cochrane, Ovid, and CINHAL to retrieve all cross-sectional studies
between January 1990 and January 2020, which had reported the frequency of ATM
variants in patients with breast cancer. A random-effects model was applied to
calculate the pooled prevalence with a 95% confidence interval. The pooled
prevalence of ATM variants in patients with breast cancer was 7% (95% CI: 5-8%).
Also, the pooled estimate based on type of variants was 6% (95% CI: 4-8%; I
square: 94%; P: 0.00) for total variants¸ 0% (95% CI: 0-1%; I square: 0%; P:
0.59) for deletion variants, 12% (95% CI: 7-18%; I square: 99%; P: 0.00) for
substitution variants, and 2% (95% CI: 4-9%; I square: 67%; P: 0.08) for
insertion variants. This meta-analysis showed that there is a significant
relationship between ATM variants in breast cancer patients. Further studies are
required to determine which of the variants of the ATM gene are associated with
BRCA mutations.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12935-021-02172-8
PMCID: PMC8424893
PMID: 34493284

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
