---
reference_id: "PMID:21492734"
title: Spinal meningeal melanocytoma in the S-1 nerve root sheath with paraspinal extension mimicking schwannoma.
authors:
- Eun SS
- Kim HS
- Lee SH
- Liu WC
- Lee JH
journal: World Neurosurg
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2010.06.034
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Melanocytes/pathology
- Melanoma/pathology
- Meningeal Neoplasms/pathology
- Middle Aged
- Nerve Sheath Neoplasms/pathology
- Neurilemmoma/pathology
- Sacrum
- Spinal Nerve Roots/pathology
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal meningeal melanocytoma in the S-1 nerve root sheath with paraspinal extension mimicking schwannoma.
**Authors:** Eun SS, Kim HS, Lee SH, Liu WC, Lee JH
**Journal:** World Neurosurg (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.wneu.2010.06.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2010.06.034)

## Content

1. World Neurosurg. 2011 Feb;75(2):303-6. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2010.06.034.

Spinal meningeal melanocytoma in the S-1 nerve root sheath with paraspinal 
extension mimicking schwannoma.

Eun SS(1), Kim HS, Lee SH, Liu WC, Lee JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Wooridul Spine Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Spinal melanocytomas are variants that can be extradural or 
intradural and are most often located in the intradural extramedullary 
compartment of the main thecal sac as in schwannomas. However, origin of this 
variant from the pure peripheral compartment of rootlets is exceedingly rare.
CASE DESCRIPTION: The authors present a case of spinal melanocytoma with 
confusing pathologic and radiologic features. This patient presented clinically 
with severe radiating pain on the right lower extremity. Before surgery, 
clinical and radiologic findings were consistent with a schwannoma. However, on 
operation, a coal-black pigmented lesion mimicking old blood clot was found 
inside the right S-1 root sheath, attached to the dura. The mass was completely 
removed and consequently the patient's symptoms improved.
CONCLUSIONS: The spinal melanocytoma should be included as a differential 
diagnosis before giving a presumptive diagnosis of schwannoma or hemorrhage for 
the patient with a space-occupying lesion at a peripheral rootlet. 
Intraoperative gross morphology and histopathologic findings facilitate 
differential diagnosis.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2010.06.034
PMID: 21492734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]