---
reference_id: "PMID:23926091"
title: "Symptom complexes at the earliest phases of rheumatoid arthritis: a synthesis of the qualitative literature."
authors:
- Stack RJ
- Sahni M
- Mallen CD
- Raza K
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/acr.22097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Symptom complexes at the earliest phases of rheumatoid arthritis: a synthesis of the qualitative literature.
**Authors:** Stack RJ, Sahni M, Mallen CD, Raza K
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.22097](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.22097)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2013 Dec;65(12):1916-26. doi: 10.1002/acr.22097.

Symptom complexes at the earliest phases of rheumatoid arthritis: a synthesis of 
the qualitative literature.

Stack RJ(1), Sahni M, Mallen CD, Raza K.

Author information:
(1)Sandwell and West Birmingham Hospitals NHS Trust and Centre for Translational 
Inflammation Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Understanding the features and patterns of symptoms that characterize 
the earliest stages of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is of considerable importance 
if patients are to be identified and started on treatment early. However, little 
is known about the characteristics of symptoms at the onset of a disease that 
eventually progresses to RA.
METHODS: A systematic review of qualitative peer-reviewed publications was 
conducted to identify the earliest symptoms associated with the onset of RA. A 
total of 1,736 abstracts were searched to identify relevant publications. 
Twenty-six publications were identified, assessed for quality, and subjected to 
analysis informed by thematic and grounded theory frameworks.
RESULTS: Several interacting themes describing the early symptoms of RA were 
identified, including swelling, pain and tenderness, stiffness, fatigue and 
weakness, and the emotional impact of symptoms. For each symptom, different and 
evolving intensities were described; in some cases, patterns of symptom onset 
and symptom complexes at the onset of RA were highlighted. Importantly, this 
review has emphasized major deficiencies in the literature. None of the studies 
reviewed originally aimed to explore symptoms at RA onset (often discussions 
about symptom onset were secondary to the study's primary aim). Also, many of 
the articles identified sampled people diagnosed with RA many years previously, 
making their recollection of symptoms at onset less reliable.
CONCLUSION: In order for clinicians to fully understand the earliest phases of 
disease, the nature of symptoms at onset needs to be understood. The current 
work represents a useful starting point, but this area needs further qualitative 
investigation, followed by quantitative explorations of symptom clusters and 
their associated features.

© 2013 The Authors. Arthritis Care & Research is published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc. on behalf of the American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.22097
PMCID: PMC4030621
PMID: 23926091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]