---
reference_id: "PMID:34861197"
title: "Mistaken Identity: Many Diagnoses are Frequently Misattributed to Lyme Disease."
authors:
- Kobayashi T
- Higgins Y
- Melia MT
- Auwaerter PG
journal: Am J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2021.10.040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mistaken Identity: Many Diagnoses are Frequently Misattributed to Lyme Disease.
**Authors:** Kobayashi T, Higgins Y, Melia MT, Auwaerter PG
**Journal:** Am J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjmed.2021.10.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2021.10.040)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 2022 Apr;135(4):503-511.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2021.10.040. Epub 
2021 Nov 30.

Mistaken Identity: Many Diagnoses are Frequently Misattributed to Lyme Disease.

Kobayashi T(1), Higgins Y(2), Melia MT(3), Auwaerter PG(2).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Disease, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City; 
Sherrilyn and Ken Fisher Center for Environmental Infectious Diseases. 
Electronic address: Takaaki-kobayashi@uiowa.edu.
(2)Sherrilyn and Ken Fisher Center for Environmental Infectious Diseases; 
Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md.

BACKGROUND: Prior studies have demonstrated that Lyme disease is frequently 
over-diagnosed. However, few studies describe which conditions are misdiagnosed 
as Lyme disease.
METHODS: This retrospective observational cohort study evaluated patients who 
lacked evidence for Borrelia burgdorferi infection referred for Lyme disease to 
a Mid-Atlantic academic center from 2000-2013. The primary outcome is clinically 
described diagnoses contributing to symptoms. Secondary outcomes included 
symptom duration and determination whether diagnoses were new or attributed to 
existing medical conditions.
RESULTS: Of 1261 referred patients, 1061 (84%) had no findings of active Lyme 
disease, with 690 (65%) receiving other diagnoses; resulting in 405 (59%) having 
newly diagnosed medical conditions, 134 (19%) attributed to pre-existing medical 
issues, and 151 (22%) with both new and pre-existing conditions. Among the 690 
patients, the median symptom duration was 796 days, and a total of 139 discrete 
diagnoses were made. Infectious disease diagnoses comprised only 3.2%. Leading 
diagnoses were anxiety/depression 222 (21%), fibromyalgia 120 (11%), chronic 
fatigue syndrome 77 (7%), migraine disorder 74 (7%), osteoarthritis 62 (6%), and 
sleep disorder/apnea 48 (5%). Examples of less frequent but non-syndromic 
diseases newly diagnosed included multiple sclerosis (n = 11), malignancy 
(n = 8), Parkinson's disease (n = 8), sarcoidosis (n = 4), or amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (n = 4).
CONCLUSIONS: Most patients with long-term symptoms have either new or 
pre-existing disorders accounting for their symptoms other than Lyme disease, 
suggesting overdiagnosis in this population. Patients referred for consideration 
of Lyme disease for chronic symptoms deserve careful assessment for diagnoses 
other than Borrelia burgdorferi infection.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2021.10.040
PMID: 34861197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]