---
reference_id: "PMID:41387948"
title: Proteasomal activity and disease outcome in phenylketonuria patients with a structural SLC7A5 variant.
authors:
- Bik-Multanowski M
- Bobis-Wozowicz S
- Piejko M
- Madetko-Talowska A
- Szewczyk K
- Kopaczka-Koziol K
- Lasota S
- Jankowska U
- Skupien-Rabian B
- Korycinska-Chaaban D
- Krzywdzinska-Rogowska A
- Steinlein OK
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-31622-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteasomal activity and disease outcome in phenylketonuria patients with a structural SLC7A5 variant.
**Authors:** Bik-Multanowski M, Bobis-Wozowicz S, Piejko M, Madetko-Talowska A, Szewczyk K, Kopaczka-Koziol K, Lasota S, Jankowska U, Skupien-Rabian B, Korycinska-Chaaban D, Krzywdzinska-Rogowska A, Steinlein OK
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-025-31622-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-31622-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2025 Dec 12;15(1):43813. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-31622-w.

Proteasomal activity and disease outcome in phenylketonuria patients with a 
structural SLC7A5 variant.

Bik-Multanowski M(1)(2), Bobis-Wozowicz S(3), Piejko M(4), Madetko-Talowska 
A(5), Szewczyk K(5), Kopaczka-Koziol K(3), Lasota S(3), Jankowska U(6)(7), 
Skupien-Rabian B(6)(7), Korycinska-Chaaban D(8), Krzywdzinska-Rogowska A(8), 
Steinlein OK(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, 
Germany. miroslaw.bikmultanowski@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 
Krakow, Poland. miroslaw.bikmultanowski@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(3)Jagiellonian University, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Biotechnology, Department of Cell Biology, Krakow, Poland.
(4)Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 
Krakow, Poland.
(6)Jagiellonian University, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Biotechnology, Proteomics Core Facility, Krakow, Poland.
(7)Jagiellonian University, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Krakow, Poland.
(8)Department of Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Paediatrics, Institute of 
Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.
(9)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, 
Germany.

Treatment in phenylketonuria is based on using a diet aimed at protecting the 
brain from uncontrolled hyperphenylalaninemia. Although treatment methods are 
well established, clinical outcomes vary among patients. This may be due to 
alterations of phenylalanine transport mediated by the amino acid transporter 
LAT1, which also regulates the function of the mTORC1/proteasomal pathway. We 
investigated the clinical and cellular effects of a structural variant in the 
SLC7A5 gene, which encodes LAT1. The investigated variant was previously 
associated with altered phenylalanine metabolism in preliminary studies. We 
assessed physical and intellectual development in children with phenylketonuria. 
Next, we explored the cellular mechanisms underlying potential phenotypic 
differences between carriers and noncarriers of the rs113883650 polymorphism - a 
marker of the studied SLC7A5 variant. For cellular experiments we used a model 
of hyperphenylalaninemia based on induced pluripotent stem cells. We assessed 
LAT1 abundance and performed transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. We found 
that carriers of rs113883650 were more prone to being overweight but exhibited 
significantly better intellectual development. They also showed a corresponding 
increased LAT1 abundance and decreased expression of proteasomal genes and the 
FOXO signalling pathway. We propose considering of the rs113883650 status during 
the follow-up of children with phenylketonuria. It may also hold relevance in 
other LAT1-related conditions including cancers.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-31622-w
PMCID: PMC12706028
PMID: 41387948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.