---
reference_id: "PMID:38290492"
title: "Phenotypic Spectrum of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy: Clinical Study and Apolipoprotein E Effect."
authors:
- Nasri A
- Sghaier I
- Neji A
- Gharbi A
- Abida Y
- Mrabet S
- Gargouri A
- Djebara MB
- Kacem I
- Gouider R
journal: J Mov Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.14802/jmd.23178
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic Spectrum of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy: Clinical Study and Apolipoprotein E Effect.
**Authors:** Nasri A, Sghaier I, Neji A, Gharbi A, Abida Y, Mrabet S, Gargouri A, Djebara MB, Kacem I, Gouider R
**Journal:** J Mov Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.14802/jmd.23178](https://doi.org/10.14802/jmd.23178)

## Content

1. J Mov Disord. 2024 Apr;17(2):158-170. doi: 10.14802/jmd.23178. Epub 2024 Jan
30.

Phenotypic Spectrum of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy: Clinical Study and 
Apolipoprotein E Effect.

Nasri A(1)(2)(3), Sghaier I(1)(3), Neji A(1), Gharbi A(1)(2)(3), Abida 
Y(1)(2)(3), Mrabet S(1)(2)(3), Gargouri A(1)(2)(3), Djebara MB(1)(2)(3), Kacem 
I(1)(2)(3), Gouider R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, LR18SP03, Razi University Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, University of Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia.
(3)Clinical Investigation Center (CIC) "Neurosciences and Mental Health", Razi 
University Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.

OBJECTIVE: Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a rare neurodegenerative 
disorder encompassing several phenotypes with various motor and cognitive 
deficits. We aimed to study motor and cognitive characteristics across PSP 
phenotypes and to assess the influence of apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene variants 
on PSP phenotypic expression.
METHODS: In this 20-year cross-sectional study, we retrospectively reviewed the 
charts of all patients classified as PSP patients and recategorized them 
according to phenotype using the Movement Disorder Society criteria (2017). 
Phenotypes were divided into three subgroups, Richardson's syndrome (PSP-RS), 
PSP-cortical (PSP with predominant frontal presentation [PSP-F] + PSP with 
predominant speech/language disorder [PSP-SL] + PSP with predominant 
corticobasal syndrome [PSP-CBS]) and PSP-subcortical (PSP with predominant 
parkinsonism [PSP-P] + PSP with progressive gait freezing [PSP-PGF] + PSP with 
predominant postural instability [PSP-PI] + PSP with predominant ocular motor 
dysfunction [PSP-OM] + PSP with cerebellar ataxia [PSP-C] + PSP with primary 
lateral sclerosis [PSP-PLS]), based on clinical presentation during the first 3 
years after symptom onset, which defines the early disease stage. Clinical and 
neuropsychological assessment data were collected. Genotyping of APOE was 
performed using restriction fragment length polymorphism polymerase chain 
reaction and verified by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: We included 112 PSP patients comprising 10 phenotypes classified into 
48 PSP-RS, 34 PSP-cortical (PSP-CBS, 17.6%; PSP-F, 9.4%; PSP-SL, 8.2%) and 30 
PSP-subcortical (PSP-P, 11.6%; PSP-PI, 8%; PSP-OM, 2.7%; PSP-PGF, 1.8%; PSP-C, 
1.8%; PSP-PLS, 0.9%) subgroups. PSP-RS patients were older at disease onset (p = 
0.009) and had more akinetic-rigid and levodopa-resistant parkinsonism (p = 
0.006), while PSP-cortical patients had more tremors and asymmetric and/or 
levodopa-responsive parkinsonism (p = 0.025). Cognitive domains were 
significantly less altered in the PSP-subcortical subgroup. Overall, PSP-APOEε4 
carriers developed parkinsonism earlier (p = 0.038), had earlier oculomotor 
dysfunction (p = 0.052) and had more altered cognitive profiles. The APOEε4 
allele was also associated with a younger age of parkinsonism onset in the 
PSP-RS phenotype group (p = 0.026).
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated the wide phenotypic spectrum of PSP among 
Tunisians. Disease onset and akinetic-rigid and levodopa-resistant parkinsonism 
were the hallmarks of the PSP-RS phenotype, while milder cognitive impairment 
was characteristic of the PSP-subcortical subgroup. The APOEε4 allele was 
associated with earlier parkinsonism and oculomotor dysfunction and seemed to 
play a role in defining a more altered cognitive profile in PSP patients.

DOI: 10.14802/jmd.23178
PMCID: PMC11082606
PMID: 38290492

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have no 
financial conflicts of interest.