---
reference_id: "PMID:8800808"
title: Emerging and reemerging of filoviruses.
authors:
- Feldmann H
- Slenczka W
- Klenk HD
journal: Arch Virol Suppl
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-7482-1_9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emerging and reemerging of filoviruses.
**Authors:** Feldmann H, Slenczka W, Klenk HD
**Journal:** Arch Virol Suppl (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-7091-7482-1_9](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7091-7482-1_9)

## Content

1. Arch Virol Suppl. 1996;11:77-100. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-7482-1_9.

Emerging and reemerging of filoviruses.

Feldmann H(1), Slenczka W, Klenk HD.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, Philipps-University, Marburg, Federal Republic of 
Germany.

Filoviruses are causative agents of a hemorrhagic fever in man with mortalities 
ranging from 22 to 88%. They are enveloped, nonsegmented negative-stranded RNA 
viruses and are separated into two types, Marburg and Ebola, which can be 
serologically, biochemically and genetically distinguished. In general, there is 
little genetic variability among viruses belonging to the Marburg type. The 
Ebola type, however, is subdivided into at least three distinct subtypes. 
Marburg virus was first isolated during an outbreak in Europe in 1967. Ebola 
virus emerged in 1976 as the causative agent of two simultaneous outbreaks in 
southern Sudan and northern Zaire. The reemergence of Ebola, subtype Zaire, in 
Kikwit 1995 caused a worldwide sensation, since it struck after a 
sensibilization on the danger of Ebola virus disease. Person-to-person 
transmission by intimate contact is the main route of infection, but 
transmission by droplets and small aerosols among infected individuals is 
discussed. The natural reservoir for filoviruses remains a mystery. Filoviruses 
are prime examples for emerging pathogens. Factors that may be involved in 
emergence are international commerce and travel, limited experience in diagnosis 
and case management, import of nonhuman primates, and the potential of 
filoviruses for rapid evolution.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-7482-1_9
PMID: 8800808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]