---
reference_id: "PMID:11078770"
title: Atovaquone and azithromycin for the treatment of babesiosis.
authors:
- Krause PJ
- Lepore T
- Sikand VK
- Gadbaw J Jr
- Burke G
- Telford SR 3rd
- Brassard P
- Pearl D
- Azlanzadeh J
- Christianson D
- McGrath D
- Spielman A
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1056/NEJM200011163432004
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Animals
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Antiprotozoal Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Atovaquone
- "Azithromycin/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Babesia/genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Babesiosis/drug therapy, parasitology"
- "Clindamycin/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "DNA, Protozoan/blood"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Naphthoquinones/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Prospective Studies
- "Quinine/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atovaquone and azithromycin for the treatment of babesiosis.
**Authors:** Krause PJ, Lepore T, Sikand VK, Gadbaw J Jr, Burke G, Telford SR 3rd, Brassard P, Pearl D, Azlanzadeh J, Christianson D, McGrath D, Spielman A
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJM200011163432004](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM200011163432004)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2000 Nov 16;343(20):1454-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200011163432004.

Atovaquone and azithromycin for the treatment of babesiosis.

Krause PJ(1), Lepore T, Sikand VK, Gadbaw J Jr, Burke G, Telford SR 3rd,
Brassard P, Pearl D, Azlanzadeh J, Christianson D, McGrath D, Spielman A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Connecticut Children's Medical Center and
the University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Hartford 06106, USA.
krause@nso.uchc.edu

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2001 Mar 8;344(10):773. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200103083441014.
    N Engl J Med. 2001 Mar 8;344(10):773-4.

BACKGROUND: Babesiosis is a tick-borne, malaria-like illness known to be
enzootic in southern New England. A course of clindamycin and quinine is the
standard treatment, but this regimen frequently causes adverse reactions and
occasionally fails. A promising alternative treatment is atovaquone plus
azithromycin.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective, nonblinded, randomized trial of the two
regimens in 58 subjects with non-life-threatening babesiosis on Nantucket, on
Block Island, and in southern Connecticut. The subjects were assigned to receive
either atovaquone (750 mg every 12 hours) and azithromycin (500 mg on day 1 and
250 mg per day thereafter) for seven days (40 subjects) or clindamycin (600 mg
every 8 hours) and quinine (650 mg every 8 hours) for seven days (18 subjects).
RESULTS: Adverse effects were reported by 15 percent of the subjects who
received atovaquone and azithromycin, as compared with 72 percent of those who
received clindamycin and quinine (P<0.001). The most common adverse effects with
atovaquone and azithromycin were diarrhea and rash (each in 8 percent of the
subjects); with clindamycin and quinine the most common adverse effects were
tinnitus (39 percent), diarrhea (33 percent), and decreased hearing (28
percent). Symptoms had resolved three months after the start of therapy in 65
percent of those who received atovaquone and azithromycin and 73 percent of
those who received clindamycin and quinine (P=0.66), and after six months no
patient in either group had symptoms. Three months after the completion of the
assigned regimen, no parasites could be seen on microscopy, and no Babesia
microti DNA was detected in the blood of any subject.
CONCLUSIONS: For the treatment of babesiosis, a regimen of atovaquone and
azithromycin is as effective as a regimen of clindamycin and quinine and is
associated with fewer adverse reactions.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM200011163432004
PMID: 11078770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
