---
reference_id: PMID:34812478
title: "Sometimes the unthinkable happens: How do catastrophic natural disasters impact the population of arts and culture nonprofits?"
authors:
- Gallagher BK
journal: J Emerg Manag
year: '2021'
doi: 10.5055/jem.0505
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sometimes the unthinkable happens: How do catastrophic natural disasters impact the population of arts and culture nonprofits?
**Authors:** Gallagher BK
**Journal:** J Emerg Manag (2021)
**DOI:** [10.5055/jem.0505](https://doi.org/10.5055/jem.0505)

## Content

1. J Emerg Manag. 2021 Sep-Oct;19(5):425-437. doi: 10.5055/jem.0505.

Sometimes the unthinkable happens: How do catastrophic natural disasters impact 
the population of arts and culture nonprofits?

Gallagher BK(1).

Author information:
(1)Political Science, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas.

Arts and culture organizations face numerous threats, and many of them are 
economically based in nature. As governments increasingly leverage arts and 
culture for a variety of policy-based agenda, it is an opportune time to 
evaluate the vulnerabilities facing and the sustainability of the population of 
arts and culture nonprofits, particularly under a variety of conditions. This 
should include cases when the unthinkable happens, as there is a need to 
understand the characteristics of the population before and after a catastrophic 
disaster. This research examines the population of nonprofit arts and culture 
organizations (NPACOs) in the United Sates and answers the questions, "Do 
catastrophic natural disasters impact the population of NPACOs? Do they alter 
patterns of formation and exit?" using quantitative analysis.

DOI: 10.5055/jem.0505
PMID: 34812478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]