---
reference_id: "PMID:37872881"
title: Cell-type-specific gene expression and regulation in the cerebral cortex and kidney of atypical Setbp1(S858R) Schinzel Giedion Syndrome mice.
authors:
- Whitlock JH
- Soelter TM
- Howton TC
- Wilk EJ
- Oza VH
- Lasseigne BN
journal: J Cell Mol Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jcmm.18001
keywords:
- Gene Expression
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- "Nails, Malformed"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital"
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability
- Kidney/pathology
- Animals
- Mice
- Cerebral Cortex/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell-type-specific gene expression and regulation in the cerebral cortex and kidney of atypical Setbp1(S858R) Schinzel Giedion Syndrome mice.
**Authors:** Whitlock JH, Soelter TM, Howton TC, Wilk EJ, Oza VH, Lasseigne BN
**Journal:** J Cell Mol Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jcmm.18001](https://doi.org/10.1111/jcmm.18001)

## Content

1. J Cell Mol Med. 2023 Nov;27(22):3565-3577. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.18001. Epub 2023 
Oct 23.

Cell-type-specific gene expression and regulation in the cerebral cortex and 
kidney of atypical Setbp1(S858R) Schinzel Giedion Syndrome mice.

Whitlock JH(1), Soelter TM(1), Howton TC(1), Wilk EJ(1), Oza VH(1), Lasseigne 
BN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, Heersink School of 
Medicine, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Schinzel Giedion Syndrome (SGS) is an ultra-rare autosomal dominant Mendelian 
disease presenting with abnormalities spanning multiple organ systems. The most 
notable phenotypes involve severe developmental delay, progressive brain 
atrophy, and drug-resistant seizures. SGS is caused by spontaneous variants in 
SETBP1, which encodes for the epigenetic hub SETBP1 transcription factor (TF). 
SETBP1 variants causing classical SGS cluster at the degron, disrupting SETBP1 
protein degradation and resulting in toxic accumulation, while those located 
outside cause milder atypical SGS. Due to the multisystem phenotype, we 
evaluated gene expression and regulatory programs altered in atypical SGS by 
snRNA-seq of the cerebral cortex and kidney of Setbp1S858R heterozygous mice 
(corresponds to the human likely pathogenic SETBP1S867R variant) compared to 
matched wild-type mice by constructing cell-type-specific regulatory networks. 
Setbp1 was differentially expressed in excitatory neurons, but known SETBP1 
targets were differentially expressed and regulated in many cell types. Our 
findings suggest molecular drivers underlying neurodevelopmental phenotypes in 
classical SGS also drive atypical SGS, persist after birth, and are present in 
the kidney. Our results indicate SETBP1's role as an epigenetic hub leads to 
cell-type-specific differences in TF activity, gene targeting, and regulatory 
rewiring. This research provides a framework for investigating 
cell-type-specific variant impact on gene expression and regulation.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by 
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.18001
PMCID: PMC10660642
PMID: 37872881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared no conflicts of 
interest.