---
reference_id: "PMID:25728441"
title: Hypocretin (orexin) biology and the pathophysiology of narcolepsy with cataplexy.
authors:
- Liblau RS
- Vassalli A
- Seifinejad A
- Tafti M
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70218-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypocretin (orexin) biology and the pathophysiology of narcolepsy with cataplexy.
**Authors:** Liblau RS, Vassalli A, Seifinejad A, Tafti M
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70218-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70218-2)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2015 Mar;14(3):318-28. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70218-2. Epub
 2015 Feb 16.

Hypocretin (orexin) biology and the pathophysiology of narcolepsy with 
cataplexy.

Liblau RS(1), Vassalli A(2), Seifinejad A(2), Tafti M(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Physiopathologie Toulouse Purpan, INSERM UMR1043, CNRS UMR5282, 
Université de Toulouse III, Toulouse, France.
(2)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(3)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland; Center for Investigation and Research in Sleep, Vaud University 
Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland. Electronic address: mehdi.tafti@unil.ch.

The discovery of hypocretins (orexins) and their causal implication in 
narcolepsy is the most important advance in sleep research and sleep medicine 
since the discovery of rapid eye movement sleep. Narcolepsy with cataplexy is 
caused by hypocretin deficiency owing to destruction of most of the 
hypocretin-producing neurons in the hypothalamus. Ablation of hypocretin or 
hypocretin receptors also leads to narcolepsy phenotypes in animal models. 
Although the exact mechanism of hypocretin deficiency is unknown, evidence from 
the past 20 years strongly favours an immune-mediated or autoimmune attack, 
targeting specifically hypocretin neurons in genetically predisposed 
individuals. These neurons form an extensive network of projections throughout 
the brain and show activity linked to motivational behaviours. The hypothesis 
that a targeted immune-mediated or autoimmune attack causes the specific 
degeneration of hypocretin neurons arose mainly through the discovery of genetic 
associations, first with the HLA-DQB1*06:02 allele and then with the T-cell 
receptor α locus. Guided by these genetic findings and now awaiting experimental 
testing are models of the possible immune mechanisms by which a specific and 
localised brain cell population could become targeted by T-cell subsets. Great 
hopes for the identification of new targets for therapeutic intervention in 
narcolepsy also reside in the development of patient-derived induced pluripotent 
stem cell systems.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70218-2
PMID: 25728441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]