---
reference_id: "PMID:37700557"
title: CD100 boosts the inflammatory response in the challenge phase of allergic contact dermatitis in mice.
authors:
- Mraz V
- Funch AB
- Jee MH
- Gadsbøll AØ
- Weber JF
- Yeung K
- Lohmann RKD
- Hawkes A
- Ødum N
- Woetmann A
- McKay D
- Witherden D
- Geisler C
- Bonefeld CM
journal: Contact Dermatitis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/cod.14414
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Allergens
- "Dermatitis, Allergic Contact/metabolism"
- Dinitrofluorobenzene/metabolism
- Keratinocytes/metabolism
- Skin
- "Antigens, CD"
- Semaphorins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD100 boosts the inflammatory response in the challenge phase of allergic contact dermatitis in mice.
**Authors:** Mraz V, Funch AB, Jee MH, Gadsbøll AØ, Weber JF, Yeung K, Lohmann RKD, Hawkes A, Ødum N, Woetmann A, McKay D, Witherden D, Geisler C, Bonefeld CM
**Journal:** Contact Dermatitis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cod.14414](https://doi.org/10.1111/cod.14414)

## Content

1. Contact Dermatitis. 2023 Dec;89(6):442-452. doi: 10.1111/cod.14414. Epub 2023 
Sep 12.

CD100 boosts the inflammatory response in the challenge phase of allergic 
contact dermatitis in mice.

Mraz V(1), Funch AB(1)(2), Jee MH(1), Gadsbøll AØ(1), Weber JF(1), Yeung 
K(1)(2), Lohmann RKD(1), Hawkes A(3), Ødum N(1), Woetmann A(1), McKay D(3), 
Witherden D(3), Geisler C(1), Bonefeld CM(1).

Author information:
(1)The LEO Foundation Skin Immunology Research Center, Department of Immunology 
and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, The University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, National Allergy Research Center, 
Copenhagen University Hospital Gentofte, Hellerup, Denmark.
(3)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is an inflammatory disease with a 
complex pathophysiology in which epidermal-resident memory CD8+ T (TRM ) cells 
play a key role. The mechanisms involved in the activation of CD8+ TRM cells 
during allergic flare-up responses are not understood.
METHODS: The expression of CD100 and its ligand Plexin B2 on CD8+ TRM cells and 
keratinocytes before and after allergen exposure was determined by flow 
cytometry and RT-qPCR. The role of CD100 in the inflammatory response during the 
challenge phase of ACD was determined in a model of ACD in CD100 knockout and 
wild-type mice.
RESULTS: We show that CD8+ TRM cells express CD100 during homeostatic conditions 
and up-regulate it following re-exposure of allergen-experienced skin to the 
experimental contact allergen 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (DNFB). Furthermore, 
Plexin B2 is up-regulated on keratinocytes following exposure to some contact 
allergens. We show that loss of CD100 results in a reduced inflammatory response 
to DNFB with impaired production of IFNγ, IL-17A, CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL5, and IL-1β 
and decreased recruitment of neutrophils to the epidermis.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that CD100 is expressed on CD8+ TRM cells and 
is required for full activation of CD8+ TRM cells and the flare-up response of 
ACD.

© 2023 The Authors. Contact Dermatitis published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cod.14414
PMID: 37700557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]