---
reference_id: "PMID:39459875"
title: STING Orchestrates EV-D68 Replication and Immunometabolism within Viral-Induced Replication Organelles.
authors:
- Triantafilou K
- Szomolay B
- Shepherd MW
- Ramanjulu J
- Triantafilou M
journal: Viruses
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/v16101541
keywords:
- Virus Replication
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "SARS-CoV-2/physiology, immunology"
- "Immunity, Innate"
- "Organelles/virology, metabolism"
- Viral Replication Compartments/metabolism
- STING Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STING Orchestrates EV-D68 Replication and Immunometabolism within Viral-Induced Replication Organelles.
**Authors:** Triantafilou K, Szomolay B, Shepherd MW, Ramanjulu J, Triantafilou M
**Journal:** Viruses (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v16101541](https://doi.org/10.3390/v16101541)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2024 Sep 29;16(10):1541. doi: 10.3390/v16101541.

STING Orchestrates EV-D68 Replication and Immunometabolism within Viral-Induced
Replication Organelles.

Triantafilou K(1), Szomolay B(1), Shepherd MW(1), Ramanjulu J(2), Triantafilou
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, School of Medicine, University Hospital
of Wales, Cardiff University, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.
(2)Immunology Research Unit, GlaxoSmithKline, 1250 South Collegeville Road,
Collegeville, PA 19426, USA.

Some respiratory viruses, such as Human Rhinovirus, SARS-CoV-2, and Enterovirus
D-68 (EV-D68), share the feature of hijacking host lipids in order to generate
specialised replication organelles (ROs) with unique lipid compositions to
enable viral replication. We have recently uncovered a novel non-canonical
function of the stimulator of interferon genes (STING) pathway, as a critical
factor in the formation of ROs in response to HRV infection. The STING pathway
is the main DNA virus sensing system of the innate immune system controlling the
type I IFN machinery. Although it is well-characterised as part of the DNA
sensor machinery, the STING function in RNA viral infections is largely
unexplored. In the current study, we investigated whether other RO-forming RNA
viruses, such as EV-D68 and SARS-CoV-2, can also utilise STING for their
replication. Using genetic and pharmacological inhibition, we demonstrate that
STING is hijacked by these viruses and is utilised as part of the viral
replication machinery. STING also co-localises with glycolytic enzymes needed to
fuel the energy for replication. The inhibition of STING leads to the modulation
of glucose metabolism in EV-D68-infected cells, suggesting that it might also
manipulate immunometabolism. Therefore, for RO-generating RNA viruses, STING
seems to have non-canonical functions in membrane lipid re-modelling, and the
formation of replication vesicles, as well as immunometabolism.

DOI: 10.3390/v16101541
PMCID: PMC11512225
PMID: 39459875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Joshi Ramanjulu was employed by the
company GlaxoSmithKline. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
