---
reference_id: "PMID:9856460"
title: Developmental regulation of neuronal K+ channels by target-derived TGF beta in vivo and in vitro.
authors:
- Cameron JS
- Lhuillier L
- Subramony P
- Dryer SE
journal: Neuron
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80622-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developmental regulation of neuronal K+ channels by target-derived TGF beta in vivo and in vitro.
**Authors:** Cameron JS, Lhuillier L, Subramony P, Dryer SE
**Journal:** Neuron (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80622-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80622-4)

## Content

1. Neuron. 1998 Nov;21(5):1045-53. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80622-4.

Developmental regulation of neuronal K+ channels by target-derived TGF beta in 
vivo and in vitro.

Cameron JS(1), Lhuillier L, Subramony P, Dryer SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Texas 77204, 
USA.

The functional expression of Ca2+-activated K+ channels (KCa) in developing 
chick ciliary ganglion (CG) neurons requires interactions with target tissues 
and preganglionic innervation. Here, we show that the stimulatory effects of 
target tissues are mediated by an isoform of TGFbeta. Exposure of cultured CG 
neurons to TGFbeta1, but not TGFbeta2 or TGFbeta3, caused robust stimulation of 
KCa. The KCa stimulatory effects of target tissue extracts were blocked by a 
neutralizing pan-TGFbeta antiserum but not by specific TGFbeta2 or TGFbeta3 
antisera. Intraocular injection of TGFbeta1 caused robust stimulation of KCa, 
whereas intraocular injection of pan-TGFbeta antiserum inhibited expression of 
KCa in CG neurons developing in vivo. The effects of TGFbeta1 were potentiated 
by beta-neuregulin-1, a differentiation factor expressed in preganglionic 
neurons.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80622-4
PMID: 9856460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]