---
reference_id: "PMID:35596199"
title: Early detection of laryngeal cleft in infants by novel technique of flexible endoscopy with sustained pharyngeal inflation.
authors:
- Soong WJ
- Tsao PC
- Yang CF
- Sung YH
- Soong YH
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.25988
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early detection of laryngeal cleft in infants by novel technique of flexible endoscopy with sustained pharyngeal inflation.
**Authors:** Soong WJ, Tsao PC, Yang CF, Sung YH, Soong YH
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.25988](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.25988)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2022 Sep;57(9):2122-2127. doi: 10.1002/ppul.25988. Epub 2022
 Jun 2.

Early detection of laryngeal cleft in infants by novel technique of flexible 
endoscopy with sustained pharyngeal inflation.

Soong WJ(1)(2)(3), Tsao PC(2)(3), Yang CF(2)(3), Sung YH(4), Soong YH(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, Children's Hospital, China Medical 
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Education, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Pulmonary and Critical Care, Paloma Medical Group, Los Angles , California, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: We report a novel technique of flexible endoscopy with noninvasive 
ventilation (NIV) and sustained pharyngeal inflation (FE-NIV-SPI) in assessing 
aeroesophageal tracts (AET) to facilitate early detection of laryngeal clefts in 
infants.
METHODS: Medical charts and flexible endoscopy videos of the children who were 
diagnosed with laryngeal cleft in a tertiary care hospital between January 2000 
and December 2020 were retrospectively reviewed and analyzed. The FE-NIV-SPI 
technique had been applied to all these children.
RESULTS: Totally, 12 infants with laryngeal cleft were identified. This equates 
to a prevalence of 0.28% in all the children who underwent flexible endoscopy at 
our institution. Their mean age was 5.0 ± 4.9 months and mean body weight was 
4.7 ± 2.3 kg. Nine (75%) infants were referred in without laryngeal cleft 
diagnosis, which was missed by 11 prior bronchoscopy and 5 computer tomography 
examinations. With the FE-NIV-SPI technique, the pharyngolaryngeal space could 
be pneumatically dilated permitting a detailed assessment. All laryngeal cleft 
types and coexisting AET lesions were visualized at the first FE-NIV-SPI 
examination with a mean time of 4.2 ± 0.9 min; they were eight Type I, two Type 
II, and one Type III. Ten (83.3%) infants had coexisting airway malacia.
CONCLUSION: Routine use of FE-NIV-SPI technique can help in early detection of 
laryngeal clefts and other associated AET lesions. Further multicenter 
collaborative investigations are essential to verify the early detection of this 
rare and occult lesion of the laryngeal cleft with this technique.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.25988
PMID: 35596199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]