---
reference_id: "PMID:34771580"
title: Androgen Receptor Signaling in Prostate Cancer and Therapeutic Strategies.
authors:
- Jacob A
- Raj R
- Allison DB
- Myint ZW
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/cancers13215417
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Androgen Receptor Signaling in Prostate Cancer and Therapeutic Strategies.
**Authors:** Jacob A, Raj R, Allison DB, Myint ZW
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers13215417](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13215417)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Oct 28;13(21):5417. doi: 10.3390/cancers13215417.

Androgen Receptor Signaling in Prostate Cancer and Therapeutic Strategies.

Jacob A(1), Raj R(2), Allison DB(3)(4)(5), Myint ZW(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology & Oncology, Pikeville Medical
Center, Pikeville, KY 41501, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism,
Pikeville Medical Center, Pikeville, KY 41501, USA.
(3)Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.
(5)Department of Urology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Understanding of the molecular mechanisms of prostate cancer has led to
development of therapeutic strategies targeting androgen receptor (AR). These
androgen-receptor signaling inhibitors (ARSI) include androgen synthesis
inhibitor-abiraterone and androgen receptor antagonists-enzalutamide,
apalutamide, and darolutamide. Although these medications provide significant
improvement in survival among men with prostate cancer, drug resistance develops
in nearly all patients with time. This could be through androgen-dependent or
androgen-independent mechanisms. Even weaker signals and non-canonical steroid
ligands can activate AR in the presence of truncated AR-splice variants, AR
overexpression, or activating mutations in AR. AR splice variant, AR-V7 is the
most studied among these and is not targeted by available ARSIs. Non-androgen
receptor dependent resistance mechanisms are mediated by activation of an
alternative signaling pathway when AR is inhibited. DNA repair pathway,
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, BRAF-MAPK and Wnt signaling pathway and activation by
glucocorticoid receptors can restore downstream signaling in prostate cancer by
alternative proteins. Multiple clinical trials are underway exploring
therapeutic strategies to overcome these resistance mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13215417
PMCID: PMC8582395
PMID: 34771580

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
