---
reference_id: "PMID:39988558"
title: A Novel Missense Mutation in SLC12A6 Impairs Ion Transport Function of the Protein to Cause Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum With Peripheral Neuropathy.
authors:
- Ahmad SR
- Hanafi S
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14733
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Agenesis of Corpus Callosum/genetics, pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- Male
- "Peripheral Nervous System Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Symporters/genetics, chemistry, metabolism"
- Ion Transport/genetics
- Pedigree
- Exome Sequencing
- K Cl- Cotransporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel Missense Mutation in SLC12A6 Impairs Ion Transport Function of the Protein to Cause Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum With Peripheral Neuropathy.
**Authors:** Ahmad SR, Hanafi S
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14733](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14733)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2025 Aug;108(2):212-217. doi: 10.1111/cge.14733. Epub 2025 Feb 23.

A Novel Missense Mutation in SLC12A6 Impairs Ion Transport Function of the
Protein to Cause Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum With Peripheral Neuropathy.

Ahmad SR(1), Hanafi S(2).

Author information:
(1)Hiralal Mazumdar Memorial College for Women, West Bengal State University,
Kolkata, India.
(2)Faculty of Applied Sciences, Department of Biotechnology, UCSI University,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Agenesis of the corpus callosum with peripheral neuropathy (ACCPN) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by malformation or absence of the
corpus callosum, accompanied by progressive peripheral nerve degeneration. ACCPN
is associated with mutations in the SLC12A6 gene, encoding the
potassium-chloride cotransporter (also termed KCC3), which plays a crucial role
in neuronal ion homeostasis. In this study, we report a novel homozygous
missense variant (c.1634A>G, p.H371R) in SLC12A6, identified through exome
sequencing in a male proband presenting with ACCPN symptoms, including
developmental delay, hypotonia, epileptic seizures, and corpus callosal
dysgenesis. The proband's MRI findings revealed additional neurodevelopmental
abnormalities such as hippocampal malformation. Functional analysis showed that
while the mutant SLC12A6 transcript and protein levels were comparable to wild
type, the mutant protein was mislocalized to the cytoplasm, disrupting its ion
transport function. This mislocalization caused an imbalance in potassium and
chloride ion levels in the proband's cells. Bioinformatics tools predicted the
pathogenicity of the p.H371R mutation, and structural modeling revealed a
destabilization effect. Elevated levels of cellular senescence markers, p16 and
p21, were detected, indicating that ion dysregulation due to SLC12A6-p.H371R
mislocalization contributed to cellular stress. This study provides novel
insights into the pathogenic mechanism of ACCPN, highlighting the importance of
mutant SLC12A6 mislocalization and ion homeostasis in disease progression. The
identification of the p.H371R mutation adds to the spectrum of SLC12A6 mutations
linked to ACCPN and underscores the potential for targeted therapeutic
strategies.

© 2025 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14733
PMID: 39988558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
