---
reference_id: "PMID:20587693"
title: The haploinsufficient Col3a1 mouse as a model for vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Cooper TK
- Zhong Q
- Krawczyk M
- Tae HJ
- Müller GA
- Schubert R
- Myers LA
- Dietz HC
- Talan MI
- Briest W
journal: Vet Pathol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1177/0300985810374842
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The haploinsufficient Col3a1 mouse as a model for vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Cooper TK, Zhong Q, Krawczyk M, Tae HJ, Müller GA, Schubert R, Myers LA, Dietz HC, Talan MI, Briest W
**Journal:** Vet Pathol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0300985810374842](https://doi.org/10.1177/0300985810374842)

## Content

1. Vet Pathol. 2010 Nov;47(6):1028-39. doi: 10.1177/0300985810374842. Epub 2010
Jun  29.

The haploinsufficient Col3a1 mouse as a model for vascular Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome.

Cooper TK(1), Zhong Q, Krawczyk M, Tae HJ, Müller GA, Schubert R, Myers LA, 
Dietz HC, Talan MI, Briest W.

Author information:
(1)Penn State Hershey Medical Center, Department of Comparative Medicine, H054, 
500 University Dr., Hershey, PA 17033-0850, USA. tcooper@hmc.psu.edu

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a rare genetic disorder resulting from 
mutations in the α-1 chain of type III collagen (COL3A1) and manifesting as 
tissue fragility with spontaneous rupture of the bowel, gravid uterus, or large 
or medium arteries. The heterozygous Col3a1 knockout mouse was investigated as a 
model for this disease. The collagen content in the abdominal aorta of 
heterozygotes was reduced, and functional testing revealed diminishing wall 
strength of the aorta in these mice. Colons were grossly and histologically 
normal, but reduced strength and increased compliance of the wall were found in 
heterozygotes via pressure testing. Although mice demonstrated no 
life-threatening clinical signs or gross lesions of vascular subtype 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV, thorough histological examination of the aorta 
of heterozygous mice revealed the presence of a spectrum of lesions similar to 
those observed in human patients. Lesions increased in number and severity with 
age (0/5 [0%] in 2-month-old males vs 9/9 [100%] in 14-month-old males, P < .05) 
and were more common in male than female mice (23/26 [88.5%] vs 14/30 [46.7%] in 
9- to 21-month-old animals, P < .05). Haploinsufficiency for Col3a1 in mice 
recapitulates features of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in humans and can be 
used as an experimental model.

DOI: 10.1177/0300985810374842
PMCID: PMC2970629
PMID: 20587693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflict of Interest The authors 
declared that they had no conflicts of interests with respect to their 
authorship or the publication of this article.