---
reference_id: "PMID:20459762"
title: Practice guidelines for the molecular analysis of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes.
authors:
- Ramsden SC
- Clayton-Smith J
- Birch R
- Buiting K
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-70
keywords:
- "Angelman Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Blotting, Southern"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15"
- DNA Methylation
- Humans
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- snRNP Core Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practice guidelines for the molecular analysis of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes.
**Authors:** Ramsden SC, Clayton-Smith J, Birch R, Buiting K
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2350-11-70](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2350-11-70)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2010 May 11;11:70. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-70.

Practice guidelines for the molecular analysis of Prader-Willi and Angelman
syndromes.

Ramsden SC(1), Clayton-Smith J, Birch R, Buiting K.

Author information:
(1)National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Manchester), Saint Mary's Hospital,
Hathersage Road, Manchester M13OJH, UK. simon.ramsden@cmft.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome (AS) are
clinically distinct neurodevelopmental genetic disorders that map to 15q11-q13.
The primary phenotypes are attributable to loss of expression of imprinted genes
within this region which can arise by means of a number of mechanisms. The most
sensitive single approach to diagnosing both PWS and AS is to study methylation
patterns within 15q11-q13; however many techniques exist for this purpose. Given
the diversity of techniques available, there is a need for consensus testing and
reporting guidelines.
METHODS: Testing and reporting guidelines have been drawn up and agreed in
accordance with the procedures of the UK Clinical Molecular Genetics Society and
the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network.
RESULTS: A practical set of molecular genetic testing and reporting guidelines
has been developed for these two disorders. In addition, advice is given on
appropriate reporting policies, including advice on test sensitivity and
recurrence risks. In considering test sensitivity, the possibility of
differential diagnoses is discussed.
CONCLUSION: An agreed set of practice guidelines has been developed for the
diagnostic molecular genetic testing of PWS and AS.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-70
PMCID: PMC2877670
PMID: 20459762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
