---
reference_id: "PMID:37705312"
title: Activation of the classical complement pathway in myasthenia gravis with acetylcholine receptor antibodies.
authors:
- Ozawa Y
- Uzawa A
- Onishi Y
- Yasuda M
- Kojima Y
- Kuwabara S
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mus.27973
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation of the classical complement pathway in myasthenia gravis with acetylcholine receptor antibodies.
**Authors:** Ozawa Y, Uzawa A, Onishi Y, Yasuda M, Kojima Y, Kuwabara S
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.27973](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.27973)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2023 Nov;68(5):798-804. doi: 10.1002/mus.27973. Epub 2023 Sep
13.

Activation of the classical complement pathway in myasthenia gravis with 
acetylcholine receptor antibodies.

Ozawa Y(1), Uzawa A(1), Onishi Y(1), Yasuda M(1), Kojima Y(1)(2), Kuwabara S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 
Chiba, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, 
Japan.

INTRODUCTION/AIMS: Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disease affecting the 
neuromuscular junction (NMJ) of skeletal muscle. Complement activation is one of 
the mechanisms by which anti-acetylcholine receptor (anti-AChR) autoantibodies 
reduce synaptic transmission at the NMJ. In this study, we aimed to examine the 
activation of the complement pathways, including the classical pathway, as 
potential contributors to the pathogenesis of MG with anti-AChR antibodies.
METHODS: In this single-center, observational study of 45 patients with 
anti-AChR-antibody-positive generalized MG, serum concentrations of major 
components of the complement pathways, including C1q, C5, C5a, soluble C5b-9 
(sC5b-9), Ba, and complement factor H, were measured using an enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. A total of 25 patients with a non-inflammatory neurological 
disorder served as controls. In addition, the relationships of complement 
activation with clinical characteristics were examined.
RESULTS: The patients with MG exhibited lower serum levels of C5 (p = .0001) and 
higher serum levels of sC5b-9 (p = .004) compared with the control group. At 
about 6 months (range, 172-209 days) after the start of immunotherapy, serum 
levels of Ba were significantly higher than baseline levels (p = .002) and were 
associated with improvement in MG clinical scores.
DISCUSSION: Herein, we provide evidence for the activation of the classical 
complement pathway and its association with disease activity in 
anti-AChR-antibody-positive generalized MG.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.27973
PMID: 37705312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]