---
reference_id: "PMID:30760309"
title: Systematic literature review and meta-analysis on the epidemiology of propionic acidemia.
authors:
- Almási T
- Guey LT
- Lukacs C
- Csetneki K
- Vokó Z
- Zelei T
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-018-0987-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic literature review and meta-analysis on the epidemiology of propionic acidemia.
**Authors:** Almási T, Guey LT, Lukacs C, Csetneki K, Vokó Z, Zelei T
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-018-0987-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-018-0987-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Feb 13;14(1):40. doi: 10.1186/s13023-018-0987-z.

Systematic literature review and meta-analysis on the epidemiology of propionic 
acidemia.

Almási T(1), Guey LT(2), Lukacs C(2), Csetneki K(3), Vokó Z(3)(4), Zelei T(3).

Author information:
(1)Syreon Research Institute, Mexikói str. 65/A, Budapest, H-1142, Hungary. 
timea.almasi@syreon.eu.
(2)Moderna, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Syreon Research Institute, Mexikói str. 65/A, Budapest, H-1142, Hungary.
(4)Department of Health Policy & Health Economics, Eötvös Loránd University, 
Budapest, Hungary.

Propionic acidemia (PA, OMIM #606054) is a serious, life-threatening, inherited, 
metabolic disorder caused by the deficiency of the mitochondrial enzyme 
propionyl-coenzyme A (CoA) carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.3). The primary objective of 
this study was to conduct a systematic literature review and meta-analysis on 
the epidemiology of PA. The literature search was performed covering Medline, 
Embase, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, CRD Database, Academic Search 
Complete, CINAHL and PROSPERO databases. Websites of rare disease organizations 
were also searched for eligible studies. Of the 2338 identified records, 188 
articles were assessed for eligibility in full text, 43 articles reported on 
disease epidemiology, and 31 studies were included into the quantitative 
synthesis. Due to the rarity of PA, broadly targeted population-based prevalence 
studies are not available. Nonetheless, implementation of newborn screening 
programs has allowed the estimation of the birth prevalence data of PA across 
multiple geographic regions. The pooled point estimates indicated detection 
rates of 0.29; 0.33; 0.33 and 4.24 in the Asia-Pacific, Europe, North America 
and the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) regions, respectively. Our 
systematic literature review and meta-analysis confirm that PA is an ultra-rare 
disorder, with similar detection rates across all regions with the exception of 
the MENA region where the disease, similar to other inherited metabolic 
disorders, is more frequent.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-018-0987-z
PMCID: PMC6375193
PMID: 30760309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: Tímea 
Almási, Tamás Zelei, Kata Csetneki, and Zoltán Vokó are employees of Syreon 
Research Institute and performed contracted research for Moderna, Inc. Lin T. 
Guey and Christine Lukacs are employees of Moderna, Inc. and receive salary and 
stock options as compensation for their employment. Nonetheless, the content of 
this paper, as well as the views and opinions expressed therein are those of the 
Authors and not the organizations that employ them. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer 
Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.