---
reference_id: "PMID:35087087"
title: Juvenile idiopathic arthritis.
authors:
- Martini A
- Lovell DJ
- Albani S
- Brunner HI
- Hyrich KL
- Thompson SD
- Ruperto N
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-021-00332-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile idiopathic arthritis.
**Authors:** Martini A, Lovell DJ, Albani S, Brunner HI, Hyrich KL, Thompson SD, Ruperto N
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-021-00332-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-021-00332-8)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2022 Jan 27;8(1):5. doi: 10.1038/s41572-021-00332-8.

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

Martini A(1), Lovell DJ(2), Albani S(3), Brunner HI(2), Hyrich KL(4)(5), 
Thompson SD(6), Ruperto N(7).

Author information:
(1)Università degli Studi di Genova, Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, 
Riabilitazione, Oftalmologia, Genetica e Scienze Materno-Infantili (DiNOGMI), 
Genova, Italy. albertomartini@gaslini.org.
(2)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(3)Translational Immunology Institute, Duke-NUS Medical School, SingHealth 
Academic Medical Center, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Centre for Epidemiology Versus Arthritis, The University of Manchester, 
Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Manchester, UK.
(5)NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre, Manchester University NHS Trust, 
Manchester, UK.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine; 
Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Aetiology, Division of Human Genetics, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(7)IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, UOSID Centro trial, Clinica Pediatrica e 
Reumatologia, PRINTO, Genova, Italy.

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is an umbrella term for arthritis of unknown 
origin, lasting for >6 weeks with onset before 16 years of age. JIA is the most 
common chronic inflammatory rheumatic condition of childhood. According to the 
International League Against Rheumatism (ILAR) classification, seven mutually 
exclusive categories of JIA exist based on disease manifestations during the 
first 6 months of disease. Although the ILAR classification has been useful to 
foster research, it has been criticized mainly as it does not distinguish those 
forms of chronic arthritis observed in adults and in children from those that 
may be unique to childhood. Hence, efforts to provide a new evidence-based 
classification are ongoing. Similar to arthritis observed in adults, 
pathogenesis involves autoimmune and autoinflammatory mechanisms. The field has 
witnessed a remarkable improvement in therapeutic possibilities of JIA owing to 
the availability of new potent drugs and the possibility to perform controlled 
trials with support from legislative interventions and large networks 
availability. The goal of drug therapy in JIA is to rapidly reduce disease 
activity to inactive disease or clinical remission, minimize drug side effects 
and achieve a quality of life comparable to that of healthy peers. As JIA can 
influence all aspects of a child's and their family's life, researchers 
increasingly recognize improvement of health-related quality of life as a key 
treatment goal.

© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-021-00332-8
PMID: 35087087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]