---
reference_id: "PMID:35574016"
title: Ovarian Reserve and ART Outcomes in Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome Patients With FOXL2 Mutations.
authors:
- Meng T
- Zhang W
- Zhang R
- Li J
- Gao Y
- Qin Y
- Jiao X
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2022.829153
keywords:
- "Blepharophimosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Forkhead Box Protein L2/genetics
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Ovarian Reserve/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Reproductive Techniques, Assisted"
- Skin Abnormalities
- Urogenital Abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ovarian Reserve and ART Outcomes in Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome Patients With FOXL2 Mutations.
**Authors:** Meng T, Zhang W, Zhang R, Li J, Gao Y, Qin Y, Jiao X
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2022.829153](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2022.829153)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Apr 28;13:829153. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2022.829153. eCollection 2022.

Ovarian Reserve and ART Outcomes in Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicanthus Inversus
Syndrome Patients With FOXL2 Mutations.

Meng T(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhang W(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhang R(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Li
J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Gao Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Qin Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Jiao
X(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Reproductive Endocrinology of Ministry of Education,
Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(3)Shandong Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan,
China.
(4)Shandong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Reproductive Health, Jinan,
China.
(5)National Research Center for Assisted Reproductive Technology and
Reproductive Genetics, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(6)Suzhou Research Institute, Shandong University, Jinan, China.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the status of ovarian reserve and ART outcomes in
BPES women and provide informative reference for clinical diagnosis and
treatment.
METHODS: Twenty-one women with BPES were screened for mutations in the FOXL2
gene and underwent assisted reproductive technology (ART) treatment. Indicators
for ovarian reserve and ART outcomes were compared between patients with and
without FOXL2 mutations. Additionally, ART outcomes were compared among patients
with different subtypes of FOXL2 mutations.
RESULTS: A total of 13 distinct heterozygous variants in the FOXL2 gene were
identified in 80.95% of BPES women, including 4 novel mutations with plausible
pathogenicity (c.173_175dup, c.481C>T, c.576del and c.675_714del). Compared to
non-mutation group, patients with FOXL2 mutations had elevated levels of FSH
(P=0.007), decreased AMH levels (P=0.012) and less AFC (P=0.015). They also had
worse ART outcomes with large amount of Gn dosage (P=0.008), fewer oocytes
(P=0.001), Day3 good quality embryos (P=0.001) and good quality blastocysts
(P=0.037), and a higher cancellation rate (P=0.272). High heterogeneity of ART
outcomes existed in BPES patients with different FOXL2 mutation types.
CONCLUSIONS: BPES patients with FOXL2 mutations had diminished ovarian reserve
and adverse ART outcomes. The genotype-reproductive phenotype correlations were
highly heterogeneous and cannot be generalized. Genetic counseling for fertility
planning and preimplantation or prenatal genetic diagnosis to reduce offspring
inheritance are recommended.

Copyright © 2022 Meng, Zhang, Zhang, Li, Gao, Qin and Jiao.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.829153
PMCID: PMC9097277
PMID: 35574016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
