---
reference_id: "PMID:27576231"
title: "Respiratory Conditions Update: Asthma."
authors:
- Zeller TA
journal: FP Essent
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory Conditions Update: Asthma.
**Authors:** Zeller TA
**Journal:** FP Essent (2016)

## Content

1. FP Essent. 2016 Sep;448:11-9.

Respiratory Conditions Update: Asthma.

Zeller TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical University of South Carolina Montgomery Center for Family Medicine, 
155 Academy Ave, Greenwood, SC 29646.

Asthma is a chronic respiratory disease characterized by chronic airway 
inflammation and variable expiratory airflow limitation. Related clinical 
features include wheezing, dyspnea, chest tightness, and cough that worsens at 
night or in the early morning, and that varies over time and in intensity. A 
finding of variable expiratory airflow limitation on spirometry confirms the 
diagnosis. A forced expiratory volume in 1 second to forced vital capacity ratio 
less than the level predicted for the patient's age is suggestive of airflow 
limitation. Variability also must be confirmed. Updated guidelines recommend 
control-based management administered in a stepwise manner, with goals of 
achieving symptom control and minimizing the risks of exacerbations, future 
fixed airway limitation, and adverse effects of therapy. There is good evidence 
for the effectiveness of asthma education and self-management plans. 
Short-acting bronchodilators should be used as needed for symptom relief, with 
the addition of an inhaled corticosteroid early as maintenance therapy if 
symptoms are not well controlled. If asthma remains uncontrolled despite 
therapy, patients should be referred for more specialized treatment. Biomarkers, 
biologic drugs, and endoscopic treatments are being studied in the management of 
severe asthma, and ongoing research may determine which patients might benefit 
most from these emerging therapies.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required 
for reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.

PMID: 27576231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]