---
reference_id: "PMID:33708533"
title: "Ketoacidotic crisis after vaccination in a girl with beta-ketothiolase deficiency: a case report."
authors:
- Mao S
- Yang L
- Yin X
- Yang J
- Huang X
journal: Transl Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.21037/tp-20-265
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ketoacidotic crisis after vaccination in a girl with beta-ketothiolase deficiency: a case report.
**Authors:** Mao S, Yang L, Yin X, Yang J, Huang X
**Journal:** Transl Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tp-20-265](https://doi.org/10.21037/tp-20-265)

## Content

1. Transl Pediatr. 2021 Feb;10(2):459-463. doi: 10.21037/tp-20-265.

Ketoacidotic crisis after vaccination in a girl with beta-ketothiolase
deficiency: a case report.

Mao S(1), Yang L(2), Yin X(3), Yang J(2), Huang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hangzhou First People's Hospital,
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child
Health, Hangzhou, China.
(3)School of Health in Social Science, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
UK.

Beta-ketothiolase (mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase, T2) is a rare
autosomal recessive disease caused by ACAT1 gene pathogenic variant involving
isoleucine catabolism and ketone body metabolism disorder. The onset of
ketoacidotic crisis commonly follows prior concurrent diseases or triggers
including long-time fasting, infections, intake of high-level of lipids or
proteins, etc. A girl aged 8 months presented with fever and cough on the day
after vaccination of the second dose of Japanese encephalitis inactivated; on
the second day after vaccination, she was admitted to the local hospital because
of unconsciousness and dyspnea. After 1 day of treatment at the local hospital,
she was referred to our hospital due to exacerbated conditions including
unconsciousness and convulsion. When referring to our hospital, she had
metabolic acidosis, hypokalemia, hypernatremia, hyperammonemia, and a Glasgow
coma scale of 8 and Kussmaul breathing. Five percent NaHCO3 (24 mL/kg), glucose
and insulin (4-6 g glucose/1 U insulin) were continuously infused for correcting
acidosis. L-carnitine (350 mg/kg/day) was given for ensuring the energy and
increasing exudates of metabolites after admission. Protein was limited at 1.5
g/kg/day. Mechanical ventilation support and hemodialysis were used. The patient
was still under unconsciousness after 2 weeks of intensive treatment in the
Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU). Due to her severe illness, the child's
parents ultimately decided to redirect their goals of care, and the child was
discharged home where she died. For children with acute unexplainable metabolic
acidosis, differential diagnosis of T2 deficiency should be considered. Rigorous
indicative treatments including mechanical ventilation and hemodialysis should
be given timely if ketoacidotic crisis occurred in patients with T2 deficiency.

2021 Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-20-265
PMCID: PMC7944172
PMID: 33708533

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tp-20-265). The authors have no conflicts of interest
to declare.
