---
reference_id: "PMID:36087421"
title: "MED13 mutation: A novel cause of developmental and epileptic encephalopathy with infantile spasms."
authors:
- Trivisano M
- De Dominicis A
- Micalizzi A
- Ferretti A
- Dentici ML
- Terracciano A
- Calabrese C
- Vigevano F
- Novelli G
- Novelli A
- Specchio N
journal: Seizure
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2022.09.002
keywords:
- Autism Spectrum Disorder/complications
- "Epilepsy/complications, genetics"
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/complications
- Male
- Mediator Complex/genetics
- Microcephaly/complications
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- Seizures/complications
- "Spasms, Infantile/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MED13 mutation: A novel cause of developmental and epileptic encephalopathy with infantile spasms.
**Authors:** Trivisano M, De Dominicis A, Micalizzi A, Ferretti A, Dentici ML, Terracciano A, Calabrese C, Vigevano F, Novelli G, Novelli A, Specchio N
**Journal:** Seizure (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.seizure.2022.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seizure.2022.09.002)

## Content

1. Seizure. 2022 Oct;101:211-217. doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2022.09.002. Epub 2022
Sep  3.

MED13 mutation: A novel cause of developmental and epileptic encephalopathy with 
infantile spasms.

Trivisano M(1), De Dominicis A(2), Micalizzi A(3), Ferretti A(4), Dentici ML(5), 
Terracciano A(3), Calabrese C(4), Vigevano F(6), Novelli G(7), Novelli A(3), 
Specchio N(4).

Author information:
(1)Rare and Complex Epilepsy Unit, Department of Neuroscience, Bambino Gesù 
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Full Member of European Reference Network EpiCARE, 
Rome, Italy. Electronic address: marina.trivisano@opbg.net.
(2)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", 
Rome 00133 Italy; Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Translational Cytogenomics 
Research Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, 
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Rare and Complex Epilepsy Unit, Department of Neuroscience, Bambino Gesù 
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Full Member of European Reference Network EpiCARE, 
Rome, Italy.
(5)Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Full 
Member of European Reference Network EpiCARE, Rome, Italy.
(7)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", 
Rome 00133 Italy; Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of 
Nevada, Reno, NV 89557, United States.

PURPOSE: Mutations in the MED13 gene are reported in the literature in 
association with clinically variable, neurodevelopmental disorders, which are 
characterized by mild-to-severe intellectual disability, autism spectrum 
disorder, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, epilepsy, ocular or skeletal 
abnormalities, congenital cardiac defects, and facial dysmorphisms. Here, we 
report a patient with an epileptic phenotype carrying a novel missense mutation 
characterized by developmental and epileptic encephalopathy with infantile 
spasms.
METHODS: Through trio-based WES, we identified a novel de novo heterozygous 
missense variant c.2501A>G in the MED13 gene. We reviewed all medical charts of 
the present patient and reviewed all previously reported cases with pathogenic 
variants of MED13.
RESULTS: This study involves a 24-month-old boy with epilepsy onset at the age 
of 3 months with drug-resistant focal seizures followed by infantile spasms at 
the age of 10 months. He had a severe, developmental delay along with 
microcephaly and dysmorphic features. From a literature review, it emerged that 
epilepsy is described in only one out of nineteen of previously reported 
patients with a phenotype of generalized, drug-resistant epilepsy with 
myoclonic-atonic seizures. Microcephaly, developmental delay, hypotonia, corpus 
callosum abnormalities, deafness, and retinal atrophy were common features in 
the previously described cases.
CONCLUSION: This case expands the genetic landscape of infantile spasms as well 
as the phenotype of MED13-related disorders adding the electroclinical features 
of early-onset developmental and epileptic encephalopathy with infantile spasms 
to the previously described, generalized epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic 
seizures.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.seizure.2022.09.002
PMID: 36087421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None of the 
authors have any conflicts of interest to declare.