---
reference_id: "PMID:22632361"
title: Evaluating Graves' orbitopathy.
authors:
- Dolman PJ
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2011.11.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating Graves' orbitopathy.
**Authors:** Dolman PJ
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2011.11.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2011.11.007)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jun;26(3):229-48. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2011.11.007.

Evaluating Graves' orbitopathy.

Dolman PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of British Columbia, Eye Care Centre, 
Section I, 2550 Willow Street, Vancouver, BC V5Z 3N9, Canada. 
peterdolman@hotmail.com

Graves' Orbitopathy (GO) is an immune-mediated disorder causing inflammation and 
expansion of orbital fat and muscle. The resulting spectrum of ocular and 
orbital changes may cause significant visual and cosmetic morbidity and are 
graded as disease severity. The disease follows a biphasic course with an active 
or progressive phase followed by a quiescent or stable phase: the temporal 
status is graded as disease activity. Grading systems for GO include Werner's NO 
SPECS and European Group on Graves' Orbitopathy (EUGOGO)'s severity scales, the 
Clinical Activity Score (CAS) and the VISA Classification (for severity and 
activity). Diagnosis of GO is based on recognition of clinical features and may 
be supported by thyroid function and immune testing, and orbital imaging. The 
endocrinologist or internist may play an important role in early recognition and 
diagnosis of GO, in grading severity and activity, and in arranging appropriate 
referral to an ophthalmologist based on this evaluation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2011.11.007
PMID: 22632361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]