---
reference_id: "PMID:41090742"
title: "Revolutionizing Huntington's Disease Treatment: Breakthroughs in AAV-Mediated Gene Therapy."
authors:
- Gavgani PM
- García-Domínguez M
journal: Cells
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/cells14191514
keywords:
- "Huntington Disease/therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Dependovirus/genetics
- Animals
- Genetic Vectors/genetics
- Huntingtin Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revolutionizing Huntington's Disease Treatment: Breakthroughs in AAV-Mediated Gene Therapy.
**Authors:** Gavgani PM, García-Domínguez M
**Journal:** Cells (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells14191514](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells14191514)

## Content

1. Cells. 2025 Sep 28;14(19):1514. doi: 10.3390/cells14191514.

Revolutionizing Huntington's Disease Treatment: Breakthroughs in AAV-Mediated 
Gene Therapy.

Gavgani PM(1), García-Domínguez M(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)DNA & RNA Medicine Division, CIMA-Universidad de Navarra, 31008 Pamplona, 
Spain.
(2)Program of Immunology and Immunotherapy, CIMA-Universidad de Navarra, 31008 
Pamplona, Spain.
(3)Department of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, 
31008 Pamplona, Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), 28029 Madrid, 
Spain.

Huntington's Disease (HD) is an inherited neurodegenerative condition caused by 
an expansion of CAG repeats in the Huntingtin (HTT) gene, leading to a toxic 
form of the HTT protein. Despite advances in understanding the disease and 
developing symptomatic treatments, effective therapies for modifying its 
progression remain limited. Among emerging and novel treatments for central 
nervous system (CNS) disorders, gene therapy (GT), particularly using 
adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated gene delivery, holds great promise. 
Numerous preclinical and clinical trials are exploring the benefits of AAVs for 
treating neurodegenerative and genetic diseases. However, while widely used and 
investigated in rare and genetic disease treatment, AAVs' potential for HD 
treatment remains underexplored. The absence of a comprehensive collection of 
previous reports, advancements, and methodologies regarding exclusively 
AAV-mediated GT for HD is notable and prompted us to address this gap. The 
current review compiles the available and emerging information regarding the 
application of AAVs in HD therapy, outlines the promise of this approach, and 
highlights the necessity of conducting further studies to achieve efficient HD 
treatment. The authors hope that the current review will guide further research 
to unlock the full potential of AAVs in treating HD.

DOI: 10.3390/cells14191514
PMCID: PMC12523392
PMID: 41090742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.