---
reference_id: "PMID:31574072"
title: "Disease-Related Worries in Persons With Crohn Disease: An Interview Study."
authors:
- Wåhlin M
- Stjernman H
- Munck B
journal: Gastroenterol Nurs
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/SGA.0000000000000395
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-Related Worries in Persons With Crohn Disease: An Interview Study.
**Authors:** Wåhlin M, Stjernman H, Munck B
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Nurs (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SGA.0000000000000395](https://doi.org/10.1097/SGA.0000000000000395)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Nurs. 2019 Sep/Oct;42(5):435-442. doi: 
10.1097/SGA.0000000000000395.

Disease-Related Worries in Persons With Crohn Disease: An Interview Study.

Wåhlin M(1), Stjernman H, Munck B.

Author information:
(1)Monica Wåhlin, MSc, RN, is a registered nurse specializing in inflammatory 
bowel disease, Department of Medicine, County Hospital Ryhov, County Council of 
Jönköping, Jönköping, Sweden. Henrik Stjernman, PhD, MD, is Chief Physician, 
Department of Medicine, County Hospital Ryhov, County Council of Jönköping, 
Jönköping, Sweden. Berit Munck, PhD, RN, is District Nurse, and Senior Lecturer, 
Department of Nursing Science, School of Health and Welfare, Jönköping 
University, Jönköping, Sweden.

Crohn disease, a chronic inflammatory bowel disease, affects everyday life, 
impairs quality of life, and creates worries. This study explored 
disease-related worries in persons with Crohn disease to gain deeper insight 
into how this worry is experienced and handled. Eight women and 4 men with Crohn 
disease who reported their disease-related worries as high or very high in a 
questionnaire were interviewed. The interviews were evaluated by qualitative 
content analysis, generating 3 categories: worries about the disease itself; 
feelings related to the worries; and management of the worries. The 
unpredictable course of the disease, impaired function due to fatigue, and lack 
of bowel control were the most prominent causes of worry. The worries created 
feelings of stress, guilt, and frustration. The participants expressed a need to 
talk about their worries, to make them visible and recognized, and to be 
understood. The participants found individual ways to handle the worries. 
Actively gaining control by changing focus, performing relaxation exercises, and 
seeking information were important self-care strategies. In addition, a strong 
and partially unmet need for expressing and venting concerns to one's caregiver 
was identified.

DOI: 10.1097/SGA.0000000000000395
PMID: 31574072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]