---
reference_id: "PMID:28522181"
title: "Safety and efficacy of edaravone in well defined patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial."
authors:
- Writing Group
- Edaravone (MCI-186) ALS 19 Study Group
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30115-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and efficacy of edaravone in well defined patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
**Authors:** Writing Group, Edaravone (MCI-186) ALS 19 Study Group
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30115-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30115-1)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2017 Jul;16(7):505-512. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30115-1.
Epub  2017 May 15.

Safety and efficacy of edaravone in well defined patients with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Writing Group; Edaravone (MCI-186) ALS 19 Study Group.

Collaborators: Abe K, Aoki M, Tsuji S, Itoyama Y, Sobue G, Togo M, Hamada C, 
Tanaka M, Akimoto M, Nakamura K, Takahashi F, Kondo K, Yoshino H, Abe K, Aoki M, 
Tsuji S, Itoyama Y, Sobue G, Togo M, Hamada C, Sasaki H, Yabe I, Doi S, Warita 
H, Imai T, Ito H, Fukuchi M, Osumi E, Wada M, Nakano I, Morita M, Ogata K, 
Maruki Y, Ito K, Kano O, Yamazaki M, Takahashi Y, Ishiura H, Ogino M, Koike R, 
Ishida C, Uchiyama T, Mizoguchi K, Obi T, Watanabe H, Atsuta N, Aiba I, 
Taniguchi A, Sawada H, Hazama T, Fujimura H, Kusaka H, Kunieda T, Kikuchi H, 
Matsuo H, Ueyama H, Uekawa K, Tanaka M, Akimoto M, Ueda M, Murakami A, Sumii R, 
Kudou T, Nakamura K, Morimoto K, Yoneoka T, Hirai M, Sasaki K, Terai H, Natori 
T, Matsui H, Kotani K, Yoshida K, Iwasaki T, Takahashi F, Kondo K, Yoshino H.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2017 Jul;16(7):490-491. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30163-1.
    Lancet Neurol. 2017 Oct;16(10):772. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30290-9.
    Lancet Neurol. 2017 Oct;16(10):772. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30289-2.
    Lancet Neurol. 2020 Sep;19(9):717-718. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(20)30265-9.

BACKGROUND: In a previous phase 3 study in patients with amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS), edaravone did not show a significant difference in the Revised 
ALS Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS-R) score compared with placebo. Post-hoc 
analysis of these data revealed that patients in an early stage with definite or 
probable diagnosis of ALS, defined by the revised El Escorial criteria, who met 
a select set of inclusion criteria showed a greater magnitude of effect than did 
the full study population. We aimed to substantiate this post-hoc result and 
assess safety and efficacy of edaravone in a phase 3 trial that focused on 
patients with early stage ALS who met the post-hoc analysis inclusion criteria.
METHODS: In this phase 3, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group study, 
patients aged 20-75 years with ALS of grade 1 or 2 in the Japan ALS Severity 
Classification, scores of at least 2 points on all 12 items of ALSFRS-R, forced 
vital capacity of 80% or more, definite or probable ALS according to the revised 
El Escorial criteria, and disease duration of 2 years or less were recruited 
from 31 hospitals in Japan. Eligible patients also had a decrease of 1-4 points 
in the ALSFRS-R score during a 12-week observation period before randomisation. 
Patients meeting all criteria were then randomly assigned 1:1 to receive 60 mg 
intravenous edaravone or intravenous saline placebo for 6 cycles (4 weeks per 
cycle with 2 weeks on, 2 weeks off) for a total treatment duration of 24 weeks. 
In cycle 1, the study drug or placebo was administered once per day for 14 days 
within a 14 day period, followed by the drug-free period. In cycle 2 and 
thereafter, the study drug or placebo was administered for 10 days within a 14 
day period, followed by a 2 week drug-free period. Participants and 
investigators, including those assessing outcomes, were masked to treatment 
allocation. The primary efficacy outcome was the change in ALSFRS-R score from 
the baseline to 24 weeks (or at discontinuation if this was after the third 
cycle) after randomisation. The primary outcome was assessed in all patients who 
had received at least one treatment infusion, had at least one assessment 
post-baseline, and reached the end of cycle 3. For patients with missing values 
at the end of cycle 6, data were imputed by the last observation carried forward 
(LOCF) method, provided the patients had completed at least cycle 3. Safety was 
assessed in all patients who had received at least one treatment infusion and 
had at least one assessment post-baseline. This trial is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01492686.
FINDINGS: Between Nov 28, 2011, and Sept 3, 2014, we screened 213 patients, and 
enrolled 192 as potential participants. Of these, 137 patients completed the 
observation period: 69 were randomly assigned to receive edaravone, and 68 were 
randomly assigned to receive placebo. 68 patients taking edaravone and 66 taking 
placebo were included in the primary efficacy analysis. For the primary outcome, 
the change in ALSFRS-R score was -5·01 (SE 0·64) in the edavarone group and 
-7·50 (0·66) in the placebo group. The least-squares mean difference between 
groups was 2·49 (SE 0·76, 95% CI 0·99-3·98; p=0·0013) in favour of edaravone. 
Treatment-emergent adverse events were reported in 58 (84%) patients receiving 
edaravone and 57 (84%) patients receiving placebo. 11 (16%) patients taking 
edaravone and 16 (24%) taking placebo had serious adverse events, and one (1%) 
patient receiving edaravone and four (6%) patients receiving placebo had adverse 
events (one dysphagia in edaravone group and one dyspnoea, two respiratory 
disorder, and one rash in the placebo group) that led to withdrawal.
INTERPRETATION: Edaravone showed efficacy in a small subset of people with ALS 
who met criteria identified in post-hoc analysis of a previous phase 3 study, 
showing a significantly smaller decline of ALSFRS-R score compared with placebo. 
There is no indication that edaravone might be effective in a wider population 
of patients with ALS who do not meet the criteria.
FUNDING: Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30115-1
PMID: 28522181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]