---
reference_id: "PMID:35145305"
title: AAV gene therapy for Tay-Sachs disease.
authors:
- Flotte TR
- Cataltepe O
- Puri A
- Batista AR
- Moser R
- McKenna-Yasek D
- Douthwright C
- Gernoux G
- Blackwood M
- Mueller C
- Tai PWL
- Jiang X
- Bateman S
- Spanakis SG
- Parzych J
- Keeler AM
- Abayazeed A
- Rohatgi S
- Gibson L
- Finberg R
- Barton BA
- Vardar Z
- Shazeeb MS
- Gounis M
- Tifft CJ
- Eichler FS
- Brown RH Jr
- Martin DR
- Gray-Edwards HL
- Sena-Esteves M
journal: Nat Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-021-01664-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AAV gene therapy for Tay-Sachs disease.
**Authors:** Flotte TR, Cataltepe O, Puri A, Batista AR, Moser R, McKenna-Yasek D, Douthwright C, Gernoux G, Blackwood M, Mueller C, Tai PWL, Jiang X, Bateman S, Spanakis SG, Parzych J, Keeler AM, Abayazeed A, Rohatgi S, Gibson L, Finberg R, Barton BA, Vardar Z, Shazeeb MS, Gounis M, Tifft CJ, Eichler FS, Brown RH Jr, Martin DR, Gray-Edwards HL, Sena-Esteves M
**Journal:** Nat Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-021-01664-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01664-4)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2022 Feb;28(2):251-259. doi: 10.1038/s41591-021-01664-4. Epub 2022
Feb  10.

AAV gene therapy for Tay-Sachs disease.

Flotte TR(1)(2), Cataltepe O(3)(4), Puri A(5), Batista AR(6)(7), Moser R(4), 
McKenna-Yasek D(7), Douthwright C(7), Gernoux G(3)(6), Blackwood M(3)(6), 
Mueller C(3)(6), Tai PWL(6), Jiang X(8), Bateman S(3), Spanakis SG(9), Parzych 
J(9), Keeler AM(3)(6), Abayazeed A(5), Rohatgi S(5), Gibson L(3)(10), Finberg 
R(10), Barton BA(11), Vardar Z(5), Shazeeb MS(5), Gounis M(5), Tifft CJ(12), 
Eichler FS(13), Brown RH Jr(6)(7), Martin DR(14), Gray-Edwards HL(6)(5), 
Sena-Esteves M(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA. 
Terry.Flotte@umassmed.edu.
(2)Horae Gene Therapy Center and The Li Weibo Institute for Rare Diseases 
Research, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA. 
Terry.Flotte@umassmed.edu.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(6)Horae Gene Therapy Center and The Li Weibo Institute for Rare Diseases 
Research, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine and Cardiovascular Division, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(9)Departments of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, UMass Chan Medical 
School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, 
USA.
(11)Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, UMass Chan Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA.
(12)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(13)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Scott-Ritchey Research Center, Department of Anatomy, Physiology and 
Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 
USA.
(15)Horae Gene Therapy Center and The Li Weibo Institute for Rare Diseases 
Research, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA. 
Miguel.esteves@umassmed.edu.
(16)Department of Neurology, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA. 
Miguel.esteves@umassmed.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2022 Feb;28(2):236-237. doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01687-5.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2022 Apr;23(4):197. doi: 10.1038/s41576-022-00462-z.

Tay-Sachs disease (TSD) is an inherited neurological disorder caused by 
deficiency of hexosaminidase A (HexA). Here, we describe an adeno-associated 
virus (AAV) gene therapy expanded-access trial in two patients with infantile 
TSD (IND 18225) with safety as the primary endpoint and no secondary endpoints. 
Patient TSD-001 was treated at 30 months with an equimolar mix of AAVrh8-HEXA 
and AAVrh8-HEXB administered intrathecally (i.t.), with 75% of the total dose (1 
× 1014 vector genomes (vg)) in the cisterna magna and 25% at the thoracolumbar 
junction. Patient TSD-002 was treated at 7 months by combined bilateral thalamic 
(1.5 × 1012 vg per thalamus) and i.t. infusion (3.9 × 1013 vg). Both patients 
were immunosuppressed. Injection procedures were well tolerated, with no 
vector-related adverse events (AEs) to date. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) HexA 
activity increased from baseline and remained stable in both patients. TSD-002 
showed disease stabilization by 3 months after injection with ongoing 
myelination, a temporary deviation from the natural history of infantile TSD, 
but disease progression was evident at 6 months after treatment. TSD-001 remains 
seizure-free at 5 years of age on the same anticonvulsant therapy as before 
therapy. TSD-002 developed anticonvulsant-responsive seizures at 2 years of age. 
This study provides early safety and proof-of-concept data in humans for 
treatment of patients with TSD by AAV gene therapy.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-021-01664-4
PMCID: PMC10786171
PMID: 35145305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The University of 
Massachusetts Chan Medical School licensed the AAV vectors to Axovant Gene 
Therapies (now Sio Gene Therapies) in December 2018. Licensing revenue is shared 
with Auburn University and M.S.-E., D.R.M. and H.G.-E. receive part of the 
licensing revenue according to institutional policies. The schedule of licensing 
payments is governed by accomplishment of milestones related to an ongoing phase 
1/2 clinical trial where the investigators named above have no role. The 
remaining authors declare no competing interests.