---
reference_id: "PMID:38327091"
title: Global pannexin 1 deletion increases tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in the BRAF/Pten mouse melanoma model.
authors:
- Sanchez-Pupo RE
- Finch GA
- Johnston DE
- Craig H
- Abdo R
- Barr K
- Kerfoot S
- Dagnino L
- Penuela S
journal: Mol Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/1878-0261.13596
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/metabolism
- "Connexins/genetics, therapeutic use"
- "Lymphocytes, Tumor-Infiltrating"
- Melanoma/pathology
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Skin Neoplasms/pathology
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global pannexin 1 deletion increases tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in the BRAF/Pten mouse melanoma model.
**Authors:** Sanchez-Pupo RE, Finch GA, Johnston DE, Craig H, Abdo R, Barr K, Kerfoot S, Dagnino L, Penuela S
**Journal:** Mol Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1878-0261.13596](https://doi.org/10.1002/1878-0261.13596)

## Content

1. Mol Oncol. 2024 Apr;18(4):969-987. doi: 10.1002/1878-0261.13596. Epub 2024 Feb
 7.

Global pannexin 1 deletion increases tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in the
BRAF/Pten mouse melanoma model.

Sanchez-Pupo RE(1), Finch GA(1), Johnston DE(1), Craig H(2), Abdo R(1), Barr
K(1), Kerfoot S(2), Dagnino L(3)(4), Penuela S(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Western University, London, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Western University, London,
Canada.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Western University, London,
Canada.
(4)Division of Experimental Oncology, Department of Oncology, Schulich School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, London, Canada.

Immunotherapies for malignant melanoma seek to boost the anti-tumoral response
of CD8+ T cells, but have a limited patient response rate, in part due to
limited tumoral immune cell infiltration. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition
of the pannexin 1 (PANX1) channel-forming protein is known to decrease melanoma
cell tumorigenic properties in vitro and ex vivo. Here, we crossed Panx1
knockout (Panx1-/-) mice with the inducible melanoma model BrafCA, PtenloxP,
Tyr::CreERT2 (BPC). We found that deleting the Panx1 gene in mice does not
reduce BRAF(V600E)/Pten-driven primary tumor formation or improve survival.
However, tumors in BPC-Panx1-/- mice exhibited a significant increase in the
infiltration of CD8+ T lymphocytes, with no changes in the expression of early
T-cell activation marker CD69, lymphocyte activation gene 3 protein (LAG-3)
checkpoint receptor, or programmed cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1) in tumors when
compared to the BPC-Panx1+/+ genotype. Our results suggest that, although Panx1
deletion does not overturn the aggressive BRAF/Pten-driven melanoma progression
in vivo, it does increase the infiltration of effector immune T-cell populations
in the tumor microenvironment. We propose that PANX1-targeted therapy could be
explored as a strategy to increase tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes to boost
anti-tumor immunity.

© 2024 The Authors. Molecular Oncology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1878-0261.13596
PMCID: PMC10994229
PMID: 38327091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
