---
reference_id: "PMID:36527879"
title: Contribution of IL-33/ILC2-mediated Th2 cytokines during the progression of minimal change disease.
authors:
- Liu C
- Liu L
- Huang Y
- Shi R
- Wu Y
- Hakimah Binti Ismail I
journal: Int Immunopharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109493
keywords:
- Animals
- Rats
- Cytokines
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Inflammation
- Interleukin-13/metabolism
- Interleukin-33
- Interleukin-5
- Lymphocytes
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- Th2 Cells
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of IL-33/ILC2-mediated Th2 cytokines during the progression of minimal change disease.
**Authors:** Liu C, Liu L, Huang Y, Shi R, Wu Y, Hakimah Binti Ismail I
**Journal:** Int Immunopharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109493](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109493)

## Content

1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2023 Jan;114:109493. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109493. 
Epub 2022 Dec 15.

Contribution of IL-33/ILC2-mediated Th2 cytokines during the progression of 
minimal change disease.

Liu C(1), Liu L(2), Huang Y(2), Shi R(2), Wu Y(3), Hakimah Binti Ismail I(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Xi'an International Medical Center Hospital, Xi'an, 
Shaanxi 710100, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University 
Putra Malaysia, 43400 UPM Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address: 
intanhakimah@163.com.

Minimal change disease (MCD) is a common type of nephrotic syndrome with high 
recurrence rate. This study aims to explore the impacts of interleukin (IL)-33 
in MCD and to discuss its potential mechanism. In adriamycin (ADM) and puromycin 
aminonucleoside (PAN)-induced MCD rat model, IL-33 was used for treatment. H&E 
staining was applied for detecting histological changes. Critical proteins were 
examined by western blot. Corresponding commercial kits tested oxidative stress- 
and inflammation-related factors. Cell apoptosis was measured by TUNEL assay. 
ADM-induced podocyte injury model was establish to mimic MCD in vitro. Cell 
proliferation and apoptosis were detected by CCK-8 and TUNEL assays. Finally, 
podocyte was stimulated by innate lymphoid type-2 cells-secreted Th2 cytokines 
(ILC2s: IL-13 and IL-5 respectively), with or without incubation with M1 
macrophage medium to further explore the immune-regulation of ILC2s behind the 
inflammatory environment of MCD. It was found that PAN-induced kidney jury, 
inflammation, oxidative stress and apoptosis were severer than ADM, and IL-33 
treatment significantly alleviated the above injuries in PAN and ADM-induced MCD 
rat model. Moreover, IL-33 reversed the reduced viability and increased 
oxidative stress and apoptosis in ADM-induced podocyte injury model. Further, 
the capacities of IL-13 alone in inducing M1/M2 macrophage polarization, 
apoptosis, inflammation, kidney injury and reducing cell viability are stronger 
than IL-5. However, IL-13 reversed reduced cell viability and stimulated 
apoptosis, inflammation, kidney injury mediated by co-incubation with 
M1-conditioned medium. Collectively, IL-33 might protect against immunologic 
injury in MCD via mediating ILC2s-secreted IL-13.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2022.109493
PMID: 36527879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.