---
reference_id: "PMID:10408718"
title: "Sensory symptoms of multiple sclerosis: a hidden reservoir of morbidity."
authors:
- Rae-Grant AD
- Eckert NJ
- Bartz S
- Reed JF
journal: Mult Scler
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1177/135245859900500307
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sensory symptoms of multiple sclerosis: a hidden reservoir of morbidity.
**Authors:** Rae-Grant AD, Eckert NJ, Bartz S, Reed JF
**Journal:** Mult Scler (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1177/135245859900500307](https://doi.org/10.1177/135245859900500307)

## Content

1. Mult Scler. 1999 Jun;5(3):179-83. doi: 10.1177/135245859900500307.

Sensory symptoms of multiple sclerosis: a hidden reservoir of morbidity.

Rae-Grant AD(1), Eckert NJ, Bartz S, Reed JF.

Author information:
(1)Division of neurology and research department, Lehigh Valley Hospital, 
Allentown, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the frequency and quality of sensory symptoms in a 
population of patients with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) and compare them with 
controls.
DESIGN: Survey to target population and control group evaluating demographic 
data, data on disease course, presence of various symptoms of MS.
SETTING: Neurological practices affiliated with a tertiary community hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: 224 patients with MS, 93 controls of similar age and sex.
RESULTS: Sensory symptoms were more common in MS patients than in controls, and 
differed in severity and quality. Fifty per cent described brief (seconds to 
hours) episodes of neurological dysfunction, significantly more often than in 
controls (P = 0.001). Pain was present at some time in similar percentages in 
patients and controls, but active pain problems were present more often in MS 
patients (P = 0.001). The qualitative description of pain in MS patients was 
more often neuropathic, with burning, itching, electric and formicatory pain, as 
opposed to throbbing, sharp or muscular pain. Pain was localized to arms, legs, 
trunk, hands, feet and face more often in the MS group. Lhermitte's phenomenon 
was present in two-thirds of patients at some time in their disease course. 
Twenty per cent of the patients identified themselves as having respiratory 
problems (Controls 7.5%, P = 0.005). Fatigue limited activity in 78% of 
patients, but only in 17% of controls (P = 0.001). Dizziness, memory 
dysfunction, and restless legs symptoms were all more frequent in patients. The 
self-rated 'worst' symptoms of MS was pain in 12%, fatigue in 17% and dizziness 
in 5%, a total of 34% of 'worst' symptoms. Sensory symptoms were present in 
patients with early disease and without disability as often as in disabled 
patients and in those with longer disease duration. There was however a strong 
correlation between the total number of sensory symptoms reported and the 
presence of disability in the MS patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Sensory symptoms are common in MS patients. Pain syndromes, 
transient neurologic events, Lhermitte's phenomenon, fatigue, respiratory 
symptoms and vertigo were present significantly more frequently in patients with 
MS than in a control population and contributed to subjective morbidity. Future 
clinical trials assessing therapy in MS might include sensory symptoms as 
secondary endpoints to capture this 'hidden reservoir' of disease morbidity.

DOI: 10.1177/135245859900500307
PMID: 10408718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]