---
reference_id: "PMID:9682811"
title: "Ultrastructural, physiological, and molecular defects in the inner ear of a gene-knockout mouse model for autosomal Alport syndrome."
authors:
- Cosgrove D
- Samuelson G
- Meehan DT
- Miller C
- McGee J
- Walsh EJ
- Siegel M
journal: Hear Res
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0378-5955(98)00069-0
keywords:
- Animals
- "Basement Membrane/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cochlea/physiopathology, ultrastructure"
- "Collagen/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endothelium/pathology
- Female
- Kidney Glomerulus/metabolism
- Male
- "Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Mutation
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, physiopathology"
- Stria Vascularis/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ultrastructural, physiological, and molecular defects in the inner ear of a gene-knockout mouse model for autosomal Alport syndrome.
**Authors:** Cosgrove D, Samuelson G, Meehan DT, Miller C, McGee J, Walsh EJ, Siegel M
**Journal:** Hear Res (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0378-5955(98)00069-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-5955(98)00069-0)

## Content

1. Hear Res. 1998 Jul;121(1-2):84-98. doi: 10.1016/s0378-5955(98)00069-0.

Ultrastructural, physiological, and molecular defects in the inner ear of a
gene-knockout mouse model for autosomal Alport syndrome.

Cosgrove D(1), Samuelson G, Meehan DT, Miller C, McGee J, Walsh EJ, Siegel M.

Author information:
(1)Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, NE 68131, USA.
Cosgrove@boystown.org

The cochleae from a COL4A3-deficient mouse line were examined for defects that
might shed light on the molecular mechanism of otopathology observed in humans
with Alport syndrome. At the light microscopic level no obvious defects were
observed. Immunohistochemical analysis using antibodies specific for the
basement membrane collagen chains revealed the absence of the COL4A3 and COL4A4
chains throughout the membranous labyrinth. The COL4A5 chain was absent from all
cochlear basement membranes except those in the vessels of the stria vascularis.
Expression of the COL4A1 and COL4A2 chains was unchanged in the mutant. Electron
microscopic examination of the cochlear basement membranes revealed significant
thinning of the basement membrane running from the spiral limbus, down the inner
sulcus, across the basilar membrane and up to the spiral prominence. Basement
membranes that normally ensheathe the root cells were not detectable. In
contrast, the basement membranes surrounding the vessels of the stria vascularis
were significantly thickened in the mutant. This was associated with endothelial
cell swelling and a marked decrease in internal capillary diameter. In severe
cases, pathology was observed in the marginal cells with a loss of basolateral
infoldings. Immunohistochemical analysis of the strial vessels revealed an
increase in entactin and collagen COL4A1 and COL4A2 chains. Auditory-evoked
brainstem response measurements suggest a small increase in thresholds across
all frequencies when successive measurements on individual mutant mice were
examined between 6 and 8 postnatal weeks. Combined, these results illustrate
changes in the basement membranes of the strial vessels that bear resemblance to
Alport glomerular basement membrane pathology. A closer look at this compartment
in human Alport biopsy specimen may be warranted.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-5955(98)00069-0
PMID: 9682811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
