---
reference_id: "PMID:22999705"
title: Complement, interferon and lupus.
authors:
- Elkon KB
- Santer DM
journal: Curr Opin Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2012.08.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complement, interferon and lupus.
**Authors:** Elkon KB, Santer DM
**Journal:** Curr Opin Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.coi.2012.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2012.08.004)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Immunol. 2012 Dec;24(6):665-70. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2012.08.004. Epub
 2012 Sep 20.

Complement, interferon and lupus.

Elkon KB(1), Santer DM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Department of Immunology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. elkon@u.washington.edu

The complement pathway was implicated in the immunopathogenesis of lupus and 
other autoimmune disorders decades ago. The apparent paradox that early 
complement component (C1q, C2 and C4) deficiencies predispose to lupus has been 
explained by the beneficial roles of these proteins in promoting the clearance 
of immune complexes (ICs) and apoptotic cells. Recent findings demonstrate that, 
in the absence of C1q, instead of ICs binding to monocytes, they preferentially 
engage plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) so generating interferon (IFN) alpha, 
the cytokine with potent immune adjuvant properties. C1q opsonized apoptotic 
cells also exert an immunosuppressive effect through cytokine regulation and the 
stimulation of additional opsonins by macrophages. C1q was recently reported to 
impede neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) degradation. NETs are known to 
promote type I IFN production in SLE by providing a source of antigen for the 
formation of ICs as well as through direct pDC activation by cathelicidin 
(LL37). Together, these findings provide both direct and indirect links between 
two key pathways implicated in lupus pathogenesis: complement and IFN.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coi.2012.08.004
PMID: 22999705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]