---
reference_id: "PMID:37450881"
title: "Pacak-Zhuang syndrome: a model providing new insights into tumor syndromes."
authors:
- Rosenblum JS
- Wang H
- Nazari MA
- Zhuang Z
- Pacak K
journal: Endocr Relat Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1530/ERC-23-0050
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Pheochromocytoma/genetics, pathology"
- Syndrome
- "Paraganglioma/genetics, pathology"
- Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins/genetics
- "Adrenal Gland Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pacak-Zhuang syndrome: a model providing new insights into tumor syndromes.
**Authors:** Rosenblum JS, Wang H, Nazari MA, Zhuang Z, Pacak K
**Journal:** Endocr Relat Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ERC-23-0050](https://doi.org/10.1530/ERC-23-0050)

## Content

1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2023 Aug 17;30(10):e230050. doi: 10.1530/ERC-23-0050.
Print  2023 Oct 1.

Pacak-Zhuang syndrome: a model providing new insights into tumor syndromes.

Rosenblum JS(1), Wang H(1), Nazari MA(2), Zhuang Z(1), Pacak K(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuro-Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States.
(2)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Development,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States.

This article is a summary of the plenary lecture presented by Jared Rosenblum
that was awarded the Manger Prize at the Sixth International Symposium on
Pheochromocytoma/Paraganglioma held on 19-22 October 2022 in Prague, Czech
Republic. Herein, we review our initial identification of a new syndrome of
multiple paragangliomas, somatostatinomas, and polycythemia caused by early
postzygotic mosaic mutations in EPAS1, encoding hypoxia-inducible factor 2 alpha
(HIF-2α), and our continued exploration of new disease phenotypes in this
syndrome, including vascular malformations and neural tube defects. Continued
recruitment and close monitoring of patients with this syndrome as well as the
generation and study of a corresponding disease mouse model as afforded by the
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma translational program at the National Institutes
of Health has provided new insights into the natural history of these
developmental anomalies and the pathophysiologic role of HIF-2α. Further, these
studies have highlighted the importance of the timing of genetic defects in the
development of related disease phenotypes. The recent discovery and continued
study of this syndrome has not only rapidly evolved our understanding of
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma but also deepened our understanding of other
developmental tumor syndromes, heritable syndromes, and sporadic diseases.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-23-0050
PMCID: PMC10512798
PMID: 37450881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ethics Declaration The authors have no relevant
conflicts of interest to disclose.
