---
reference_id: "PMID:30200907"
title: "Progression of retinal pigmentation mimicking unilateral retinitis pigmentosa after bilateral pars planitis: a case report."
authors:
- Vela JI
- Marcantonio I
- Díaz-Cascajosa J
- Crespí J
- Buil JA
journal: BMC Ophthalmol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12886-018-0814-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progression of retinal pigmentation mimicking unilateral retinitis pigmentosa after bilateral pars planitis: a case report.
**Authors:** Vela JI, Marcantonio I, Díaz-Cascajosa J, Crespí J, Buil JA
**Journal:** BMC Ophthalmol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12886-018-0814-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-018-0814-2)

## Content

1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2018 Sep 10;18(1):242. doi: 10.1186/s12886-018-0814-2.

Progression of retinal pigmentation mimicking unilateral retinitis pigmentosa 
after bilateral pars planitis: a case report.

Vela JI(1)(2), Marcantonio I(3), Díaz-Cascajosa J(3), Crespí J(3)(4), Buil 
JA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i de Sant Pau, 
Barcelona, Spain. 34128jvs@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Institut Condal d'Oftalmología, Barcelona, 
Spain. 34128jvs@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i de Sant Pau, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Institut Condal d'Oftalmología, Barcelona, 
Spain.

BACKGROUND: To report our findings in a young patient with unilateral retinitis 
pigmentosa (RP)-like appearance who developed pigmentary changes in his left 
retina after an episode of bilateral pars planitis.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 17-year-old man presented with 6 months of blurry vision in 
both eyes. He was diagnosed with bilateral pars planitis. Progressive, 
intraretinal bone crepuscule pigmentation developed in his left retina during 
the following three months. An electroretinogram showed subnormal response only 
in the left eye, suggesting the diagnosis of unilateral pseudoRP.
CONCLUSION: An inflammatory disease like pars planitis can accelerate the 
pigmentation of the retina and mimic a RP in young patients. Causes of pseudoRP 
may be considered, especially in those rare cases with unilateral affection.

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-018-0814-2
PMCID: PMC6131731
PMID: 30200907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent was obtained from 
the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. Written 
informed consent was also obtained from his parents. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.