---
reference_id: "PMID:39056027"
title: "Excitation/Inhibition balance relates to cognitive function and gene expression in temporal lobe epilepsy: a high density EEG assessment with aperiodic exponent."
authors:
- Duma GM
- Cuozzo S
- Wilson L
- Danieli A
- Bonanni P
- Pellegrino G
journal: Brain Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae231
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Excitation/Inhibition balance relates to cognitive function and gene expression in temporal lobe epilepsy: a high density EEG assessment with aperiodic exponent.
**Authors:** Duma GM, Cuozzo S, Wilson L, Danieli A, Bonanni P, Pellegrino G
**Journal:** Brain Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/braincomms/fcae231](https://doi.org/10.1093/braincomms/fcae231)

## Content

1. Brain Commun. 2024 Jul 8;6(4):fcae231. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae231. 
eCollection 2024.

Excitation/Inhibition balance relates to cognitive function and gene expression 
in temporal lobe epilepsy: a high density EEG assessment with aperiodic 
exponent.

Duma GM(1), Cuozzo S(1), Wilson L(2), Danieli A(1), Bonanni P(1), Pellegrino 
G(3).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Institute IRCCS E.Medea, Epilepsy and Clinical Neurophysiology 
Unit, 31015, Conegliano, Italy.
(2)McConnell Brain Imaging Centre, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, Canada.
(3)Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Western University, London N6A5C1, Canada.

Patients with epilepsy are characterized by a dysregulation of 
excitation/inhibition balance (E/I). The assessment of E/I may inform clinicians 
during the diagnosis and therapy management, even though it is rarely performed. 
An accessible measure of the E/I of the brain represents a clinically relevant 
feature. Here, we exploited the exponent of the aperiodic component of the power 
spectrum of the electroencephalography (EEG) signal, as a non-invasive and 
cost-effective proxy of the E/I balance. We recorded resting-state activity with 
high-density EEG from 67 patients with temporal lobe epilepsy and 35 controls. 
We extracted the exponent of the aperiodic fit of the power spectrum from 
source-reconstructed EEG and tested differences between patients with epilepsy 
and controls. Spearman's correlation was performed between the exponent and 
clinical variables (age of onset, epilepsy duration and neuropsychology) and 
cortical expression of epilepsy-related genes derived from the Allen Human Brain 
Atlas. Patients with temporal lobe epilepsy showed a significantly larger 
exponent, corresponding to inhibition-directed E/I balance, in bilateral frontal 
and temporal regions. Lower E/I in the left entorhinal and bilateral 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortices corresponded to a lower performance of 
short-term verbal memory. Limited to patients with temporal lobe epilepsy, we 
detected a significant correlation between the exponent and the cortical 
expression of GABRA1, GRIN2A, GABRD, GABRG2, KCNA2 and PDYN genes. EEG aperiodic 
exponent maps the E/I balance non-invasively in patients with epilepsy and 
reveals a close relationship between altered E/I patterns, cognition and 
genetics.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae231
PMCID: PMC11272395
PMID: 39056027

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.