---
reference_id: "PMID:23510069"
title: SOX2 promotes tumor growth of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma through the AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 signaling pathway.
authors:
- Gen Y
- Yasui K
- Nishikawa T
- Yoshikawa T
journal: Cancer Sci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/cas.12155
keywords:
- Animals
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Cell Survival/drug effects
- Chromones/pharmacology
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma
- Heterografts
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/drug effects
- Male
- Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 1
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Mice, Nude"
- Morpholines/pharmacology
- "Multiprotein Complexes/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Phosphoinositide-3 Kinase Inhibitors
- Phosphorylation/drug effects
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/genetics, metabolism"
- "SOXB1 Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Sirolimus/pharmacology
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SOX2 promotes tumor growth of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma through the AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Gen Y, Yasui K, Nishikawa T, Yoshikawa T
**Journal:** Cancer Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cas.12155](https://doi.org/10.1111/cas.12155)

## Content

1. Cancer Sci. 2013 Jul;104(7):810-6. doi: 10.1111/cas.12155. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

SOX2 promotes tumor growth of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma through the
AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 signaling pathway.

Gen Y(1), Yasui K, Nishikawa T, Yoshikawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of
Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

The transcription factor SOX2 is essential for the maintenance of embryonic stem
cells and normal development of the esophagus. Our previous study revealed that
the SOX2 gene is an amplification target of 3q26.3 in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC), and that SOX2 promotes ESCC cell proliferation in vitro. In
the present study, we aimed to identify the mechanisms by which SOX2 promotes
proliferation of ESCC cells. Using a phosphoprotein array, we assayed multiple
signaling pathways activated by SOX2 and determined that SOX2 activated the
AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling pathway.
LY294002, an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and rapamycin, an
inhibitor of mTORC1, suppressed the ability of SOX2 to enhance proliferation of
ESCC cells in vitro. Effects of SOX2 knockdown, including reduced levels of
phosphorylated AKT and decreased ESCC cell proliferation, were reversed with
constitutive activation of AKT with knockdown of phosphatase and tensin homolog.
In mouse xenografts, SOX2 promoted in vivo tumor growth of ESCC, which was
dependent on AKT/mTORC1 activation. LY294002 suppressed the ability of SOX2 to
enhance tumor growth of ESCC by reducing cell proliferation, but not by
enhancing apoptosis. Furthermore, tissue microarray analysis of 61 primary ESCC
tumors showed a positive correlation between expression levels of SOX2 and
phosphorylated AKT. Our findings suggest that SOX2 promotes in vivo tumor growth
of ESCC through activation of the AKT/mTORC1 signaling pathway, which enhances
cell proliferation.

© 2013 Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12155
PMCID: PMC7657236
PMID: 23510069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
