---
reference_id: "PMID:38289514"
title: "A Global View of Pemphigus: Geographical Variations."
authors:
- Timóteo RP
- Pessoa-Gonçalves YM
- do Carmo Neto JR
- Rodrigues WF
- da Silva MV
- Oliveira CJF
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-024-08980-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Pemphigus
- Autoimmune Diseases
- Brazil
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Global View of Pemphigus: Geographical Variations.
**Authors:** Timóteo RP, Pessoa-Gonçalves YM, do Carmo Neto JR, Rodrigues WF, da Silva MV, Oliveira CJF
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-024-08980-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-024-08980-w)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2024 Feb;66(1):14-29. doi:
10.1007/s12016-024-08980-w.  Epub 2024 Jan 30.

A Global View of Pemphigus: Geographical Variations.

Timóteo RP(#)(1), Pessoa-Gonçalves YM(#)(1), do Carmo Neto JR(2), Rodrigues 
WF(1), da Silva MV(1), Oliveira CJF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Institute of 
Biological and Natural Sciences, Federal University of Triângulo Mineiro, 
Uberaba, Minas Gerais, 38025-180, Brazil.
(2)Department of Bioscience and Technology, Institute of Tropical Pathology and 
Public Health, Federal University of Goiás, Goiania, Goiás, 74690-900, Brazil.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Institute of 
Biological and Natural Sciences, Federal University of Triângulo Mineiro, 
Uberaba, Minas Gerais, 38025-180, Brazil. carlo.oliveira@uftm.edu.br.
(#)Contributed equally

Pemphigus, an autoimmune intraepidermal bullous disease group with roughly eight 
distinct forms, includes pemphigus vulgaris (PV) and pemphigus foliaceus (PF) as 
its predominant global forms. Despite the increased utilization of global health 
records and reporting systems, epidemiological data remain limited and poorly 
categorized. Therefore, this study aimed to conduct a review to track, identify, 
and characterize cases of PV and PF published and categorized worldwide. A 
research question was formulated; studies were selected based on the inclusion 
criteria; and data from these publications were systematically collected, 
summarized, and presented using narrative descriptions. The search strategy 
yielded 3,212 articles, of which 95 underwent critical analysis and data 
extraction. Studies from 52 countries contributed to the dataset, covering 
various pemphigus variants. Notably, only two countries, Iran (18.87%) and South 
Korea (11.43%), accounted for approximately a third of the reported PV cases, 
while Brazil contributed 40.25% of the foliaceus variants cases documented in 
the literature. These findings offer valuable insights into the global 
distribution of pemphigus and inform future research and healthcare efforts.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-024-08980-w
PMID: 38289514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]