---
reference_id: "PMID:39180526"
title: "Bilateral juvenile temporal arteritis: a case-based review."
authors:
- Marques-Soares J
- Garcia-Domingo MI
- Leal CB
- Alijotas-Reig J
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-024-05624-2
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Biopsy
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- Temporal Arteries/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bilateral juvenile temporal arteritis: a case-based review.
**Authors:** Marques-Soares J, Garcia-Domingo MI, Leal CB, Alijotas-Reig J
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-024-05624-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-024-05624-2)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2024 Oct;44(10):2253-2261. doi: 10.1007/s00296-024-05624-2.
Epub  2024 Aug 24.

Bilateral juvenile temporal arteritis: a case-based review.

Marques-Soares J(1)(2), Garcia-Domingo MI(3), Leal CB(4), Alijotas-Reig J(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Systemic Autoimmune Diseases Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital
Universitari Vall d'Hebron and Systemic Autoimmune Research Unit, Vall d'Hebron
Research Institute, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Passeig Vall d'Hebron
119-29, 08035-Barcelona, Catalonia, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Hospital Universitari Mútua Terrassa,
Universitat de Barcelona, Terrassa, Spain.
(4)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitari Mútua Terrassa, Universitat de
Barcelona, Terrassa, Spain.
(5)Systemic Autoimmune Diseases Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital
Universitari Vall d'Hebron and Systemic Autoimmune Research Unit, Vall d'Hebron
Research Institute, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Passeig Vall d'Hebron
119-29, 08035-Barcelona, Catalonia, Barcelona, Spain. jaime.alijotas@uab.cat.
(6)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. jaime.alijotas@uab.cat.

Juvenile Temporal Arteritis (JTA) is a rare non-granulomatous vasculitis
affecting the superficial temporal arteries, mostly in individuals under 45
years old. It is often misdiagnosed due to its benign nature and the absence of
systemic symptoms. Herein, we present a case report of a 40-year-old woman who
initially presented with painless nodules in the left temporal area. Following a
biopsy, the patient developed additional nodules not only in the same temple but
also on the contralateral side. Remarkably, these nodules underwent spontaneous
regression without further treatment, highlighting the variability in JTA's
course and distinctive response to intervention. In addition, through a
systematic literature review of 43 case reports - 17 with bilateral involvement
- we aimed to thoroughly understand the clinical and histopathological findings,
diagnostic processes, and treatment responses in JTA, with an emphasis on cases
with bilateral involvement. Findings indicate that JTA typically presents as
painless or painful temporal nodules, rarely accompanied by other non-specific
symptoms, making histopathological examination crucial for accurate diagnosis.
Collectively, our work provides the most extensive account of bilateral JTA
cases to date. It emphasizes the need for clinical awareness of this condition,
contributes valuable data to the limited information available on this rare
condition and serves as a stepping-stone for further inquiry. The main takeaway
from this review is the variable nature of JTA and the importance of
histopathology in diagnosis, which helps clinicians avoid excessive testing and
overtreatment and anticipate possible spontaneous resolution.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-024-05624-2
PMCID: PMC11393210
PMID: 39180526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.