---
reference_id: "PMID:38063602"
title: Arabic Translation and Psychometric Validation of PROMIS General Life Satisfaction Short Form in the General Population.
authors:
- Bakhsh HR
- Aldajani NS
- Sheeha BB
- Aldhahi MI
- Alsomali AA
- Alhamrani GK
- Alamri RZ
- Alhasani R
journal: Healthcare (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/healthcare11233034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arabic Translation and Psychometric Validation of PROMIS General Life Satisfaction Short Form in the General Population.
**Authors:** Bakhsh HR, Aldajani NS, Sheeha BB, Aldhahi MI, Alsomali AA, Alhamrani GK, Alamri RZ, Alhasani R
**Journal:** Healthcare (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/healthcare11233034](https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11233034)

## Content

1. Healthcare (Basel). 2023 Nov 24;11(23):3034. doi: 10.3390/healthcare11233034.

Arabic Translation and Psychometric Validation of PROMIS General Life 
Satisfaction Short Form in the General Population.

Bakhsh HR(1), Aldajani NS(1), Sheeha BB(1), Aldhahi MI(1), Alsomali AA(1), 
Alhamrani GK(1), Alamri RZ(1), Alhasani R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, College of Health and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University (PNU), Riyadh 11671, Saudi 
Arabia.

This study aimed to translate the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement 
Information System (PROMIS) General Life Satisfaction Short Form (GLS SF5a) into 
the Arabic language and psychometrically validate the scale in the general 
population of Saudi Arabia. The translation processes followed the international 
recommendations of the FACIT Measurement System. The study was a multicentre 
cross-sectional study conducted in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. A total of 657 
individuals who were above 18 years of age and able to write and comprehend 
Arabic completed the GLS SF5a. Rasch analysis was used to evaluate item fit, 
reliability indices, item difficulty, principal component analysis and local 
item dependency. WINSTEPS (v. 5.6.0) was used for the analysis. The translation 
process and cognitive defibring were completed with no issues. The rating scale 
categories had a disordered threshold. All items, except one, demonstrated a 
satisfactory fit to the Rasch model. The reliability of the person separation 
was 0.86. The scale was unidimensional, and no items showed local dependency. 
Overall, this study confirms the psychometric properties of the Arabic version 
of the PROMIS GLS SF5a, which can be used as an instrument for measuring general 
life satisfaction in the general population. Further research is required to 
explore responsiveness, interpretability and feasibility in the clinical 
setting.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare11233034
PMCID: PMC10706306
PMID: 38063602

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.