---
reference_id: "PMID:28448665"
title: "Trends in the Incidence, Prevalence, and Survival Outcomes in Patients With Neuroendocrine Tumors in the United States."
authors:
- Dasari A
- Shen C
- Halperin D
- Zhao B
- Zhou S
- Xu Y
- Shih T
- Yao JC
journal: JAMA Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.0589
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- Female
- "Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/epidemiology, pathology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/epidemiology, pathology"
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/epidemiology, pathology"
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- SEER Program
- Survival Analysis
- Survival Rate
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trends in the Incidence, Prevalence, and Survival Outcomes in Patients With Neuroendocrine Tumors in the United States.
**Authors:** Dasari A, Shen C, Halperin D, Zhao B, Zhou S, Xu Y, Shih T, Yao JC
**Journal:** JAMA Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.0589](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.0589)

## Content

1. JAMA Oncol. 2017 Oct 1;3(10):1335-1342. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.0589.

Trends in the Incidence, Prevalence, and Survival Outcomes in Patients With 
Neuroendocrine Tumors in the United States.

Dasari A(1), Shen C(2)(3), Halperin D(1), Zhao B(2), Zhou S(3), Xu Y(2), Shih 
T(2), Yao JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston.
(2)Department of Health Services Research, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston.

Comment in
    JAMA Oncol. 2017 Oct 1;3(10):1343-1344. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.0575.

IMPORTANCE: The incidence and prevalence of neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are 
thought to be rising, but updated epidemiologic data are lacking.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the evolving epidemiology and investigate the effect of 
therapeutic advances on survival of patients with NETs.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A retrospective, population-based study using 
nationally representative data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End 
Results (SEER) program was conducted to evaluate 64 971 patients with NETs from 
1973 to 2012. Associated population data were used to determine annual 
age-adjusted incidence, limited-duration prevalence, and 5-year overall survival 
(OS) rates. Trends in survival from 2000 to 2012 were evaluated for the entire 
cohort as well as specific subgroups, including distant-stage gastrointestinal 
NETs and pancreatic NETs. Analyses were conducted between December 2015, and 
February 2017.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Neuroendocrine tumor incidence, prevalence, and OS 
rates.
RESULTS: Of the 64 971 cases of NETs, 34 233 (52.7%) were women. The 
age-adjusted incidence rate increased 6.4-fold from 1973 (1.09 per 100 000) to 
2012 (6.98 per 100 000). This increase occurred across all sites, stages, and 
grades. In the SEER 18 registry grouping (2000-2012), the highest incidence 
rates were 1.49 per 100 000 in the lung, 3.56 per 100 000 in 
gastroenteropancreatic sites, and 0.84 per 100 000 in NETs with an unknown 
primary site. The estimated 20-year limited-duration prevalence of NETs in the 
United States on January 1, 2014, was 171 321. On multivariable analyses, the 
median 5-year OS rate varied significantly by stage, grade, age at diagnosis, 
primary site, and time period of diagnosis. The OS rate for all NETs improved 
from the 2000-2004 period to the 2009-2012 period (hazard ratio [HR], 0.79; 95% 
CI, 0.73-0.85). Even larger increases in OS between these periods were noted in 
distant-stage gastrointestinal NETs (HR, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.62-0.81) and 
distant-stage pancreatic NETs (HR, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.44-0.70).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The incidence and prevalence of NETs are steadily 
rising, possibly owing to detection of early-stage disease and stage migration. 
Survival for all NETs has improved over time, especially for distant-stage 
gastrointestinal NETs and pancreatic NETs in particular, reflecting improvement 
in therapies. These data will help to prioritize future research directions.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.0589
PMCID: PMC5824320
PMID: 28448665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Dasari has 
received research support from Novartis, Ipsen, and Eisai and serves as a 
consultant for Novartis, Ipsen, and Lexicon. Dr Shen has received research 
support from Novartis and Ipsen. Dr Halperin has received research support from 
Novartis, Ipsen and serves as a consultant for Novartis and Ipsen. Dr Yao has 
received research support from Novartis and Ipsen and serves as a consultant for 
Novartis, Ipsen, Lexicon. No other disclosures were reported.