---
reference_id: "PMID:15075045"
title: Erythromelalgia.
authors:
- Ljubojević S
- Lipozencić J
- Pustisek N
journal: Acta Dermatovenerol Croat
year: '2004'
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Erythromelalgia/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Microcirculation
- Skin/blood supply
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythromelalgia.
**Authors:** Ljubojević S, Lipozencić J, Pustisek N
**Journal:** Acta Dermatovenerol Croat (2004)

## Content

1. Acta Dermatovenerol Croat. 2004;12(2):99-105.

Erythromelalgia.

Ljubojević S(1), Lipozencić J, Pustisek N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Split University Hospital, Split, Croatia. 
suzana.ljubojevic@zg.htnet.hr

Erythromelalgia is a rare poorly understood clinical condition characterized by 
intense burning pain, pronounced erythema, and increased skin temperature. 
Although there are many classifications of the disease, it can basically be 
divided into primary, which begins spontaneously at any age, and secondary, 
which is associated with myeloproliferative disorders-related thrombocythemia, 
polycythemia, collagen-vascular diseases, diabetes mellitus, peripheral 
neuropathy, autoimmune and infectious diseases, and use of certain medicaments. 
A wide variety of etiological conditions can cause erythromelalgia, all having a 
single common pathogenetic mechanism - microvascular arteriovenous shunting. The 
disease is characterized by severe pain associated with redness and hotness in 
extremities. The diagnosis is based on the medical history and clinical 
findings. The most useful oral medications for erythromelalgia seem to be 
aspirin, propranolol, clonazepam, cyproheptadine, drugs inhibiting serotonin 
re-uptake (venlafaxine and sertraline), tricyclic antidepressants 
(amitriptyline, imipramine), anticonvulsants (gabapentin), calcium antagonists 
(nifedipine, diltiazem), and prostaglandins (micoprostol). Erythromelalgia is 
usually chronic, sometimes progressive, and disabling disease, which can greatly 
affect the quality of life. Some patients have stable disease and get better, or 
even experience full resolution of the disease, with time. This review article 
presents the etiological basis, diagnostics, and therapy of erythromelalgia.

PMID: 15075045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]