---
reference_id: "PMID:23333342"
title: "Nothing tastes as good as skinny feels: the neurobiology of anorexia nervosa."
authors:
- Kaye WH
- Wierenga CE
- Bailer UF
- Simmons AN
- Bischoff-Grethe A
journal: Trends Neurosci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2013.01.003
keywords:
- "Anorexia Nervosa/physiopathology, psychology"
- Brain/physiopathology
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nothing tastes as good as skinny feels: the neurobiology of anorexia nervosa.
**Authors:** Kaye WH, Wierenga CE, Bailer UF, Simmons AN, Bischoff-Grethe A
**Journal:** Trends Neurosci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tins.2013.01.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2013.01.003)

## Content

1. Trends Neurosci. 2013 Feb;36(2):110-20. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2013.01.003. Epub
2013 Jan 18.

Nothing tastes as good as skinny feels: the neurobiology of anorexia nervosa.

Kaye WH(1), Wierenga CE, Bailer UF, Simmons AN, Bischoff-Grethe A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA,
USA. wkaye@ucsd.edu

Individuals with anorexia nervosa (AN) engage in relentless restrictive eating
and often become severely emaciated. Because there are no proven treatments, AN
has high rates of relapse, chronicity, and death. Those with AN tend to have
childhood temperament and personality traits, such as anxiety, obsessions, and
perfectionism, which may reflect neurobiological risk factors for developing AN.
Restricted eating may be a means of reducing negative mood caused by skewed
interactions between serotonin aversive or inhibitory and dopamine reward
systems. Brain imaging studies suggest that altered eating is a consequence of
dysregulated reward and/or awareness of homeostatic needs, perhaps related to
enhanced executive ability to inhibit incentive motivational drives. An
understanding of the neurobiology of this disorder is likely to be important for
developing more effective treatments.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2013.01.003
PMCID: PMC3880159
PMID: 23333342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclaimer statement: Authors have no conflicts
to declare
