---
reference_id: "PMID:8914632"
title: Incidence of peroxisomal disorders in Japan.
authors:
- Suzuki Y
- Shimozawa N
- Yajima S
- Inoue K
- Orii T
- Kondo N
journal: Jpn J Hum Genet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1007/BF01892624
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence of peroxisomal disorders in Japan.
**Authors:** Suzuki Y, Shimozawa N, Yajima S, Inoue K, Orii T, Kondo N
**Journal:** Jpn J Hum Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01892624](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01892624)

## Content

1. Jpn J Hum Genet. 1996 Mar;41(1):167-75. doi: 10.1007/BF01892624.

Incidence of peroxisomal disorders in Japan.

Suzuki Y(1), Shimozawa N, Yajima S, Inoue K, Orii T, Kondo N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gifu University School of Medicine, Japan.

Japanese patients with peroxisomal disorders in the pediatric field were 
screened. Very long chain fatty acid analysis in the serum sphingomyelin was 
introduced since 1987 and was useful for the first screening of peroxisomal 
disorders. Seventy-five patients were diagnosed since 1980: 15 patients with 
Zellweger syndrome, 2 with neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), 1 with 
rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, 1 with Zellweger-like syndrome. 2 with 
acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency, 2 with bifunctional enzyme deficiency and 52 with 
X-linked ALD. The incidence of peroxisome-deficient disorders was estimated to 
be approximately 1 in 800,000 births which is far less than that in the USA. 
However, the incidence in Okinawa Islands was 1 in 30,000. Japanese Zellweger 
patients belonged to 5 complementation groups (A, B, C, E, F) and the patients 
in Okinawa Islands belonged to groups A and C. The results of this screening 
were useful for genetic counseling, prenatal diagnosis, carrier detection and 
early medical care of patients with peroxisomal disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01892624
PMID: 8914632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]