---
reference_id: "PMID:33083279"
title: Dietary Restriction Suppresses Steatosis-Associated Hepatic Tumorigenesis in Hepatitis C Virus Core Gene Transgenic Mice.
authors:
- Jia F
- Diao P
- Wang X
- Hu X
- Kimura T
- Nakamuta M
- Nakamura I
- Shirotori S
- Sato Y
- Moriya K
- Koike K
- Gonzalez FJ
- Nakayama J
- Aoyama T
- Tanaka N
journal: Liver Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000508308
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dietary Restriction Suppresses Steatosis-Associated Hepatic Tumorigenesis in Hepatitis C Virus Core Gene Transgenic Mice.
**Authors:** Jia F, Diao P, Wang X, Hu X, Kimura T, Nakamuta M, Nakamura I, Shirotori S, Sato Y, Moriya K, Koike K, Gonzalez FJ, Nakayama J, Aoyama T, Tanaka N
**Journal:** Liver Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000508308](https://doi.org/10.1159/000508308)

## Content

1. Liver Cancer. 2020 Sep;9(5):529-548. doi: 10.1159/000508308. Epub 2020 Jul 10.

Dietary Restriction Suppresses Steatosis-Associated Hepatic Tumorigenesis in
Hepatitis C Virus Core Gene Transgenic Mice.

Jia F(1), Diao P(1), Wang X(1)(2), Hu X(1)(3), Kimura T(4), Nakamuta M(5),
Nakamura I(1), Shirotori S(1), Sato Y(6), Moriya K(7), Koike K(8), Gonzalez
FJ(9), Nakayama J(6), Aoyama T(1), Tanaka N(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Regulation, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Lishui Hospital, Zhejiang University School
of Medicine, Lishui, China.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Kyushu Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Department of Molecular Pathology, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan.
(7)Department of Infection Control and Prevention, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(10)Research Center for Social Systems, Shinshu University, Matsumoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Dietary restriction (DR) is a preventive strategy for
obesity, metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes. Although an
interconnection between obesity, metabolic syndrome, fatty liver, and
hepatocellular carcinoma has been documented, the mechanism and impact of DR on
steatosis-derived hepatocarcinogenesis are not fully understood. This study
aimed to evaluate whether DR can prevent hepatic tumorigenesis.
METHODS: Male hepatitis C virus core gene transgenic (HCVcpTg) mice that develop
spontaneous age-dependent insulin resistance, hepatic steatosis, and ensuing
liver tumor development without apparent hepatic fibrosis, were fed with either
a control diet ad libitum (control group) or 70% of the same control diet (DR
group) for 15 months, and liver phenotypes were investigated.
RESULTS: DR significantly reduced the number and volume of liver tumors. DR
attenuated hepatic oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress and markedly
suppressed nuclear factor-κB, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3) and STAT5, and phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase,
leading to downregulation of several pro-oncogenic mediators, such as cyclin D1.
Serum insulin and insulin-like growth factor 1 levels, as well as hepatic
expression of insulin receptor substrate 1/2, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase, and
serine/threonine-protein kinase AKT, were downregulated by DR. A transcriptome
analysis revealed that STAT3 signaling and lipogenesis were the most suppressed
hepatocarcinogenic pathways affected by DR. Additionally, DR stimulated
autophagy and p62/sequestosome 1 degradation, enhanced phosphorylation of
AMP-activated protein kinase α, increased fibroblast growth factor 21
expression, and attenuated expression of senescence-associated secretory
phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: DR suppressed steatosis-associated hepatic tumorigenesis in HCVcpTg
mice, mainly due to attenuation of pathways involved in inflammation, cellular
stress, cell proliferation, insulin signaling, and senescence. These findings
support the notion that persistent 30% reduction of daily food intake is
beneficial for preventing steatosis-associated hepatocarcinogenesis caused by
HCV core protein.

Copyright © 2020 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000508308
PMCID: PMC7548900
PMID: 33083279

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.
