---
reference_id: "PMID:20702104"
title: Peripheral T-cell lymphoma--not otherwise specified.
authors:
- Savage KJ
- Ferreri AJ
- Zinzani PL
- Pileri SA
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2010.07.007
keywords:
- Alemtuzumab
- "Anthracyclines/administration & dosage"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage"
- "Antibodies, Neoplasm/administration & dosage"
- "Antigens, CD/metabolism"
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/metabolism"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- CD52 Antigen
- Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Peripheral/diagnosis, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Neoadjuvant Therapy
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- "Radiotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Risk Factors
- Survival Rate
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, pathology"
- "Transplantation, Homologous/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripheral T-cell lymphoma--not otherwise specified.
**Authors:** Savage KJ, Ferreri AJ, Zinzani PL, Pileri SA
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.critrevonc.2010.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2010.07.007)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2011 Sep;79(3):321-9. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2010.07.007. Epub 2010 Aug 10.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma--not otherwise specified.

Savage KJ(1), Ferreri AJ, Zinzani PL, Pileri SA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS) does correspond
to a heterogeneous group of nodal and extranodal mature T-cell lymphomas, with a
low prevalence in Western countries. PTCL-NOS accounts for about 25% of all
PTCL, which represent over 15% of all lymphomas. In the lymph node, PTCL-NOS
shows paracortical or diffuse infiltrates with effacement of the normal
architecture, with a broad cytological spectrum and a frequently observed
inflammatory background. Some morphological variants include: lymphoepithelioid
or Lennert's type, T-zone, and follicular. PTCL-NOS is characterized by an
aberrant T-cell phenotype, with frequent loss of CD5 and CD7. A CD4+/CD8-
phenotype predominates in nodal cases. CD4/CD8 +/+ or -/- is at times seen, as
is CD8, CD56 and cytotoxic granule expression. Ki-67 rate is typically high. TCR
β-chain is usually expressed; TCR genes are most often clonally rearranged.
PTCL-NOS typically occurs in adults (median age 55-60 years), with a higher
prevalence in males. It presents more often as disseminated disease,
occasionally with eosinophilia, pruritis or hemophagocytic syndrome. Patients
often have B symptoms, generalized lymphadenopathy, bone marrow infiltration,
and extranodal involvement, with high or high-intermediate IPI score in 50-70%
of cases. Prognosis is poor, with a 5-year OS of 20-30%. Some variables, like
ST2(L), CXCR5, CXCR3, EBV infection, cytotoxic granule expression, high
proliferative index, NF-κB expression, were proposed as prognostic indicators,
but the IPI score, and its variant called PIT, remains the most effective
prognostic factor. Patients with PTCL-NOS should be treated with
anthracycline-containing chemotherapy, followed by radiotherapy in cases of
stage I-II disease. This strategy is associated with an overall response rate
higher than 60%, but the 5-year overall survival is only 20-30%. Upfront
high-dose chemotherapy supported by autologous or allogeneic SCT is an
investigational approach, with a 4-year overall survival of about 40%. Patients
with chemosensitive relapse respond favorably to high-dose chemotherapy and
ASCT, with long-term survival rates of 35-45%. Graft-versus-lymphoma effect
following allogeneic SCT has been observed; and reduced intensity conditioning
emerges as an attractive strategy for frail patients. Most patients with
PTCL-NOS are enrolled in prospective trials to explore new approaches, and new
agents, like gemcitabine, alemtuzumab and pralatrexate, are being investigated.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2010.07.007
PMID: 20702104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
