---
reference_id: "PMID:30931409"
title: Familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity and quantification of vascular tortuosity using swept-source optical coherence tomography angiography.
authors:
- Saraf SS
- Tyring AJ
- Chen CL
- Le TP
- Kalina RE
- Wang RK
- Chao JR
journal: Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2019.03.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity and quantification of vascular tortuosity using swept-source optical coherence tomography angiography.
**Authors:** Saraf SS, Tyring AJ, Chen CL, Le TP, Kalina RE, Wang RK, Chao JR
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajoc.2019.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajoc.2019.03.001)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep. 2019 Mar 7;14:74-78. doi:
10.1016/j.ajoc.2019.03.001.  eCollection 2019 Jun.

Familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity and quantification of vascular tortuosity 
using swept-source optical coherence tomography angiography.

Saraf SS(1), Tyring AJ(1), Chen CL(2), Le TP(1), Kalina RE(2), Wang RK(1)(2), 
Chao JR(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Washington Department of Ophthalmology 325 Ninth Avenue, Box 
359608, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Foege N410E, 3720 
15th Ave NE, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA.

PURPOSE: Familial retinal arteriolar tortuosity (FRAT) is a rare autosomal 
dominant disorder that is characterized by tortuosity of the second and higher 
order retinal arterioles. We implement swept-source optical coherence tomography 
angiography (SS-OCTA) to quantify vessel tortuosity in patients with FRAT. We 
hypothesize that patients with FRAT will have higher retinal arteriole 
tortuosity when compared to controls.
METHODS: Patients were scanned with a SS-OCTA device (Plex Elite 9000, Carl 
Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA). Images of a 12 × 12 mm2 area centered on the fovea 
were processed, and retinal vessels >23.5 μm in diameter were identified. An 
automatic tortuosity measurement program written in MATLAB was used to assess 
vessel tortuosity. Branch points in the vessels were detected and used to 
separate the vasculature into individual segments. The tortuosity was measured 
by calculating the arc-chord ratio of each vessel segment, where a minimum value 
of 1 indicated a straight vessel and higher values corresponded to increasing 
tortuosity.
RESULTS: Two patients (4 eyes) with a known history of FRAT and six controls (12 
eyes) were enrolled in the study. The mean tortuosity of all vessel segments 
(MTVS) in scans of FRAT eyes was on average 1.1244 [range: 1.1044-1.1438] while 
for control eyes it was 1.0818 [range: 1.0746-1.0872]. Average MTVS of FRAT eyes 
was significantly higher compared to control eyes (p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPORTANCE: Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that 
patients with FRAT have higher objective measurements of tortuosity compared to 
controls. Broader applications of this method may be of benefit in other retinal 
diseases with changes in retinal vessel configuration.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2019.03.001
PMCID: PMC6425085
PMID: 30931409