---
reference_id: "PMID:29949592"
title: Cholera outbreak caused by drinking contaminated water from a lakeshore water-collection site, Kasese District, south-western Uganda, June-July 2015.
authors:
- Pande G
- Kwesiga B
- Bwire G
- Kalyebi P
- Riolexus A
- Matovu JKB
- Makumbi F
- Mugerwa S
- Musinguzi J
- Wanyenze RK
- Zhu BP
journal: PLoS One
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0198431
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera outbreak caused by drinking contaminated water from a lakeshore water-collection site, Kasese District, south-western Uganda, June-July 2015.
**Authors:** Pande G, Kwesiga B, Bwire G, Kalyebi P, Riolexus A, Matovu JKB, Makumbi F, Mugerwa S, Musinguzi J, Wanyenze RK, Zhu BP
**Journal:** PLoS One (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0198431](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0198431)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2018 Jun 27;13(6):e0198431. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0198431. 
eCollection 2018.

Cholera outbreak caused by drinking contaminated water from a lakeshore 
water-collection site, Kasese District, south-western Uganda, June-July 2015.

Pande G(1)(2), Kwesiga B(1)(3), Bwire G(1), Kalyebi P(2), Riolexus A(1)(3), 
Matovu JKB(1)(3), Makumbi F(3), Mugerwa S(2), Musinguzi J(2), Wanyenze RK(1)(3), 
Zhu BP(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Uganda Public Health Fellowship Program - Field Epidemiology Track, Kampala, 
Uganda.
(2)Ministry of Health Uganda, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Makerere University School of Public Health, Kampala, Uganda.
(4)United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Kampala, Uganda.
(5)Divison of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, United States 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of 
America.

On 20 June 2015, a cholera outbreak affecting more than 30 people was reported 
in a fishing village, Katwe, in Kasese District, south-western Uganda. We 
investigated this outbreak to identify the mode of transmission and to recommend 
control measures. We defined a suspected case as onset of acute watery diarrhoea 
between 1 June and 15 July 2015 in a resident of Katwe village; a confirmed case 
was a suspected case with Vibrio cholerae cultured from stool. For case finding, 
we reviewed medical records and actively searched for cases in the community. In 
a case-control investigation we compared exposure histories of 32 suspected 
case-persons and 128 age-matched controls. We also conducted an environmental 
assessment on how the exposures had occurred. We found 61 suspected cases 
(attack rate = 4.9/1000) during this outbreak, of which eight were confirmed. 
The primary case-person had onset on 16 June; afterwards cases sharply 
increased, peaked on 19 June, and rapidly declined afterwards. After 22 June, 
eight scattered cases occurred. The case-control investigation showed that 97% 
(31/32) of cases and 62% (79/128) of controls usually collected water from 
inside a water-collection site "X" (ORM-H = 16; 95% CI = 2.4-107). The primary 
case-person who developed symptoms while fishing, reportedly came ashore in the 
early morning hours on 17 June, and defecated "near" water-collection site X. We 
concluded that this cholera outbreak was caused by drinking lake water collected 
from inside the lakeshore water-collection site X. At our recommendations, the 
village administration provided water chlorination tablets to the villagers, 
issued water boiling advisory to the villagers, rigorously disinfected all 
patients' faeces and, three weeks later, fixed the tap-water system.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0198431
PMCID: PMC6021037
PMID: 29949592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.