---
reference_id: "PMID:38907197"
title: "DOK7 congenital myasthenic syndrome: case series and review of literature."
authors:
- Ziaadini B
- Ghaderi Yazdi B
- Dirandeh E
- Boostani R
- Karimi N
- Panahi A
- Kariminejad A
- Fadaee M
- Ahangari F
- Nafissi S
journal: BMC Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12883-024-03713-0
keywords:
- Humans
- "Myasthenic Syndromes, Congenital/genetics, diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Male
- Female
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- Adult
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- Child
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DOK7 congenital myasthenic syndrome: case series and review of literature.
**Authors:** Ziaadini B, Ghaderi Yazdi B, Dirandeh E, Boostani R, Karimi N, Panahi A, Kariminejad A, Fadaee M, Ahangari F, Nafissi S
**Journal:** BMC Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12883-024-03713-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12883-024-03713-0)

## Content

1. BMC Neurol. 2024 Jun 21;24(1):211. doi: 10.1186/s12883-024-03713-0.

DOK7 congenital myasthenic syndrome: case series and review of literature.

Ziaadini B(#)(1), Ghaderi Yazdi B(#)(2)(3), Dirandeh E(4), Boostani R(5), Karimi 
N(6), Panahi A(2)(3), Kariminejad A(7), Fadaee M(7), Ahangari F(7), Nafissi 
S(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Research Center, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, 
Iran.
(2)Neuromuscular Research Center, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Shariati Hospital, North Karegar St, Tehran, 14117-13135, 
Iran.
(3)Department of Neurology, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Clinical Research Development Unit, Kowsar Educational, Research and 
Therapeutic Hospital, Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Semnan, Iran.
(5)Department of Neurology, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, 
Iran.
(6)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Immunogenetics Research Center, 
Toxoplasmosis Research Center, Clinical Research Development Unit of Bou Ali 
Sina Hospital, Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Sari, Iran.
(7)Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Neuromuscular Research Center, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Shariati Hospital, North Karegar St, Tehran, 14117-13135, 
Iran. nafisi@sina.tums.ac.ir.
(9)Department of Neurology, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. nafisi@sina.tums.ac.ir.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are among the most challenging 
differential diagnoses in the neuromuscular domain, consisting of diverse 
genotypes and phenotypes. A mutation in the Docking Protein 7 (Dok-7) is a 
common cause of CMS. DOK7 CMS requires different treatment than other CMS types. 
Regarding DOK7's special considerations and challenges ahead of neurologists, we 
describe seven DOK7 patients and evaluate their response to treatment.
METHODS: The authors visited these patients in the neuromuscular clinics of 
Tehran and Kerman Universities of Medical Sciences Hospitals. They diagnosed 
these patients based on clinical findings and neurophysiological studies, which 
Whole Exome Sequencing confirmed. For each patient, we tried unique medications 
and recorded the clinical response.
RESULTS: The symptoms started from birth to as late as the age of 33, with the 
mean age of onset being 12.5. Common symptoms were: Limb-girdle weakness in 6, 
fluctuating symptoms in 5, ptosis in 4, bifacial weakness in 3, reduced 
extraocular movement in 3, bulbar symptoms in 2 and dyspnea in 2 3-Hz RNS was 
decremental in 5 out of 6 patients. Salbutamol was the most effective. 
c.1124_1127dupTGCC is the most common variant; three patients had this variant.
CONCLUSION: We strongly recommend that neurologists consider CMS in patients 
with these symptoms and a similar familial history. We recommend prescribing 
salbutamol as the first-choice treatment option for DOK7 patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-024-03713-0
PMCID: PMC11191154
PMID: 38907197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.