---
reference_id: "PMID:1569169"
title: Assessment of depot leuprolide acetate dose-adequacy for central precocious puberty.
authors:
- Cook JS
- Doty KL
- Conn PM
- Hansen JR
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1210/jcem.74.5.1569169
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of depot leuprolide acetate dose-adequacy for central precocious puberty.
**Authors:** Cook JS, Doty KL, Conn PM, Hansen JR
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.74.5.1569169](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.74.5.1569169)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1992 May;74(5):1206-9. doi:
10.1210/jcem.74.5.1569169.

Assessment of depot leuprolide acetate dose-adequacy for central precocious 
puberty.

Cook JS(1), Doty KL, Conn PM, Hansen JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City 
52242-1109.

The development of GnRH analogs (GnRHa) has made it possible to treat children 
with central precocious puberty (CPP). This treatment may prevent adult short 
stature due to premature epiphyseal fusion. Achievement of this goal, however, 
is dependent upon adequate suppression of gonadal steroid production as a result 
of GnRHa-induced pituitary desensitization and decreased gonadotropin release. A 
depot formulation of a GnRHa [leuprolide acetate (dLA)] is being used by many 
clinicians for the treatment of CPP, but studies to establish the optimal dose 
of dLA have not been performed. In this study we evaluated the effectiveness of 
dLA (7.5 mg, im, every 4 weeks). Six children (7-10 yr old) with CPP treated 
with dLA were assessed clinically and divided into two groups: A (incompletely 
suppressed) and B (well suppressed). Each group had overnight blood sampling and 
a GnRH stimulation test the following morning. LH pulses were analyzed and 
compared to 11 normal prepubertal children. Mean LH concentration, LH curve 
area, LH pulse frequency, and mean LH pulse amplitude were significantly greater 
(P less than 0.03) in group A than in group B or the normal prepubertal 
children. There was no significant difference among the three groups in 
GnRH-stimulated peak LH release. These results indicate that dLA (7.5 mg, im, 
every 4 weeks) does not produce complete desensitization in all children with 
CPP and suggest that overnight monitoring of LH release is more sensitive than 
GnRH stimulation testing for the assessment of dLA dose adequacy.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.74.5.1569169
PMID: 1569169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]