---
reference_id: "PMID:38500130"
title: "The parent and family impact of CLN3 disease: an observational survey-based study."
authors:
- Schulz A
- Patel N
- Brudvig JJ
- Stehr F
- Weimer JM
- Augustine EF
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03119-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/genetics
- "Molecular Chaperones/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics
- Parents
- Disease Progression
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The parent and family impact of CLN3 disease: an observational survey-based study.
**Authors:** Schulz A, Patel N, Brudvig JJ, Stehr F, Weimer JM, Augustine EF
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03119-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03119-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Mar 18;19(1):125. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03119-8.

The parent and family impact of CLN3 disease: an observational survey-based
study.

Schulz A(1), Patel N(2), Brudvig JJ(3)(4), Stehr F(5), Weimer JM(3)(4),
Augustine EF(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Amicus Therapeutics, Princeton, NJ, USA. npatel@amicusrx.com.
(3)Amicus Therapeutics, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(4)Pediatrics & Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, SD, USA.
(5)NCL-Stiftung, Hamburg, Germany.
(6)Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: CLN3 disease (also known as CLN3 Batten disease or Juvenile Neuronal
Ceroid Lipofuscinosis) is a rare pediatric neurodegenerative disorder caused by
biallelic mutations in CLN3. While extensive efforts have been undertaken to
understand CLN3 disease etiology, pathology, and clinical progression, little is
known about the impact of CLN3 disease on parents and caregivers. Here, we
investigated CLN3 disease progression, clinical care, and family experiences
using semi-structured interviews with 39 parents of individuals with CLN3
disease. Analysis included response categorization by independent observers and
quantitative methods.
RESULTS: Parents reported patterns of disease progression that aligned with
previous reports. Insomnia and thought- and mood-related concerns were reported
frequently. "Decline in visual acuity" was the first sign/symptom noticed by
n = 28 parents (70%). A minority of parents reported "behavioral issues" (n = 5,
12.5%), "communication issues" (n = 3, 7.5%), "cognitive decline" (n = 1, 2.5%),
or "seizures" (n = 1, 2.5%) as the first sign/symptom. The mean time from the
first signs or symptoms to a diagnosis of CLN3 disease was 2.8 years (SD = 4.1).
Misdiagnosis was common, being reported by n = 24 participants (55.8%).
Diagnostic tests and treatments were closely aligned with observed symptoms.
Desires for improved or stabilized vision (top therapeutic treatment concern for
n = 14, 32.6%), cognition (n = 8, 18.6%), and mobility (n = 3, 7%) dominated
parental concerns and wishes for therapeutic correction. Family impacts were
common, with n = 34 (81%) of respondents reporting a financial impact on the
family and n = 20 (46.5%) reporting marital strain related to the disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, responses demonstrated clear patterns of disease
progression, a strong desire for therapies to treat symptoms related to vision
and cognition, and a powerful family impact driven by the unrelenting nature of
disease progression.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03119-8
PMCID: PMC10949783
PMID: 38500130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.P., J.J.B., and J.M.W. are employees of Amicus
Therapeutics, a company that develops therapies for rare diseases including CLN3
disease.
