---
reference_id: "PMID:40541254"
title: Hereditary Combined Deficiency of the Vitamin K-Dependent Coagulation Factors.
authors:
- Raharimanana A
- Cunat S
- Falaise C
- Oudot C
- Fournel A
- Dargaud Y
journal: Hamostaseologie
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1055/a-2567-3567
keywords:
- Humans
- Vitamin K/therapeutic use
- Carbon-Carbon Ligases/genetics
- "Vitamin K Deficiency/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Blood Coagulation Factors
- Hemorrhage/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Combined Deficiency of the Vitamin K-Dependent Coagulation Factors.
**Authors:** Raharimanana A, Cunat S, Falaise C, Oudot C, Fournel A, Dargaud Y
**Journal:** Hamostaseologie (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2567-3567](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2567-3567)

## Content

1. Hamostaseologie. 2025 Oct;45(5):396-404. doi: 10.1055/a-2567-3567. Epub 2025
Jun  4.

Hereditary Combined Deficiency of the Vitamin K-Dependent Coagulation Factors.

Raharimanana A(1), Cunat S(2), Falaise C(3), Oudot C(4), Fournel A(5), Dargaud 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)French Reference Centre for Hemophilia, Louis Pradel Hospital, Lyon, France.
(2)Service d'Hématologie Biologique, Site unique de biologie, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(3)Department of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Center for Bleeding Disorders, 
AP-HM, Children Hospital La Timone, Marseille, France.
(4)Purpan University Hospital, Center for Bleeding Disorders, Toulouse, France.
(5)Center for Bleeding Disorders, University Hospital, Besançon, France.

Hereditary combined vitamin K-dependent coagulation factor deficiency (VKCFD) is 
an extremely rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterized by 
deficiencies in vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors and natural 
anticoagulants. The condition presents with a spectrum of bleeding symptoms 
ranging from mild to severe, often beginning in the neonatal period. These 
bleeding episodes can be particularly severe and even life-threatening, 
occurring spontaneously or during surgery. In addition to bleeding problems, 
individuals with VKCFD may experience a variety of non-hemostatic problems, 
including skeletal deformities, cardiovascular abnormalities, and skin 
conditions.VKCFD is caused by variants in the genes encoding either γ-glutamyl 
carboxylase or the vitamin K 2,3-epoxide reductase complex. Both proteins play a 
critical role in γ-carboxylation, a posttranslational modification that is 
essential for the proper function of vitamin K-dependent proteins. Timely and 
accurate diagnosis is essential to differentiate VKCFD from other genetic and 
acquired disorders, and genetic testing is required to identify the specific 
variant.The primary treatment for VKCFD is the administration of vitamin K, with 
transfusions of fresh frozen plasma often required during surgery or in cases of 
severe bleeding. In certain situations, alternative therapies such as 
prothrombin complex concentrates (PCCs) or a combination of recombinant 
activated factor VII and vitamin K may be considered. With appropriate 
treatment, individuals with VKCFD generally have a good clinical outcome, and 
the condition has a limited impact on their quality of life. This article 
presents a comprehensive review of all 57 VKCFD cases documented in the 
literature, as well as 4 new, unpublished cases from France.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2567-3567
PMID: 40541254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.