---
reference_id: "PMID:37848700"
title: A Novel TTBK2 Mutation in a Chinese Pedigree with Spinocerebellar Ataxia 11.
authors:
- Lu YQ
- Chen JM
- Huang YL
- Zou ZY
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-023-01616-3
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Asian People/genetics
- East Asian People
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, diagnostic imaging"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel TTBK2 Mutation in a Chinese Pedigree with Spinocerebellar Ataxia 11.
**Authors:** Lu YQ, Chen JM, Huang YL, Zou ZY
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-023-01616-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-023-01616-3)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2024 Jun;23(3):1221-1225. doi: 10.1007/s12311-023-01616-3. Epub
2023  Oct 17.

A Novel TTBK2 Mutation in a Chinese Pedigree with Spinocerebellar Ataxia 11.

Lu YQ(#)(1)(2), Chen JM(#)(1), Huang YL(1), Zou ZY(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, No. 29, 
Xinquan Road, Gulou District, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350001, China.
(2)Institute of Clinical Neurology, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, 350004, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, No. 29, 
Xinquan Road, Gulou District, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350001, China. fmuzzy@fjmu.edu.cn.
(4)Institute of Clinical Neurology, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, 350004, 
China. fmuzzy@fjmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11) is a rare disease and the tau tubulin 
kinase 2 (TTBK2) gene was the causative gene. To date, only six SCA11 families 
have been reported. Here, we reported a Chinese SCA11 pedigree with cerebellar 
ataxia. Both patients in the family demonstrated typical clinical features of 
cerebellar ataxia and cerebellar atrophy on brain MRI. A novel heterozygous 
duplication mutation (c.1211_1217dupAGGAGAA) of the TTBK2 gene was identified in 
the proband using whole-exome sequencing (WES), which resulted in a frameshift 
mutation and formed a premature stop codon (p. N406Kfs*47). The mutation was 
detected in the proband's affected brother, and his unaffected mother, who with 
a lower percentage of the mutation and considered as an asymptomatic mutation 
carrier. Our study delineated the genotypic spectrum of SCA11.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-023-01616-3
PMID: 37848700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]