---
reference_id: "PMID:26198113"
title: "Tuberculosis: a disease without boundaries."
authors:
- Fogel N
journal: Tuberculosis (Edinb)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2015.05.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberculosis: a disease without boundaries.
**Authors:** Fogel N
**Journal:** Tuberculosis (Edinb) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tube.2015.05.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tube.2015.05.017)

## Content

1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2015 Sep;95(5):527-31. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2015.05.017. 
Epub 2015 Jun 25.

Tuberculosis: a disease without boundaries.

Fogel N(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Toronto, St. George Campus, Victoria College, 95 Queen's Park 
Crescent, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1K7 Canada. Electronic address: 
nicole.fogel@mail.utoronto.ca.

Tuberculosis (TB) is an airborne disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(MTB) that usually affects the lungs leading to severe coughing, fever, and 
chest pains. Although current research in the past four years has provided 
valuable insight into TB transmission, diagnosis, and treatment, much remains to 
be discovered to effectively decrease the incidence of and eventually eradicate 
TB. The disease still puts a strain on public health, being only second to 
HIV/AIDS in causing high mortality rates. This review will highlight the history 
of TB as well as provide an overview of the current literature on epidemiology, 
pathogenesis and the immune response, treatment, and control of TB. In this race 
to combat a disease that knows no boundaries, it is necessary to have a 
conceptual and clear understanding of TB overall with the hope of providing 
better treatment through novel and collaborative research and public health 
efforts.

Copyright © 2015 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2015.05.017
PMID: 26198113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]