---
reference_id: "PMID:34695790"
title: "Evidence-Based Health Behavior Interventions for Cholera: Lessons from an Outbreak Investigation in India."
authors:
- Deoshatwar A
- Salve D
- Gopalkrishna V
- Kumar A
- Barve U
- Joshi M
- Katendra S
- Dhembre V
- Maheshwari S
- Viswanathan R
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0625
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence-Based Health Behavior Interventions for Cholera: Lessons from an Outbreak Investigation in India.
**Authors:** Deoshatwar A, Salve D, Gopalkrishna V, Kumar A, Barve U, Joshi M, Katendra S, Dhembre V, Maheshwari S, Viswanathan R
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.21-0625](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.21-0625)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Oct 25;106(1):229-232. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0625.

Evidence-Based Health Behavior Interventions for Cholera: Lessons from an 
Outbreak Investigation in India.

Deoshatwar A(1), Salve D(2), Gopalkrishna V(3), Kumar A(4), Barve U(5), Joshi 
M(3), Katendra S(6), Dhembre V(6), Maheshwari S(6), Viswanathan R(6).

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Group, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)-National 
Institute of Virology, Pune, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Public Health Department, Government of Maharashtra, Nashik, Maharashtra, 
India.
(3)Enteric Viruses Group, ICMR-National Institute of Virology, Pune, 
Maharashtra, India.
(4)ICMR-National Institute of Cancer Prevention and Research, NOIDA, Uttar 
Pradesh, India.
(5)Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme, Nashik, Maharashtra, India.
(6)Bacteriology Group, ICMR-National Institute of Virology, Pune, Maharashtra, 
India.

In rural India, since 2014, the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan (Clean India Mission) has 
ensured construction of more than 100 million toilets and is now focusing on 
reinforcement of sanitation behaviors. We report a cholera outbreak in a remote 
village in western India where open defecation was implicated in causation. A 
water pipeline was damaged in the vicinity of a stream flowing from a site of 
open defecation. Despite the availability of a toilet facility in the majority 
of households (75%), open defecation was widely practiced (62.8%). Many reported 
not washing hands with soap and water before eating (78.5%) and after defecation 
(61.1%). The study emphasizes the need for focused health behavior studies and 
evidence-based interventions to reduce the occurrence of cholera outbreaks. This 
could be the last lap in the path toward achieving the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goal 6, which aims to "ensure availability and 
sustainable management of water and sanitation for all."

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-0625
PMCID: PMC8733540
PMID: 34695790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]