---
reference_id: "PMID:32421983"
title: An Insight into Primary Congenital Glaucoma.
authors:
- Khan MU
- Zia MUQ
- Tabassum W
journal: Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1615/CritRevEukaryotGeneExpr.2020027901
keywords:
- Cytochrome P-450 CYP1B1/genetics
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- "Glaucoma/congenital, epidemiology, genetics, surgery"
- Glycoproteins/genetics
- Gonioscopy
- Humans
- Intraocular Pressure/genetics
- Latent TGF-beta Binding Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- "Trabecular Meshwork/pathology, surgery"
- Trabeculectomy
- Myocilin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Insight into Primary Congenital Glaucoma.
**Authors:** Khan MU, Zia MUQ, Tabassum W
**Journal:** Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1615/CritRevEukaryotGeneExpr.2020027901](https://doi.org/10.1615/CritRevEukaryotGeneExpr.2020027901)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2020;30(1):39-43. doi: 
10.1615/CritRevEukaryotGeneExpr.2020027901.

An Insight into Primary Congenital Glaucoma.

Khan MU(1), Zia MUQ(1), Tabassum W(1).

Author information:
(1)University Institute of Medical Lab Technology, Faculty of Allied Health 
Sciences, University of Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan.

Glaucoma is the second most prominent cause of impaired vision in the world. 
Over 60 million individuals are presently affected, and 12 million are sightless 
as a result. Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is a childhood disease that can 
lead to blindness in newborns and very young children. The rate of occurrence of 
PCG varies in different communities and across geographical boundaries, and its 
etiology is unknown. It is caused by genetic structural defects in the 
trabecular meshwork and makes its appearence in newborns and children no older 
than three years. PCG is most prevalent in populations with high rates of 
consanguineous marriages. It is categorized by inappropriate development of the 
eye's aqueous outflow system, causing increased intraocular pressure (IOP) and 
leading to swelling of the cornea, epiphora, discomfort or pain, enlargement of 
the eyeball (buphthalmos), corneal opacity, and optic nerve damage. PCG is 
classified as an autosomal recessive disorder involving four loci. The main 
culprit is CYP1B1, at locus GLC3A. PCG is also linked with loci GLC3B and GLC3C; 
however, their genetic factors have only recently been recognized. The gene 
LTPB2 at locus GLC3D, plays an important role in tissue healing and cell 
attachment. Trabeculectomy and gonioscopy are effective treatments for PCG. 
Additional efforts are essential to provide timely screening of children and, 
most important, to assign sufficient resources to allow healthcare workers to 
reduce the rate of avoidable blindness in developing countries.

DOI: 10.1615/CritRevEukaryotGeneExpr.2020027901
PMID: 32421983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]