---
reference_id: "PMID:18693279"
title: Absence of arterial phenotype in mice with homozygous slc2A10 missense substitutions.
authors:
- Callewaert BL
- Loeys BL
- Casteleyn C
- Willaert A
- Dewint P
- De Backer J
- Sedlmeier R
- Simoens P
- De Paepe AM
- Coucke PJ
journal: Genesis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/dvg.20409
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arteries/cytology, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Glucose Transport Proteins, Facilitative/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Absence of arterial phenotype in mice with homozygous slc2A10 missense substitutions.
**Authors:** Callewaert BL, Loeys BL, Casteleyn C, Willaert A, Dewint P, De Backer J, Sedlmeier R, Simoens P, De Paepe AM, Coucke PJ
**Journal:** Genesis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dvg.20409](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvg.20409)

## Content

1. Genesis. 2008 Aug;46(8):385-9. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20409.

Absence of arterial phenotype in mice with homozygous slc2A10 missense
substitutions.

Callewaert BL, Loeys BL, Casteleyn C, Willaert A, Dewint P, De Backer J,
Sedlmeier R, Simoens P, De Paepe AM, Coucke PJ.

Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS, MIM# 208050) is a rare autosomal recessive
connective tissue disease, mainly characterized by widespread arterial
involvement with elongation, tortuosity, and aneurysms of the large and
middle-sized arteries (Callewaert et al., 2008, Hum Mutat 29:150-158). Recently,
mutations were identified in the SLC2A10 gene encoding the facilitative glucose
transporter GLUT10 (Coucke et al., 2006, Nat Genet 38:452-457). It was
hypothesized that loss-of-function of the transporter results in upregulation of
the transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) signaling pathway (Coucke et al.,
2006, Nat Genet 38:452-457). We anticipated that a mouse model would help to
gain more insight in the complex pathophysiological mechanism of human ATS.
Here, we report that two mouse models, homozygous respectively for G128E and
S150F missense substitutions in glut10 do not present any of the vascular,
anatomical, or immunohistological abnormalities as encountered in human ATS
patients. We conclude that these mouse strains do not phenocopy human ATS and
cannot help the further elucidation of pathogenetic mechanisms underlying this
disease.

DOI: 10.1002/dvg.20409
PMID: 18693279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
