---
reference_id: "PMID:26473392"
title: "Distinct clinical and pathological phenotypes in frontotemporal dementia associated with MAPT, PGRN and C9orf72 mutations."
authors:
- Snowden JS
- Adams J
- Harris J
- Thompson JC
- Rollinson S
- Richardson A
- Jones M
- Neary D
- Mann DM
- Pickering-Brown S
journal: Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3109/21678421.2015.1074700
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct clinical and pathological phenotypes in frontotemporal dementia associated with MAPT, PGRN and C9orf72 mutations.
**Authors:** Snowden JS, Adams J, Harris J, Thompson JC, Rollinson S, Richardson A, Jones M, Neary D, Mann DM, Pickering-Brown S
**Journal:** Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3109/21678421.2015.1074700](https://doi.org/10.3109/21678421.2015.1074700)

## Content

1. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2015;16(7-8):497-505. doi: 
10.3109/21678421.2015.1074700. Epub 2015 Oct 16.

Distinct clinical and pathological phenotypes in frontotemporal dementia 
associated with MAPT, PGRN and C9orf72 mutations.

Snowden JS(1)(2), Adams J(1)(2), Harris J(1)(2), Thompson JC(1)(2), Rollinson 
S(2), Richardson A(1)(2), Jones M(1)(2), Neary D(1), Mann DM(2), Pickering-Brown 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)a Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Cerebral Function Unit, Greater 
Manchester Neuroscience Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust , Salford.
(2)b Institute of Brain, Behaviour and Mental Health, Faculty of Human and 
Medical Sciences, University of Manchester , Manchester , UK.

Our objective was to compare the clinical and pathological characteristics of 
frontotemporal dementia patients with MAPT, GRN and C9orf72 gene mutations. We 
carried out a cross-sectional comparative study of 74 gene-positive patients (15 
MAPT, 17 GRN and 42 C9orf72). Thirty had post mortem pathological data 
permitting clinico-pathological correlation. MAPT patients were younger than 
other groups, and showed more frequent behavioural disinhibition, repetitive and 
stereotyped behaviours, semantic impairment and temporal predominance of 
atrophy. GRN patients were older at death and more likely to present with 
non-fluent aphasia. C9orf72 patients alone showed a co-occurrence of ALS. They 
showed more psychotic symptoms and irrational behaviour, yet were more often 
reported clinically as socially appropriate and warm. They showed less dietary 
change than other groups. C9orf72 patients with and without ALS differed only in 
frequency of psychosis. Greater clinical overlap was observed between GRN and 
C9orf72 compared to MAPT cases. MAPT cases had tau and GRN and C9orf72, with one 
exception, TDP-43 pathology. Non-fluent aphasia was linked to TDP subtype A in 
both GRN and C9orf72 cases and ALS with subtype B. In conclusion, the findings 
reinforce clinical heterogeneity in FTD and strengthen evidence that genotype 
influences clinical presentation. Clinical features may inform targeted genetic 
testing.

DOI: 10.3109/21678421.2015.1074700
PMID: 26473392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]