---
reference_id: "PMID:38928273"
title: Immunogenetic and Environmental Factors in Age-Related Macular Disease.
authors:
- Brodzka S
- Baszyński J
- Rektor K
- Hołderna-Bona K
- Stanek E
- Kurhaluk N
- Tkaczenko H
- Malukiewicz G
- Woźniak A
- Kamiński P
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25126567
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunogenetic and Environmental Factors in Age-Related Macular Disease.
**Authors:** Brodzka S, Baszyński J, Rektor K, Hołderna-Bona K, Stanek E, Kurhaluk N, Tkaczenko H, Malukiewicz G, Woźniak A, Kamiński P
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25126567](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25126567)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jun 14;25(12):6567. doi: 10.3390/ijms25126567.

Immunogenetic and Environmental Factors in Age-Related Macular Disease.

Brodzka S(1)(2), Baszyński J(1), Rektor K(2), Hołderna-Bona K(1), Stanek E(1), 
Kurhaluk N(3), Tkaczenko H(3), Malukiewicz G(4), Woźniak A(5), Kamiński P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Ecology and Environmental Protection, Department of Medical 
Biology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, 
Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń, M. Skłodowska-Curie St. 9, PL 85-094 
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Faculty of 
Biological Sciences, University of Zielona Góra, Prof. Z. Szafran St. 1, PL 
65-516 Zielona Góra, Poland.
(3)Institute of Biology, Pomeranian University in Słupsk, Arciszewski St. 22 B, 
PL 76-200 Słupsk, Poland.
(4)Department of Eye Diseases, University Hospital No. 1, Faculty of Medicine, 
Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń, M. 
Skłodowska-Curie St. 9, PL 85-092 Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(5)Department of Medical Biology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, 
Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń, M. 
Karłowicz St. 24, PL 85-092 Bydgoszcz, Poland.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a chronic disease, which often 
develops in older people, but this is not the rule. AMD pathogenesis changes 
include the anatomical and functional complex. As a result of damage, it occurs, 
in the retina and macula, among other areas. These changes may lead to partial 
or total loss of vision. This disease can occur in two clinical forms, i.e., dry 
(progression is slowly and gradually) and exudative (wet, progression is acute 
and severe), which usually started as dry form. A coexistence of both forms is 
possible. AMD etiology is not fully understood. Extensive genetic studies have 
shown that this disease is multifactorial and that genetic determinants, along 
with environmental and metabolic-functional factors, are important risk factors. 
This article reviews the impact of heavy metals, macro- and microelements, and 
genetic factors on the development of AMD. We present the current state of 
knowledge about the influence of environmental factors and genetic determinants 
on the progression of AMD in the confrontation with our own research conducted 
on the Polish population from Kuyavian-Pomeranian and Lubusz Regions. Our 
research is concentrated on showing how polluted environments of large 
agglomerations affects the development of AMD. In addition to confirming heavy 
metal accumulation, the growth of risk of acute phase factors and polymorphism 
in the genetic material in AMD development, it will also help in the detection 
of new markers of this disease. This will lead to a better understanding of the 
etiology of AMD and will help to establish prevention and early treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25126567
PMCID: PMC11203563
PMID: 38928273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.