---
reference_id: "PMID:37026610"
title: Provisional practice recommendation for the management of myopathy in VCP-associated multisystem proteinopathy.
authors:
- Roy B
- Peck A
- Evangelista T
- Pfeffer G
- Wang L
- Diaz-Manera J
- Korb M
- Wicklund MP
- Milone M
- Freimer M
- Kushlaf H
- Villar-Quiles RN
- Stojkovic T
- Needham M
- Palmio J
- Lloyd TE
- Keung B
- Mozaffar T
- Weihl CC
- Kimonis V
journal: Ann Clin Transl Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/acn3.51760
keywords:
- Humans
- Valosin Containing Protein/genetics
- "Muscular Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Phenotype
- Proteostasis Deficiencies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Provisional practice recommendation for the management of myopathy in VCP-associated multisystem proteinopathy.
**Authors:** Roy B, Peck A, Evangelista T, Pfeffer G, Wang L, Diaz-Manera J, Korb M, Wicklund MP, Milone M, Freimer M, Kushlaf H, Villar-Quiles RN, Stojkovic T, Needham M, Palmio J, Lloyd TE, Keung B, Mozaffar T, Weihl CC, Kimonis V
**Journal:** Ann Clin Transl Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acn3.51760](https://doi.org/10.1002/acn3.51760)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2023 May;10(5):686-695. doi: 10.1002/acn3.51760. Epub
2023 Apr 7.

Provisional practice recommendation for the management of myopathy in
VCP-associated multisystem proteinopathy.

Roy B(1), Peck A(2), Evangelista T(3), Pfeffer G(4), Wang L(5), Diaz-Manera
J(6), Korb M(7), Wicklund MP(8), Milone M(9), Freimer M(10), Kushlaf H(11),
Villar-Quiles RN(12), Stojkovic T(12), Needham M(13), Palmio J(14), Lloyd
TE(15)(16), Keung B(1), Mozaffar T(7), Weihl CC(17), Kimonis V(7)(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut,
USA.
(2)Cure VCP Disease, Americus, Georgia, USA.
(3)GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Sorbonne Université-Inserm UMRS97, Institut de
Myologie, Paris, France.
(4)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University
of Calgary Cumming School of Medicine, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(6)John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of California-Irvine School of Medicine,
Orange, California, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(11)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(12)APHP, Reference Center for Neuromuscular Disorders, Center of Research in
Myology, Sorbonne Université-Inserm UMRS974, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris,
France.
(13)University of Notre Dame, Murdoch University and Fiona Stanley Hospital,
Perth, Australia.
(14)Neuromuscular Research Center, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere,
Finland.
(15)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Massachusetts, USA.
(16)Department of Neuroscience and Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Massachusetts, USA.
(17)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, University of California-Irvine School of
Medicine, Orange, California, USA.

Valosin-containing protein (VCP)-associated multisystem proteinopathy (MSP) is a
rare genetic disorder with abnormalities in the autophagy pathway leading to
various combinations of myopathy, bone diseases, and neurodegeneration. Ninety
percent of patients with VCP-associated MSP have myopathy, but there is no
consensus-based guideline. The goal of this working group was to develop a best
practice set of provisional recommendations for VCP myopathy which can be easily
implemented across the globe. As an initiative by Cure VCP Disease Inc., a
patient advocacy organization, an online survey was initially conducted to
identify the practice gaps in VCP myopathy. All prior published literature on
VCP myopathy was reviewed to better understand the different aspects of
management of VCP myopathy, and several working group sessions were conducted
involving international experts to develop this provisional recommendation. VCP
myopathy has a heterogeneous clinical phenotype and should be considered in
patients with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy phenotype, or any myopathy with an
autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Genetic testing is the only
definitive way to diagnose VCP myopathy, and single-variant testing in the case
of a known familial VCP variant, or multi-gene panel sequencing in
undifferentiated cases can be considered. Muscle biopsy is important in cases of
diagnostic uncertainty or lack of a definitive pathogenic genetic variant since
rimmed vacuoles (present in ~40% cases) are considered a hallmark of VCP
myopathy. Electrodiagnostic studies and magnetic resonance imaging can also help
rule out disease mimics. Standardized management of VCP myopathy will optimize
patient care and help future research initiatives.

© 2023 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.51760
PMCID: PMC10187720
PMID: 37026610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Bhaskar Roy has served as a consultant for
Alexion Pharmaceuticals, now part of AstraZeneca, Takeda Pharmaceuticals and
Argenx. No direct conflicts related to this work. Allison Peck, Teresinha
Evangelista, Gerald Pfeffer, Leo Wang, Hani Kushlaf, Rocio‐Nur Villar‐Quiles,
Johanna Palmio, Virginia Kimonis does not have any conflicts of interest to
disclose. Jordi Diaz‐Manera has served on advisory boards for Sanofi‐Genzyme,
Sarepta, Amicus, Lupin, Astellas and Jansen. He has received payments for
presenting in conferences by Sanofi‐Genzyme, Amicus and Sarepta. He has received
funding for research by Spark, Sanofi‐Genzyme and Boehringer‐Ingelheim. Manisha
Korb has served on advisory boards and the speakers bureau for Biogen. Matthew
Wicklund, MD has no conflicts as relates to this manuscript; Unrelated to this
manuscript: Research funding from Alexion, Edgewise, Acceleron, Avidity,
Orphazyme, Sarepta, ML Bio, Roche, Avidity, Harmony; Served on advisory boards
for Amicus, Edgewise, ML Bio, Sanofi‐Genzyme, Sarepta, Spark; No employment for
or stock in any pharmaceutical company Margherita Milone has received research
support from the Neurology Department and Center for Clinical and Translational
Science, care center grant award from the Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA
497263), and compensation to serve as associate editor of Neurology Genetics.
Miriam Freimer has served on the advisory boards for UCB, Argenx, Alexion, CSL
Behring, Takeda. Dr. Freimer receives research support from Amicus, Orphazyme,
Catalyst, Fulcrum, Ionis, Momenta, Roche, UCB. Merrilee Needham has received
honoraria for participation in educational events and Advisory Boards for
Biogen, Roche, Sanofi‐Aventis and Abcuro. None of these were related to this
Manuscript. Thomas E. Lloyd has received consulting fees or research support
from Aavogen, Abata Therapeutics, Abcuro, Acceleron, DrenBio, EMD Serano, Kezar
Life Sciences, Ono Pharma, Orphazyme, Pharnext, Regenecy, Sarepta, and Takeda.
Benison Keung: No direct conflict of interest related to this study. Conrad
Chris Weihl has served on advisory boards for Acceleron, Sarepta, Abata, and
Orphazyme, and as a consultant for Sarepta. Tahseen Mozaffar has served in an
advisory capacity for Abbvie, Alexion, Amicus, Argenx, Audentes, Maze
Therapeutics, Modis, Momenta, Ra Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi‐Genzyme, Sarepta, Spark
Therapeutics, UCB, and Ultragenyx. He serves on the speaker's bureau for
Sanofi‐Genzyme. Dr. Mozaffar serves on the medical advisory board for the
Myositis Association, Neuromuscular Disease Foundation, Myasthenia Gravis
Foundation of California and Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America. Dr.
Mozaffar receives research funding from the Myositis Association, the Muscular
Dystrophy Association, the National Institutes for Health and from the following
sponsors: Alexion, Amicus, Argenx, Audentes, Bristol‐Myers‐Squib, Cartesian
Therapeutics, Grifols, Momenta, Ra Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi‐Genzyme, Spark
Therapeutics, UCB, and Valerion. He serves on the data safety monitoring board
for Acceleron, Avexis, Sarepta, and the NIH.
