---
reference_id: "PMID:26492104"
title: Preliminary neurocognitive outcomes in Jeavons syndrome.
authors:
- Fournier-Goodnight AS
- Gabriel M
- Perry MS
journal: Epilepsy Behav
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.09.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preliminary neurocognitive outcomes in Jeavons syndrome.
**Authors:** Fournier-Goodnight AS, Gabriel M, Perry MS
**Journal:** Epilepsy Behav (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.09.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.09.022)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Behav. 2015 Nov;52(Pt A):260-3. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.09.022.
Epub  2015 Nov 6.

Preliminary neurocognitive outcomes in Jeavons syndrome.

Fournier-Goodnight AS(1), Gabriel M(2), Perry MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuropsychology Section, St. Jude Children's 
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. Electronic address: 
Ashley.Fournier@StJude.org.
(2)Jane and John Justin Neurosciences Center, Cook Children's Medical Center, 
Fort Worth, TX, USA.

Jeavons syndrome (JS, eyelid myoclonia with absences [EMA]) consists of a triad 
of symptoms including eyelid myoclonia that may be accompanied by absence 
seizures, eye closure-induced EEG paroxysms or seizures, and photosensitivity. 
The age of onset ranges between 2 and 14 years with symptoms peaking between 6 
and 8 years of age. Though investigation of the clinical, EEG, and neurological 
features of JS has occurred, neurocognitive functioning has not been 
well-delineated despite suggestion that a subtype of the syndrome is 
characterized in part by cognitive impairment. The purpose of this study was to 
define neurocognitive functioning in a more detailed manner by examining global 
IQ and relevant neurocognitive domains (i.e., verbal and nonverbal reasoning, 
attention, executive functioning, memory) in pediatric patients. The sample 
(N=6, 4 females) ranged in age from 8 to 15 years (M=11, SD=2.82). All 
participants completed neuropsychological evaluations. Statistical analyses 
revealed performance that was below average on measures of global IQ, processing 
speed and rote, verbal learning coupled with average nonverbal reasoning, and 
sustained attention. There was also evidence of impaired higher-level verbal 
reasoning. While global IQ ranged from low average to borderline impaired, no 
participant could be accurately described as impaired or having intellectual 
disability (ID) given the consistently average performance noted on some 
higher-order tasks including nonverbal reasoning.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.09.022
PMID: 26492104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]