---
reference_id: "PMID:28476287"
title: Severe cutaneous adverse reactions to drugs.
authors:
- Duong TA
- Valeyrie-Allanore L
- Wolkenstein P
- Chosidow O
journal: Lancet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30378-6
keywords:
- "Acute Generalized Exanthematous Pustulosis/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Drug Hypersensitivity Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- "Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Prognosis
- Risk Assessment
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe cutaneous adverse reactions to drugs.
**Authors:** Duong TA, Valeyrie-Allanore L, Wolkenstein P, Chosidow O
**Journal:** Lancet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30378-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30378-6)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2017 Oct 28;390(10106):1996-2011. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30378-6. 
Epub 2017 May 2.

Severe cutaneous adverse reactions to drugs.

Duong TA(1), Valeyrie-Allanore L(2), Wolkenstein P(3), Chosidow O(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, AP-HP, Créteil, France; 
Centre de Référence des Dermatoses Bulleuses Toxiques, Créteil, France. 
Electronic address: tu-anh.duong@aphp.fr.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, AP-HP, Créteil, France; 
Centre de Référence des Dermatoses Bulleuses Toxiques, Créteil, France.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, AP-HP, Créteil, France; 
Centre de Référence des Dermatoses Bulleuses Toxiques, Créteil, France; EA 7379 
EpiDermE (Epidémiologie en Dermatologie et Evaluation des Thérapeutiques), 
Université Paris-Est Créteil Val-de-Marne, Créteil, France.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, AP-HP, Créteil, France; 
Centre de Référence des Dermatoses Bulleuses Toxiques, Créteil, France; EA 7379 
EpiDermE (Epidémiologie en Dermatologie et Evaluation des Thérapeutiques), 
Université Paris-Est Créteil Val-de-Marne, Créteil, France; French Satellite of 
the Cochrane Skin Group, Créteil, France; INSERM, Centre d'Investigation 
Clinique 1430, Créteil, France.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2017 Oct 28;390(10106):1948. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31656-2.

During the past decade, major advances have been made in the accurate diagnosis 
of severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs) to drugs, management of their 
manifestations, and identification of their pathogenetic mechanisms and at-risk 
populations. Early recognition and diagnosis of SCARs are key in the 
identification of culprit drugs. SCARS are potentially life threatening, and 
associated with various clinical patterns and morbidity during the acute stage 
of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug reactions with 
eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, and acute generalised exanthematous 
pustulosis. Early drug withdrawal is mandatory in all SCARs. Physicians' 
knowledge is essential to the improvement of diagnosis and management, and in 
the limitation and prevention of long-term sequelae. This Seminar provides the 
tools to help physicians in their clinical approach and investigations of SCARs.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30378-6
PMID: 28476287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]