---
reference_id: "PMID:32318302"
title: "Oculodentodigital Dysplasia: A Case Report and Major Review of the Eye and Ocular Adnexa Features of 295 Reported Cases."
authors:
- Kumar V
- Couser NL
- Pandya A
journal: Case Rep Ophthalmol Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1155/2020/6535974
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oculodentodigital Dysplasia: A Case Report and Major Review of the Eye and Ocular Adnexa Features of 295 Reported Cases.
**Authors:** Kumar V, Couser NL, Pandya A
**Journal:** Case Rep Ophthalmol Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2020/6535974](https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/6535974)

## Content

1. Case Rep Ophthalmol Med. 2020 Apr 4;2020:6535974. doi: 10.1155/2020/6535974. 
eCollection 2020.

Oculodentodigital Dysplasia: A Case Report and Major Review of the Eye and 
Ocular Adnexa Features of 295 Reported Cases.

Kumar V(1), Couser NL(2)(3)(4), Pandya A(5).

Author information:
(1)Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Virginia Commonwealth University School of 
Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA.
(3)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University 
School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth University School of 
Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, School of 
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD) is a rare genetic disorder associated with a 
characteristic craniofacial profile with variable dental, limb, eye, and ocular 
adnexa abnormalities. We performed an extensive literature review to highlight 
key eye features in patients with ODDD and report a new case of a female patient 
with a heterozygous missense GJA1 mutation (c.65G>A, p.G22E) and clinical 
features consistent with the condition. Our patient presented with multiple 
congenital anomalies including syndactyly, microphthalmia, microcornea, 
retrognathia, and a small nose with hypoplastic alae and prominent columella; in 
addition, an omphalocele defect was present, which has not been reported in 
previous cases. A systematic review of the published cases to date revealed 91 
literature reports of 295 individuals with ODDD. There were 73 different GJA1 
mutations associated with these cases, of which the most common were the 
following missense mutations: c.605G>A (p.R202H) (11%), c.389T>C (p.I130T) 
(10%), and c.119C>T (p.A40V) (10%). Mutations most commonly affect the 
extracellular-1 and cytoplasmic-1 domains of connexin-43 (gene product of GJA1), 
predominately manifesting in microphthalmia and microcornea. The syndrome 
appears with an approximately equal sex ratio. The most common eye features 
reported among all mutations were microcornea, microphthalmia, short palpebral 
fissures, and glaucoma.

Copyright © 2020 Virang Kumar et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/6535974
PMCID: PMC7165356
PMID: 32318302

Conflict of interest statement: Virang Kumar and Arti Pandya declare that they 
have no conflicts of interest. Natario L. Couser, MD, MS, is a principal 
investigator at the Virginia Commonwealth University site of Retrophin, Inc., 
and book editor in Elsevier.