---
reference_id: "PMID:29203834"
title: Molecular and cellular issues of KMT2A variants involved in Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome.
authors:
- Lebrun N
- Giurgea I
- Goldenberg A
- Dieux A
- Afenjar A
- Ghoumid J
- Diebold B
- Mietton L
- Briand-Suleau A
- Billuart P
- Bienvenu T
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-017-0033-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular and cellular issues of KMT2A variants involved in Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome.
**Authors:** Lebrun N, Giurgea I, Goldenberg A, Dieux A, Afenjar A, Ghoumid J, Diebold B, Mietton L, Briand-Suleau A, Billuart P, Bienvenu T
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-017-0033-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-017-0033-y)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2018 Jan;26(1):107-116. doi: 10.1038/s41431-017-0033-y. Epub 
2017 Dec 4.

Molecular and cellular issues of KMT2A variants involved in Wiedemann-Steiner 
syndrome.

Lebrun N(1)(2)(3), Giurgea I(4), Goldenberg A(5), Dieux A(6), Afenjar A(7), 
Ghoumid J(6), Diebold B(8), Mietton L(1)(2)(3), Briand-Suleau A(8), Billuart 
P(1)(2)(3), Bienvenu T(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Inserm, Institut Cochin, U1016, Paris, France.
(2)Cnrs, UMR8104, Paris, France.
(3)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(4)Service de Génétique, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France.
(5)Service de génétique, CHU de Rouen et Inserm U1079, Université de Rouen, 
Center Normand de Génomique Médicale et Médecine Personnalisée, Rouen, France.
(6)Service de génétique clinique Guy Fontaine CHRU de Lille - Hôpital Jeanne de 
Flandre Avenue Eugène Avinée, 59037, LILLE, France.
(7)GRC Concer-LD, Sorbonne universités, Département de Génétique et Embryologie 
Médicale, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France.
(8)Laboratoire de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaires, Hôpital Cochin, HUPC, 
AP-HP, Paris, France.
(9)Inserm, Institut Cochin, U1016, Paris, France. thierry.bienvenu@inserm.fr.
(10)Cnrs, UMR8104, Paris, France. thierry.bienvenu@inserm.fr.
(11)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. 
thierry.bienvenu@inserm.fr.
(12)Laboratoire de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaires, Hôpital Cochin, HUPC, 
AP-HP, Paris, France. thierry.bienvenu@inserm.fr.

Variants in KMT2A, encoding the histone methyltransferase KMT2A, are a growing 
cause of intellectual disability (ID). Up to now, the majority of KMT2A variants 
are non-sense and frameshift variants causing a typical form of 
Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome. We studied KMT2A gene in a cohort of 200 patients 
with unexplained syndromic and non-syndromic ID and identified four novel 
variants, one splice and three missense variants, possibly deleterious. We used 
primary cells from the patients and molecular approaches to determine the 
deleterious effects of those variants on KMT2A expression and function. For the 
putative splice variant c.11322-1G>A, we showed that it led to only one 
nucleotide deletion and loss of the C-terminal part of the protein. For two 
studied KMT2A missense variants, c.3460C>T (p.(Arg1154Trp)) and c.8558T>G 
(p.(Met2853Arg)), located at the cysteine-rich CXXC domain and the 
transactivation domain of the protein, respectively, we found altered KMT2A 
target genes expression in patient's fibroblasts compared to controls. 
Furthermore, we found a disturbed subcellular distribution of KMT2A for the 
c.3460C>T mutant. Taken together, our results demonstrated the deleterious 
impact of the splice variant and of the missense variants located at two 
different functional domains and suggested reduction of KMT2A function as the 
disease-causing mechanism.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-017-0033-y
PMCID: PMC5839021
PMID: 29203834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.