---
reference_id: "PMID:8002647"
title: Idiopathic phalangeal osteolysis.
authors:
- Todd G
- Saxe N
journal: Arch Dermatol
year: '1994'
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Fingers
- "Foot Deformities, Acquired/etiology"
- "Hand Deformities, Acquired/etiology"
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteolysis, Essential/complications"
- Toes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idiopathic phalangeal osteolysis.
**Authors:** Todd G, Saxe N
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol (1994)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol. 1994 Jun;130(6):759-62.

Idiopathic phalangeal osteolysis.

Todd G(1), Saxe N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, Republic of 
South Africa.

BACKGROUND: The acro-osteolytic diseases are a heterogeneous group of bone 
disorders characterized by bone resorption. Acquired and genetic forms have been 
well described. As hand abnormalities are frequently encountered in dermatologic 
practice, bone resorptive states, with particular reference to the idiopathic 
osteolytic disorders, are discussed.
OBSERVATIONS: Asymptomatic terminal phalangeal osteolysis has been investigated 
in two unrelated young adults with no other bony or systemic abnormalities. The 
nails of the attenuated bulbous fingers were dystrophic, and pigmentary changes 
were present in the affected areas. The skin was otherwise normal, and there was 
minimal soft-tissue loss. Roentgenograms of the hands and feet showed varying 
stages of phalangeal osteolysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Both cases represent primary idiopathic acro-osteolysis, as the 
bony changes are limited to the distal phalanges of the hands and feet. There 
were no features in the history or clinical evaluation to support a diagnosis of 
secondary acro-osteolysis.

PMID: 8002647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]