---
reference_id: "PMID:37435300"
title: "Duchenne muscular dystrophy: disease mechanism and therapeutic strategies."
authors:
- Bez Batti Angulski A
- Hosny N
- Cohen H
- Martin AA
- Hahn D
- Bauer J
- Metzger JM
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1183101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Duchenne muscular dystrophy: disease mechanism and therapeutic strategies.
**Authors:** Bez Batti Angulski A, Hosny N, Cohen H, Martin AA, Hahn D, Bauer J, Metzger JM
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2023.1183101](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2023.1183101)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2023 Jun 26;14:1183101. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1183101. 
eCollection 2023.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy: disease mechanism and therapeutic strategies.

Bez Batti Angulski A(1), Hosny N(1), Cohen H(1), Martin AA(1), Hahn D(1), Bauer 
J(1), Metzger JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, Minneapolis, MN, United States.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a severe, progressive, and ultimately fatal 
disease of skeletal muscle wasting, respiratory insufficiency, and 
cardiomyopathy. The identification of the dystrophin gene as central to DMD 
pathogenesis has led to the understanding of the muscle membrane and the 
proteins involved in membrane stability as the focal point of the disease. The 
lessons learned from decades of research in human genetics, biochemistry, and 
physiology have culminated in establishing the myriad functionalities of 
dystrophin in striated muscle biology. Here, we review the pathophysiological 
basis of DMD and discuss recent progress toward the development of therapeutic 
strategies for DMD that are currently close to or are in human clinical trials. 
The first section of the review focuses on DMD and the mechanisms contributing 
to membrane instability, inflammation, and fibrosis. The second section 
discusses therapeutic strategies currently used to treat DMD. This includes a 
focus on outlining the strengths and limitations of approaches directed at 
correcting the genetic defect through dystrophin gene replacement, modification, 
repair, and/or a range of dystrophin-independent approaches. The final section 
highlights the different therapeutic strategies for DMD currently in clinical 
trials.

Copyright © 2023 Bez Batti Angulski, Hosny, Cohen, Martin, Hahn, Bauer and 
Metzger.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1183101
PMCID: PMC10330733
PMID: 37435300

Conflict of interest statement: JM is on the scientific advisory board of and 
holds shares in Phrixus Pharmaceuticals Inc., a company developing novel 
therapeutics for heart failure. The terms of this arrangement have been reviewed 
and approved by the University of Minnesota in accordance with its 
conflict-of-interest policies.