---
reference_id: "PMID:34168064"
title: Epigenetics and sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Konigsberg IR
- Maier LA
- Yang IV
journal: Eur Respir Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1183/16000617.0076-2021
keywords:
- DNA Methylation
- Environmental Exposure
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Humans
- Lung Diseases
- "Sarcoidosis/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetics and sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Konigsberg IR, Maier LA, Yang IV
**Journal:** Eur Respir Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1183/16000617.0076-2021](https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0076-2021)

## Content

1. Eur Respir Rev. 2021 Jun 23;30(160):210076. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0076-2021.
Print 2021 Jun 30.

Epigenetics and sarcoidosis.

Konigsberg IR(1)(2), Maier LA(2)(3)(4), Yang IV(5)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Human Medical Genetics and Genomics Program, University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA iain.konigsberg@cuanschutz.edu.
(2)Dept of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO,
USA.
(3)Dept of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(4)Dept of Environmental and Occupational Health, Colorado School of Public
Health, Aurora, CO, USA.
(5)Human Medical Genetics and Genomics Program, University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Dept of Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora, CO, USA.

Epigenetic modifications are emerging as important regulatory mechanisms of gene
expression in lung disease, given that they are influenced by environmental
exposures and genetic variants, and that they regulate immune and fibrotic
processes. In this review, we introduce these concepts with a focus on the study
of DNA methylation and histone modifications and discuss how they have been
applied to lung disease, and how they can be applied to sarcoidosis. This
information has implications for other exposure and immunologically mediated
lung diseases, such as chronic beryllium disease, hypersensitivity pneumonitis,
and asbestosis.

Copyright ©The authors 2021.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0076-2021
PMCID: PMC9488730
PMID: 34168064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: I.R. Konigsberg has
nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: L.A. Maier reports grants from
National Institutes of Health, during the conduct of the study; and grants from
National Institutes of Health, University of Cincinnati under a Mallinckrodt
Foundation, MNK14344100 and ATYR1923-C-002, outside the submitted work. L.A.
Maier is a member of the FSR Scientific Advisory Board. She does not receive any
compensation for this activity. Conflict of interest: I.V. Yang reports grants
from NIH, during the conduct of the study; and personal fees from Eleven P15,
outside the submitted work. I.V. Yang has a patent “Circulating Biomarkers of
Preclinical Pulmonary Fibrosis” pending.
