---
reference_id: "PMID:29039317"
title: "Progression pattern of rheumatoid arthritis: A study of 500 Pakistani patients."
authors:
- Jalil F
- Arshad M
- Bhatti A
- Jamal M
- Ahmed M
- Malik JM
- Ali S
- Akbar F
- John P
journal: Pak J Pharm Sci
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progression pattern of rheumatoid arthritis: A study of 500 Pakistani patients.
**Authors:** Jalil F, Arshad M, Bhatti A, Jamal M, Ahmed M, Malik JM, Ali S, Akbar F, John P
**Journal:** Pak J Pharm Sci (2017)

## Content

1. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2017 Jul;30(4):1219-1223.

Progression pattern of rheumatoid arthritis: A study of 500 Pakistani patients.

Jalil F(1), Arshad M(2), Bhatti A(2), Jamal M(3), Ahmed M(4), Malik JM(5), Ali 
S(1), Akbar F(6), John P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, Pakistan.
(2)Atta-Ur-Rahman School of Applied Biosciences (ASAB), National University of 
Sciences and Technology (NUST), Pakistan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Military Hospital (MH), Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(5)Arthritis Research Center and Rahmat Noor Clinic, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(6)Center for Biotechnology and Microbiology, University of Swat, Pakistan.

To estimate the most prevalent age of patients and disease status and 
progression in terms of severity at different age groups in the Pakistani 
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) patients. A total of five hundred (500) RA patients 
were enrolled during October, 2009 to October, 2013. A screening questionnaire 
was filled for each patient satisfying America College of Rheumatology (ACR) 
criteria under the supervision of certified rheumatologists. Epidemiological and 
demographic variables were statistically analyzed for correlation with 
progression of the disease using SPSS ver 17.0.1 software. In general, 
rheumatoid arthritis preferentially affects women with female to male ratio of 
about 3:1; however, patients with above 60 years of age have equal female to 
male ratio. The most prevalent age is 45-60 years. The disease severity 
increases with increase in the age and reaches to its peak in above 60 years of 
age (p=0.001). The pattern of progression of RA in the Pakistani patients is 
almost consistent with other relevant studies conducted on European and European 
derived populations.

PMID: 29039317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]