---
reference_id: "PMID:10229030"
title: Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
authors:
- Tyni T
- Pihko H
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1080/08035259950169954
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** Tyni T, Pihko H
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08035259950169954](https://doi.org/10.1080/08035259950169954)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 1999 Mar;88(3):237-45. doi: 10.1080/08035259950169954.

Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.

Tyni T(1), Pihko H.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Child Neurology, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki 
University Central Hospital, Finland.

Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency is one of the 
recently discovered defects of mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. As a 
group, the beta-oxidation defects are among the most common inherited metabolic 
disorders, and LCHAD deficiency appears to be the most frequently diagnosed 
beta-oxidation defect in Finland. In the vast majority of patients, LCHAD 
deficiency is caused by a common autosomal recessive mutation G1528C. Like 
several beta-oxidation defects, it presents during infancy with hypoglycemic 
coma, hepatic steatosis, and hypocarnitinemia. Other manifestations are 
cardiomyopathy and rhabdomyolysis, which are frequent in defects of long-chain 
fatty acid oxidation. In addition, LCHAD deficiency has specific features, 
namely peripheral neuropathy and chorioretinopathy. Female carriers of LCHAD 
deficiency are prone to have preeclampsia-related pregnancy complications. 
Diagnosis is suggested by 3-hydroxylated acylcarnitine species in blood and the 
definitive diagnosis can be made by measuring intermediates of fatty acid 
beta-oxidation in fibroblasts or by detecting disease causing mutations. 
Analysis of the frequency of the G1528C mutation in Finland revealed carrier 
frequency of 1:240. Because of therapeutic and prenatal diagnostic opportunities 
in LCHAD deficiency, it is important to recognize this severe disorder early in 
its course.

DOI: 10.1080/08035259950169954
PMID: 10229030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]