---
reference_id: "PMID:7581378"
title: "Crouzon syndrome: mutations in two spliceoforms of FGFR2 and a common point mutation shared with Jackson-Weiss syndrome."
authors:
- Gorry MC
- Preston RA
- White GJ
- Zhang Y
- Singhal VK
- Losken HW
- Parker MG
- Nwokoro NA
- Post JC
- Ehrlich GD
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/4.8.1387
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crouzon syndrome: mutations in two spliceoforms of FGFR2 and a common point mutation shared with Jackson-Weiss syndrome.
**Authors:** Gorry MC, Preston RA, White GJ, Zhang Y, Singhal VK, Losken HW, Parker MG, Nwokoro NA, Post JC, Ehrlich GD
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/4.8.1387](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/4.8.1387)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1995 Aug;4(8):1387-90. doi: 10.1093/hmg/4.8.1387.

Crouzon syndrome: mutations in two spliceoforms of FGFR2 and a common point 
mutation shared with Jackson-Weiss syndrome.

Gorry MC(1), Preston RA, White GJ, Zhang Y, Singhal VK, Losken HW, Parker MG, 
Nwokoro NA, Post JC, Ehrlich GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Dominant mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene have 
been recently identified as causes of four phenotypically distinct 
craniosynostosis syndromes, including Crouzon, Jackson-Weiss, Pfeiffer, and 
Apert syndromes. These data suggest that the genetics of the craniosynostosis 
syndromes is more complex than would be expected from their simple 
autosomal-dominant inheritance pattern. Identical mutations in the FGFR2 gene 
have been reported to cause both Pfeiffer and Crouzon syndrome phenotypes. We 
now report the finding of a mutation in exon IIIc of the FGFR2 gene in a kindred 
affected with Crouzon syndrome (C1043 to G; Ala344Gly) that is identical to the 
mutation previously associated with Jackson-Weiss syndrome. We also report 
finding in a Crouzon kindred a mutation in the 3' end of exon IIIu (formerly 
referred to as exon 5, exon 7, or exon U) (A878 to C; Gln289Pro) which encodes 
the amino terminal portion of the Ig-like III domain of the FGFR2 protein. This 
exon is common to both the FGFR2 and the KGFR spliceoforms of the FGFR2 gene, 
unlike all previously reported Crouzon mutations, which have been found only in 
the FGFR2 spliceoform. These findings reveal further unexpected complexity in 
the molecular genetics of these craniosynostosis syndromes. The data implies 
that second-site mutations in FGFR2 itself (outside of exon IIIc) or in other 
genes may determine specific aspects of the phenotypes of craniosynostosis 
syndromes.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/4.8.1387
PMID: 7581378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]