---
reference_id: "PMID:24429302"
title: "Chronic inactive pulmonary tuberculosis and treatment sequelae: chest radiographic features."
authors:
- Hicks A
- Muthukumarasamy S
- Maxwell D
- Howlett D
journal: Int J Tuberc Lung Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.5588/ijtld.13.0360
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic inactive pulmonary tuberculosis and treatment sequelae: chest radiographic features.
**Authors:** Hicks A, Muthukumarasamy S, Maxwell D, Howlett D
**Journal:** Int J Tuberc Lung Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.5588/ijtld.13.0360](https://doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.13.0360)

## Content

1. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2014 Feb;18(2):128-33. doi: 10.5588/ijtld.13.0360.

Chronic inactive pulmonary tuberculosis and treatment sequelae: chest 
radiographic features.

Hicks A(1), Muthukumarasamy S(2), Maxwell D(3), Howlett D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, Kings College London, London, 
UK.
(2)Department of Radiology, Eastbourne District General Hospital, Eastbourne, 
UK.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Eastbourne District General Hospital, 
Eastbourne, UK.

The chest radiograph (CXR) is a key initial tool in the diagnosis of many lung 
conditions, including pulmonary tuberculosis (TB). With proper use of 
anti-tuberculosis drugs, TB can be treated effectively and many CXR changes are 
limited. However, anti-tuberculosis drugs have not always been available, and in 
some cases they have not been started early in the disease process. The 
infection has then been able to take hold and cause significant radiologically 
visible damage, such as calcification and fibrosis. Before the use of 
anti-tuberculosis drugs, a variety of surgical techniques were employed to 
control pulmonary infection, including plombage, oleothorax, phrenic nerve crush 
and thoracoplasty. Each of these led to distinctive CXR features. This article 
sets out to describe the CXR features of chronic disease and surgical 
treatments, as their increasing rarity with the passage of time has meant that 
they can be misinterpreted. However, with increasing life expectancy and the 
revival of surgery due to the development of anti-tuberculosis drug resistance, 
the correct interpretation of these CXR changes is still of importance.

DOI: 10.5588/ijtld.13.0360
PMID: 24429302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]