---
reference_id: "PMID:36175366"
title: The role and control of arginine levels in arginase 1 deficiency.
authors:
- Diaz GA
- Bechter M
- Cederbaum SD
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12564
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Hyperargininemia
- Arginase/genetics
- Arginine
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn"
- Hyperammonemia/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role and control of arginine levels in arginase 1 deficiency.
**Authors:** Diaz GA, Bechter M, Cederbaum SD
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12564](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12564)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2023 Jan;46(1):3-14. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12564. Epub 2022
Oct  13.

The role and control of arginine levels in arginase 1 deficiency.

Diaz GA(1), Bechter M(2), Cederbaum SD(3).

Author information:
(1)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Aeglea BioTherapeutics, Inc., Austin, TX, USA.
(3)David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

Arginase 1 Deficiency (ARG1-D) is a rare urea cycle disorder that results in
persistent hyperargininemia and a distinct, progressive neurologic phenotype
involving developmental delay, intellectual disability, and spasticity,
predominantly affecting the lower limbs and leading to mobility impairment.
Unlike the typical presentation of other urea cycle disorders, individuals with
ARG1-D usually appear healthy at birth and hyperammonemia is comparatively less
severe and less common. Clinical manifestations typically begin to develop in
early childhood in association with high plasma arginine levels, with
hyperargininemia (and not hyperammonemia) considered to be the primary driver of
disease sequelae. Nearly five decades of clinical experience with ARG1-D and
empirical studies in genetically manipulated models have generated a large body
of evidence that, when considered in aggregate, implicates arginine directly in
disease pathophysiology. Severe dietary protein restriction to minimize arginine
intake and diversion of ammonia from the urea cycle are the mainstay of care.
Although this approach does reduce plasma arginine and improve patients'
cognitive and motor/mobility manifestations, it is inadequate to achieve and
maintain sufficiently low arginine levels and prevent progression in the long
term. This review presents a comprehensive discussion of the clinical and
scientific literature, the effects and limitations of the current standard of
care, and the authors' perspectives regarding the past, current, and future
management of ARG1-D.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12564
PMCID: PMC10091968
PMID: 36175366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Diaz has served as an advisor and clinical
trial investigator for Aeglea. Dr Cederbaum has served as a consultant and/or
advisor for several biopharmaceutical companies, including Aeglea. Dr Bechter is
an Aeglea employee (Medical Affairs). No author received compensation for their
role in writing this article.
