---
reference_id: "PMID:36902329"
title: "Psoriatic Arthritis: Pathogenesis and Targeted Therapies."
authors:
- Azuaga AB
- Ramírez J
- Cañete JD
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24054901
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psoriatic Arthritis: Pathogenesis and Targeted Therapies.
**Authors:** Azuaga AB, Ramírez J, Cañete JD
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24054901](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24054901)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 3;24(5):4901. doi: 10.3390/ijms24054901.

Psoriatic Arthritis: Pathogenesis and Targeted Therapies.

Azuaga AB(1), Ramírez J(1), Cañete JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Department, Hospital Clinic and IDIBAPS of Barcelona, 08036 
Barcelona, Spain.

Psoriatic arthritis (PsA), a heterogeneous chronic inflammatory immune-mediated 
disease characterized by musculoskeletal inflammation (arthritis, enthesitis, 
spondylitis, and dactylitis), generally occurs in patients with psoriasis. PsA 
is also associated with uveitis and inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn's disease 
and ulcerative colitis). To capture these manifestations as well as the 
associated comorbidities, and to recognize their underlining common 
pathogenesis, the name of psoriatic disease was coined. The pathogenesis of PsA 
is complex and multifaceted, with an interplay of genetic predisposition, 
triggering environmental factors, and activation of the innate and adaptive 
immune system, although autoinflammation has also been implicated. Research has 
identified several immune-inflammatory pathways defined by cytokines 
(IL-23/IL-17, TNF), leading to the development of efficacious therapeutic 
targets. However, heterogeneous responses to these drugs occur in different 
patients and in the different tissues involved, resulting in a challenge to the 
global management of the disease. Therefore, more translational research is 
necessary in order to identify new targets and improve current disease outcomes. 
Hopefully, this may become a reality through the integration of different omics 
technologies that allow better understanding of the relevant cellular and 
molecular players of the different tissues and manifestations of the disease. In 
this narrative review, we aim to provide an updated overview of the 
pathophysiology, including the latest findings from multiomics studies, and to 
describe current targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24054901
PMCID: PMC10003101
PMID: 36902329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest for 
this manuscript.