---
reference_id: "PMID:34196272"
title: Respiratory and intestinal epithelial cells exhibit differential susceptibility and innate immune responses to contemporary EV-D68 isolates.
authors:
- Freeman MC
- Wells AI
- Ciomperlik-Patton J
- Myerburg MM
- Yang L
- Konopka-Anstadt J
- Coyne CB
journal: Elife
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.66687
keywords:
- Cell Line
- "Enterovirus D, Human/classification, genetics"
- "Epithelial Cells/immunology, physiology, virology"
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Hydrogen-Ion Concentration
- Intestines/cytology
- Lung/cytology
- Organoids
- Temperature
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory and intestinal epithelial cells exhibit differential susceptibility and innate immune responses to contemporary EV-D68 isolates.
**Authors:** Freeman MC, Wells AI, Ciomperlik-Patton J, Myerburg MM, Yang L, Konopka-Anstadt J, Coyne CB
**Journal:** Elife (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.66687](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.66687)

## Content

1. Elife. 2021 Jul 1;10:e66687. doi: 10.7554/eLife.66687.

Respiratory and intestinal epithelial cells exhibit differential susceptibility
and innate immune responses to contemporary EV-D68 isolates.

Freeman MC(1), Wells AI(1)(2), Ciomperlik-Patton J(3), Myerburg MM(4), Yang
L(1)(2), Konopka-Anstadt J(3), Coyne CB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, UPMC Children's
Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, United States.
(2)Center for Microbial Pathogenesis, UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, United States.
(3)Division of Viral Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, United States.
(4)Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, United States.

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) has been implicated in outbreaks of severe respiratory
illness and is associated with acute flaccid myelitis (AFM). EV-D68 is often
detected in patient respiratory samples but has also been detected in stool and
wastewater, suggesting the potential for both respiratory and enteric routes of
transmission. Here, we used a panel of EV-D68 isolates, including a historical
pre-2014 isolate and multiple contemporary isolates from AFM outbreak years, to
define the dynamics of viral replication and the host response to infection in
primary human airway cells and stem cell-derived enteroids. We show that some
recent EV-D68 isolates have decreased sensitivity to acid and temperature
compared with earlier isolates and that the respiratory, but not intestinal,
epithelium induces a robust type III interferon response that restricts
infection. Our findings define the differential responses of the respiratory and
intestinal epithelium to contemporary EV-D68 isolates and suggest that a subset
of isolates have the potential to target both the human airway and
gastrointestinal tracts.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.66687
PMCID: PMC8285104
PMID: 34196272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MF, AW, JC, MM, LY, JK, CC No competing
interests declared
