---
reference_id: "PMID:39215664"
title: Activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling is critical for the tumorigenesis of choroid plexus.
authors:
- Ho KH
- Trapp M
- Guida C
- Ivanova EL
- De Jaime-Soguero A
- Jabali A
- Thomas C
- Salasova A
- Bernatík O
- Salio C
- Horschitz S
- Hasselblatt M
- Sassoè-Pognetto M
- Čajánek L
- Ishikawa H
- Schroten H
- Schwerk C
- Acebrón SP
- Angel P
- Koch P
- Patrizi A
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noae176
keywords:
- Humans
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- "Choroid Plexus Neoplasms/pathology, metabolism, genetics"
- "beta Catenin/metabolism, genetics"
- "Carcinogenesis/metabolism, pathology"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Cell Proliferation
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling is critical for the tumorigenesis of choroid plexus.
**Authors:** Ho KH, Trapp M, Guida C, Ivanova EL, De Jaime-Soguero A, Jabali A, Thomas C, Salasova A, Bernatík O, Salio C, Horschitz S, Hasselblatt M, Sassoè-Pognetto M, Čajánek L, Ishikawa H, Schroten H, Schwerk C, Acebrón SP, Angel P, Koch P, Patrizi A
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noae176](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noae176)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2025 Jan 12;27(1):106-122. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noae176.

Activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling is critical for the tumorigenesis of
choroid plexus.

Ho KH(1)(2), Trapp M(2), Guida C(3)(4)(5), Ivanova EL(6), De Jaime-Soguero A(7),
Jabali A(3)(4)(5), Thomas C(8), Salasova A(9), Bernatík O(10)(11), Salio C(12),
Horschitz S(3)(4)(5), Hasselblatt M(8), Sassoè-Pognetto M(13), Čajánek
L(10)(11), Ishikawa H(14), Schroten H(15), Schwerk C(15), Acebrón SP(7), Angel
P(6), Koch P(3)(4)(5), Patrizi A(16)(17)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Schaller Research Group, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany.
(3)German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Hector Institute for Translational Brain Research, Mannheim, Germany.
(5)Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Mannheim, Germany.
(6)Division of Signal Transduction and Growth Control, DKFZ/ZMBH Alliance,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Centre for Organismal Studies (COS), Heidelberg University, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(8)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(9)Danish Research Institute of Translational Neuroscience DANDRITE, and Center
of Excellence PROMEMO, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark.
(10)Section of Animal Physiology and Immunology, Department of Experimental
Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia.
(11)Laboratory of Cilia and Centrosome Biology, Department of Histology and
Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia.
(12)Department of Veterinary Sciences, Turin University, Grugliasco, Italy.
(13)Department of Neurosciences "Rita Levi Montalcini," Turin University, Turin,
Italy.
(14)Laboratory of Clinical Regenerative Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Medical Faculty
Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(16)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg, DKFZ-ZMBH
Alliance, Heidelberg, Germany.
(17)Interdisciplinary Center for Neuroscience, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The choroid plexus (ChP) is the secretory epithelial structure
located in the brain ventricles. Choroid plexus tumors (CPTs) are rare neoplasms
predominantly occurring in young patients with intensified malignancy in
children. CPT treatment is hindered by insufficient knowledge of tumor pathology
and the limited availability of valid models.
METHODS: Genomic and transcriptomic data from CPT patients were analyzed to
identify the putative pathological pathway. Cellular and molecular techniques
were employed to validate bioinformatic results in CPT patient samples.
Pharmacologic inhibition of Wnt/β-catenin signaling was assessed in CPT cells.
Cell-based assays of ChP cell lines were performed following CRISPR-Cas9-derived
knockout and overexpression of Wnt/β-catenin pathway genes. A 3D CPT model was
generated through CRISPR-Cas9-derived knockout of APC.
RESULTS: We discovered that Wnt/β-catenin signaling is activated in human CPTs,
likely as a consequence of large-scale chromosomal instability events of the CPT
genomes. We demonstrated that CPT-derived cells depend on autocrine
Wnt/β-catenin signaling for survival. Constitutive Wnt/β-catenin pathway
activation, either through knockout of the negative regulator APC or
overexpression of the ligand WNT3A, induced tumorigenic properties in ChP 2D in
vitro models. Increased activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway in ChP
organoids, through treatment with a potent GSK3β inhibitor, reduced the
differentiation of mature ChP epithelial cells. Remarkably, the depletion of APC
was sufficient to induce the oncogenic transformation of ChP organoids.
CONCLUSIONS: Our research identifies Wnt/β-catenin signaling as a critical
driver of CPT tumorigenesis and provides the first 3D in vitro model for future
pathological and therapeutic studies of CPT.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please
contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All
other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the
Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please
contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noae176
PMCID: PMC11726344
PMID: 39215664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
