---
reference_id: "PMID:39481610"
title: "High rates of Dientamoeba fragilis and Blastocystis species in children's stool but minor clinical significance."
authors:
- Shasha D
- Treygerman O
- Levy Dahari E
- Bilavsky E
- Hacham D
- Grupel D
- Paran Y
- Prajgrod G
- Zacay G
journal: J Infect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2024.106340
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High rates of Dientamoeba fragilis and Blastocystis species in children's stool but minor clinical significance.
**Authors:** Shasha D, Treygerman O, Levy Dahari E, Bilavsky E, Hacham D, Grupel D, Paran Y, Prajgrod G, Zacay G
**Journal:** J Infect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jinf.2024.106340](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2024.106340)

## Content

1. J Infect. 2024 Dec;89(6):106340. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2024.106340. Epub 2024
Oct  29.

High rates of Dientamoeba fragilis and Blastocystis species in children's stool 
but minor clinical significance.

Shasha D(1), Treygerman O(2), Levy Dahari E(2), Bilavsky E(3), Hacham D(2), 
Grupel D(4), Paran Y(5), Prajgrod G(2), Zacay G(6).

Author information:
(1)Head Office, Medical Division, Meuhedet Health Services, Tel Aviv, Israel; 
Infectious Disease Unit, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel; 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic address: 
davidsha@tlvmc.gov.il.
(2)Central Laboratory, Meuhedet Health Services, Lod, Israel.
(3)Infectious Diseases Unit, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, 
Petah Tikva, Israel.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Hadassah-Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(5)Infectious Disease Unit, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel; 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Head Office, Medical Division, Meuhedet Health Services, Tel Aviv, Israel; 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to describe the epidemiology and the 
clinical significance of Dientamoeba fragilis (DF) and Blastocystis (Bs) in 
pediatric stool samples.
METHODS: A historical cohort study of children under 18 years of age who 
underwent stool multiplex PCR for bacteria and parasites. DF and Bs results were 
not routinely reported. We assessed the frequency of various stool 
microorganisms and analyzed a composite of symptoms occurring within 14 days 
before testing and four post-test composite outcomes (symptoms, further medical 
evaluation, prescriptions of symptomatic treatment or antibiotics). Comparisons 
were made between children mono-infected with DF or Bs, those with negative PCR 
results, and those positive for microorganisms with established pathogenicity.
RESULTS: Of 36,008 eligible children, 32.5% were positive for DF and 7.9% for 
Bs. Children positive for DF or Bs did not exhibit higher odds for pre- or 
post-test composite outcomes compared to those with all-negative PCR results, 
except for increased rates of abdominal pain and referrals for anti-TTG testing 
among DF-positive children. Antibiotic prescription was significantly more 
common among those positive for microorganisms of known pathogenicity.
CONCLUSIONS: While DF and Bs are frequently detected in pediatric stool samples, 
their clinical significance appears to be limited.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2024.106340
PMID: 39481610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.