---
reference_id: "PMID:40125546"
title: "Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency manifested in an adult treated with prednisone for polymyositis, and cured by live-donor liver transplantation."
authors:
- Yokota K
- Ohtake A
- Yamazaki T
- Tsuzuki-Wada T
- Saito-Tsuruoka M
- Fushimi T
- Murayama K
- Akiyama Y
- Mimura T
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency manifested in an adult treated with prednisone for polymyositis, and cured by live-donor liver transplantation.
**Authors:** Yokota K, Ohtake A, Yamazaki T, Tsuzuki-Wada T, Saito-Tsuruoka M, Fushimi T, Murayama K, Akiyama Y, Mimura T
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101200](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101200)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2025 Mar 5;43:101200. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101200. 
eCollection 2025 Jun.

Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency manifested in an adult treated with 
prednisone for polymyositis, and cured by live-donor liver transplantation.

Yokota K(1), Ohtake A(2)(3)(4), Yamazaki T(2), Tsuzuki-Wada T(1), Saito-Tsuruoka 
M(3)(4), Fushimi T(5), Murayama K(5)(6), Akiyama Y(1), Mimura T(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Applied Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Saitama Medical University, 
Saitama, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Genomics, Faculty of Medicine, Saitama Medical 
University, Saitama, Japan.
(4)Center for Intractable Diseases, Saitama Medical University Hospital, 
Saitama, Japan.
(5)Department of Metabolism, Chiba Children 's Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(6)Diagnostics and Therapeutic of Intractable Diseases, Intractable Disease 
Research Center, Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.

Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) deficiency (OMIM#237300) is a rare 
inherited disorder due to complete or partial lack of the CPS1 enzyme. 
Polymyositis is a relatively rare systemic inflammatory autoimmune disease. 
Here, we report a 59-year-old Japanese woman diagnosed with late-onset CPS1 
deficiency during polymyositis treatment. The polymyositis appeared two years 
before the diagnosis of CPS1 deficiency. Prednisolone (PSL) at 35 mg/day initial 
dosage, promptly alleviated the symptoms. However, the patient, without apparent 
cause, suddenly developed confusion progressing to unconsciousness and coma. 
Upon admission, the patient's plasma ammonia levels were 458 μg/dL (269 μM). 
Plasma amino acid analysis revealed decreased citrulline levels and elevated 
glutamine levels. Genetic analysis of CPS1 (OMIM *608307) showed homozygosity 
for the likely pathogenic variant c.2397G > A (p.Met799Ile), leading to the 
diagnosis of CPS1 deficiency. The patient responded to pharmacotherapy and 
continuous hemodialysis. However, the patient experienced hyperammonemia 
decompensation events while on pharmacotherapy at home, which were successfully 
managed with emergency treatment and/or hemodialysis. Subsequently, after liver 
transplantation, the patient's plasma ammonia levels consistently remained at 
normal. This case illustrates late-onset CPS1 deficiency manifested in an adult 
treated with PSL for polymyositis, and the cure of its enzyme deficiency by 
live-donor liver transplantation.

© 2025 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2025.101200
PMCID: PMC11928813
PMID: 40125546

Conflict of interest statement: We have no conflicts of interest to declare.