---
reference_id: "PMID:35047842"
title: "Biallelic variants in MESD, which encodes a WNT-signaling-related protein, in four new families with recessively inherited osteogenesis imperfecta."
authors:
- Tran TT
- Keller RB
- Guillemyn B
- Pepin M
- Corteville JE
- Khatib S
- Fallah MS
- Zeinali S
- Malfait F
- Symoens S
- Coucke P
- Witters P
- Levtchenko E
- Bagherian H
- Nickerson DA
- Bamshad MJ
- Chong JX
- University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics
- Byers PH
journal: HGG Adv
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2021.100051
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic variants in MESD, which encodes a WNT-signaling-related protein, in four new families with recessively inherited osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Tran TT, Keller RB, Guillemyn B, Pepin M, Corteville JE, Khatib S, Fallah MS, Zeinali S, Malfait F, Symoens S, Coucke P, Witters P, Levtchenko E, Bagherian H, Nickerson DA, Bamshad MJ, Chong JX, University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics, Byers PH
**Journal:** HGG Adv (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xhgg.2021.100051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2021.100051)

## Content

1. HGG Adv. 2021 Aug 20;2(4):100051. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2021.100051. eCollection
 2021 Oct 14.

Biallelic variants in MESD, which encodes a WNT-signaling-related protein, in 
four new families with recessively inherited osteogenesis imperfecta.

Tran TT(1), Keller RB(2), Guillemyn B(3), Pepin M(2), Corteville JE(4), Khatib 
S(5), Fallah MS(6), Zeinali S(6)(7), Malfait F(3), Symoens S(3), Coucke P(3), 
Witters P(8), Levtchenko E(9), Bagherian H(5)(6), Nickerson DA(10), Bamshad 
MJ(10)(11), Chong JX(11); University of Washington Center for Mendelian 
Genomics; Byers PH(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(3)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Department of 
Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Reproductive Biology, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
(5)GMDC Al Quds University, P.O. Box 5100, Abu Dis, Palestine.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, 
Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur 
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Center for Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital Leuven, Department of 
Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)University Hospital Leuven, Departments of Pediatric Nephrology and 
Development and Regeneration, Leuven, Belgium.
(10)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(12)Department of Medicine (Medical Genetics), University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The bone disorder osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is genetically heterogeneous. 
Most affected individuals have an autosomal dominant disorder caused by 
heterozygous variants in either of the type I collagen genes (COL1A1 or COL1A2). 
To date, two reports have linked Mesoderm Development LRP Chaperone (MESD) to 
autosomal recessive OI type XX. Four different biallelic pathogenic variants in 
MESD were shown to cause a progressively deforming phenotype, associated with 
recurrent fractures and oligodontia in five individuals in five families. 
Recently, compound heterozygosity for a frameshift predicted to lead to a 
premature termination codon in exon 2 of the 3-exon gene and a second frameshift 
in the terminal exon in MESD were detected in three stillbirths in one family 
with severe OI consistent with the neonatal lethal phenotype. We have identified 
four additional individuals from four independent families with biallelic 
variants in MESD: the earlier reported c.632dupA (p.Lys212Glufs∗19) and c.676C>T 
(p.Arg226∗)-which are associated with a severe form of OI-and one new pathogenic 
variant, c.603-606delTAAA (p.Asn201Lysfs∗15), which causes a neonatal lethal 
form of OI. MESD acts in the WNT signaling pathway, where it is thought to play 
a role in the folding of the WNT co-receptors low-density lipoprotein 
receptor-related proteins 5 and 6 (LRP5/LRP6) and in chaperoning their transit 
to the cell surface. Our report broadens the phenotypic and genetic spectrum of 
MESD-related OI, provides additional insight into the pathogenic pathways, and 
underscores the necessity of MESD for normal WNT signaling in bone formation.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2021.100051
PMCID: PMC8756491
PMID: 35047842

Conflict of interest statement: M.J.B. is the Editor of Human Genetics and 
Genomics Advances. All other authors declare no competing interests.