---
reference_id: "PMID:35760456"
title: Novel ophthalmic findings and deep phenotyping in Williams-Beuren syndrome.
authors:
- Huryn LA
- Flaherty T
- Nolen R
- Prasov L
- Zein WM
- Cukras CA
- Osgood S
- Raja N
- Levin MD
- Vitale S
- Brooks BP
- Hufnagel RB
- Kozel BA
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2022-321103
keywords:
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Child
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- "Williams Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Elastin/genetics
- "Aortic Stenosis, Supravalvular/genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel ophthalmic findings and deep phenotyping in Williams-Beuren syndrome.
**Authors:** Huryn LA, Flaherty T, Nolen R, Prasov L, Zein WM, Cukras CA, Osgood S, Raja N, Levin MD, Vitale S, Brooks BP, Hufnagel RB, Kozel BA
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjophthalmol-2022-321103](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2022-321103)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2023 Oct;107(10):1554-1559. doi: 
10.1136/bjophthalmol-2022-321103. Epub 2022 Jun 27.

Novel ophthalmic findings and deep phenotyping in Williams-Beuren syndrome.

Huryn LA(1), Flaherty T(2), Nolen R(2), Prasov L(2)(3)(4), Zein WM(2), Cukras 
CA(5), Osgood S(6), Raja N(6), Levin MD(6), Vitale S(5), Brooks BP(2), Hufnagel 
RB(2), Kozel BA(6).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA Laryssa.huryn@nih.gov.
(2)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, W K Kellogg Eye Center, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
USA.
(5)Division of Epidemiology and Clinical Applications, National Eye Institute, 
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(6)Translational Vascular Medicine Branch, National Heart Lung and Blood 
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: To characterise the ocular manifestations of Williams-Beuren 
syndrome (WBS) and compare these to patients with isolated elastin mediated 
supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS).
METHODS: Fifty-seven patients with a diagnosis of WBS and five with SVAS 
underwent comprehensive ophthalmic evaluation at the National Institutes of 
Health from 2017 to 2020, including best-corrected visual acuity, slit-lamp 
biomicroscopy, optical biometry, dilated fundus examination, optical coherence 
tomography and colour fundus imaging.
RESULTS: Mean age of the 57 WBS patients was 20.3 years (range 3-60 years). 
Best-corrected visual acuity ranged from 20/20 to 20/400 with mean spherical 
equivalent near plano OU. Twenty-four eyes (21.8%) had an axial length (AL) less 
than 20.5 mm and 38 eyes (34.5%) had an AL measuring 20.5-22.0 mm. Stellate iris 
and retinal arteriolar tortuosity were noted in 30 (52.6%) and 51 (89.5%) WBS 
patients, respectively. Novel retinal findings in WBS included small 
hypopigmented retinal deposits (OD 29/57, OS 27/57) and broad foveal pit contour 
(OD 44/55, OS 42/51). Of the five patients with SVAS, none had stellate iris or 
broad foveal pit contour while 2/5 had retinal arteriolar tortuosity.
CONCLUSION: WBS is a complex multisystem genetic disorder with diverse 
ophthalmic findings that differ from those seen in isolated elastin mediated 
SVAS. These results suggest other genes within the WBS critical region, aside 
from ELN, may be involved in observed ocular phenotypes and perhaps broader 
ocular development. Furthermore, retinal arteriolar tortuosity may provide 
future insight into systemic vascular findings in WBS.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2022-321103
PMCID: PMC10074447
PMID: 35760456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.