---
reference_id: "PMID:25611507"
title: "The roles of PINK1, parkin, and mitochondrial fidelity in Parkinson's disease."
authors:
- Pickrell AM
- Youle RJ
journal: Neuron
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The roles of PINK1, parkin, and mitochondrial fidelity in Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Pickrell AM, Youle RJ
**Journal:** Neuron (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.007)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2015 Jan 21;85(2):257-73. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.007.

The roles of PINK1, parkin, and mitochondrial fidelity in Parkinson's disease.

Pickrell AM(1), Youle RJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Section, Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Biochemistry Section, Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
Electronic address: youler@ninds.nih.gov.

Understanding the function of genes mutated in hereditary forms of Parkinson's 
disease yields insight into disease etiology and reveals new pathways in cell 
biology. Although mutations or variants in many genes increase the 
susceptibility to Parkinson's disease, only a handful of monogenic causes of 
parkinsonism have been identified. Biochemical and genetic studies reveal that 
the products of two genes that are mutated in autosomal recessive parkinsonism, 
PINK1 and Parkin, normally work together in the same pathway to govern 
mitochondrial quality control, bolstering previous evidence that mitochondrial 
damage is involved in Parkinson's disease. PINK1 accumulates on the outer 
membrane of damaged mitochondria, activates Parkin's E3 ubiquitin ligase 
activity, and recruits Parkin to the dysfunctional mitochondrion. Then, Parkin 
ubiquitinates outer mitochondrial membrane proteins to trigger selective 
autophagy. This review covers the normal functions that PINK1 and Parkin play 
within cells, their molecular mechanisms of action, and the pathophysiological 
consequences of their loss.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.007
PMCID: PMC4764997
PMID: 25611507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]