---
reference_id: "PMID:12185667"
title: Islet abnormalities in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diabetes.
authors:
- Rosmalen JG
- Leenen PJ
- Pelegri C
- Drexhage HA
- Homo-Delarche F
journal: Trends Endocrinol Metab
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s1043-2760(02)00600-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Islet abnormalities in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diabetes.
**Authors:** Rosmalen JG, Leenen PJ, Pelegri C, Drexhage HA, Homo-Delarche F
**Journal:** Trends Endocrinol Metab (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1043-2760(02)00600-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1043-2760(02)00600-8)

## Content

1. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jul;13(5):209-14. doi: 
10.1016/s1043-2760(02)00600-8.

Islet abnormalities in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diabetes.

Rosmalen JG(1), Leenen PJ, Pelegri C, Drexhage HA, Homo-Delarche F.

Author information:
(1)Dept Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus is a T-cell-mediated autoimmune disease that results in 
the destruction of the insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreatic islets of 
Langerhans. In spite of extensive genetic and immunological studies, mainly 
performed in the non-obese diabetic (NOD) spontaneous mouse model, the etiology 
of the autoimmune attack remains unknown. Several autoantigens have been 
identified and numerous studies have suggested a role for defective regulation 
of immune function. However, this account does not explain why the autoimmune 
process specifically affects the insulin-producing beta cells. Thus, abnormal 
immune regulation might explain the predisposition to autoimmunity in general, 
but additional factors should then determine the target of the autoimmune 
attack. Here, we review the evidence that abnormalities in islet cell 
differentiation and function exist that might trigger the immune system towards 
beta-cell autoimmunity in humans and NOD mice.

DOI: 10.1016/s1043-2760(02)00600-8
PMID: 12185667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]