---
reference_id: "PMID:34403134"
title: "A Practical, Evidence-informed Approach to Managing Stimulant-Refractory Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)."
authors:
- Cortese S
- Newcorn JH
- Coghill D
journal: CNS Drugs
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s40263-021-00848-3
keywords:
- "Adrenergic Uptake Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Adrenergic alpha-2 Receptor Agonists/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Atomoxetine Hydrochloride/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Central Nervous System Stimulants/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Clonidine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Dextroamphetamine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Drug Resistance/drug effects, physiology"
- Empirical Research
- Humans
- "Methylphenidate/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Practical, Evidence-informed Approach to Managing Stimulant-Refractory Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
**Authors:** Cortese S, Newcorn JH, Coghill D
**Journal:** CNS Drugs (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40263-021-00848-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-021-00848-3)

## Content

1. CNS Drugs. 2021 Oct;35(10):1035-1051. doi: 10.1007/s40263-021-00848-3. Epub
2021  Aug 17.

A Practical, Evidence-informed Approach to Managing Stimulant-Refractory
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).

Cortese S(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Newcorn JH(6), Coghill D(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Centre for Innovation in Mental Health (CIMH), Faculty
of Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Highfield Campus,
Building 44, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK. samuele.cortese@soton.ac.uk.
(2)Clinical and Experimental Sciences (CNS and Psychiatry), Faculty of Medicine,
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. samuele.cortese@soton.ac.uk.
(3)Solent NHS Trust, Southampton, UK. samuele.cortese@soton.ac.uk.
(4)Hassenfeld Children's Hospital at NYU Langone, New York University Child
Study Center, New York, NY, USA. samuele.cortese@soton.ac.uk.
(5)Division of Psychiatry and Applied Psychology, School of Medicine, University
of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. samuele.cortese@soton.ac.uk.
(6)Division of ADHD and Learning Disorders, Departments of Psychiatry and
Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(8)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(9)The Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Stimulants (methylphenidate or amphetamines) are the recommended first-line
option for the pharmacological treatment of individuals with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). However, some patients with ADHD will not respond
optimally to stimulants. Here, we discuss strategies to manage
stimulant-refractory ADHD, based on the recommendations advanced in clinical
guidelines, knowledge of expert practice in the field, and our own clinical
recommendations, informed by a comprehensive literature search in PubMed,
PsycInfo, EMBASE + EMBASE classic, OVID Medline, and Web of Science (up to 30
March 2021). We first highlight the importance of stimulant optimization as an
effective strategy to increase response. We then discuss a series of factors
that should be considered before using alternative pharmacological strategies
for ADHD, including poor adherence, time action properties of stimulants (and
wearing-off of effects), poor tolerability (that prevents the use of higher,
more effective doses), excessive focus on or confounding from presence of
comorbid non-ADHD symptoms, and tolerance. Finally, we consider the role of
non-stimulants and combined pharmacological approaches. While the choice of
medication for ADHD is still to a large extent based on a trial-and-error
process, there are reasonably accepted data and guidelines to aid in clinical
decision-making. It is hoped that advances in precision psychiatry in the years
ahead will further guide prescribers to tailor medication choice to the specific
characteristics of the patient.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40263-021-00848-3
PMID: 34403134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
