---
reference_id: "PMID:23499310"
title: WNT1 mutations in families affected by moderately severe and progressive recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Pyott SM
- Tran TT
- Leistritz DF
- Pepin MG
- Mendelsohn NJ
- Temme RT
- Fernandez BA
- Elsayed SM
- Elsobky E
- Verma I
- Nair S
- Turner EH
- Smith JD
- Jarvik GP
- Byers PH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.009
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Wnt1 Protein/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WNT1 mutations in families affected by moderately severe and progressive recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Pyott SM, Tran TT, Leistritz DF, Pepin MG, Mendelsohn NJ, Temme RT, Fernandez BA, Elsayed SM, Elsobky E, Verma I, Nair S, Turner EH, Smith JD, Jarvik GP, Byers PH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.009)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Apr 4;92(4):590-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.009. Epub 
2013 Mar 14.

WNT1 mutations in families affected by moderately severe and progressive 
recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.

Pyott SM(1), Tran TT, Leistritz DF, Pepin MG, Mendelsohn NJ, Temme RT, Fernandez 
BA, Elsayed SM, Elsobky E, Verma I, Nair S, Turner EH, Smith JD, Jarvik GP, 
Byers PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7470, 
USA. shawnap@uw.edu

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable disorder that ranges in severity 
from death in the perinatal period to an increased lifetime risk of fracture. 
Mutations in COL1A1 and COL1A2, which encode the chains of type I procollagen, 
result in dominant forms of OI, and mutations in several other genes result in 
recessive forms of OI. Here, we describe four recessive-OI-affected families in 
which we identified causative mutations in wingless-type MMTV integration site 
family 1 (WNT1). In family 1, we identified a homozygous missense mutation by 
exome sequencing. In family 2, we identified a homozygous nonsense mutation 
predicted to produce truncated WNT1. In family 3, we found a nonsense mutation 
and a single-nucleotide duplication on different alleles, and in family 4, we 
found a homozygous 14 bp deletion. The mutations in families 3 and 4 are 
predicted to result in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and the absence of WNT1. 
WNT1 is a secreted signaling protein that binds the frizzled receptor (FZD) and 
the coreceptor low-density lipoprotein-receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5). 
Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in LRP5 result in recessive 
osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome with low bone mass, whereas heterozygous 
gain-of-function mutations result in van Buchem disease with elevated bone 
density. Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in WNT1 result in a recessive 
clinical picture that includes bone fragility with a moderately severe and 
progressive presentation that is not easily distinguished from dominant OI type 
III.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.02.009
PMCID: PMC3617391
PMID: 23499310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]