---
reference_id: "PMID:24198067"
title: "The Yersinia pestis type III secretion system: expression, assembly and role in the evasion of host defenses."
authors:
- Plano GV
- Schesser K
journal: Immunol Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s12026-013-8454-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Bacterial Proteins/metabolism
- Bacterial Secretion Systems/physiology
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Bacterial"
- Host-Pathogen Interactions/immunology
- Humans
- "Plague/immunology, metabolism, microbiology"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Transport
- Signal Transduction
- Yersinia pestis/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Yersinia pestis type III secretion system: expression, assembly and role in the evasion of host defenses.
**Authors:** Plano GV, Schesser K
**Journal:** Immunol Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12026-013-8454-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12026-013-8454-3)

## Content

1. Immunol Res. 2013 Dec;57(1-3):237-45. doi: 10.1007/s12026-013-8454-3.

The Yersinia pestis type III secretion system: expression, assembly and role in
the evasion of host defenses.

Plano GV(1), Schesser K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami Miller School
of Medicine, 1600 NW 10th Avenue, Miami, FL, 33136, USA, gplano@med.miami.edu.

Yersinia pestis, the etiologic agent of plague, utilizes a type III secretion
system (T3SS) to subvert the defenses of its mammalian hosts. T3SSs are complex
nanomachines that allow bacterial pathogens to directly inject effector proteins
into eukaryotic cells. The Y. pestis T3SS is not expressed during transit
through the flea vector, but T3SS gene expression is rapidly thermoinduced upon
entry into a mammalian host. Assembly of the T3S apparatus is a highly
coordinated process that requires the homo- and hetero-oligomerization over 20
Yersinia secretion (Ysc) proteins, several assembly intermediates and the T3S
process to complete the assembly of the rod and external needle structures. The
activation of effector secretion is controlled by the YopN/TyeA/SycN/YscB
complex, YscF and LcrG in response to extracellular calcium and/or contact with
a eukaryotic cell. Cell contact triggers the T3S process including the secretion
and assembly of a pore-forming translocon complex that facilitates the
translocation of effector proteins, termed Yersinia outer proteins (Yops),
across the eukaryotic membrane. Within the host cell, the Yop effector proteins
function to inhibit bacterial phagocytosis and to suppress the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-013-8454-3
PMID: 24198067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
