---
reference_id: "PMID:37816841"
title: "Congenital laryngo-tracheo-esophageal clefts: updates from a quaternary care pediatric airway unit."
authors:
- Ishii A
- Christophel E
- Chollet M
- Sandu K
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-023-08263-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital laryngo-tracheo-esophageal clefts: updates from a quaternary care pediatric airway unit.
**Authors:** Ishii A, Christophel E, Chollet M, Sandu K
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-023-08263-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-023-08263-8)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2024 Jan;281(1):283-294. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-023-08263-8. Epub 2023 Oct 11.

Congenital laryngo-tracheo-esophageal clefts: updates from a quaternary care 
pediatric airway unit.

Ishii A(1), Christophel E(2), Chollet M(2), Sandu K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Anaesthesia, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 
Switzerland. kishore.sandu@chuv.ch.

PURPOSE: To review the operative techniques, outcomes, and complications 
following surgery in pediatric patients with laryngo-tracheo-esophageal clefts 
(LTEC). We describe a new combined approach to treat long LTECs.
METHODS: Twenty-five patients underwent surgical repair for LTEC from March 2012 
to July 2022 at our hospital. Every patient underwent a diagnostic endoscopy 
under general anesthesia and spontaneous ventilation to assess the LTEC and 
synchronous aero-digestive comorbidities/malformations. All patients underwent 
at least one surveillance endoscopy after the repair at our institution.
RESULTS: The patients had multiple other malformations, specifically 
gastro-intestinal, synchronous airway, and cardiac. The cleft distribution 
according to the modified Benjamin and Inglis classification was type I (n = 5, 
20%), type II (n = 6, 24%), type IIIa (n = 8, 32%), type IIIb (n = 4, 16%), and 
type IVa (n = 2, 8%). The median follow-up was 44.6 months. Five patients (20%) 
had undergone previous cleft corrective surgery(s). Seven patients (28%) had 
partial to complete breakdown of the repair, needing additional intervention(s), 
and two required a combined-open plus endoscopic repair. Preoperatively, most 
patients (n = 18, 72%) needed a feeding assistance. At latest follow-up, feeding 
assistance was weaned off in 13 out of 18 patients, which was a 72% improvement. 
Ten patients (40%) needed ventilation assistance before the surgery. 
Post-operatively, ventilatory assistance was weaned off in 6 patients, meaning a 
60% improvement.
CONCLUSION: LTEC are rare malformations, and their management needs precise 
diagnosis, appropriate surgical planning, and execution, and dedicated 
post-operative care. Primary and revision repair of long clefts with tracheal 
extension may require a combined approach.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-023-08263-8
PMCID: PMC10764377
PMID: 37816841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors do not have competing interests to 
disclose.