---
reference_id: "PMID:35544637"
title: First-degree atrioventricular block in 14-year-old child due to Lyme disease.
authors:
- Lytvyn H
- Basa N
- Slivinska-Kurchak K
- Avramenko I
journal: J Infect Dev Ctries
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3855/jidc.15071
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First-degree atrioventricular block in 14-year-old child due to Lyme disease.
**Authors:** Lytvyn H, Basa N, Slivinska-Kurchak K, Avramenko I
**Journal:** J Infect Dev Ctries (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3855/jidc.15071](https://doi.org/10.3855/jidc.15071)

## Content

1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2022 Apr 30;16(4):726-728. doi: 10.3855/jidc.15071.

First-degree atrioventricular block in 14-year-old child due to Lyme disease.

Lytvyn H(1), Basa N(2), Slivinska-Kurchak K(3), Avramenko I(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Danylo Halytsky Lviv National 
Medical University, Lviv, Ukraine.
(2)Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Danylo Halytsky Lviv National 
Medical University, Communal Noncommercial Enterprise of Lviv Regional Council 
Lviv Regional Infectious Diseases Hospital, Lviv, Ukraine. 
natella.apfel@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology FPGE, Danylo Halytsky Lviv National 
Medical University,Communal Nonprofit Enterprise" Lviv First Territorial Medical 
Union", separate Enterprise" Hospital of St. Niсholas", Lviv, Ukraine.
(4)Department of Propaedeutic Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Danylo Halytsky 
Lviv National Medical University, Communal Noncommercial Enterprise of Lviv 
Regional Council Lviv Regional Children's Clinical Hospital "Ohmatdyt", Lviv, 
Ukraine.

Lyme disease is an infectious disease caused by bacteria of the Borrelia 
burgdorferi sensu lato (Bbsl) complex and is characterized by predominant 
lesions of the skin, cardiovascular system, nervous system and musculoskeletal 
system. We have described a clinical case of first-degree atrioventricular block 
in a 14-year-old boy caused by Lyme borreliosis. The disease started with the 
manifestations of cardiovascular system involvement. The patient and his parents 
did not recall observing a tick bite or manifestation of erythema migrans (EM). 
The boy was prescribed doxycycline. Three weeks after antibiotic therapy a 
second ECG examination was performed and showed no abnormalities.

Copyright (c) 2022 Halyna Lytvyn, Natella Basa, Khrystyna Slivinska-Kurchak, 
Iryna Avramenko.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.15071
PMID: 35544637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No Conflict of Interest is declared