---
reference_id: "PMID:37172092"
title: Genetics of mirror movements identifies a multifunctional complex required for Netrin-1 guidance and lateralization of motor control.
authors:
- Schlienger S
- Yam PT
- Balekoglu N
- Ducuing H
- Michaud JF
- Makihara S
- Kramer DK
- Chen B
- Fasano A
- Berardelli A
- Hamdan FF
- Rouleau GA
- Srour M
- Charron F
journal: Sci Adv
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.add5501
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- DCC Receptor/genetics
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Nerve Growth Factors/metabolism
- Netrin-1/genetics
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics, metabolism"
- Axons/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of mirror movements identifies a multifunctional complex required for Netrin-1 guidance and lateralization of motor control.
**Authors:** Schlienger S, Yam PT, Balekoglu N, Ducuing H, Michaud JF, Makihara S, Kramer DK, Chen B, Fasano A, Berardelli A, Hamdan FF, Rouleau GA, Srour M, Charron F
**Journal:** Sci Adv (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1126/sciadv.add5501](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.add5501)

## Content

1. Sci Adv. 2023 May 12;9(19):eadd5501. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.add5501. Epub 2023
May  12.

Genetics of mirror movements identifies a multifunctional complex required for 
Netrin-1 guidance and lateralization of motor control.

Schlienger S(1)(2), Yam PT(1), Balekoglu N(1)(3), Ducuing H(1), Michaud JF(1), 
Makihara S(1)(3), Kramer DK(4), Chen B(4), Fasano A(5)(6)(7), Berardelli 
A(8)(9), Hamdan FF(10), Rouleau GA(10)(11), Srour M(12)(13)(14), Charron 
F(1)(2)(3)(15).

Author information:
(1)Montreal Clinical Research Institute (IRCM), 110 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, 
QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Division of Experimental Medicine, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 0G4, Canada.
(3)Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, 
Canada.
(4)Roy J. Carver Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 
Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
(5)Edmond J. Safra Program in Parkinson's Disease, Morton and Gloria Shulman 
Movement Disorders Clinic, Toronto Western Hospital, UHN, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Division of Neurology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Krembil Brain Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli (IS), Italy.
(9)Department of Human Neurosciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(10)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, CHU Sainte-Justine 
and University of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T1C5, Canada.
(11)Department of Human Genetics, Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(12)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC 
H3A 2B4, Canada.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada.
(14)McGill University Health Center Research Institute, Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, 
Canada.
(15)Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T 1J4, 
Canada.

Mirror movements (MM) disorder is characterized by involuntary movements on one 
side of the body that mirror intentional movements on the opposite side. We 
performed genetic characterization of a family with autosomal dominant MM and 
identified ARHGEF7, a RhoGEF, as a candidate MM gene. We found that Arhgef7 and 
its partner Git1 bind directly to Dcc. Dcc is the receptor for Netrin-1, an axon 
guidance cue that attracts commissural axons to the midline, promoting the 
midline crossing of axon tracts. We show that Arhgef7 and Git1 are required for 
Netrin-1-mediated axon guidance and act as a multifunctional effector complex. 
Arhgef7/Git1 activates Rac1 and Cdc42 and inhibits Arf1 downstream of Netrin-1. 
Furthermore, Arhgef7/Git1, via Arf1, mediates the Netrin-1-induced increase in 
cell surface Dcc. Mice heterozygous for Arhgef7 have defects in commissural axon 
trajectories and increased symmetrical paw placements during skilled walking, a 
MM-like phenotype. Thus, we have delineated how ARHGEF7 mutation causes MM.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.add5501
PMCID: PMC10181192
PMID: 37172092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]