---
reference_id: "PMID:37062251"
title: Regulatory factors involved in Th17/Treg cell balance of immune thrombocytopenia.
authors:
- Kargar M
- Torabizadeh M
- Purrahman D
- Zayeri ZD
- Saki N
journal: Curr Res Transl Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.retram.2023.103389
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulatory factors involved in Th17/Treg cell balance of immune thrombocytopenia.
**Authors:** Kargar M, Torabizadeh M, Purrahman D, Zayeri ZD, Saki N
**Journal:** Curr Res Transl Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.retram.2023.103389](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retram.2023.103389)

## Content

1. Curr Res Transl Med. 2023 Apr-Jun;71(2):103389. doi: 
10.1016/j.retram.2023.103389. Epub 2023 Apr 5.

Regulatory factors involved in Th17/Treg cell balance of immune 
thrombocytopenia.

Kargar M(1), Torabizadeh M(2), Purrahman D(1), Zayeri ZD(2), Saki N(3).

Author information:
(1)Thalassemia & Hemoglobinopathy Research Center, Health Research Institute, 
Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(2)Golestan Hospital Clinical Research Development Unit, Ahvaz Jundishapur 
University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(3)Thalassemia & Hemoglobinopathy Research Center, Health Research Institute, 
Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran. Electronic 
address: najmaldinsaki@gmail.com.

Immune thrombocytopenia is a common heterogeneous autoimmune disease that is 
characterized by decreasing peripheral blood platelet counts and increasing risk 
of bleeding. Studies have shown that an imbalance between T helper 17 (Th17) and 
Regulatory T (Treg) cells differentiated from CD4+T-cells is a key factor 
influencing the development and pathogenesis of immune thrombocytopenia. Th17 
cells promote the development of chronic inflammatory disorders and induce 
autoimmune diseases, whereas Treg cells regulate immune homeostasis and prevent 
autoimmune diseases. Several regulators affecting the production and maintenance 
of these cells are also essential for proper regulation of Th17/Treg balance; 
these regulatory factors include cell surface proteins, miRNAs, and cytokine 
signaling. In this review, we focus on the function and role of balance between 
Th17 and Treg cells in immune thrombocytopenia, the regulatory factors, and 
therapeutic goals of this balance in immune thrombocytopenia.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.retram.2023.103389
PMID: 37062251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]