---
reference_id: PMID:26228362
title: Framework for interpretation of trypsin-antitrypsin imbalance and genetic heterogeneity in pancreatitis.
authors:
- Lin K
- Gao F
- Chen Q
- Liu Q
- Chen S
journal: Saudi J Gastroenterol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.4103/1319-3767.161643
keywords:
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Pancreatitis/etiology, pathology"
- Trypsin/physiology
- Trypsinogen/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Framework for interpretation of trypsin-antitrypsin imbalance and genetic heterogeneity in pancreatitis.
**Authors:** Lin K, Gao F, Chen Q, Liu Q, Chen S
**Journal:** Saudi J Gastroenterol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.4103/1319-3767.161643](https://doi.org/10.4103/1319-3767.161643)

## Content

1. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 2015 Jul-Aug;21(4):198-207. doi: 
10.4103/1319-3767.161643.

Framework for interpretation of trypsin-antitrypsin imbalance and genetic 
heterogeneity in pancreatitis.

Lin K, Gao F(1), Chen Q, Liu Q, Chen S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Fuzhou, China.

Early intracellular premature trypsinogen activation was interpreted as the key 
initiator of pancreatitis. When the balance in the homeostasis of trypsin and 
antitrypsin system is disequilibrated, elevated aggressive enzymes directly 
attack the pancreatic tissue, which leads to pancreatic destruction and 
inflammation. However, trypsin alone is not enough to cause complications in 
pancreatitis, which may play a crucial role in modulating signaling events in 
the initial phase of the disease. NFκB activation is the major inflammatory 
pathway involved in the occurrence and development of pancreatitis and it can be 
induced by intrapancreatic activation of trypsinogen. Synthesis of trypsinogen 
occurs in endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and ER stress is an important early acinar 
cell event. Components of ER stress response are known to be able to trigger 
cell death as well as NFκB signaling cascade. The strongest evidence supporting 
the trypsin-centered theory is that gene mutations, which lead to the generation 
of more trypsin, or reduce the activity of trypsin inhibitors or trypsin 
degradation, are associated with pancreatitis. Thus, trypsin-antitrypsin 
imbalance may be the first step leading to pancreatic autodigestion and inducing 
other pathways. Continued experimental studies are necessary to determine the 
specific relationships between trypsin-antitrypsin imbalance and genetic 
heterogeneity in pancreatitis. In this article, we review the latest advances 
that contributed to the understanding of the basic mechanisms behind the 
occurrence and development of pancreatitis with a focus on the interpretation of 
trypsin-antitrypsin imbalance and their relationships with other inflammation 
pathways. We additionally highlight genetic predispositions to pancreatitis and 
possible mechanisms associated with them.

DOI: 10.4103/1319-3767.161643
PMCID: PMC4542417
PMID: 26228362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.