---
reference_id: "PMID:27101632"
title: "Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: the added value of cytology."
authors:
- Roelens M
- Dossier C
- Fenneteau O
- Couque N
- Da Costa L
journal: Ann Biol Clin (Paris)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1684/abc.2016.1136
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: the added value of cytology.
**Authors:** Roelens M, Dossier C, Fenneteau O, Couque N, Da Costa L
**Journal:** Ann Biol Clin (Paris) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1684/abc.2016.1136](https://doi.org/10.1684/abc.2016.1136)

## Content

1. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2016 Jun 1;74(3):299-305. doi: 10.1684/abc.2016.1136.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: the added value of cytology.

[Article in English]

Roelens M(1), Dossier C(2), Fenneteau O(1), Couque N(3), Da Costa L(4).

Author information:
(1)Service d'hématologie biologique, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(2)Service de néphrologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, 
France.
(3)Département de génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(4)Service d'hématologie biologique, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France, 
Université Paris 7-Denis Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, Inserm 
U1149, CRI, Faculté de médecine Bichat Claude Bernard, Paris, France, 
Laboratoire d'Excellence, GR-Ex, Paris, France.

We report the case of a 2 year-old boy hospitalized into the emergency room for 
influenza pneumonia infection. The evolution was marked by a respiratory 
distress syndrome, a severe hemolytic anemia, associated with thrombocytopenia 
and kidney failure. First, a diagnosis of hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) has 
been judiciously suggested due to the classical triad: kidney failure, hemolytic 
anemia and thrombocytopenia. But, strikingly, blood smears do not exhibit 
schizocytes, but instead ghosts and hemighosts, some characteristic features of 
a glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Our hypothesis has been 
confirmed by enzymatic dosage and molecular biology. The unusual initial 
aplastic feature of this anemia could be the result of a transient 
erythroblastopenia due to the viral agent, at the origin of the G6PD crisis on a 
background of a major erythrocyte anti-oxydant enzyme defect. This case of G6PD 
defect points out the continuously importance of the cytology, which was able to 
redirect the diagnosis by the hemighost and ghost detection.

DOI: 10.1684/abc.2016.1136
PMID: 27101632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]