---
reference_id: "PMID:11552003"
title: "Stiff person syndrome: quantification, specificity, and intrathecal synthesis of GAD65 antibodies."
authors:
- Dalakas MC
- Li M
- Fujii M
- Jacobowitz DM
journal: Neurology
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.57.5.780
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stiff person syndrome: quantification, specificity, and intrathecal synthesis of GAD65 antibodies.
**Authors:** Dalakas MC, Li M, Fujii M, Jacobowitz DM
**Journal:** Neurology (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.57.5.780](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.57.5.780)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2001 Sep 11;57(5):780-4. doi: 10.1212/wnl.57.5.780.

Stiff person syndrome: quantification, specificity, and intrathecal synthesis of 
GAD65 antibodies.

Dalakas MC(1), Li M, Fujii M, Jacobowitz DM.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Diseases Section, National Institute of Neurological Diseases 
and Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-1382, USA. dalakasm@ninds.nih.gov

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the specificity of anti-GAD(65) antibodies in 
patients with stiff person syndrome (SPS), quantify antibody titers, and examine 
antibody production within the CNS.
METHODS: The authors studied 18 patients with SPS and positive serum 
immunoreactivity to gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic neurons. The reactivity 
of serum and CSF to purified GAD antigen was examined by Western blots, and the 
anti-GAD(65) antibody titers in serum and CSF were quantified by ELISA and 
compared with 70 disease controls (49 with other autoimmune disorders and 11 
with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus). The intrathecal synthesis of 
anti-GAD(65) IgG was calculated, and the functional significance of the 
antibodies was examined by measuring the GABA levels in the CSF.
RESULTS: The serum and CSF of all selected patients with SPS had high 
anti-GAD(65) titers (from 7.0 to 215 microg/mL in serum and from 92 to 2500 
ng/mL in CSF) and immunoreacted strongly with recombinant GAD(65) on Western 
blots and with GABA-ergic neurons on rat cerebellum. Among controls, only the 
serum of eight patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus had low 
anti-GAD(65) antibody titers (from 200 to 1760 ng/mL) but no reactivity to 
recombinant GAD(65). The CSF showed oligoclonal IgG bands in 10 (67%) of 15 
patients and an increased anti-GAD(65)-specific IgG index in 11 (85%) of 13. The 
mean level of GABA in the CSF was lower in patients with SPS than in controls.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with SPS, there is marked intrathecal antibody response 
against neuronal GAD(65) epitopes, indicating a clonal B cell activation in the 
CNS. Anti-GAD(65) antibodies at high titers, when confirmed with immunoblots, 
are highly specific for SPS and appear to impair GABA synthesis.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.57.5.780
PMID: 11552003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]