---
reference_id: "PMID:11103877"
title: Animal models for the negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
authors:
- Ellenbroek BA
- Cools AR
journal: Behav Pharmacol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1097/00008877-200006000-00006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Animal models for the negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Ellenbroek BA, Cools AR
**Journal:** Behav Pharmacol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00008877-200006000-00006](https://doi.org/10.1097/00008877-200006000-00006)

## Content

1. Behav Pharmacol. 2000 Jun;11(3-4):223-33. doi:
10.1097/00008877-200006000-00006.

Animal models for the negative symptoms of schizophrenia.

Ellenbroek BA(1), Cools AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychoneuropharmacology, University of Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. A.Ellenbroek@pnf.kun.nl

Negative or defect symptoms refer to a reduction in normal functioning. In 
schizophrenia, negative symptoms encompass, among others, anhedonia, flat 
affect, avolition and social withdrawal. These symptoms have been found to be 
particularly prominent in the more chronic phase of the illness and seem to be 
virtually insensitive to current antipsychotic treatment. This review focuses on 
the possibilities and limitations of animal models for the negative symptoms of 
schizophrenia. Following a review of the negative symptoms in schizophrenia, 
attention is focused on the two symptoms most often modelled in animals - 
anhedonia and social withdrawal. We then look at the important question of how 
to model schizophrenic pathology in animals. Since the exact pathology is still 
far from clear, most efforts have in the past concentrated on using 
psychotomimetic drugs such as amphetamine or phencyclidine. The recently 
accumulated knowledge that schizophrenia probably results from disturbances in 
the normal development of the brain has led to a surge of new animal models in 
which the long-term consequences of early manipulations are investigated. 
However, so far these models have predominantly concentrated on the positive 
rather than the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. The last part of this review 
is dedicated to the question of validation of animal models for anhedonia and 
social withdrawal. The general conclusion is that very few models have so far 
been adequately tested. The lack of currently effective treatment further 
hampers the study of such validation.

DOI: 10.1097/00008877-200006000-00006
PMID: 11103877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]