---
reference_id: "PMID:26830867"
title: "Follicular vitiligo: A report of 8 cases."
authors:
- Gan EY
- Cario-André M
- Pain C
- Goussot JF
- Taïeb A
- Seneschal J
- Ezzedine K
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2015.12.049
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Biopsy
- Child
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Epidermis/pathology
- Hair Color
- Hair Follicle/pathology
- Humans
- Male
- Melanocytes/pathology
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Vitiligo/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Follicular vitiligo: A report of 8 cases.
**Authors:** Gan EY, Cario-André M, Pain C, Goussot JF, Taïeb A, Seneschal J, Ezzedine K
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2015.12.049](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2015.12.049)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016 Jun;74(6):1178-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2015.12.049. 
Epub 2016 Jan 30.

Follicular vitiligo: A report of 8 cases.

Gan EY(1), Cario-André M(2), Pain C(2), Goussot JF(3), Taïeb A(4), Seneschal 
J(4), Ezzedine K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Pediatric Dermatology, National Center for Rare 
Skin Disorders, Hôpital Pellegrin-Enfants and Hôpital Saint André, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France; National Skin 
Center, Singapore. Electronic address: emily.ganyp@gmail.com.
(2)Inserm U1035, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(3)Department of Pathology, Hôpital Haut-Lévêque, Pessac, France.
(4)Department of Dermatology and Pediatric Dermatology, National Center for Rare 
Skin Disorders, Hôpital Pellegrin-Enfants and Hôpital Saint André, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France; Inserm U1035, 
University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND: Follicular vitiligo, a recently proposed new subtype of vitiligo, 
has primary involvement of the hair follicle melanocytic reservoir.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to characterize follicular vitiligo through a case series 
of 8 patients.
METHODS: Patients with features of follicular vitiligo who were seen at the 
vitiligo clinic in the National Center for Rare Skin Disorders in Bordeaux, 
France, were recruited. A retrospective review of case records and clinical 
photographs was carried out.
RESULTS: There were 8 male patients with a mean age of 48 years. All patients 
reported significant whitening of their body and, in some, scalp hairs before 
cutaneous depigmentation. Examination revealed classic generalized depigmented 
lesions of vitiligo and an impressive presence of leukotrichia, not only in the 
vitiliginous areas, but also in areas with clinically normal-appearing skin. 
Punch biopsy specimen of the leukotrichia and vitiligo lesions demonstrated loss 
of melanocytes and precursors in the basal epidermis and hair follicle.
LIMITATIONS: This was a cross-sectional study based on a single-center 
experience.
CONCLUSION: Follicular vitiligo is a distinct entity within the spectrum of 
vitiligo. This entity may serve as the missing link between alopecia areata and 
vitiligo, with probable physiopathological similarities between these 
conditions.

Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2015.12.049
PMID: 26830867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]