---
reference_id: "PMID:32173230"
title: Prevalence and Impact of Aphasia among Patients Admitted with Acute Ischemic Stroke.
authors:
- Wu C
- Qin Y
- Lin Z
- Yi X
- Wei X
- Ruan Y
- He J
journal: J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.104764
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Aphasia/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality, therapy"
- "Brain Ischemia/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality, therapy"
- China/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Databases, Factual"
- Female
- Hospital Mortality
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Patient Admission
- Prevalence
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- "Stroke/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality, therapy"
- Time Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and Impact of Aphasia among Patients Admitted with Acute Ischemic Stroke.
**Authors:** Wu C, Qin Y, Lin Z, Yi X, Wei X, Ruan Y, He J
**Journal:** J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.104764](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.104764)

## Content

1. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2020 May;29(5):104764. doi:
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.104764. Epub 2020 Mar 12.

Prevalence and Impact of Aphasia among Patients Admitted with Acute Ischemic
Stroke.

Wu C(1), Qin Y(1), Lin Z(1), Yi X(2), Wei X(3), Ruan Y(1), He J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Statistics, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida.
(3)Department of cardiology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond,
Virginia.
(4)Department of Health Statistics, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China, Shanghai, China; Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. Electronic address: hejia63@yeah.net.

OBJECTIVE: Aphasia is one of the most severe symptoms in stroke patients,
affecting one-third of acute stroke patients. We aimed to investigate the
prevalence and outcomes of aphasia in patients with acute ischemic stroke (AIS).
METHODS: We computed the weighted prevalence of aphasia in AIS patients using
the 2003 to 2014 National Inpatient Sample databases. Crude regression model,
multivariable regression model, and propensity score matching were used to
evaluate the impact of aphasia on the clinical outcomes in AIS patients. We
performed the Subpopulation Treatment Effect Pattern Plot (STEPP) analyses in
propensity score matching cohort to visually display the effect of interaction
between aphasia and age on the clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: A total of 16.93% of 4,339,156 AIS patients identified were with
aphasia. The proportion of patients with comorbid aphasia increased from 13.34%
in 2003 to 21.94% in 2014 (P < .0001). The results of both multivariable
regression model and propensity score matching analyses indicated aphasia in AIS
as a risk factor for in-hospital deaths. Aphasia was linked to prolonged length
of stay (0.66 day, P < .0001) and high hospitalization cost ($971.35, P <
.0001). In the STEPP analyses, in-hospital mortality rate increased with age,
and the rate was higher in patients with aphasia, but the ratios decreased with
an increase in age.
CONCLUSIONS: Prevalence of comorbid aphasia with AIS is increasing, and it has a
significant impact on clinical outcomes. Additionally, aphasia shows a greater
impact on survival and medical burden among young patients with AIS.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2020.104764
PMID: 32173230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.