---
reference_id: "PMID:9598892"
title: Cutaneous vasculitis in a defined population--clinical and epidemiological associations.
authors:
- Watts RA
- Jolliffe VA
- Grattan CE
- Elliott J
- Lockwood M
- Scott DG
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '1998'
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Antinuclear/analysis"
- Female
- "Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis/epidemiology, immunology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- "Skin Diseases, Vascular/classification, epidemiology, immunology"
- "Vasculitis/classification, epidemiology, immunology"
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/epidemiology, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous vasculitis in a defined population--clinical and epidemiological associations.
**Authors:** Watts RA, Jolliffe VA, Grattan CE, Elliott J, Lockwood M, Scott DG
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (1998)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 1998 May;25(5):920-4.

Cutaneous vasculitis in a defined population--clinical and epidemiological
associations.

Watts RA(1), Jolliffe VA, Grattan CE, Elliott J, Lockwood M, Scott DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Ipswich Hospital, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the value of the American College of Rheumatology (ACR)
1990 criteria for Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) and hypersensitivity vasculitis
(HSV) and the Chapel Hill Consensus Conference (CHCC) definition of cutaneous
leukocytoclastic angiitis (CLA) in the classification of cutaneous vasculitis
and to estimate the annual incidence of biopsy proven cutaneous vasculitis in a
well defined population.
METHODS: ACR criteria for HSP and HSV and the CHCC definition for CLA and HSP
were applied to an unselected cohort of 84 patients with biopsy proven cutaneous
vasculitis attending a single district hospital in the United Kingdom between
January 1990 and December 1994.
RESULTS: Thirty-seven patients fulfilled ACR criteria for HSV, of whom 27 also
fulfilled the ACR criteria for HSP. Thirty-two patients met the CHCC definition
for CLA and 7 the CHCC definition for HSP. The overall annual incidence of
cutaneous vasculitis was 38.6/million (95% CI 30.6-48.1), and for CLA
15.4/million (95% CI 10.6-21.8).
CONCLUSION: The ACR 1990 criteria for HSP and HSV overlap; the CHCC definitions
for CLA and HSP provide clearer distinction. Cutaneous vasculitis is as common
as systemic vasculitis.

PMID: 9598892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
