---
reference_id: "PMID:38438911"
title: "Peutz-Jeghers syndrome with polyps in the stomach, duodenum, and small and large intestine: a case report."
authors:
- Shah ZA
- Zeb M
- Ilyas M
- Hamid H
- Fatima K
- Batool M
- Abbas M
journal: J Med Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13256-023-04335-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers syndrome with polyps in the stomach, duodenum, and small and large intestine: a case report.
**Authors:** Shah ZA, Zeb M, Ilyas M, Hamid H, Fatima K, Batool M, Abbas M
**Journal:** J Med Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13256-023-04335-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13256-023-04335-9)

## Content

1. J Med Case Rep. 2024 Mar 5;18(1):86. doi: 10.1186/s13256-023-04335-9.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome with polyps in the stomach, duodenum, and small and large 
intestine: a case report.

Shah ZA(1), Zeb M(2), Ilyas M(1), Hamid H(1), Fatima K(1), Batool M(1), Abbas 
M(3).

Author information:
(1)Hayatabad Medical Complex Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(2)General Surgery, Hayatabad Medical Complex, Peshawar, Pakistan. 
drmzeb@gmail.com.
(3)General Surgery, Hayatabad Medical Complex, Peshawar, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is a rare hereditary condition characterized 
by gastrointestinal polyps and pigmented oral lesions. The case contributes to a 
deeper understanding of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and underscores the significance 
of interdisciplinary collaboration for accurate diagnosis and tailored 
therapeutic strategies.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We present a case of a 15-year-old Afghan female patient with 
multiple polyps throughout the gastrointestinal tract and mucocutaneous 
pigmentation. Despite previous medical visits and colonoscopies, her symptoms 
persisted. A multidisciplinary team discussed the case and recommended further 
investigations and interventions. A polypectomy was performed, confirming the 
presence of hamartomatous polyps. The patient was diagnosed with Peutz-Jeghers 
syndrome, but during the course of treatment she went through complications and 
was managed surgically as well.
CONCLUSION: Timely polyp removal and lifelong surveillance are crucial in 
managing Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Further research and genetic analysis are 
needed to improve understanding and management of this rare disorder.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-023-04335-9
PMCID: PMC10913253
PMID: 38438911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests.