---
reference_id: "PMID:25439696"
title: International Myeloma Working Group updated criteria for the diagnosis of multiple myeloma.
authors:
- Rajkumar SV
- Dimopoulos MA
- Palumbo A
- Blade J
- Merlini G
- Mateos MV
- Kumar S
- Hillengass J
- Kastritis E
- Richardson P
- Landgren O
- Paiva B
- Dispenzieri A
- Weiss B
- LeLeu X
- Zweegman S
- Lonial S
- Rosinol L
- Zamagni E
- Jagannath S
- Sezer O
- Kristinsson SY
- Caers J
- Usmani SZ
- Lahuerta JJ
- Johnsen HE
- Beksac M
- Cavo M
- Goldschmidt H
- Terpos E
- Kyle RA
- Anderson KC
- Durie BG
- Miguel JF
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70442-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# International Myeloma Working Group updated criteria for the diagnosis of multiple myeloma.
**Authors:** Rajkumar SV, Dimopoulos MA, Palumbo A, Blade J, Merlini G, Mateos MV, Kumar S, Hillengass J, Kastritis E, Richardson P, Landgren O, Paiva B, Dispenzieri A, Weiss B, LeLeu X, Zweegman S, Lonial S, Rosinol L, Zamagni E, Jagannath S, Sezer O, Kristinsson SY, Caers J, Usmani SZ, Lahuerta JJ, Johnsen HE, Beksac M, Cavo M, Goldschmidt H, Terpos E, Kyle RA, Anderson KC, Durie BG, Miguel JF
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70442-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70442-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2014 Nov;15(12):e538-48. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70442-5.
Epub  2014 Oct 26.

International Myeloma Working Group updated criteria for the diagnosis of 
multiple myeloma.

Rajkumar SV(1), Dimopoulos MA(2), Palumbo A(3), Blade J(4), Merlini G(5), Mateos 
MV(6), Kumar S(7), Hillengass J(8), Kastritis E(2), Richardson P(9), Landgren 
O(10), Paiva B(11), Dispenzieri A(7), Weiss B(12), LeLeu X(13), Zweegman S(14), 
Lonial S(15), Rosinol L(4), Zamagni E(16), Jagannath S(17), Sezer O(18), 
Kristinsson SY(19), Caers J(20), Usmani SZ(21), Lahuerta JJ(22), Johnsen HE(23), 
Beksac M(24), Cavo M(16), Goldschmidt H(8), Terpos E(2), Kyle RA(7), Anderson 
KC(9), Durie BG(25), Miguel JF(11).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Electronic address: 
rajkumar.vincent@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Clinical Therapeutics, University of Athens, School of 
Medicine, Athens, Greece.
(3)Myeloma Unit, Division of Hematology, University of Torino, Azienda 
Ospedaliero-Universitaria Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Torino, 
Italy.
(4)Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Amyloidosis Center, University Hospital Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(6)University Hospital of Salamanca/IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain.
(7)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(8)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Rheumatology, University of 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(9)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(10)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(11)Clinica Universidad de Navarra, Centro de Investigacion Medica Aplicada 
(CIMA), Pamplona, Spain.
(12)Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(13)University Hospital of Lille, Lille, France.
(14)Department of Hematology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(15)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, 
Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(16)Seràgnoli Institute of Hematology, Bologna University School of Medicine, 
Bologna, Italy.
(17)Mount Sinai Cancer Institute, New York, NY, USA.
(18)Memorial Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(19)Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(20)Department of Hematology, CHU de Liege, Liege, Belgium.
(21)Levine Cancer Institute, Carolinas HealthCare System, Charlotte, NC, USA.
(22)Servicio de Hematología, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, 
Spain.
(23)Department of Haematology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(24)Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
(25)Cedars-Sinai Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

This International Myeloma Working Group consensus updates the disease 
definition of multiple myeloma to include validated biomarkers in addition to 
existing requirements of attributable CRAB features (hypercalcaemia, renal 
failure, anaemia, and bone lesions). These changes are based on the 
identification of biomarkers associated with near inevitable development of CRAB 
features in patients who would otherwise be regarded as having smouldering 
multiple myeloma. A delay in application of the label of multiple myeloma and 
postponement of therapy could be detrimental to these patients. In addition to 
this change, we clarify and update the underlying laboratory and radiographic 
variables that fulfil the criteria for the presence of myeloma-defining CRAB 
features, and the histological and monoclonal protein requirements for the 
disease diagnosis. Finally, we provide specific metrics that new biomarkers 
should meet for inclusion in the disease definition. The International Myeloma 
Working Group recommends the implementation of these criteria in routine 
practice and in future clinical trials, and recommends that future studies 
analyse any differences in outcome that might occur as a result of the new 
disease definition.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70442-5
PMID: 25439696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]