---
reference_id: "PMID:24978195"
title: Pathophysiology of empty nose syndrome.
authors:
- Sozansky J
- Houser SM
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/lary.24813
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of empty nose syndrome.
**Authors:** Sozansky J, Houser SM
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.24813](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.24813)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2015 Jan;125(1):70-4. doi: 10.1002/lary.24813. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Pathophysiology of empty nose syndrome.

Sozansky J(1), Houser SM.

Author information:
(1)Northeast Ohio Medical University, Rootstown, Ohio.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: To review current knowledge on nasal airflow sensation in 
relation to empty nose syndrome (ENS).
STUDY DESIGN: PubMed searches.
METHODS: Current literature pertaining to measurement of nasal patency, 
mechanism of sensory perception of nasal airflow, and ENS.
RESULTS: A reliance on pure anatomical analysis of the anatomy in ENS falls 
short of explaining the disorder. Our understanding of subjective nasal 
sensation has advanced, as has our understanding of the flow of air through the 
nose. Neural healing following a surgical insult may not result in a return to a 
normal physiologic state. Aberrations in neurosensory systems from improper 
healing may play a major role in the abnormal sensations ENS patients 
experience.
CONCLUSIONS: An evidence-based hypothesis for the development and symptoms of 
ENS is offered.

© 2014 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.24813
PMID: 24978195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]