---
reference_id: "PMID:20587963"
title: "Dental management of oculodentodigital dysplasia: a case report."
authors:
- Aminabadi NA
- Pourkazemi M
- Oskouei SG
- Jamali Z
journal: J Oral Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.2334/josnusd.52.337
keywords:
- Child
- Comprehensive Dental Care
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics, pathology"
- Dental Caries/therapy
- Dental Enamel Hypoplasia/therapy
- Dental Pulp Capping
- "Dental Restoration, Permanent"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Odontodysplasia/therapy
- Patient Care Planning
- Pulpitis/therapy
- Root Canal Therapy
- Tooth Abnormalities/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dental management of oculodentodigital dysplasia: a case report.
**Authors:** Aminabadi NA, Pourkazemi M, Oskouei SG, Jamali Z
**Journal:** J Oral Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.2334/josnusd.52.337](https://doi.org/10.2334/josnusd.52.337)

## Content

1. J Oral Sci. 2010 Jun;52(2):337-42. doi: 10.2334/josnusd.52.337.

Dental management of oculodentodigital dysplasia: a case report.

Aminabadi NA(1), Pourkazemi M, Oskouei SG, Jamali Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Tabriz University
(Medical Sciences), Tabriz, Iran. aslaminabadi@gmail.com

Oculodentodigital dysplasia is an extremely rare autosomal dominant pleiotropic
disorder. The syndrome is characterized by abnormal facial features, central
nervous system involvement, syndactyly and clinodactyly of fourth and fifth
fingers, dry and lusterless hair, generalized enamel hypoplasia and
odontodysplasia. Combination of odontodysplasia, poor oral hygiene, and parental
neglect can lead to extensive destruction of tooth structure and the treatment
options become limited. Early diagnosis with a proper treatment plan and
meticulous oral hygiene program helps eliminate the necessity of multiple tooth
extractions. This case report describes the comprehensive dental treatment aimed
at rehabilitation of function and aesthetics of the dentition in an 8-year-old
boy with oculodentodigital dysplasia.

DOI: 10.2334/josnusd.52.337
PMID: 20587963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
