---
reference_id: "PMID:40736256"
title: Mutations differentially affecting the coronavirus Mac1 ADP-ribose binding and hydrolysis activities indicate that it promotes multiple stages of the viral replication cycle.
authors:
- "O'Connor JJ"
- Roy A
- Khattabi R
- Kerr C
- Schwarting N
- Alhammad YM
- Gao P
- Zhang X
- Deng X
- Fehr AR
journal: J Virol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1128/jvi.00623-25
keywords:
- Virus Replication/genetics
- Adenosine Diphosphate Ribose/metabolism
- Animals
- Mutation
- Mice
- Hydrolysis
- Humans
- "Viral Nonstructural Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- Macrophages/virology
- Cell Line
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations differentially affecting the coronavirus Mac1 ADP-ribose binding and hydrolysis activities indicate that it promotes multiple stages of the viral replication cycle.
**Authors:** O'Connor JJ, Roy A, Khattabi R, Kerr C, Schwarting N, Alhammad YM, Gao P, Zhang X, Deng X, Fehr AR
**Journal:** J Virol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jvi.00623-25](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.00623-25)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2025 Aug 19;99(8):e0062325. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00623-25. Epub 2025 Jul
30.

Mutations differentially affecting the coronavirus Mac1 ADP-ribose binding and
hydrolysis activities indicate that it promotes multiple stages of the viral
replication cycle.

O'Connor JJ(1), Roy A(2), Khattabi R(1), Kerr C(1), Schwarting N(1), Alhammad
YM(1), Gao P(3), Zhang X(4), Deng X(4)(5), Fehr AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas,
USA.
(2)Infectious Disease Assay Development (IDAD) Core, University of Kansas,
Lawrence, Kansas, USA.
(3)Molecular Structures Group, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA.
(4)Department of Physiological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA.
(5)Oklahoma Center for Respiratory and Infectious Diseases, Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA.

All coronaviruses (CoVs) encode a conserved macrodomain, termed Mac1, in
non-structural protein 3 (nsp3) that binds and hydrolyzes ADP-ribose covalently
attached to proteins. Mac1 is a key virulence factor that counters antiviral
ADP-ribosyltransferase (PARP) activity. Previously, we found that MHV strain JHM
(JHMV) with a mutation in the adenine binding site, JHMV-D1329A, was extremely
attenuated in all tested cell types as opposed to JHMV-N1347A, which only has a
replication defect in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs). Interestingly, an
N1347A/D1329A double mutant was unrecoverable, indicating an essential role for
Mac1 in JHMV infection. We hypothesized that these mutations may impact
different stages of the MHV life cycle. First, to clarify how these mutations
affected the biochemical activities of Mac1, we generated Mac1 proteins encoding
the same mutations. As expected, the D-A mutation was extremely defective in
ADP-ribose binding but maintained enzyme activity. In contrast, we previously
found that the N-A mutation had WT levels of ADP-ribose binding but low enzyme
activity, confirming that these mutations differentially affect the biochemical
functions of Mac1. Following infection, D1329A displayed a large defect in the
accumulation of viral RNA compared to WT or N1347A in all cells tested.
Alternatively, N1347A infection produced normal levels of viral RNA but produced
reduced levels of viral protein in interferon-competent bone marrow-derived
macrophages (BMDMs). These results suggest that Mac1 ADP-ribose binding and
enzymatic activities promote different stages of the viral life cycle,
demonstrating the critical importance of Mac1 for JHMV replication.
IMPORTANCE: Over the last three decades, coronaviruses have repeatedly
demonstrated their potential to become significant veterinary and public health
threats. Zoonotic transmission of the myriad known coronavirus strains will
remain a concern, regardless of the advances in vaccines and treatment. One
difficulty in anticipating the next coronavirus outbreak is its diverse lineage
and high propensity for mutation and recombination. The coronavirus macrodomain,
Mac1, is conserved among all known coronaviruses and is also conserved in the
Togaviridae and Hepeviridae families. Mac1 is a key factor in viral replication
and pathogenesis, but its role in the replication cycle remains unclear. A
deeper investigation of Mac1 function will identify conserved antiviral
mechanisms and aid in the development of Mac1 inhibitors that represent a novel
strategy for antiviral therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00623-25
PMCID: PMC12363162
PMID: 40736256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
