---
reference_id: "PMID:36129975"
title: Organoid-on-a-chip model of human ARPKD reveals mechanosensing pathomechanisms for drug discovery.
authors:
- Hiratsuka K
- Miyoshi T
- Kroll KT
- Gupta NR
- Valerius MT
- Ferrante T
- Yamashita M
- Lewis JA
- Morizane R
journal: Sci Adv
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abq0866
keywords:
- Drug Discovery
- "Drugs, Investigational"
- Humans
- Lab-On-A-Chip Devices
- Organoids/metabolism
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Recessive/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Organoid-on-a-chip model of human ARPKD reveals mechanosensing pathomechanisms for drug discovery.
**Authors:** Hiratsuka K, Miyoshi T, Kroll KT, Gupta NR, Valerius MT, Ferrante T, Yamashita M, Lewis JA, Morizane R
**Journal:** Sci Adv (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1126/sciadv.abq0866](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abq0866)

## Content

1. Sci Adv. 2022 Sep 23;8(38):eabq0866. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abq0866. Epub 2022
Sep  21.

Organoid-on-a-chip model of human ARPKD reveals mechanosensing pathomechanisms
for drug discovery.

Hiratsuka K(1)(2)(3)(4), Miyoshi T(4), Kroll KT(3), Gupta NR(1)(2)(4)(5),
Valerius MT(2)(4)(5), Ferrante T(3), Yamashita M(6), Lewis JA(3)(5), Morizane
R(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences and Wyss Institute
for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Division of Renal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Harvard Stem Cell Institute (HSCI), Cambridge, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Organoids serve as a novel tool for disease modeling in three-dimensional
multicellular contexts. Static organoids, however, lack the requisite
biophysical microenvironment such as fluid flow, limiting their ability to
faithfully recapitulate disease pathology. Here, we unite organoids with
organ-on-a-chip technology to unravel disease pathology and develop therapies
for autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. PKHD1-mutant
organoids-on-a-chip are subjected to flow that induces clinically relevant
phenotypes of distal nephron dilatation. Transcriptomics discover 229 signal
pathways that are not identified by static models. Mechanosensing molecules,
RAC1 and FOS, are identified as potential therapeutic targets and validated by
patient kidney samples. On the basis of this insight, we tested two U.S. Food
and Drug Administration-approved and one investigational new drugs that target
RAC1 and FOS in our organoid-on-a-chip model, which suppressed cyst formation.
Our observations highlight the vast potential of organoid-on-a-chip models to
elucidate complex disease mechanisms for therapeutic testing and discovery.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abq0866
PMCID: PMC9491724
PMID: 36129975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
