---
reference_id: "PMID:26929321"
title: High-throughput small molecule screen identifies inhibitors of aberrant chromatin accessibility.
authors:
- Pattenden SG
- Simon JM
- Wali A
- Jayakody CN
- Troutman J
- McFadden AW
- Wooten J
- Wood CC
- Frye SV
- Janzen WP
- Davis IJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1521827113
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Agents/isolation & purification, pharmacology"
- Bone Neoplasms/pathology
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Chromatin/drug effects, ultrastructure"
- Drug Design
- "Drug Evaluation, Preclinical"
- High-Throughput Screening Assays/methods
- "Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors/isolation & purification, pharmacology"
- Histones/metabolism
- Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells
- Humans
- Hydroxamic Acids/pharmacology
- Indoles/pharmacology
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Nucleosomes/ultrastructure
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Panobinostat
- Phenylbutyrates/pharmacology
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/pathology"
- Small Molecule Libraries
- "Transcription, Genetic/drug effects"
- Vorinostat
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High-throughput small molecule screen identifies inhibitors of aberrant chromatin accessibility.
**Authors:** Pattenden SG, Simon JM, Wali A, Jayakody CN, Troutman J, McFadden AW, Wooten J, Wood CC, Frye SV, Janzen WP, Davis IJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1521827113](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1521827113)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Mar 15;113(11):3018-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1521827113. Epub 2016 Feb 29.

High-throughput small molecule screen identifies inhibitors of aberrant
chromatin accessibility.

Pattenden SG(1), Simon JM(2), Wali A(3), Jayakody CN(1), Troutman J(4), McFadden
AW(5), Wooten J(3), Wood CC(1), Frye SV(1), Janzen WP(1), Davis IJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27302; Division of Chemical
Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27302;
(2)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599; Curriculum in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599;
(3)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599; Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599;
(4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Department of Pediatrics,
School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599;
(5)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599;
(6)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599; Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Carolina Center for Genome
Sciences, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 ian_davis@med.unc.edu.

Mutations in chromatin-modifying proteins and transcription factors are commonly
associated with a wide variety of cancers. Through gain- or loss-of-function,
these mutations may result in characteristic alterations of accessible
chromatin, indicative of shifts in the landscape of regulatory elements
genome-wide. The identification of compounds that reverse a specific chromatin
signature could lead to chemical probes or potential therapies. To explore
whether chromatin accessibility could serve as a platform for small molecule
screening, we adapted formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements
(FAIRE), a chemical method to enrich for nucleosome-depleted genomic regions, as
a high-throughput, automated assay. After demonstrating the validity and
robustness of this approach, we applied this method to screen an epigenetically
targeted small molecule library by evaluating regions of aberrant nucleosome
depletion mediated by EWSR1-FLI1, the chimeric transcription factor critical for
the bone and soft tissue tumor Ewing sarcoma. As a class, histone deacetylase
inhibitors were greatly overrepresented among active compounds. These compounds
resulted in diminished accessibility at targeted sites by disrupting
transcription of EWSR1-FLI1. Capitalizing on precise differences in chromatin
accessibility for drug discovery efforts offers significant advantages because
it does not depend on the a priori selection of a single molecular target and
may detect novel biologically relevant pathways.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1521827113
PMCID: PMC4801272
PMID: 26929321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
