---
reference_id: "PMID:38063134"
title: An open-pore MFI zeolite nanosheet-modified separator with Li-ion flux regulation for lithium-metal batteries.
authors:
- Zhai Y
- Wu Y
- Sheng J
- Liu H
- Huang Z
- Xiao Q
- Li L
journal: Chem Commun (Camb)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1039/d3cc05702j
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An open-pore MFI zeolite nanosheet-modified separator with Li-ion flux regulation for lithium-metal batteries.
**Authors:** Zhai Y, Wu Y, Sheng J, Liu H, Huang Z, Xiao Q, Li L
**Journal:** Chem Commun (Camb) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1039/d3cc05702j](https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cc05702j)

## Content

1. Chem Commun (Camb). 2024 Jan 2;60(3):324-327. doi: 10.1039/d3cc05702j.

An open-pore MFI zeolite nanosheet-modified separator with Li-ion flux 
regulation for lithium-metal batteries.

Zhai Y(1)(2), Wu Y(1), Sheng J(3), Liu H(1), Huang Z(1), Xiao Q(4), Li L(1).

Author information:
(1)Jiaxing Key Laboratory of Molecular Recognition and Sensing, College of 
Biological, Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Jiaxing University, Jiaxing, 
314001, China. liuhaiqing@mail.zjxu.edu.cn.
(2)Research Center for Analysis and Measurement, Jiaxing University, Jiaxing, 
314001, China.
(3)College of Materials and Textile Engineering, Jiaxing University, Jiaxing, 
314001, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Advanced Catalysis Materials, 
Institute of Advanced Fluorine-Containing Materials, Zhejiang Normal University, 
Jinhua, 321004, China. xiaoq@zjnu.edu.cn.

Separator modification has become one of the most facile and promising methods 
to inhibit Li dendrite formation. Herein, an open-pore MFI zeolite 
nanosheet-modified polyacrylonitrile (open-pore MFI NSs@PAN) separator was 
prepared via the combination of vacuum filtration and the electrospinning 
technique. The straight channels in the MFI NSs, the fluid channels formed by 
the stacking of the MFI NSs and the interconnected network channels formed by 
the interweaving of the PAN nanofibers jointly constructed a micro/nano pore 
structure, which provides sufficient Li+ transport channels and enables uniform 
Li+ flux. Consequently, the open-pore MFI NSs@PAN separator-based cell delivers 
a stable and uniform Li deposition, demonstrating a more stable cycle-life and 
better rate capability. Redistributing Li+ flux through straight channel zeolite 
nanosheets provides a powerful method for suppressing Li dendrites, presenting 
enormous potential for promoting the commercial application of lithium metal 
batteries.

DOI: 10.1039/d3cc05702j
PMID: 38063134