---
reference_id: "PMID:26150484"
title: In vitro modeling of hyperpigmentation associated to neurofibromatosis type 1 using melanocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells.
authors:
- Allouche J
- Bellon N
- Saidani M
- Stanchina-Chatrousse L
- Masson Y
- Patwardhan A
- Gilles-Marsens F
- Delevoye C
- Domingues S
- Nissan X
- Martinat C
- Lemaitre G
- Peschanski M
- Baldeschi C
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1501032112
keywords:
- Cell Proliferation
- Cyclic AMP/metabolism
- Embryonic Stem Cells/cytology
- Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases/metabolism
- Humans
- Hyperpigmentation/pathology
- Melanins/metabolism
- "Melanocytes/enzymology, metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation/genetics
- Neurofibromatosis 1/pathology
- Neurofibromin 1/genetics
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Small Interfering/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vitro modeling of hyperpigmentation associated to neurofibromatosis type 1 using melanocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells.
**Authors:** Allouche J, Bellon N, Saidani M, Stanchina-Chatrousse L, Masson Y, Patwardhan A, Gilles-Marsens F, Delevoye C, Domingues S, Nissan X, Martinat C, Lemaitre G, Peschanski M, Baldeschi C
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1501032112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1501032112)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 21;112(29):9034-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1501032112. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

In vitro modeling of hyperpigmentation associated to neurofibromatosis type 1
using melanocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells.

Allouche J(1), Bellon N(2), Saidani M(3), Stanchina-Chatrousse L(3), Masson
Y(3), Patwardhan A(4), Gilles-Marsens F(4), Delevoye C(5), Domingues S(3),
Nissan X(3), Martinat C(1), Lemaitre G(1), Peschanski M(1), Baldeschi C(6).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U-861, Institut des cellules Souches pour le Traitement et l'Etude des
Maladies monogéniques (I-Stem), Association Française contre les Myopathies
(AFM), 91030 Evry Cedex, France; Université d'Evry Val d'Essonne (UEVE) U-861,
I-Stem, AFM, 91030 Evry Cedex, France;
(2)Department of Dermatology, Reference Center for Dermatologic Diseases, Paris
Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, 75015 Paris, France; Centre d'Etude
des Cellules Souches (CECS), I-Stem, AFM, 91030 Evry Cedex, France; Instiute
Imagine, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, 75015 Paris, France;
(3)Centre d'Etude des Cellules Souches (CECS), I-Stem, AFM, 91030 Evry Cedex,
France;
(4)Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University, F-75248 Paris,
France; Structure and Membrane Compartments, CNRS UMR 144, F-75248 Paris,
France;
(5)Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University, F-75248 Paris,
France; Structure and Membrane Compartments, CNRS UMR 144, F-75248 Paris,
France; Cell and Tissue Imaging Facility, CNRS UMR 144, F-75248 Paris, France.
(6)INSERM U-861, Institut des cellules Souches pour le Traitement et l'Etude des
Maladies monogéniques (I-Stem), Association Française contre les Myopathies
(AFM), 91030 Evry Cedex, France; Université d'Evry Val d'Essonne (UEVE) U-861,
I-Stem, AFM, 91030 Evry Cedex, France; cbaldeschi@istem.fr.

Comment in
    Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2016 Jan;29(1):4-5. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12423.

"Café-au-lait" macules (CALMs) and overall skin hyperpigmentation are early
hallmarks of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). One of the most frequent monogenic
diseases, NF1 has subsequently been characterized with numerous benign Schwann
cell-derived tumors. It is well established that neurofibromin, the NF1 gene
product, is an antioncogene that down-regulates the RAS oncogene. In contrast,
the molecular mechanisms associated with alteration of skin pigmentation have
remained elusive. We have reassessed this issue by differentiating human
embryonic stem cells into melanocytes. In the present study, we demonstrate that
NF1 melanocytes reproduce the hyperpigmentation phenotype in vitro, and further
characterize the link between loss of heterozygosity and the typical CALMs that
appear over the general hyperpigmentation. Molecular mechanisms associated with
these pathological phenotypes correlate with an increased activity of
cAMP-mediated PKA and ERK1/2 signaling pathways, leading to overexpression of
the transcription factor MITF and of the melanogenic enzymes tyrosinase and
dopachrome tautomerase, all major players in melanogenesis. Finally, the
hyperpigmentation phenotype can be rescued using specific inhibitors of these
signaling pathways. These results open avenues for deciphering the pathological
mechanisms involved in pigmentation diseases, and provide a robust assay for the
development of new strategies for treating these diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1501032112
PMCID: PMC4517235
PMID: 26150484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
