---
reference_id: "PMID:25813151"
title: The clinicopathological significance of ALK rearrangements and KRAS and EGFR mutations in primary pulmonary mucinous adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Qu Y
- Che N
- Zhao D
- Zhang C
- Su D
- Zhou L
- Zhang L
- Wang C
- Zhang H
- Wei L
journal: Tumour Biol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3331-4
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- Adenocarcinoma of Lung
- "Adenocarcinoma, Mucinous/genetics, pathology"
- Adult
- Aged
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- ras Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinicopathological significance of ALK rearrangements and KRAS and EGFR mutations in primary pulmonary mucinous adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Qu Y, Che N, Zhao D, Zhang C, Su D, Zhou L, Zhang L, Wang C, Zhang H, Wei L
**Journal:** Tumour Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13277-015-3331-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13277-015-3331-4)

## Content

1. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug;36(8):6417-24. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3331-4. Epub 2015
 Mar 28.

The clinicopathological significance of ALK rearrangements and KRAS and EGFR
mutations in primary pulmonary mucinous adenocarcinoma.

Qu Y(1), Che N, Zhao D, Zhang C, Su D, Zhou L, Zhang L, Wang C, Zhang H, Wei L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The General Hospital of People's Liberation Army,
28# Fuxing Road, Haidian District, Beijing, 100853, China.

Primary pulmonary mucinous adenocarcinoma (PPMA) is one of the important
subtypes of lung adenocarcinoma. Detection of anaplastic lymphoma receptor
tyrosine kinase (ALK) rearrangements and of KRAS and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutations will help in diagnosing and predicting treatment
outcome. The aim of this study was to investigate the clinicopathological
significance of ALK rearrangements, KRAS and EGFR mutations in PPMA. ALK
expression was detected immunohistochemically. KRAS and EGFR mutations were
determined by the amplification refractory mutation system. Seventy-three
patients of PPMA were enrolled. ALK rearrangements were detected in 34.2 % of
patients and were more frequent in upper/middle lobe, stage III-IV, lymphatic
permeation-positive patients and non-smokers. ALK rearrangements were
significantly increased in the solid tumor predominant with mucin production
subtype, and in special tissue structures, including signet ring cells,
cribriform, and micropapillary patterns. KRAS mutations were observed in 23.3 %
of patients and were more prevalent in invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma and
lower lobe tumors. Only one case of ALK rearrangements harbored KRAS mutation,
and no cases manifested with the coexistence of ALK rearrangements and EGFR
mutations. KRAS and EGFR co-mutation was detected in one case. PPMA patients
with ALK rearrangements or KRAS mutation represent a unique subtype in NSCLC.
The results provide basis data for target therapy screening of PPMA patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-3331-4
PMID: 25813151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
