---
reference_id: PMID:38768529
title: Ketogenic diet modifies ribosomal protein dysregulation in KMT2D Kabuki syndrome.
authors:
- Tsang E
- Han VX
- Flutter C
- Alshammery S
- Keating BA
- Williams T
- Gloss BS
- Graham ME
- Aryamanesh N
- Pang I
- Wong M
- Winlaw D
- Cardamone M
- Mohammad S
- Gold W
- Patel S
- Dale RC
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2024.105156
keywords:
- "Diet, Ketogenic"
- "Vestibular Diseases/genetics, metabolism, diet therapy"
- Humans
- Face/abnormalities
- Male
- "Hematologic Diseases/metabolism, genetics, etiology, diet therapy"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ribosomal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- Proteomics/methods
- Female
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Mutation
- Transcriptome
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ketogenic diet modifies ribosomal protein dysregulation in KMT2D Kabuki syndrome.
**Authors:** Tsang E, Han VX, Flutter C, Alshammery S, Keating BA, Williams T, Gloss BS, Graham ME, Aryamanesh N, Pang I, Wong M, Winlaw D, Cardamone M, Mohammad S, Gold W, Patel S, Dale RC
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2024.105156](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2024.105156)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2024 Jun;104:105156. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2024.105156. Epub 2024
 May 19.

Ketogenic diet modifies ribosomal protein dysregulation in KMT2D Kabuki 
syndrome.

Tsang E(1), Han VX(2), Flutter C(3), Alshammery S(1), Keating BA(4), Williams 
T(5), Gloss BS(6), Graham ME(7), Aryamanesh N(8), Pang I(9), Wong M(10), Winlaw 
D(11), Cardamone M(12), Mohammad S(1), Gold W(13), Patel S(1), Dale RC(14).

Author information:
(1)Kids Neuroscience Centre, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia; The Children's 
Hospital at Westmead Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Kids Neuroscience Centre, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia; Khoo Teck 
Puat-National University Children's Medical Institute, National University 
Health System, Singapore, Singapore; Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin 
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(3)The Kabuki Syndrome Foundation - Volunteer, Northbrook, IL, USA.
(4)Kids Neuroscience Centre, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(5)Kids Rehab, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(6)Westmead Research Hub, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, Westmead, 
NSW, Australia.
(7)Biomedical Proteomics, Children's Medical Research Institute, The University 
of Sydney, Australia.
(8)Bioinformatics Group, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia; School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(9)Bioinformatics Group, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(10)The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW, Australia.
(11)Heart Centre, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago and 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, USA.
(12)Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, NSW, Australia; School of Clinical 
Medicine, University of New South Wales, NSW, Australia.
(13)School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University 
of Sydney, NSW, Australia; Molecular Neurobiology Research Laboratory, Kids 
Research, The Children's Hospital at Westmead & the Children's Medical Research 
Institute, NSW, Australia.
(14)Kids Neuroscience Centre, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia; The Children's 
Hospital at Westmead Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; The Brain and Mind Centre, The University of 
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic address: 
russell.dale@health.nsw.gov.au.

BACKGROUND: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a genetic disorder caused by DNA mutations 
in KMT2D, a lysine methyltransferase that methylates histones and other 
proteins, and therefore modifies chromatin structure and subsequent gene 
expression. Ketones, derived from the ketogenic diet, are histone deacetylase 
inhibitors that can 'open' chromatin and encourage gene expression. Preclinical 
studies have shown that the ketogenic diet rescues hippocampal memory 
neurogenesis in mice with KS via the epigenetic effects of ketones.
METHODS: Single-cell RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry-based proteomics were 
used to explore molecular mechanisms of disease in individuals with KS (n = 4) 
versus controls (n = 4).
FINDINGS: Pathway enrichment analysis indicated that loss of function mutations 
in KMT2D are associated with ribosomal protein dysregulation at an RNA and 
protein level in individuals with KS (FDR <0.05). Cellular proteomics also 
identified immune dysregulation and increased abundance of other lysine 
modification and histone binding proteins, representing a potential compensatory 
mechanism. A 12-year-old boy with KS, suffering from recurrent episodes of 
cognitive decline, exhibited improved cognitive function and neuropsychological 
assessment performance after 12 months on the ketogenic diet, with concomitant 
improvement in transcriptomic ribosomal protein dysregulation.
INTERPRETATION: Our data reveals that lysine methyltransferase deficiency is 
associated with ribosomal protein dysfunction, with secondary immune 
dysregulation. Diet and the production of bioactive molecules such as ketone 
bodies serve as a significant environmental factor that can induce epigenetic 
changes and improve clinical outcomes. Integrating transcriptomic, proteomic, 
and clinical data can define mechanisms of disease and treatment effects in 
individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders.
FUNDING: This study was supported by the Dale NHMRC Investigator Grant 
(APP1193648) (R.D), Petre Foundation (R.D), and The Sydney Children's Hospital 
Foundation/Kids Research Early and Mid-Career Researcher Grant (E.T).

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2024.105156
PMCID: PMC11134553
PMID: 38768529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors report no 
competing interests.