---
reference_id: "PMID:15734872"
title: Genetic association between a lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase (PTPN22) and type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Zheng W
- She JX
journal: Diabetes
year: '2005'
doi: 10.2337/diabetes.54.3.906
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic association between a lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase (PTPN22) and type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Zheng W, She JX
**Journal:** Diabetes (2005)
**DOI:** [10.2337/diabetes.54.3.906](https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.54.3.906)

## Content

1. Diabetes. 2005 Mar;54(3):906-8. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.54.3.906.

Genetic association between a lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase (PTPN22) and type 1 
diabetes.

Zheng W(1), She JX.

Author information:
(1)Medical College of Georgia, Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, 
1120 15th St., PV6B108, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

The lymphoid-specific phosphatase (LYP) encoded by PTPN22 is involved in 
preventing spontaneous T-cell activation by dephosphorylating and inactivating 
T-cell receptor-associated Csk kinase. We have genotyped 396 type 1 diabetic 
patients and 1,178 control subjects of Caucasian descent from north central 
Florida and report a strong association between type 1 diabetes and a 
polymorphism (R620W) in the PTPN22 gene. The homozygous genotype for the T 
allele encoding the 620W residue is associated with an increased risk for 
developing type 1 diabetes (odds ratio [OR] = 3.4, P < 0.008), and the 
heterozygous genotype C/T had an OR of 1.7 (P = 6 x 10(-6)). The C/C homozygous 
genotype is protective against type 1 diabetes (OR = 0.5, P = 6 x 10(-6)). 
Furthermore, transmission disequilibrium analysis of 410 affected sibpair and 
simplex families of Caucasian descent indicated that the type 1 
diabetes-associated T allele is transmitted more often (57.2%) than randomly 
expected (P < 0.003). Together with previous reports of the association between 
PTPN22 and type 1 diabetes, as well as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus 
erythematosus, these results provide compelling evidence that LYP is a critical 
player in multiple autoimmune disorders.

DOI: 10.2337/diabetes.54.3.906
PMID: 15734872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]