---
reference_id: "PMID:23578821"
title: Analysis of TFAP2A mutations in Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome indicates functional complexity within the AP-2α DNA-binding domain.
authors:
- Li H
- Sheridan R
- Williams T
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt173
keywords:
- "Branchio-Oto-Renal Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "DNA/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Eye/pathology
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Mutagenesis
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- "Transcription Factor AP-2/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of TFAP2A mutations in Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome indicates functional complexity within the AP-2α DNA-binding domain.
**Authors:** Li H, Sheridan R, Williams T
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt173](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt173)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Aug 15;22(16):3195-206. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt173. Epub 2013
 Apr 10.

Analysis of TFAP2A mutations in Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome indicates 
functional complexity within the AP-2α DNA-binding domain.

Li H(1), Sheridan R, Williams T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology and Cell and Developmental Biology, 
University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Multiple lines of evidence indicate that the AP-2 transcription factor family 
has an important regulatory function in human craniofacial development. Notably, 
mutations in TFAP2A, the gene encoding AP-2α, have been identified in patients 
with Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome (BOFS). BOFS is an autosomal-dominant trait 
that commonly presents with facial clefting, eye defects and branchial skin 
anomalies. Examination of multiple cases has suggested either simple 
haploinsufficiency or more complex genetic causes for BOFS, especially as the 
clinical manifestations are variable, with no clear genotype-phenotype 
correlation. Mutations occur throughout TFAP2A, but mostly within conserved 
sequences within the DNA contact domain of AP-2α. However, the consequences of 
the various mutations for AP-2α protein function have not been evaluated. 
Therefore, it remains unclear if all BOFS mutations result in similar changes to 
the AP-2α protein or if they each produce specific alterations that underlie the 
spectrum of phenotypes. Here, we have investigated the molecular consequences of 
the mutations that localize to the DNA-binding region. We show that although 
individual mutations have different effects on DNA binding, they all demonstrate 
significantly reduced transcriptional activities. Moreover, all mutant 
derivatives have an altered nuclear:cytoplasmic distribution compared with the 
predominantly nuclear localization of wild-type AP-2α and several can exert a 
dominant-negative activity on the wild-type AP-2α protein. Overall, our data 
suggest that the individual TFAP2A BOFS mutations can generate null, hypomorphic 
or antimorphic alleles and that these differences in activity, combined with a 
role for AP-2α in epigenetic events, may influence the resultant pathology and 
the phenotypic variability.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt173
PMCID: PMC3723307
PMID: 23578821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]