---
reference_id: "PMID:39415268"
title: "Epidemic of multiple Treponema pallidum strains in men who have sex with men in Japan: efficient multi-locus sequence typing scheme and indicator biomarkers."
authors:
- Sato W
- Sedohara A
- Koga M
- Nakagama Y
- Yotsuyanagi H
- Kido Y
- Adachi E
journal: AIDS Res Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12981-024-00663-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Treponema pallidum/genetics, classification"
- "Syphilis/epidemiology, microbiology"
- "Homosexuality, Male"
- Multilocus Sequence Typing
- Phylogeny
- Adult
- "HIV Infections/epidemiology, microbiology"
- Japan/epidemiology
- Biomarkers/blood
- Molecular Epidemiology
- Middle Aged
- Genotype
- "Bacteremia/microbiology, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemic of multiple Treponema pallidum strains in men who have sex with men in Japan: efficient multi-locus sequence typing scheme and indicator biomarkers.
**Authors:** Sato W, Sedohara A, Koga M, Nakagama Y, Yotsuyanagi H, Kido Y, Adachi E
**Journal:** AIDS Res Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12981-024-00663-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12981-024-00663-y)

## Content

1. AIDS Res Ther. 2024 Oct 16;21(1):71. doi: 10.1186/s12981-024-00663-y.

Epidemic of multiple Treponema pallidum strains in men who have sex with men in
Japan: efficient multi-locus sequence typing scheme and indicator biomarkers.

Sato W(1)(2), Sedohara A(3), Koga M(3), Nakagama Y(4), Yotsuyanagi H(2)(3), Kido
Y(4), Adachi E(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, IMSUT Hospital of The Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases and Applied Immunology, IMSUT Hospital of
The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai,
Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Advanced Clinical Research Center, The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Virology and Parasitology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
Metropolitan University, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases and Applied Immunology, IMSUT Hospital of
The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai,
Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan. e-adachi@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The challenges in culturing Treponema pallidum have hindered
molecular-biological analysis. This study aims to establish a molecular
epidemiological analysis of syphilis among Japanese men who have sex with men
(MSM) and to investigate the relationship between bacteremia and associated
pathophysiology.
METHODS: We used whole blood specimens from syphilis-diagnosed individuals in
Tokyo, collected between February 2019 and June 2022. All individuals were MSM,
and most were people with HIV (97.2%). We used a multi-locus sequence typing
(MLST) scheme for epidemiological analysis. Sequences for MLST (TP0136, TP0548,
and TP0705) were obtained.
RESULTS: Out of 71 whole blood samples, 26 samples (36.6%) were positive for
TP0136, and we sequenced three loci for MLST in 22 samples (31.0%). The most
frequently detected sequence type (ST) was ST3 (n = 9), followed by ST6 (n = 6).
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that 12 samples belonged to the SS14-like group
(60%), and 8 samples belonged to the Nichols-like group (40%). Treponema
pallidum subsp. endemicum (TEN), the cause of bejel was detected in three
samples (12%). There was a significant association between TP0136 detection rate
and C- reactive protein (CRP) (77.0% at a cut-off:0.5 mg/dL).
CONCLUSION: Both SS14-like and Nichols-like strains were circulating
concurrently, and TEN could have been sexually transmitted among MSM with HIV.
Elevated CRP may indicate the presence of the pathogen in the blood.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12981-024-00663-y
PMCID: PMC11484458
PMID: 39415268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
