---
reference_id: "PMID:29446906"
title: Bohring-Opitz Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Russell B
- Tan WH
- Graham JM Jr
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bohring-Opitz Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Russell B, Tan WH, Graham JM Jr

## Content

1. Bohring-Opitz Syndrome.

Russell B(1), Tan WH(2), Graham JM Jr(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2018 Feb 15.

Author information:
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio
(2)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
(3)Cedars Sinai Medical Center Department of Pediatrics, Harbor-UCLA Medical 
Center, Emeritus Professor of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
UCLA, Los Angeles, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS) is characterized by 
distinctive facial features and posture, growth failure, variable but usually 
severe intellectual disability, and variable anomalies. The facial features may 
include microcephaly or trigonocephaly / prominent (but not fused) metopic 
ridge, hypotonic facies with full cheeks, synophrys, glabellar and eyelid nevus 
flammeus (simplex), prominent globes, widely set eyes, palate anomalies, and 
micrognathia. The BOS posture, which is most striking in early childhood and 
often becomes less apparent with age, is characterized by flexion at the elbows 
with ulnar deviation and flexion of the wrists and metacarpophalangeal joints. 
Feeding difficulties in early childhood, including cyclic vomiting, have a 
significant impact on overall health; feeding tends to improve with age. 
Seizures are common and typically responsive to standard epileptic medications. 
Minor cardiac anomalies and transient bradycardia and apnea may be present. 
Affected individuals may experience recurrent infections, which also tend to 
improve with age. Isolated case reports suggest that individuals with BOS are at 
greater risk for Wilms tumor than the general population, but large-scale 
epidemiologic studies have not been conducted.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS) is established 
in a proband with suggestive clinical features and/or the identification of a 
constitutional heterozygous pathogenic variant in ASXL1 by molecular genetic 
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Cyclic vomiting may be managed by 
identification and avoidance of triggers, daily maintenance medication, and 
early abortive treatment; G-tubes or GJ-tubes may decrease aspiration and 
improve nutrition. Due to the prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea, 
polysomnography should be considered. Referral to a craniofacial team should be 
considered for those with palatal abnormalities, micrognathia, or obstructive 
sleep apnea. Tracheostomy may be considered for those with recurrent aspiration 
who develop secondary lung disease, or in those with severe sleep apnea that is 
not adequately treated with noninvasive pressure support (e.g., CPAP, BiPAP) or 
surgical intervention (e.g., mandibular distraction). Standard management is 
indicated for seizures, congenital heart defects, intellectual disability, 
myopia, urinary tract infections, urinary retention, and kidney stones. 
Prevention of primary manifestations: Adequate treatment of severe emesis can 
decrease hospitalizations, infectious exposures, and ascending aspiration. 
Surveillance: Renal ultrasound every three months from birth to age eight to 
screen for the development of Wilms tumor; frequent monitoring of growth and 
development; close monitoring of feeding intolerance with a gastroenterology 
specialist; regular follow up for vision optimization. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Triggers for vomiting should be avoided and managed with prophylactic 
antiemetics prior to the exposure.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS) is typically the result of a de 
novo pathogenic variant in ASXL1. When BOS results from a de novo variant, the 
risk to the sibs of a proband is small. No individuals with BOS have been 
reported to reproduce. Although the vast majority of BOS occurs as the result of 
a de novo variant in ASXL1, molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate a 
pregnancy at theoretically increased risk as a result of constitutional and/or 
germline mosaicism for an ASXL1 pathogenic variant in a clinically unaffected 
parent.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 29446906