---
reference_id: "PMID:35536236"
title: "Thrombocytopenia in primary antiphospholipid syndrome: association with prognosis and clinical implications."
authors:
- Shi Y
- Zhao J
- Jiang H
- Huang C
- Qi W
- Song Y
- Wang Q
- Li M
- Tian X
- Zhao Y
- Zeng X
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keac264
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thrombocytopenia in primary antiphospholipid syndrome: association with prognosis and clinical implications.
**Authors:** Shi Y, Zhao J, Jiang H, Huang C, Qi W, Song Y, Wang Q, Li M, Tian X, Zhao Y, Zeng X
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keac264](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keac264)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2022 Dec 23;62(1):256-263. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keac264.

Thrombocytopenia in primary antiphospholipid syndrome: association with 
prognosis and clinical implications.

Shi Y(1), Zhao J(1)(2), Jiang H(1), Huang C(1)(2), Qi W(1), Song Y(3), Wang 
Q(1)(2), Li M(1)(2), Tian X(1)(2), Zhao Y(4), Zeng X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Dermatologic and Immunologic Diseases.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology.
(4)Department of Hematology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVES: Thrombocytopenia, a frequent clinical manifestation in patients with 
APS, could be an independent predictor of recurrent thrombotic, obstetric and 
severe extracriteria events.
METHODS: This single-centre prospective study enrolled 218 consecutive patients 
diagnosed with primary APS between 2010 and 2021. Thrombocytopenia was defined 
as a platelet count less than 100 × 109/L.
RESULTS: Our cohort included 74 (33.94%) patients with thrombocytopenia and 144 
patients with a continuous normal platelet count. Comparison of baseline 
characteristics indicated that patients with thrombocytopenia had more visceral 
venous thromboses [10 (13.51%) vs 5(3.47%); P = 0.009] and extracriteria 
manifestations [mainly haemolytic anaemia; 20 (27.03%) vs 17 (11.81%); 
P = 0.007]. Hypocomplementemia was more likely among patients with 
thrombocytopenia [19 (25.68%) vs 16 (11.11%); P = 0.01]. The presence of 
aCL-IgG/IgM, anti-β2-glycoprotein I and lupus anticoagulant were more frequently 
detected in patients with thrombocytopenia. In survival analysis, thrombotic, 
obstetric and severe extracriteria survival rates were significantly worse in 
patients with thrombocytopenia. In multivariate Cox regression, thrombocytopenia 
was an independent risk factor for all endpoint events, including thrombotic 
events [hazard ratio (HR) 2.93 (95% CI 1.31, 6.56), P = 0.009], pregnancy 
morbidity [HR 8.00 (95% CI 2.43, 26.37), P = 0.0006] and severe extracriteria 
events [HR 15.27 (95% CI 1.85, 125.98), P = 0.01].
CONCLUSION: Thrombocytopenia could identify primary APS patients at high risk of 
developing thrombotic events, pregnancy morbidity and severe extracriteria 
events.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keac264
PMID: 35536236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]