---
reference_id: "PMID:28578601"
title: Olaparib for Metastatic Breast Cancer in Patients with a Germline BRCA Mutation.
authors:
- Robson M
- Im SA
- Senkus E
- Xu B
- Domchek SM
- Masuda N
- Delaloge S
- Li W
- Tung N
- Armstrong A
- Wu W
- Goessl C
- Runswick S
- Conte P
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1706450
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Breast Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- "Genes, BRCA1"
- "Genes, BRCA2"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Metastasis/drug therapy
- "Phthalazines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Piperazines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Olaparib for Metastatic Breast Cancer in Patients with a Germline BRCA Mutation.
**Authors:** Robson M, Im SA, Senkus E, Xu B, Domchek SM, Masuda N, Delaloge S, Li W, Tung N, Armstrong A, Wu W, Goessl C, Runswick S, Conte P
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1706450](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1706450)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2017 Aug 10;377(6):523-533. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1706450. Epub
2017  Jun 4.

Olaparib for Metastatic Breast Cancer in Patients with a Germline BRCA Mutation.

Robson M(1), Im SA(1), Senkus E(1), Xu B(1), Domchek SM(1), Masuda N(1),
Delaloge S(1), Li W(1), Tung N(1), Armstrong A(1), Wu W(1), Goessl C(1),
Runswick S(1), Conte P(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York (M.R.); Seoul
National University Hospital, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea (S.-A.I.); Medical University
of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland (E.S.); National Cancer Center-Cancer Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
(B.X.), and the First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun (W.L.) - both in
China; Basser Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (S.M.D.);
National Hospital Organization, Osaka National Hospital, Osaka, Japan (N.M.);
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France (S.D.); Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Dana-Farber Harvard Cancer Center, Boston (N.T.); Christie Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust and Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of
Manchester, Manchester (A.A.), and AstraZeneca, Macclesfield (S.R.) - both in
the United Kingdom; AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD (W.W., C.G.); and University
of Padua and Istituto Oncologico Veneto Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico, Padua, Italy (P.C.).

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2017 Oct 26;377(17):1700. doi: 10.1056/NEJMx170012.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. ;377(18):1792. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1711644.

BACKGROUND: Olaparib is an oral poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase
inhibitor that has promising antitumor activity in patients with metastatic
breast cancer and a germline BRCA mutation.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, open-label, phase 3 trial in which olaparib
monotherapy was compared with standard therapy in patients with a germline BRCA
mutation and human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER2)-negative
metastatic breast cancer who had received no more than two previous chemotherapy
regimens for metastatic disease. Patients were randomly assigned, in a 2:1
ratio, to receive olaparib tablets (300 mg twice daily) or standard therapy with
single-agent chemotherapy of the physician's choice (capecitabine, eribulin, or
vinorelbine in 21-day cycles). The primary end point was progression-free
survival, which was assessed by blinded independent central review and was
analyzed on an intention-to-treat basis.
RESULTS: Of the 302 patients who underwent randomization, 205 were assigned to
receive olaparib and 97 were assigned to receive standard therapy. Median
progression-free survival was significantly longer in the olaparib group than in
the standard-therapy group (7.0 months vs. 4.2 months; hazard ratio for disease
progression or death, 0.58; 95% confidence interval, 0.43 to 0.80; P<0.001). The
response rate was 59.9% in the olaparib group and 28.8% in the standard-therapy
group. The rate of grade 3 or higher adverse events was 36.6% in the olaparib
group and 50.5% in the standard-therapy group, and the rate of treatment
discontinuation due to toxic effects was 4.9% and 7.7%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer and a
germline BRCA mutation, olaparib monotherapy provided a significant benefit over
standard therapy; median progression-free survival was 2.8 months longer and the
risk of disease progression or death was 42% lower with olaparib monotherapy
than with standard therapy. (Funded by AstraZeneca; OlympiAD ClinicalTrials.gov
number, NCT02000622 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1706450
PMID: 28578601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
