---
reference_id: "PMID:36387130"
title: "Bladder paraganglioma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, and SDHB germline mutation in a patient with Carney-Stratakis syndrome: A case report and literature review."
authors:
- Shi Y
- Ding L
- Mo C
- Luo Y
- Huang S
- Cai S
- Xia Y
- Zhang X
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.1030092
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bladder paraganglioma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, and SDHB germline mutation in a patient with Carney-Stratakis syndrome: A case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Shi Y, Ding L, Mo C, Luo Y, Huang S, Cai S, Xia Y, Zhang X
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2022.1030092](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2022.1030092)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2022 Oct 28;12:1030092. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.1030092.
eCollection  2022.

Bladder paraganglioma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, and SDHB germline 
mutation in a patient with Carney-Stratakis syndrome: A case report and 
literature review.

Shi Y(1), Ding L(2), Mo C(3), Luo Y(4), Huang S(1), Cai S(1), Xia Y(5), Zhang 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Urology Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Carney-Stratakis syndrome (CSS) is a rare dyad of paraganglioma 
(PGL)/pheochromocytoma (PHEO) and gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). PGLs 
are neuroendocrine tumors of neural crest origin which are mostly found in the 
head, neck, and retroperitoneal space. GISTs are the most common mesenchymal 
tumors of the digestive tract, usually caused by KIT/PDGFRA mutations. Here, we 
reported a case of CSS with unusual bladder PGL and succinate dehydrogenase 
(SDH) deficient GIST due to a germline mutation in SDH-subunit B (SDHB) gene.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 39-year-old female patient initially diagnosed with gastric 
GIST and isolated pelvic metastasis was eventually found to be CSS with bladder 
PGL and SDH-deficient GIST after surgery. This patient underwent resection of 
gastric and bladder tumors, and postoperative pathology confirmed the diagnosis 
of CSS. According to the next-generation sequencing (NGS), the patient carried a 
germline mutation in the SDHB gene, which was the cause of the disorder. The 
patient had no tumor recurrence with regular follow-up in 10 months.
CONCLUSIONS: CSS is an autosomal genetic disorder with no gender difference in 
incidence, and PGLs are more frequent than GISTs. SDH germline mutation is the 
molecular biological mechanism of CSS while the most common type is SDHB 
mutation. The unique mechanism of tumorigenesis including hypoxia and 
hypermethylation caused by SDH deficiency renders target therapy with tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors ineffective, therefore complete surgical resection is the 
optimal treatment in the absence of tumor metastases.

Copyright © 2022 Shi, Ding, Mo, Luo, Huang, Cai, Xia and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.1030092
PMCID: PMC9650230
PMID: 36387130

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.