---
reference_id: "PMID:8964702"
title: "[Epidemiology of varicella zoster infection. Results of a prospective study in the Ansbach area]."
authors:
- Paul E
- Thiel T
journal: Hautarzt
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1007/s001050050476
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Epidemiology of varicella zoster infection. Results of a prospective study in the Ansbach area].
**Authors:** Paul E, Thiel T
**Journal:** Hautarzt (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s001050050476](https://doi.org/10.1007/s001050050476)

## Content

1. Hautarzt. 1996 Aug;47(8):604-9. doi: 10.1007/s001050050476.

[Epidemiology of varicella zoster infection. Results of a prospective study in 
the Ansbach area].

[Article in German]

Paul E(1), Thiel T.

Author information:
(1)Hautklinik, Klinikum Nürnberg Nord, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg.

In the country city of Ansbach, Germany all cases of varicellazoster virus 
infection seen by dermatologists, pediatricians and general practitioners were 
registered over a period of 16 months, from February 1992 until May 1993. 152 
patients were clinically diagnosed with herpes zoster and 437 patients with 
chickenpox. The population-based incidence of zoster infections was 22.6 per 
10,000 inhabitants per year, while the incidence of chickenpox was 42.4. There 
was a slight predominance of male patients with zoster. There was also a marked 
influence of age and sex, on the localization of the involved nerve segments. 
Zoster was seen in patients of all ages but there was a clear predominance in 
older patients. The peak of the disease occurred in the eighth decade. In 
patients with chickenpox, the sex ratio was equal. The disease typically occurs 
in children and we observed a predominance of the cases in the first decade. 
Spread over the year, zoster was seen equally during all seasons. Chickenpox, 
however, showed epidemiological peaks of frequency. It is possible that the 
epidemic spread of the disease and the end of the peak are influenced by special 
metereological conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/s001050050476
PMID: 8964702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]