---
reference_id: "PMID:10393910"
title: "Identification of the endonuclease domain encoded by R2 and other site-specific, non-long terminal repeat retrotransposable elements."
authors:
- Yang J
- Malik HS
- Eickbush TH
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.14.7847
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of the endonuclease domain encoded by R2 and other site-specific, non-long terminal repeat retrotransposable elements.
**Authors:** Yang J, Malik HS, Eickbush TH
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.14.7847](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.14.7847)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jul 6;96(14):7847-52. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.96.14.7847.

Identification of the endonuclease domain encoded by R2 and other site-specific, 
non-long terminal repeat retrotransposable elements.

Yang J(1), Malik HS, Eickbush TH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627-0211, 
USA.

The non-long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposon, R2, encodes a 
sequence-specific endonuclease responsible for its insertion at a unique site in 
the 28S rRNA genes of arthropods. Although most non-LTR retrotransposons encode 
an apurinic-like endonuclease upstream of a common reverse transcriptase domain, 
R2 and many other site-specific non-LTR elements do not (CRE1 and 2, SLACS, 
CZAR, Dong, R4). Sequence comparison of these site-specific elements has 
revealed that the region downstream of their reverse transcriptase domain is 
conserved and shares sequence features with various prokaryotic restriction 
endonucleases. In particular, these non-LTR elements have a 
Lys/Arg-Pro-Asp-X12-14aa-Asp/Glu motif known to lie near the scissile 
phosphodiester bonds in the protein-DNA complexes of restriction enzymes. 
Site-directed mutagenesis of the R2 protein was used to provide evidence that 
this motif is also part of the active site of the endonuclease encoded by this 
element. Mutations of this motif eliminate both DNA-cleavage activities of the 
R2 protein: first-strand cleavage in which the exposed 3' end is used to prime 
reverse transcription of the RNA template and second-strand cleavage, which 
occurs after reverse transcription. The general organization of the R2 protein 
appears similar to the type IIS restriction enzyme, FokI, in which specific DNA 
binding is controlled by a separate domain located amino terminal to the 
cleavage domain. Previous phylogenetic analysis of their reverse transcriptase 
domains has indicated that the non-LTR elements identified here as containing 
restriction-like endonucleases are the oldest lineages of non-LTR elements, 
suggesting a scenario for the evolution of non-LTR elements.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.14.7847
PMCID: PMC22150
PMID: 10393910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]