---
reference_id: "PMID:29902798"
title: "Autosomal Recessive Oculodentodigital Dysplasia: A Case Report and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Taşdelen E
- Durmaz CD
- Karabulut HG
journal: Cytogenet Genome Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1159/000489000
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Codon, Terminator/genetics"
- Connexin 43/genetics
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Syndactyly/genetics
- Tooth Abnormalities/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Recessive Oculodentodigital Dysplasia: A Case Report and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Taşdelen E, Durmaz CD, Karabulut HG
**Journal:** Cytogenet Genome Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000489000](https://doi.org/10.1159/000489000)

## Content

1. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2018;154(4):181-186. doi: 10.1159/000489000. Epub 2018
Jun  15.

Autosomal Recessive Oculodentodigital Dysplasia: A Case Report and Review of the
Literature.

Taşdelen E, Durmaz CD, Karabulut HG.

Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD) is a rare condition characterized by a
typical facial appearance and variable findings of the eyes, teeth, and fingers.
ODDD is caused by mutations in the GJA1 gene in chromosome 6q22 and inherited in
an autosomal dominant manner in the majority of the patients. However, in recent
clinical reports, autosomal recessive ODDD cases due to by GJA1 mutations were
also described. Here, we report on a 14-year-old boy with microphthalmia,
microcornea, narrow nasal bridge, hypoplastic alae nasi, prominent columnella,
hypodontia, dental caries, and partial syndactyly of the 2nd and 3rd toes. These
clinical findings were concordant with the diagnosis of ODDD, and a novel
homozygous mutation (c.442C>T, p.Arg148Ter) was determined in the GJA1 gene
leading to a premature stop codon. His phenotypically normal parents were found
to be carriers of the same mutation. This is the third family in the literature
in which ODDD segregates in an autosomal recessive manner.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000489000
PMID: 29902798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
