---
reference_id: "PMID:12839317"
title: "Clinical features of recurrent and insidious chronic bird fancier's lung."
authors:
- Ohtani Y
- Saiki S
- Sumi Y
- Inase N
- Miyake S
- Costabel U
- Yoshizawa Y
journal: Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)61863-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features of recurrent and insidious chronic bird fancier's lung.
**Authors:** Ohtani Y, Saiki S, Sumi Y, Inase N, Miyake S, Costabel U, Yoshizawa Y
**Journal:** Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1081-1206(10)61863-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1081-1206(10)61863-7)

## Content

1. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2003 Jun;90(6):604-10. doi: 
10.1016/S1081-1206(10)61863-7.

Clinical features of recurrent and insidious chronic bird fancier's lung.

Ohtani Y(1), Saiki S, Sumi Y, Inase N, Miyake S, Costabel U, Yoshizawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2003 Jun;90(6):579-80. doi: 
10.1016/S1081-1206(10)61857-1.

BACKGROUND: Chronic bird fancier's lung (BFL) can be subgrouped into two types. 
One subgroup of patients develops interstitial pulmonary fibrosis after 
recurrent acute episodes (recurrent BFL), and the other subgroup of patients has 
no history of acute episodes but has slowly progressive chronic respiratory 
disease (insidious BFL).
OBJECTIVE: To define the clinical characteristics of both types of BFL and to 
provide clues for diagnosis.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of the medical records of patients 
with chronic BFL who were evaluated between October 1992 and March 2001 at the 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University Hospital in Japan. Patients were evaluated 
for their clinical characteristics, including history, laboratory, and 
immunologic findings; imaging; bronchoalveolar lavage; and histologic findings.
RESULTS: Thirty-two patients with chronic BFL were included in this study; 15 
patients had recurrent BFL and 17 had insidious BFL. The patients with recurrent 
BFL tended to breed dozens of pigeons in a loft, whereas the patients with 
insidious BFL were likely to be exposed to smaller birds kept indoors. Specific 
antibodies against pigeon dropping extracts or budgerigar dropping extracts were 
positive in 87% of the recurrent BFL cases and 35% of the insidious BFL cases. 
Antigen-induced lymphocyte proliferation was positive in more than 90% of both 
groups. The upper lung field was frequently involved in both groups as 
demonstrated by chest radiographic findings. In all of the patients with 
insidious BFL, the diagnosis was confirmed by positive laboratory-controlled 
inhalation test results.
CONCLUSIONS: Insidious BFL may be misdiagnosed as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 
if a careful history is not taken and antigen-induced lymphocyte proliferation, 
careful imaging evaluation, and laboratory-controlled inhalation challenge 
testing are not conducted. In contrast, the clinical findings of recurrent BFL 
are consistent with hypersensitivity pneumonitis induced by other antigens.

DOI: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)61863-7
PMID: 12839317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]