---
reference_id: "PMID:34261675"
title: "Efficacy, Safety, and Biomarker Analysis of Combined PD-L1 (Atezolizumab) and VEGF (Bevacizumab) Blockade in Advanced Malignant Peritoneal Mesothelioma."
authors:
- Raghav K
- Liu S
- Overman MJ
- Willett AF
- Knafl M
- Fu SC
- Malpica A
- Prasad S
- Royal RE
- Scally CP
- Mansfield PF
- Wistuba II
- Futreal AP
- Maru DM
- Solis Soto LM
- Parra Cuentas ER
- Chen H
- Villalobos P
- Verma A
- Mahvash A
- Hwu P
- Cortazar P
- McKenna E
- Yun C
- Dervin S
- Schulze K
- Darbonne WC
- Morani AC
- Kopetz S
- Fournier KF
- Woodman SE
- Yao JC
- Varadhachary GR
- Halperin DM
journal: Cancer Discov
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0331
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects
- B7-H1 Antigen/metabolism
- Bevacizumab/therapeutic use
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Humans
- "Mesothelioma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy, Safety, and Biomarker Analysis of Combined PD-L1 (Atezolizumab) and VEGF (Bevacizumab) Blockade in Advanced Malignant Peritoneal Mesothelioma.
**Authors:** Raghav K, Liu S, Overman MJ, Willett AF, Knafl M, Fu SC, Malpica A, Prasad S, Royal RE, Scally CP, Mansfield PF, Wistuba II, Futreal AP, Maru DM, Solis Soto LM, Parra Cuentas ER, Chen H, Villalobos P, Verma A, Mahvash A, Hwu P, Cortazar P, McKenna E, Yun C, Dervin S, Schulze K, Darbonne WC, Morani AC, Kopetz S, Fournier KF, Woodman SE, Yao JC, Varadhachary GR, Halperin DM
**Journal:** Cancer Discov (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0331](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0331)

## Content

1. Cancer Discov. 2021 Nov;11(11):2738-2747. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0331.
Epub 2021 Jul 14.

Efficacy, Safety, and Biomarker Analysis of Combined PD-L1 (Atezolizumab) and
VEGF (Bevacizumab) Blockade in Advanced Malignant Peritoneal Mesothelioma.

Raghav K(1), Liu S(2), Overman MJ(3), Willett AF(3), Knafl M(4), Fu SC(4),
Malpica A(5), Prasad S(3), Royal RE(6), Scally CP(6), Mansfield PF(6), Wistuba
II(7), Futreal AP(7), Maru DM(5), Solis Soto LM(7), Parra Cuentas ER(7), Chen
H(7), Villalobos P(7), Verma A(7), Mahvash A(8), Hwu P(9), Cortazar P(10),
McKenna E(10), Yun C(10), Dervin S(10), Schulze K(10), Darbonne WC(10), Morani
AC(11), Kopetz S(3), Fournier KF(6), Woodman SE(4), Yao JC(3), Varadhachary
GR(#)(3), Halperin DM(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas. kpraghav@mdanderson.org.
(2)Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas.
(3)Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas.
(4)Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas.
(5)Anatomic Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas.
(6)Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas.
(7)Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas.
(8)Interventional Radiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas.
(9)Cancer Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas.
(10)Roche/Genentech, South San Francisco, California.
(11)Diagnostic Imaging, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2021 Nov;11(11):2674-2676. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-1046.

Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma (MPeM) is a rare but aggressive malignancy
with limited treatment options. VEGF inhibition enhances efficacy of
immune-checkpoint inhibitors by reworking the immunosuppressive tumor milieu.
Efficacy and safety of combined PD-L1 (atezolizumab) and VEGF (bevacizumab)
blockade (AtezoBev) was assessed in 20 patients with advanced and unresectable
MPeM with progression or intolerance to prior platinum-pemetrexed chemotherapy.
The primary endpoint of confirmed objective response rate per RECISTv1.1 by
independent radiology review was 40% [8/20; 95% confidence interval (CI),
19.1-64.0] with median response duration of 12.8 months. Six (75%) responses
lasted for >10 months. Progression-free and overall survival at one year were
61% (95% CI, 35-80) and 85% (95% CI, 60-95), respectively. Responses occurred
notwithstanding low tumor mutation burden and PD-L1 expression status. Baseline
epithelial-mesenchymal transition gene expression correlated with therapeutic
resistance/response (r = 0.80; P = 0.0010). AtezoBev showed promising and
durable efficacy in patients with advanced MPeM with an acceptable safety
profile, and these results address a grave unmet need for this orphan disease.
SIGNIFICANCE: Efficacy of atezolizumab and bevacizumab vis-à-vis response rates
and survival in advanced peritoneal mesothelioma previously treated with
chemotherapy surpassed outcomes expected with conventional therapies. Biomarker
analyses uncovered epithelial-mesenchymal transition phenotype as an important
resistance mechanism and showcase the value and feasibility of performing
translationally driven clinical trials in rare tumors.See related commentary by
Aldea et al., p. 2674.This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature,
p. 2659.

©2021 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0331
PMCID: PMC8563380
PMID: 34261675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
