---
reference_id: "PMID:38251345"
title: "Future Prospects, Approaches, and the Government's Role in the Development of a Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine."
authors:
- Tabll AA
- Sohrab SS
- Ali AA
- Petrovic A
- Steiner Srdarevic S
- Siber S
- Glasnovic M
- Smolic R
- Smolic M
journal: Pathogens
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/pathogens13010038
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hepatitis C/prevention & control, epidemiology"
- Hepacivirus/immunology
- Vaccine Development
- Viral Hepatitis Vaccines/immunology
- Government
- Health Policy/trends
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Future Prospects, Approaches, and the Government's Role in the Development of a Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine.
**Authors:** Tabll AA, Sohrab SS, Ali AA, Petrovic A, Steiner Srdarevic S, Siber S, Glasnovic M, Smolic R, Smolic M
**Journal:** Pathogens (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pathogens13010038](https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens13010038)

## Content

1. Pathogens. 2023 Dec 31;13(1):38. doi: 10.3390/pathogens13010038.

Future Prospects, Approaches, and the Government's Role in the Development of a
Hepatitis C Virus Vaccine.

Tabll AA(1)(2), Sohrab SS(3)(4), Ali AA(5), Petrovic A(6), Steiner Srdarevic
S(6), Siber S(6), Glasnovic M(6), Smolic R(6), Smolic M(6).

Author information:
(1)Microbial Biotechnology Department, Biotechnology Research Institute,
National Research Centre, Cairo 12622, Egypt.
(2)Egypt Centre for Research and Regenerative Medicine (ECRRM), Cairo 11517,
Egypt.
(3)Special Infectious Agents Unit, King Fahd Medical Research Center, King
Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratory Technology, Faculty of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Molecular Biology Department, Biotechnology Research Institute, National
Research Centre, Cairo 12622, Egypt.
(6)Faculty of Dental Medicine and Health Osijek, Josip Juraj Strossmayer
University of Osijek, 31000 Osijek, Croatia.

Developing a safe and effective vaccine against the hepatitis C virus (HCV)
remains a top priority for global health. Despite recent advances in antiviral
therapies, the high cost and limited accessibility of these treatments impede
their widespread application, particularly in resource-limited settings.
Therefore, the development of the HCV vaccine remains a necessity. This review
article analyzes the current technologies, future prospects, strategies, HCV
genomic targets, and the governmental role in HCV vaccine development. We
discuss the current epidemiological landscape of HCV infection and the potential
of HCV structural and non-structural protein antigens as vaccine targets. In
addition, the involvement of government agencies and policymakers in supporting
and facilitating the development of HCV vaccines is emphasized. We explore how
vaccine development regulatory channels and frameworks affect research goals,
funding, and public health policy. The significance of international and
public-private partnerships in accelerating the development of an HCV vaccine is
examined. Finally, the future directions for developing an HCV vaccine are
discussed. In conclusion, the review highlights the urgent need for a preventive
vaccine to fight the global HCV disease and the significance of collaborative
efforts between scientists, politicians, and public health organizations to
reach this important public health goal.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens13010038
PMCID: PMC10820710
PMID: 38251345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.
