---
reference_id: "PMID:38587247"
title: "Olezarsen, Acute Pancreatitis, and Familial Chylomicronemia Syndrome."
authors:
- Stroes ESG
- Alexander VJ
- Karwatowska-Prokopczuk E
- Hegele RA
- Arca M
- Ballantyne CM
- Soran H
- Prohaska TA
- Xia S
- Ginsberg HN
- Witztum JL
- Tsimikas S
- Balance Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2400201
keywords:
- Humans
- Pancreatitis/drug therapy
- Male
- Female
- Double-Blind Method
- Apolipoprotein C-III/blood
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Triglycerides/blood
- "Hyperlipoproteinemia Type I/drug therapy, blood, complications"
- Acute Disease
- "Oligonucleotides/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Aged
- "Hypertriglyceridemia/drug therapy, blood"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Olezarsen, Acute Pancreatitis, and Familial Chylomicronemia Syndrome.
**Authors:** Stroes ESG, Alexander VJ, Karwatowska-Prokopczuk E, Hegele RA, Arca M, Ballantyne CM, Soran H, Prohaska TA, Xia S, Ginsberg HN, Witztum JL, Tsimikas S, Balance Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2400201](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2400201)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2024 May 16;390(19):1781-1792. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2400201. Epub 
2024 Apr 7.

Olezarsen, Acute Pancreatitis, and Familial Chylomicronemia Syndrome.

Stroes ESG(1), Alexander VJ(1), Karwatowska-Prokopczuk E(1), Hegele RA(1), Arca 
M(1), Ballantyne CM(1), Soran H(1), Prohaska TA(1), Xia S(1), Ginsberg HN(1), 
Witztum JL(1), Tsimikas S(1); Balance Investigators.

Collaborators: Bergeron J, Bernard S, Gaudet D, Moulin P, Valero R, Verges B, 
Reiber I, Hussein O, Alberti A, Arca M, Averna M, Iannuzzo G, Sjoerd E, Stroes 
G, Retterstol K, Curdia Goncalves T, Sequeira Duarte J, Raslova K, Blanco A, 
Diaz Diaz JL, Muniz O, Zambon D, Eriksson M, Romeo S, Nair D, Soran H, 
Wierzbicki A, Ahmad Z, Bajaj A, Ballantyne C, Brown A, Baum S, Ginsberg H, 
Goldberg I, Hilty K, Linton M, Moriarty P, Morise A, Oral E, Rosenblit P, Stock 
E, Trippi J, Becker RC, Duell PB, Dwyer JP, Maddrey WC, Wei LJ, Bruno M, 
Ruszniewski P, Webster G.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, (E.S.G.S.); Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad (V.J.A., E.K.-P., 
T.A.P., S.X., S.T.), and the Divisions of Endocrinology and Metabolism (J.L.W.) 
and Cardiovascular Medicine (S.T.), Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla - both in California; the Department of Medicine 
and Robarts Research Institute, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Western University, London, ON, Canada (R.A.H.); the Department of Translational 
and Precision Medicine, Center for Rare Disorders of Lipid Metabolism, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome (M.A.); Baylor College of Medicine and the Texas Heart 
Institute, Houston (C.M.B.); the National Institute for Health Research and 
Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Facility, Manchester University Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom (H.S.); and the Department of 
Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, New 
York (H.N.G.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2024 Jun;21(6):353. doi: 10.1038/s41569-024-01034-w.

BACKGROUND: Familial chylomicronemia syndrome is a genetic disorder associated 
with severe hypertriglyceridemia and severe acute pancreatitis. Olezarsen 
reduces the plasma triglyceride level by reducing hepatic synthesis of 
apolipoprotein C-III.
METHODS: In a phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, we randomly 
assigned patients with genetically identified familial chylomicronemia syndrome 
to receive olezarsen at a dose of 80 mg or 50 mg or placebo subcutaneously every 
4 weeks for 49 weeks. There were two primary end points: the difference between 
the 80-mg olezarsen group and the placebo group in the percent change in the 
fasting triglyceride level from baseline to 6 months, and (to be assessed if the 
first was significant) the difference between the 50-mg olezarsen group and the 
placebo group. Secondary end points included the mean percent change from 
baseline in the apolipoprotein C-III level and an independently adjudicated 
episode of acute pancreatitis.
RESULTS: A total of 66 patients underwent randomization; 22 were assigned to the 
80-mg olezarsen group, 21 to the 50-mg olezarsen group, and 23 to the placebo 
group. At baseline, the mean (±SD) triglyceride level among the patients was 
2630±1315 mg per deciliter, and 71% had a history of acute pancreatitis within 
the previous 10 years. Triglyceride levels at 6 months were significantly 
reduced with the 80-mg dose of olezarsen as compared with placebo (-43.5 
percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], -69.1 to -17.9; P<0.001) but 
not with the 50-mg dose (-22.4 percentage points; 95% CI, -47.2 to 2.5; 
P = 0.08). The difference in the mean percent change in the apolipoprotein C-III 
level from baseline to 6 months in the 80-mg group as compared with the placebo 
group was -73.7 percentage points (95% CI, -94.6 to -52.8) and between the 50-mg 
group as compared with the placebo group was -65.5 percentage points (95% CI, 
-82.6 to -48.3). By 53 weeks, 11 episodes of acute pancreatitis had occurred in 
the placebo group, and 1 episode had occurred in each olezarsen group (rate 
ratio [pooled olezarsen groups vs. placebo], 0.12; 95% CI, 0.02 to 0.66). 
Adverse events of moderate severity that were considered by a trial investigator 
at the site to be related to the trial drug or placebo occurred in 4 patients in 
the 80-mg olezarsen group.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with familial chylomicronemia syndrome, olezarsen may 
represent a new therapy to reduce plasma triglyceride levels. (Funded by Ionis 
Pharmaceuticals; Balance ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04568434.).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2400201
PMID: 38587247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]