---
reference_id: "PMID:20400889"
title: "Delayed diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency is common: a cross-sectional study in 216 patients."
authors:
- Bleicken B
- Hahner S
- Ventz M
- Quinkler M
journal: Am J Med Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181db6b7a
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delayed diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency is common: a cross-sectional study in 216 patients.
**Authors:** Bleicken B, Hahner S, Ventz M, Quinkler M
**Journal:** Am J Med Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181db6b7a](https://doi.org/10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181db6b7a)

## Content

1. Am J Med Sci. 2010 Jun;339(6):525-31. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181db6b7a.

Delayed diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency is common: a cross-sectional study in 
216 patients.

Bleicken B(1), Hahner S, Ventz M, Quinkler M.

Author information:
(1)Charité University Medicine Berlin, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Little information is available on patients with adrenal 
insufficiency (AI) in regard to complaints before diagnosis, time until correct 
diagnosis, false diagnosis, and professional changes due to the diagnosis.
OBJECTIVE: We retrospectively evaluated circumstances before and at diagnosis of 
AI in patients with primary and secondary AI by using established Hospital 
Anxiety and Depression Scale, Short Form-36 and Giessen Complaint List (GBB-24) 
questionnaires, and a self-established general registration form.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study, questionnaire sets were available from 
216 patients (primary AI, n = 99; secondary AI, n = 117). Time duration before 
treatment, underlying diagnoses, and disease symptoms were verified by 
questionnaires and review of medical records. Results regarding subjective 
health status (SHS) were compared with sex- and age-matched controls drawn from 
questionnaire-specific reference cohorts.
RESULTS: Less than 30% of woman and 50% of men with AI were diagnosed within the 
first 6 months after onset of symptoms. Twenty percent of patients suffered >5 
years before being diagnosed. More than 67% of patients consulted at least 3 
physicians, and 68% were primarily false diagnosed. The most common false 
diagnoses were of psychiatric and gastrointestinal origin. Overall, patients 
with AI showed an impaired SHS compared with controls, and patients who were 
diagnosed correctly within 3 months showed a significantly better SHS.
CONCLUSIONS: Because of the unspecific symptoms, diagnosis is often delayed, not 
recognized by physicians or diagnosed falsely. An early diagnosis is necessary 
and might positively influence SHS in patients with AI.

DOI: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181db6b7a
PMID: 20400889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]