---
reference_id: "PMID:21835074"
title: "Silent sinus syndrome: dynamic changes in the position of the orbital floor after restoration of normal sinus pressure."
authors:
- Sivasubramaniam R
- Sacks R
- Thornton M
journal: J Laryngol Otol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1017/S0022215111001952
keywords:
- Adult
- Chronic Disease
- Endoscopy
- "Enophthalmos/diagnostic imaging, pathology, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Maxillary Sinusitis/diagnostic imaging, pathology, surgery"
- Middle Aged
- Orbit/pathology
- Pressure
- Radiography
- Reoperation
- Retrospective Studies
- Syndrome
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Silent sinus syndrome: dynamic changes in the position of the orbital floor after restoration of normal sinus pressure.
**Authors:** Sivasubramaniam R, Sacks R, Thornton M
**Journal:** J Laryngol Otol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0022215111001952](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022215111001952)

## Content

1. J Laryngol Otol. 2011 Dec;125(12):1239-43. doi: 10.1017/S0022215111001952.
Epub  2011 Aug 11.

Silent sinus syndrome: dynamic changes in the position of the orbital floor 
after restoration of normal sinus pressure.

Sivasubramaniam R(1), Sacks R, Thornton M.

Author information:
(1)Ear, Nose and Throat Department, The Canberra Hospital, Australian Capital 
Territory, New South Wales, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Silent sinus syndrome is characterised by spontaneous enophthalmos 
and hypoglobus, in association with chronic atelectasis of the maxillary sinus, 
and in the absence of signs or symptoms of intrinsic sinonasal inflammatory 
disease. Traditionally, correction of the enophthalmos involved reconstruction 
of the orbital floor, which was performed simultaneously with sinus surgery. 
Recently, there has been increasing evidence to support the performance of 
uncinectomy and antrostomy alone, then orbital floor reconstruction as a 
second-stage procedure if needed.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of 23 cases of chronic maxillary 
atelectasis managed in our unit with endoscopic uncinectomy and antrostomy 
alone. All patients were operated upon by the same surgeon.
RESULTS: Twenty-two of the 23 patients had either complete or partial 
resolution. One patient had ongoing enophthalmos, and was considered for an 
orbital floor reconstruction as a second-stage procedure.
CONCLUSION: Our case series demonstrates that dynamic changes in orbital floor 
position can occur after sinus re-ventilation. These findings support the 
approach of delaying orbital floor reconstruction in cases of silent sinus 
syndrome treated with sinus re-ventilation, as such reconstruction may prove 
unnecessary over time.

DOI: 10.1017/S0022215111001952
PMID: 21835074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]