---
reference_id: "PMID:25966638"
title: "A novel phenotype in N-glycosylation disorders: Gillessen-Kaesbach-Nishimura skeletal dysplasia due to pathogenic variants in ALG9."
authors:
- Tham E
- Eklund EA
- Hammarsjö A
- Bengtson P
- Geiberger S
- Lagerstedt-Robinson K
- Malmgren H
- Nilsson D
- Grigelionis G
- Conner P
- Lindgren P
- Lindstrand A
- Wedell A
- Albåge M
- Zielinska K
- Nordgren A
- Papadogiannakis N
- Nishimura G
- Grigelioniene G
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.91
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Alternative Splicing/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Central Nervous System Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Male
- Mannosyltransferases/genetics
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nerve Degeneration/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel phenotype in N-glycosylation disorders: Gillessen-Kaesbach-Nishimura skeletal dysplasia due to pathogenic variants in ALG9.
**Authors:** Tham E, Eklund EA, Hammarsjö A, Bengtson P, Geiberger S, Lagerstedt-Robinson K, Malmgren H, Nilsson D, Grigelionis G, Conner P, Lindgren P, Lindstrand A, Wedell A, Albåge M, Zielinska K, Nordgren A, Papadogiannakis N, Nishimura G, Grigelioniene G
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2015.91](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2015.91)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;24(2):198-207. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.91. Epub 2015 
May 13.

A novel phenotype in N-glycosylation disorders: Gillessen-Kaesbach-Nishimura 
skeletal dysplasia due to pathogenic variants in ALG9.

Tham E(1)(2), Eklund EA(3), Hammarsjö A(1)(2), Bengtson P(4), Geiberger S(5), 
Lagerstedt-Robinson K(1)(2), Malmgren H(1)(2), Nilsson D(1)(2), Grigelionis 
G(1), Conner P(6)(7), Lindgren P(6)(7), Lindstrand A(1)(2), Wedell A(1)(8), 
Albåge M(9), Zielinska K(3), Nordgren A(1)(2), Papadogiannakis N(10), Nishimura 
G(11), Grigelioniene G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Experimental Pediatrics, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Chemistry, part of University Health Care in Region 
Skåne, Lund, Sweden.
(5)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Woman and Child Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(8)Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)Department of Neuropediatrics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(10)Section for Perinatal Pathology, Department of Pathology, Karolinska 
University Hospital and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(11)Department of Pediatric Imaging, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical 
Center, Tokyo, Japan.

A rare lethal autosomal recessive syndrome with skeletal dysplasia, polycystic 
kidneys and multiple malformations was first described by Gillessen-Kaesbach et 
al and subsequently by Nishimura et al. The skeletal features uniformly comprise 
a round pelvis, mesomelic shortening of the upper limbs and defective 
ossification of the cervical spine. We studied two unrelated families including 
three affected fetuses with Gillessen-Kaesbach-Nishimura syndrome using 
whole-exome and Sanger sequencing, comparative genome hybridization and 
homozygosity mapping. All affected patients were shown to have a novel 
homozygous splice variant NM_024740.2: c.1173+2T>A in the ALG9 gene, encoding 
alpha-1,2-mannosyltransferase, involved in the formation of the lipid-linked 
oligosaccharide precursor of N-glycosylation. RNA analysis demonstrated skipping 
of exon 10, leading to shorter RNA. Mass spectrometric analysis showed an 
increase in monoglycosylated transferrin as compared with control tissues, 
confirming that this is a congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG). Only three 
liveborn children with ALG9-CDG have been previously reported, all with missense 
variants. All three suffered from intellectual disability, muscular hypotonia, 
microcephaly and renal cysts, but none had skeletal dysplasia. Our study shows 
that some pathogenic variants in ALG9 can present as a lethal skeletal dysplasia 
with visceral malformations as the most severe phenotype. The skeletal features 
overlap with that previously reported for ALG3- and ALG12-CDG, suggesting that 
this subset of glycosylation disorders constitutes a new diagnostic group of 
skeletal dysplasias.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.91
PMCID: PMC4717212
PMID: 25966638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]