---
reference_id: "PMID:22553128"
title: Prostaglandin transporter mutations cause pachydermoperiostosis with myelofibrosis.
authors:
- Diggle CP
- Parry DA
- Logan CV
- Laissue P
- Rivera C
- Restrepo CM
- Fonseca DJ
- Morgan JE
- Allanore Y
- Fontenay M
- Wipff J
- Varret M
- Gibault L
- Dalantaeva N
- Korbonits M
- Zhou B
- Yuan G
- Harifi G
- Cefle K
- Palanduz S
- Akoglu H
- Zwijnenburg PJ
- Lichtenbelt KD
- Aubry-Rozier B
- Superti-Furga A
- Dallapiccola B
- Accadia M
- Brancati F
- Sheridan EG
- Taylor GR
- Carr IM
- Johnson CA
- Markham AF
- Bonthron DT
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22111
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Organic Anion Transporters/genetics
- "Osteoarthropathy, Primary Hypertrophic/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Primary Myelofibrosis/genetics
- Prostaglandins/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prostaglandin transporter mutations cause pachydermoperiostosis with myelofibrosis.
**Authors:** Diggle CP, Parry DA, Logan CV, Laissue P, Rivera C, Restrepo CM, Fonseca DJ, Morgan JE, Allanore Y, Fontenay M, Wipff J, Varret M, Gibault L, Dalantaeva N, Korbonits M, Zhou B, Yuan G, Harifi G, Cefle K, Palanduz S, Akoglu H, Zwijnenburg PJ, Lichtenbelt KD, Aubry-Rozier B, Superti-Furga A, Dallapiccola B, Accadia M, Brancati F, Sheridan EG, Taylor GR, Carr IM, Johnson CA, Markham AF, Bonthron DT
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22111](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22111)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2012 Aug;33(8):1175-81. doi: 10.1002/humu.22111. Epub 2012 May 29.

Prostaglandin transporter mutations cause pachydermoperiostosis with 
myelofibrosis.

Diggle CP(1), Parry DA, Logan CV, Laissue P, Rivera C, Restrepo CM, Fonseca DJ, 
Morgan JE, Allanore Y, Fontenay M, Wipff J, Varret M, Gibault L, Dalantaeva N, 
Korbonits M, Zhou B, Yuan G, Harifi G, Cefle K, Palanduz S, Akoglu H, 
Zwijnenburg PJ, Lichtenbelt KD, Aubry-Rozier B, Superti-Furga A, Dallapiccola B, 
Accadia M, Brancati F, Sheridan EG, Taylor GR, Carr IM, Johnson CA, Markham AF, 
Bonthron DT.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.

Pachydermoperiostosis, or primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO), is an 
inherited multisystem disorder, whose features closely mimic the reactive 
osteoarthropathy that commonly accompanies neoplastic and inflammatory 
pathologies. We previously described deficiency of the prostaglandin-degrading 
enzyme 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (HPGD) as a cause of this 
condition, implicating elevated circulating prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) as 
causative of PHO, and perhaps also as the principal mediator of secondary HO. 
However, PHO is genetically heterogeneous. Here, we use whole-exome sequencing 
to identify recessive mutations of the prostaglandin transporter SLCO2A1, in 
individuals lacking HPGD mutations. We performed exome sequencing of four 
probands with severe PHO, followed by conventional mutation analysis of SLCO2A1 
in nine others. Biallelic SLCO2A1 mutations were identified in 12 of the 13 
families. Affected individuals had elevated urinary PGE(2), but unlike 
HPGD-deficient patients, also excreted considerable quantities of the PGE(2) 
metabolite, PGE-M. Clinical differences between the two groups were also 
identified, notably that SLCO2A1-deficient individuals have a high frequency of 
severe anemia due to myelofibrosis. These findings reinforce the key role of 
systemic or local prostaglandin excess as the stimulus to HO. They also suggest 
that the induction or maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells by prostaglandin 
may depend upon transporter activity.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22111
PMID: 22553128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]