---
reference_id: "PMID:35793244"
title: Long non-coding RNA H19 contributes to spinal cord ischemia/reperfusion injury through increasing neuronal pyroptosis by miR-181a-5p/HMGB1 axis.
authors:
- Guo L
- Wang D
- Alexander HY
- Ren X
- Ma H
journal: Aging (Albany NY)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.18632/aging.204160
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- HMGB1 Protein/genetics
- Inflammation
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- Pyroptosis
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/genetics"
- Rats
- Reperfusion Injury/metabolism
- Spinal Cord Ischemia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long non-coding RNA H19 contributes to spinal cord ischemia/reperfusion injury through increasing neuronal pyroptosis by miR-181a-5p/HMGB1 axis.
**Authors:** Guo L, Wang D, Alexander HY, Ren X, Ma H
**Journal:** Aging (Albany NY) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.18632/aging.204160](https://doi.org/10.18632/aging.204160)

## Content

1. Aging (Albany NY). 2022 Jul 5;14(13):5449-5463. doi: 10.18632/aging.204160.
Epub  2022 Jul 5.

Long non-coding RNA H19 contributes to spinal cord ischemia/reperfusion injury
through increasing neuronal pyroptosis by miR-181a-5p/HMGB1 axis.

Guo L(1), Wang D(1), Alexander HY(1), Ren X(1), Ma H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang 110001, Liaoning Province, China.

Pyroptosis, a programmed inflammatory necrotizing cell death, is likely involved
in spinal cord ischemia-reperfusion (SCI/R) injury, but the mechanisms
initiating driving neuronal pyroptosis must be further revealed. The aim of this
study is to unravel the mechanism of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) H19 during
SCI/R. SCI/R model was induced in C57BL/6 mice by blocking the aortic arch in
vivo, and oxygen-glucose deprivation/reperfusion (OGD/R) injury model of PC12
cells was established in vitro. Our results showed that H19 and HMGB1 expression
was upregulated, while miR-181a-5p was downregulated in the SCI/R mice and
OGD/R-treated PC12 cells. SCI/R induced pathological damage, pyroptosis and
inflammation compared with the sham group. H19 acted as a molecular sponge to
suppress miR-181a-5p, and HMGB1 was identified as a direct target of
miR-181a-5p. MiR-181a-5p overexpression inhibited the increase of IL-1β, IL-18
and TNF-α production and NLRP3, ASC, and Cleaved-caspase-1 expression in
OGD/R-treated PC12 cells; while miR-181a-5p silencing exerted opposite effects.
HMGB1 overexpression reversed H19 knockdown-mediated the inhibition of
pyroptosis and inflammation in OGD/R-treated PC12 cells. In vivo, H19 knockdown
promoted the hind limb motor function recovery and alleviated the pathological
damage, pyroptosis and inflammation induced by SCI/R. LncRNA
H19/miR-181a-5p/HMGB1 pathway contributes to pyroptosis via activating caspase1
signaling during SCI/R, suggesting that this axis may be a potent therapeutic
target in SCI/R.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.204160
PMCID: PMC9320554
PMID: 35793244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest.
