---
reference_id: "PMID:35716105"
title: "Cutaneous manifestations following COVID-19 vaccination: A report of 25 cases."
authors:
- Shakoei S
- Kalantari Y
- Nasimi M
- Tootoonchi N
- Ansari MS
- Razavi Z
- Etesami I
journal: Dermatol Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/dth.15651
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "COVID-19/prevention & control"
- COVID-19 Vaccines/adverse effects
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pemphigus/chemically induced
- Pityriasis Lichenoides/chemically induced
- Psoriasis/chemically induced
- Vaccination/adverse effects
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous manifestations following COVID-19 vaccination: A report of 25 cases.
**Authors:** Shakoei S, Kalantari Y, Nasimi M, Tootoonchi N, Ansari MS, Razavi Z, Etesami I
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dth.15651](https://doi.org/10.1111/dth.15651)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther. 2022 Aug;35(8):e15651. doi: 10.1111/dth.15651. Epub 2022 Jul 4.

Cutaneous manifestations following COVID-19 vaccination: A report of 25 cases.

Shakoei S(1)(2), Kalantari Y(2)(3), Nasimi M(2), Tootoonchi N(2), Ansari MS(2),
Razavi Z(2), Etesami I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences (TUMS), Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Razi Hospital, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Autoimmune Bullous Diseases Research Center, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Comment in
    Dermatol Ther. 2022 Dec;35(12):e15937. doi: 10.1111/dth.15937.

Various adverse effects particularly cutaneous manifestations associated with
different COVID-19 vaccines have been observed in practice. The aim of our study
was to evaluate all patients who presented to our tertiary center with skin
manifestations following COVID-19 vaccines injection from September to December
2021. All patients with skin manifestation within 30 days or less following
COVID-19 vaccination were enrolled in our case-series. All cases included in our
study were diagnosed based on clinical and/or histopathological evaluation and
all other possible differential diagnoses were ruled out. Twenty-five
individuals including 16 (64%) males and 9 (36%) females with the mean age of
47 ± 17.62 years (range 18-91) were enrolled in our study. Twenty-two (88%)
patients developed lesions after Sinopharm vaccine injection and 3 (12%) cases
manifested lesions after the AstraZeneca vaccine. Six (24%) patients developed
new-onset lichen planus (LP) and 1 (4%) patient manifested LP flare-up. Two (8%)
individuals developed psoriasis and 1 (4%) case showed psoriasis exacerbation.
One (4%) patient developed new-onset pemphigus vulgaris (PV) and 1 (4%) case
experienced a flare of PV lesions. One (4%) patient manifested pityriasis
lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) flare-up. Other new-onset cases were
as follows: toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) (n = 1, 4%), bullous pemphigoid
(BP) (n = 2, 8%), alopecia areata (AA) (n = 2, 8%), pytriasis rosea (n = 1, 4%),
herpes zoster (n = 1, 4%), cutaneous small vessel vasculitis (n = 1, 4%),
erythema multiform (EM) and urticaria (n = 3, 12%), and morphea (n = 1, 4%).
Physicians should be aware of the possible side effects especially cutaneous
manifestations associated with COVID-19 vaccines.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/dth.15651
PMCID: PMC9349410
PMID: 35716105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
