---
reference_id: "PMID:33817732"
title: Case report of a novel phenotype in 18q deletion syndrome.
authors:
- Bohîlţea RE
- Cîrstoiu MM
- Nedelea FM
- Turcan N
- Georgescu TA
- Munteanu O
- Baroş A
- Istrate-Ofiţeru AM
- Berceanu C
journal: Rom J Morphol Embryol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.47162/RJME.61.3.29
keywords:
- Adult
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosome Disorders/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18/genetics"
- Female
- Fetus
- Humans
- Infant
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report of a novel phenotype in 18q deletion syndrome.
**Authors:** Bohîlţea RE, Cîrstoiu MM, Nedelea FM, Turcan N, Georgescu TA, Munteanu O, Baroş A, Istrate-Ofiţeru AM, Berceanu C
**Journal:** Rom J Morphol Embryol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.47162/RJME.61.3.29](https://doi.org/10.47162/RJME.61.3.29)

## Content

1. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2020 Jul-Sep;61(3):905-910. doi: 10.47162/RJME.61.3.29.

Case report of a novel phenotype in 18q deletion syndrome.

Bohîlţea RE(1), Cîrstoiu MM, Nedelea FM, Turcan N, Georgescu TA, Munteanu O, 
Baroş A, Istrate-Ofiţeru AM, Berceanu C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Department of Pathology, Carol Davila University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania; octav_munteanu@yahoo.com, 
tiberiuaugustin.georgescu@gmail.com.

The latest decades are characterized by an enormous progression in the field of 
human genetics. In consequences, for various phenotypic manifestations, genetic 
testing could identify a specific underlying cause. An estimated incidence for 
all types of 18q deletions is one in 55 000 births predominant on females. About 
94% of cases with 18q deletion syndrome appearance are de novo, and the 
remaining 6% are the inherited from a parent carrying a balanced chromosomal 
translocation. We present the case of a 35-year-old female who was admitted in 
our Unit for a second ultrasound opinion after being diagnosed at the second 
trimester scan at gestational age of 21 weeks of pregnancy with multiple brain 
and heart malformations, having the recommendation for fetal magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI). Further investigations included genetic analysis and pathological 
examination. Major malformations diagnosed and confirmed were agenesis of the 
corpus callosum, ventriculomegaly with dilated fourth ventricle, partial 
agenesis of vermis, bilateral anophthalmia with wide nasal base and left cleft 
lip. Additional, cardiac malformation, with an important ventricular septal 
defect and overriding aorta were noted. The results of the microarray analysis 
showed an abnormal fetal karyotype with a loss of 30.5 basis identified in the 
long arm of chromosome 18. Although most of the cases of 18q deletion are 
sporadically or de novo, could be cases where the possible existing syndromes 
can be inherited from a healthy or mild affected parent. Therefore, in order to 
establish the recurrence risk, parental karyotypes are recommended.

DOI: 10.47162/RJME.61.3.29
PMCID: PMC8112787
PMID: 33817732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interests.