---
reference_id: "PMID:28560571"
title: Molecular studies with Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti (Linnaeus, 1762), mosquito transmitting the dengue virus.
authors:
- Pereira LPLA
- Brito MCA
- Araruna FB
- de Andrade MS
- Moraes DFC
- Borges ACR
- do Rêgo Barros Pires Leal ER
journal: Parasitol Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00436-017-5484-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular studies with Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti (Linnaeus, 1762), mosquito transmitting the dengue virus.
**Authors:** Pereira LPLA, Brito MCA, Araruna FB, de Andrade MS, Moraes DFC, Borges ACR, do Rêgo Barros Pires Leal ER
**Journal:** Parasitol Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00436-017-5484-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00436-017-5484-0)

## Content

1. Parasitol Res. 2017 Aug;116(8):2057-2063. doi: 10.1007/s00436-017-5484-0. Epub
 2017 May 30.

Molecular studies with Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti (Linnaeus, 1762), mosquito 
transmitting the dengue virus.

Pereira LPLA(1), Brito MCA(2), Araruna FB(2)(3), de Andrade MS(2)(4), Moraes 
DFC(2), Borges ACR(2), do Rêgo Barros Pires Leal ER(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós-Gradução em Biotecnologia da Rede Renorbio, Universidade 
Federal do Maranhão, Av. dos Portugueses, 1966, Vila Bacanga, São Luís, MA, 
65065-545, Brazil. llucianapatricia@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Programa de Pós-Gradução em Biotecnologia da Rede Renorbio, Universidade 
Federal do Maranhão, Av. dos Portugueses, 1966, Vila Bacanga, São Luís, MA, 
65065-545, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal do Piauí, Av. São Sebastião, S/N, Reis Velloso, 
Parnaíba, PI, 64202-020, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Estudos Genômicos e Histocompatibilidade-LEGH, Hospital 
Universitário da Universidade Federal do Maranhão, Rua Barão de Itapari, 227, 
Centro, São Luís, MA, 65020-070, Brazil.

Dengue is an infectious viral disease, which can present a wide clinical 
picture, ranging from oligo or asymptomatic forms, to bleeding and shock, and 
can progress to death. The disease problem has increased in recent years, 
especially in urban and suburban areas of tropical and subtropical regions. 
There are five dengue viruses, called serotypes (DEN-1, DEN-2, DEN-3, DEN-4, and 
DEN-5), which belong to the Flaviviridae family and are transmitted to humans 
through infected mosquito bites, with the main vector the Aedes aegypti mosquito 
(Linnaeus, 1762). Studies performed with Ae. aegypti, aimed at their 
identification and analysis of their population structure, are fundamental to 
improve understanding of the epidemiology of dengue, as well for the definition 
of strategic actions that reduce the transmission of this disease. Therefore, 
considering the importance of such research to the development of programs to 
combat dengue, the present review considers the techniques used for the 
molecular identification, and evaluation of the genetic variability of Ae. 
aegypti.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-017-5484-0
PMID: 28560571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]