---
reference_id: "PMID:34929642"
title: "Idiopathic intracranial hypertension: Pathophysiology, diagnosis and management."
authors:
- Wang MTM
- Bhatti MT
- Danesh-Meyer HV
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2021.11.029
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Intracranial Hypertension
- Prospective Studies
- "Pseudotumor Cerebri/diagnosis, therapy"
- Quality of Life
- Stents
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Idiopathic intracranial hypertension: Pathophysiology, diagnosis and management.
**Authors:** Wang MTM, Bhatti MT, Danesh-Meyer HV
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2021.11.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2021.11.029)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2022 Jan;95:172-179. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2021.11.029. Epub
2021  Dec 17.

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension: Pathophysiology, diagnosis and management.

Wang MTM(1), Bhatti MT(2), Danesh-Meyer HV(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, New Zealand National Eye Centre, University of 
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Departments of Ophthalmology and Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN, United States.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, New Zealand National Eye Centre, University of 
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. Electronic address: helendm@gmail.com.

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) is characterized by increased 
intracranial pressure, manifested by papilledema and radiological findings, in 
the absence of an identifiable casual factor. The primary symptoms include 
headache, vision loss, and pulsatile tinnitus, and are recognized to have 
profound impacts on quality of life and visual function. IIH demonstrates a 
strong predilection towards obese women of reproductive age, and the population 
incidence is rising with the growing prevalence of obesity worldwide. The 
pathophysiology involves dysregulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) dynamics and 
venous sinus pressure, and recent studies highlighting the pathogenic role of 
metabolic and hormonal factors have led to the identification of several 
pharmacological targets and development of novel therapeutic agents. The 
overarching treatment goals include symptomatic alleviation and prevention of 
permanent vision loss. The Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension Treatment Trial, 
the first of its kind randomized controlled trial on IIH, provides class I 
evidence for treatment with weight loss and acetazolamide. In medically 
refractive or fulminant cases, optic nerve sheath fenestration, CSF diversion, 
and venous sinus stenting, have been successfully implemented. However, there 
are few high-quality prospective studies investigating the treatment and natural 
history of IIH, highlighting the compelling need for further research to 
determine the optimal treatment regimen.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2021.11.029
PMID: 34929642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.