---
reference_id: "PMID:37291210"
title: "Trofinetide for the treatment of Rett syndrome: a randomized phase 3 study."
authors:
- Neul JL
- Percy AK
- Benke TA
- Berry-Kravis EM
- Glaze DG
- Marsh ED
- Lin T
- Stankovic S
- Bishop KM
- Youakim JM
journal: Nat Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02398-1
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Rett Syndrome/drug therapy
- Treatment Outcome
- Glutamates
- Double-Blind Method
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trofinetide for the treatment of Rett syndrome: a randomized phase 3 study.
**Authors:** Neul JL, Percy AK, Benke TA, Berry-Kravis EM, Glaze DG, Marsh ED, Lin T, Stankovic S, Bishop KM, Youakim JM
**Journal:** Nat Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-023-02398-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-023-02398-1)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2023 Jun;29(6):1468-1475. doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02398-1. Epub 2023
Jun 8.

Trofinetide for the treatment of Rett syndrome: a randomized phase 3 study.

Neul JL(1), Percy AK(2), Benke TA(3), Berry-Kravis EM(4), Glaze DG(5), Marsh
ED(6), Lin T(7), Stankovic S(7), Bishop KM(7), Youakim JM(8).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Kennedy Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN, USA.
(2)University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)Children's Hospital of Colorado and University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Texas Children's Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Acadia Pharmaceuticals Inc., San Diego, CA, USA.
(8)Acadia Pharmaceuticals Inc., San Diego, CA, USA. jyouakim@acadia-pharm.com.

Rett syndrome is a rare, genetic neurodevelopmental disorder. Trofinetide is a
synthetic analog of glycine-proline-glutamate, the N-terminal tripeptide of the
insulin-like growth factor 1 protein, and has demonstrated clinical benefit in
phase 2 studies in Rett syndrome. In this phase 3 study (
https://clinicaltrials.gov identifier NCT04181723 ), females with Rett syndrome
received twice-daily oral trofinetide (n = 93) or placebo (n = 94) for 12 weeks.
For the coprimary efficacy endpoints, least squares mean (LSM) change from
baseline to week 12 in the Rett Syndrome Behaviour Questionnaire for trofinetide
versus placebo was -4.9 versus -1.7 (P = 0.0175; Cohen's d effect size, 0.37),
and LSM Clinical Global Impression-Improvement at week 12 was 3.5 versus 3.8
(P = 0.0030; effect size, 0.47). For the key secondary efficacy endpoint, LSM
change from baseline to week 12 in the Communication and Symbolic Behavior
Scales Developmental Profile Infant-Toddler Checklist Social Composite score was
-0.1 versus -1.1 (P = 0.0064; effect size, 0.43). Common treatment-emergent
adverse events included diarrhea (80.6% for trofinetide versus 19.1% for
placebo), which was mostly mild to moderate in severity. Significant improvement
for trofinetide compared with placebo was observed for the coprimary efficacy
endpoints, suggesting that trofinetide provides benefit in treating the core
symptoms of Rett syndrome.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-023-02398-1
PMCID: PMC10287558
PMID: 37291210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.L.N. has received research funding from the
International Rett Syndrome Foundation, the National Institutes of Health and
Rett Syndrome Research Trust; and personal consultancy fees from Acadia
Pharmaceuticals, Analysis Group, AveXis, GW Pharmaceuticals, Hoffmann-La Roche,
Myrtelle, Neurogene, Newron Pharmaceuticals, Signant Health and Taysha Gene
Therapies and for the preparation of CME activities for Medscape and PeerView
Institute; serves on the scientific advisory board of Alcyone Lifesciences; is a
scientific cofounder of LizarBio Therapeutics; and was a member of a data safety
monitoring board for clinical trials conducted by Ovid Therapeutics. A.K.P. is
coeditor of Translational Science of Rare Diseases, received research funding
from the National Institutes of Health and is a consultant for Acadia
Pharmaceuticals, AveXis, GW Pharmaceuticals and Anavex Life Science as well as
an adviser to the International Rett Syndrome Foundation. T.A.B. received
research funding from the GRIN2B Foundation, the International Foundation for
CDKL5 Research, the Loulou Foundation, the National Institutes of Health and the
Simons Foundation; has consultancies for Alcyone, AveXis, GRIN Therapeutics, GW
Pharmaceuticals, the International Rett Syndrome Foundation, Marinus
Pharmaceuticals, Neurogene, Ovid Therapeutics and Takeda Pharmaceutical; has
clinical trials with Acadia Pharmaceuticals, GW Pharmaceuticals, Marinus
Pharmaceuticals, Ovid Therapeutics and Rett Syndrome Research Trust; all
remuneration has been made to his department. E.M.B.-K. has received funding
from Acadia Pharmaceuticals, Alcobra Pharmaceuticals, AMO Pharma, Asuragen,
AveXis, Biogen, BioMarin, Cydan Development, EryDel, Fulcrum Therapeutics,
GeneTx, GW Pharmaceuticals, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Jaguar Health, Lumos Pharma,
Marinus Pharmaceuticals, Neuren Pharmaceuticals, Neurogene, Neurotrope,
Novartis, Orphazyme, Ovid Therapeutics, Retrophin, Roche, Seaside Therapeutics,
Taysha Gene Therapies, Tetra Bio-Pharma, Ultragenyx, Yamo Pharmaceuticals,
Zynerba Pharmaceuticals and Vtesse–Sucampo–Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals to
consult on trial design or run clinical or laboratory validation trials in
genetic neurodevelopmental or neurodegenerative disorders, all of which is
directed to Rush University Medical Center in support of rare disease programs;
E.M.B.-K. receives no personal funds, and Rush University Medical Center has no
relevant financial interest in any of the commercial entities listed. D.G.G. has
received personal compensation and research support from Acadia Pharmaceuticals,
Neuren Pharmaceuticals and Newron Pharmaceuticals. E.D.M. has received research
support from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and the
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, the Eagles Autism
Foundation, Penn Orphan Disease Center, the International Rett Syndrome
Foundation, Rett Syndrome Research Trust, the International CDKL5 Research
Foundation and the Loulou Foundation. He has been a site principal investigator
for trials from Stoke Therapeutics, GW Pharmaceuticals, Zogenix, Acadia
Pharmaceuticals and Marinus Pharmaceuticals. He has received personal
compensation for consulting from Stoke Therapeutics and Acadia Pharmaceuticals.
J.M.Y., K.M.B., S.S. and T.L. are employees of and stockholders in Acadia
Pharmaceuticals. S.S. is also a board director and stockholder of Neurogene.
