---
reference_id: "PMID:7666399"
title: "Neuroectodermal (CHIME) syndrome: an additional case with long term follow up of all reported cases."
authors:
- Shashi V
- Zunich J
- Kelly TE
- Fryburg JS
journal: J Med Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.32.6.465
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroectodermal (CHIME) syndrome: an additional case with long term follow up of all reported cases.
**Authors:** Shashi V, Zunich J, Kelly TE, Fryburg JS
**Journal:** J Med Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.32.6.465](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.32.6.465)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 1995 Jun;32(6):465-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.32.6.465.

Neuroectodermal (CHIME) syndrome: an additional case with long term follow up of 
all reported cases.

Shashi V(1), Zunich J, Kelly TE, Fryburg JS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Virginia, Health Sciences Center, 
Charlottesville 22901, USA.

A new neuroectodermal syndrome (designated CHIME syndrome) was described in 1983 
with a total of four patients reported, it is presumed to be an autosomal 
recessive disorder because of recurrence in sibs. The main features include 
ocular colobomas, congenital heart disease, early onset migratory ichthyosiform 
dermatosis, mental retardation, conductive hearing loss, seizures, and typical 
facial features. We report a fifth child with the condition, confirming the 
unique nature of the condition. Long term follow up information on this patient, 
as well as the previously described cases, provides information regarding the 
outcome for these patients, which includes general good health, severe mental 
retardation, seizures that worsen after puberty, conductive hearing loss, and 
chronic migratory ichthyosiform skin rash without scarring.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.32.6.465
PMCID: PMC1050487
PMID: 7666399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]