---
reference_id: "PMID:31626957"
title: "Baricitinib experience on STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy: A representative case from Turkey."
authors:
- Balci S
- Ekinci RMK
- de Jesus AA
- Goldbach-Mansky R
- Yilmaz M
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2019.108273
keywords:
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- Azetidines/therapeutic use
- C-Reactive Protein/immunology
- "Fever/drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- Gain of Function Mutation
- Humans
- Infant
- Janus Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Methylprednisolone/therapeutic use
- Mutation
- Nitriles
- Purines
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Pyrimidines
- "Skin Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- "Skin Ulcer/drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- Sulfonamides/therapeutic use
- Syndrome
- Treatment Failure
- Turkey
- "Vascular Diseases/drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- STING Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Baricitinib experience on STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy: A representative case from Turkey.
**Authors:** Balci S, Ekinci RMK, de Jesus AA, Goldbach-Mansky R, Yilmaz M
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2019.108273](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2019.108273)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2020 Mar;212:108273. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2019.108273. Epub 2019
Oct 15.

Baricitinib experience on STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy: A
representative case from Turkey.

Balci S(1), Ekinci RMK(2), de Jesus AA(3), Goldbach-Mansky R(4), Yilmaz M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Cukurova University Faculty of
Medicine, Adana, Turkey. Electronic address: drsibelbalci@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Cukurova University Faculty of
Medicine, Adana, Turkey.
(3)Translational Autoinflammatory Disease Studies (TADS), National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: adriana.almeidadejesus@nih.gov.
(4)Translational Autoinflammatory Disease Studies (TADS), National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: raphaela.goldbach-mansky@nih.gov.
(5)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Cukurova University Faculty of
Medicine, Adana, Turkey; Department of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology,
Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine, Adana, Turkey.

Stimulator of interferon genes associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy
(SAVI), caused by heterozygote gain-of-function mutations in TMEM173, is
characterized by fever attacks with ulcerating cutaneous manifestations on
cold-sensitive areas and interstitial lung disease. A six-month-old boy was
admitted to our hospital with fever, cough, and rash on the external surface of
both upper and lower extremities. Respiratory symptoms consistent with ILD
developed and skin lesions evolved to eschar formation particularly on acral
regions. Ultimately, diagnosis of SAVI was confirmed at the age of 10 months due
to the high level of interferon-score and a heterozygous N154S mutation in
TMEM173. Since systemic corticosteroid and ruxolitinib were not effective,
baricitinib was initiated at the age of 15 months, resulting in alleviation of
fever attacks, cutaneous manifestations and respiratory symptoms within
2 months. In conclusion, we reported an infant diagnosed with SAVI at the age of
10 months and treated with baricitinib.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2019.108273
PMID: 31626957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have no conflicts of interest relevant to this article to disclose.
