---
reference_id: "PMID:21838505"
title: "Vagus nerve stimulation for epilepsy: a meta-analysis of efficacy and predictors of response."
authors:
- Englot DJ
- Chang EF
- Auguste KI
journal: J Neurosurg
year: '2011'
doi: 10.3171/2011.7.JNS11977
keywords:
- Epilepsy/therapy
- Humans
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Treatment Outcome
- Vagus Nerve Stimulation/standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vagus nerve stimulation for epilepsy: a meta-analysis of efficacy and predictors of response.
**Authors:** Englot DJ, Chang EF, Auguste KI
**Journal:** J Neurosurg (2011)
**DOI:** [10.3171/2011.7.JNS11977](https://doi.org/10.3171/2011.7.JNS11977)

## Content

1. J Neurosurg. 2011 Dec;115(6):1248-55. doi: 10.3171/2011.7.JNS11977. Epub 2011 
Aug 12.

Vagus nerve stimulation for epilepsy: a meta-analysis of efficacy and predictors 
of response.

Englot DJ(1), Chang EF, Auguste KI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, 
California 94143-0112, USA. englotdj@neurosurg.ucsf.edu

Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) was approved by the US FDA in 1997 as an 
adjunctive treatment for medically refractory epilepsy. It is considered for use 
in patients who are poor candidates for resection or those in whom resection has 
failed. However, disagreement regarding the utility of VNS in epilepsy continues 
because of the variability in benefit reported across clinical studies. 
Moreover, although VNS was approved only for adults and adolescents with partial 
epilepsy, its efficacy in children and in patients with generalized epilepsy 
remains unclear. The authors performed the first meta-analysis of VNS efficacy 
in epilepsy, identifying 74 clinical studies with 3321 patients suffering from 
intractable epilepsy. These studies included 3 blinded, randomized controlled 
trials (Class I evidence); 2 nonblinded, randomized controlled trials (Class II 
evidence); 10 prospective studies (Class III evidence); and numerous 
retrospective studies. After VNS, seizure frequency was reduced by an average of 
45%, with a 36% reduction in seizures at 3-12 months after surgery and a 51% 
reduction after > 1 year of therapy. At the last follow-up, seizures were 
reduced by 50% or more in approximately 50% of the patients, and VNS predicted a 
≥ 50% reduction in seizures with a main effects OR of 1.83 (95% CI 1.80-1.86). 
Patients with generalized epilepsy and children benefited significantly from VNS 
despite their exclusion from initial approval of the device. Furthermore, 
posttraumatic epilepsy and tuberous sclerosis were positive predictors of a 
favorable outcome. In conclusion, VNS is an effective and relatively safe 
adjunctive therapy in patients with medically refractory epilepsy not amenable 
to resection. However, it is important to recognize that complete seizure 
freedom is rarely achieved using VNS and that a quarter of patients do not 
receive any benefit from therapy.

DOI: 10.3171/2011.7.JNS11977
PMID: 21838505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]