---
reference_id: "PMID:33173272"
title: "Ocular Manifestations of Sarcoidosis in a South Florida Population."
authors:
- Laura D
- Lee Y
- Farhangi M
- Salamo O
- Mirsaeidi M
- Goldhardt R
- Galor A
journal: Clin Ophthalmol
year: "2020"
doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S278373
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular Manifestations of Sarcoidosis in a South Florida Population.
**Authors:** Laura D, Lee Y, Farhangi M, Salamo O, Mirsaeidi M, Goldhardt R, Galor A
**Journal:** Clin Ophthalmol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2147/OPTH.S278373](https://doi.org/10.2147/OPTH.S278373)

## Content

1. Clin Ophthalmol. 2020 Nov 2;14:3741-3746. doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S278373.

Ocular Manifestations of Sarcoidosis in a South Florida Population.

Laura D(1)(2), Lee Y(1)(2), Farhangi M(1)(2), Salamo O(1), Mirsaeidi M(1)(3),
Goldhardt R(1)(2), Galor A(1)(2).

OBJECTIVE: To describe the ocular manifestations of sarcoidosis in a South
Florida population and identify risk factors for the presence of ocular disease.
DESIGN: Retrospective consecutive case series.
METHODS: Medical charts of individuals with sarcoidosis seen in the University
of Miami pulmonary department were reviewed for ocular disease. Odds ratios were
used to identify risk factors for ocular sarcoidosis.
RESULTS: Fourteen of 108 individuals with sarcoidosis had ocular involvement.
The mean age of the 14 individuals was 56±15 years. Seventy-one percent were
female, 50% were black, and 21% were Hispanic. Twelve had uveitis of which
panuveitis was the most common subtype. Five had <=20/70 vision in at least one
eye due to uveitis. Neurosarcoidosis was a risk factor for ocular sarcoidosis
(OR 6.14, p=0.03, 95% CI 1.21-31.09).
CONCLUSION: Ocular manifestations occurred in a minority of individuals in a
pulmonary sarcoidosis clinic in South Florida. Uveitis was the most common
ocular manifestation. Neurosarcoidosis was a risk factor for ocular involvement.

DOI: 10.2147/OPTH.S278373
PMCID: PMC7648141
PMID: 33173272
