---
reference_id: "PMID:20354761"
title: "Heavy metal poisoning: the effects of cadmium on the kidney."
authors:
- Johri N
- Jacquillet G
- Unwin R
journal: Biometals
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s10534-010-9328-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heavy metal poisoning: the effects of cadmium on the kidney.
**Authors:** Johri N, Jacquillet G, Unwin R
**Journal:** Biometals (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10534-010-9328-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10534-010-9328-y)

## Content

1. Biometals. 2010 Oct;23(5):783-92. doi: 10.1007/s10534-010-9328-y. Epub 2010
Mar  31.

Heavy metal poisoning: the effects of cadmium on the kidney.

Johri N(1), Jacquillet G, Unwin R.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Nephrology, University College London Medical School, Royal Free 
Campus, Rowland Hill Street, London, UK. nikhil.johri@royalfree.nhs.uk

The heavy metal cadmium (Cd) is known to be a widespread environmental 
contaminant and a potential toxin that may adversely affect human health. 
Exposure is largely via the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts; important 
non-industrial sources of exposure are cigarette smoke and food (from 
contaminated soil and water). The kidney is the main organ affected by chronic 
Cd exposure and toxicity. Cd accumulates in the kidney as a result of its 
preferential uptake by receptor-mediated endocytosis of freely filtered and 
metallothionein bound Cd (Cd-MT) in the renal proximal tubule. Internalised 
Cd-MT is degraded in endosomes and lysosomes, releasing free Cd(2+) into the 
cytosol, where it can generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) and activate cell 
death pathways. An early and sensitive manifestation of chronic Cd renal 
toxicity, which can be useful in individual and population screening, is 
impaired reabsorption of low molecular weight proteins (LMWP) (also a 
receptor-mediated process in the proximal tubule) such as retinol binding 
protein (RBP). This so-called 'tubular proteinuria' is a good index of proximal 
tubular damage, but it is not usually detected by routine clinical dipstick 
testing for proteinuria. Continued and heavy Cd exposure can progress to the 
clinical renal Fanconi syndrome, and ultimately to renal failure. Environmental 
Cd exposure may be a significant contributory factor to the development of 
chronic kidney disease, especially in the presence of other co-morbidities such 
as diabetes or hypertension; therefore, the sources and environmental impact of 
Cd, and efforts to limit Cd exposure, justify more attention.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-010-9328-y
PMID: 20354761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]