---
reference_id: "PMID:30640893"
title: "Chylomicron retention disease: genetics, biochemistry, and clinical spectrum."
authors:
- Levy E
- Poinsot P
- Spahis S
journal: Curr Opin Lipidol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/MOL.0000000000000578
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Apolipoprotein A-I/genetics, metabolism"
- "Apolipoprotein B-48/genetics, metabolism"
- "COP-Coated Vesicles/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cholesterol, HDL/metabolism"
- Chylomicrons/metabolism
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- "Epithelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Golgi Apparatus/metabolism
- Humans
- "Hypobetalipoproteinemias/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Intestinal Mucosa/metabolism, pathology"
- Lipid Metabolism/genetics
- "Malabsorption Syndromes/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Monomeric GTP-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chylomicron retention disease: genetics, biochemistry, and clinical spectrum.
**Authors:** Levy E, Poinsot P, Spahis S
**Journal:** Curr Opin Lipidol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOL.0000000000000578](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOL.0000000000000578)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2019 Apr;30(2):134-139. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0000000000000578.

Chylomicron retention disease: genetics, biochemistry, and clinical spectrum.

Levy E(1)(2)(3), Poinsot P(2), Spahis S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre.
(2)Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Unit, CHU Ste-Justine.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Chylomicron retention disease (CRD) is an autosomic recessive
disorder, in which intestinal fat malabsorption is the main cause of diverse
severe manifestations. The specific molecular defect was identified in 2003 and
consists of mutations in the SAR1B or SARA2 gene encoding for intracellular
SAR1B GTPase protein. The aim of this review is first to provide an update of
the recent biochemical, genetic and clinical findings, and second to discuss
novel mechanisms related to hallmark symptoms.
RECENT FINDINGS: CRD patients present with SAR1B mutations, which disable the
formation of coat protein complex II and thus blocks the transport of
chylomicron cargo from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi. Consequently,
there is a total absence of chylomicron and apolipoprotein B-48 in the blood
circulation following a fat meal, accompanied by a deficiency in liposoluble
vitamins and essential fatty acids. The recent discovery of Transport and Golgi
organization and Transport and Golgi organization-like proteins may explain the
intriguing export of large chylomicron, exceeding coat protein complex II size.
Hypocholesterolemia could be accounted for by a decrease in HDL cholesterol,
likely a reflection of limited production of intestinal HDL in view of reduced
ATP-binding cassette family A protein 1 and apolipoprotein A-I protein. In
experimental studies, the paralog SAR1A compensates for the lack of the SAR1B
GTPase protein.
SUMMARY: Molecular testing for CRD is recommended to distinguish the disease
from other congenital fat malabsorptions, and to early define molecular
aberrations, accelerate treatment, and prevent complications.

DOI: 10.1097/MOL.0000000000000578
PMID: 30640893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
