---
reference_id: "PMID:35696748"
title: "Encorafenib plus cetuximab with or without binimetinib in patients with BRAF V600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: real-life data from an Italian multicenter experience."
authors:
- Boccaccino A
- Borelli B
- Intini R
- Antista M
- Bensi M
- Rossini D
- Passardi A
- Tamberi S
- Giampieri R
- Antonuzzo L
- Noto L
- Roviello G
- Zichi C
- Salati M
- Puccini A
- Noto C
- Parisi A
- Rihawi K
- Persano M
- Crespi V
- Libertini M
- Giordano M
- Moretto R
- Lonardi S
- Cremolini C
journal: ESMO Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100506
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects
- Benzimidazoles
- Carbamates
- Cetuximab/adverse effects
- Colonic Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Sulfonamides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Encorafenib plus cetuximab with or without binimetinib in patients with BRAF V600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: real-life data from an Italian multicenter experience.
**Authors:** Boccaccino A, Borelli B, Intini R, Antista M, Bensi M, Rossini D, Passardi A, Tamberi S, Giampieri R, Antonuzzo L, Noto L, Roviello G, Zichi C, Salati M, Puccini A, Noto C, Parisi A, Rihawi K, Persano M, Crespi V, Libertini M, Giordano M, Moretto R, Lonardi S, Cremolini C
**Journal:** ESMO Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100506](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100506)

## Content

1. ESMO Open. 2022 Jun;7(3):100506. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100506. Epub 2022
Jun 10.

Encorafenib plus cetuximab with or without binimetinib in patients with BRAF
V600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: real-life data from an Italian
multicenter experience.

Boccaccino A(1), Borelli B(1), Intini R(2), Antista M(3), Bensi M(4), Rossini
D(1), Passardi A(5), Tamberi S(6), Giampieri R(7), Antonuzzo L(8), Noto L(9),
Roviello G(10), Zichi C(11), Salati M(12), Puccini A(13), Noto C(14), Parisi
A(15), Rihawi K(16), Persano M(17), Crespi V(18), Libertini M(19), Giordano
M(1), Moretto R(20), Lonardi S(21), Cremolini C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and
Surgery, Unit of Medical Oncology 2, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana,
Pisa, Italy.
(2)Medical Oncology Unit 1, Department of Oncology, Veneto Institute of Oncology
IOV-IRCCSP, Padova, Italy.
(3)Medical Oncology Department, ENETS Center of Excellence, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy.
(4)Oncologia Medica, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Roma, Italy; Università Cattolica del
Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, IRCCS Istituto Romagnolo per lo Studio dei
Tumori (IRST) "Dino Amadori", Meldola, Italy.
(6)UOC Oncologia Ravenna, AUSL Romagna, Ravenna, Italy.
(7)Clinica Oncologica, Dipartimento Scienze Cliniche e Molecolari, Università
Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy.
(8)Clinical Oncology Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy;
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Firenze, Italy.
(9)UOC Oncologia Medica, Policlinico "G.Rodolico" AOU Policlinico - San Marco,
Catania, Italy.
(10)Department of Health Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(11)Oncologia Medica, A.O. Ordine Mauriziano - Umberto I, Torino, Italy.
(12)Division of Oncology, Department of Oncology and Hematology, University
Hospital of Modena, Modena, Italy; PhD Program Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(13)Università degli Studi di Genova, Ospedale Policlinico San Martino IRCCS,
Genova, Italy.
(14)Università degli Studi di Udine, Dipartimento di Area Medica, Udine, Italy;
Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Friuli Centrale, Dipartimento di Oncologia
medica, Udine, Italy.
(15)Medical Oncology, St. Salvatore Hospital, L'Aquila, Italy; Department of
Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila,
Italy.
(16)IRCSS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(17)Medical Oncology, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(18)Department of Oncology, University of Turin, Torino, Italy.
(19)Oncology Unit, Poliambulanza Foundation, Brescia, Italy.
(20)Unit of Medical Oncology 2, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, Pisa,
Italy.
(21)Medical Oncology 3, Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, Padua, Italy.
Electronic address: sara.lonardi@iov.veneto.it.

BACKGROUND: Encorafenib plus cetuximab with or without binimetinib showed
increased objective response rate (ORR), progression-free survival (PFS), and
overall survival (OS) compared with chemotherapy plus anti-EGFR in previously
treated patients with BRAF V600E-mutated (mut) metastatic colorectal cancer
(mCRC). Although no formal comparison was planned, addition of binimetinib to
encorafenib plus cetuximab did not provide significant efficacy advantage.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This real-life study was aimed at evaluating safety,
activity, and efficacy of encorafenib plus cetuximab with or without binimetinib
in patients with BRAF V600E-mut mCRC treated at 21 Italian centers within a
nominal use program launched in May 2019.
RESULTS: Out of 133 patients included, 97 (73%) received encorafenib plus
cetuximab (targeted doublet) and 36 (27%) the same therapy plus binimetinib
(targeted triplet). Most patients had Eastern Cooperative Group Performance
Status (ECOG-PS) of 0 or 1 (86%), right-sided primary tumor (69%), and
synchronous disease (66%). Twenty (15%) tumors were DNA mismatch repair
deficiency (dMMR)/microsatellite instability (MSI)-high. As many as 44 (34%)
patients had received two or more prior lines of therapy, 122 (92%) were
previously exposed to oxaliplatin, and 109 (82%) to anti-vascular endothelial
growth factor (anti-VEGF). Most frequent adverse events were asthenia (62%) and
anti-EGFR-related skin rash (52%). Any grade nausea (P = 0.03), vomiting (P =
0.04), and diarrhea (P = 0.07) were more frequent with the triplet therapy,
while melanocytic nevi were less common (P = 0.06). Overall, ORR and disease
control rate (DCR) were 23% and 69%, respectively, with numerically higher rates
in the triplet group (ORR 31% versus 17%, P = 0.12; DCR 78% versus 65%, P =
0.23). Median PFS and OS were 4.5 and 7.2 months, respectively. Worse ECOG-PS,
peritoneal metastases, and more than one prior treatment were independent poor
prognostic factors for PFS and OS. Clonality of BRAF mutation measured as
adjusted mutant allele fraction in tumor tissue was not associated with clinical
outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Our real-life data are consistent with those from the BEACON trial
in terms of safety, activity, and efficacy. Patients in good general condition
and not heavily pretreated are those more likely to derive benefit from the
targeted treatment.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100506
PMCID: PMC9271503
PMID: 35696748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure MS reports being on the advisory
board and speakers’ bureau for MERCK, MSD, Sanofi, Amgen, BMS, EISAI, and
Servier. SL reports being on the speakers’ bureau for Amgen, Merck, Roche,
Lilly, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pierre-Fabre, GSK, and Servier; playing a
consulting or advisory role for Amgen, MSD, Merck Serono, Lilly, Astra Zeneca,
Incyte, Daiichi-Sankyo, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Servier; research funding to
institution from Bayer, Merck, Amgen, Roche, Lilly, AstraZeneca, and
Bristol-Myers Squibb. CC reports honoraria from Amgen, Bayer, Merck, Roche, and
Servier; performing a consulting or advisory role for Amgen, Bayer, MSD, and
Roche; being on the speakers’ bureau for Servier; receiving/received research
funding from Bayer, Merck, and Servier; travel, accommodations, and expenses
from Roche and Servier. All other authors have declared no conflicts of
interest.
