---
reference_id: PMID:39335451
title: "Animal Models of Retinopathy of Prematurity: Advances and Metabolic Regulators."
authors:
- Maurya M
- Liu CH
- Bora K
- Kushwah N
- Pavlovich MC
- Wang Z
- Chen J
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12091937
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Animal Models of Retinopathy of Prematurity: Advances and Metabolic Regulators.
**Authors:** Maurya M, Liu CH, Bora K, Kushwah N, Pavlovich MC, Wang Z, Chen J
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12091937](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12091937)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 Aug 23;12(9):1937. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12091937.

Animal Models of Retinopathy of Prematurity: Advances and Metabolic Regulators.

Maurya M(1), Liu CH(1), Bora K(1), Kushwah N(1), Pavlovich MC(1), Wang Z(1), 
Chen J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a primary cause of visual impairment and 
blindness in premature newborns, characterized by vascular abnormalities in the 
developing retina, with microvascular alteration, neovascularization, and in the 
most severe cases retinal detachment. To elucidate the pathophysiology and 
develop therapeutics for ROP, several pre-clinical experimental models of ROP 
were developed in different species. Among them, the oxygen-induced retinopathy 
(OIR) mouse model has gained the most popularity and critically contributed to 
our current understanding of pathological retinal angiogenesis and the discovery 
of potential anti-angiogenic therapies. A deeper comprehension of molecular 
regulators of OIR such as hypoxia-inducible growth factors including vascular 
endothelial growth factors as primary perpetrators and other new metabolic 
modulators such as lipids and amino acids influencing pathological retinal 
angiogenesis is also emerging, indicating possible targets for treatment 
strategies. This review delves into the historical progressions that gave rise 
to the modern OIR models with a focus on the mouse model. It also reviews the 
fundamental principles of OIR, recent advances in its automated assessment, and 
a selected summary of metabolic investigation enabled by OIR models including 
amino acid transport and metabolism.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12091937
PMCID: PMC11428941
PMID: 39335451

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.