---
reference_id: PMID:38382000
title: Long-Term Longitudinal Course of Cognitive and Motor Symptoms in Patients With Cerebral Small Vessel Disease.
authors:
- Bergkamp MI
- Jacob MA
- Cai M
- Claassen JA
- Kessels RPC
- Esselink R
- Tuladhar AM
- De Leeuw FE
journal: Neurology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209148
keywords:
- Humans
- Cohort Studies
- Prospective Studies
- Postural Balance
- Time and Motion Studies
- Parkinsonian Disorders/complications
- "Dementia/diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Cerebral Small Vessel Diseases/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Cognition
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Longitudinal Course of Cognitive and Motor Symptoms in Patients With Cerebral Small Vessel Disease.
**Authors:** Bergkamp MI, Jacob MA, Cai M, Claassen JA, Kessels RPC, Esselink R, Tuladhar AM, De Leeuw FE
**Journal:** Neurology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000209148](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000209148)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2024 Mar 12;102(5):e209148. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209148. Epub
 2024 Feb 21.

Long-Term Longitudinal Course of Cognitive and Motor Symptoms in Patients With 
Cerebral Small Vessel Disease.

Bergkamp MI(1), Jacob MA(1), Cai M(1), Claassen JA(1), Kessels RPC(1), Esselink 
R(1), Tuladhar AM(1), De Leeuw FE(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neurology (M.I.B., M.A.J., M.C., R.E., A.M.T., 
F.-E.D.L.), of Medical Psychology (R.P.C.K.), Geriatrics (J.A.C.), and 
Radboudumc Alzheimer Center (J.A.C., R.P.C.K.), Radboud University Medical 
Center; Donders Center for Medical Neuroscience (M.I.B., M.A.J., M.C., R.E., 
A.M.T., F.-E.D.L.), and Donders Institute for Brain (J.A.C., R.P.C.K.), 
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; 
Department of Neurology (M.C.), Guangdong Neuroscience Institute, Guangdong 
Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, China; Department of Cardiovascular Sciences (J.A.C.), 
University of Leicester, United Kingdom; Vincent van Gogh Institute for 
Psychiatry (R.P.C.K.), Venray, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Patients with cerebral small vessel disease (SVD) 
show a heterogenous clinical course. The aim of the current study was to 
investigate the longitudinal course of cognitive and motor function in patients 
who developed parkinsonism, dementia, both, or none.
METHODS: Participants were from the Radboud University Nijmegen Diffusion Tensor 
and Magnetic Resonance Cohort study, a prospective cohort of patients with SVD. 
Parkinsonism and dementia were, respectively, diagnosed according to the UK 
Parkinson's Disease Society brain bank criteria and the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, criteria for major 
neurocognitive disorder. Linear and generalized linear mixed-effect analyses 
were used to study the longitudinal course of motor and cognitive tasks.
RESULTS: After a median follow-up of 12.8 years (interquartile range 10.2-15.3), 
132 of 501 (26.3%) participants developed parkinsonism, dementia, or both. Years 
before diagnosis of these disorders, participants showed distinct clinical 
trajectories from those who developed none: Participant who developed 
parkinsonism had an annual percentage of 22% (95% CI 18%-27%) increase in motor 
part of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale score. This was 
significantly higher than the 16% (95% CI 14%-18%) of controls, mainly because 
of a steep increase in bradykinesia and posture and gait disturbances. When they 
developed dementia as well, the increase in Timed Up and Go Test time of 0.73 
seconds per year (95% CI 0.58-0.87) was significantly higher than the 0.20 
seconds per year increase (95% CI 0.16-0.23) of controls. All groups, including 
the participants who developed parkinsonism without dementia, showed a faster 
decline in executive function compared with controls: Annual decline in Z-score 
was -0.07 (95% CI -0.10 to -0.05), -0.09 (95% CI -0.11 to -0.08), and -0.11 (95% 
CI -0.14 to -0.08) for participants who developed, respectively, parkinsonism, 
dementia, and both parkinsonism and dementia. These declines were all 
significantly faster than the annual decline in Z-score of 0.07 (95% CI -0.10 to 
-0.05) of controls.
DISCUSSION: A distinct pattern in deterioration of clinical markers is visible 
in patients with SVD, years before the diagnosis of parkinsonism and dementia. 
This knowledge aids early identification of patients with a high risk of 
developing these disorders.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209148
PMID: 38382000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]