---
reference_id: "PMID:33432192"
title: Cellular and molecular pathobiology of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.
authors:
- Mishra S
- Kass DA
journal: Nat Rev Cardiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41569-020-00480-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular and molecular pathobiology of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.
**Authors:** Mishra S, Kass DA
**Journal:** Nat Rev Cardiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41569-020-00480-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41569-020-00480-6)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2021 Jun;18(6):400-423. doi: 10.1038/s41569-020-00480-6. Epub
 2021 Jan 11.

Cellular and molecular pathobiology of heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction.

Mishra S(1), Kass DA(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, The Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, The Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. dkass@jhmi.edu.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. dkass@jhmi.edu.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. dkass@jhmi.edu.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2021 Oct;18(10):735. doi: 10.1038/s41569-021-00516-5.

Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) affects half of all 
patients with heart failure worldwide, is increasing in prevalence, confers 
substantial morbidity and mortality, and has very few effective treatments. 
HFpEF is arguably the greatest unmet medical need in cardiovascular disease. 
Although HFpEF was initially considered to be a haemodynamic disorder 
characterized by hypertension, cardiac hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction, 
the pandemics of obesity and diabetes mellitus have modified the HFpEF syndrome, 
which is now recognized to be a multisystem disorder involving the heart, lungs, 
kidneys, skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, vascular system, and immune and 
inflammatory signalling. This multiorgan involvement makes HFpEF difficult to 
model in experimental animals because the condition is not simply cardiac 
hypertrophy and hypertension with abnormal myocardial relaxation. However, new 
animal models involving both haemodynamic and metabolic disease, and increasing 
efforts to examine human pathophysiology, are revealing new signalling pathways 
and potential therapeutic targets. In this Review, we discuss the cellular and 
molecular pathobiology of HFpEF, with the major focus being on mechanisms 
relevant to the heart, because most research has focused on this organ. We also 
highlight the involvement of other important organ systems, including the lungs, 
kidneys and skeletal muscle, efforts to characterize patients with the use of 
systemic biomarkers, and ongoing therapeutic efforts. Our objective is to 
provide a roadmap of the signalling pathways and mechanisms of HFpEF that are 
being characterized and which might lead to more patient-specific therapies and 
improved clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41569-020-00480-6
PMCID: PMC8574228
PMID: 33432192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]