---
reference_id: "PMID:30566620"
title: Symptomatic and Radiological Response to 177Lu-DOTATATE for the Treatment of Functioning Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors.
authors:
- Zandee WT
- Brabander T
- Blažević A
- Kam BLR
- Teunissen JJM
- Feelders RA
- Hofland J
- de Herder WW
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2018-01991
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Coordination Complexes/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Female
- "Gastrins/blood, metabolism"
- "Glucagon/blood, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Insulin/blood, metabolism"
- "Lutetium/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/blood, pathology, radiotherapy"
- "Octreotide/administration & dosage, adverse effects, analogs & derivatives"
- "Pancreas/metabolism, pathology, radiation effects"
- "Pancreatic Neoplasms/blood, pathology, radiotherapy"
- Quality of Life
- Radiation Dosage
- "Radioisotopes/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
- Retrospective Studies
- "Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide/blood, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Symptomatic and Radiological Response to 177Lu-DOTATATE for the Treatment of Functioning Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors.
**Authors:** Zandee WT, Brabander T, Blažević A, Kam BLR, Teunissen JJM, Feelders RA, Hofland J, de Herder WW
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2018-01991](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2018-01991)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2019 Apr 1;104(4):1336-1344. doi: 
10.1210/jc.2018-01991.

Symptomatic and Radiological Response to 177Lu-DOTATATE for the Treatment of 
Functioning Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors.

Zandee WT(1), Brabander T(2), Blažević A(1), Kam BLR(2), Teunissen JJM(2), 
Feelders RA(1), Hofland J(1), de Herder WW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Sector of Endocrinology, Erasmus Medical 
Center and Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Radiology & Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center and 
Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) with the radiolabeled 
somatostatin analogue [Lutetium-177-DOTA0-Tyr3]octreotate (177Lu-DOTATATE) is 
widely applied for inoperable metastatic small intestinal and nonfunctioning 
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs). The aim of this study is to describe 
the safety and efficacy of the treatment of functioning pNETs.
METHODS: Patients were treated with up to four cycles of 177Lu-DOTATATE with an 
intended dose of 7.4 Gbq per cycle. Radiological (Response Evaluation Criteria 
in Solid Tumors 1.1), symptomatic, and biochemical response were analyzed 
retrospectively for all patients with a functioning pNET (insulinoma, 
gastrinoma, VIPoma, and glucagonoma) treated with 177Lu-DOTATATE. Quality of 
life (QOL) was assessed with the European Organization for Research and 
Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire-Core Module questionnaire.
RESULTS: Thirty-four patients with a metastatic functioning pNET (European 
Neuroendocrine Tumor Society grade 1 or 2) were included: 14 insulinomas, 5 
VIPomas, 7 gastrinomas, and 8 glucagonomas. Subacute hematological toxicity, 
grade 3 or 4 occurred in 4 patients (12%) and a hormonal crisis in 3 patients 
(9%). PRRT resulted in partial or complete response in 59% of patients and the 
disease control rate was 78% in patients with baseline progression. 71% of 
patients with uncontrolled symptoms had a reduction of symptoms and a more than 
80% decrease of circulating hormone levels was measured during follow-up. After 
PRRT, median progression-free survival was 18.1 months (interquartile range: 3.3 
to 35.7) with a concurrent increase in QOL.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with 177Lu-DOTATATE is a safe and effective therapy 
resulting in radiological, symptomatic and biochemical response in a high 
percentage of patients with metastatic functioning pNETs. Hormonal crises occur 
relatively frequent and preventive therapy should be considered before and/or 
during PRRT.

Copyright © 2019 Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2018-01991
PMID: 30566620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]