---
reference_id: "PMID:31793853"
title: "Segmental arterial mediolysis (SAM): Systematic review and analysis of 143 cases."
authors:
- Skeik N
- Olson SL
- Hari G
- Pavia ML
journal: Vasc Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/1358863X19873410
keywords:
- Abdomen/blood supply
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Aortic Dissection/diagnostic imaging, mortality, therapy"
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Abdominal/diagnostic imaging, mortality, therapy"
- "Aortic Rupture/diagnostic imaging, mortality, therapy"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Segmental arterial mediolysis (SAM): Systematic review and analysis of 143 cases.
**Authors:** Skeik N, Olson SL, Hari G, Pavia ML
**Journal:** Vasc Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1358863X19873410](https://doi.org/10.1177/1358863X19873410)

## Content

1. Vasc Med. 2019 Dec;24(6):549-563. doi: 10.1177/1358863X19873410.

Segmental arterial mediolysis (SAM): Systematic review and analysis of 143 
cases.

Skeik N(1), Olson SL(1), Hari G(1), Pavia ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Vascular Medicine Section, Minneapolis Heart Institute, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Segmental arterial mediolysis (SAM) is a rare but serious nonatherosclerotic, 
noninflammatory vasculopathy of unknown etiology that often results in 
dissection, aneurysm, occlusion, or stenosis of, primarily, the abdominal 
arteries. Current literature lacks consensus on diagnostic criteria and 
management options for SAM. This review summarizes 143 cases and aims to advance 
appropriate recognition and management of SAM. Literature review of all relevant 
SAM case studies from 2005 to 2018 yielded 126 individual SAM cases from 66 
reports. We identified 17 additional SAM cases from our center, bringing our 
analysis to 143 patients. Patients with SAM were most commonly men (68%) in 
their 60s. Hypertension (43%), tobacco use (12%), and hyperlipidemia (12%) were 
common comorbidities. Abdominal pain (80%) and intraabdominal bleeding (50%) 
were the most common presenting symptoms. Computed tomography was the most 
frequently used imaging method (78%), and histology was available in 44% of 
cases. The most commonly affected vessels were the superior mesenteric (53%), 
hepatic (45%), celiac (36%), renal (26%), and splenic (25%) arteries with 
aneurysm (76%), dissection (61%), and arterial rupture (46%). Treatments 
included coil embolization (28%), abdominal organ surgery (24%), open arterial 
repair (21%), and medical management (20%). Case-specific treatment modalities 
yielded symptom relief in the vast majority (91%) of patients, with a mortality 
rate of 7%.

DOI: 10.1177/1358863X19873410
PMID: 31793853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]