---
reference_id: "PMID:21990111"
title: Update of the mutation spectrum and clinical correlations of over 360 mutations in eight genes that underlie the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses.
authors:
- Kousi M
- Lehesjoki AE
- Mole SE
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21624
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Blindness/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Exons
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- Introns
- "Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Molecular Chaperones/genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Mortality, Premature"
- Mutation
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- Severity of Illness Index
- Tripeptidyl-Peptidase 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update of the mutation spectrum and clinical correlations of over 360 mutations in eight genes that underlie the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses.
**Authors:** Kousi M, Lehesjoki AE, Mole SE
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21624](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21624)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2012 Jan;33(1):42-63. doi: 10.1002/humu.21624. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Update of the mutation spectrum and clinical correlations of over 360 mutations 
in eight genes that underlie the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses.

Kousi M(1), Lehesjoki AE, Mole SE.

Author information:
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman 
Institute, University of Helsinki, Finland.

The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders. Most are autosomal recessively 
inherited. Clinical features include a variable age of onset, motor and mental 
decline, epilepsy, visual loss, and premature death. Mutations in eight genes 
(PPT1/CLN1, TPP1/CLN2, CLN3, CLN5, CLN6, MFSD8/CLN7, CLN8) have been identified 
and several more are predicted to exist, including two provisionally named CLN4 
and CLN9. Despite excessive in vitro and in vivo studies, the precise functions 
of the NCL proteins and the disease mechanisms remain elusive. To date 365 
NCL-causing mutations are known, with 91 novel disease-causing mutations 
reported. These are reviewed with an emphasis on their complex correlation to 
phenotypes. Different mutations within the NCL spectrum can cause variable 
disease severity. The NCLs exemplify both phenotypic convergence or mimicry and 
phenotypic divergence. For example, mutations in CLN5, CLN6, MFSD8, or CLN8 can 
underlie the clinically similar late infantile variant NCL disease. Phenotypic 
divergence is exemplified by different CLN8 mutations giving rise to two very 
different diseases, the mild CLN8 disease, EPMR (progressive epilepsy with 
mental retardation), and the more severe CLN8 disease, late infantile variant. 
The increase in the genetic understanding of the NCLs has led to improved 
diagnostic approaches, and the recent proposal of a new nomenclature.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21624
PMID: 21990111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]