---
reference_id: "PMID:38798824"
title: Akap5 links synaptic dysfunction to neuroinflammatory signaling in a mouse model of infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
authors:
- Koster KP
- Fyke Z
- Nguyen TTA
- Niqula A
- Noriega-González LY
- Woolfrey KM
- "Dell'Acqua ML"
- Cologna SM
- Yoshii A
journal: Front Synaptic Neurosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2024.1384625
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Akap5 links synaptic dysfunction to neuroinflammatory signaling in a mouse model of infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
**Authors:** Koster KP, Fyke Z, Nguyen TTA, Niqula A, Noriega-González LY, Woolfrey KM, Dell'Acqua ML, Cologna SM, Yoshii A
**Journal:** Front Synaptic Neurosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnsyn.2024.1384625](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsyn.2024.1384625)

## Content

1. Front Synaptic Neurosci. 2024 May 10;16:1384625. doi:
10.3389/fnsyn.2024.1384625. eCollection 2024.

Akap5 links synaptic dysfunction to neuroinflammatory signaling in a mouse model
of infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.

Koster KP(1), Fyke Z(1), Nguyen TTA(2), Niqula A(1), Noriega-González LY(1),
Woolfrey KM(3), Dell'Acqua ML(3), Cologna SM(2), Yoshii A(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL,
United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, United States.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL,
United States.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL,
United States.

Palmitoylation and depalmitoylation represent dichotomic processes by which a
labile posttranslational lipid modification regulates protein trafficking and
degradation. The depalmitoylating enzyme, palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1
(PPT1), is associated with the devastating pediatric neurodegenerative
condition, infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (CLN1). CLN1 is
characterized by the accumulation of autofluorescent lysosomal storage material
(AFSM) in neurons and robust neuroinflammation. Converging lines of evidence
suggest that in addition to cellular waste accumulation, the symptomology of
CLN1 corresponds with disruption of synaptic processes. Indeed, loss of Ppt1
function in cortical neurons dysregulates the synaptic incorporation of the
GluA1 AMPA receptor (AMPAR) subunit during a type of synaptic plasticity called
synaptic scaling. However, the mechanisms causing this aberration are unknown.
Here, we used the Ppt1-/- mouse model (both sexes) to further investigate how
Ppt1 regulates synaptic plasticity and how its disruption affects downstream
signaling pathways. To this end, we performed a palmitoyl-proteomic screen,
which provoked the discovery that Akap5 is excessively palmitoylated at Ppt1-/-
synapses. Extending our previous data, in vivo induction of synaptic scaling,
which is regulated by Akap5, caused an excessive upregulation of GluA1 in
Ppt1-/- mice. This synaptic change was associated with exacerbated disease
pathology. Furthermore, the Akap5- and inflammation-associated transcriptional
regulator, nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), was sensitized in Ppt1-/-
cortical neurons. Suppressing the upstream regulator of NFAT activation,
calcineurin, with the FDA-approved therapeutic FK506 (Tacrolimus) modestly
improved neuroinflammation in Ppt1-/- mice. These findings indicate that the
absence of depalmitoylation stifles synaptic protein trafficking and contributes
to neuroinflammation via an Akap5-associated mechanism.

Copyright © 2024 Koster, Fyke, Nguyen, Niqula, Noriega-González, Woolfrey,
Dell’Acqua, Cologna and Yoshii.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsyn.2024.1384625
PMCID: PMC11116793
PMID: 38798824

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
