---
reference_id: "PMID:19383830"
title: "Molecular genetics of medullary thyroid carcinoma: the quest for novel therapeutic targets."
authors:
- Cerrato A
- De Falco V
- Santoro M
journal: J Mol Endocrinol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1677/JME-09-0024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular genetics of medullary thyroid carcinoma: the quest for novel therapeutic targets.
**Authors:** Cerrato A, De Falco V, Santoro M
**Journal:** J Mol Endocrinol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1677/JME-09-0024](https://doi.org/10.1677/JME-09-0024)

## Content

1. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Oct;43(4):143-55. doi: 10.1677/JME-09-0024. Epub 2009
Apr  21.

Molecular genetics of medullary thyroid carcinoma: the quest for novel 
therapeutic targets.

Cerrato A(1), De Falco V, Santoro M.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale CNR c/o Dipartimento di 
Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, L. Califano, Università Federico II 
di Napoli, Naples, Italy.

Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a rare tumour arising from neural 
crest-derived parafollicular C-cells. Metastatic MTC patients are incurable 
because the cancer does not respond to radiotherapy or chemotherapy. The 
REarranged during Transfection (RET) proto-oncogene plays a key role in the 
development of MTC. However, one-half of the sporadic MTC do not carry RET 
mutations. Mice models and early evidence obtained in human samples suggest that 
other genes, including those encoding components of the RB1 (retinoblastoma) and 
TP53 tumour-suppressor pathways, may be involved in MTC formation. Here, we 
review the data on the involvement of genes acting in the RET and RB1/TP53 
pathways in MTC. Understanding genetic lesions that occur in MTC is a 
prerequisite to identifying molecular therapeutic targets in MTC and in 
improving the efficacy of RET-targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.1677/JME-09-0024
PMID: 19383830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]