---
reference_id: "PMID:39014460"
title: "PD1/PD-L1 blockade in clear cell renal cell carcinoma: mechanistic insights, clinical efficacy, and future perspectives."
authors:
- Zhu Z
- Jin Y
- Zhou J
- Chen F
- Chen M
- Gao Z
- Hu L
- Xuan J
- Li X
- Song Z
- Guo X
journal: Mol Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12943-024-02059-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/drug therapy, pathology, metabolism, therapy"
- "B7-H1 Antigen/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Kidney Neoplasms/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Treatment Outcome
- Animals
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Immunotherapy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PD1/PD-L1 blockade in clear cell renal cell carcinoma: mechanistic insights, clinical efficacy, and future perspectives.
**Authors:** Zhu Z, Jin Y, Zhou J, Chen F, Chen M, Gao Z, Hu L, Xuan J, Li X, Song Z, Guo X
**Journal:** Mol Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12943-024-02059-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-024-02059-y)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer. 2024 Jul 16;23(1):146. doi: 10.1186/s12943-024-02059-y.

PD1/PD-L1 blockade in clear cell renal cell carcinoma: mechanistic insights, 
clinical efficacy, and future perspectives.

Zhu Z(#)(1)(2), Jin Y(#)(2), Zhou J(#)(3), Chen F(3), Chen M(3), Gao Z(3), Hu 
L(3), Xuan J(4), Li X(5), Song Z(6), Guo X(7).

Author information:
(1)Jiaxing University Master Degree Cultivation Base, Zhejiang Chinese Medical 
University, Hangzhou, 310000, Zhejiang, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University, 
Jiaxing, 310000, Zhejiang, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University, 
Jiaxing, 310000, Zhejiang, P.R. China.
(4)Department of General Practice, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing 
University, Jiaxing, 310000, Zhejiang, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University, 
Jiaxing, 310000, Zhejiang, P.R. China. 292624249@qq.com.
(6)Department of Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University, 
Jiaxing, 310000, Zhejiang, P.R. China. doctorsongzw@zjxu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University, 
Jiaxing, 310000, Zhejiang, P.R. China. cngxchpgyc101@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

The advent of PD1/PD-L1 inhibitors has significantly transformed the therapeutic 
landscape for clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). This review provides an 
in-depth analysis of the biological functions and regulatory mechanisms of PD1 
and PD-L1 in ccRCC, emphasizing their role in tumor immune evasion. We 
comprehensively evaluate the clinical efficacy and safety profiles of PD1/PD-L1 
inhibitors, such as Nivolumab and Pembrolizumab, through a critical examination 
of recent clinical trial data. Furthermore, we discuss the challenges posed by 
resistance mechanisms to these therapies and potential strategies to overcome 
them. We also explores the synergistic potential of combination therapies, 
integrating PD1/PD-L1 inhibitors with other immunotherapies, targeted therapies, 
and conventional modalities such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy. In addition, 
we examine emerging predictive biomarkers for response to PD1/PD-L1 blockade and 
biomarkers indicative of resistance, providing a foundation for personalized 
therapeutic approaches. Finally, we outline future research directions, 
highlighting the need for novel therapeutic strategies, deeper mechanistic 
insights, and the development of individualized treatment regimens. Our work 
summarizes the latest knowledge and progress in this field, aiming to provide a 
valuable reference for improving clinical efficacy and guiding future research 
on the application of PD1/PD-L1 inhibitors in ccRCC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12943-024-02059-y
PMCID: PMC11251344
PMID: 39014460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.