---
reference_id: "PMID:35690315"
title: Longitudinal Changes in Cardiac Troponin and Risk of Heart Failure Among Black Adults.
authors:
- Saha A
- Patel KV
- Ayers C
- Ballantyne CM
- Correa A
- Defilippi C
- Hall ME
- Mentz RJ
- Seliger SL
- Yimer W
- Butler J
- Berry JD
- De Lemos JA
- Pandey A
journal: J Card Fail
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2022.05.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinal Changes in Cardiac Troponin and Risk of Heart Failure Among Black Adults.
**Authors:** Saha A, Patel KV, Ayers C, Ballantyne CM, Correa A, Defilippi C, Hall ME, Mentz RJ, Seliger SL, Yimer W, Butler J, Berry JD, De Lemos JA, Pandey A
**Journal:** J Card Fail (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cardfail.2022.05.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cardfail.2022.05.013)

## Content

1. J Card Fail. 2023 Jan;29(1):6-15. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2022.05.013. Epub
2022  Jun 8.

Longitudinal Changes in Cardiac Troponin and Risk of Heart Failure Among Black 
Adults.

Saha A(1), Patel KV(2), Ayers C(1), Ballantyne CM(3), Correa A(4), Defilippi 
C(5), Hall ME(4), Mentz RJ(6), Seliger SL(7), Yimer W(4), Butler J(8), Berry 
JD(1), De Lemos JA(1), Pandey A(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Houston Methodist DeBakey Heart & Vascular Center, 
Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, 
Mississippi.
(5)Inova Heart and Vascular Institute, Falls Church, Virginia.
(6)Division of Cardiology, Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, North 
Carolina.
(7)Division of Nephrology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland.
(8)Baylor Scott and White Research Institute, Dallas, TX.
(9)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. Electronic address: 
AMBARISH.PANDEY@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    J Card Fail. 2023 Jan;29(1):16-17. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2022.07.051.

BACKGROUND: Among Black adults, high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I (hs-cTnI) is 
associated with heart failure (HF) risk. The association of longitudinal changes 
in hs-cTnI with risk of incident HF, HF with reduced and preserved ejection 
fraction (HFrEF and HFpEF, respectively), among Black adults is not 
well-established.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This study included Black participants from the Jackson 
Heart Study with available hs-cTnI data at visits 1 (2000-2004) and 2 
(2005-2008) and no history of cardiovascular disease. Cox models were used to 
evaluate associations of categories of longitudinal change in hs-cTnI with 
incident HF risk. Among 2423 participants, 11.6% had incident elevation in 
hs-cTnI at visit 2, and 16.9% had stable or improved elevation (≤50% increase in 
hs-cTnI), and 4.0% had worsened hs-cTnI elevation (>50% increase). Over a median 
follow-up of 12.0 years, there were 139 incident HF hospitalizations (64 HFrEF, 
58 HFpEF). Compared with participants without an elevated hs-cTnI, those with 
incident, stable or improved, or worsened hs-cTnI elevation had higher HF risk 
(adjusted hazard ratio 3.20 [95% confidence interval, 1.92-5.33]; adjusted 
hazard ratio 2.40, [95% confidence interval, 1.47-3.92]; and adjusted hazard 
ratio 8.10, [95% confidence interval, 4.74-13.83], respectively). Similar 
patterns of association were observed for risk of HFrEF and HFpEF.
CONCLUSIONS: Among Black adults, an increase in hs-cTnI levels on follow-up was 
associated with a higher HF risk.
LAY SUMMARY: The present study included 2423 Black adults from the Jackson Heart 
Study with available biomarkers of cardiac injury and no history of 
cardiovascular disease at visits 1 and 2. The majority of participants did not 
have evidence of cardiac injury at both visits (67.5%), 11.6% had evidence of 
cardiac injury only on follow-up, 14.5% had stable elevations, 4.0% had worsened 
elevations, and 2.4% had improved elevations of cardiac injury biomarkers during 
follow-up. Compared with participants without evidence of cardiac injury, those 
with new, stable, and worsened levels of cardiac injury had a higher risk of 
developing heart failure.
TWEET: Among Black adults, persistent or worsening subclinical myocardial injury 
is associated with an elevated risk of HF.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2022.05.013
PMID: 35690315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]