---
reference_id: "PMID:18155911"
title: "Differential diagnosis of muscular hypotonia in infants: the kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VI)."
authors:
- Yiş U
- Dirik E
- Chambaz C
- Steinmann B
- Giunta C
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2007.11.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential diagnosis of muscular hypotonia in infants: the kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VI).
**Authors:** Yiş U, Dirik E, Chambaz C, Steinmann B, Giunta C
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2007.11.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2007.11.006)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2008 Mar;18(3):210-4. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2007.11.006. Epub
 2007 Dec 26.

Differential diagnosis of muscular hypotonia in infants: the kyphoscoliotic type 
of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VI).

Yiş U(1), Dirik E, Chambaz C, Steinmann B, Giunta C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology, Dokuz Eylül University School of Medicine, 
Department of Pediatrics, 35340 Izmir, Turkey. ulyis@yahoo.com

Comment in
    Neuromuscul Disord. 2008 Nov;18(11):906; author reply 907. doi: 
10.1016/j.nmd.2008.05.016.

The kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VI) (OMIM 225400) is an 
inherited connective tissue disorder characterized by hypotonia and 
kyphoscoliosis at birth, joint hypermobility, and skin hyperelasticity and 
fragility. Biochemically, it is characterized by a deficiency of collagen lysyl 
hydroxylase (EC 1.14.11.4) due to mutations in PLOD1. This deficiency results in 
underhydroxylation of collagen lysyl residues and, hence, an abnormal pattern of 
lysyl pyridinoline (LP) and hydroxylysyl pyridinoline (HP) crosslinks excreted 
in the urine. Because of hypotonia and delay in gross motor development, a 
neuromuscular disease is usually suspected, and in most cases the diagnosis is 
considered only very late, after performing an invasive neuromuscular work-up 
with normal results. We report a 12-month-old boy with kyphoscoliosis and 
delayed gross motor development, in whom the differential diagnosis of 
kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS VI) was initially suspected 
and successively confirmed by the abnormal urinary ratio of total pyridinolines 
(LP to HP), and by mutation analysis. We advocate the analysis of urinary 
pyridinolines in all infants with severe hypotonia which is highly specific and 
sensitive, quick and inexpensive.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2007.11.006
PMID: 18155911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]