---
reference_id: "PMID:21157040"
title: Cardiac neural crest orchestrates remodeling and functional maturation of mouse semilunar valves.
authors:
- Jain R
- Engleka KA
- Rentschler SL
- Manderfield LJ
- Li L
- Yuan L
- Epstein JA
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1172/JCI44244
keywords:
- Animals
- "Aortic Valve/abnormalities, embryology, physiopathology"
- Apoptosis
- "Endocardial Cushion Defects/embryology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Models, Cardiovascular"
- "Neural Crest/abnormalities, embryology, physiopathology"
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- "Paired Box Transcription Factors/deficiency, genetics"
- Pregnancy
- "Receptors, Notch/genetics, physiology"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac neural crest orchestrates remodeling and functional maturation of mouse semilunar valves.
**Authors:** Jain R, Engleka KA, Rentschler SL, Manderfield LJ, Li L, Yuan L, Epstein JA
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI44244](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI44244)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2011 Jan;121(1):422-30. doi: 10.1172/JCI44244. Epub 2010 Dec
13.

Cardiac neural crest orchestrates remodeling and functional maturation of mouse
semilunar valves.

Jain R(1), Engleka KA, Rentschler SL, Manderfield LJ, Li L, Yuan L, Epstein JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Congenital anomalies of the aortic valve are common and are associated with
progressive valvular insufficiency and/or stenosis. In addition, aneurysm,
coarctation, and dissection of the ascending aorta and aortic arch are often
associated conditions that complicate patient management and increase morbidity
and mortality. These associated aortopathies are commonly attributed to
turbulent hemodynamic flow through the malformed valve leading to focal defects
in the vessel wall. However, numerous surgical and pathological studies have
identified widespread cystic medial necrosis and smooth muscle apoptosis
throughout the aortic arch in affected patients. Here, we provide experimental
evidence for an alternative model to explain the association of aortic vessel
and valvular disease. Using mice with primary and secondary cardiac neural crest
deficiencies, we have shown that neural crest contribution to the outflow
endocardial cushions (the precursors of the semilunar valves) is required for
late gestation valvular remodeling, mesenchymal apoptosis, and proper valve
architecture. Neural crest was also shown to contribute to the smooth muscle
layer of the wall of the ascending aorta and aortic arch. Hence, defects of
cardiac neural crest can result in functionally abnormal semilunar valves and
concomitant aortic arch artery abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI44244
PMCID: PMC3007154
PMID: 21157040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
