---
reference_id: "PMID:39576422"
title: Naturally derived bioactive compounds as precision modulators of immune and inflammatory mechanisms in psoriatic conditions.
authors:
- Radu A
- Tit DM
- Endres LM
- Radu AF
- Vesa CM
- Bungau SG
journal: Inflammopharmacology
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10787-024-01602-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Naturally derived bioactive compounds as precision modulators of immune and inflammatory mechanisms in psoriatic conditions.
**Authors:** Radu A, Tit DM, Endres LM, Radu AF, Vesa CM, Bungau SG
**Journal:** Inflammopharmacology (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10787-024-01602-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10787-024-01602-z)

## Content

1. Inflammopharmacology. 2025 Feb;33(2):527-549. doi: 10.1007/s10787-024-01602-z.
 Epub 2024 Nov 22.

Naturally derived bioactive compounds as precision modulators of immune and 
inflammatory mechanisms in psoriatic conditions.

Radu A(1)(2), Tit DM(1)(2), Endres LM(1)(3), Radu AF(4)(5), Vesa CM(6)(7), 
Bungau SG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Doctoral School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, University of Oradea, 
410087, Oradea, Romania.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of 
Oradea, 410028, Oradea, Romania.
(3)Department of Psycho-Neurosciences and Recovery, Faculty of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, University of Oradea, 410073, Oradea, Romania.
(4)Doctoral School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, University of Oradea, 
410087, Oradea, Romania. andreiflavius.radu@uoradea.ro.
(5)Department of Preclinical Disciplines, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
University of Oradea, 410073, Oradea, Romania. andreiflavius.radu@uoradea.ro.
(6)Doctoral School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, University of Oradea, 
410087, Oradea, Romania. cosmin.vesa@csud.uoradea.ro.
(7)Department of Preclinical Disciplines, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
University of Oradea, 410073, Oradea, Romania. cosmin.vesa@csud.uoradea.ro.

Psoriasis represents a chronic autoimmune skin condition defined by various 
clinical forms, including inverse, erythrodermic, pustular, guttate, plaque 
types. While current therapies, including topical treatments but also systemic 
through conventional synthetic drugs and biologics, have improved symptom 
management, no treatment completely cures the disease, and numerous options are 
linked to considerable adverse effects, including immunosuppression and 
carcinogenic risks. Therefore, there is growing interest in bioactive compounds 
from natural sources due to their potential to reduce inflammation and oxidative 
stress in psoriasis with fewer adverse effects. The present narrative review 
aimed to address the limitations of current psoriasis therapies by exploring the 
therapeutic potential of bioactive compounds in the classes of flavonoids, 
terpenoids, omega-3 fatty acids, and alkaloids assessed through complex 
experimental models, focusing on their immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory 
properties. Recent studies highlight the efficacy of natural bioactive compounds 
in reducing psoriasis symptoms, either as standalone treatments or in 
combination with conventional therapies. While these compounds show promise in 
alleviating psoriasis-related inflammation, further research is needed to 
optimize their therapeutic use, understand their mechanisms of action, and 
assess long-term safety. Future studies should focus on clinical trials to 
establish standardized protocols for incorporating bioactive compounds into 
psoriasis management and explore their potential role in personalized treatment 
strategies. Continued research is essential to develop more effective, safer, 
and affordable therapeutic options for psoriasis patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10787-024-01602-z
PMCID: PMC11842495
PMID: 39576422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest. Ethics approval and consent to participate: 
Not applicable. Consent for publications: Not applicable.