---
reference_id: "PMID:36089135"
title: The clinical landscape of cell-free DNA alterations in 1671 patients with advanced biliary tract cancer.
authors:
- Berchuck JE
- Facchinetti F
- DiToro DF
- Baiev I
- Majeed U
- Reyes S
- Chen C
- Zhang K
- Sharman R
- Uson Junior PLS
- Maurer J
- Shroff RT
- Pritchard CC
- Wu MJ
- Catenacci DVT
- Javle M
- Friboulet L
- Hollebecque A
- Bardeesy N
- Zhu AX
- Lennerz JK
- Tan B
- Borad M
- Parikh AR
- Kiedrowski LA
- Kelley RK
- Mody K
- Juric D
- Goyal L
journal: Ann Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2022.09.150
keywords:
- Humans
- Cell-Free Nucleic Acids/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Bile Duct Neoplasms/genetics
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Mutation
- "Biliary Tract Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical landscape of cell-free DNA alterations in 1671 patients with advanced biliary tract cancer.
**Authors:** Berchuck JE, Facchinetti F, DiToro DF, Baiev I, Majeed U, Reyes S, Chen C, Zhang K, Sharman R, Uson Junior PLS, Maurer J, Shroff RT, Pritchard CC, Wu MJ, Catenacci DVT, Javle M, Friboulet L, Hollebecque A, Bardeesy N, Zhu AX, Lennerz JK, Tan B, Borad M, Parikh AR, Kiedrowski LA, Kelley RK, Mody K, Juric D, Goyal L
**Journal:** Ann Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.annonc.2022.09.150](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.09.150)

## Content

1. Ann Oncol. 2022 Dec;33(12):1269-1283. doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2022.09.150. Epub 
2022 Sep 9.

The clinical landscape of cell-free DNA alterations in 1671 patients with 
advanced biliary tract cancer.

Berchuck JE(1), Facchinetti F(2), DiToro DF(3), Baiev I(4), Majeed U(5), Reyes 
S(6), Chen C(7), Zhang K(8), Sharman R(9), Uson Junior PLS(10), Maurer J(4), 
Shroff RT(9), Pritchard CC(11), Wu MJ(4), Catenacci DVT(12), Javle M(13), 
Friboulet L(2), Hollebecque A(2), Bardeesy N(4), Zhu AX(14), Lennerz JK(3), Tan 
B(15), Borad M(16), Parikh AR(4), Kiedrowski LA(17), Kelley RK(8), Mody K(5), 
Juric D(4), Goyal L(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, USA.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, Institut Gustave Roussy, Inserm U981, Biomarqueurs 
Prédictifs et Nouvelles Stratégies Thérapeutiques en Oncologie, Villejuif, 
France.
(3)Center for Integrated Diagnostics, Department of Pathology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston.
(4)Department of Medicine, Mass General Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston.
(5)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville.
(6)Duke University School of Medicine, Durham.
(7)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Palo Alto.
(8)UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco.
(9)University of Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, USA.
(10)Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
(11)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle.
(12)University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago.
(13)Division of Cancer Medicine, Department of Gastrointestinal Medical 
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA.
(14)Jiahui International Cancer Center, Jihaui Health, Shanghai; I-Mab 
Biopharma, Shanghai, China.
(15)Department of Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis.
(16)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale.
(17)Department of Medical Affairs, Guardant Health, Redwood City, USA.
(18)Department of Medicine, Mass General Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston. Electronic address: lgoyal@partners.org.

Comment in
    Ann Oncol. 2022 Dec;33(12):1209-1211. doi: 10.1016/j.annonc.2022.09.157.

BACKGROUND: Targeted therapies have transformed clinical management of advanced 
biliary tract cancer (BTC). Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) analysis is an attractive 
approach for cancer genomic profiling that overcomes many limitations of 
traditional tissue-based analysis. We examined cfDNA as a tool to inform 
clinical management of patients with advanced BTC and generate novel insights 
into BTC tumor biology.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed next-generation sequencing data of 2068 cfDNA 
samples from 1671 patients with advanced BTC generated with Guardant360. We 
carried out clinical annotation on a multi-institutional subset (n = 225) to 
assess intra-patient cfDNA-tumor concordance and the association of cfDNA 
variant allele fraction (VAF) with clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: Genetic alterations were detected in cfDNA in 84% of patients, with 
targetable alterations detected in 44% of patients. Fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 2 (FGFR2) fusions, isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) mutations, and 
BRAF V600E were clonal in the majority of cases, affirming these targetable 
alterations as early driver events in BTC. Concordance between cfDNA and tissue 
for mutation detection was high for IDH1 mutations (87%) and BRAF V600E (100%), 
and low for FGFR2 fusions (18%). cfDNA analysis uncovered novel putative 
mechanisms of resistance to targeted therapies, including mutation of the 
cysteine residue (FGFR2 C492F) to which covalent FGFR inhibitors bind. High 
pre-treatment cfDNA VAF was associated with poor prognosis and shorter response 
to chemotherapy and targeted therapy. Finally, we report the frequency of 
promising targets in advanced BTC currently under investigation in other 
advanced solid tumors, including KRAS G12C (1.0%), KRAS G12D (5.1%), PIK3CA 
mutations (6.8%), and ERBB2 amplifications (4.9%).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings from the largest and most comprehensive study to 
date of cfDNA from patients with advanced BTC highlight the utility of cfDNA 
analysis in current management of this disease. Characterization of oncogenic 
drivers and mechanisms of therapeutic resistance in this study will inform drug 
development efforts to reduce mortality for patients with BTC.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annonc.2022.09.150
PMID: 36089135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]