---
reference_id: "PMID:10095436"
title: "[Evidence of genetic alterations in chromosome 11 in embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma]."
authors:
- Brinkschmidt C
- Poremba C
- Schäfer KL
- Simon R
- Jürgens H
- Böcker W
- Dockhorn-Dworniczak B
journal: Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Evidence of genetic alterations in chromosome 11 in embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma].
**Authors:** Brinkschmidt C, Poremba C, Schäfer KL, Simon R, Jürgens H, Böcker W, Dockhorn-Dworniczak B
**Journal:** Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol (1998)

## Content

1. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 1998;82:210-4.

[Evidence of genetic alterations in chromosome 11 in embryonal and alveolar 
rhabdomyosarcoma].

[Article in German]

Brinkschmidt C(1), Poremba C, Schäfer KL, Simon R, Jürgens H, Böcker W, 
Dockhorn-Dworniczak B.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Westfälischen Wilhelms-Universität Münster.

Various chromosome 11 alterations have been described in rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). 
Allelic losses of 11p15.5 are characteristic of embryonal RMS (eRMS), whereas an 
increase in the expression of the Igf2 gene located on 11p15.5 has regularly 
been observed in eRMS and alveolar RMS (aRMS). The aim of our study was to 
analyse chromosome 11 alterations of RMS by combining different 
molecular-genetic and cytogenetic methods. 16 RMSs (7 aRMS with proven 2;13 or 
1;13 translocations, 9 eRMS) were studied by a PCR-based microsatellite analysis 
of loci 11p15.5 and 11q23. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was performed 
in 8/16 cases. The ploidy status of chromosome 11 was evaluated using the FISH 
technique. A RT-PCR analysis of Igf2 gene region was performed to evaluate the 
imprinting status. Allelic losses (LOH) of 11p15.5 were observed in 4/7 aRMS and 
8/9 eRMS. These losses were accompanied by LOH of 11q23 in 2/7 aRMS and 5/9 
eRMS, respectively. CGH of all the eRMSs and one aRMS studied revealed gains of 
genetic material mostly involving the entire length of chromosome 11. One aRMS 
showed a loss of chromosome 11 material, both in CGH and LOH analysis. In 2/9 
aRMS, which neither in CGH nor in LOH analysis had exhibited chromosome 11 
alterations, biallelic IGF-II expression was revealed. Our results show that 
chromosome 11 alterations play a major role in the biology of both alveolar and 
eRMS. Combining the data of our study, we demonstrated that three different 
chromosome 11 alterations are involved in the tumorigenesis of RMS: 1) LOH 
resulting in hemizygosity of chromosome 11. 2) LOH with simultaneous gains of 
chromosome 11 material due to uniparental polysomy. 3) loss of imprinting for 
the Igf2 gene in the absence of gross chromosome 11 alterations.

PMID: 10095436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]