---
reference_id: "PMID:34355424"
title: "Ectopic Calcification and Hypophosphatemic Rickets: Natural History of ENPP1 and ABCC6 Deficiencies."
authors:
- Ferreira CR
- Kintzinger K
- Hackbarth ME
- Botschen U
- Nitschke Y
- Mughal MZ
- Baujat G
- Schnabel D
- Yuen E
- Gahl WA
- Gafni RI
- Liu Q
- Huertas P
- Khursigara G
- Rutsch F
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4418
keywords:
- "Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Mutation
- "Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Pyrophosphatases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Vascular Calcification/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ectopic Calcification and Hypophosphatemic Rickets: Natural History of ENPP1 and ABCC6 Deficiencies.
**Authors:** Ferreira CR, Kintzinger K, Hackbarth ME, Botschen U, Nitschke Y, Mughal MZ, Baujat G, Schnabel D, Yuen E, Gahl WA, Gafni RI, Liu Q, Huertas P, Khursigara G, Rutsch F
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4418](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4418)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2021 Nov;36(11):2193-2202. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4418. Epub 2021
 Aug 16.

Ectopic Calcification and Hypophosphatemic Rickets: Natural History of ENPP1 and 
ABCC6 Deficiencies.

Ferreira CR(1), Kintzinger K(2), Hackbarth ME(1), Botschen U(2), Nitschke Y(2), 
Mughal MZ(3), Baujat G(4), Schnabel D(5), Yuen E(6), Gahl WA(1), Gafni RI(7), 
Liu Q(8), Huertas P(6), Khursigara G(6), Rutsch F(2).

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Department of General Pediatrics, Münster University Children's Hospital, 
Münster, Germany.
(3)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester, UK.
(4)Centre de Référence Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles (CR MOC) et Filière 
OSCAR, Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(5)Center for Chronically Sick Children, Pediatric Endocrinology, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Inozyme Pharma, Inc., Boston, MA, USA.
(7)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)Quantitative & Regulatory Medical Science, LLC, Long Valley, NJ, USA.

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is a rare disorder caused 
by ENPP1 or ABCC6 variants. GACI is characterized by low pyrophosphate, arterial 
calcification, and high mortality during the first year of life, but the natural 
course and possible differences between the causative genes remain unknown. In 
all, 247 individual records for patients with GACI (from birth to 58.3 years of 
age) across 19 countries were reviewed. Overall mortality was 54.7% (13.4% in 
utero or stillborn), with a 50.4% probability of death before the age of 
6 months (critical period). Contrary to previous publications, we found that 
bisphosphonate treatment had no survival benefit based on a start-time matched 
analysis and inconclusive results when initiated within 2 weeks of birth. 
Despite a similar prevalence of GACI phenotypes between ENPP1 and ABCC6 
deficiencies, including arterial calcification (77.2% and 89.5%, respectively), 
organ calcification (65.8% and 84.2%, respectively), and cardiovascular 
complications (58.4% and 78.9%, respectively), mortality was higher for ENPP1 
versus ABCC6 variants (40.5% versus 10.5%, respectively; p = 0.0157). Higher 
prevalence of rickets was reported in 70.8% of surviving affected individuals 
with ENPP1 compared with that of ABCC6 (11.8%; p = 0.0001). Eleven affected 
individuals presenting with rickets and without a GACI diagnosis, termed 
autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 (ARHR2), all had confirmed 
ENPP1 variants. Approximately 70% of these patients demonstrated evidence of 
ectopic calcification or complications similar to those seen in individuals with 
GACI, which shows that ARHR2 is not a distinct condition from GACI but 
represents part of the spectrum of ENPP1 deficiency. Overall, this study 
identified an early mortality risk in GACI patients despite attempts to treat 
with bisphosphonates, high prevalence of rickets almost exclusive to ENPP1 
deficiency, and a spectrum of heterogenous calcification and multiple organ 
complications with both ENPP1 and ABCC6 variants, which suggests an overlapping 
pathology. © 2021 The Authors. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Bone and Mineral 
Research (ASBMR). This article has been contributed to by US Government 
employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 
(ASBMR). This article has been contributed to by US Government employees and 
their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4418
PMCID: PMC8595532
PMID: 34355424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]