---
reference_id: "PMID:18567864"
title: "Common cellular and diverse genetic basis of thymoma-associated myasthenia gravis: role of MHC class II and AIRE genes and genetic polymorphisms."
authors:
- Ströbel P
- Chuang WY
- Chuvpilo S
- Zettl A
- Katzenberger T
- Kalbacher H
- Rieckmann P
- Nix W
- Schalke B
- Gold R
- Müller-Hermelink HK
- Peterson P
- Marx A
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1196/annals.1405.018
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Methylation
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- "Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Interferon-gamma/pharmacology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Myasthenia Gravis/complications, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- "Polymorphism, Genetic/genetics"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- "STAT1 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Thymoma/etiology, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- AIRE Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Common cellular and diverse genetic basis of thymoma-associated myasthenia gravis: role of MHC class II and AIRE genes and genetic polymorphisms.
**Authors:** Ströbel P, Chuang WY, Chuvpilo S, Zettl A, Katzenberger T, Kalbacher H, Rieckmann P, Nix W, Schalke B, Gold R, Müller-Hermelink HK, Peterson P, Marx A
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1196/annals.1405.018](https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1405.018)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008;1132:143-56. doi: 10.1196/annals.1405.018.

Common cellular and diverse genetic basis of thymoma-associated myasthenia
gravis: role of MHC class II and AIRE genes and genetic polymorphisms.

Ströbel P(1), Chuang WY, Chuvpilo S, Zettl A, Katzenberger T, Kalbacher H,
Rieckmann P, Nix W, Schalke B, Gold R, Müller-Hermelink HK, Peterson P, Marx A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Mannheim, University of
Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68135 Mannheim, Germany.
philipp.stroebel@path.ma.uni-heidelberg.de

Generation of autoreactive CD4(+) effector T cells and defective production of
regulatory CD4(+) T cells inside thymomas contribute to the development of
myasthenia gravis (MG) in >90% of MG(+) thymomas. The molecular basis of these
abnormalities is unknown. We report here that a) expression levels of class II
major histocompatibility complex (MHCII) genes are variably decreased in
thymomas, most prominently in histological WHO types A and AB; b) epithelial
cells of type A and AB thymomas exhibit signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT-1)-related defects of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) signaling
and human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR expression in vitro; c) the promoter III
(pIII)- and pIV-driven splice variants of the MHCII transactivator (CIITA) play
a key role in MHCII gene expression in thymus and thymomas; and d) the pIV CIITA
promoter is heavily methylated in thymomas. Recently, we also found that
expression of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene is absent from approximately
95% of thymomas. Among all theses abnormalities, only better preserved
expression levels of MHCII (P < 0.001) in thymomas were significantly associated
with the presence of MG. Taking the association of a gain-of-function
polymorphism of the CTLA-4 and PTPN22 gene with MG in thymomas into account, we
conclude that these acquired cellular abnormalities of the thymoma
microenvironment in concert with inherited genetic high-risk polymorphisms of
immunoregulatory genes have an impact on intratumorous thymopoiesis and appear
to tip the balance toward central tolerance failure and development of MG. The
findings imply that IFN-gamma and STAT-1 signaling play a role in MHCII
expression in the human thymus and in the pathogenesis of paraneoplastic MG.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1405.018
PMID: 18567864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
