---
reference_id: "PMID:11279523"
title: "The amnionless gene, essential for mouse gastrulation, encodes a visceral-endoderm-specific protein with an extracellular cysteine-rich domain."
authors:
- Kalantry S
- Manning S
- Haub O
- Tomihara-Newberger C
- Lee HG
- Fangman J
- Disteche CM
- Manova K
- Lacy E
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/86912
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The amnionless gene, essential for mouse gastrulation, encodes a visceral-endoderm-specific protein with an extracellular cysteine-rich domain.
**Authors:** Kalantry S, Manning S, Haub O, Tomihara-Newberger C, Lee HG, Fangman J, Disteche CM, Manova K, Lacy E
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/86912](https://doi.org/10.1038/86912)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Apr;27(4):412-6. doi: 10.1038/86912.

The amnionless gene, essential for mouse gastrulation, encodes a 
visceral-endoderm-specific protein with an extracellular cysteine-rich domain.

Kalantry S(1), Manning S, Haub O, Tomihara-Newberger C, Lee HG, Fangman J, 
Disteche CM, Manova K, Lacy E.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Weill 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences of Cornell University, New York, New York, 
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2001 Apr;27(4):351-2. doi: 10.1038/86829.

Fate-mapping experiments in the mouse have revealed that the primitive streak 
can be divided into three functional regions: the proximal region gives rise to 
germ cells and the extra-embryonic mesoderm of the yolk sac; the distal region 
generates cardiac mesoderm and node-derived axial mesendoderm; and the middle 
streak region produces the paraxial, intermediate and lateral plate mesoderm of 
the trunk. To gain insight into the mechanisms that mediate the assembly of the 
primitive streak into these functional regions, we have cloned and functionally 
identified the gene disrupted in the amnionless (amn) mouse, which has a 
recessive, embryonic lethal mutation that interferes specifically with the 
formation and/or specification of the middle primitive streak region during 
gastrulation. Here we report that the gene Amn encodes a novel type I 
transmembrane protein that is expressed exclusively in the extra-embryonic 
visceral endoderm layer during gastrulation. The extracellular region of the Amn 
protein contains a cysteine-rich domain with similarity to bone morphogenetic 
protein (BMP)-binding cysteine-rich domains in chordin, its Drosophila 
melanogaster homolog (Short gastrulation) and procollagen IIA (ref. 3). Our 
findings indicate that Amn may direct the production of trunk mesoderm derived 
from the middle streak by acting in the underlying visceral endoderm to modulate 
a BMP signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/86912
PMID: 11279523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]