---
reference_id: "PMID:28070642"
title: "Distinct expression profile of stem cell markers, LGR5 and LGR6, in basaloid skin tumors."
authors:
- Jang BG
- Lee C
- Kim HS
- Shin MS
- Cheon MS
- Kim JW
- Kim WH
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-016-2061-3
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Hair Diseases/pathology
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/analysis, biosynthesis"
- Skin Neoplasms/pathology
- "Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Sweat Gland Neoplasms/pathology
- Tissue Array Analysis
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct expression profile of stem cell markers, LGR5 and LGR6, in basaloid skin tumors.
**Authors:** Jang BG, Lee C, Kim HS, Shin MS, Cheon MS, Kim JW, Kim WH
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-016-2061-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-016-2061-3)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2017 Mar;470(3):301-310. doi: 10.1007/s00428-016-2061-3. Epub
2017 Jan 9.

Distinct expression profile of stem cell markers, LGR5 and LGR6, in basaloid
skin tumors.

Jang BG(1), Lee C(2), Kim HS(1), Shin MS(3), Cheon MS(4), Kim JW(4), Kim WH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Jeju National University School of Medicine, Jeju,
South Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28
Yeongeon-dong, Seoul, 110-799, South Korea.
(3)Department of Plastic Surgery, Jeju National University School of Medicine,
Jeju, South Korea.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Jeju National University School of Medicine, Jeju,
South Korea.
(5)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28
Yeongeon-dong, Seoul, 110-799, South Korea. woohokim@snu.ac.kr.

Mammalian epidermis, which is composed of hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and
interfollicular epidermis, is maintained by discrete stem cells. In vivo lineage
tracing demonstrated that murine LGR5 cells are mainly responsible for hair
follicle regeneration whereas LGR6 cells generate sebaceous glands and
interfollicular epidermis. However, little is known about their expression in
the human skin tumors. In this study, we investigated the expression profile of
LGR5 and LGR6 in a variety of human skin tumors including basaloid tumors with
follicular differentiation (94 basal cell carcinomas, 18 trichoepitheliomas, 3
basaloid follicular hamartomas, and 12 pilomatricomas) and tumors with ductal
differentiation (7 eccrine poromas, 8 hidradenomas, and 5 spiradenomas). LGR5
expression was highest in basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) followed by
trichoepitheliomas (TEs) and basaloid follicular hamartomas. LGR6 had the same
expression pattern as LGR5, even though its expression was lower. Interestingly,
LGR6 expression was detected in stromal cells around the tumor and papillary
mesenchymal bodies of TEs but not in stromal cells of BCCs, suggesting different
characteristics of tumor-associated fibroblasts between TEs and BCCs. It was
unexpected to find that pilomatricomas exclusively expressed LGR6, and its
expression was limited to the basaloid cells. Notably, LGR6-positive cells were
observed in sweat gland ductal cells in normal skin. This might explain, in
part, the finding that LGR6 expression was relatively higher in basaloid tumors
with ductal differentiation than in those with follicular differentiation. In
particular, spiradenomas displayed the same distribution pattern of LGR6 as
normal sweat glands, suggesting the possibility of LGR6-positive cells as tumor
stem cells. In conclusion, we documented the different expression patterns of
stem cell markers, LGR5 and LGR6 in various skin tumors. These data may provide
important insights to understand the origin and development of basaloid skin
tumors.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-016-2061-3
PMID: 28070642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
