---
reference_id: "PMID:37812819"
title: Temporal manipulation of the Scn1a gene reveals its essential role in adult brain function.
authors:
- Di Berardino C
- Mainardi M
- Brusco S
- Benvenuto E
- Broccoli V
- Colasante G
journal: Brain
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awad350
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temporal manipulation of the Scn1a gene reveals its essential role in adult brain function.
**Authors:** Di Berardino C, Mainardi M, Brusco S, Benvenuto E, Broccoli V, Colasante G
**Journal:** Brain (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awad350](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad350)

## Content

1. Brain. 2024 Apr 4;147(4):1216-1230. doi: 10.1093/brain/awad350.

Temporal manipulation of the Scn1a gene reveals its essential role in adult 
brain function.

Di Berardino C(1), Mainardi M(1), Brusco S(1)(2), Benvenuto E(1)(3), Broccoli 
V(1)(2), Colasante G(1).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell and Neurogenesis Unit, Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(2)National Research Council (CNR), Institute of Neuroscience, 20129 Milan, 
Italy.
(3)Gene and Cell Therapy PhD Program, Vita- Salute San Raffaele University, 
20132 Milan, Italy.

Dravet syndrome is a severe epileptic encephalopathy, characterized by 
drug-resistant epilepsy, severe cognitive and behavioural deficits, with 
increased risk of sudden unexpected death (SUDEP). It is caused by 
haploinsufficiency of SCN1A gene encoding for the α-subunit of the voltage-gated 
sodium channel Nav1.1. Therapeutic approaches aiming to upregulate the healthy 
copy of SCN1A gene to restore its normal expression levels are being developed. 
However, whether Scn1a gene function is required only during a specific 
developmental time-window or, alternatively, if its physiological expression is 
necessary in adulthood is untested up to now. We induced Scn1a gene 
haploinsufficiency at two ages spanning postnatal brain development (P30 and 
P60) and compared the phenotypes of those mice to Scn1a perinatally induced mice 
(P2), recapitulating all deficits of Dravet mice. Induction of heterozygous 
Nav1.1 mutation at P30 and P60 elicited susceptibility to the development of 
both spontaneous and hyperthermia-induced seizures and SUDEP rates comparable to 
P2-induced mice, with symptom onset accompanied by the characteristic GABAergic 
interneuron dysfunction. Finally, delayed Scn1a haploinsufficiency induction 
provoked hyperactivity, anxiety and social attitude impairment at levels 
comparable to age matched P2-induced mice, while it was associated with a better 
cognitive performance, with P60-induced mice behaving like the control group. 
Our data show that maintenance of physiological levels of Nav1.1 during brain 
development is not sufficient to prevent Dravet symptoms and that long-lasting 
restoration of Scn1a gene expression would be required to grant optimal clinical 
benefit in patients with Dravet syndrome.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awad350
PMCID: PMC10994529
PMID: 37812819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.