---
reference_id: "PMID:38357897"
title: "Treatment of dissociative identity disorder: leveraging neurobiology to optimize success."
authors:
- Purcell JB
- Brand B
- Browne HA
- Chefetz RA
- Shanahan M
- Bair ZA
- Baranowski KA
- Davis V
- Mangones P
- Modell RL
- Palermo CA
- Robertson EC
- Robinson MA
- Ward L
- Winternitz S
- Kaufman ML
- Lebois LAM
journal: Expert Rev Neurother
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/14737175.2024.2316153
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dissociative Identity Disorder/therapy, diagnosis"
- Neurobiology
- Dissociative Disorders/therapy
- Brain
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of dissociative identity disorder: leveraging neurobiology to optimize success.
**Authors:** Purcell JB, Brand B, Browne HA, Chefetz RA, Shanahan M, Bair ZA, Baranowski KA, Davis V, Mangones P, Modell RL, Palermo CA, Robertson EC, Robinson MA, Ward L, Winternitz S, Kaufman ML, Lebois LAM
**Journal:** Expert Rev Neurother (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737175.2024.2316153](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737175.2024.2316153)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2024 Mar;24(3):273-289. doi: 
10.1080/14737175.2024.2316153. Epub 2024 Feb 15.

Treatment of dissociative identity disorder: leveraging neurobiology to optimize 
success.

Purcell JB(1)(2), Brand B(3), Browne HA(1)(4), Chefetz RA(5), Shanahan M(4), 
Bair ZA(1), Baranowski KA(1), Davis V(4), Mangones P(4), Modell RL(1), Palermo 
CA(1), Robertson EC(1)(6), Robinson MA(1)(2), Ward L(1), Winternitz S(1)(2), 
Kaufman ML(1)(2), Lebois LAM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Depression and Anxiety Disorders, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, 
USA.
(2)b Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Towson University, Towson, MD, USA.
(4)Division of Women's Mental Health, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, USA.
(5)The New Washington School of Psychiatry, Washington DC, USA.
(6)Smith College, Northampton, MA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Dissociative identity disorder (DID) is a treatable mental health 
condition that is associated with a range of psychobiological manifestations. 
However, historical controversy, modern day misunderstanding, and lack of 
professional education have prevented accurate treatment information from 
reaching most clinicians and patients. These obstacles also have slowed 
empirical efforts to improve treatment outcomes for people with DID. Emerging 
neurobiological findings in DID provide essential information that can be used 
to improve treatment outcomes.
AREAS COVERED: In this narrative review, the authors discuss symptom 
characteristics of DID, including dissociative self-states. Current treatment 
approaches are described, focusing on empirically supported psychotherapeutic 
interventions for DID and pharmacological agents targeting dissociative symptoms 
in other conditions. Neurobiological correlates of DID are reviewed, including 
recent research aimed at identifying a neural signature of DID.
EXPERT OPINION: Now is the time to move beyond historical controversy and focus 
on improving DID treatment availability and efficacy. Neurobiological findings 
could optimize treatment by reducing shame, aiding assessment, providing novel 
interventional brain targets and guiding novel pharmacologic and 
psychotherapeutic interventions. The inclusion of those with lived experience in 
the design, planning and interpretation of research investigations is another 
powerful way to improve health outcomes for those with DID.

DOI: 10.1080/14737175.2024.2316153
PMCID: PMC10950423
PMID: 38357897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest: LAM Lebois has an 
unpaid membership on the Scientific Committee for the International Society for 
the Study of Trauma and Dissociation (ISSTD). They also report spousal IP 
payments from Vanderbilt University for technology licensed to Acadia 
Pharmaceuticals unrelated to the present work. ML Kaufman reports unpaid 
membership on the Scientific Committee for the ISSTD. CA Palermo and M Robinson 
report unpaid membership on the Scientific Committee for the ISSTD. Neither 
ISSTD nor any funding sources were involved in the analysis or preparation of 
the paper. The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial 
involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or 
financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the 
manuscript apart from those disclosed.