---
reference_id: "PMID:21844578"
title: "Two novel PEX1 mutations in a patient with Zellweger syndrome: the first Korean case confirmed by biochemical, and molecular evidence."
authors:
- Cho SY
- Chang YP
- Park JY
- Park HD
- Sohn YB
- Park SW
- Kim SH
- Ji S
- Kim SJ
- Choi EW
- Kim CH
- Ko AR
- Paik KH
- Jin DK
journal: Ann Clin Lab Sci
year: '2011'
keywords:
- ATPases Associated with Diverse Cellular Activities
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Republic of Korea
- "Zellweger Syndrome/etiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel PEX1 mutations in a patient with Zellweger syndrome: the first Korean case confirmed by biochemical, and molecular evidence.
**Authors:** Cho SY, Chang YP, Park JY, Park HD, Sohn YB, Park SW, Kim SH, Ji S, Kim SJ, Choi EW, Kim CH, Ko AR, Paik KH, Jin DK
**Journal:** Ann Clin Lab Sci (2011)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2011 Spring;41(2):182-7.

Two novel PEX1 mutations in a patient with Zellweger syndrome: the first Korean
case confirmed by biochemical, and molecular evidence.

Cho SY(1), Chang YP, Park JY, Park HD, Sohn YB, Park SW, Kim SH, Ji S, Kim SJ,
Choi EW, Kim CH, Ko AR, Paik KH, Jin DK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBD) represent a spectrum of genetic disorders
characterized by impaired peroxisome assembly. Zellweger syndrome (ZS) is the
most severe form of PBD and is characterized by craniofacial abnormalities,
severe hypotonia, neonatal seizures, ocular abnormalities, psychomotor
retardation, hepatomegaly and increased levels of very long chain fatty acids
(VLCFA). The most common mutation associated with the PBD is PEX1. Here, the
first Korean patient with ZS confirmed by clinical, biochemical, and molecular
findings is reported. Two novel mutations of the PEX1 gene were identified in
the patient with ZS. The patient was a compound heterozygote for
c.2034_2035delCA and c.2845C>T mutations of the PEX1 gene. Both mutations are
novel findings and were inherited from the patient's parents. In summary, here
the first Korean case of ZS is reported that was confirmed by two novel
mutations of the PEX1 gene.

PMID: 21844578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
