---
reference_id: "PMID:39741260"
title: Nanopore sequencing as a novel method of characterising anorexia nervosa risk loci.
authors:
- Berthold N
- Gaudieri S
- Hood S
- Tschochner M
- Miller AL
- Jordan J
- Thornton LM
- Bulik CM
- Akkari PA
- Kennedy MA
journal: BMC Genomics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12864-024-11172-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Anorexia Nervosa/genetics
- Nanopore Sequencing/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genetic Loci
- Female
- Computational Biology/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nanopore sequencing as a novel method of characterising anorexia nervosa risk loci.
**Authors:** Berthold N, Gaudieri S, Hood S, Tschochner M, Miller AL, Jordan J, Thornton LM, Bulik CM, Akkari PA, Kennedy MA
**Journal:** BMC Genomics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12864-024-11172-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-024-11172-7)

## Content

1. BMC Genomics. 2024 Dec 31;25(1):1262. doi: 10.1186/s12864-024-11172-7.

Nanopore sequencing as a novel method of characterising anorexia nervosa risk
loci.

Berthold N(1)(2)(3), Gaudieri S(4)(5)(6), Hood S(4), Tschochner M(7), Miller
AL(8), Jordan J(9), Thornton LM(10), Bulik CM(10)(11)(12), Akkari
PA(#)(4)(13)(5)(14), Kennedy MA(#)(8).

Author information:
(1)University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.
natasha.berthold@research.uwa.edu.au.
(2)Perron Research Institute, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
natasha.berthold@research.uwa.edu.au.
(3)Pathology and Biomedical Science Department, University of Otago
Christchurch, Christchurch, New Zealand. natasha.berthold@research.uwa.edu.au.
(4)University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.
(5)Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA, Australia.
(6)Vanderbilt University Medical Centre, Nashville, TN, USA.
(7)University of Notre Dame Australia, Fremantle, WA, Australia.
(8)Pathology and Biomedical Science Department, University of Otago
Christchurch, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(9)Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Otago Christchurch,
Christchurch, New Zealand.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, USA.
(11)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(12)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, USA.
(13)Perron Research Institute, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(14)Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a polygenic, severe metabopsychiatric
disorder with poorly understood aetiology. Eight significant loci have been
identified by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP)-based heritability was estimated to be ~ 11-17, yet causal
variants remain elusive. It is therefore important to define the full spectrum
of genetic variants in the wider regions surrounding these significantly
associated loci. The hypothesis we evaluate here is that unrecognised or
relatively unexplored variants in these regions exist and are promising targets
for future functional analyses. To test this hypothesis, we implemented a novel
approach with targeted nanopore sequencing (Oxford Nanopore Technologies) for
200 kb regions centred on each of the eight AN-associated loci in 10 AN case
samples. Our bioinformatics pipeline entailed base-calling and alignment with
Dorado and minimap2 software, followed by variant calling with four separate
tools, Sniffles2, Clair3, Straglr, and NanoVar. We then leveraged publicly
available databases to characterise these loci in putative functional context
and prioritise a subset of potentially relevant variants.
RESULTS: Targeted nanopore sequencing effectively enriched the target regions
(average coverage 14.64x). To test our hypothesis, we curated a list of 20
prioritised variants in non-coding regions, poorly represented in the current
human reference genome but that may have functional consequences in AN
pathology. Notably, we identified a polymorphic SINE-VNTR-Alu like sub-family D
element (SVA-D), intergenic with IP6K2 and PRKAR2A, and a poly-T short tandem
repeat (STR) in the 3'UTR of FOXP1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results highlight the potential of targeted nanopore sequencing
for characterising poorly resolved or complex variation, which may be initially
obscured in risk-associated regions detected by GWAS. Some of the variants
identified in this way, such as the polymorphic SVA-D and poly-T STR, could
contribute to mechanisms of phenotypic risk, through regulation of several
neighbouring genes implicated in AN biology, and affect post-transcriptional
processing of FOXP1, respectively. This exploratory investigation was not
powered to detect functional effects, however, the variants we observed using
this method are poorly represented in the current human reference genome and
accompanying databases, and further examination of these may provide new
opportunities for improved understanding of genetic risk mechanisms of AN.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-024-11172-7
PMCID: PMC11687000
PMID: 39741260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: All publicly available data used had documented permission from
local ethical committees, all participants provided informed consent for studies
done in settings and countries where this was required. The pilot cohort was a
subsample of previously de-identified samples from New Zealand participants in
the Anorexia Nervosa Genetics Initiative (ANGI) with informed consent and
approval from the Southern Health and Disability Ethics Committee (New Zealand)
reference 14/STH/115.The use of human samples and data in this study adhered to
the ethical principles of the Helsinki Declaration, World Medical Association
Declaration of Helsinki. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing
interests: CMB is an author and royalty recipient from Pearson Education, Inc.
