---
reference_id: "PMID:27928007"
title: Mice Expressing Minimally Humanized CD81 and Occludin Genes Support Hepatitis C Virus Uptake In Vivo.
authors:
- Ding Q
- von Schaewen M
- Hrebikova G
- Heller B
- Sandmann L
- Plaas M
- Ploss A
journal: J Virol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.01799-16
keywords:
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Expression
- Gene Targeting
- "Genes, Reporter"
- Genetic Loci
- Hepacivirus/physiology
- "Hepatitis C/genetics, virology"
- Host-Pathogen Interactions
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Occludin/genetics, metabolism"
- Organ Specificity/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Tetraspanin 28/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Virus Internalization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mice Expressing Minimally Humanized CD81 and Occludin Genes Support Hepatitis C Virus Uptake In Vivo.
**Authors:** Ding Q, von Schaewen M, Hrebikova G, Heller B, Sandmann L, Plaas M, Ploss A
**Journal:** J Virol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.01799-16](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01799-16)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2017 Jan 31;91(4):e01799-16. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01799-16. Print 2017
Feb  15.

Mice Expressing Minimally Humanized CD81 and Occludin Genes Support Hepatitis C
Virus Uptake In Vivo.

Ding Q(1), von Schaewen M(1), Hrebikova G(1), Heller B(1), Sandmann L(2), Plaas
M(3), Ploss A(4).

Author information:
(1)Princeton University, Department of Molecular Biology, Lewis Thomas
Laboratory, Princeton New Jersey, USA.
(2)Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(3)University of Tartu, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine and
Translational Medicine, Laboratory Animal Centre, Tartu, Estonia.
(4)Princeton University, Department of Molecular Biology, Lewis Thomas
Laboratory, Princeton New Jersey, USA aploss@princeton.edu.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) causes chronic infections in at least 150 million
individuals worldwide. HCV has a narrow host range and robustly infects only
humans and chimpanzees. The underlying mechanisms for this narrow host range are
incompletely understood. At the level of entry, differences in the amino acid
sequences between the human and mouse orthologues of two essential host factors,
the tetraspanin CD81 and the tight junction protein occludin (OCLN), explain, at
least in part, HCV's limited ability to enter mouse hepatocytes. We have
previously shown that adenoviral or transgenic overexpression of human CD81 and
OCLN facilitates HCV uptake into mouse hepatocytes in vitro and in vivo In
efforts to refine these models, we constructed knock-in mice in which the second
extracellular loops of CD81 and OCLN were replaced with the respective human
sequences, which contain the determinants that are critical for HCV uptake. We
demonstrate that the humanized CD81 and OCLN were expressed at physiological
levels in a tissue-appropriate fashion. Mice bearing the humanized alleles
formed normal tight junctions and did not exhibit any immunologic abnormalities,
indicating that interactions with their physiological ligands were intact. HCV
entry factor knock-in mice take up HCV with an efficiency similar to that in
mice expressing HCV entry factors transgenically or adenovirally, demonstrating
the utility of this model for studying HCV infection in vivo IMPORTANCE: At
least 150 million individuals are chronically infected with hepatitis C virus
(HCV). Chronic hepatitis C can result in progressive liver disease and liver
cancer. New antiviral treatments can cure HCV in the majority of patients, but a
vaccine remains elusive. To gain a better understanding of the processes
culminating in liver failure and cancer and to prioritize vaccine candidates
more efficiently, small-animal models are needed. Here, we describe the
characterization of a new mouse model in which the parts of two host factors
that are essential for HCV uptake, CD81 and occludin (OCLN), which differ
between mice and humans, were humanized. We demonstrate that such minimally
humanized mice develop normally, express the modified genes at physiological
levels, and support HCV uptake. This model is of considerable utility for
studying viral entry in the three-dimensional context of the liver and to test
approaches aimed at preventing HCV entry.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01799-16
PMCID: PMC5286898
PMID: 27928007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
