---
reference_id: "PMID:25034052"
title: "Pathophysiology of brain dysfunction in hyperammonemic syndromes: The many faces of glutamine."
authors:
- Butterworth RF
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.06.003
keywords:
- Amino Acid Transport System X-AG/metabolism
- "Brain Diseases/etiology, metabolism"
- Glutamates/metabolism
- Glutaminase/metabolism
- Glutamine/metabolism
- Humans
- Hyperammonemia/complications
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of brain dysfunction in hyperammonemic syndromes: The many faces of glutamine.
**Authors:** Butterworth RF
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.06.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.06.003)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Sep-Oct;113(1-2):113-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.06.003.  Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Pathophysiology of brain dysfunction in hyperammonemic syndromes: The many faces
of glutamine.

Butterworth RF(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Medicine, University of Montreal and Neuroscience Research Unit,
St-Luc Hospital (CHUM), Montreal, Qc, Canada.

Ineffective hepatic clearance of excess ammonia in the form of urea, as occurs
in urea cycle enzymopathies (UCDs) and in liver failure, leads to increases in
circulating and tissue concentrations of glutamine and a positive correlation
between brain glutamine and the severity of neurological symptoms. Studies using
1H/13C Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy reveal increased de novo
synthesis of glutamine in the brain in acute liver failure (ALF) but increases
of synthesis rates per se do not correlate with either the severity of
encephalopathy or brain edema. Skeletal muscle becomes primarily responsible for
removal of excess ammonia in liver failure and in UCDs, an adaptation that
results from a post-translational induction of the glutamine synthetase (GS)
gene. The importance of muscle in ammonia removal in hyperammonemia accounts for
the resurgence of interest in maintaining adequate dietary protein and the use
of agents aimed at the stimulation of muscle GS. Alternative or additional
metabolic and regulatory pathways that impact on brain glutamine homeostasis in
hyperammonemia include (i) glutamine deamination by the two isoforms of
glutaminase, (ii) glutamine transamination leading to the production of the
putative neurotoxin alpha-ketoglutaramate and (iii) alterations of high affinity
astrocytic glutamine transporters (SNATs). Findings of reduced expression of the
glutamine transporter SNAT-5 (responsible for glutamine clearance from the
astrocyte) in ALF raise the possibility of "glutamine trapping" within these
cells. Such a trapping mechanism could contribute to cytotoxic brain edema and
to the imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission in this
disorder.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.06.003
PMID: 25034052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
