---
reference_id: "PMID:8630503"
title: A homozygous mutation in the endothelin-3 gene associated with a combined Waardenburg type 2 and Hirschsprung phenotype (Shah-Waardenburg syndrome).
authors:
- Hofstra RM
- Osinga J
- Tan-Sindhunata G
- Wu Y
- Kamsteeg EJ
- Stulp RP
- van Ravenswaaij-Arts C
- Majoor-Krakauer D
- Angrist M
- Chakravarti A
- Meijers C
- Buys CH
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1038/ng0496-445
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Endothelins/genetics
- Female
- "Hirschsprung Disease/complications, genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/classification, complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A homozygous mutation in the endothelin-3 gene associated with a combined Waardenburg type 2 and Hirschsprung phenotype (Shah-Waardenburg syndrome).
**Authors:** Hofstra RM, Osinga J, Tan-Sindhunata G, Wu Y, Kamsteeg EJ, Stulp RP, van Ravenswaaij-Arts C, Majoor-Krakauer D, Angrist M, Chakravarti A, Meijers C, Buys CH
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0496-445](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0496-445)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1996 Apr;12(4):445-7. doi: 10.1038/ng0496-445.

A homozygous mutation in the endothelin-3 gene associated with a combined
Waardenburg type 2 and Hirschsprung phenotype (Shah-Waardenburg syndrome).

Hofstra RM(1), Osinga J, Tan-Sindhunata G, Wu Y, Kamsteeg EJ, Stulp RP, van
Ravenswaaij-Arts C, Majoor-Krakauer D, Angrist M, Chakravarti A, Meijers C, Buys
CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) or colonic aganglionosis is a congenital disorder
characterized by an absence of intramural ganglia along variable lengths of the
colon resulting in intestinal obstruction. The incidence of HSCR is 1 in 5,000
live births. Mutations in the RET gene, which codes for a receptor tyrosine
kinase, and in EDNRB which codes for the endothelin-B receptor, have been shown
to be associated with HSCR in humans. The lethal-spotted mouse which has pigment
abnormalities, but also colonic aganglionosis, carries a mutation in the gene
coding for endothelin 3 (Edn3), the ligand for the receptor protein encoded by
EDNRB. Here, we describe a mutation of the human gene for endothelin 3 (EDN3),
homozygously present in a patient with a combined Waardenburg syndrome type 2
(WS2) and HSCR phenotype (Shah-Waardenburg syndrome). The mutation, Cys159Phe,
in exon 3 in the ET-3 like domain of EDN3, presumably affects the proteolytic
processing of the preproendothelin to the mature peptide EDN3. The patient's
parents were first cousins. A previous child in this family had been diagnosed
with a similar combination of HSCR, depigmentation and deafness. Depigmentation
and deafness were present in other relatives. Moreover, we present a further
indication for the involvement of EDNRB in HSCR by reporting a novel mutation
detected in one of 40 unselected HSCR patients.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0496-445
PMID: 8630503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
