---
reference_id: "PMID:11807983"
title: Frequent loss Xq25 on the inactive X chromosome in primary breast carcinomas is associated with tumor grade and axillary lymph node metastasis.
authors:
- Piao Z
- Malkhosyan SR
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.10024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequent loss Xq25 on the inactive X chromosome in primary breast carcinomas is associated with tumor grade and axillary lymph node metastasis.
**Authors:** Piao Z, Malkhosyan SR
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.10024](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.10024)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Mar;33(3):262-9. doi: 10.1002/gcc.10024.

Frequent loss Xq25 on the inactive X chromosome in primary breast carcinomas is 
associated with tumor grade and axillary lymph node metastasis.

Piao Z(1), Malkhosyan SR.

Author information:
(1)Burnham Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

We previously applied arbitrarily primed polymerase chain reaction DNA 
fingerprinting to identify molecular genetic alterations in primary breast 
carcinomas. One of the most frequently observed fingerprint alterations was a 
reduction in the intensity of the MCG1-B2 band in 32% of tumors, indicating 
recurrent loss of X-chromosome segments. This article reports a mapping analysis 
of those chromosomal deletions. The subchromosomal origin of MCG1-B2 was 
determined to be the Xq25 chromosomal region. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) 
analysis was carried out on 72 infiltrating ductal carcinomas with a panel of 
seven microsatellite markers spanning Xq25. The smallest common region of the 
X-chromosome deletions was mapped to between markers DXS8059 and DXS8009, with 
the highest LOH frequency of 52.4% at the DXS8098 locus. The LOH at DXS8098 was 
associated with larger tumor size (> 3 cm) (P = 0.048, Fisher exact test), 
higher histologic grade (P = 0.036, Fisher exact test), and axillary lymph node 
metastasis (P = 0.020, Fisher exact test). These results suggest that the Xq25 
region harbors a putative tumor suppressor gene whose inactivation in breast 
cancer is associated with tumor progression and metastasis. LOH at this region, 
therefore, potentially could be used as a prognostic marker for disease 
development. One of the two X chromosomes is transcriptionally silent in women. 
The loss of the Xq25 region detected in this study occurred preferentially on 
the inactive X chromosome. This suggests that the putative tumor suppressor gene 
may escape X inactivation.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.10024
PMID: 11807983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]