---
reference_id: "PMID:25552656"
title: "Unveiling a common mechanism of apoptosis in β-cells and neurons in Friedreich's ataxia."
authors:
- Igoillo-Esteve M
- Gurgul-Convey E
- Hu A
- Romagueira Bichara Dos Santos L
- Abdulkarim B
- Chintawar S
- Marselli L
- Marchetti P
- Jonas JC
- Eizirik DL
- Pandolfo M
- Cnop M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu745
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Cell Line
- "Diabetes Mellitus/etiology, genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Friedreich Ataxia/complications, genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Insulin-Secreting Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "Iron-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neurons/cytology, metabolism"
- Oxidative Stress
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
- Frataxin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unveiling a common mechanism of apoptosis in β-cells and neurons in Friedreich's ataxia.
**Authors:** Igoillo-Esteve M, Gurgul-Convey E, Hu A, Romagueira Bichara Dos Santos L, Abdulkarim B, Chintawar S, Marselli L, Marchetti P, Jonas JC, Eizirik DL, Pandolfo M, Cnop M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu745](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu745)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Apr 15;24(8):2274-86. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu745. Epub 2014
Dec  30.

Unveiling a common mechanism of apoptosis in β-cells and neurons in Friedreich's
ataxia.

Igoillo-Esteve M(1), Gurgul-Convey E(2), Hu A(3), Romagueira Bichara Dos Santos
L(4), Abdulkarim B(1), Chintawar S(3), Marselli L(5), Marchetti P(5), Jonas
JC(4), Eizirik DL(1), Pandolfo M(3), Cnop M(6).

Author information:
(1)ULB Center for Diabetes Research and.
(2)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625,
Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Experimental Neurology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels
1070, Belgium.
(4)Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique, Pôle d' Endocrinologie,
Diabète et Nutrition, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels 1200, Belgium.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
and.
(6)ULB Center for Diabetes Research and, Division of Endocrinology, Erasmus
Hospital, 1070, Brussels, Belgium mcnop@ulb.ac.be.

Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is a neurodegenerative disorder associated with
cardiomyopathy and diabetes. Effective therapies for FRDA are an urgent unmet
need; there are currently no options to prevent or treat this orphan disease.
FRDA is caused by reduced expression of the mitochondrial protein frataxin. We
have previously demonstrated that pancreatic β-cell dysfunction and death cause
diabetes in FRDA. This is secondary to mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis
but the underlying molecular mechanisms are not known. Here we show that β-cell
demise in frataxin deficiency is the consequence of oxidative stress-mediated
activation of the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis. The pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family
members Bad, DP5 and Bim are the key mediators of frataxin deficiency-induced
β-cell death. Importantly, the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis is also activated
in FRDA patients' induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons. Interestingly,
cAMP induction normalizes mitochondrial oxidative status and fully prevents
activation of the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis in frataxin-deficient β-cells
and neurons. This preclinical study suggests that incretin analogs hold
potential to prevent/delay both diabetes and neurodegeneration in FRDA.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu745
PMID: 25552656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
