---
reference_id: "PMID:38910652"
title: "Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type II: The Lethal Newborn Form Diagnosed in the Postnatal Period."
authors:
- Elhaddadi H
- Ayyad A
- Messaoudi S
- Amrani R
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.60945
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type II: The Lethal Newborn Form Diagnosed in the Postnatal Period.
**Authors:** Elhaddadi H, Ayyad A, Messaoudi S, Amrani R
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.60945](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.60945)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 May 23;16(5):e60945. doi: 10.7759/cureus.60945. eCollection 2024 
May.

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type II: The Lethal Newborn Form Diagnosed in the 
Postnatal Period.

Elhaddadi H(1), Ayyad A(2), Messaoudi S(2), Amrani R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Mohammed VI, Faculty of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Mohammed First University, Oujda, MAR.
(2)Department of Neonatology and Neonatal Resuscitation, University Hospital 
Mohammed VI, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Mohammed First University, Oujda, 
MAR.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare inherited skeletal disease, characterized 
by bone fragility and low bone density. There are several types of OI, varying 
in severity from benign to severe. We report a case of type II OI, which is a 
lethal form according to the Sillence classification. At birth, the newborn 
presented immediate respiratory distress. Postnatal examination and bone 
radiography confirmed the diagnosis of OI type IIA. The genetic analysis was 
done along with genetic counseling. Death occurred on day nine of life due to 
respiratory failure secondary to pulmonary hypoplasia.

Copyright © 2024, Elhaddadi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.60945
PMCID: PMC11193546
PMID: 38910652

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.