---
reference_id: "PMID:34369231"
title: "Pharmacology Update: Emergency and Controller Medications for Treatment of Asthma."
authors:
- Nanda A
- Russell AF
- Bingemann TA
journal: NASN Sch Nurse
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/1942602X211036933
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacology Update: Emergency and Controller Medications for Treatment of Asthma.
**Authors:** Nanda A, Russell AF, Bingemann TA
**Journal:** NASN Sch Nurse (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1942602X211036933](https://doi.org/10.1177/1942602X211036933)

## Content

1. NASN Sch Nurse. 2022 Jan;37(1):31-35. doi: 10.1177/1942602X211036933. Epub
2021  Aug 8.

Pharmacology Update: Emergency and Controller Medications for Treatment of 
Asthma.

Nanda A(1), Russell AF(2), Bingemann TA(3).

Author information:
(1)Allergist/Immunologist, Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of 
Allergy and Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 
TX, Asthma and Allergy Center, Lewisville and Flower Mound, TX.
(2)Nursing Faculty, Spring Arbor University, Spring Arbor, MI.
(3)Allergist/Immunologist, Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Medicine, 
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY.

Asthma is the most common noncommunicable chronic childhood disease, affecting 
more than 5 million children in the United States. Asthma is the leading cause 
of school absenteeism. Treatments for asthma are divided into fast-acting 
medications that are used to relieve symptoms and slower acting (controller) 
medications that prevent symptoms. Albuterol is the most common fast acting 
medication for asthma, and it exists in multiple forms, including metered-dose 
inhaler and nebulized therapy. The use of spacers and holding chambers can 
further improve medication deposition in the airway. The cornerstone controller 
therapy for asthma is inhaled corticosteroid. Other medications for asthma 
include long-acting beta agonists, long-acting antimuscarinics, and 
antileukotrienes. The newest agents for controller asthma therapies are 
biologics.

DOI: 10.1177/1942602X211036933
PMID: 34369231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]