---
reference_id: "PMID:19945623"
title: Kindler syndrome pathogenesis and fermitin family homologue 1 (kindlin-1) function.
authors:
- "D'Souza MA"
- Kimble RM
- McMillan JR
journal: Dermatol Clin
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.det.2009.10.012
keywords:
- Disease Progression
- Epidermis/pathology
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kindler syndrome pathogenesis and fermitin family homologue 1 (kindlin-1) function.
**Authors:** D'Souza MA, Kimble RM, McMillan JR
**Journal:** Dermatol Clin (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.det.2009.10.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.det.2009.10.012)

## Content

1. Dermatol Clin. 2010 Jan;28(1):115-8. doi: 10.1016/j.det.2009.10.012.

Kindler syndrome pathogenesis and fermitin family homologue 1 (kindlin-1) 
function.

D'Souza MA(1), Kimble RM, McMillan JR.

Author information:
(1)Children's Centre for Burns Research, The University of Queensland, 
Queensland Children's Medical Research Institute, L/4 RCH Foundation Building, 
Herston, Brisbane, Queensland 4029, Australia.

Kindler syndrome is caused by genetic defects in the focal contact-associated 
protein, fermitin family homologue 1 (FFH1), encoded by the gene FERMT1 (known 
as KIND1). Defects in FFH1 lead to abnormal integrin activation and loss of 
keratinocyte epidermal adhesion to the underlying basal lamina, disruption in 
normal cell cytoskeleton within keratinocytes, and altered signaling pathways, 
leading to increased extracellular matrix production. Null mutations in FERMT1 
result in skin blistering from birth and early childhood progressive 
poikiloderma, mucosal fragility, and increased risk of cancer. The complete 
range of FFH1 functions in skin and other epithelia has yet to be determined.

DOI: 10.1016/j.det.2009.10.012
PMID: 19945623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]