---
reference_id: "PMID:18394989"
title: RyR1 S-nitrosylation underlies environmental heat stroke and sudden death in Y522S RyR1 knockin mice.
authors:
- Durham WJ
- Aracena-Parks P
- Long C
- Rossi AE
- Goonasekera SA
- Boncompagni S
- Galvan DL
- Gilman CP
- Baker MR
- Shirokova N
- Protasi F
- Dirksen R
- Hamilton SL
journal: Cell
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.02.042
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Death, Sudden/etiology"
- Heat Stroke/metabolism
- Hot Temperature
- Humans
- Malignant Hyperthermia/metabolism
- Mice
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- Nitrosation
- Oxidative Stress
- Reactive Nitrogen Species
- Reactive Oxygen Species
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RyR1 S-nitrosylation underlies environmental heat stroke and sudden death in Y522S RyR1 knockin mice.
**Authors:** Durham WJ, Aracena-Parks P, Long C, Rossi AE, Goonasekera SA, Boncompagni S, Galvan DL, Gilman CP, Baker MR, Shirokova N, Protasi F, Dirksen R, Hamilton SL
**Journal:** Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2008.02.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.02.042)

## Content

1. Cell. 2008 Apr 4;133(1):53-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.02.042.

RyR1 S-nitrosylation underlies environmental heat stroke and sudden death in 
Y522S RyR1 knockin mice.

Durham WJ(1), Aracena-Parks P, Long C, Rossi AE, Goonasekera SA, Boncompagni S, 
Galvan DL, Gilman CP, Baker MR, Shirokova N, Protasi F, Dirksen R, Hamilton SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2008 Apr 4;133(1):33-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.03.013.

Mice with a malignant hyperthermia mutation (Y522S) in the ryanodine receptor 
(RyR1) display muscle contractures, rhabdomyolysis, and death in response to 
elevated environmental temperatures. We demonstrate that this mutation in RyR1 
causes Ca(2+) leak, which drives increased generation of reactive nitrogen 
species (RNS). Subsequent S-nitrosylation of the mutant RyR1 increases its 
temperature sensitivity for activation, producing muscle contractures upon 
exposure to elevated temperatures. The Y522S mutation in humans is associated 
with central core disease. Many mitochondria in the muscle of heterozygous Y522S 
mice are swollen and misshapen. The mutant muscle displays decreased force 
production and increased mitochondrial lipid peroxidation with aging. Chronic 
treatment with N-acetylcysteine protects against mitochondrial oxidative damage 
and the decline in force generation. We propose a feed-forward cyclic mechanism 
that increases the temperature sensitivity of RyR1 activation and underlies heat 
stroke and sudden death. The cycle eventually produces a myopathy with damaged 
mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.02.042
PMCID: PMC2366094
PMID: 18394989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]