---
reference_id: "PMID:10374109"
title: "Testicular sperm extraction: microdissection improves sperm yield with minimal tissue excision."
authors:
- Schlegel PN
journal: Hum Reprod
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1093/humrep/14.1.131
keywords:
- Dissection
- Humans
- Male
- Minimally Invasive Surgical Procedures
- Oligospermia/surgery
- "Seminiferous Tubules/pathology, physiopathology"
- Specimen Handling/methods
- Spermatozoa
- Testis/surgery
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Testicular sperm extraction: microdissection improves sperm yield with minimal tissue excision.
**Authors:** Schlegel PN
**Journal:** Hum Reprod (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/humrep/14.1.131](https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/14.1.131)

## Content

1. Hum Reprod. 1999 Jan;14(1):131-5. doi: 10.1093/humrep/14.1.131.

Testicular sperm extraction: microdissection improves sperm yield with minimal 
tissue excision.

Schlegel PN(1).

Author information:
(1)James Buchanan Brady Foundation, Department of Urology, New York Presbyterian 
Hospital-Cornell University Medical College, NY 10021, USA.

Testicular sperm extraction (TESE) is often an effective method for sperm 
retrieval from men with non-obstructive azoospermia. However, TESE has been a 
blind procedure that does not identify the focal sperm-producing areas of the 
testicle until after tissue has been excised from the patient. Experience with a 
new technique of microdissection of testicular tubules is presented here that 
identifies sperm-containing regions before their removal. Identification of 
spermatogenically active regions of the testicle is possible by direct 
examination of the individual seminiferous tubules. The underlying concept for 
this technique is simple: seminiferous tubules containing many developing germ 
cells, rather than Sertoli cells alone, are likely to be larger and more opaque 
than tubules without sperm production. In a sequential series of TESE cases for 
men with non-obstructive azoospermia, the ability to find spermatozoa increased 
from 45% (10/22) to 63% (17/27) after introduction of the microdissection 
technique. Microdissected samples yielded an average of 160,000 spermatozoa per 
sample in only 9.4 mg of tissue, whereas only 64,000 spermatozoa were found in 
standard biopsy samples that averaged 720 mg in weight (P < 0.05 for all 
comparisons). For men where microdissection was attempted, successful 
identification of enlarged tubules was possible in 56% (15/27) of cases. 
However, spermatozoa were retrieved with microdissection TESE for six men in 
whom sperm retrieval was unsuccessful with standard TESE approaches (35% of all 
men with spermatozoa retrieved). These findings suggest that microdissection 
TESE can improve sperm retrieval for men with non-obstructive azoospermia over 
that achieved with previously described biopsy techniques.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/14.1.131
PMID: 10374109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]