---
reference_id: "PMID:37483445"
title: "Microsurgical revascularization of a symptomatic proximal vertebral artery: pilot experiences from a single center."
authors:
- Zhang T
- Zhou D
- Xu Y
- Li M
- Zhuang J
- Wang H
- Zhong W
- Chen C
- Kuang H
- Wang D
- Wang Y
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1202565
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microsurgical revascularization of a symptomatic proximal vertebral artery: pilot experiences from a single center.
**Authors:** Zhang T, Zhou D, Xu Y, Li M, Zhuang J, Wang H, Zhong W, Chen C, Kuang H, Wang D, Wang Y
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1202565](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1202565)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Jul 7;14:1202565. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1202565. 
eCollection 2023.

Microsurgical revascularization of a symptomatic proximal vertebral artery: 
pilot experiences from a single center.

Zhang T(1)(2), Zhou D(1), Xu Y(1), Li M(1), Zhuang J(1), Wang H(3), Zhong W(1), 
Chen C(1)(4), Kuang H(5), Wang D(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Cheeloo 
College of Medicine and Institute of Brain and Brain-Inspired Science, Shandong 
University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Yangxin County People's Hospital, Binzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Yantai Penglai People's Hospital, Yantai, China.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First 
Medical University, Jinan, China.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.

BACKGROUND: Vertebral artery stenosis and occlusion (VASO) is a high-risk factor 
for posterior circulation stroke. Post-stent restenosis and drug tolerance have 
facilitated the exploration of microsurgical vascular reconstruction. This study 
aims to evaluate the safety and efficacy of microsurgical reconstruction of the 
proximal VA.
METHODS: Twenty-nine patients (25 men, aged 63.2 years) who had symptoms of 
posterior circulation ischemia underwent microsurgical revascularization for 
proximal VASO were retrospectively included in this study. Procedural 
complications and clinical and angiographic outcomes were reviewed.
RESULTS: Twelve, three, and five patients underwent VA endarterectomy, artery 
transposition, or both, respectively; seven patients underwent vertebral 
endarterectomy plus stent implantation; and two patients failed surgery because 
of the difficult exposure of the VA and the occurrence of vascular dissection. 
The perioperative period-related complications included seven cases of Horner's 
syndrome, five cases of hoarseness, and one case of chylothorax. No cases of 
perioperative stroke or death were reported. The mean follow-up period was 28.4 
(8-62 months). Most patients improved clinically; however, the vertebrobasilar 
ischemia symptoms did not decrease significantly in two patients during the 
follow-up. Moreover, follow-up imaging was performed in all the patients, and no 
signs of anastomotic stenosis were reported.
CONCLUSION: Microsurgical reconstruction is an alternative option that can 
effectively treat refractory proximal VASO disease and in-stent stenosis, with a 
high rate of postoperative vascular recirculation. Prospective cohort studies 
with larger sample sizes must be conducted to validate the above conclusions.

Copyright © 2023 Zhang, Zhou, Xu, Li, Zhuang, Wang, Zhong, Chen, Kuang, Wang and 
Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1202565
PMCID: PMC10361759
PMID: 37483445

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.