---
reference_id: "PMID:16195329"
title: Immunoselection by natural killer cells of PIGA mutant cells missing stress-inducible ULBP.
authors:
- Hanaoka N
- Kawaguchi T
- Horikawa K
- Nagakura S
- Mitsuya H
- Nakakuma H
journal: Blood
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-03-1337
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunoselection by natural killer cells of PIGA mutant cells missing stress-inducible ULBP.
**Authors:** Hanaoka N, Kawaguchi T, Horikawa K, Nagakura S, Mitsuya H, Nakakuma H
**Journal:** Blood (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2005-03-1337](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2005-03-1337)

## Content

1. Blood. 2006 Feb 1;107(3):1184-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-03-1337. Epub 2005
Sep  29.

Immunoselection by natural killer cells of PIGA mutant cells missing 
stress-inducible ULBP.

Hanaoka N(1), Kawaguchi T, Horikawa K, Nagakura S, Mitsuya H, Nakakuma H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Kumamoto University Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kumamoto, Japan.

The mechanism by which paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) clones expand 
is unknown. PNH clones harbor PIGA mutations and do not synthesize 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI), resulting in deficiency of GPI-linked 
membrane proteins. GPI-deficient blood cells often expand in patients with 
aplastic anemia who sustain immune-mediated marrow injury putatively induced by 
cytotoxic cells, hence suggesting that the injury allows PNH clones to expand 
selectively. We previously reported that leukemic K562 cells preferentially 
survived natural killer (NK) cell-mediated cytotoxicity in vitro when they 
acquired PIGA mutations. We herein show that the survival is ascribable to the 
deficiency of stress-inducible GPI-linked membrane proteins ULBP1 and ULBP2, 
which activate NK and T cells. The ULBPs were detected on GPI-expressing but not 
on GPI-deficient K562 cells. In the presence of antibodies to either the ULBPs 
or their receptor NKG2D on NK cells, GPI-expressing cells were as less NK 
sensitive as GPI-deficient cells. NK cells therefore spared ULBP-deficient cells 
in vitro. The ULBPs were identified only on GPI-expressing blood cells of a 
proportion of patients with PNH but none of healthy individuals. Granulocytes of 
the patients partly underwent killing by autologous cytotoxic cells, implying 
ULBP-associated blood cell injury. In this setting, the lack of ULBPs may allow 
immunoselection of PNH clones.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-03-1337
PMID: 16195329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]