---
reference_id: "PMID:24966613"
title: "Hepatitis B transmission by cell and tissue allografts: how safe is safe enough?"
authors:
- Solves P
- Mirabet V
- Alvarez M
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i23.7434
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B transmission by cell and tissue allografts: how safe is safe enough?
**Authors:** Solves P, Mirabet V, Alvarez M
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v20.i23.7434](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i23.7434)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jun 21;20(23):7434-41. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v20.i23.7434.

Hepatitis B transmission by cell and tissue allografts: how safe is safe enough?

Solves P(1), Mirabet V(1), Alvarez M(1).

Author information:
(1)Pilar Solves, Vicente Mirabet, Manuel Alvarez, Blood Bank, Hospital 
Universitari I Politècnic La Fe, Bulevar Sur, 46026 Valencia, Spain.

More than 2 million human tissue transplants (bone, tendon, cartilage, skin, 
cornea, amniotic membrane, stem cells, heart valve, blood vessel, etc.), are 
performed worldwide every year. Cells and tissues are shared between countries 
which have different regulations and laboratory equipment and represent a risk 
of hepatitis B virus (HBV) transmission that has become a global safety concern. 
While the risk of transfusion-transmitted HBV infection from blood donations has 
been estimated, the rate of HBV transmission from donors to recipients of 
allografts is unknown and varies between different tissues. There are various 
important ways of reducing the transmission risk, but donor screening and donor 
testing are still the main factors for preventing HBV transmission. HBV 
detection is included in the routine screening tests for cell and tissue donors. 
The standard test for preventing transplant-transmitted hepatitis B is the 
hepatitis B surface antigen. The implementation of methods involving nucleic 
acid amplification and the new generation of reactives to detect viral 
antibodies or antigens with an immunoassay, has increased the sensitivity and 
the specificity of the screening tests. The objective of our research was to 
review the literature and critically analyse the different steps for avoiding 
HBV transmission in cell and tissue donors, focusing on the screening tests 
performed.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i23.7434
PMCID: PMC4064088
PMID: 24966613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]