---
reference_id: PMID:11385510
title: A newly discovered human pneumovirus isolated from young children with respiratory tract disease.
authors:
- van den Hoogen BG
- de Jong JC
- Groen J
- Kuiken T
- de Groot R
- Fouchier RA
- Osterhaus AD
journal: Nat Med
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/89098
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Chickens
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Genome, Viral"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Macaca fascicularis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- "Paramyxoviridae/classification, genetics, isolation & purification, ultrastructure"
- "Paramyxoviridae Infections/epidemiology, virology"
- Phylogeny
- Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/epidemiology, virology"
- Seroepidemiologic Studies
- Turkeys
- "Viral Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A newly discovered human pneumovirus isolated from young children with respiratory tract disease.
**Authors:** van den Hoogen BG, de Jong JC, Groen J, Kuiken T, de Groot R, Fouchier RA, Osterhaus AD
**Journal:** Nat Med (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/89098](https://doi.org/10.1038/89098)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2001 Jun;7(6):719-24. doi: 10.1038/89098.

A newly discovered human pneumovirus isolated from young children with 
respiratory tract disease.

van den Hoogen BG(1), de Jong JC, Groen J, Kuiken T, de Groot R, Fouchier RA, 
Osterhaus AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

From 28 young children in the Netherlands, we isolated a paramyxovirus that was 
identified as a tentative new member of the Metapneumovirus genus based on 
virological data, sequence homology and gene constellation. Previously, avian 
pneumovirus was the sole member of this recently assigned genus, hence the 
provisional name for the newly discovered virus: human metapneumovirus. The 
clinical symptoms of the children from whom the virus was isolated were similar 
to those caused by human respiratory syncytial virus infection, ranging from 
upper respiratory tract disease to severe bronchiolitis and pneumonia. 
Serological studies showed that by the age of five years, virtually all children 
in the Netherlands have been exposed to human metapneumovirus and that the virus 
has been circulating in humans for at least 50 years.

DOI: 10.1038/89098
PMCID: PMC7095854
PMID: 11385510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]