---
reference_id: "PMID:25274939"
title: Irritant contact dermatitis.
authors:
- Ale IS
- Maibach HI
journal: Rev Environ Health
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1515/reveh-2014-0060
keywords:
- "Dermatitis, Contact/etiology, physiopathology"
- Environmental Exposure
- Humans
- Irritants/toxicity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Irritant contact dermatitis.
**Authors:** Ale IS, Maibach HI
**Journal:** Rev Environ Health (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1515/reveh-2014-0060](https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2014-0060)

## Content

1. Rev Environ Health. 2014;29(3):195-206. doi: 10.1515/reveh-2014-0060.

Irritant contact dermatitis.

Ale IS, Maibach HI.

Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) is the most common form of contact dermatitis. 
It represents the cutaneous response to the toxic/physical effects of a wide 
variety of environmental agents. Nowadays, it is recognized that irritancy does 
not represent a single monomorphous entity but rather a complex biologic 
syndrome with diverse pathophysiology and clinical manifestations. The clinical 
presentation is highly variable depending on several factors, including 
properties and strength of the irritant, dose, duration and frequency of 
exposure, environmental factors, and skin susceptibility. The pathophysiological 
mechanism depends on activation of the innate immune system and involves skin 
barrier disruption, cellular changes, and release of proinflammatory mediators 
that directly recruit and activate T lymphocytes. The diagnosis of irritant 
contact dermatitis is often clinical, and involves a comprehensive history and 
examination, as well as the exclusion of allergic contact dermatitis with patch 
testing. Recent advances in understanding the pathogenesis as well as better 
awareness of the clinical significance of ICD will lead to a improved care for 
our patients.

DOI: 10.1515/reveh-2014-0060
PMID: 25274939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]