---
reference_id: "PMID:21543977"
title: Role of the lymphatic system in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease.
authors:
- von der Weid PY
- Rehal S
- Ferraz JG
journal: Curr Opin Gastroenterol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283476e8f
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the lymphatic system in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** von der Weid PY, Rehal S, Ferraz JG
**Journal:** Curr Opin Gastroenterol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283476e8f](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283476e8f)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2011 Jul;27(4):335-41. doi: 
10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283476e8f.

Role of the lymphatic system in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease.

von der Weid PY(1), Rehal S, Ferraz JG.

Author information:
(1)Inflammation Research Network and Smooth Muscle Research Group, Snyder 
Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Department of Physiology & 
Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada. vonderwe@ucalgary.ca

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Intestinal lymph containing interstitial fluid, proteins, 
immune cells, and digested lipids is actively transported back to the blood 
stream thanks to rhythmical contractions of the mesenteric lymphatic vessels. 
During this process, lymph flows through several lymph nodes, allowing antigens 
to be sampled by the immune system. Abnormalities in lymphatic drainage have 
been noted in the original descriptions of Crohn's disease, but essentially 
ignored since. The lymphatic system is re-emerging as a critical player in 
inflammatory and immune processes and the purpose of this review is to present 
and discuss new concepts related to the involvement of the lymphatic system in 
the development of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) and more specifically 
Crohn's disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies reporting lymphangitis, lymphangiogenesis, 
bacterial infiltration and lymph node infection, immune cell trafficking, and 
fat-wrapping in Crohn's disease suggest altered lymph drainage and lymphatic 
pumping, implicating the lymphatic system as a likely player in inflammatory 
disorders and IBDs.
SUMMARY: Improved knowledge and appreciation of the roles that the lymphatic 
system plays in immune cell trafficking, infection, fat transport, distribution 
and metabolism and, of course, edema resolution is necessary to better 
understand the pathogenesis of chronic inflammatory conditions such as Crohn's 
disease and may provide the basis for new therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283476e8f
PMID: 21543977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]