---
reference_id: "PMID:15838717"
title: "Incidence of hip fracture in Shiraz, Iran."
authors:
- Soveid M
- Serati AR
- Masoompoor M
journal: Osteoporos Int
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s00198-005-1854-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence of hip fracture in Shiraz, Iran.
**Authors:** Soveid M, Serati AR, Masoompoor M
**Journal:** Osteoporos Int (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00198-005-1854-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00198-005-1854-z)

## Content

1. Osteoporos Int. 2005 Nov;16(11):1412-6. doi: 10.1007/s00198-005-1854-z. Epub 
2005 Apr 19.

Incidence of hip fracture in Shiraz, Iran.

Soveid M(1), Serati AR, Masoompoor M.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Research Center, Nemazee Hospital, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. msoveid@sums.ac.ir

Hip fracture, the most serious complication of osteoporosis, puts the burden of 
a lot of costs for treatment on any health system. Previous reports on rates of 
hip fracture in Asian countries differ a lot. The aim of this study was to 
estimate the incidence rate of hip fracture in Shiraz, Iran. In Shiraz, Iran, 
all operating-room logs with diagnosis of hip fracture were reviewed for hip 
fractures caused by a simple fall in patients over 50 years, during March 21, 
2000, to March 21, 2003. According to patients' medical records, age, sex, type 
of fracture (intertrochanteric, neck, subtrochanteric) and patients' regions 
according to Shiraz municipality divisions were obtained. The age-adjusted 
incidence rates of hip fracture standardized to the 1985 US white population 
(325.74/100,000 for men and 519.05/100,000 for women) and to the 1989 US white 
population (384.61/100,000 for men and 548.17/100,000 for women) were the 
highest in Asia. The intertrochanteric fractures were significantly higher among 
females ( p =0.003). The incidence of intertrochanteric and neck fractures were 
increased with age. In all age groups, females had higher incidence rates, 
except for ages over 80 years, in which males had higher incidence rates than 
females. In wealthier regions of the city, the incidence rates were higher than 
in other regions. High incidence of hip fracture in our population, especially 
in males over 80 years, shows that preventive strategies for hip fracture and 
osteoporosis should be considered in males as well as females. Further studies 
are needed to find incidence rates in other cities, especially in the very 
urbanized city of Tehran.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-005-1854-z
PMID: 15838717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]