---
reference_id: "PMID:36332212"
title: "Tetanus immunization among healthcare professionals: cross-sectional study in Turkey."
authors:
- Sayar MS
- Akca MÖ
- Asan A
- Gümüş A
- Yorulmaz Göktaş S
- Hakyemez İN
- Dağlı Ö
- Öztürk Ç
journal: J Infect Dev Ctries
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3855/jidc.16787
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tetanus immunization among healthcare professionals: cross-sectional study in Turkey.
**Authors:** Sayar MS, Akca MÖ, Asan A, Gümüş A, Yorulmaz Göktaş S, Hakyemez İN, Dağlı Ö, Öztürk Ç
**Journal:** J Infect Dev Ctries (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3855/jidc.16787](https://doi.org/10.3855/jidc.16787)

## Content

1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2022 Oct 31;16(10):1596-1601. doi: 10.3855/jidc.16787.

Tetanus immunization among healthcare professionals: cross-sectional study in 
Turkey.

Sayar MS(1), Akca MÖ(2), Asan A(2), Gümüş A(2), Yorulmaz Göktaş S(2), Hakyemez 
İN(2), Dağlı Ö(2), Öztürk Ç(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Bursa Yuksek 
Ihtısas Training and Research Hospital, Bursa, Turkey. 
drmervesefasayar@yahoo.com.
(2)Departments of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Bursa Yuksek 
Ihtısas Training and Research Hospital, Bursa, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Vaccine-preventable diseases can be effectively managed through 
timely vaccine booster doses. In this study, the tetanus vaccination status of 
healthcare professionals and their level of knowledge about tetanus vaccination 
were investigated.
METHODOLOGY: The data were obtained through a survey questionnaire from 336 
healthcare professionals. The survey participants were recruited on a voluntary 
basis among the personnel working in a tertiary hospital between 1 July 2021 and 
30 September 2021. The participants were asked about their tetanus vaccination 
status and general awareness about the tetanus vaccine.
RESULTS: The survey participants included nurses (41.4%, n = 139), doctors 
(39.9%, n = 134) and support unit personnel (18.8%, n = 63). The support unit 
personnel had insufficient knowledge about military service period, pregnancy 
period, vaccination of women aged 15-49 years, and the necessity of booster 
tetanus vaccine every 10 years. Interestingly, the nurses had significantly 
inadequate knowledge of geriatric tetanus vaccination.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the tetanus immunization program is widely implemented 
throughout the country, our study concluded that it is necessary to educate 
healthcare professionals on the importance of the tetanus vaccine.

Copyright (c) 2022 Merve Sefa Sayar, Mustafa Ozgur Akca, Ali Asan, Ali Gumus, 
Sibel Yorulmaz Goktas, Ismail Necati Hakyemez, Ozgur Dagli, Cinar Ozturk.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.16787
PMID: 36332212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No Conflict of Interest is declared