---
reference_id: "PMID:36346630"
title: Analysis of Electrolyte Abnormalities in Adolescents and Adults and Subsequent Diagnosis of an Eating Disorder.
authors:
- Hundemer GL
- Clarke A
- Akbari A
- Bugeja A
- Massicotte-Azarniouch D
- Knoll G
- Myran DT
- Tanuseputro P
- Sood MM
journal: JAMA Netw Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.40809
keywords:
- Adult
- Male
- Humans
- Adolescent
- Female
- "Hypernatremia/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Hyponatremia/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Hypokalemia/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Hyperkalemia
- Case-Control Studies
- Quality of Life
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Alkalosis
- Hypophosphatemia
- Electrolytes
- Ontario/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of Electrolyte Abnormalities in Adolescents and Adults and Subsequent Diagnosis of an Eating Disorder.
**Authors:** Hundemer GL, Clarke A, Akbari A, Bugeja A, Massicotte-Azarniouch D, Knoll G, Myran DT, Tanuseputro P, Sood MM
**Journal:** JAMA Netw Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.40809](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.40809)

## Content

1. JAMA Netw Open. 2022 Nov 1;5(11):e2240809. doi:
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.40809.

Analysis of Electrolyte Abnormalities in Adolescents and Adults and Subsequent
Diagnosis of an Eating Disorder.

Hundemer GL(1)(2)(3), Clarke A(2)(3), Akbari A(1)(2), Bugeja A(1)(2),
Massicotte-Azarniouch D(1)(2), Knoll G(1)(2), Myran DT(2)(3)(4), Tanuseputro
P(2)(3)(4)(5), Sood MM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Clinical Epidemiology Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(3)ICES (formerly Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences), Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.
(4)Department of Family Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Division of Palliative Care, Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

IMPORTANCE: Eating disorders lead to increased mortality and reduced quality of
life. While the acute presentations of eating disorders frequently involve
electrolyte abnormalities, it remains unknown whether electrolyte abnormalities
may precede the future diagnosis of an eating disorder.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether outpatient electrolyte abnormalities are
associated with the future diagnosis of an eating disorder.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This population-level case-control study used
provincial administrative health data for residents of Ontario, Canada aged 13
years or older from 2008 to 2020. Individuals without an eating disorder
(controls) were matched 4:1 to individuals diagnosed with an incident eating
disorder (cases) based on age and sex. Both groups had outpatient electrolyte
measurements between 3 years and 30 days prior to index. Index was defined as
the date of an eating disorder diagnosis in any inpatient or outpatient clinical
setting for cases. Controls were assigned a pseudo-index date according to the
distribution of index dates in the case population. Individuals with any prior
eating disorder diagnosis were excluded. The data analyzed was from January 1,
2008, through June 30, 2020.
EXPOSURES: Any electrolyte abnormality, defined as abnormal test results for a
composite of hypokalemia, hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, hypernatremia,
hypomagnesemia, hypophosphatemia, metabolic acidosis, or metabolic alkalosis.
OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Eating disorder diagnosis including anorexia nervosa,
bulimia nervosa, and eating disorder not otherwise specified.
RESULTS: A total 6970 eligible Ontario residents with an eating disorder (mean
[SD] age, 28 (19) years; 6075 [87.2%] female, 895 [12.8%] male) were matched
with 27 878 age- and sex-matched residents without an eating disorder diagnosis
(mean [SD] age, 28 [19] years; 24 300 [87.2%] female, 3578 [12.8%] male).
Overall, 18.4% of individuals with an eating disorder had a preceding
electrolyte abnormality vs 7.5% of individuals without an eating disorder
(adjusted odds ratio [aOR], 2.12; [95% CI, 1.86-2.41]). The median (IQR) time
from the earliest electrolyte abnormality to eating disorder diagnosis was 386
(157-716) days. Specific electrolyte abnormalities associated with a higher risk
of an eating disorder were: hypokalemia (aOR, 1.98; 95% CI, 1.70-2.32),
hyperkalemia (aOR, 1.97; 95% CI, 1.48-2.62), hyponatremia (aOR, 5.26; 95% CI,
3.32-8.31), hypernatremia (aOR, 3.09; 95% CI, 1.01-9.51), hypophosphatemia (aOR,
2.83; 95% CI, 1.82-4.40), and metabolic alkalosis (aOR, 2.60; 95% CI,
1.63-4.15).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this case-control study, individuals with an
eating disorder were associated with a preceding outpatient electrolyte
abnormality compared with matched controls. Otherwise unexplained electrolyte
abnormalities may serve to identify individuals who may benefit from screening
for an underlying eating disorder.

DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.40809
PMCID: PMC9644262
PMID: 36346630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Sood
reported personal fees from AstraZeneca outside the submitted work. No other
disclosures were reported.
