---
reference_id: "PMID:37973491"
title: Drug-induced glomerular diseases.
authors:
- Garnier AS
- Laubacher H
- Briet M
journal: Therapie
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.therap.2023.10.010
keywords:
- Humans
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/chemically induced, metabolism"
- Kidney Glomerulus/metabolism
- "Kidney Diseases/chemically induced, metabolism"
- Podocytes/metabolism
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug-induced glomerular diseases.
**Authors:** Garnier AS, Laubacher H, Briet M
**Journal:** Therapie (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.therap.2023.10.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.therap.2023.10.010)

## Content

1. Therapie. 2024 Mar-Apr;79(2):271-281. doi: 10.1016/j.therap.2023.10.010. Epub 
2023 Oct 31.

Drug-induced glomerular diseases.

Garnier AS(1), Laubacher H(2), Briet M(3).

Author information:
(1)Service de néphrologie-dialyse-transplantation, CHU d'Angers, 49000 Angers, 
France; UFR Santé, université d'Angers, 49000 Angers, France; Université 
d'Angers, UMR CNRS 6015, Inserm U1083, unité MitoVasc, Team Carme, SFR ICAT, 
49000 Angers, France; Laboratoire MitoVasc, UMR Inserm 1083 CNRS 6215, 49000 
Angers, France.
(2)UFR Santé, université d'Angers, 49000 Angers, France; Laboratoire MitoVasc, 
UMR Inserm 1083 CNRS 6215, 49000 Angers, France.
(3)UFR Santé, université d'Angers, 49000 Angers, France; Université d'Angers, 
UMR CNRS 6015, Inserm U1083, unité MitoVasc, Team Carme, SFR ICAT, 49000 Angers, 
France; Laboratoire MitoVasc, UMR Inserm 1083 CNRS 6215, 49000 Angers, France; 
Service de pharmacologie - toxicologie et pharmacovigilance, CHU d'Angers, 49000 
Angers, France. Electronic address: marie.briet@chu-angers.fr.

Drug-induced kidney diseases represent a wide range of diseases that are 
responsible for a significant proportion of all acute kidney injuries and 
chronic kidney diseases. In the present review, we focused on drug-induced 
glomerular diseases, more precisely podocytopathies - minimal change diseases 
(MCD), focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) - and membranous nephropathies 
(MN), from a physiological and a pharmacological point of view. The glomerular 
filtration barrier is composed of podocytes that form foot processes tightly 
connected and directly in contact with the basal membrane and surrounding 
capillaries. The common clinical feature of these diseases is represented by the 
loss of the ability of the filtration barrier to retain large proteins, leading 
to massive proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome. Drugs such as non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), D-penicillamine, tiopronin, trace elements, 
bisphosphonate, and interferons have been historically associated with the 
occurrence of MCD, FSGS, and MN. In the last ten years, the development of new 
anti-cancer agents, including tyrosine kinase inhibitors and immune checkpoint 
inhibitors, and research into their renal adverse effects highlighted these 
issues and have improved our comprehension of these diseases.

Copyright © 2023 Société française de pharmacologie et de thérapeutique. 
Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.therap.2023.10.010
PMID: 37973491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]