---
reference_id: "PMID:32552203"
title: Association of TGF-β3 and ANXA11 with pulmonary sarcoidosis in Greek population.
authors:
- Sikorova K
- Kishore A
- Rapti A
- Adam K
- Kocourkova L
- Zizkova V
- Charikiopoulou M
- Kalianos A
- Bouros E
- Bouros D
- Petrek M
journal: Expert Rev Respir Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/17476348.2020.1784729
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Alleles
- Annexins/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotyping Techniques
- Greece
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/genetics, metabolism"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta3/genetics
- White People/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of TGF-β3 and ANXA11 with pulmonary sarcoidosis in Greek population.
**Authors:** Sikorova K, Kishore A, Rapti A, Adam K, Kocourkova L, Zizkova V, Charikiopoulou M, Kalianos A, Bouros E, Bouros D, Petrek M
**Journal:** Expert Rev Respir Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17476348.2020.1784729](https://doi.org/10.1080/17476348.2020.1784729)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2020 Oct;14(10):1065-1069. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2020.1784729. Epub 2020 Jul 7.

Association of TGF-β3 and ANXA11 with pulmonary sarcoidosis in Greek population.

Sikorova K(1), Kishore A(1), Rapti A(2), Adam K(3), Kocourkova L(4), Zizkova 
V(1), Charikiopoulou M(2), Kalianos A(2), Bouros E(5), Bouros D(5), Petrek M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathological Physiology and Institute of Molecular and 
Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University 
Olomouc, Olomouc , Czech Republic.
(2)Sarcoidosis Center, General Hospital of Chest Diseases of Athens "Sotiria" , 
Athens, Greece.
(3)Department of Immunology and Histocompatibility, Laiko General Hospital , 
Athens, Greece.
(4)Laboratory of Cardiogenomics, University Hospital Olomouc , Olomouc, Czech 
Republic.
(5)Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens First Academic 
Department of Pneumonology, Interstitial Lung Diseases Unit Hospital for 
Diseases of the Chest "Sotiria" , Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: In sarcoidosis, the direction and intensity of immunological 
reactions involved in disease pathophysiology is affected by variation in the 
genes coding for effector and regulatory molecules with immune functions. This 
study, therefore, investigates polymorphic variants in genes involved in 
inflammation, immune reactions, and granuloma formation in context of their 
plausible association with sarcoidosis, with specific focus on Greek population.
METHODS: A total of 18 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in 
Greek patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis (n = 103) and in healthy Greek control 
subjects (n = 100) using multiplexed MassARRAY (MassARRAY ®) iPLEX assay based 
on MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: TGF-β3 rs3917200*G variant was associated with sarcoidosis (OR: 3.04 
[95% CI: 1.98-4.69], p = 2.76*10-7). Further, ANXA11 rs1049550*A variant was 
associated with sarcoidosis (OR: 0.59 [0.39-0.89], p = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: This first study of genetic variation of immune-related genes in 
Greek patients with sarcoidosis brings to attention a novel disease 
'susceptibility' factor: TGF-β3 rs3917200*G allele. It also confirms previously 
reported 'protective' association between sarcoidosis and functional variant 
ANXA11 rs1049550*A. Further work is required to validate these findings and to 
expand investigation of their plausible relationship with clinical course of the 
disease.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2020.1784729
PMID: 32552203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]