---
reference_id: "PMID:33369056"
title: A pilot clinical trial with losartan in Myhre syndrome.
authors:
- Cappuccio G
- Caiazza M
- Roca A
- Melis D
- Iuliano A
- Matyas G
- Rubino M
- Limongelli G
- Brunetti-Pierri N
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62019
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Young Adult
- Angiotensin II Type 1 Receptor Blockers/therapeutic use
- "Cryptorchidism/drug therapy, pathology"
- Facies
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Growth Disorders/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Intellectual Disability/drug therapy, pathology"
- Losartan/therapeutic use
- Pilot Projects
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A pilot clinical trial with losartan in Myhre syndrome.
**Authors:** Cappuccio G, Caiazza M, Roca A, Melis D, Iuliano A, Matyas G, Rubino M, Limongelli G, Brunetti-Pierri N
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62019](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62019)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Mar;185(3):702-709. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62019. Epub
2020  Dec 24.

A pilot clinical trial with losartan in Myhre syndrome.

Cappuccio G(1)(2), Caiazza M(3), Roca A(4), Melis D(1), Iuliano A(2), Matyas 
G(5), Rubino M(3), Limongelli G(3), Brunetti-Pierri N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, Section of Pediatrics, Federico II 
University, Naples, Italy.
(2)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, (Naples), Italy.
(3)Inherited and Rare Disease Unit, AORN Colli, Department of Translational 
Medical Sciences, 'Luigi Vanvitelli' University, Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurosciences and Reproductive and Odontostomatological 
Sciences, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(5)Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Foundation for 
People with Rare Diseases, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: Myhre syndrome (MS) is an ultra-rare disorder due to pathogenic 
variants in the SMAD4 gene that encodes a protein regulating the TGF-β pathway 
and extra-cellular matrix (ECM) homeostasis. Main clinical features of MS 
include thickening of skin and joint stiffness. Previous studies showed that 
losartan improved ECM deposition in MS fibroblasts.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Four molecularly confirmed MS subjects (mean age 
23.8 ± 17 years) were evaluated for: (a) skin thickness by Rodnan score, (b) 
joint range of motion (ROM) by goniometry, and (c) speckle-tracking 
echocardiogram. Following baseline evaluations, three MS individuals received 
losartan for 12 months and pre-defined endpoints were monitored after 6 and 
12 months of treatment.
RESULTS: At baseline, Rodnan scores were increased, joint ROM was reduced, and 
speckle-tracking echocardiogram revealed reduced myocardial strain. In three MS 
subjects, improvements in skin thickness, joint ROM and to a lesser extent of 
myocardial strain, were observed after 6 and 12 months of losartan treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Although further long-term controlled clinical trials with a larger 
number of affected individuals are needed, the present study suggests that 
losartan might improve skin, joint and heart abnormalities of MS.

© 2020 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62019
PMCID: PMC7898344
PMID: 33369056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.