---
reference_id: "PMID:18085124"
title: Pesticide poisoning.
authors:
- Goel A
- Aggarwal P
journal: Natl Med J India
year: '2007'
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- "Carbamates/poisoning, toxicity"
- "Herbicides/poisoning, toxicity"
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Magnesium Sulfate/therapeutic use
- Organophosphate Poisoning
- Organophosphorus Compounds/toxicity
- "Pesticides/poisoning, toxicity"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pesticide poisoning.
**Authors:** Goel A, Aggarwal P
**Journal:** Natl Med J India (2007)

## Content

1. Natl Med J India. 2007 Jul-Aug;20(4):182-91.

Pesticide poisoning.

Goel A(1), Aggarwal P.

Author information:
(1)All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, India.

Acute poisoning with pesticides is a global public health problem and accounts 
for as many as 300,000 deaths worldwide every year. The majority of deaths occur 
due to exposure to organophosphates, organochlorines and aluminium phosphide. 
Organophosphate compounds inhibit acetylcholinesterase resulting in acute 
toxicity. Intermediate syndrome can develop in a number of patients and may lead 
to respiratory paralysis and death. Management consists of proper oxygenation, 
atropine in escalating doses and pralidoxime in high doses. It is Important to 
decontaminate the skin while taking precautions to avoid secondary contamination 
of health personnel. Organochlorine pesticides are toxic to the central nervous 
system and sensitize the myocardium to catecholamines. Treatment involves 
supportive care and avoiding exogenous sympathomimetic agents. Ingestion of 
paraquat causes severe inflammation of the throat, corrosive injury to the 
gastrointestinal tract, renal tubular necrosis, hepatic necrosis and pulmonary 
fibrosis. Administration of oxygen should be avoided as it produces more 
fibrosis. Use of immunosuppressive agents have improved outcome in patients with 
paraquat poisoning. Rodenticides include thallium, superwarfarins, barium 
carbonate and phosphides (aluminium and zinc phosphide). Alopecia is an atypical 
feature of thallium toxicity. Most exposures to superwarfarins are harmless but 
prolonged bleeding may occur. Barium carbonate Ingestion can cause severe 
hypokalaemia and respiratory muscle paralysis. Aluminium phosphide is a highly 
toxic agent with mortality ranging from 37% to 100%. It inhibits mitochondrial 
cytochrome c oxidase and leads to pulmonary and cardiac toxicity. Treatment is 
supportive with some studies suggesting a beneficial effect of magnesium 
sulphate. Pyrethroids and insect repellants (e.g. diethyltoluamide) are 
relatively harmless but can cause toxic effects to pulmonary and central nervous 
systems. Ethylene dibromide-a highly toxic, fumigant pesticide-produces oral 
ulcerations, followed by liver and renal toxicity, and is almost uniformly 
fatal. Physicians working in remote and rural areas need to be educated about 
early diagnosis and proper management using supportive care and antidotes, 
wherever available.

PMID: 18085124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]