---
reference_id: "PMID:31239752"
title: "Barth syndrome: mechanisms and management."
authors:
- Finsterer J
journal: Appl Clin Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2147/TACG.S171481
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Barth syndrome: mechanisms and management.
**Authors:** Finsterer J
**Journal:** Appl Clin Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2147/TACG.S171481](https://doi.org/10.2147/TACG.S171481)

## Content

1. Appl Clin Genet. 2019 Jun 5;12:95-106. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S171481. eCollection
2019.

Barth syndrome: mechanisms and management.

Finsterer J(1).

Author information:
(1)Krankenanstalt Rudolfstiftung, Messerli Institute, Vienna, Austria.

Objectives: Barth syndrome is an ultra-rare, infantile-onset, X-linked recessive
mitochondrial disorder, primarily affecting males, due to variants in TAZ
encoding for the cardiolipin transacylase tafazzin. This review aimed to
summarize and discuss recent and earlier findings concerning the etiology,
pathogenesis, clinical presentation, diagnosis, treatment, and outcome of Barth
syndrome. Method: A literature review was undertaken through a MEDLINE search.
Results: The phenotype of Barth syndrome is highly variable but most frequently
patients present with hypertrophic/dilated/non-compaction cardiomyopathy,
fibroelastosis, arrhythmias, neutropenia, mitochondrial myopathy, growth
retardation, dysmorphism, cognitive impairment, and other, rarer features.
Lactic acid and creatine kinase, and blood and urine organic acids, particularly
3-methylglutaconic acid and monolysocardiolipin, are often elevated. Cardiolipin
is decreased. Biochemical investigations may show decreased activity of various
respiratory chain complexes. The diagnosis is confirmed by documentation of a
causative TAZ variant. Treatment is symptomatic and directed toward treating
heart failure, arrhythmias, neutropenia, and mitochondrial myopathy.
Conclusions: Although Barth syndrome is still an orphan disease, with fewer than
200 cases described so far, there is extensive ongoing research with regard to
its pathomechanism and new therapeutic approaches. Although most of these
approaches are still experimental, it can be expected that causative strategies
will be developed in the near future.

DOI: 10.2147/TACG.S171481
PMCID: PMC6558240
PMID: 31239752

Conflict of interest statement: The author reports no conflicts of interest in
this work.
