---
reference_id: "PMID:2185334"
title: Interleukin 3 perfusion prevents death due to acute anemia induced by monoclonal antierythrocyte autoantibody.
authors:
- Shibata T
- Kindler V
- Chicheportiche Y
- Vassalli P
- Izui S
journal: J Exp Med
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1084/jem.171.5.1809
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interleukin 3 perfusion prevents death due to acute anemia induced by monoclonal antierythrocyte autoantibody.
**Authors:** Shibata T, Kindler V, Chicheportiche Y, Vassalli P, Izui S
**Journal:** J Exp Med (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.171.5.1809](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.171.5.1809)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 1990 May 1;171(5):1809-14. doi: 10.1084/jem.171.5.1809.

Interleukin 3 perfusion prevents death due to acute anemia induced by monoclonal 
antierythrocyte autoantibody.

Shibata T(1), Kindler V, Chicheportiche Y, Vassalli P, Izui S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

We have evaluated the therapeutic activity of rIL-3, in comparison with 
recombinant granulocyte-macrophage CSF (rGM-CSF) and recombinant erythropoietin 
(rEpo), on a lethal form of acute anemia induced by a single injection of a 
monoclonal IgG1 anti-mouse RBC (MRBC) autoantibody. Continuous perfusion of 
rIL-3 before the administration of anti-MRBC mAb prevented animals from the 
death due to anemia with a rapid recovery in greater than 90% of the cases, 
while only partial protection (one third of the cases) was obtained by rEpo 
perfusion, and no protection by rGM-CSF. Since the anti-MRBC mAb induced a 
marked agglutination of RBC in spleens and livers, and subsequent hemodynamic 
failure may be an additional contributing factor to the animals' death, the 
activation of Fc gamma receptor-dependent phagocytosis by rIL-3, as well as the 
increased number of monocytes/macrophages resulting from rIL-3 perfusion, may 
also facilitate rapid elimination of these agglutinated RBC, resulting in the 
further amelioration of the animals' survival. Our results suggest that the 
therapeutic effect of rIL-3 on anti-MRBC autoantibody-induced anemia is achieved 
by: (a) its activity to promote the growth and differentiation of erythroid 
progenitors responsive to Epo and of monocyte/macrophage lineage; and (b) its 
activity to enhance the phagocytic activity of macrophages to efficiently 
eliminate agglutinated RBC in spleens and livers.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.171.5.1809
PMCID: PMC2187881
PMID: 2185334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]