---
reference_id: "PMID:2349162"
title: "Hyperostosis frontalis interna, acromegaly and hyperprolactinaemia."
authors:
- Fulton JD
- Shand J
- Ritchie D
- McGhee J
journal: Postgrad Med J
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1136/pgmj.66.771.16
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperostosis frontalis interna, acromegaly and hyperprolactinaemia.
**Authors:** Fulton JD, Shand J, Ritchie D, McGhee J
**Journal:** Postgrad Med J (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1136/pgmj.66.771.16](https://doi.org/10.1136/pgmj.66.771.16)

## Content

1. Postgrad Med J. 1990 Jan;66(771):16-9. doi: 10.1136/pgmj.66.771.16.

Hyperostosis frontalis interna, acromegaly and hyperprolactinaemia.

Fulton JD(1), Shand J, Ritchie D, McGhee J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Stobhill General Hospital, Glasgow, UK.

The association between hyperostosis frontalis interna (HFI), acromegaly and 
hyperprolactinaemia was investigated. Thirty six acromegalic patients, of whom 
19 had hyperprolactinaemia, were compared with 36 randomly-selected, age-sex 
matched controls. There was a higher prevalence of HFI in the skull X-rays of 
the acromegalic cohort (P = 0.0002) when compared to the control group. This 
difference was apparent in both men (P = 0.01) and women (P = 0.01). Acromegalic 
patients with hyperprolactinaemia also expressed HFI in a higher proportion of 
individuals than the control group (P = 0.0001). Intra- and interobserver 
variability was assessed and concordance with 100% and 97% in the moderate and 
severe HFI sub-groups. The following sub-group analysis was undertaken: 
acromegalics and those acromegalics with hyperprolactinaemia were compared with 
the controls and a highly significant distinction was confirmed (P = 0.0007 and 
P = 0.00001 respectively). A relationship between HFI severity and the patient's 
age was noted in both male and female acromegalics. Also, the severity of HFI 
appeared related to disease duration in female acromegalics. The cause of HFI 
remains unknown but appears to be strongly associated with acromegaly, 
particularly in the presence of co-existent hyperprolactinaemia. The association 
may have symptomatic significance and the presence of HFI should be confirmed or 
refuted in all patients with acromegaly.

DOI: 10.1136/pgmj.66.771.16
PMCID: PMC2429375
PMID: 2349162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]