---
reference_id: "PMID:40062058"
title: Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Presenting With Iron-Deficiency Anaemia and a Giant Colonic Polyp.
authors:
- Naher N
- Al Masud A
- Biswas SK
- Imam H
- Hasan MN
journal: Cureus
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.78520
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Presenting With Iron-Deficiency Anaemia and a Giant Colonic Polyp.
**Authors:** Naher N, Al Masud A, Biswas SK, Imam H, Hasan MN
**Journal:** Cureus (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.78520](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.78520)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2025 Feb 4;17(2):e78520. doi: 10.7759/cureus.78520. eCollection 2025 
Feb.

Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Presenting With Iron-Deficiency Anaemia and a Giant 
Colonic Polyp.

Naher N(1), Al Masud A(2), Biswas SK(1), Imam H(1), Hasan MN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University, 
Dhaka, BGD.
(2)Internal Medicine, St. Louis University School of Medicine, Missouri, USA.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an uncommon autosomal dominant disorder that 
manifests as mucocutaneous pigmentation and hamartomatous polyps in the 
gastrointestinal system. Pigmentation of the skin and mucous membranes may be 
present from birth, but it typically appears in early childhood and can 
sometimes develop later. In addition to an increased lifelong risk of cancers 
and problems, such as gastrointestinal bleeding from polyposis, hamartomatous 
polyps can develop in the stomach, small bowel, or colon. In order to prevent 
difficulties associated with intestinal and extraintestinal malignancies in 
patients diagnosed with PJS, routine screening is essential. We report a case of 
a 19-year-old young girl who presented with intermittent episodes of abdominal 
pain and a few occasions of fresh per rectal bleeding, as well as features of 
anaemia.

Copyright © 2025, Naher et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.78520
PMCID: PMC11885176
PMID: 40062058

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all 
authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared 
that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted 
work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no 
financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.