---
reference_id: "PMID:22581531"
title: "Early corticosteroid treatment in 4 Duchenne muscular dystrophy patients: 14-year follow-up."
authors:
- Merlini L
- Gennari M
- Malaspina E
- Cecconi I
- Armaroli A
- Gnudi S
- Talim B
- Ferlini A
- Cicognani A
- Franzoni E
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/mus.23272
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early corticosteroid treatment in 4 Duchenne muscular dystrophy patients: 14-year follow-up.
**Authors:** Merlini L, Gennari M, Malaspina E, Cecconi I, Armaroli A, Gnudi S, Talim B, Ferlini A, Cicognani A, Franzoni E
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.23272](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.23272)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2012 Jun;45(6):796-802. doi: 10.1002/mus.23272.

Early corticosteroid treatment in 4 Duchenne muscular dystrophy patients: 
14-year follow-up.

Merlini L(1), Gennari M, Malaspina E, Cecconi I, Armaroli A, Gnudi S, Talim B, 
Ferlini A, Cicognani A, Franzoni E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Musculoskeletal Cell Biology, Rizzoli Orthopedic Institute, 
Bologna, Italy. luciano.merlini@ior.it

Comment in
    Muscle Nerve. 2012 Jun;45(6):777-9. doi: 10.1002/mus.23304.

INTRODUCTION: Corticosteroid treatment is the standard of care in Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy (DMD), but the optimal age to initiate treatment and dosage 
pattern remain a matter of discussion.
METHODS: We performed a long-term study of alternate-day corticosteroids in five 
2- to 4-year-old DMD patients. The primary outcome measure was prolongation of 
the ability to walk.
RESULTS: One patient lost ambulation at age 10. Four patients, aged 16 to 18 
were fully ambulant, and 3 of them could still climb stairs. Respiratory 
function was moderately reduced in 2. Left ventricular ejection fraction was > 
45%. Short stature and delayed puberty were the most relevant side effects. 
Although the negative impact of corticosteroid treatment on growth rate remained 
their major concern, parents and patients stated that they preferred 
corticosteroid therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term corticosteroid treatment is effective in prolonging 
function but not in recovering lost function, and its early use seems 
appropriate.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.23272
PMID: 22581531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]