---
reference_id: "PMID:24459070"
title: Amyoplasia revisited.
authors:
- Hall JG
- Aldinger KA
- Tanaka KI
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36395
keywords:
- "Arthrogryposis/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Phenotype
- Risk Factors
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyoplasia revisited.
**Authors:** Hall JG, Aldinger KA, Tanaka KI
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36395](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36395)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Mar;164A(3):700-30. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36395. Epub
2014  Jan 23.

Amyoplasia revisited.

Hall JG(1), Aldinger KA, Tanaka KI.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, University of British 
Columbia and BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, Canada.

Amyoplasia is a specific type and the most common form of arthrogryposis 
(multiple congenital contractures). It is a clinical diagnosis at this time. 
Care should be used making the diagnosis because of the implications for 
recurrence, natural history, associated anomalies, and both etiology and 
pathogenesis. We reviewed over 600 published reports and 2,500 individual 
records to identify the 560 individuals reported here. Affected limbs had 
characteristic positions with fatty-fibrous replacement of muscle. Upper limb 
involvement was usually characterized by extended elbows. Lower limbs were held 
in various positions at birth; however, equinovarus positioning of feet was 
almost always present. Symmetric involvement was common. Among 560 affected 
individuals, subtypes were identified: four-limb symmetric involvement (331/560 
= 55.9%), severe involvement (41/560 = 7.3%), three-limb involvement (27/560 = 
4.8%), upper limb only Amyoplasia (ULA; 94/560 = 16.8%), and lower limb only 
Amyoplasia (LLA; 25/560 = 15.5%). Discordant monozygotic twinning was increased, 
occurring in 6.6% (37/560; OR 10.9). A variety of additional anomalies were 
seen, attributed to apparent vascular compromise. Gastrointestinal vascular 
compromise-type anomalies were present in 9.1% (51/560), trunk muscle defects in 
another 2.7% (15/560), digit compromise in 12.1% (68/560), constriction rings in 
4.3% (24/560), and perinatal long bone fractures in 10.5% (59/560). Although 
prenatal ultrasound became the standard of care in 1990, only about one quarter 
of affected pregnancies were diagnosed prenatally since 1990. Amyoplasia appears 
to be completely sporadic. Novel pathogenetic mechanisms for the congenital 
anomalies seen in Amyoplasia need to be identified.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36395
PMID: 24459070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]