---
reference_id: "PMID:33621542"
title: Cardiac transplantation outcomes in patients with amyloid cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Ohiomoba RO
- Youmans QR
- Ezema A
- Akanyirige P
- Anderson AS
- Bryant A
- Jackson K
- Mandieka E
- Pham DT
- Rich JD
- Yancy CW
- Okwuosa IS
journal: Am Heart J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2021.02.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac transplantation outcomes in patients with amyloid cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Ohiomoba RO, Youmans QR, Ezema A, Akanyirige P, Anderson AS, Bryant A, Jackson K, Mandieka E, Pham DT, Rich JD, Yancy CW, Okwuosa IS
**Journal:** Am Heart J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ahj.2021.02.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ahj.2021.02.016)

## Content

1. Am Heart J. 2021 Jun;236:13-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2021.02.016. Epub 2021 Feb 
20.

Cardiac transplantation outcomes in patients with amyloid cardiomyopathy.

Ohiomoba RO(1), Youmans QR(2), Ezema A(1), Akanyirige P(1), Anderson AS(3), 
Bryant A(4), Jackson K(5), Mandieka E(5), Pham DT(6), Rich JD(2), Yancy CW(2), 
Okwuosa IS(7).

Author information:
(1)Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine.
(2)Northwestern University, Division of Cardiology.
(3)University of Texas San Antonio, Division of Cardiology.
(4)Mehary Medical College.
(5)Northwestern University, Department of Medicine.
(6)Northwestern University, Department of Cardiac Surgery.
(7)Northwestern University, Division of Cardiology. Electronic address: 
ike.okwuosa@nm.org.

OBJECTIVE: Amyloid cardiomyopathy (ACM) is a progressive and life-threatening 
disease caused by abnormal protein deposits within cardiac tissue. The most 
common forms of ACM are caused by immunoglobulin derived light chains (AL) and 
transthyretin (TTR). Orthotopic heart transplantation (OHT) remains the 
definitive treatment for patients with end stage heart failure. In this study, 
we perform a contemporary multicenter analysis evaluating post OHT survival in 
patients with ACM.
METHODS: We conducted a multicenter analysis of 40,044 adult OHT recipients 
captured in the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) registry from 1987-2018. 
Patients were characterized as ACM or non-ACM. Baseline characteristics were 
obtained, and summary characteristics were calculated. Outcomes of interest 
included post-transplant survival, infection, treated rejection, and the ability 
to return to work. Racial differences in OHT survival were also analyzed. 
Unadjusted associations between ACM and non-ACM survival were determined using 
the Kaplan-Meier estimations and confounding was addressed using multivariable 
Cox proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: Three hundred ninety-eight patients with a diagnosis of ACM were 
identified of which 313 underwent heart only OHT. ACM patients were older (61 vs 
53; P < .0001) and had a higher proportion of African Americans (30.7% vs 17.6%; 
P < .0001). Median survival for ACM was 10.2 years vs 12.5 years in non-ACM 
(P = .01). After adjusting for confounding, ACM patients had a higher likelihood 
of death post-OHT (HR 1.39 CI: 1.14, 1.70; P = .001). African American ACM 
patients had a higher likelihood of survival compared to White ACM patients (HR 
0.51 CI 0.31-0.85; P = .01). No difference was observed in episodes of treated 
rejection (OR 0.63 CI 0.23, 1.78; P = .39), hospitalizations for infections (OR 
1.24 CI: 0.85, 1.81; P = .26), or likelihood of returning to work for income (OR 
1.23 CI: 0.84, 1.80; P = .30).
CONCLUSIONS: In this analysis of OHT in ACM, ACM was associated with a higher 
likelihood of post-OHT mortality. Racial differences in post-OHT were observed 
with African American patients with ACM having higher likelihood of survival 
compared to White patients with ACM. No differences were observed in episodes of 
treated rejection, hospitalization for infection, or likelihood to return to 
work for income.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ahj.2021.02.016
PMID: 33621542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors of this study do not 
have any financial disclosures or conflicts of interest associated with this 
study.