---
reference_id: "PMID:22803835"
title: "Recurrent furunculosis: a review of the literature."
authors:
- Demos M
- McLeod MP
- Nouri K
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11151.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent furunculosis: a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Demos M, McLeod MP, Nouri K
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11151.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11151.x)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Oct;167(4):725-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11151.x.

Recurrent furunculosis: a review of the literature.

Demos M(1), McLeod MP, Nouri K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2012 Oct;167(4):707-8. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12028.

BACKGROUND: Community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(CA-MRSA) is increasing in incidence and manifests as skin and soft tissue 
infections including furuncles. The majority of studies have focused on the 
epidemiology of single furuncles and not recurrent disease. There is a lack of 
data concerning the incidence of furunculosis outside the U.S.A.
OBJECTIVES: This report reviews the literature of recurrent furunculosis and the 
impact of CA-MRSA on the disease.
METHODS: Article citations were searched within PubMed. Search terms used were 
'furunculosis', 'recurrent furunculosis', 'skin abscess' and 'recurrent boils'. 
Articles were discarded if they did not refer to furunculosis secondary to S. 
aureus.
RESULTS: A total of 1515 articles were initially retrieved with the term 
'furunculosis', 77 with the term 'recurrent furunculosis', 2778 with the term 
'skin abscess', and 1526 with the term 'recurrent boils'. After excluding 
articles not referring to S. aureus furunculosis, 86 articles were included for 
this review.
CONCLUSIONS: Furunculosis is increasing within the U.S.A. secondary to the 
CA-MRSA epidemic and the resistant organism's close association with the 
Panton-Valentine leucocidin (PVL) virulence factor. PVL is associated with 
follicular infections in general, having its strongest association with 
furunculosis and its recurrence. The majority of furuncles in the U.S.A. are 
caused by CA-MRSA, while elsewhere in the world they are caused by 
methicillin-sensitive S. aureus. Nasal carriage of S. aureus is the primary risk 
factor for recurrent furunculosis and occurs in 60% of individuals.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11151.x
PMID: 22803835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]