---
reference_id: "PMID:34182057"
title: "Mini-Review: Mitochondrial dysfunction and chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain."
authors:
- Doyle TM
- Salvemini D
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.136087
keywords:
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- "Axons/drug effects, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Mitochondria/drug effects, pathology"
- Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Neuralgia/chemically induced, pathology"
- "Sensory Receptor Cells/cytology, drug effects, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mini-Review: Mitochondrial dysfunction and chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain.
**Authors:** Doyle TM, Salvemini D
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2021.136087](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2021.136087)

## Content

1. Neurosci Lett. 2021 Aug 24;760:136087. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.136087. Epub
 2021 Jun 26.

Mini-Review: Mitochondrial dysfunction and chemotherapy-induced neuropathic 
pain.

Doyle TM(1), Salvemini D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Saint Louis University School of 
Medicine, 1402 S. Grand Blvd, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA; Henry and Amelia 
Nasrallah Center for Neuroscience, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, 
1402 S. Grand Blvd, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Saint Louis University School of 
Medicine, 1402 S. Grand Blvd, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA; Henry and Amelia 
Nasrallah Center for Neuroscience, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, 
1402 S. Grand Blvd, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA. Electronic address: 
daniela.salvemini@health.slu.edu.

Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is a somatosensory axonopathy 
in cancer patients receiving any of a variety of widely-use antitumor agents. 
CIPN can lead to long-lasting neuropathic pain that limits the dose or length of 
otherwise life-saving cancer therapy. Accumulating evidence over the last two 
decades indicates that many chemotherapeutic agents cause mitochondrial injury 
in the peripheral sensory nerves by disrupting mitochondrial structure and 
bioenergetics, increasing nitro-oxidative stress and altering mitochondrial 
transport, fission, fusion and mitophagy. The accumulation of abnormal and 
dysfunctional mitochondria in sensory neurons are linked to axonal growth 
defects resulting in the loss of intraepidermal nerve fibers in the hands and 
feet, increased spontaneous discharge and the sensitization of peripheral 
sensory neurons that provoke and promote changes in the central nervous system 
that establish a chronic neuropathic pain state. This has led to the propose 
mitotoxicity theory of CIPN. Strategies that improve mitochondrial function have 
shown success in preventing and reversing CIPN in pre-clinical animal models and 
have begun to show some progress toward translation to the clinic. In this 
review, we will review the evidence for, the causes and effects of and current 
strategies to target mitochondrial dysfunction in CIPN.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.136087
PMCID: PMC9260825
PMID: 34182057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest. The authors 
declare no conflicts of interests.