---
reference_id: "PMID:35768194"
title: "Cancer risk and tumour spectrum in 172 patients with a germline SUFU pathogenic variation: a collaborative study of the SIOPE Host Genome Working Group."
authors:
- Guerrini-Rousseau L
- Masliah-Planchon J
- Waszak SM
- Alhopuro P
- Benusiglio PR
- Bourdeaut F
- Brecht IB
- Del Baldo G
- Dhanda SK
- Garrè ML
- Gidding CEM
- Hirsch S
- Hoarau P
- Jorgensen M
- Kratz C
- Lafay-Cousin L
- Mastronuzzi A
- Pastorino L
- Pfister SM
- Schroeder C
- Smith MJ
- Vahteristo P
- Vibert R
- Vilain C
- Waespe N
- Winship IM
- Evans DG
- Brugieres L
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108385
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer risk and tumour spectrum in 172 patients with a germline SUFU pathogenic variation: a collaborative study of the SIOPE Host Genome Working Group.
**Authors:** Guerrini-Rousseau L, Masliah-Planchon J, Waszak SM, Alhopuro P, Benusiglio PR, Bourdeaut F, Brecht IB, Del Baldo G, Dhanda SK, Garrè ML, Gidding CEM, Hirsch S, Hoarau P, Jorgensen M, Kratz C, Lafay-Cousin L, Mastronuzzi A, Pastorino L, Pfister SM, Schroeder C, Smith MJ, Vahteristo P, Vibert R, Vilain C, Waespe N, Winship IM, Evans DG, Brugieres L
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108385](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108385)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2022 Jun 29;59(11):1123-32. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108385. 
Online ahead of print.

Cancer risk and tumour spectrum in 172 patients with a germline SUFU pathogenic 
variation: a collaborative study of the SIOPE Host Genome Working Group.

Guerrini-Rousseau L(1)(2), Masliah-Planchon J(3), Waszak SM(4)(5), Alhopuro 
P(6), Benusiglio PR(7), Bourdeaut F(3), Brecht IB(8), Del Baldo G(9), Dhanda 
SK(10), Garrè ML(11), Gidding CEM(12), Hirsch S(13)(14), Hoarau P(15), Jorgensen 
M(16), Kratz C(17), Lafay-Cousin L(18), Mastronuzzi A(19), Pastorino L(20)(21), 
Pfister SM(14)(22)(23), Schroeder C(24), Smith MJ(25), Vahteristo P(6)(26), 
Vibert R(27), Vilain C(28)(29), Waespe N(30)(31), Winship IM(32), Evans DG(33), 
Brugieres L(2)(34).

Author information:
(1)Department of Children and Adolescents Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, 
France lea.guerrini-rousseau@gustaveroussy.fr.
(2)Team "Genomics and Oncogenesis of pediatric Brain Tumors"-Paris Saclay 
University, INSERM U981, VILLEJUIF, France.
(3)INSERM U830, Laboratory of Translational Research in Pediatric Oncology, 
SIREDO Pediatric Oncology Center, Institute Curie, Paris, France.
(4)Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM), Nordic EMBL Partnership, 
University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Pediatric Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Département de Génétique et Institut Universitaire de Cancérologie, Sorbonne 
University Faculty of Medicine Pitié-Salpêtrière Campus, Paris, France.
(8)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, University Hospitals 
Tubingen, Tubingen, Germany.
(9)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Cell Therapy, Gene Therapy and Hemopoietic 
Transplant, IRCCS, Bambino Gesu Pediatric Hospital, Roma, Italy.
(10)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee, USA.
(11)Neuro-Oncology Unit, Department of Neurochirurgia, IRCCS Istituto Giannina 
Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
(12)Neuro-Oncology Department, Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(14)Hopp Children's Cancer Center Heidelberg (KiTZ), Heidelberg Health Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(15)Department of Children and Adolescents Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, 
France.
(16)Oncology, Great Ormond Street Hospital For Children NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(17)Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(18)Section of Pediatric Hematology Oncology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, 
Alberta Children's Hospital and Cumming School of Medicine, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(19)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology and Stem Cells Transplatation, Bambino Gesu 
Pediatric Hospital, Roma, Italy.
(20)Department of Oncology, Biology and Genetics, University of Genoa, Genoa, 
Italy.
(21)Genetics of Rare Cancers, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genova, 
Italy.
(22)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany.
(23)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, University 
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(24)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tubingen 
Institute of Human Genetics, Tubingen, Germany.
(25)Division of Evolution, Infection and Genomics, The University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(26)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Applied Tumor Genomics Research 
Program, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(27)Department of Genetics, PSL Research University, Institute Curie, Paris, 
France.
(28)Department of Genetics, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, ULB 
Center of Human Genetics, Universite Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium.
(29)Department of Genetics, Hôpital Erasme, ULB Center of Human Genetics, 
Universite Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium.
(30)CANSEARCH Research Platform, Depatment of pediatric oncology and hematology, 
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(31)Childhood Cancer Research Group, Institute of Social and Preventive 
Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(32)Department of Medicine, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(33)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, School of Biological Sciences,Division of 
Evolution, Infection and Genomics, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(34)Department of Children and Adolescents Oncology, Gustave Roussy Institute, 
Villejuif, France.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about risks associated with germline SUFU pathogenic 
variants (PVs) known as a cancer predisposition syndrome.
METHODS: To study tumour risks, we have analysed data of a large cohort of 45 
unpublished patients with a germline SUFU PV completed with 127 previously 
published patients. To reduce the ascertainment bias due to index patient 
selection, the risk of tumours was evaluated in relatives with SUFU PV (89 
patients) using the Nelson-Aalen estimator.
RESULTS: Overall, 117/172 (68%) SUFU PV carriers developed at least one tumour: 
medulloblastoma (MB) (86 patients), basal cell carcinoma (BCC) (25 patients), 
meningioma (20 patients) and gonadal tumours (11 patients). Thirty-three of them 
(28%) had multiple tumours. Median age at diagnosis of MB, gonadal tumour, first 
BCC and first meningioma were 1.5, 14, 40 and 44 years, respectively. Follow-up 
data were available for 160 patients (137 remained alive and 23 died). The 
cumulative incidence of tumours in relatives was 14.4% (95% CI 6.8 to 21.4), 
18.2% (95% CI 9.7 to 25.9) and 44.1% (95% CI 29.7 to 55.5) at the age of 5, 20 
and 50 years, respectively. The cumulative risk of an MB, gonadal tumour, BCC 
and meningioma at age 50 years was: 13.3% (95% CI 6 to 20.1), 4.6% (95% CI 0 to 
9.7), 28.5% (95% CI 13.4 to 40.9) and 5.2% (95% CI 0 to 12), respectively. 
Sixty-four different PVs were reported across the entire SUFU gene and inherited 
in 73% of cases in which inheritance could be evaluated.
CONCLUSION: Germline SUFU PV carriers have a life-long increased risk of tumours 
with a spectrum dominated by MB before the age of 5, gonadal tumours during 
adolescence and BCC and meningioma in adulthood, justifying fine-tuned 
surveillance programmes.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108385
PMCID: PMC9613872
PMID: 35768194

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.