---
reference_id: "PMID:19150884"
title: Toll-like receptors 4 and 5 induce distinct types of vasculitis.
authors:
- Deng J
- Ma-Krupa W
- Gewirtz AT
- Younge BR
- Goronzy JJ
- Weyand CM
journal: Circ Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.185777
keywords:
- "Adjuvants, Immunologic/pharmacology"
- Adoptive Transfer
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chemokine CCL20/metabolism
- "Chemotaxis, Leukocyte"
- "Dendritic Cells/drug effects, immunology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/immunology, pathology"
- Humans
- Ligands
- Lymphocyte Activation/drug effects
- Mice
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Muscle, Smooth, Vascular/immunology, pathology"
- "Receptors, CCR6/metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "T-Lymphocyte Subsets/drug effects, immunology, transplantation"
- "Temporal Arteries/drug effects, immunology, pathology, transplantation"
- Tissue Culture Techniques
- Toll-Like Receptor 4/metabolism
- Toll-Like Receptor 5/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toll-like receptors 4 and 5 induce distinct types of vasculitis.
**Authors:** Deng J, Ma-Krupa W, Gewirtz AT, Younge BR, Goronzy JJ, Weyand CM
**Journal:** Circ Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.185777](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.185777)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2009 Feb 27;104(4):488-95. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.185777. Epub
2009 Jan 15.

Toll-like receptors 4 and 5 induce distinct types of vasculitis.

Deng J(1), Ma-Krupa W, Gewirtz AT, Younge BR, Goronzy JJ, Weyand CM.

Author information:
(1)Lowance Center for Human Immunology, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2009 Feb 27;104(4):425-7. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.194266.

Large vessel vasculitides, such as Takayasu arteritis and giant cell arteritis,
affect vital arteries and cause clinical complications by either luminal
occlusion or vessel wall destruction. Inflammatory infiltrates, often with
granulomatous arrangements, are distributed as a panarteritis throughout all of
the artery's wall layers or cluster in the adventitia as a perivasculitis.
Factors determining the architecture and compartmentalization of vasculitis are
unknown. Human macrovessels are populated by indigenous dendritic cells (DCs)
positioned in the adventitia. Herein, we report that these vascular DCs sense
bacterial pathogens and regulate the patterning of the emerging arteritis. In
human temporal artery-SCID chimeras, lipopolysaccharides stimulating Toll-like
receptor (TLR)4 and flagellin stimulating TLR5 trigger vascular DCs and induce
T-cell recruitment and activation. However, the architecture of the evolving
inflammation is ligand-specific; TLR4 ligands cause transmural panarteritis and
TLR5 ligands promote adventitial perivasculitis. Underlying mechanisms involve
selective recruitment of functional T cell subsets. Specifically, TLR4-mediated
DC stimulation markedly enhances production of the chemokine CCL20, biasing
recruitment toward CCL20-responsive CCR6(+) T cells. In adoptive transfer
experiments, CCR6(+) T cells produce an arteritis pattern with media-invasive T
cells damaging vascular smooth muscle cells. Also, CCR6(+) T cells dominate the
vasculitic infiltrates in patients with panarteritic giant cell arteritis. Thus,
depending on the original danger signal, vascular DCs edit the emerging immune
response by differentially recruiting specialized T effector cells and direct
the disease process toward distinct types of vasculitis.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.185777
PMCID: PMC2731717
PMID: 19150884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
