---
reference_id: "PMID:36949783"
title: Demographics and Clinical Characteristics of Autosomal Dominant Spinocerebellar Ataxia in Canada.
authors:
- Alshimemeri S
- Abo Alsamh D
- Zhou L
- Furtado S
- Kraft S
- Bruno V
- Duquette A
- Brais B
- Suchowersky O
- Munhoz RP
- Slow E
journal: Mov Disord Clin Pract
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mdc3.13666
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Demographics and Clinical Characteristics of Autosomal Dominant Spinocerebellar Ataxia in Canada.
**Authors:** Alshimemeri S, Abo Alsamh D, Zhou L, Furtado S, Kraft S, Bruno V, Duquette A, Brais B, Suchowersky O, Munhoz RP, Slow E
**Journal:** Mov Disord Clin Pract (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mdc3.13666](https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.13666)

## Content

1. Mov Disord Clin Pract. 2023 Feb 7;10(3):440-451. doi: 10.1002/mdc3.13666.
eCollection 2023 Mar.

Demographics and Clinical Characteristics of Autosomal Dominant Spinocerebellar
Ataxia in Canada.

Alshimemeri S(1)(2), Abo Alsamh D(3), Zhou L(4), Furtado S(3), Kraft S(3), Bruno
V(3), Duquette A(5), Brais B(6), Suchowersky O(7), Munhoz RP(2)(8), Slow
E(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)King Saud University Riyadh Saudi Arabia.
(2)University of Toronto Toronto Ontario Canada.
(3)University of Calgary Calgary Alberta Canada.
(4)University of British Columbia Vancouver British Columbia Canada.
(5)CHUM Montreal Quebec Canada.
(6)McGill University Montreal Quebec Canada.
(7)University of Alberta Edmonton Alberta Canada.
(8)University Health Network Toronto Ontario Canada.

BACKGROUND: Autosomal dominant (AD) spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) encompass a
large group of rare disorders, which occurs in individuals of different ethnic
backgrounds. To date, demographics, and clinical descriptions of AD SCA in
Canada are lacking.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review of patients with a genetically confirmed
diagnosis of AD SCAs was performed at five tertiary centers across Canada in the
provinces of Quebec, Alberta, and Ontario. Demographic, genetic, and clinical
information were collected and analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 203 patients with AD SCA were identified. Weighted estimated
prevalence of AD SCA in three large Canadian provinces was calculated (2.25
cases per 100.000) which is in keeping with the figures documented worldwide. We
found that the distribution of the most common SCA differed when comparing
provinces. The most prevalent SCA diagnosis in Ontario was SCA3 (49%), while the
most prevalent SCA diagnosis in Alberta and Quebec was SCA2 in 26% and 47%,
respectively. SCA6 was the third most prevalent SCA subtype in Quebec (14%),
which was not seen as commonly in other provinces. SCA1 was uncommonly seen in
both Alberta and Quebec, despite being common in Ontario.
CONCLUSIONS: In this largest Canadian study, we describe the prevalence,
distribution, and clinical characteristics of AD SCA. We found that the
distribution of the most common SCA differed in the three provinces studied.
This finding reflects the heterogenous nature of the Canadian population.

© 2023 The Authors. Movement Disorders Clinical Practice published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder
Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mdc3.13666
PMCID: PMC10026276
PMID: 36949783
