---
reference_id: "PMID:36831657"
title: "Downstream Targets of VHL/HIF-α Signaling in Renal Clear Cell Carcinoma Progression: Mechanisms and Therapeutic Relevance."
authors:
- Mazumder S
- Higgins PJ
- Samarakoon R
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15041316
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Downstream Targets of VHL/HIF-α Signaling in Renal Clear Cell Carcinoma Progression: Mechanisms and Therapeutic Relevance.
**Authors:** Mazumder S, Higgins PJ, Samarakoon R
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15041316](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15041316)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Feb 19;15(4):1316. doi: 10.3390/cancers15041316.

Downstream Targets of VHL/HIF-α Signaling in Renal Clear Cell Carcinoma
Progression: Mechanisms and Therapeutic Relevance.

Mazumder S(1), Higgins PJ(1), Samarakoon R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Regenerative & Cancer Cell Biology, Albany Medical College,
Albany, NY 12208, USA.

The clear cell variant of renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common renal
epithelial malignancy and responsible for most of the deaths from kidney cancer.
Patients carrying inactivating mutations in the Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene
have an increased proclivity to develop several types of tumors including ccRCC.
Normally, the Hypoxia Inducible Factor alpha (HIF-α) subunits of the HIF
heterodimeric transcription factor complex are regulated by oxygen-dependent
prolyl-hydroxylation, VHL-mediated ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation.
Loss of pVHL function results in elevated levels of HIF-α due to increased
stability, leading to RCC progression. While HIF-1α acts as a tumor suppressor,
HIF-2α promotes oncogenic potential by driving tumor progression and metastasis
through activation of hypoxia-sensitive signaling pathways and overexpression of
HIF-2α target genes. One strategy to suppress ccRCC aggressiveness is directed
at inhibition of HIF-2α and the associated molecular pathways leading to cell
proliferation, angiogenesis, and metastasis. Indeed, clinical and pre-clinical
data demonstrated the effectiveness of HIF-2α targeted therapy in attenuating
ccRCC progression. This review focuses on the signaling pathways and the
involved genes (cyclin D, c-Myc, VEGF-a, EGFR, TGF-α, GLUT-1) that confer
oncogenic potential downstream of the VHL-HIF-2α signaling axis in ccRCC.
Discussed as well are current treatment options (including receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors such as sunitinib), the medical challenges (high prevalence of
metastasis at the time of diagnosis, refractory nature of advanced disease to
current treatment options), scientific challenges and future directions.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15041316
PMCID: PMC9953937
PMID: 36831657

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
