---
reference_id: "PMID:12162821"
title: "Clinical protocol. Gene therapy of Canavan disease: AAV-2 vector for neurosurgical delivery of aspartoacylase gene (ASPA) to the human brain."
authors:
- Janson C
- McPhee S
- Bilaniuk L
- Haselgrove J
- Testaiuti M
- Freese A
- Wang DJ
- Shera D
- Hurh P
- Rupin J
- Saslow E
- Goldfarb O
- Goldberg M
- Larijani G
- Sharrar W
- Liouterman L
- Camp A
- Kolodny E
- Samulski J
- Leone P
journal: Hum Gene Ther
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1089/104303402760128612
keywords:
- "Amidohydrolases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Brain/enzymology, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Canavan Disease/pathology, surgery, therapy"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Clinical Protocols
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Cohort Studies
- Dependovirus/genetics
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Gene Transfer Techniques
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- "Genetic Vectors/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Injections, Intraventricular"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Male
- Patient Selection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical protocol. Gene therapy of Canavan disease: AAV-2 vector for neurosurgical delivery of aspartoacylase gene (ASPA) to the human brain.
**Authors:** Janson C, McPhee S, Bilaniuk L, Haselgrove J, Testaiuti M, Freese A, Wang DJ, Shera D, Hurh P, Rupin J, Saslow E, Goldfarb O, Goldberg M, Larijani G, Sharrar W, Liouterman L, Camp A, Kolodny E, Samulski J, Leone P
**Journal:** Hum Gene Ther (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1089/104303402760128612](https://doi.org/10.1089/104303402760128612)

## Content

1. Hum Gene Ther. 2002 Jul 20;13(11):1391-412. doi: 10.1089/104303402760128612.

Clinical protocol. Gene therapy of Canavan disease: AAV-2 vector for
neurosurgical delivery of aspartoacylase gene (ASPA) to the human brain.

Janson C(1), McPhee S, Bilaniuk L, Haselgrove J, Testaiuti M, Freese A, Wang DJ,
Shera D, Hurh P, Rupin J, Saslow E, Goldfarb O, Goldberg M, Larijani G, Sharrar
W, Liouterman L, Camp A, Kolodny E, Samulski J, Leone P.

Author information:
(1)Robert Wood Johnson Medical School-UMDNJ and Cooper Hospital, 08103, USA.

This clinical protocol describes virus-based gene transfer for Canavan disease,
a childhood leukodystrophy. Canavan disease, also known as Van Bogaert-Bertrand
disease, is a monogeneic, autosomal recessive disease in which the gene coding
for the enzyme aspartoacylase (ASPA) is defective. The lack of functional enzyme
leads to an increase in the central nervous system of the substrate molecule,
N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA), which impairs normal myelination and results in
spongiform degeneration of the brain. No effective treatment currently exists;
however, virus-based gene transfer has the potential to arrest or reverse the
course of this otherwise fatal condition. This procedure involves neurosurgical
administration of approximately 900 billion genomic particles (approximately 10
billion infectious particles) of recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV)
containing the aspartoacylase gene (ASPA) directly to affected regions of the
brain in each of 21 patients with Canavan disease. Pre- and post-delivery
assessments include a battery of noninvasive biochemical, radiological, and
neurological tests. This gene transfer study represents the first clinical use
of AAV in the human brain and the first instance of viral gene transfer for a
neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1089/104303402760128612
PMID: 12162821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
