---
reference_id: "PMID:33958799"
title: Transcriptional analysis of cystic fibrosis airways at single-cell resolution reveals altered epithelial cell states and composition.
authors:
- Carraro G
- Langerman J
- Sabri S
- Lorenzana Z
- Purkayastha A
- Zhang G
- Konda B
- Aros CJ
- Calvert BA
- Szymaniak A
- Wilson E
- Mulligan M
- Bhatt P
- Lu J
- Vijayaraj P
- Yao C
- Shia DW
- Lund AJ
- Israely E
- Rickabaugh TM
- Ernst J
- Mense M
- Randell SH
- Vladar EK
- Ryan AL
- Plath K
- Mahoney JE
- Stripp BR
- Gomperts BN
journal: Nat Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-021-01332-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptional analysis of cystic fibrosis airways at single-cell resolution reveals altered epithelial cell states and composition.
**Authors:** Carraro G, Langerman J, Sabri S, Lorenzana Z, Purkayastha A, Zhang G, Konda B, Aros CJ, Calvert BA, Szymaniak A, Wilson E, Mulligan M, Bhatt P, Lu J, Vijayaraj P, Yao C, Shia DW, Lund AJ, Israely E, Rickabaugh TM, Ernst J, Mense M, Randell SH, Vladar EK, Ryan AL, Plath K, Mahoney JE, Stripp BR, Gomperts BN
**Journal:** Nat Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-021-01332-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01332-7)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2021 May;27(5):806-814. doi: 10.1038/s41591-021-01332-7. Epub 2021
May  6.

Transcriptional analysis of cystic fibrosis airways at single-cell resolution 
reveals altered epithelial cell states and composition.

Carraro G(#)(1), Langerman J(#)(2), Sabri S(2), Lorenzana Z(3)(4), Purkayastha 
A(5), Zhang G(1), Konda B(1), Aros CJ(5)(6)(7), Calvert BA(3), Szymaniak A(8), 
Wilson E(8), Mulligan M(8), Bhatt P(8), Lu J(8), Vijayaraj P(5), Yao C(1), Shia 
DW(5)(6)(7), Lund AJ(5)(6), Israely E(1), Rickabaugh TM(5), Ernst J(2)(9)(10), 
Mense M(8), Randell SH(11), Vladar EK(12), Ryan AL(3)(4), Plath K(13)(14)(15), 
Mahoney JE(16), Stripp BR(17), Gomperts BN(18)(19)(20)(21).

Author information:
(1)Lung and Regenerative Medicine Institutes, Department of Medicine, 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Hastings Center for Pulmonary Research and Division of Pulmonary, Critical 
Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Keck School of 
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)UCLA Children's Discovery and Innovation Institute, Mattel Children's 
Hospital UCLA, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology Interdepartmental Program, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)UCLA Medical Scientist Training Program, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)CFFT Lab, Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Lexington, MA, USA.
(9)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(10)Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell Research Center, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(11)Marsico Lung Institute/Cystic Fibrosis Center, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(12)Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine and Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of 
Colorado Denver School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(13)Department of Biological Chemistry, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
kplath@mednet.ucla.edu.
(14)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA. kplath@mednet.ucla.edu.
(15)Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell Research Center, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. kplath@mednet.ucla.edu.
(16)CFFT Lab, Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Lexington, MA, USA. jmahoney@cff.org.
(17)Lung and Regenerative Medicine Institutes, Department of Medicine, 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. barry.stripp@cshs.org.
(18)UCLA Children's Discovery and Innovation Institute, Mattel Children's 
Hospital UCLA, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
bgomperts@mednet.ucla.edu.
(19)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA. bgomperts@mednet.ucla.edu.
(20)Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell Research Center, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. bgomperts@mednet.ucla.edu.
(21)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
bgomperts@mednet.ucla.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a lethal autosomal recessive disorder that afflicts more 
than 70,000 people. People with CF experience multi-organ dysfunction resulting 
from aberrant electrolyte transport across polarized epithelia due to mutations 
in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. 
CF-related lung disease is by far the most important determinant of morbidity 
and mortality. Here we report results from a multi-institute consortium in which 
single-cell transcriptomics were applied to define disease-related changes by 
comparing the proximal airway of CF donors (n = 19) undergoing transplantation 
for end-stage lung disease with that of previously healthy lung donors (n = 19). 
Disease-dependent differences observed include an overabundance of epithelial 
cells transitioning to specialized ciliated and secretory cell subsets coupled 
with an unexpected decrease in cycling basal cells. Our study yields a molecular 
atlas of the proximal airway epithelium that will provide insights for the 
development of new targeted therapies for CF airway disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-021-01332-7
PMCID: PMC9009537
PMID: 33958799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no conflict of 
interest exists.