---
reference_id: "PMID:17173698"
title: Mutations underlying 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA lyase deficiency in the Saudi population.
authors:
- Al-Sayed M
- Imtiaz F
- Alsmadi OA
- Rashed MS
- Meyer BF
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-7-86
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Frameshift Mutation
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/ethnology, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Oxo-Acid-Lyases/deficiency, genetics"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Saudi Arabia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations underlying 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA lyase deficiency in the Saudi population.
**Authors:** Al-Sayed M, Imtiaz F, Alsmadi OA, Rashed MS, Meyer BF
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2350-7-86](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2350-7-86)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2006 Dec 16;7:86. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-7-86.

Mutations underlying 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA lyase deficiency in the
Saudi population.

Al-Sayed M(1), Imtiaz F, Alsmadi OA, Rashed MS, Meyer BF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. moeen@kfshrc.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric aciduria (3HMG, McKusick: 246450) is an
autosomal recessive branched chain organic aciduria caused by deficiency of the
enzyme 3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl CoA lyase (HL, HMGCL, EC 4.1.3.4). HL is
encoded by HMGCL gene and many mutations have been reported. 3HMG is commonly
observed in Saudi Arabia.
METHODS: We utilized Whole Genome Amplification (WGA), PCR and direct sequencing
to identify mutations underlying 3HMG in the Saudi population. Two patients from
two unrelated families and thirty-four 3HMG positive dried blood spots (DBS)
were included.
RESULTS: We detected the common missense mutation R41Q in 89% of the tested
alleles (64 alleles). 2 alleles carried the frame shift mutation F305fs (-2) and
the last two alleles had a novel splice site donor IVS6+1G>A mutation which was
confirmed by its absence in more than 100 chromosomes from the normal
population. All mutations were present in a homozygous state, reflecting
extensive consanguinity. The high frequency of R41Q is consistent with a founder
effect. Together the three mutations described account for >94% of the
pathogenic mutations underlying 3HMG in Saudi Arabia.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides the most extensive genotype analysis on 3HMG
patients from Saudi Arabia. Our findings have direct implications on rapid
molecular diagnosis, prenatal and pre-implantation diagnosis and population
based prevention programs directed towards 3HMG.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-7-86
PMCID: PMC1764877
PMID: 17173698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
