---
reference_id: "PMID:29984642"
title: "Sitosterolemia: Diagnosis, Metabolic and Hematological Abnormalities, Cardiovascular Disease and Management."
authors:
- Bastida JM
- Girós ML
- Benito R
- Janusz K
- Hernández-Rivas JM
- González-Porras JR
journal: Curr Med Chem
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2174/0929867325666180705145900
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/blood, diagnosis, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Hypercholesterolemia/blood, diagnosis, metabolism"
- "Intestinal Diseases/blood, diagnosis, metabolism"
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, diagnosis, metabolism"
- "Phytosterols/adverse effects, blood, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sitosterolemia: Diagnosis, Metabolic and Hematological Abnormalities, Cardiovascular Disease and Management.
**Authors:** Bastida JM, Girós ML, Benito R, Janusz K, Hernández-Rivas JM, González-Porras JR
**Journal:** Curr Med Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2174/0929867325666180705145900](https://doi.org/10.2174/0929867325666180705145900)

## Content

1. Curr Med Chem. 2019;26(37):6766-6775. doi: 10.2174/0929867325666180705145900.

Sitosterolemia: Diagnosis, Metabolic and Hematological Abnormalities,
Cardiovascular Disease and Management.

Bastida JM(1), Girós ML(2), Benito R(3), Janusz K(3), Hernández-Rivas JM(1)(3),
González-Porras JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca-IBSAL-USAL,
Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Seccio d'Errors Congenits del Metabolisme-IBC, Servei de Bioquimica i
Genetica Molecular Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)IBSAL, IBMCC, CIC, Universidad de Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain.

Sitosterolemia is a recessive inherited metabolic disorder of unknown
prevalence, characterized by increased levels of plasma plant sterols. It is
caused by 28 and 31 variants in ABCG5 and ABCG8 genes, respectively, and is
characterized by a predisposition to hyperabsorption and accumulation of toxic
levels of plant sterols in plasma. Its clinical picture is extremely
heterogeneous. The main clinical features are tendinous and cutaneous xanthomas,
arthritis or arthralgia, premature cardiovascular disease and atherosclerosis.
These characteristics are shared with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), making
it possible for sitosterolemia to be misdiagnosed as homozygous FH, especially
in pediatric patients. In such cases, a specific chromatography-based laboratory
method is essential to differentiate sitosterol and cholesterol. Hematological
abnormalities (hemolytic anemia and macrothrombocytopenia) may be present in
25-35% of patients, in whom it is usually associated with the main clinical
features, as occurs in the 70% of the cases. In this context, the peripheral
blood smear is essential and reveals giant platelets and stomatocytes. Only 21
causative variants in ABCG5/ABCG8 are associated with macrothrombocytopenia.
Most physicians still do not recognize these hematological abnormalities or
relate them to sitosterolemia. Patients may suffer long-term misdiagnosis of
immune thrombocytopenia and be at high risk of receiving harmful therapies or of
not benefitting from a low-cholesterol diet and/or from the gold standard
treatment with ezetimibe. This drug reduces the levels of plasma plant sterols,
provokes regression of xanthomas, and can alleviate hematological abnormalities.
Finally, to identify genetic defects, recent advances in high-throughput
sequencing, especially in the use of targeted sequencing of pre-specified genes,
have begun to be incorporated in the first-line approach in the field of genetic
disorders.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867325666180705145900
PMID: 29984642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
