---
reference_id: "PMID:28556973"
title: "Primary cutaneous perivascular epithelioid cell tumor (PEComa): Five new cases and review of the literature."
authors:
- Stuart LN
- Tipton RG
- DeWall MR
- Parker DC
- Stelton CD
- Morrison AO
- Coleman LW
- Fosko SW
- Vidal CI
- Yadira Hurley M
- Deeken AH
- Gardner JM
journal: J Cutan Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/cup.12972
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Cell Proliferation
- "Dermis/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Proteins/metabolism
- "Perivascular Epithelioid Cell Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary cutaneous perivascular epithelioid cell tumor (PEComa): Five new cases and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Stuart LN, Tipton RG, DeWall MR, Parker DC, Stelton CD, Morrison AO, Coleman LW, Fosko SW, Vidal CI, Yadira Hurley M, Deeken AH, Gardner JM
**Journal:** J Cutan Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cup.12972](https://doi.org/10.1111/cup.12972)

## Content

1. J Cutan Pathol. 2017 Aug;44(8):713-721. doi: 10.1111/cup.12972. Epub 2017 Jun 
22.

Primary cutaneous perivascular epithelioid cell tumor (PEComa): Five new cases 
and review of the literature.

Stuart LN(1), Tipton RG(2), DeWall MR(3), Parker DC(4)(5), Stelton CD(6), 
Morrison AO(7), Coleman LW(8), Fosko SW(9), Vidal CI(2)(10), Yadira Hurley 
M(2)(10), Deeken AH(11), Gardner JM(3).

Author information:
(1)Finan Templeton Dermatopathology Associates, Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, Missouri.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, Arkansas.
(4)Department of Pathology, Emory University Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Emory University Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia.
(6)Suncoast Pathology, Venice, Florida.
(7)Aurora Diagnostics, Las Vegas, Nevada.
(8)Department of Pathology, Intermountain Medical Center, Murray, Utah.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(10)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, Missouri.
(11)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Summa Health System, Akron, 
Ohio.

PEComas represent a family of uncommon mesenchymal tumors composed of 
"perivascular epithelioid cells" with a distinct immunophenotype that typically 
shows both myogenic and melanocytic differentiation. The PEComa family includes 
angiomyolipoma (AML), clear cell "sugar" tumor of the lung and extra pulmonary 
sites, lymphangioleiomyomatosis and clear cell myomelanocytic tumor of the 
falciform ligament/ligamentum teres. Very rarely, PEComas may arise in the skin. 
Primary cutaneous PEComas typically display a dermal proliferation of 
epithelioid cells with pale, clear, or granular pink cytoplasm arranged in nests 
and trabecula with an intervening arborizing network of delicate capillaries. 
Primary cutaneous PEComas have a lower frequency of myogenic marker expression 
than their deep soft tissue and visceral counterparts. They also often express 
strong diffuse CD10, leading to potential confusion with metastatic renal cell 
carcinoma. Most cases behave indolently. We report 5 additional cases of this 
rare entity. All showed classic histologic features and expression of either 
HMB-45 and/or Melan-A/MART-1. Four cases were tested for myogenic markers (2 
were positive & 2 were negative). Three cases were tested for CD10 (all 3 were 
positive). All of our cases with clinical follow-up behaved indolently. Table 1 
provides a summary of findings for all 5 cases in our series.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.12972
PMID: 28556973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]