---
reference_id: "PMID:9124808"
title: "Brain regional differences in the expansion of a CAG repeat in the spinocerebellar ataxias: dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy, Machado-Joseph disease, and spinocerebellar ataxia type 1."
authors:
- Hashida H
- Goto J
- Kurisaki H
- Mizusawa H
- Kanazawa I
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1002/ana.410410414
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Cerebellum/pathology
- Cerebral Cortex/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA/analysis
- Female
- Hippocampus/pathology
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mosaicism
- Nerve Degeneration
- "Spinocerebellar Degenerations/genetics, pathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain regional differences in the expansion of a CAG repeat in the spinocerebellar ataxias: dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy, Machado-Joseph disease, and spinocerebellar ataxia type 1.
**Authors:** Hashida H, Goto J, Kurisaki H, Mizusawa H, Kanazawa I
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.410410414](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410410414)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 1997 Apr;41(4):505-11. doi: 10.1002/ana.410410414.

Brain regional differences in the expansion of a CAG repeat in the
spinocerebellar ataxias: dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy, Machado-Joseph
disease, and spinocerebellar ataxia type 1.

Hashida H(1), Goto J, Kurisaki H, Mizusawa H, Kanazawa I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku,
Japan.

Three autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias, dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy (DRPLA), Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), and spinocerebellar ataxia type 1
(SCA1), are associated with the expansion of a CAG repeat in the respective
genes. To investigate the association between CAG repeat expansion and
neuropathological findings, we analyzed several brain regions from 9 cases of
DRPLA, 3 cases of MJD, and 1 case of SCA1. We found that the expanded alleles
were smaller in the cerebellar cortex than in other brain regions, such as the
frontal cortex, in these three diseases. The discrepancy in the expanded CAG
repeat length between cerebellar cortex and other tissues was most prominent in
DRPLA, and especially in cases of adult-onset DRPLA. A significant correlation
was found between the age at onset of DRPLA and the size of the CAG repeat
expansion. Cerebella of DRPLA patients were microscopically dissected into three
layers, the molecular and granular layers and the white matter, which were
analyzed separately. The lower level of CAG repeat expansion in DRPLA cerebella
was representative of CAG repeat expansion in the granule cells. The
microdissected samples of the granular layer of the hippocampal formation, which
is densely packed with neuronal cells, revealed that the degree of CAG repeat
expansion in this layer was similar to that in the cerebellum. These
observations suggest that granule cells in the cerebellum and hippocampus have
low levels of CAG repeat expansion, and that other types of cells exhibit a
higher level of CAG repeat expansion, in spinocerebellar ataxias.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410410414
PMID: 9124808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
