---
reference_id: "PMID:26181500"
title: The Surgical Treatment of Toxic Megacolon in Hirschsprung Disease.
authors:
- Khasanov R
- Schaible T
- Wessel LM
- Hagl CI
journal: Pediatr Emerg Care
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000000444
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Surgical Treatment of Toxic Megacolon in Hirschsprung Disease.
**Authors:** Khasanov R, Schaible T, Wessel LM, Hagl CI
**Journal:** Pediatr Emerg Care (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PEC.0000000000000444](https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0000000000000444)

## Content

1. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2016 Nov;32(11):785-788. doi:
10.1097/PEC.0000000000000444.

The Surgical Treatment of Toxic Megacolon in Hirschsprung Disease.

Khasanov R(1), Schaible T, Wessel LM, Hagl CI.

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of *Pediatric Surgery and †Pediatrics, University of 
Mannheim, Medical Faculty of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Enterocolitis remains the most significant cause of morbidity and 
mortality in Hirschsprung disease (HD). It could progress into toxic megacolon 
(TM)-acute dilatation of the colon as accompanying toxic complication of 
Hirschsprung enterocolitis. It is a devastating complication, especially in 
infants with so far undiagnosed HD.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of medical records of 4 infants with TM was 
performed. The diagnosis TM was determined on the basis of clinical information 
(abdominal pain or tenderness, abdominal distension, diarrhea, bloody diarrhea, 
and constipation), plain x-rays of the abdomen (segmental or total colonic 
dilation), and the presence of such criteria (fever, high heart rate, increased 
white blood cell count, C reactive protein, anemia, dehydration, electrolyte 
disturbances, hypotension). Surgical management and outcome was evaluated by 
retrospective chart review.
RESULTS: The median duration of symptoms characteristic for TM was 3 days. Toxic 
megacolon was seen as the first manifestation of previously unknown HD in 3 
patients; in 1 newborn, the contrast radiograph was suggestive of HD. In all 
patients, conservative treatment was failed. Three patients were treated with 
surgical decompression and ileostomy only. In all these cases, severe 
complications occurred, consequently 2 of them died. In 1 patient, a resection 
of the transverse dilated colon additionally was performed. This patient had no 
complications in postoperative period and survived.
CONCLUSIONS: Because of the high mortality in patients with TM that were treated 
medically or with colonic decompression, a resection of massively distended part 
of the colon should be performed.

DOI: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000000444
PMID: 26181500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]