---
reference_id: "PMID:8664898"
title: Missense mutation in the paired domain of PAX3 causes craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome.
authors:
- Asher JH Jr
- Sommer A
- Morell R
- Friedman TB
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '1996'
doi: "10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1996)7:1<30::AID-HUMU4>3.0.CO;2-T"
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Deafness
- Facial Bones/abnormalities
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital"
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Sequence Alignment
- Sequence Deletion
- Skull/abnormalities
- Syndrome
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Missense mutation in the paired domain of PAX3 causes craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome.
**Authors:** Asher JH Jr, Sommer A, Morell R, Friedman TB
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1996)7:1<30::AID-HUMU4>3.0.CO;2-T](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1996)7:1<30::AID-HUMU4>3.0.CO;2-T)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 1996;7(1):30-5. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1996)7:1<30::AID-HUMU4>3.0.CO;2-T.

Missense mutation in the paired domain of PAX3 causes craniofacial-deafness-hand
syndrome.

Asher JH Jr(1), Sommer A, Morell R, Friedman TB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824, USA.

Craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome (MIM 122880) is inherited as an autosomal
dominant mutation characterized by the absence or hypoplasia of the nasal bones,
profound sensorineural deafness, a small and short nose with slitlike nares,
hypertelorism, short palpebral fissures, and limited movement at the wrist and
ulnar deviations of the fingers. In a family of three affected individuals with
this syndrome, a mother and two children, a missense mutation (Asn47Lys) in the
paired domain of PAX3 was initially detected by SSCP analysis. PCR amplification
using an oligonucleotide with a terminal 3'-residue match for the C-to-G
transversion in codon 47 showed the presence of this mutation in the DNA from
all affected members. The DNA from unaffected members were refractory to PCR
amplification with the mutation-specific oligonucleotide but did amplify a
control primer pair in the same PCR reaction tube. A previously described
missense mutation in this same codon (Asn47His) is associated with Waardenburg
syndrome type 3 (Hoth et al., 1993). Substitution of a basic amino acid for
asparagine at residue 47, conserved in all known murine Pax and human PAX genes,
appears to have a more drastic effect on the phenotype than missense, frameshift
and deletion mutations of PAX3 that cause Waardenburg syndrome type 1.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1996)7:1<30::AID-HUMU4>3.0.CO;2-T
PMID: 8664898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
