---
reference_id: "PMID:39636566"
title: "Influence of Treatment Effect Modifiers in Fabry Disease: A Systematic Literature Review."
authors:
- Azimpour K
- Tordoff-Gibson C
- Dorling P
- Koulinska I
- Kunduri S
- Laliman-Khara V
- Forsythe A
journal: Adv Ther
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12325-024-03062-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Influence of Treatment Effect Modifiers in Fabry Disease: A Systematic Literature Review.
**Authors:** Azimpour K, Tordoff-Gibson C, Dorling P, Koulinska I, Kunduri S, Laliman-Khara V, Forsythe A
**Journal:** Adv Ther (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12325-024-03062-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325-024-03062-x)

## Content

1. Adv Ther. 2025 Feb;42(2):579-596. doi: 10.1007/s12325-024-03062-x. Epub 2024
Dec  5.

Influence of Treatment Effect Modifiers in Fabry Disease: A Systematic 
Literature Review.

Azimpour K(1), Tordoff-Gibson C(2), Dorling P(3), Koulinska I(3), Kunduri S(3), 
Laliman-Khara V(4), Forsythe A(5).

Author information:
(1)Chiesi, 3800 Steeles Ave. West, Suite 100E, Woodbridge, ON, L4L 4G9, Canada. 
k.azimpour@chiesi.com.
(2)Cytel, Inc., London, UK.
(3)Chiesi, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Cytel, Inc., Toronto, Canada.
(5)Cytel, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Fabry disease (FD) is a rare metabolic disorder which presents with 
considerable heterogeneity in disease characteristics. Given the absence of 
interventional studies comparing all available treatments, it is important for 
indirect treatment comparisons (ITCs) to account for potential treatment effect 
modifiers (TEMs). This systematic literature review (SLR) aimed to identify 
patient characteristics that may impact clinical outcomes by analyzing 
real-world evidence (RWE) in FD.
METHODS: An SLR was conducted according to PRISMA guidelines, with searches 
performed in the EMBASE, MEDLINE, and Cochrane databases (1946-2022; with a 
recent update in April 2023). Full-text articles reporting clinical outcomes 
from RWE studies of pharmacological therapies for the treatment of FD were 
included.
RESULTS: Including studies from the recent SLR update, a total of 119 original 
studies met the PICOS criteria and 25 studies provided insights into TEMS. 
Potential TEMs in FD were identified: sex, age, timing of treatment initiation 
(early/delayed), left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), estimated glomerular 
filtration rate (eGFR), proteinuria, presence of anti-drug-antibodies (ADAs) at 
baseline, and previous enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). In three studies (two 
including ERT-treated patients and one study of migalastat-treated patients) 
males showed worse renal outcomes than females. Five studies found that younger 
patients and those who received initial ERT before the age of 25 years had 
greater reductions in plasma-lysoGb3, as well as more favorable renal, cardiac, 
and biochemical outcomes. Seven studies identified associations between LVH and 
reduced eGFR at baseline, along with an increased risk of cardiovascular, renal, 
and neurological events. In four studies, lower baseline eGFR and proteinuria 
were associated with faster annual eGFR decline despite ERT; high baseline 
proteinuria was a significant predictor of renal disease progression. Baseline 
ADAs were linked to lower eGFR, increased left ventricular mass, and reduced 
treatment impact on plasma/urine-lysoGb3. Migalastat was effective in 
treatment-naïve patients, while those previously treated with ERT experienced 
deteriorations in mean lysoGb3, eGFR, and left ventricular mass.
CONCLUSIONS: This SLR highlighted several patient characteristics that influence 
treatment effectiveness in FD. It is important to account for these 
characteristics in ITCs to ensure unbiased outcomes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-024-03062-x
PMCID: PMC11787270
PMID: 39636566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of Interest: Khashayar 
Azimpour, Patricia Dorling, Irene Koulinska, and Swati Kunduri are employees of 
Chiesi. Carla Tordoff-Gibson, Victor Laliman-Khara, and Anna Forsythe * are 
employees of Cytel Inc.; Chiesi commissioned Cytel Inc. for the study design, 
analysis, and development of the manuscript. *Affiliation at the time of the 
study. Ethical Approval: This article is based on previously conducted studies 
and does not contain any new studies with human participants or animals 
performed by any of the authors and the data are not identifiable. Further the 
data from the databases used in the searches is not identifiable. Therefore, 
Ethics committee approval was not required for this study. The systematic 
literature review used the following publicly available databases: Ovid 
platform: 
https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en-nz/solutions/ovid/platforms-products/ovid . 
Medline: https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medline/medline_home.html . Embase: 
https://www.elsevier.com/products/embase . Econlit: 
https://www.aeaweb.org/econlit/ . Cochrane: 
https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/about-cdsr .