---
reference_id: "PMID:24494792"
title: Efficacy and mechanism of anticonvulsant drugs in migraine.
authors:
- Hoffmann J
- Akerman S
- Goadsby PJ
journal: Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1586/17512433.2014.885835
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and mechanism of anticonvulsant drugs in migraine.
**Authors:** Hoffmann J, Akerman S, Goadsby PJ
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1586/17512433.2014.885835](https://doi.org/10.1586/17512433.2014.885835)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2014 Mar;7(2):191-201. doi: 
10.1586/17512433.2014.885835. Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Efficacy and mechanism of anticonvulsant drugs in migraine.

Hoffmann J(1), Akerman S, Goadsby PJ.

Author information:
(1)Headache Group-Department of Neurology, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.

Anticonvulsants represent one of the main substance classes used for the 
preventive treatment of migraine. Efficacy has been demonstrated in randomized 
placebo-controlled trials for topiramate and valproic acid including divalproex 
sodium. In the case of topiramate, efficacy has recently been proven for chronic 
migraine and even medication overuse headache, questioning the established 
concept of medication withdrawal. However, preventive treatment with 
anticonvulsants is frequently hampered by side effects that occasionally require 
treatment discontinuation. In addition, these data indicate that some 
anticonvulsant drugs are effective in migraine, while a number are clearly not 
useful. Effective anticonvulsants, such as topiramate and valproate, target 
nociceptive trigeminovascular and trigeminothalamic dural pathways or mechanisms 
involved in cortical spreading depression. Dissecting out how the 
anticonvulsants that do not work differ mechanistically from those that do will 
almost certainly provide avenues through which one can develop new treatments to 
bring to patients with migraine.

DOI: 10.1586/17512433.2014.885835
PMID: 24494792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]