---
reference_id: "PMID:28427099"
title: Role of Phosphodiesterases on the Function of Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor-Interacting Protein (AIP) in the Pituitary Gland and on the Evaluation of AIP Gene Variants.
authors:
- Hernández-Ramírez LC
- Trivellin G
- Stratakis CA
journal: Horm Metab Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1055/s-0043-104700
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cyclic AMP/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cyclic Nucleotide Phosphodiesterases, Type 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cyclic Nucleotide Phosphodiesterases, Type 4/genetics, metabolism"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Growth Hormone-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Isoenzymes/genetics, metabolism"
- Neoplasm Proteins/metabolism
- "Pituitary Gland/metabolism, pathology"
- Second Messenger Systems/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of Phosphodiesterases on the Function of Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor-Interacting Protein (AIP) in the Pituitary Gland and on the Evaluation of AIP Gene Variants.
**Authors:** Hernández-Ramírez LC, Trivellin G, Stratakis CA
**Journal:** Horm Metab Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0043-104700](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-104700)

## Content

1. Horm Metab Res. 2017 Apr;49(4):286-295. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-104700. Epub 2017 
Apr 20.

Role of Phosphodiesterases on the Function of Aryl Hydrocarbon 
Receptor-Interacting Protein (AIP) in the Pituitary Gland and on the Evaluation 
of AIP Gene Variants.

Hernández-Ramírez LC(1), Trivellin G(1), Stratakis CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics (SEGEN), Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.

Familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) is caused in about 20% of cases by 
loss-of-function germline mutations in the AIP gene. Patients harboring AIP 
mutations usually present with somatotropinomas resulting either in gigantism or 
young-onset acromegaly. AIP encodes for a co-chaperone protein endowed with 
tumor suppressor properties in somatotroph cells. Among other mechanisms 
proposed to explain this function, a regulatory effect over the 3',5'-cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) signaling pathway seems to play a prominent role. 
In this setting, the well-known interaction between AIP and 2 different isoforms 
of phosphodiesterases (PDEs), PDE2A3 and PDE4A5, is of particular interest. 
While the interaction with over-expressed AIP does not seem to affect PDE2A3 
function, the reported effect on PDE4A5 is, in contrast, reduced enzymatic 
activity. In this review, we explore the possible implications of these 
molecular interactions for the function of somatotroph cells. In particular, we 
discuss how both PDEs and AIP could act as negative regulators of the cAMP 
pathway in the pituitary, probably both by shared and independent mechanisms. 
Moreover, we describe how the evaluation of the AIP-PDE4A5 interaction has 
proven to be a useful tool for testing AIP mutations, complementing other in 
silico, in vitro, and in vivo analyses. Improved assessment of the pathogenicity 
of AIP mutations is indeed paramount to provide adequate guidance for genetic 
counseling and clinical screening in AIP mutation carriers, which can lead to 
prospective diagnosis of pituitary adenomas.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-104700
PMID: 28427099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]