---
reference_id: "PMID:36920288"
title: Interdependence of SS18-SSX-driven YAP1 and β-Catenin Activation in Synovial Sarcoma.
authors:
- Isfort I
- Berthold R
- Heinst L
- Wardelmann E
- Larsson O
- Trautmann M
- Hartmann W
journal: Mol Cancer Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-22-0588
keywords:
- Humans
- beta Catenin/genetics
- "Sarcoma, Synovial/genetics, pathology"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Nucleus/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interdependence of SS18-SSX-driven YAP1 and β-Catenin Activation in Synovial Sarcoma.
**Authors:** Isfort I, Berthold R, Heinst L, Wardelmann E, Larsson O, Trautmann M, Hartmann W
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-22-0588](https://doi.org/10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-22-0588)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer Res. 2023 Jun 1;21(6):535-547. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-22-0588.

Interdependence of SS18-SSX-driven YAP1 and β-Catenin Activation in Synovial
Sarcoma.

Isfort I(1)(2), Berthold R(1)(2), Heinst L(1)(2), Wardelmann E(2), Larsson O(3),
Trautmann M(1)(2), Hartmann W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Münster, Division of Translational Pathology,
Gerhard-Domagk-Institute of Pathology, Münster University Hospital, Münster,
Germany.
(2)University of Münster, Gerhard-Domagk-Institute of Pathology, Münster
University Hospital, Münster, Germany.
(3)Departments of Oncology and Pathology, The Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Synovial sarcoma, a rare malignant soft tissue tumor, is characterized by a
specific chromosomal translocation t(X;18). The resulting chimeric SS18-SSX
fusion protein drives synovial sarcoma pathogenesis by integrating into the BAF
complex and dysregulating gene transcription. Because previous functional
analyses revealed a connection between SS18-SSX and the activity of the
transcriptional coregulators YAP1/TAZ and β-catenin, respectively, this study
examined a potential interdependence between these essential effector proteins
in synovial sarcoma. In a large cohort of synovial sarcoma tissue specimens, IHC
analyses revealed a substantial subset of synovial sarcoma with concurrent
nuclear accumulation of YAP1/TAZ and β-catenin. In vitro, small-molecule
inhibitor treatment, RNAi-mediated knockdown, and vector-based overexpression
assays demonstrated that YAP1, TAZ, and β-catenin transcriptional activity is
not only stimulated by the SS18-SSX fusion protein, but that they also mutually
enhance each other's activation. These analyses showed the highest cooperative
effect with overexpression of YAP1 in combination with β-catenin.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments detected nuclear interactions between YAP1,
β-catenin, and the SS18-SSX fusion protein, the latter being an integral part of
the BAF complex. Disruption of BAF complex assembly affected the coregulation of
YAP1 and β-catenin, indicating that this chromatin remodeling complex plays a
crucial role for interdependent YAP1 and β-catenin activation in synovial
sarcoma cells.
IMPLICATIONS: This study provides deeper insights into synovial sarcoma tumor
biology demonstrating a mutual dependence between YAP1/TAZ and β-catenin
transcriptional activity and a complex interplay with the SS18-SSX fusion
protein within the BAF complex.

©2023 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-22-0588
PMID: 36920288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
