---
reference_id: "PMID:36275641"
title: "NLRP3 inflammasome and NLRP3-related autoinflammatory diseases: From cryopyrin function to targeted therapies."
authors:
- Moltrasio C
- Romagnuolo M
- Marzano AV
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1007705
keywords:
- Humans
- "NLR Family, Pyrin Domain-Containing 3 Protein/genetics"
- Inflammasomes/genetics
- Interleukin-18
- "Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes/drug therapy, genetics, diagnosis"
- Inflammation/complications
- Cytokines/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NLRP3 inflammasome and NLRP3-related autoinflammatory diseases: From cryopyrin function to targeted therapies.
**Authors:** Moltrasio C, Romagnuolo M, Marzano AV
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.1007705](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.1007705)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Oct 6;13:1007705. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1007705. 
eCollection 2022.

NLRP3 inflammasome and NLRP3-related autoinflammatory diseases: From cryopyrin 
function to targeted therapies.

Moltrasio C(1)(2), Romagnuolo M(1)(3), Marzano AV(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Surgical and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.

The NLRP3 inflammasome is one of the NOD-like receptor family members with the 
most functional characterization and acts as a key player in innate immune 
system, participating in several physiological processes including, among 
others, the modulation of the immune system response and the coordination of 
host defences. Activation of the inflammasome is a crucial signaling mechanism 
that promotes both an acute and a chronic inflammatory response, which can 
accelerate the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, mainly Interleukin 
(IL)-1β and IL-18, leading to an exacerbated inflammatory network. Cryopyrin 
associated periodic syndrome (CAPS) is a rare inherited autoinflammatory 
disorder, clinically characterized by cutaneous and systemic, musculoskeletal, 
and central nervous system inflammation. Gain-of-function mutations in NLRP3 
gene are causative of signs and inflammatory symptoms in CAPS patients, in which 
an abnormal activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome, resulting in an inappropriate 
release of IL-1β and gasdermin-D-dependent pyroptosis, has been demonstrated 
both in in vitro and in ex vivo studies. During recent years, two new hereditary 
NLRP3-related disorders have been described, deafness autosomal dominant 34 
(DFN34) and keratitis fugax hereditaria (KFH), with an exclusive cochlear- and 
anterior eye- restricted autoinflammation, respectively, and caused by mutations 
in NLRP3 gene, thus expanding the clinical and genetic spectrum of 
NLRP3-associated autoinflammatory diseases. Several crucial mechanisms involved 
in the control of activation and regulation of the NLRP3 inflammasome have been 
identified and researchers took advantage of this to develop novel target 
therapies with a significant improvement of clinical signs and symptoms of 
NLRP3-associated diseases. This review provides a broad overview of NLRP3 
inflammasome biology with particular emphasis on CAPS, whose clinical, genetic, 
and therapeutic aspects will be explored in depth. The latest evidence on two 
"new" diseases, DFN34 and KFH, caused by mutations in NLRP3 is also described.

Copyright © 2022 Moltrasio, Romagnuolo and Marzano.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1007705
PMCID: PMC9583146
PMID: 36275641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.