---
reference_id: "PMID:29492674"
title: "Urinary CD80: a biomarker for a favorable response to corticosteroids in minimal change disease."
authors:
- Cara-Fuentes G
- Lanaspa MA
- Garcia GE
- Banks M
- Garin EH
- Johnson RJ
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-018-3886-6
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones
- B7-1 Antigen
- Biomarkers
- Child
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental"
- Humans
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid"
- Nephrotic Syndrome
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Urinary CD80: a biomarker for a favorable response to corticosteroids in minimal change disease.
**Authors:** Cara-Fuentes G, Lanaspa MA, Garcia GE, Banks M, Garin EH, Johnson RJ
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-018-3886-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-018-3886-6)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2018 Jul;33(7):1101-1103. doi: 10.1007/s00467-018-3886-6.
Epub  2018 Mar 1.

Urinary CD80: a biomarker for a favorable response to corticosteroids in minimal 
change disease.

Cara-Fuentes G(1), Lanaspa MA(2), Garcia GE(3), Banks M(4), Garin EH(5), Johnson 
RJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, 
University of Colorado, Denver, CO, USA. Miguel.lanaspagarcia@ucdenver.edu.
(3)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, 
University of Colorado, Denver, CO, USA.
(4)Rocky Mountain Pediatric Kidney Center, Suite 330, 2055 High Street, Denver, 
CO, USA.
(5)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Comment on
    Pediatr Nephrol. 2018 Jul;33(7):1183-1187. doi: 10.1007/s00467-018-3885-7.

Minimal Change Disease (MCD) is the most common type of nephrotic syndrome in 
children. The etiology has remained unknown, although it is commonly thought to 
be due to an unknown circulating factor that triggers podocyte dysfunction. To 
date, several changes in podocytes have been reported in MCD, of which one is 
the expression of CD80, also known as B7.1, which is a costimulatory molecule 
that is normally expressed on antigen -presenting cells. Some studies suggest 
that subjects with steroid-sensitive MCD may express CD80 in their podocytes 
during relapse and that this expression is associated with high urinary levels 
of CD80. Indeed, subjects with MCD in remission, or subjects with other 
glomerular diseases, such as focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, have 
substantially lower levels of urinary CD80 excretion. A recent study has now 
reported that high levels of urinary CD80 may be a sensitive marker for 
steroid-sensitivity and that their presence is also associated with long-term 
preservation of renal function. Thus, urinary CD80 is emerging as a potential 
biomarker for steroid-responsiveness in children presenting with primary 
nephrotic syndrome.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-018-3886-6
PMCID: PMC5990433
PMID: 29492674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors disclose no conflicts of 
interest.

In 2004, Reiser et al. reported that under certain conditions podocytes can express CD80 (also known as B7.1) [1], a costimulatory molecule normally expressed by antigen-presenting cells. Later, others confirmed that podocytes can function as antigen-presenting cells, suggesting additional functions of the podocyte in biology and evolution [2].

The discovery that CD80 can be expressed by podocytes resulted in a series of studies to determine if it might act as a biomarker, or mediator, of various glomerular diseases. CD80 was reported to be induced in podocytes in a variety of experimental glomerular disease models associated with proteinuria, including in genetic models (α3 integrin knockout and nephrin knockout), lupus models, diabetic nephropathy, and following administration of toll-like receptor ligands (TLRL), such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and poly-IC, to mice [1, 3, 4]. Clinical studies also reported CD80 to be variably expressed in podocytes in lupus nephritis, minimal change disease (MCD), focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), and diabetic renal disease [1, 3, 5, 6], but others could not confirm these findings [7–11]. Furthermore, CTLA-4, which binds CD80 and downregulates the CD80 response, has been suggested as a potential treatment for glomerular disease based on these findings, especially in subjects with FSGS [6]. However, while treatment with Abatacept (CTLA-4 Ig) was initially reported as beneficial in FSGS [6], most subsequent reports have been disappointing [12, 13]. Thus, the story of CD80 as a potential biomarker and mediator of kidney disease has remained in controversy.

Perhaps we are overthinking CD80 as being “black and white” in disease states when it may be a biomarker that is variably expressed in many glomerular diseases in response to podocyte injury. Indeed, if there is low grade expression in disease, then blocking CD80 may not provide any additional protection from the underlying mechanism of injury. Indeed, in immune complex diseases there may be ongoing complement activation with inflammatory cells driving disease, in diabetes the presence of microvascular disease can drive hemodynamic changes with glomerular injury, and in some genetic diseases proteinuria results from alteration in slit diaphragm proteins.

An exception may be the diseases characterized by a lack of immune deposits or inflammation—such as MCD and FSGS. In this regard, the strongest evidence for a role for CD80 is in corticosteroid-sensitive MCD and not FSGS. The evidence for involvement of CD80 in MCD has been primarily based on the finding of markedly elevated levels of CD80 in the urine, which are higher than those observed in other glomerular diseases, including FSGS [5, 14–17]. Our studies suggest that in MCD, CD80 expression occurs in the podocyte, likely from engagement via TLRL, and that the CD80 activation is associated with functional changes that may cause proteinuria [4, 18, 19]. Evidence that induction of CD80 in podocytes may drive proteinuria and podocyte dysfunction has also been reported by Reiser et al. and others [1, 20]. Indeed, we also found a remarkable improvement in proteinuria in a child with recurrent MCD who was treated with abatacept, although relapse occurred rapidly [13].

In a article recently published in Pediatric Nephrology, Ling et al. evaluate the level of urinary CD80 as a predictor for response and long-term outcome in children presenting with primary nephrotic syndrome [21]. A baseline level of >328 ng CD80/g creatinine was found to predict steroid responsiveness (97% vs 48% for those under the cutoff) and also to protect against the development of CKD stage 2 or higher (2.8% vs 33.3%).

These studies support elevated urinary CD80 excretion as a useful biomarker for steroid-sensitive primary nephrotic syndrome in children, and raise the question of whether CD80 may have a causal role in this condition. It does not address the discrepancy in the literature on whether CD80 is present in glomeruli of subjects with MCD. However, some of the discrepancy may relate to the patient population, as the studies that could not find positive glomerular staining rarely noted if the subjects had corticosteroid-sensitive MCD, whether they were already responding (as CD80 excretion drops prior to full remission), and some were not nephrotic [9]. Most importantly, in none of the negative studies was urinary CD80 measured, which has been shown to reflect the activity of the disease, including in the accompanying paper [21].

In summary, CD80 should remain a hot topic in pediatric nephrology. Urinary CD80 may be an attractive marker for steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome in pediatric patients. Additional studies are necessary to better understand the role of CD80 in the pathogenesis of the disease.