---
reference_id: "PMID:33550962"
title: Gestational Diabetes Mellitus Pharmacological Prevention and Treatment.
authors:
- Chatzakis C
- Cavoretto P
- Sotiriadis A
journal: Curr Pharm Des
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2174/1381612827666210125155428
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gestational Diabetes Mellitus Pharmacological Prevention and Treatment.
**Authors:** Chatzakis C, Cavoretto P, Sotiriadis A
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Des (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1381612827666210125155428](https://doi.org/10.2174/1381612827666210125155428)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Des. 2021;27(36):3833-3840. doi: 10.2174/1381612827666210125155428.

Gestational Diabetes Mellitus Pharmacological Prevention and Treatment.

Chatzakis C(1), Cavoretto P(2), Sotiriadis A(1).

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Gynecology and Obstetrics Department, IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, 
Vita-Salute University, Milan, EU, Italy.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is one of the most common medical 
complications of pregnancy and is defined as glucose intolerance that first 
emerges or is first recognized during pregnancy. Several factors increase the 
risk of a pregnant woman developing gestational diabetes mellitus, and several 
interventions have been tested for the prevention of GDM development. The most 
common pharmacological interventions that have been assessed are metformin 
administration, probiotics administration, and vitamin D administration. 
However, no intervention appears to be universally superior to placebo/no 
intervention for the prevention of GDM. Administration of insulin is the 
preferred medication for treating hyperglycemia in gestational diabetes 
mellitus. Metformin and glyburide are not regarded as first-line agents, as both 
cross the placenta to the fetus. Even though there are sufficient data 
indicating that administration of metformin is safe and effective in women with 
GDM, there are very limited data concerning the long-term effects of metformin 
on the offspring. Furthermore, glyburide should be used with caution, as it 
increases the risk of neonatal hypoglycemia. Some studies also show that it 
increases the risk of macrosomia. Overall, oral agents may be a therapeutic 
option in women with GDM after a discussion of the known risks and the need for 
more long-term safety data in the offspring. The present review aims to 
highlight the current scientific status regarding the prevention and treatment 
of GDM.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612827666210125155428
PMID: 33550962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]