---
reference_id: "PMID:37390966"
title: "Gilbert's syndrome revisited."
authors:
- Vítek L
- Tiribelli C
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.004
keywords:
- Humans
- Gilbert Disease/metabolism
- Hyperbilirubinemia/metabolism
- Liver/metabolism
- Bilirubin/metabolism
- Antioxidants
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gilbert's syndrome revisited.
**Authors:** Vítek L, Tiribelli C
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.004)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2023 Oct;79(4):1049-1055. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.004. Epub
2023  Jun 28.

Gilbert's syndrome revisited.

Vítek L(1), Tiribelli C(2).

Author information:
(1)1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital 
in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. Electronic address: vitek@cesnet.cz.
(2)Fondazione Italiana Fegato, Trieste, Italy. Electronic address: 
ctliver@fegato.it.

Gilbert's syndrome, also known as benign hyperbilirubinaemia, was described more 
than 100 years ago. It has usually been considered a physiological abnormality 
characterised by a mild elevation of the systemic level of unconjugated 
bilirubin, in the absence of any underlying liver or overt haemolytic disease. 
However, since the re-discovery of the potent antioxidant effects of bilirubin 
in the late 1980s, as well as multiple intracellular signalling pathways 
affected by bilirubin, an ever-increasing body of evidence suggests that 
individuals with Gilbert's syndrome may benefit from the mild 
hyperbilirubinaemia and are actually protected from the development of a wide 
variety of "diseases of civilisation" such as cardiovascular diseases, certain 
cancers, and autoimmune or neurodegenerative diseases. This review analyses the 
current state of medical knowledge given recent discoveries in this rapidly 
developing field, as well as their possible clinical significance, and provides 
a new perspective on this condition.

Copyright © 2023 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2023.06.004
PMID: 37390966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]