---
reference_id: "PMID:28716069"
title: Angiosarcoma treated successfully with anti-PD-1 therapy - a case report.
authors:
- Sindhu S
- Gimber LH
- Cranmer L
- McBride A
- Kraft AS
journal: J Immunother Cancer
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s40425-017-0263-0
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage"
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Immunological/administration & dosage"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Facial Neoplasms/drug therapy, secondary"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/drug therapy, secondary"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/drug therapy, secondary"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nose Neoplasms
- Off-Label Use
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angiosarcoma treated successfully with anti-PD-1 therapy - a case report.
**Authors:** Sindhu S, Gimber LH, Cranmer L, McBride A, Kraft AS
**Journal:** J Immunother Cancer (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40425-017-0263-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40425-017-0263-0)

## Content

1. J Immunother Cancer. 2017 Jul 18;5(1):58. doi: 10.1186/s40425-017-0263-0.

Angiosarcoma treated successfully with anti-PD-1 therapy - a case report.

Sindhu S(1)(2), Gimber LH(3), Cranmer L(4), McBride A(2), Kraft AS(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, The University of
Arizona, 1501 N Campbell Ave, Tucson, AZ, 85724, USA.
(2)The University of Arizona Cancer Center, Suite 2912, 1515 N Campbell Ave,
Tucson, AZ, 85724, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Imaging, The University of Arizona, 1501 N Campbell
Ave, Tucson, AZ, 85724, USA.
(4)Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, 825 Eastlake Ave, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, The University of
Arizona, 1501 N Campbell Ave, Tucson, AZ, 85724, USA. akraft@uacc.arizona.edu.
(6)The University of Arizona Cancer Center, Suite 2912, 1515 N Campbell Ave,
Tucson, AZ, 85724, USA. akraft@uacc.arizona.edu.

BACKGROUND: Angiosarcomas are tumors of malignant endothelial origin that have a
poor prognosis with a five-year survival of less than 40%. These tumors can be
found in all age groups, but are more common in older patients; with the
cutaneous form most common in older white men. Combined modality therapy
including surgery and radiation appears to have a better outcome than each
modality alone. When metastatic, agents such as liposomal doxorubicin,
paclitaxel and ifosfamide have activity but it is short-lived and not curative.
Immunotherapy targeting either the PD-1 receptor or PD-L1 ligand has recently
been shown to have activity in multiple cancers including melanoma, renal, and
non-small lung cancer. Although these agents have been used in sarcoma therapy,
their ability to treat angiosarcoma has not been reported.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here we describe the case of a 63-year-old man who presented
initially with angiosarcoma of the nose and received surgery for the primary.
Over 4 years he had recurrent disease in the face and liver and was treated with
nab-paclitaxel, surgery, and radioembolization, but continued to have
progressive disease. His tumor was found to express PD-L1 and he received
off-label pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg every 21 days for 13 cycles with marked
shrinkage of his liver disease and no new facial lesions. Secondary to this
therapy he developed hepatitis and has been treated with decreasing doses of
prednisone. During the 8 months off therapy he has developed no new or
progressive lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: Although occasional responses to immunotherapy have been reported
for sarcomas, this case report demonstrates that angiosarcoma can express PD-L1
and have a sustained response to PD-1 directed therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s40425-017-0263-0
PMCID: PMC5514460
PMID: 28716069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The
patient was treated on a compassionate use basis with the appropriate consent.
No other ethical approvals were needed. Consent for administration of this agent
was obtained from this patient. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of their individual
details and accompanying images in this manuscript. The consent form is held by
the authors and is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief. COMPETING
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
