---
reference_id: "PMID:24733735"
title: "Nasopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma: a comparative analysis of keratinizing and nonkeratinizing subtypes."
authors:
- Vazquez A
- Khan MN
- Govindaraj S
- Baredes S
- Eloy JA
journal: Int Forum Allergy Rhinol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/alr.21332
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nasopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma: a comparative analysis of keratinizing and nonkeratinizing subtypes.
**Authors:** Vazquez A, Khan MN, Govindaraj S, Baredes S, Eloy JA
**Journal:** Int Forum Allergy Rhinol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/alr.21332](https://doi.org/10.1002/alr.21332)

## Content

1. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2014 Aug;4(8):675-83. doi: 10.1002/alr.21332. Epub 
2014 Apr 14.

Nasopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma: a comparative analysis of keratinizing 
and nonkeratinizing subtypes.

Vazquez A(1), Khan MN, Govindaraj S, Baredes S, Eloy JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Rutgers New Jersey 
Medical School, Newark, NJ.

BACKGROUND: Nasopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (NPSCC) is uncommon in 
non-endemic regions. Two major histologic subtypes are recognized: keratinizing 
(K-NPSCC) and nonkeratinizing (NK-NPSCC). We hypothesize that significant 
differences exist between the 2 in terms of demographic, clinicopathologic, 
survival, and prognostic features. We aim to show that differentiating between 
the 2 subtypes is perhaps the most important first step at the time of 
diagnosis.
METHODS: Using a retrospective cohort design, the U.S. National Cancer 
Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) registry was used 
to extract data on the 2 major subtypes of NPSCC. Frequency, incidence, and 
relative survival (RS) were analyzed comparatively. Regression analysis was 
conducted and hazard ratios (HRs) calculated.
RESULTS: A total of 1624 cases were identified: 1234 (76.0%) cases of NK-NPSCC 
and 390 (24.0%) cases of K-NPSCC. Five-year RS was 60.6% for NK-NPSCC and 40.5% 
for K-NPSCC. Regression analysis revealed K-NPSCC to be a poor prognostic factor 
(HR 2.1; 95% confidence interval, 1.8-2.6; p < 0.0001). Other factors associated 
with a poor prognosis included female gender in K-NPSCC, age greater than 44 
years in both groups, and advanced-stage disease at diagnosis. Favorable 
prognostic factors included Asian/Pacific Islander race, and treatment with 
radiation therapy. Higher histologic grade did not portend a worse prognosis for 
either group.
CONCLUSION: NPSCC remains an uncommon malignancy in the United States. K-NPSCC 
and NK-NPSCC represent 2 different histologic entities with important clinical 
differences. K-NPSCC carries a worse overall prognosis when compared to 
NK-NPSCC.

© 2014 ARS-AAOA, LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/alr.21332
PMID: 24733735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]