---
reference_id: "PMID:34364070"
title: Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells from a Bardet-Biedl syndrome patient carrying a homologous BBS2 c.534 + 1G > T mutation.
authors:
- Ting CY
- Huang CY
- Chen HC
- Chiu YW
- Hsieh PCH
- Lee JJ
journal: Stem Cell Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2021.102480
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells from a Bardet-Biedl syndrome patient carrying a homologous BBS2 c.534 + 1G > T mutation.
**Authors:** Ting CY, Huang CY, Chen HC, Chiu YW, Hsieh PCH, Lee JJ
**Journal:** Stem Cell Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scr.2021.102480](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scr.2021.102480)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Res. 2021 Aug;55:102480. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2021.102480. Epub 2021
Jul  30.

Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells from a Bardet-Biedl syndrome 
patient carrying a homologous BBS2 c.534 + 1G > T mutation.

Ting CY(1), Huang CY(1), Chen HC(2), Chiu YW(3), Hsieh PCH(1), Lee JJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Human Disease iPSC Service Consortium, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia 
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Faculty of Medicine, College of 
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Faculty of Renal 
Care, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Faculty of Medicine, College of 
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Faculty of Renal 
Care, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; 
Regenerative Medicine and Cell Therapy Research Center, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Electronic address: jjlee7351@gmail.com.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome is a autosomal recessive hereditary disorder characterized 
by polydactyly, multiple renal cysts, retinal cone-rod dystrophy, obesity, and 
variable neural development or cognitive impairment. We reported the generation 
and characterization of an iPS cell line, IBMS-iPSC-063-06, from a patient 
carrying the BBS2 homologous c534 + 1G > T mutation. The generated iPS cell line 
retains the mutation and exhibits pluripotency and differentiation ability both 
in vivo and in vitro condition.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2021.102480
PMID: 34364070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]