---
reference_id: "PMID:21554323"
title: Neuroprotective effects of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor in a novel transgenic mouse model of SCA17.
authors:
- Chang YC
- Lin CY
- Hsu CM
- Lin HC
- Chen YH
- Lee-Chen GJ
- Su MT
- Ro LS
- Chen CM
- Hsieh-Li HM
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07304.x
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Neuroprotective Agents/therapeutic use
- Phenotype
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, prevention & control"
- "TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroprotective effects of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor in a novel transgenic mouse model of SCA17.
**Authors:** Chang YC, Lin CY, Hsu CM, Lin HC, Chen YH, Lee-Chen GJ, Su MT, Ro LS, Chen CM, Hsieh-Li HM
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07304.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07304.x)

## Content

1. J Neurochem. 2011 Jul;118(2):288-303. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07304.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Neuroprotective effects of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor in a novel
transgenic mouse model of SCA17.

Chang YC(1), Lin CY, Hsu CM, Lin HC, Chen YH, Lee-Chen GJ, Su MT, Ro LS, Chen
CM, Hsieh-Li HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) is an autosomal dominant inherited
disorder characterized by degeneration of spinocerebellar tracts and selected
brainstem neurons owing to the expansion of a CAG repeat of the human
TATA-binding protein (hTBP) gene. To gain insight into the pathogenesis of this
hTBP mutation, we generated transgenic mice with the mutant hTBP gene driven by
the Purkinje specific protein (Pcp2/L7) gene promoter. Mice with the expanded
hTBP allele developed ataxia within 2-5 months. Behavioral analysis of L7-hTBP
transgenic mice showed reduced fall latency in a rotarod assay. Purkinje cell
degeneration was identified by immunostaining of calbindin and IP3R1. Reactive
gliosis and neuroinflammation occurred in the transgenic cerebellum, accompanied
by up-regulation of GFAP and Iba1. The L7-hTBP transgenic mice were thus
confirmed to recapitulate the SCA17 phenotype and were used as a disease model
to explore the potential of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor in SCA17
treatment. Our results suggest that granulocyte-colony stimulating factor has a
neuroprotective effect in these transgenic mice, ameliorating their neurological
and behavioral deficits. These data indicate that the expression of the mutant
hTBP in Purkinje cells is sufficient to produce cell degeneration and an ataxia
phenotype, and constitutes a good model for better analysis of the
neurodegeneration in SCA17.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07304.x
PMID: 21554323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
