---
reference_id: "PMID:38684309"
title: "[Prenatal phenotype and genetic analysis of a fetus with Fibrochondrogenesis 1 due to compound heterozygous variants of COL11A1 gene]."
authors:
- Wu J
- Lyu Y
- Xyu S
- Wang X
journal: Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20231219-00341
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Pregnancy
- Phenotype
- Heterozygote
- Collagen Type XI/genetics
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
- Fetus/abnormalities
- Exome Sequencing
- Adult
- Mutation
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Genetic Testing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Prenatal phenotype and genetic analysis of a fetus with Fibrochondrogenesis 1 due to compound heterozygous variants of COL11A1 gene].
**Authors:** Wu J, Lyu Y, Xyu S, Wang X
**Journal:** Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20231219-00341](https://doi.org/10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20231219-00341)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2024 May 10;41(5):601-605. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20231219-00341.

[Prenatal phenotype and genetic analysis of a fetus with Fibrochondrogenesis 1 
due to compound heterozygous variants of COL11A1 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu J(1), Lyu Y, Xyu S, Wang X.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Training Base of Jinzhou Medical University, Chaoyang Central 
Hospital, Chaoyang, Liaoning 122000, China. 1553548426@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the genetic etiology of a fetus with short limbs 
identified by prenatal ultrasonography.
METHODS: A fetus detected with short limb malformations at Shengjing Hospital 
Affiliated to China Medical University on October 25, 2021 was selected as the 
study subject. Prenatal ultrasound and post-abortion imaging were carried out to 
determine the phenotypic characteristics of the fetus. Amniotic fluid sample of 
the fetus and peripheral blood samples of its parents were collected. Following 
extraction of genomic DNA, whole-exome sequencing was carried out. Candidate 
variants were verified by Sanger sequencing. Online software was used to predict 
the structural changes of the mutant proteins.
RESULTS: Prenatal ultrasound showed that the fetus had a small bell-shaped 
thorax, markedly shortened limbs, flat midface, a small nose with anteriorly 
tilted nostrils, and a small mandible. Post-abortion CT showed typical short and 
wide fetal ribs, cupped metaphyses at both ends, short long bones with wide 
metaphyses, resulting in a dumbbell-shaped appearance and curved thoracic 
vertebrae. Whole-exome sequencing revealed that the fetus had harbored compound 
heterozygous variants of the COL11A1 gene, namely c.2251G>T and c.3790G>T, both 
of which were predicted to alter the important Gly-X-Y structure of collagen 
protein. Sanger sequencing confirmed that the variants were respectively 
inherited from its parents.
CONCLUSION: A rare fetus with Fibrochondrogenesis type 1 due to compound 
heterozygous variants of the COL11A1 gene has been diagnosed. Above finding has 
enabled genetic counseling and reproductive guidance for this family.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn511374-20231219-00341
PMID: 38684309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
