---
reference_id: "PMID:22575700"
title: Disease severity in a mouse model of ataxia telangiectasia is modulated by the DNA damage checkpoint gene Hus1.
authors:
- Balmus G
- Zhu M
- Mukherjee S
- Lyndaker AM
- Hume KR
- Lee J
- Riccio ML
- Reeves AP
- Sutter NB
- Noden DM
- Peters RM
- Weiss RS
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds173
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics, metabolism"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA Breaks, Double-Stranded"
- DNA Damage
- DNA Replication
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Genes, cdc"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease severity in a mouse model of ataxia telangiectasia is modulated by the DNA damage checkpoint gene Hus1.
**Authors:** Balmus G, Zhu M, Mukherjee S, Lyndaker AM, Hume KR, Lee J, Riccio ML, Reeves AP, Sutter NB, Noden DM, Peters RM, Weiss RS
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds173](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds173)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Aug 1;21(15):3408-20. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds173. Epub 2012
May  9.

Disease severity in a mouse model of ataxia telangiectasia is modulated by the
DNA damage checkpoint gene Hus1.

Balmus G(1), Zhu M, Mukherjee S, Lyndaker AM, Hume KR, Lee J, Riccio ML, Reeves
AP, Sutter NB, Noden DM, Peters RM, Weiss RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

The human genomic instability syndrome ataxia telangiectasia (A-T), caused by
mutations in the gene encoding the DNA damage checkpoint kinase ATM, is
characterized by multisystem defects including neurodegeneration,
immunodeficiency and increased cancer predisposition. ATM is central to a
pathway that responds to double-strand DNA breaks, whereas the related kinase
ATR leads a parallel signaling cascade that is activated by replication stress.
To dissect the physiological relationship between the ATM and ATR pathways, we
generated mice defective for both. Because complete ATR pathway inactivation
causes embryonic lethality, we weakened the ATR mechanism to different degrees
by impairing HUS1, a member of the 911 complex that is required for efficient
ATR signaling. Notably, simultaneous ATM and HUS1 defects caused synthetic
lethality. Atm/Hus1 double-mutant embryos showed widespread apoptosis and died
mid-gestationally. Despite the underlying DNA damage checkpoint defects,
increased DNA damage signaling was observed, as evidenced by H2AX
phosphorylation and p53 accumulation. A less severe Hus1 defect together with
Atm loss resulted in partial embryonic lethality, with the surviving
double-mutant mice showing synergistic increases in genomic instability and
specific developmental defects, including dwarfism, craniofacial abnormalities
and brachymesophalangy, phenotypes that are observed in several human genomic
instability disorders. In addition to identifying tissue-specific consequences
of checkpoint dysfunction, these data highlight a robust, cooperative
configuration for the mammalian DNA damage response network and further suggest
HUS1 and related genes in the ATR pathway as candidate modifiers of disease
severity in A-T patients.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds173
PMCID: PMC3392115
PMID: 22575700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
