---
reference_id: "PMID:17924881"
title: "An unusual cause of ulceration: ainhum (dactylolysis spontanea)."
authors:
- Jemmott T
- Foster AV
- Edmonds ME
journal: Int Wound J
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-481X.2007.00297.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An unusual cause of ulceration: ainhum (dactylolysis spontanea).
**Authors:** Jemmott T, Foster AV, Edmonds ME
**Journal:** Int Wound J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-481X.2007.00297.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-481X.2007.00297.x)

## Content

1. Int Wound J. 2007 Sep;4(3):251-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-481X.2007.00297.x.

An unusual cause of ulceration: ainhum (dactylolysis spontanea).

Jemmott T(1), Foster AV, Edmonds ME.

Author information:
(1)Diabetic Foot Clinic, King's College Hospital, NHS Trust, Denmark Hill, 
London, UK. timothy.jemmott@kingsch.nhs.uk

We describe a case of ainhum, a mutilating condition, usually seen in peoples of 
West African origin. A patient presented at the Diabetic Foot Clinic, Kings 
College Hospital, with a painful infected ulcer between the fourth and fifth toe 
of his right foot. He was a 43-year-old Nigerian and did not have diabetes. He 
reported that his left fifth toe had autoamputated some months before. 
Radiograph of the right fifth toe showed absorption of the proximal and 
intermediate phalanges, and a diagnosis of ainhum was made. Ainhum or 
dactylolysis spontanea is a rare condition of unknown aetiology in which a 
groove or fissure of constricting tissue forms around the proximal end of the 
fifth toe. Eventually, the groove extends to encircle the toe, the underlying 
structures are absorbed and the toe autoamputates. It may present as chronic 
fissuring at the base of the fifth toe or as foot ulceration. This condition is 
seldom seen in the United Kingdom, but it is likely that this condition is 
underdiagnosed. It is important that wound care specialists be aware of the 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-481X.2007.00297.x
PMCID: PMC7951423
PMID: 17924881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]