---
reference_id: "PMID:28351195"
title: Utility of Flow Cytometry in Diagnosing Hematologic Malignancy in Tonsillar Tissue.
authors:
- Aisagbonhi O
- DeLelys M
- Hartford N
- Preffer F
- Ly A
journal: Int J Surg Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1177/1066896917700726
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Utility of Flow Cytometry in Diagnosing Hematologic Malignancy in Tonsillar Tissue.
**Authors:** Aisagbonhi O, DeLelys M, Hartford N, Preffer F, Ly A
**Journal:** Int J Surg Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1066896917700726](https://doi.org/10.1177/1066896917700726)

## Content

1. Int J Surg Pathol. 2017 Aug;25(5):406-413. doi: 10.1177/1066896917700726. Epub
 2017 Mar 28.

Utility of Flow Cytometry in Diagnosing Hematologic Malignancy in Tonsillar 
Tissue.

Aisagbonhi O(1), DeLelys M(1), Hartford N(1), Preffer F(1), Ly A(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Tonsil surgical biopsy or excision is a very common procedure. 
However, there exist no consensus guidelines for the pathologic handling of 
tonsil specimens; gross and/or microscopic evaluation may be used. Diagnosis of 
tonsillar hematologic malignancy requires histology, immunohistochemistry and/or 
flow cytometry. Data regarding the utility of flow cytometry in tonsillar 
tissues are limited. We assessed our experience with flow cytometry for tonsil 
diagnosis with regard to accuracy and use patterns at a tertiary academic 
medical center.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed all surgically biopsied or excised tonsil 
specimens that underwent flow cytometry evaluation from August 2011 to March 
2014. Patient clinical information, intraoperative frozen section, histology, 
immunohistochemistry, and flow cytometry diagnoses were recorded.
RESULTS: The study included 154 tonsil specimens from 89 females and 65 males. 
Patients averaged 27.4 years old (range 2-87 years); 73 were pediatric. Both 
histology and flow cytometry were benign for 148 patients (96.1%). 
Hematolymphoid malignancy was diagnosed in 6 adults by 
histology/immunohistochemistry: diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (2), small B-cell 
lymphoma (2), concomitant follicular lymphoma and histiocytic sarcoma (1), and 
extraosseous plasmacytoma (1). Flow cytometry identified abnormal populations in 
5 of 6 cases, and detected clonal populations in 2 reactive follicular 
hyperplasia cases.
CONCLUSION: Tonsillar hematolymphoid malignancy is uncommon, and flow cytometry 
was less accurate than histology/immunohistochemistry for its diagnosis. Despite 
the rarity of tonsillar lymphoma in children, nearly half of study patients were 
pediatric. Intraoperative frozen section diagnosis showed excellent sensitivity 
for malignancy, and could be used to effectively triage cases for flow cytometry 
evaluation.

DOI: 10.1177/1066896917700726
PMID: 28351195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]