---
reference_id: "PMID:36324124"
title: "Updates in idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis in 2022: A state of the art review."
authors:
- Saha BK
- Aiman A
- Chong WH
- Saha S
- Song J
- Bonnier A
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.26230
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updates in idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis in 2022: A state of the art review.
**Authors:** Saha BK, Aiman A, Chong WH, Saha S, Song J, Bonnier A
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.26230](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.26230)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2023 Feb;58(2):382-391. doi: 10.1002/ppul.26230. Epub 2022
Nov  11.

Updates in idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis in 2022: A state of the art 
review.

Saha BK(1), Aiman A(2), Chong WH(3), Saha S(4), Song J(2), Bonnier A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)New York Institute of Technology College of Osteopathic Medicine at Arkansas 
State University, Arkansas, USA.
(3)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Ng Teng Fong General Hospital, 
National University Health System, Singapore City, Singapore.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Saha Clinic, Narail, Bangladesh.
(5)Department of Critical Care Nursing, Goldfarb School of Nursing, Barnes 
Jewish College, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

This manuscript reports the recent advances in idiopathic pulmonary 
hemosiderosis (IPH), a rare cause of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage in children and 
adults. This narrative review of the literature summarizes different aspects of 
IPH, including proposed pathogenesis, patient demographics, clinical and 
radiological characteristics, treatment, and prognosis. Additionally, the 
association between Celiac Disease (CD) and IPH is carefully evaluated. IPH is a 
frequently misdiagnosed disease. The delay in the diagnosis of IPH is often 
significant but fortunately, appears to have decreased in recent years. IPH in 
adults and children have distinct demographic preferences. The autoantibodies 
are common in IPH but with a definite difference between the adult and pediatric 
populations. The definitive diagnosis of IPH requires lung biopsy and careful 
exclusion of all competing diagnoses, even with lung biopsy showing bland 
pulmonary hemorrhage. The presence of nonspecific inflammatory cells or lymphoid 
aggregates may suggest a secondary immunologic phenomenon and needs careful 
evaluation and follow-up. A substantial number of patients suffer from 
coexisting CD, also known as Lane-Hamilton syndrome (LHS), and all patients with 
IPH need to be evaluated for LHS by serology. Although strict gluten free 
diet can manage the majority of patients with LHS, other patients generally 
require immunosuppressive therapy. The corticosteroids are the backbone of IPH 
therapy. Recently utilized experimental treatment options include mesenchymal 
stem cell transplant, liposteroid and bronchial artery embolization. The 
immunosuppression should be adjusted to achieve optimal disease control. 
Patients may progress to end-stage lung disease despite all measures, and lung 
transplantation may be the only viable option.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.26230
PMID: 36324124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]