---
reference_id: "PMID:30169722"
title: Acute flaccid myelitis-Clustering of polio-like illness in the tertiary care centre in Southern India.
authors:
- Sarmast SN
- Gowda VK
- Ahmed M
- Gv B
- Saini J
- Benakappa A
journal: J Trop Pediatr
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmy052
keywords:
- "Administration, Intravenous"
- "Administration, Oral"
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Gray Matter/diagnostic imaging, parasitology"
- Humans
- India/epidemiology
- Leukocytosis/cerebrospinal fluid
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Methylprednisolone/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Myelitis/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Paralysis/etiology
- "Prednisolone/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Prospective Studies
- Tertiary Care Centers
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute flaccid myelitis-Clustering of polio-like illness in the tertiary care centre in Southern India.
**Authors:** Sarmast SN, Gowda VK, Ahmed M, Gv B, Saini J, Benakappa A
**Journal:** J Trop Pediatr (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/tropej/fmy052](https://doi.org/10.1093/tropej/fmy052)

## Content

1. J Trop Pediatr. 2019 Aug 1;65(4):309-314. doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmy052.

Acute flaccid myelitis-Clustering of polio-like illness in the tertiary care
centre in Southern India.

Sarmast SN(1), Gowda VK(2), Ahmed M(3), Gv B(4), Saini J(5), Benakappa A(6).

Author information:
(1)Postdoctoral Fellow, Department of Paediatric Neurology, Indira Gandhi
Institute of Child Health, Bengaluru, India.
(2)Associate Professor, Department of Paediatric Neurology, Indira Gandhi
Institute of Child Health, Bengaluru, India.
(3)Associate Professor, Department of Paediatrics, Indira Gandhi Institute of
Child Health, Bengaluru, India.
(4)Associate Professor, Department of Paediatrics and Paediatrics Critical Care,
Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health, Bengaluru, India.
(5)Associate Professor, Department of Neuroradiology, National Institute of
Mental Health Sciences, Bengaluru, India.
(6)Professor, Department of Paediatrics, Indira Gandhi Institute of Child
Health, Bengaluru, India.

INTRODUCTION: Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is characterized by limb weakness
with spinal cord grey matter lesion on imaging or electrodiagnostic evidence of
spinal cord motor neuron injury. This Poliomyelitis-like illness is rare in
children, and its natural course is not yet well defined.
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY: The purpose of the study was to report the clinical
presentation, laboratory findings, management and outcome of children with AFM.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This is a prospective case series study.
RESULTS: Nine children met the case definition given by CDC. All cases presented
with prodromal symptoms followed by acute onset asymmetrical limb weakness.
Maximum weakness is reached within 4 days from the day of onset. Cerebrospinal
fluid analysis shows that pleocytosis with viral markers for arboviruses and
enteroviruses was negative. Electrophysiological study revealed decreased muscle
action potential in all. MRI of the spinal cord showed predominantly grey matter
involvement.
CONCLUSION: AFM should be one of the differential diagnoses in any child
presenting with acute flaccid paralysis.

© The Author(s) [2018]. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights
reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/tropej/fmy052
PMID: 30169722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
