---
reference_id: "PMID:31984228"
title: "Antithrombotic treatment for secondary prevention of stroke and other thromboembolic events in patients with stroke or transient ischemic attack and non-valvular atrial fibrillation: A European Stroke Organisation guideline."
authors:
- Klijn CJ
- Paciaroni M
- Berge E
- Korompoki E
- Kõrv J
- Lal A
- Putaala J
- Werring DJ
journal: Eur Stroke J
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/2396987319841187
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antithrombotic treatment for secondary prevention of stroke and other thromboembolic events in patients with stroke or transient ischemic attack and non-valvular atrial fibrillation: A European Stroke Organisation guideline.
**Authors:** Klijn CJ, Paciaroni M, Berge E, Korompoki E, Kõrv J, Lal A, Putaala J, Werring DJ
**Journal:** Eur Stroke J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/2396987319841187](https://doi.org/10.1177/2396987319841187)

## Content

1. Eur Stroke J. 2019 Sep;4(3):198-223. doi: 10.1177/2396987319841187. Epub 2019
Apr 9.

Antithrombotic treatment for secondary prevention of stroke and other
thromboembolic events in patients with stroke or transient ischemic attack and
non-valvular atrial fibrillation: A European Stroke Organisation guideline.

Klijn CJ(1), Paciaroni M(2), Berge E(3)(4), Korompoki E(5)(6), Kõrv J(7), Lal
A(8), Putaala J(7), Werring DJ(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(2)Stroke Unit and Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Santa Maria della
Misericordia Hospital, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Division of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(5)First Department of Neurology, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Athens, Greece.
(6)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia.
(7)European Stroke Organisation, Basel, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(9)Stroke Research Centre, Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, UCL
Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(10)The National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.

Patients with ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack and non-valvular
atrial fibrillation have a high risk of recurrent stroke and other vascular
events. The aim of this guideline is to provide recommendations on
antithrombotic medication for secondary prevention of stroke and other vascular
outcomes in these patients. The working group identified questions and outcomes,
graded evidence, and developed recommendations according to the Grading of
Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation approach and the
European Stroke Organisation (ESO) standard operating procedure for guidelines.
The guideline was reviewed and approved by the ESO guideline board and the ESO
executive committee. In patients with atrial fibrillation and previous stroke or
transient ischemic attack, oral anticoagulants reduce the risk of recurrence
over antiplatelets or no antithrombotic treatment. Non-vitamin K antagonist oral
anticoagulants are preferred over vitamin K antagonists because they have a
lower risk of major bleeding and death. Recommendations are weak regarding
timing of treatment, (re-)starting oral anticoagulants in patients with previous
intracerebral haemorrhage, and treatment in specific patient subgroups of those
of older age, with cognitive impairment, renal failure or small vessel disease,
because of a lack of strong evidence. In conclusion, for patients with atrial
fibrillation and ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack, non-vitamin K
antagonist oral anticoagulants are the preferred treatment for secondary
prevention of recurrent stroke or thromboembolism. Further research is required
to determine the best timing for initiating oral anticoagulants after an acute
ischemic stroke, whether or not oral anticoagulants should be (re)started in
patients with a history of intracerebral haemorrhage, and the best secondary
preventive treatment in specific subgroups.

© European Stroke Organisation 2019.

DOI: 10.1177/2396987319841187
PMCID: PMC6960695
PMID: 31984228