---
reference_id: "PMID:26519854"
title: Analysis of fatality due to cholera epidemics in Tuliszków parish in 1852.
authors:
- Cichy B
journal: Przegl Epidemiol
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of fatality due to cholera epidemics in Tuliszków parish in 1852.
**Authors:** Cichy B
**Journal:** Przegl Epidemiol (2015)

## Content

1. Przegl Epidemiol. 2015;69(3):549-54, 653-6.

Analysis of fatality due to cholera epidemics in Tuliszków parish in 1852.

[Article in English, Polish]

Cichy B.

INTRODUCTION: Little is known about the correlation between age, 
gender-distribution and fatality rate during cholera epidemics.
AIM: To analyze the change in the fatality rate with regard to age and gender 
during cholera epidemics in 1852 in Tuliszków Parish.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Data for the present study were retrieved from the 
archives. Information on fatal cases was obtained from the records of Tuliszków 
Parish - The Register of Deaths (1851-1879). Age, gender of the deceased and 
place of residence in Tuliszków Parish were analyzed. Data from the year in 
which the epidemic occurred (1852) and year preceding it (1851) were compared 
using Pearson's χ2 test.
RESULTS: A total of 3200 persons lived in the Roman Catholic Parish of Tuliszków 
during cholera epidemic in 1852. Having compared to the control year (1851), 
fatality rate distribution changed statistically significantly in the epidemic 
year (1852); (χ2=27.5665, p=0.0011). In particular, it applied to males 
(χ2=28.9476, p=0.0007). Irrespective of the gender, the highest increase of the 
fatality rate was observed in the 10-25 age group (χ2=5.0375, p=0.0248) while 
infant fatality rate decreased (χ2=19.2789, p=0.0000).
CONCLUSIONS: Cholera epidemic resulted in a significant change of fatality rate 
in infants, males and the youth. Death of both parents aged up to 45 years old 
contributed to an increase in the number of orphans.

PMID: 26519854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]