---
reference_id: "PMID:21959952"
title: "WT1 in disease: shifting the epithelial-mesenchymal balance."
authors:
- Miller-Hodges E
- Hohenstein P
journal: J Pathol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/path.2977
keywords:
- Animals
- Cardiovascular Diseases/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Embryonic Development/genetics
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition/genetics
- Epithelium/pathology
- "Genes, Wilms Tumor/physiology"
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis, 46,XY/genetics"
- Humans
- Kidney/embryology
- "Kidney Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Mesoderm/pathology
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- Oncogenes/physiology
- Regeneration/genetics
- "Wilms Tumor/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WT1 in disease: shifting the epithelial-mesenchymal balance.
**Authors:** Miller-Hodges E, Hohenstein P
**Journal:** J Pathol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/path.2977](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.2977)

## Content

1. J Pathol. 2012 Jan;226(2):229-40. doi: 10.1002/path.2977. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

WT1 in disease: shifting the epithelial-mesenchymal balance.

Miller-Hodges E(1), Hohenstein P.

Author information:
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit and Institute for Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 
Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.

WT1 is a versatile gene that controls transitions between the mesenchymal and 
epithelial state of cells in a tissue-context dependent manner. As such, WT1 is 
indispensable for normal development of many organs and tissues. Uncontrolled 
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a hallmark of a diverse array of 
pathologies and disturbance of mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) has 
been associated with a number of developmental abnormalities. It is therefore 
not surprising that WT1 has been linked to many of these. Here we review the 
role of WT1 in proper control of the mesenchymal-epithelial balance of cells and 
discuss how far these roles can explain the role of WT1 in a variety of disease 
states.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.2977
PMID: 21959952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]