---
reference_id: "PMID:40564079"
title: "Epidemiology, Clinical Features and Treatment of Neurosarcoidosis in Northern Spain."
authors:
- Herrero-Morant A
- Fernández-Ramón R
- Prieto-Peña D
- Martín-Varillas JL
- Castañeda S
- Blanco R
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines13061360
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology, Clinical Features and Treatment of Neurosarcoidosis in Northern Spain.
**Authors:** Herrero-Morant A, Fernández-Ramón R, Prieto-Peña D, Martín-Varillas JL, Castañeda S, Blanco R
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines13061360](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines13061360)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2025 Jun 1;13(6):1360. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines13061360.

Epidemiology, Clinical Features and Treatment of Neurosarcoidosis in Northern
Spain.

Herrero-Morant A(1), Fernández-Ramón R(2), Prieto-Peña D(1), Martín-Varillas
JL(3), Castañeda S(4), Blanco R(1).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology, HUM Valdecilla, Immunopathology Group, Instituto de
Investigación Marqués de Valdecilla (IDIVAL), 39011 Santander, Spain.
(2)Ophtalmology, HUM Valdecilla, Immunopathology Group, Instituto de
Investigación Marqués de Valdecilla (IDIVAL), 39011 Santander, Spain.
(3)Rheumatology, Hospital De Laredo, 39770 Laredo, Spain.
(4)Rheumatology, Hospital De La Princesa, IIS-Princesa, 28006 Madrid, Spain.

Objectives: Neurosarcoidosis (NS) is a severe and infrequent complication of
sarcoidosis. Available data on NS are variable. We aimed to characterize NS
epidemiology, clinical and therapeutic characteristics in a well-defined cohort
of NS patients. Methods: Observational population-based cohort study of 342
patients diagnosed with sarcoidosis in Northern Spain, between 1999 and 2019.
Among them, those patients who fulfilled the Consortium Consensus Group
diagnosis criteria for NS were included. The annual incidence between 1999 and
2019 was estimated by gender, age, and year of diagnosis. Additionally, a
literature review was performed. Therapeutic efficacy was evaluated using the
neurological-related extra-pulmonary physician organ severity tool (ePOST).
Results: NS was diagnosed in 29 out of 342 patients with sarcoidosis (8.5%; 18
women/11 men) with a mean age of 42.3 ± 15.1 years. Most NS patients have
associated systemic sarcoidosis (93.4%) mainly consisting of lung (n = 22;
75.9%), articular (n = 15; 51.7%) and/or ocular (n = 12; 40%) involvement. The
annual incidence of NS during the study period was 1.1 per 1,000,000 people.
There is a linear relationship with a weak decrease in age at diagnosis over
time. NS was subdivided into chronic headache (n = 11; 36.7%), cranial
neuropathy (n = 7; 24.1%), myelitis (n = 4; 13.8%), peripheral neuropathy (n =
3; 10.3%), cranial neuropathy with chronic headache (n = 3; 10.3%) and aseptic
meningitis (n = 2; 6.9%). Twenty-five patients (86.2%) received oral
glucocorticoids (mean ± SD maximum prednisone dose 49.6 ± 19.4 mg/day). In
addition, conventional immunosuppressive drugs were administered to 17 (58.6%)
patients and biological therapy to 12 (41.4%) patients. After 12 months of
initiating biological therapy, 14 out of 17 patients (82.4%) achieved complete
remission, defined as an ePOST score of 0. Severe allergic reaction was observed
in only one patient who had received treatment with both Infliximab and
Adalimumab. Conclusions: The epidemiological, clinical and treatment
characteristics of NS in Northern Spain are similar to that of other countries.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines13061360
PMCID: PMC12190128
PMID: 40564079

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures that may be interpreted as
constituting possible conflict(s) of interest for this study are as follows:
José L. Martín-Varillas received grants/research supports from AbbVie, Pfizer,
Lilly, Janssen, UCB, and Celgene. Ricardo Blanco received grants/research
support from Abbvie, MSD, and Roche, as well as consultation fees/participation
from company-sponsored speakers bureaus tied to Abbvie, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi,
Lilly, Celgene, MSD, UCB and GSK. No financial disclosures declared: Alba
Herrero-Morant, Raúl Fernández-Ramón, Diana Prieto and S. Castañeda. The authors
received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication
of this article.
