---
reference_id: "PMID:28232490"
title: The Trypanosoma brucei TbHrg protein is a heme transporter involved in the regulation of stage-specific morphological transitions.
authors:
- Horáková E
- Changmai P
- Vancová M
- Sobotka R
- Van Den Abbeele J
- Vanhollebeke B
- Lukeš J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.762997
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Trypanosoma brucei TbHrg protein is a heme transporter involved in the regulation of stage-specific morphological transitions.
**Authors:** Horáková E, Changmai P, Vancová M, Sobotka R, Van Den Abbeele J, Vanhollebeke B, Lukeš J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.762997](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.762997)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Apr 28;292(17):6998-7010. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.762997. Epub
 2017 Feb 23.

The Trypanosoma brucei TbHrg protein is a heme transporter involved in the 
regulation of stage-specific morphological transitions.

Horáková E(1), Changmai P(1), Vancová M(1)(2), Sobotka R(2)(3), Van Den Abbeele 
J(4), Vanhollebeke B(5), Lukeš J(6)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Parasitology, Biology Center, Czech Academy of 
Sciences, 37005 České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Sciences, University of South Bohemia, 37005 České Budějovice 
(Budweis), Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Microbiology, Czech Academy of Sciences, 37981 Třeboň, Czech 
Republic.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Unit of Veterinary Protozoology, Institute 
of Tropical Medicine, B2000 Antwerp, Belgium.
(5)Institut de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, B6041 Gosselies, Belgium, and.
(6)From the Institute of Parasitology, Biology Center, Czech Academy of 
Sciences, 37005 České Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic, jula@paru.cas.cz.
(7)Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1Z8, Canada.

The human parasite Trypanosoma brucei does not synthesize heme de novo and 
instead relies entirely on heme supplied by its vertebrate host or its insect 
vector, the tsetse fly. In the host bloodstream T. brucei scavenges heme via 
haptoglobin-hemoglobin (HpHb) receptor-mediated endocytosis occurring in the 
flagellar pocket. However, in the procyclic developmental stage, in which T. 
brucei is confined to the tsetse fly midgut, this receptor is apparently not 
expressed, suggesting that T. brucei takes up heme by a different, unknown 
route. To define this alternative route, we functionally characterized heme 
transporter TbHrg in the procyclic stage. RNAi-induced down-regulation of TbHrg 
in heme-limited culture conditions resulted in slower proliferation, decreased 
cellular heme, and marked changes in cellular morphology so that the cells 
resemble mesocyclic trypomastigotes. Nevertheless, the TbHrg KO developed 
normally in the tsetse flies at rates comparable with wild-type cells. T. brucei 
cells overexpressing TbHrg displayed up-regulation of the early procyclin GPEET 
and down-regulation of the late procyclin EP1, two proteins coating the T. 
brucei surface in the procyclic stage. Light microscopy of immunostained TbHrg 
indicated localization to the flagellar membrane, and scanning electron 
microscopy revealed more intense TbHrg accumulation toward the flagellar pocket. 
Based on these findings, we postulate that T. brucei senses heme levels via the 
flagellar TbHrg protein. Heme deprivation in the tsetse fly anterior midgut 
might represent an environmental stimulus involved in the transformation of this 
important human parasite, possibly through metabolic remodeling.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.762997
PMCID: PMC5409468
PMID: 28232490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article