---
reference_id: "PMID:12455560"
title: Diagnostic criteria for idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
authors:
- Friedman DI
- Jacobson DM
journal: Neurology
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000029570.69134.1b
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Intracranial Hypertension/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Papilledema/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis, pathology"
- Posture/physiology
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic criteria for idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
**Authors:** Friedman DI, Jacobson DM
**Journal:** Neurology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1212/01.wnl.0000029570.69134.1b](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000029570.69134.1b)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2002 Nov 26;59(10):1492-5. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000029570.69134.1b.

Diagnostic criteria for idiopathic intracranial hypertension.

Friedman DI(1), Jacobson DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, SUNY Upstate Medial University, Syracuse, NY 14642, 
USA. Deborah-Friedman@urmc.rochester.edu

The syndrome of increased intracranial pressure without hydrocephalus or mass 
lesion and with normal CSF composition, previously referred to as pseudotumor 
cerebri, is a diagnosis of exclusion now termed idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension (IIH). Diagnostic criteria of this disorder have not been updated 
since the Modified Dandy Criteria were articulated in 1985. Since then, new 
developments, including advances in neuroimaging technology and recognition of 
additional secondary causes of intracranial hypertension, have further enhanced 
the ability to diagnose conditions that may mimic IIH. These factors are not 
addressed in the Modified Dandy Criteria. This report describes updated 
diagnostic criteria for IIH that may be used for routine patient management and 
for research purposes.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000029570.69134.1b
PMID: 12455560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]