---
reference_id: "PMID:31467654"
title: "Modified French Osteotomy for Humeroradial Synostosis in a Child with Multiple Synostoses Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Sahdi H
- Rasit AH
- Khoo CS
- Bojeng A
- Nur-Alyana BA
journal: Malays Orthop J
year: '2019'
doi: 10.5704/MOJ.1907.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modified French Osteotomy for Humeroradial Synostosis in a Child with Multiple Synostoses Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Sahdi H, Rasit AH, Khoo CS, Bojeng A, Nur-Alyana BA
**Journal:** Malays Orthop J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.5704/MOJ.1907.011](https://doi.org/10.5704/MOJ.1907.011)

## Content

1. Malays Orthop J. 2019 Jul;13(2):52-55. doi: 10.5704/MOJ.1907.011.

Modified French Osteotomy for Humeroradial Synostosis in a Child with Multiple 
Synostoses Syndrome: A Case Report.

Sahdi H(1)(2)(3)(4), Rasit AH(1)(2)(3)(4), Khoo CS(2), Bojeng A(3), Nur-Alyana 
BA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Kota Samarahan, 
Malaysia.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Hospital Umum Sarawak, Kuching, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Radiology, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Kota Samarahan, 
Malaysia.
(4)Department of Nursing, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Kota Samarahan, Malaysia.

Congenital humeroradial synostosis can occur as an isolated clinical entity or 
as part of a syndrome. Bilateral elbow fixed flexion deformity is very 
incapacitating and challenging to treat. Here we present the case of a boy with 
fixed flexion deformity of both elbows due bilateral humeroradial synostosis. 
Other characteristic features of multiple synostoses syndrome were also present 
in this child, his elder brother and mother. We elected to improve the position 
of the right elbow by adapting the modified French osteotomy described by 
Bellemore et al.

DOI: 10.5704/MOJ.1907.011
PMCID: PMC6702971
PMID: 31467654