---
reference_id: "PMID:37834872"
title: Updates on Emerging Interventions for Autosomal Recessive ABCA4-Associated Stargardt Disease.
authors:
- Wang L
- Shah SM
- Mangwani-Mordani S
- Gregori NZ
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12196229
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updates on Emerging Interventions for Autosomal Recessive ABCA4-Associated Stargardt Disease.
**Authors:** Wang L, Shah SM, Mangwani-Mordani S, Gregori NZ
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12196229](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12196229)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Sep 27;12(19):6229. doi: 10.3390/jcm12196229.

Updates on Emerging Interventions for Autosomal Recessive ABCA4-Associated 
Stargardt Disease.

Wang L(1), Shah SM(1)(2), Mangwani-Mordani S(2), Gregori NZ(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(3)Miami Veterans Administration Medical Center, Miami, FL 33125, USA.

Autosomal recessive Stargardt disease (STGD1) is an inherited retinal 
degenerative disease associated with a mutated ATP-binding cassette, subfamily 
A, member 4 (ABCA4) gene. STGD1 is the most common form of juvenile macular 
degeneration with onset in late childhood to early or middle adulthood and 
causes progressive, irreversible visual impairment and blindness. No effective 
treatment is currently available. In the present article, we review the most 
recent updates in clinical trials targeting the management of STGD1, including 
gene therapy, small molecule therapy, and stem cell therapy. In gene therapy, 
dual adeno-associated virus and non-viral vectors have been successful in 
delivering the human ABCA4 gene in preclinical studies. For pharmaceutical 
therapies ALK-001, deuterated vitamin A shows promise with preliminary data for 
phase 2 trial, demonstrating a decreased atrophy growth rate after two years. 
Stem cell therapy using human pluripotent stem cell-derived retinal pigment 
epithelium cells demonstrated long-term safety three years after implantation 
and visual acuity improvements in the first two years after initiation of 
therapy. Many other treatment options have ongoing investigations and clinical 
trials. While multiple potential interventions have shown promise in attenuating 
disease progression, further exploration is necessary to demonstrate treatment 
safety and efficacy.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12196229
PMCID: PMC10573680
PMID: 37834872

Conflict of interest statement: Ninel Z. Gregori receives research support from 
Ocugen, Endogena, Nanoscope, Gyroscope, and Biogen as well as consultation fees 
from Gyroscope, Novartis, BlueRock Therapeutics, and Bionic Vision Technologies. 
The remaining authors declare no conflicts of interest.