---
reference_id: "PMID:14750102"
title: Clinical and histological presentation of 3 siblings with mutations in the NPHP4 gene.
authors:
- Hoefele J
- Otto E
- Felten H
- Kühn K
- Bley TA
- Zäuner I
- Hildebrandt F
- Neumann HP
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2003.10.023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and histological presentation of 3 siblings with mutations in the NPHP4 gene.
**Authors:** Hoefele J, Otto E, Felten H, Kühn K, Bley TA, Zäuner I, Hildebrandt F, Neumann HP
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2003.10.023](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2003.10.023)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2004 Feb;43(2):358-64. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2003.10.023.

Clinical and histological presentation of 3 siblings with mutations in the NPHP4 
gene.

Hoefele J(1), Otto E, Felten H, Kühn K, Bley TA, Zäuner I, Hildebrandt F, 
Neumann HP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Nephronophthisis (NPH) is an autosomal recessive kidney disease characterized by 
tubular basement membrane disruption, interstitial infiltration, and tubular 
cysts. NPH leads to end-stage renal failure in the first 2 decades of life. Four 
genes responsible for different types of NPH have been identified: NPHP1, NPHP2, 
NPHP3, and NPHP4. The NPHP1 gene encodes nephrocystin; NPHP2, inversin; NPHP3, 
nephrocystin-3; and NPHP4, nephrocystin-4. We report 3 siblings from a 
consanguineous family with NPH who were previously described as carrying a 
homozygous mutation in the NPHP4 gene. Renal imaging showed cysts in the 
children. The histological picture of NPHP4 showed the same characteristic 
features as those known for NPHP1 and NPHP3. Progression to end-stage renal 
disease occurred between the ages of 17 and 22 years. None of the renal 
transplants showed recurrence of the disease. Retinitis pigmentosa was absent in 
all affected family members.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2003.10.023
PMID: 14750102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]