---
reference_id: "PMID:37181966"
title: A Rare Case of Telecanthus-Hypospadias Syndrome in a Pediatric Patient.
authors:
- Vagha J
- Wazurkar A
- Vagha K
- Lohiya S
- Varma A
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.37411
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Rare Case of Telecanthus-Hypospadias Syndrome in a Pediatric Patient.
**Authors:** Vagha J, Wazurkar A, Vagha K, Lohiya S, Varma A
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.37411](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.37411)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Apr 10;15(4):e37411. doi: 10.7759/cureus.37411. eCollection 2023 
Apr.

A Rare Case of Telecanthus-Hypospadias Syndrome in a Pediatric Patient.

Vagha J(1), Wazurkar A(1), Vagha K(1), Lohiya S(1), Varma A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe 
Institute of Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

Hypertelorism and hypospadias are the main characteristics of 
telecanthus-hypospadias syndrome; however, it can also include other midline 
structural anomalies, such as cleft lip and palate, cryptorchidism, congenital 
heart problem, laryngotracheal cleft, esophageal fistula, and irregular scrotum. 
Here, we describe an eight-year-old male who was brought to us for cleft lip 
repair, but upon evaluation, the other listed anomalies were discovered. He had 
hypertelorism, hypospadias, a ventricular septal defect, and a history of 
cryptorchidism. A multidisciplinary approach involved pediatricians, oral 
surgeons, cardiologists, and pediatric surgeons. The patient underwent surgery 
for first-stage hypospadias correction and was advised to follow up for 
additional surgery and maintenance procedures before being discharged. We wish 
to report this case with the aim to enlighten budding pediatricians and surgeons 
about this rare syndrome.

Copyright © 2023, Vagha et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.37411
PMCID: PMC10174682
PMID: 37181966

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.