---
reference_id: "PMID:27558151"
title: Ovarian cancer.
authors:
- Matulonis UA
- Sood AK
- Fallowfield L
- Howitt BE
- Sehouli J
- Karlan BY
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.61
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ovarian cancer.
**Authors:** Matulonis UA, Sood AK, Fallowfield L, Howitt BE, Sehouli J, Karlan BY
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2016.61](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2016.61)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 Aug 25;2:16061. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.61.

Ovarian cancer.

Matulonis UA(1), Sood AK(2), Fallowfield L(3), Howitt BE(4), Sehouli J(5), 
Karlan BY(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline 
Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.
(2)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, and Center for 
RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNA, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Sussex Health Outcomes Research and Education in Cancer (SHORE-C), Brighton 
and Sussex Medical School, University of Sussex, Falmer, East Sussex, UK.
(4)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(5)Charité Universitaetsmedizin Berlin Charité Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, 
Germany.
(6)Women's Cancer Program, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, 
USA.

Ovarian cancer is not a single disease and can be subdivided into at least five 
different histological subtypes that have different identifiable risk factors, 
cells of origin, molecular compositions, clinical features and treatments. 
Ovarian cancer is a global problem, is typically diagnosed at a late stage and 
has no effective screening strategy. Standard treatments for newly diagnosed 
cancer consist of cytoreductive surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy. In 
recurrent cancer, chemotherapy, anti-angiogenic agents and poly(ADP-ribose) 
polymerase inhibitors are used, and immunological therapies are currently being 
tested. High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) is the most commonly diagnosed form 
of ovarian cancer and at diagnosis is typically very responsive to 
platinum-based chemotherapy. However, in addition to the other histologies, 
HGSCs frequently relapse and become increasingly resistant to chemotherapy. 
Consequently, understanding the mechanisms underlying platinum resistance and 
finding ways to overcome them are active areas of study in ovarian cancer. 
Substantial progress has been made in identifying genes that are associated with 
a high risk of ovarian cancer (such as BRCA1 and BRCA2), as well as a precursor 
lesion of HGSC called serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma, which holds 
promise for identifying individuals at high risk of developing the disease and 
for developing prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.61
PMCID: PMC7290868
PMID: 27558151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests U.A.M. has served as a 
consultant for AstraZeneca, ImmunoGen, Pfizer, Genentech and Merck. All other 
authors declare no competing interests.