---
reference_id: PMID:40625299
title: Multiparameter MRI-based automatic segmentation and diagnostic models for the differentiation of intracranial solitary fibrous tumors and meningiomas.
authors:
- Wei L
- Cao Z
- Shi F
- Li F
- Cui Y
- Gu Y
- Chen J
- Li M
- Liu J
- Wang H
- Wang X
- Zeng Q
journal: Ann Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2530223
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiparameter MRI-based automatic segmentation and diagnostic models for the differentiation of intracranial solitary fibrous tumors and meningiomas.
**Authors:** Wei L, Cao Z, Shi F, Li F, Cui Y, Gu Y, Chen J, Li M, Liu J, Wang H, Wang X, Zeng Q
**Journal:** Ann Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/07853890.2025.2530223](https://doi.org/10.1080/07853890.2025.2530223)

## Content

1. Ann Med. 2025 Dec;57(1):2530223. doi: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2530223. Epub 2025
 Jul 8.

Multiparameter MRI-based automatic segmentation and diagnostic models for the 
differentiation of intracranial solitary fibrous tumors and meningiomas.

Wei L(1)(2), Cao Z(3), Shi F(3), Li F(4), Cui Y(5), Gu Y(6), Chen J(1), Li M(1), 
Liu J(1), Wang H(1), Wang X(3), Zeng Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First 
Medical University & Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan, China.
(2)School of Clinical Medicine, Jining Medical University, Jining, China.
(3)Department of Research and Development, United Imaging Intelligence, 
Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
First Medical University, Jinan, China.
(5)Department of Radiology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(6)Department of Radiology, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, 
Jining, China.

BACKGROUND: Intracranial solitary fibrous tumors (SFTs) and meningiomas are 
meningeal tumors with different malignancy levels and prognoses. Their similar 
imaging features make preoperative differentiation difficult, resulting in high 
misdiagnosis rates. Thus, accurately distinguishing SFTs from meningiomas 
preoperatively is vital for surgical planning and treatment strategies.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 252 patients (56 SFTs and 196 meningiomas) data 
from January 2014 to May 2024 were used to train our models . A VB-Net deep 
learning network was employed to refine automatic segmentation. To identify SFTs 
and meningiomas, the segmented data were analyzed using machine learning to 
construct single-sequence and multi-sequence MRI models and combined with 
clinical/radiological features to develop a fusion index-related model.To 
enhance clinical applicability, we constructed a four-category model using the 
predictive probabilities from secondary classification as input features.
RESULTS: The VB-Net segmentation model performed well in both the tumor cores 
and the whole tumor, with DSCs of 0.87 (±0.17) and 0.79 (±0.26), respectively. 
The integration of clinical and radiological data enhanced the model's AUC to 
0.957. Stratified analysis showed that the weighted AUC value reached 0.846 in 
the validation set.
CONCLUSION: The comprehensive system integrating automatic segmentation with 
diagnostic models can differentiate SFTs from meningiomas precisely.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2530223
PMCID: PMC12239233
PMID: 40625299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.