---
reference_id: "PMID:35902747"
title: rAAV-mediated over-expression of acid ceramidase prevents retinopathy in a mouse model of Farber lipogranulomatosis.
authors:
- Zhang H
- Nagree MS
- Liu H
- Pan X
- Medin JA
- Lipinski DM
journal: Gene Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41434-022-00359-w
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- "Farber Lipogranulomatosis/genetics, therapy, metabolism"
- "Acid Ceramidase/genetics, metabolism"
- Ceramides/metabolism
- Mutation
- "Retinal Diseases/genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# rAAV-mediated over-expression of acid ceramidase prevents retinopathy in a mouse model of Farber lipogranulomatosis.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Nagree MS, Liu H, Pan X, Medin JA, Lipinski DM
**Journal:** Gene Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41434-022-00359-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41434-022-00359-w)

## Content

1. Gene Ther. 2023 Apr;30(3-4):297-308. doi: 10.1038/s41434-022-00359-w. Epub
2022  Jul 28.

rAAV-mediated over-expression of acid ceramidase prevents retinopathy in a mouse
model of Farber lipogranulomatosis.

Zhang H(#)(1)(2), Nagree MS(#)(3)(4), Liu H(5), Pan X(5), Medin JA(3)(4)(6),
Lipinski DM(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics: Section of Hematology/Oncology/BMT, Medical College
of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(5)Department of Mathematics, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
(7)Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, WI, USA. dlipinski@mcw.edu.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA. dlipinski@mcw.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Farber disease (FD) is a rare monogenic lysosomal storage disorder caused by
mutations in ASAH1 that results in a deficiency of acid ceramidase (ACDase)
activity and the abnormal systemic accumulation of ceramide species, leading to
multi-system organ failure involving neurological decline and retinopathy. Here
we describe the effects of rAAV-mediated ASAH1 over-expression on the
progression of retinopathy in a mouse model of FD (Asah1P361R/P361R) and its
littermate controls (Asah1+/+ and Asah1+/P361R). Using a combination of
non-invasive multimodal imaging, electrophysiology, post-mortem histology and
mass spectrometry we demonstrate that ASAH1 over-expression significantly
reduces central retinal thickening, ceramide accumulation, macrophage activation
and limits fundus hyper-reflectivity and auto-fluorescence in FD mice,
indicating rAAV-mediated over-expression of biologically active ACDase protein
is able to rescue the anatomical retinal phenotype of Farber disease.
Unexpectedly, ACDase over-expression in Asah1+/+ and Asah1+/P361R control eyes
was observed to induce abnormal fundus hyper-reflectivity, auto-fluorescence and
retinal thickening that closely resembles a FD phenotype. This study represents
the first evidence of a gene therapy for Farber disease-related retinopathy.
Importantly, the described gene therapy approach could be used to preserve
vision in FD patients synergistically with broader enzyme replacement strategies
aimed at preserving life.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41434-022-00359-w
PMID: 35902747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
