---
reference_id: "PMID:32322270"
title: "Update on Pathophysiology, Treatment, and Complications of Carcinoid Syndrome."
authors:
- Clement D
- Ramage J
- Srirajaskanthan R
journal: J Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1155/2020/8341426
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on Pathophysiology, Treatment, and Complications of Carcinoid Syndrome.
**Authors:** Clement D, Ramage J, Srirajaskanthan R
**Journal:** J Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2020/8341426](https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8341426)

## Content

1. J Oncol. 2020 Jan 21;2020:8341426. doi: 10.1155/2020/8341426. eCollection
2020.

Update on Pathophysiology, Treatment, and Complications of Carcinoid Syndrome.

Clement D(1)(2)(3), Ramage J(2)(3), Srirajaskanthan R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Kings College Hospital London, London SE5 
9RS, UK.
(2)Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, Kings College London, London, UK.
(3)Neuroendocrine Tumour Unit, Kings Health Partners ENETS Centre of Excellence, 
London SE5 9RS, UK.

Carcinoid syndrome (CS) develops in patients with hormone-producing 
neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) when hormones reach a significant level in the 
systemic circulation. The classical symptoms of carcinoid syndrome are flushing, 
diarrhoea, abdominal pain, and wheezing. Neuroendocrine neoplasms can produce 
multiple hormones: 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) is the most well-known one, 
but histamine, catecholamines, and brady/tachykinins are also released. 
Serotonin overproduction can lead to symptoms and also stimulates fibrosis 
formation which can result in development of carcinoid syndrome-associated 
complications such as carcinoid heart disease (CaHD) and mesenteric fibrosis. 
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) is one of the main factors in developing 
fibrosis, but platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), basic fibroblast growth 
factor (FGF2), and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF or CCN2) are also 
related to fibrosis development. Treatment of CS focuses on reducing serotonin 
levels with somatostatin analogues (SSA's). Telotristat ethyl and peptide 
receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) have recently become available for patients 
with symptoms despite being established on SSA's. Screening for CaHD is advised, 
and early intervention prolongs survival. Mesenteric fibrosis is often present 
and associated with poorer survival, but the role for prophylactic surgery of 
this is unclear. Depression, anxiety, and cognitive impairment are frequently 
present symptoms in patients with CS but not always part of their care plan. The 
role of antidepressants, mainly SSRIs, is debatable, but recent retrospective 
studies show evidence for safe use in patients with CS. Carcinoid crisis is a 
life-threatening complication of CS which can appear spontaneously but mostly 
described during surgery, anaesthesia, chemotherapy, PRRT, and radiological 
procedures and may be prevented by octreotide administration.

Copyright © 2020 Dominique Clement et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/8341426
PMCID: PMC7160731
PMID: 32322270

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.