---
reference_id: "PMID:31519471"
title: "Altered chondrocyte differentiation, matrix mineralization and MEK-Erk1/2 signaling in an INPPL1 catalytic knock-out mouse model of opsismodysplasia."
authors:
- Vande Catsyne CA
- Sayyed SA
- Molina-Ortiz P
- Moes B
- Communi D
- Muller J
- Heusschen R
- Caers J
- Azzi A
- Erneux C
- Schurmans S
journal: Adv Biol Regul
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbior.2019.100651
keywords:
- "Aminoacetonitrile/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Animals
- "Calcification, Physiologic/genetics"
- Cell Differentiation
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 2/pharmacology
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Growth Plate/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/pharmacology
- "MAP Kinase Kinase Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 3/genetics, metabolism"
- "Osteocalcin/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Osteogenesis/genetics
- "Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-Trisphosphate 5-Phosphatases/antagonists & inhibitors, deficiency, genetics"
- Phosphorylation/drug effects
- Primary Cell Culture
- "RNA, Messenger/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Thiophenes/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered chondrocyte differentiation, matrix mineralization and MEK-Erk1/2 signaling in an INPPL1 catalytic knock-out mouse model of opsismodysplasia.
**Authors:** Vande Catsyne CA, Sayyed SA, Molina-Ortiz P, Moes B, Communi D, Muller J, Heusschen R, Caers J, Azzi A, Erneux C, Schurmans S
**Journal:** Adv Biol Regul (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbior.2019.100651](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbior.2019.100651)

## Content

1. Adv Biol Regul. 2020 May;76:100651. doi: 10.1016/j.jbior.2019.100651. Epub
2019  Sep 5.

Altered chondrocyte differentiation, matrix mineralization and MEK-Erk1/2 
signaling in an INPPL1 catalytic knock-out mouse model of opsismodysplasia.

Vande Catsyne CA(1), Sayyed SA(1), Molina-Ortiz P(1), Moes B(1), Communi D(2), 
Muller J(3), Heusschen R(3), Caers J(3), Azzi A(1), Erneux C(2), Schurmans S(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Functional Genetics, GIGA-Molecular Biology of Disease, 
GIGA-B34, CHU Sart-Tilman, University of Liège, avenue de l'Hôpital 11, 4000, 
Liège, Belgium.
(2)IRIBHM, Bat. C, Campus Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles, route 
de Lennik 808, 1070, Bruxelles, Belgium.
(3)Laboratory of Hematology, GIGA-Inflammation, Infection & Immunity, GIGA-B34, 
CHU Sart Tilman, University of Liège, avenue de l'Hôpital 11, 4000, Liège, 
Belgium.
(4)Laboratory of Functional Genetics, GIGA-Molecular Biology of Disease, 
GIGA-B34, CHU Sart-Tilman, University of Liège, avenue de l'Hôpital 11, 4000, 
Liège, Belgium. Electronic address: sschurmans@uliege.be.

Opsismodysplasia (OPS) is a rare but severe autosomal recessive skeletal 
chondrodysplasia caused by inactivating mutations in the Inppl1/Ship2 gene. The 
molecular mechanism leading from Ship2 gene inactivation to OPS is currently 
unknown. Here, we used our Ship2Δ/Δ mouse expressing reduced amount of a 
catalytically-inactive SHIP2 protein and a previously reported SHIP2 inhibitor 
to investigate growth plate development and mineralization in vivo, ex vivo and 
in vitro. First, as observed in OPS patients, catalytic inactivation of SHIP2 in 
mouse leads to reduced body length, shortening of long bones, craniofacial 
dysmorphism, reduced height of the hyperthrophic chondrocyte zone and to defects 
in growth plate mineralization. Second, intrinsic Ship2Δ/Δ bone defects were 
sufficient to induce the characteristic OPS alterations in bone growth, 
histology and mineralization ex vivo. Third, expression of osteocalcin was 
significantly increased in SHIP2-inactivated chondrocyte cultures whereas 
production of mineralized nodules was markedly decreased. Targeting osteocalcin 
mRNA with a specific shRNA increased the production of mineralized nodules. 
Fourth, levels of p-MEK and p-Erk1/2 were significantly increased in 
SHIP2-inactivated chondrocytes in response to serum and IGF-1, but not to FGF2, 
as compared to control chondrocytes. Treatment of chondrocytes and bones in 
culture with a MEK inhibitor partially rescued the production of mineralized 
nodules, the size of the hypertrophic chondrocyte zone and bone growth, raising 
the possibility of a treatment that could partially reduce the phenotype of this 
severe condition. Altogether, our results indicate that Ship2Δ/Δ mice represent 
a relevant model for human OPS. They also highlight the important role of SHIP2 
in chondrocytes during endochondral ossification and its different 
differentiation steps. Finally, we identified a role of osteocalcin in 
mineralized nodules production and for the MEK-Erk1/2 signaling pathway in the 
OPS phenotype.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbior.2019.100651
PMID: 31519471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]