---
reference_id: "PMID:1981107"
title: "Schizophrenia: a subcortical neurotransmitter imbalance syndrome?"
authors:
- Carlsson M
- Carlsson A
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/16.3.425
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schizophrenia: a subcortical neurotransmitter imbalance syndrome?
**Authors:** Carlsson M, Carlsson A
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/16.3.425](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/16.3.425)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 1990;16(3):425-32. doi: 10.1093/schbul/16.3.425.

Schizophrenia: a subcortical neurotransmitter imbalance syndrome?

Carlsson M(1), Carlsson A.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Pharmacology, University of Göteborg, Sweden.

Recent animal experiments suggest that glutamate plays a fundamental role in the 
control of psychomotor activity. This is illustrated by the finding that even in 
the virtually complete absence of dopamine, a marked behavioral activation is 
produced in mice following suppression of glutamatergic neurotransmission. This 
article discusses the possibility that a deficient activity within the 
cortico-striatal glutamatergic pathway is an important pathophysiological 
component in some cases of schizophrenia and that glutamatergic agonists may 
prove beneficial in this disorder. In a broader perspective, schizophrenia may 
be looked upon as a syndrome induced by a neurotransmitter imbalance in a 
feedback-regulated system, where dopamine and glutamate play a crucial role in 
controlling arousal and the processing of signals from the outer world to the 
cerebral cortex via the thalamus.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/16.3.425
PMID: 1981107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]