---
reference_id: "PMID:38951485"
title: CTCF mutation at R567 causes developmental disorders via 3D genome rearrangement and abnormal neurodevelopment.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Hu G
- Lu Y
- Ren H
- Huang Y
- Wen Y
- Ji B
- Wang D
- Wang H
- Liu H
- Ma N
- Zhang L
- Pan G
- Qu Y
- Wang H
- Zhang W
- Miao Z
- Yao H
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-49684-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CTCF mutation at R567 causes developmental disorders via 3D genome rearrangement and abnormal neurodevelopment.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Hu G, Lu Y, Ren H, Huang Y, Wen Y, Ji B, Wang D, Wang H, Liu H, Ma N, Zhang L, Pan G, Qu Y, Wang H, Zhang W, Miao Z, Yao H
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-49684-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49684-1)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Jul 1;15(1):5524. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-49684-1.

CTCF mutation at R567 causes developmental disorders via 3D genome rearrangement 
and abnormal neurodevelopment.

Zhang J(#)(1)(2), Hu G(#)(3), Lu Y(#)(1)(4), Ren H(#)(5), Huang Y(3), Wen 
Y(1)(4), Ji B(1)(6), Wang D(7), Wang H(5), Liu H(3), Ma N(3), Zhang L(8), Pan 
G(1)(4), Qu Y(7), Wang H(8), Zhang W(3), Miao Z(3), Yao H(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of 
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Basic Research, Guangzhou National Laboratory, Guangzhou, 
China.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(5)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural University, Jinzhong, 
China.
(6)Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology 
of China, Hefei, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of CNS Regeneration (Ministry of Education), Guangdong-Hong 
Kong-Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Key Laboratory of Anti-Inflammatory and 
Immune Medicine (Ministry of Education), Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.
(9)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of 
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China. 
yao_hongjie@gzlab.ac.cn.
(10)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China. yao_hongjie@gzlab.ac.cn.
(11)Department of Basic Research, Guangzhou National Laboratory, Guangzhou, 
China. yao_hongjie@gzlab.ac.cn.
(12)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 
yao_hongjie@gzlab.ac.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The three-dimensional genome structure organized by CTCF is required for 
development. Clinically identified mutations in CTCF have been linked to adverse 
developmental outcomes. Nevertheless, the underlying mechanism remains elusive. 
In this investigation, we explore the regulatory roles of a clinically relevant 
R567W point mutation, located within the 11th zinc finger of CTCF, by 
introducing this mutation into both murine models and human embryonic stem 
cell-derived cortical organoid models. Mice with homozygous CTCFR567W mutation 
exhibit growth impediments, resulting in postnatal mortality, and deviations in 
brain, heart, and lung development at the pathological and single-cell 
transcriptome levels. This mutation induces premature stem-like cell exhaustion, 
accelerates the maturation of GABAergic neurons, and disrupts neurodevelopmental 
and synaptic pathways. Additionally, it specifically hinders CTCF binding to 
peripheral motifs upstream to the core consensus site, causing alterations in 
local chromatin structure and gene expression, particularly at the clustered 
protocadherin locus. Comparative analysis using human cortical organoids mirrors 
the consequences induced by this mutation. In summary, this study elucidates the 
influence of the CTCFR567W mutation on human neurodevelopmental disorders, 
paving the way for potential therapeutic interventions.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-49684-1
PMCID: PMC11217373
PMID: 38951485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.