---
reference_id: "PMID:30844008"
title: Environmental and demographic determinants of dengue incidence in Brazil.
authors:
- Johansen IC
- do Carmo RL
- Correia Alves L
- Bueno MDCD
journal: Rev Salud Publica (Bogota)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.15446/rsap.V20n3.54315
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental and demographic determinants of dengue incidence in Brazil.
**Authors:** Johansen IC, do Carmo RL, Correia Alves L, Bueno MDCD
**Journal:** Rev Salud Publica (Bogota) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.15446/rsap.V20n3.54315](https://doi.org/10.15446/rsap.V20n3.54315)

## Content

1. Rev Salud Publica (Bogota). 2018 May-Jun;20(3):346-351. doi: 
10.15446/rsap.V20n3.54315.

Environmental and demographic determinants of dengue incidence in Brazil.

Johansen IC(1), do Carmo RL(2), Correia Alves L(3), Bueno MDCD(4).

Author information:
(1)IC: Sociologist. MA and Ph. D. Demography. Post-doc at University of São 
Paulo (USP). São Paulo, Brazil. igorcavallini@usp.br.
(2)RC: Sociologist. MA and Ph. D. Demography. Professor at University of 
Campinas (UNICAMP) and researcher at Population Studies Center (NEPO/UNICAMP). 
Campinas, Brazil. roberto@nepo.unicamp.br.
(3)LA: Physiotherapist. MA Demography. Ph. D. in Public Health. Professor at 
University of Campinas (UNICAMP) and researcher at Population Studies Center 
(NEPO/UNICAMP). Campinas, Brazil. luciana@nepo.unicamp.br.
(4)MB: Civil Engineer. M. Sc. Civil Engineering, M. Sc. in Geomatics and Ph. D. 
Demography. Technician in Geographical and Statistical Information at the 
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
bueno.mariadocarmo@email.com.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the spatial distribution of dengue fever cases within an 
urban area of the São Paulo State, southeast Brazil.
METHODS: Based on a methodology created by the authors, it was possible to 
organize the Brazilian Census data of 2010 into a regular grid of 250x250 meters 
each cell. This cell was the unit of analysis. Then, the 1 688 residential 
addresses of autochthonous dengue cases reported in 2013 in Caraguatatuba city 
were geocoded to calculate the incidence rate by cell. The dependent variable 
was the dengue incidence rate and the independent variables were classified into 
two types: environmental and sociodemographic. Finally, a Zero-Inflated Negative 
Binomial Regression was performed using the software R.
RESULTS: The statistical analysis showed an association between dengue incidence 
rate and the environmental variable "proximity to strategic points (junk yards, 
tire repair shops and deposits of recyclable materials)." Dengue was also 
associated to the sociodemographic variables "proportion of households with per 
capita income up to 3 minimum wages", "proportion of nonwhite people" and 
"proportion of not owned households".
CONCLUSION: Dengue is associated to several factors related to its epidemic 
outbreak. In this complex context, results suggest that this infectious disease 
is socially conditioned, since it is more likely to reach population groups with 
specific characteristics, notably those with low socioeconomic status.

DOI: 10.15446/rsap.V20n3.54315
PMID: 30844008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]