---
reference_id: "PMID:9608358"
title: Fulminant metastatic melanoma complicated by a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.
authors:
- Bhagwati N
- Seno R
- Dutcher JP
- Oleksowicz L
journal: Hematopathol Mol Hematol
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fulminant metastatic melanoma complicated by a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.
**Authors:** Bhagwati N, Seno R, Dutcher JP, Oleksowicz L
**Journal:** Hematopathol Mol Hematol (1998)

## Content

1. Hematopathol Mol Hematol. 1998;11(2):101-8.

Fulminant metastatic melanoma complicated by a microangiopathic hemolytic 
anemia.

Bhagwati N(1), Seno R, Dutcher JP, Oleksowicz L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, USA.

A 34-year-old male acutely presented with widely disseminated malignant 
melanoma, a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and disseminated intravascular 
coagulation. Although the patient had a history of intense childhood exposure to 
ultraviolet light and an occupational exposure to organic dyes, he had no 
history of a precursor skin lesion. The histopathology of the patient's bone 
marrow revealed sheets of malignant cells immunoreactive with S-100, HMB-45, and 
vimentin and also staining positively for melanin. A bone marrow aspirate 
revealed myeloid precursors filled with melanin-bearing vacuoles. 
Immunophenotypic analysis of the patient's bone marrow by flow cytometry 
revealed a paucity of hematopoietic cells. A karyotypic analysis of the 
patient's tumor cells demonstrated an abnormal hypertriploid composite clone 
characterized by multiple numerical and structural abnormalities. Although the 
patient was treated aggressively with transfusional support, heparin, and 
chemotherapy, he expired 3 weeks after diagnosis. This is the first recognized 
case of metastatic melanoma occurring in association with a microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia.

PMID: 9608358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]