---
reference_id: "PMID:11554771"
title: Genetics of type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Kelly MA
- Mijovic CH
- Barnett AH
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1053/beem.2001.0146
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Kelly MA, Mijovic CH, Barnett AH
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1053/beem.2001.0146](https://doi.org/10.1053/beem.2001.0146)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Sep;15(3):279-91. doi: 
10.1053/beem.2001.0146.

Genetics of type 1 diabetes.

Kelly MA(1), Mijovic CH, Barnett AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, Edgbaston, B15 
2TH, UK.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus is a T-cell-mediated autoimmune disease characterized 
by the selective destruction of pancreatic beta cells. Susceptibility to the 
disease is determined by a combination of genetic and environmental factors. The 
genetic factors are termed 'susceptibility genes' as they modify the risk of 
diabetes but are neither necessary nor sufficient for disease to develop. A 
large number of chromosomal regions have been identified as containing potential 
diabetes susceptibility genes. The IDDM1 locus, which encompasses the major 
histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6, is the major genetic risk factor. 
The HLA-DQ genes are the primary susceptibility genes within this region, 
although other genes may also contribute. The IDDM2 locus maps to a variable 
number of tandem repeats in the insulin gene region on chromosome 11. Further 
research is necessary to determine the precise location and identity of other 
diabetes susceptibility genes.

Copyright 2001 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

DOI: 10.1053/beem.2001.0146
PMID: 11554771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]