---
reference_id: "PMID:29409041"
title: The Endocrine and Metabolic Characteristics of a Large Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Clinic Population.
authors:
- Mujahid S
- Hunt KF
- Cheah YS
- Forsythe E
- Hazlehurst JM
- Sparks K
- Mohammed S
- Tomlinson JW
- Amiel SA
- Carroll PV
- Beales PL
- Huda MSB
- McGowan BM
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2017-01459
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Endocrine and Metabolic Characteristics of a Large Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Clinic Population.
**Authors:** Mujahid S, Hunt KF, Cheah YS, Forsythe E, Hazlehurst JM, Sparks K, Mohammed S, Tomlinson JW, Amiel SA, Carroll PV, Beales PL, Huda MSB, McGowan BM
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2017-01459](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2017-01459)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018 May 1;103(5):1834-1841. doi: 
10.1210/jc.2017-01459.

The Endocrine and Metabolic Characteristics of a Large Bardet-Biedl Syndrome 
Clinic Population.

Mujahid S(1), Hunt KF(2), Cheah YS(2), Forsythe E(1), Hazlehurst JM(3)(4), 
Sparks K(1), Mohammed S(1), Tomlinson JW(3)(4), Amiel SA(2), Carroll PV(1), 
Beales PL(1), Huda MSB(1)(2), McGowan BM(1).

Author information:
(1)Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(2)King's Diabetes Research Group, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, NIHR Oxford 
Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(4)University Hospitals, Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United 
Kingdom.

CONTEXT: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder in 
which previous reports have described obesity and a metabolic syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: We describe the endocrine and metabolic characteristics of a large 
BBS population compared with matched control subjects.
DESIGN: We performed a case-control study.
SETTING: This study was performed at a hospital clinic.
PATIENTS: Study patients had a clinical or genetic diagnosis of BBS.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: Our study determined the prevalence of a metabolic 
syndrome in our cohort.
RESULTS: A total of 152 subjects were studied. Eighty-four (55.3%) were male. 
Mean (± standard deviation) age was 33.2 ± 1.0 years. Compared with age-, sex-, 
and body mass index-matched control subjects, fasting glucose and insulin levels 
were significantly higher in subjects with BBS (glucose: BBS, 5.2 ± 1.2 mmol/L 
vs control, 4.9 ± 0.9 mmol/L, P = 0.04; insulin: BBS, 24.2 ± 17.0 pmol/L vs 
control, 14.2 ± 14.8 pmol/L, P < 0.001). Serum triglycerides were significantly 
higher in subjects with BBS (2.0 ± 1.2 mmol/L) compared with control subjects 
(1.3 ± 0.8 mmol/L; P < 0.001), but total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein, 
and low-density lipoprotein were similar in both groups. Systolic blood pressure 
was higher in the BBS group (BBS, 135 ± 18 mm Hg vs control subjects, 129 ± 16 
mm Hg; P = 0.02). Alanine transaminase was raised in 34 (26.8%) subjects with 
BBS, compared with five (8.9%) control subjects (P = 0.01). The rate of 
metabolic syndrome, determined using International Diabetes Federation criteria, 
was significantly higher in the BBS group (54.3%) compared with control subjects 
(26% P < 0.001). Twenty-six (19.5%) of male subjects with BBS were hypogonadal 
(serum testosterone, 9.9 ± 5.3 mmol/L), but significant pituitary abnormalities 
were uncommon. Subclinical hypothyroidism was present in 24 of 125 (19.4%) 
patients with BBS, compared with 3 of 65 (4.6%) control subjects (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Insulin resistance and the metabolic syndrome are increased in 
adult patients with BBS compared with matched control subjects. Increased 
subclinical hypothyroidism in the BBS cohort needs further investigation.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2017-01459
PMID: 29409041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]