---
reference_id: "PMID:39135018"
title: "A case of Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome with temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis: multidisciplinary treatment and autoimmune etiological hypothesis."
authors:
- Wu A
- Zhang Y
- Cao W
- Wang X
- Song Z
- Jaspers RT
- Chen L
- Pathak JL
- Zhang Q
journal: BMC Oral Health
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12903-024-04723-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome with temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis: multidisciplinary treatment and autoimmune etiological hypothesis.
**Authors:** Wu A, Zhang Y, Cao W, Wang X, Song Z, Jaspers RT, Chen L, Pathak JL, Zhang Q
**Journal:** BMC Oral Health (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12903-024-04723-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12903-024-04723-7)

## Content

1. BMC Oral Health. 2024 Aug 13;24(1):935. doi: 10.1186/s12903-024-04723-7.

A case of Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome with temporomandibular joint 
osteoarthritis: multidisciplinary treatment and autoimmune etiological 
hypothesis.

Wu A(#)(1)(2), Zhang Y(#)(1), Cao W(#)(1), Wang X(3)(4), Song Z(1), Jaspers 
RT(1)(2), Chen L(3), Pathak JL(5), Zhang Q(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Temporomandibular Joint, School and Hospital of Stomatology, 
Guangdong Engineering Research Center of Oral Restoration and Reconstruction, 
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Basic and Applied Research of Oral Regenerative 
Medicine, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Laboratory for Myology, Department of Human Movement Sciences, Faculty of 
Behavioural and Movement Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam 
Movement Science, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Guangdong 
Engineering Research Center of Oral Restoration and Reconstruction, Guangzhou 
Key Laboratory of Basic and Applied Research of Oral Regenerative Medicine, 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Oral Mucosa, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Guangdong 
Engineering Research Center of Oral Restoration and Reconstruction, Guangzhou 
Key Laboratory of Basic and Applied Research of Oral Regenerative Medicine, 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Temporomandibular Joint, School and Hospital of Stomatology, 
Guangdong Engineering Research Center of Oral Restoration and Reconstruction, 
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Basic and Applied Research of Oral Regenerative 
Medicine, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. j.pathak@gzhmu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Temporomandibular Joint, School and Hospital of Stomatology, 
Guangdong Engineering Research Center of Oral Restoration and Reconstruction, 
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Basic and Applied Research of Oral Regenerative 
Medicine, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. 
qingbinzhang@gzhmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome (MRS) is a rare neuro-mucocutaneous 
disorder characterized by recurrent edema, facial palsies, and nerve 
dysfunctions often associated with the plicata tongue. Although the etiology of 
MRS is not well understood, there is growing evidence suggesting an autoimmune 
involvement.
CASE PRESENTATION: This paper presents a case report of a 25-year-old male with 
MRS as the initial symptom, followed by temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis 
(TMJ-OA). A comprehensive diagnosis and multidisciplinary treatment approach 
including surgery, local injections, and oral medication were implemented, 
resulting in a favorable prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support the hypothesis that MRS is a systemic 
granulomatous disease caused by autoimmunity, which may also influence the 
occurrence and development of TMJ-OA through immune-related mechanisms. This 
study emphasizes the significance of systemic immune regulation in the treatment 
of patients with MRS and TMJ-OA comorbid conditions.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-024-04723-7
PMCID: PMC11320842
PMID: 39135018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.