---
reference_id: "PMID:19764031"
title: Clinical variability of Waardenburg-Shah syndrome in patients with proximal 13q deletion syndrome including the endothelin-B receptor locus.
authors:
- Tüysüz B
- Collin A
- Arapoğlu M
- Suyugül N
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33031
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 13/genetics"
- "Eye Abnormalities/complications, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- "Genetic Loci/genetics, physiology"
- "Hirschsprung Disease/complications, genetics"
- Humans
- "Hypopigmentation/complications, genetics"
- Male
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Endothelin B/genetics"
- Syndrome
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/classification, complications, diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical variability of Waardenburg-Shah syndrome in patients with proximal 13q deletion syndrome including the endothelin-B receptor locus.
**Authors:** Tüysüz B, Collin A, Arapoğlu M, Suyugül N
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.33031](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.33031)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Oct;149A(10):2290-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33031.

Clinical variability of Waardenburg-Shah syndrome in patients with proximal 13q
deletion syndrome including the endothelin-B receptor locus.

Tüysüz B(1), Collin A, Arapoğlu M, Suyugül N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Cerrahpaşa Medical Faculty, Istanbul
University, Istanbul, Turkey. beyhan@istanbul.edu.tr

Waardenburg-Shah syndrome (Waardenburg syndrome type IV-WS4) is an
auditory-pigmentary disorder that combines clinical features of pigmentary
abnormalities of the skin, hair and irides, sensorineural hearing loss, and
Hirschsprung disease (HSCR). Mutations in the endothelin-B receptor (EDNRB) gene
on 13q22 have been found to cause this syndrome. Mutations in both alleles cause
the full phenotype, while heterozygous mutations cause isolated HSCR or HSCR
with minor pigmentary anomalies and/or sensorineural deafness. We investigated
the status of the EDNRB gene, by FISH analysis, in three patients with de novo
proximal 13q deletions detected at cytogenetic analysis and examined the
clinical variability of WS4 among these patients. Chromosome 13q was screened
with locus specific FISH probes and breakpoints were determined at 13q22.1q31.3
in Patients 1 and 3, and at 13q21.1q31.3 in Patient 2. An EDNRB specific FISH
probe was deleted in all three patients. All patients had common facial features
seen in proximal 13q deletion syndrome and mild mental retardation. However,
findings related to WS4 were variable; Patient 1 had hypopigmentation of the
irides and HSCR, Patient 2 had prominent bicolored irides and mild bilateral
hearing loss, and Patient 3 had only mild unilateral hearing loss. These data
contribute new insights into the pathogenesis of WS4.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33031
PMID: 19764031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
