---
reference_id: "PMID:31158302"
title: "Clinicopathological features, diagnosis, and treatment of sessile serrated adenoma/polyp with dysplasia/carcinoma."
authors:
- Murakami T
- Sakamoto N
- Nagahara A
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/jgh.14752
keywords:
- "Adenomatous Polyps/pathology, surgery"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma/pathology, surgery"
- Colectomy/adverse effects
- "Colonic Polyps/pathology, surgery"
- Colonoscopy/adverse effects
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/pathology, surgery"
- Disease Progression
- Endoscopic Mucosal Resection/adverse effects
- Female
- Humans
- Lymph Node Excision
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathological features, diagnosis, and treatment of sessile serrated adenoma/polyp with dysplasia/carcinoma.
**Authors:** Murakami T, Sakamoto N, Nagahara A
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jgh.14752](https://doi.org/10.1111/jgh.14752)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019 Oct;34(10):1685-1695. doi: 10.1111/jgh.14752.
Epub  2019 Jun 30.

Clinicopathological features, diagnosis, and treatment of sessile serrated
adenoma/polyp with dysplasia/carcinoma.

Murakami T(1), Sakamoto N(1), Nagahara A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019 Oct;34(10):1667-1668. doi: 10.1111/jgh.14891.

Sessile serrated adenoma/polyps (SSA/Ps) are early precursor lesions in the
serrated neoplasia pathway, which results in BRAF-mutated colorectal carcinomas
with not only high levels of microsatellite instability but also microsatellite
stable. SSA/Ps with advanced histology, including cytological dysplasia or
minimally invasive carcinomas, are important lesions because SSA/Ps are
considered major contributors to "interval cancers" and these lesions can
rapidly become dysplastic or invasive carcinomas. Clinicopathologically, SSA/Ps
with dysplasia or invasive carcinoma were associated with advanced age, female
sex, and proximal colon. Although SSA/Ps with submucosal invasive carcinoma were
smaller and invaded less deeply into the submucosal layer than conventional
tubular adenomas with submucosal invasive carcinoma, SSA/Ps with submucosal
invasive carcinoma frequently had a mucinous component and exhibited a higher
potential for lymphatic invasion and lymph node metastasis. In an SSA/P series,
endoscopic characteristics, including (semi)pedunculated morphology, double
elevation, central depression, and reddishness, may help accurately diagnose
SSA/Ps with advanced histology. Removal of SSA/Ps with dysplasia or invasive
carcinoma was recommended. Endoscopic treatment such as endoscopic mucosal
resection or endoscopic submucosal dissection is useful for those lesions.
However, surgical resection with lymph node dissection might be indicated when
SSA/Ps with invasive carcinoma are endoscopically suspected, because these have
the high risk of lymph node metastasis. Greater awareness may promote further
research into improving the detection, recognition, and complete resection rates
of SSA/Ps with dysplasia or invasive carcinoma and reduce the interval cancer
rates.

© 2019 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jgh.14752
PMID: 31158302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
