---
reference_id: "PMID:28365729"
title: The HIV oligonucleotide database (HIVoligoDB).
authors:
- Carneiro J
- Resende A
- Pereira F
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/database/bax005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The HIV oligonucleotide database (HIVoligoDB).
**Authors:** Carneiro J, Resende A, Pereira F
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/bax005](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bax005)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2017 Jan 1;2017(1):bax005. doi: 10.1093/database/bax005.

The HIV oligonucleotide database (HIVoligoDB).

Carneiro J(1), Resende A(1), Pereira F.

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research (CIIMAR), 
University of Porto, Terminal de Cruzeiros do Porto de Leix?Av. General Norton 
de Matos s/n 4450-208 Porto.

The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is associated with one of the most 
widespread infectious disease, the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). 
The development of antiretroviral drugs and methods for virus detection requires 
a comprehensive analysis of the HIV genomic diversity, particularly in the 
binding sites of oligonucleotides. Here, we describe a versatile online database 
(HIVoligoDB) with oligonucleotides selected for the diagnosis of HIV and 
treatment of AIDS. Currently, the database provides an interface for 
visualization, analysis and download of 380 HIV-1 and 65 HIV-2 oligonucleotides 
annotated according to curated reference genomes. The database also allows the 
selection of the most conserved HIV genomic regions for the development of 
molecular diagnostic assays and sequence-based candidate therapeutics.
DATABASE URL: http://portugene.com/HIVoligoDB.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bax005
PMCID: PMC5502365
PMID: 28365729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]