---
reference_id: "PMID:15914363"
title: Complete and durable remission of refractory mantle cell lymphoma with repeated rituximab monotherapy.
authors:
- Ishiyama K
- Takami A
- Okumura H
- Ozaki J
- Shimadoi S
- Yamanaka S
- Nakao S
journal: Int J Hematol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1532/IJH97.04167
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Bleomycin/administration & dosage"
- "Cyclophosphamide/administration & dosage"
- "Doxorubicin/administration & dosage"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm"
- "Etoposide/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Mantle-Cell/drug therapy, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Prednisolone/administration & dosage"
- Rituximab
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vincristine/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complete and durable remission of refractory mantle cell lymphoma with repeated rituximab monotherapy.
**Authors:** Ishiyama K, Takami A, Okumura H, Ozaki J, Shimadoi S, Yamanaka S, Nakao S
**Journal:** Int J Hematol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1532/IJH97.04167](https://doi.org/10.1532/IJH97.04167)

## Content

1. Int J Hematol. 2005 May;81(4):319-22. doi: 10.1532/IJH97.04167.

Complete and durable remission of refractory mantle cell lymphoma with repeated 
rituximab monotherapy.

Ishiyama K(1), Takami A, Okumura H, Ozaki J, Shimadoi S, Yamanaka S, Nakao S.

Author information:
(1)Cellular Transplantation Biology, Division of Cancer Medicine, Kanazawa 
University Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8641, 
Japan.

We encountered a 53-year-old man with general fatigue. Bone marrow 
investigations revealed an infiltration of CD20+CD5+CD23- cells and the presence 
of cyclin D1 lymphoid cells, leading to a diagnosis of mantle cell lymphoma, 
clinical stage IV. The first 2 lines of chemotherapy, CyclOBEAP 
(cyclophosphamide, vincristine, bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin, and 
prednisolone) and fludarabine-cyclophosphamide, produced only a transient 
decrease in serum lactic dehydrogenase levels, without a clinical remission. 
Because of the persistence of bone marrow hypoplasia, monotherapy with 375 mg/m2 
rituximab was administered. The pancytopenia gradually improved, and a complete 
remission was obtained after 4 cycles of rituximab. The patient remains in 
complete remission 21 months after the third rituximab therapy for maintenance.

DOI: 10.1532/IJH97.04167
PMID: 15914363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]