---
reference_id: "PMID:9264803"
title: "[Peroxisomal hereditary diseases]."
authors:
- Chandoga J
- Tomková M
- Hlavatá A
journal: Bratisl Lek Listy
year: '1997'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Peroxisomal hereditary diseases].
**Authors:** Chandoga J, Tomková M, Hlavatá A
**Journal:** Bratisl Lek Listy (1997)

## Content

1. Bratisl Lek Listy. 1997 Jan;98(1):32-42.

[Peroxisomal hereditary diseases].

[Article in Slovak]

Chandoga J(1), Tomková M, Hlavatá A.

Author information:
(1)Centrum lekárskej genetiky Fakultnej nemocnice a IVZ v Bratislave, Slovakia.

Nearly two tens of diseases are known to be caused by impairment of several 
metabolic functions of peroxisomes, or by deficiency in individual peroxisomal 
enzymes. With the exception of X-bound adrenoleukodystrophy, all diseases are 
based on autosomally recessive type of inheritance and a majority of them are 
characteristic by specific neurologic symptoms. The group of diseases in which 
patients develop a generalised loss of peroxisomal functions includes: 
Zellweger's cerebro-hepato-renal syndrome, neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy, 
infantile Refsum's disease, hyperpipecolic acidaemia. Other diseases, such as 
rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata and Zellweger-like syndrome are accompanied 
by a deficiency in several enzymatic activities. X-bound adrenoleukodystrophy, 
pseudo-Zellweger's syndrome, hyperoxaluria 1, adult form of Refsum's disease and 
acatalasaemia are peroxisomal diseases with a deficiency of a single enzyme. In 
clinically most severe diseases (generalised loss of peroxisomal functions), the 
impairment of peroxisomal biogenesis is caused assumedly due to the defect in 
some of the peroxisomal membrane proteins. The biochemical findings are brought 
about by insufficiency in such metabolic functions as oxidation of fatty acids 
with very long chains, oxidation of the phytanic and pipecolic acids, synthesis 
of cholesterol, bile salts and plasmalogenes. Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia 
punctata and Zellweger's syndrome are more moderate forms which are dominantly 
biochemically manifestant by an impairment in the synthesis of plasmalogenes. 
Among the diseases characterised by a deficiency in individual peroxisomal 
enzymes, most frequent is the X-bound andrenoleukodystrophy which has several 
clinical phenotypes manifestant in childhood, as well as a clinically less 
severe form manifestant in adulthood-adrenomyeloneuropathy. The diagnosis of 
peroxisomal diseases is performed by use of a wide range of methods 
(morphological, biochemical, immunochemical and molecular genetic examinations) 
which enable both postnatal and prenatal diagnostics. (Tab. 1, Ref. 104.)

PMID: 9264803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]