---
reference_id: "PMID:40387020"
title: First-Line Treatment of Pulmonary Sarcoidosis with Prednisone or Methotrexate.
authors:
- Kahlmann V
- Janssen Bonás M
- Moor CC
- Grutters JC
- Mostard RLM
- van Rijswijk HNAJ
- van der Maten J
- Marges ER
- Moonen LAA
- Overbeek MJ
- Koopman B
- Loth DW
- Nossent EJ
- Wagenaar M
- Kramer H
- Wielders PLML
- Bonta PI
- Walen S
- Bogaarts BAHA
- Kerstens R
- Overgaauw M
- Veltkamp M
- Wijsenbeek MS
- PREDMETH Collaborators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2501443
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Methotrexate/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Netherlands
- "Prednisone/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Vital Capacity/drug effects, physiology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First-Line Treatment of Pulmonary Sarcoidosis with Prednisone or Methotrexate.
**Authors:** Kahlmann V, Janssen Bonás M, Moor CC, Grutters JC, Mostard RLM, van Rijswijk HNAJ, van der Maten J, Marges ER, Moonen LAA, Overbeek MJ, Koopman B, Loth DW, Nossent EJ, Wagenaar M, Kramer H, Wielders PLML, Bonta PI, Walen S, Bogaarts BAHA, Kerstens R, Overgaauw M, Veltkamp M, Wijsenbeek MS, PREDMETH Collaborators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2501443](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2501443)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2025 Jul 17;393(3):231-242. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2501443. Epub
2025  May 18.

First-Line Treatment of Pulmonary Sarcoidosis with Prednisone or Methotrexate.

Kahlmann V(1), Janssen Bonás M(2), Moor CC(1), Grutters JC(2)(3), Mostard 
RLM(4)(5), van Rijswijk HNAJ(6), van der Maten J(7), Marges ER(8), Moonen 
LAA(9), Overbeek MJ(8)(10), Koopman B(11), Loth DW(12), Nossent EJ(13), Wagenaar 
M(14), Kramer H(15), Wielders PLML(16), Bonta PI(13), Walen S(17), Bogaarts 
BAHA(18), Kerstens R(19), Overgaauw M(20), Veltkamp M(2)(3), Wijsenbeek MS(1); 
PREDMETH Collaborators.

Collaborators: van Beek FT, van den Berg JMW, Boerrigter BG, Bresser P, Bülbül 
M, Chandoesing PP, Collard SM, Custers FLJ, de Gier MG, Grootenboers MJJH, 
Helfrich G, Hendriks P, Kuijvenhoven-Varkevisser JC, van Laren M, Limonard GJM, 
van Loenhout CJ, Miedema JR, Nagtegaal MM, Nijman SFM, Quanjel MJR, Schakenraad 
EL, van der Sloot CA, van der Valk JPM, van de Ven MJT, Vorselaars ADM, Kahlmann 
V, Janssen Bonás M, Moor CC, Veltkamp M, Wijsenbeek MS, Overgaauw M, Vruwink G, 
Berendse A, Grutters JC, Mostard RLM, van Rijswijk HNAJ, van der Maten J, Marges 
ER, Moonen LAA, Overbeek MJ, Koopman B, Loth DW, Nossent EJ, Wagenaar M, Kramer 
H, Wielders PLML, Bonta PI, Walen S, Bogaarts BAHA, Kerstens R.

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence for Interstitial Lung Diseases and Sarcoidosis (member 
of the European Reference Network on Rare Respiratory Diseases), Department of 
Respiratory Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Interstitial Lung Disease Center of Excellence (member of the European 
Reference Network on Rare Respiratory Diseases), St. Antonius Hospital, 
Nieuwegein, the Netherlands.
(3)Division of Heart and Lungs, University Medical Center, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Zuyderland Medical Center, Heerlen, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Center, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Jeroen Bosch Hospital, 's-Hertogenbosch, 
the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Medical Center Leeuwarden, Leeuwarden, the 
Netherlands.
(8)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Rijnstate Hospital, Arnhem, the 
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Haaglanden Medical Center, the Hague, the 
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis, Amsterdam.
(12)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Amphia, Breda, the Netherlands.
(13)Center of Expertise for Interstitial Lung Disease and Sarcoidosis, 
Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam.
(14)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, the 
Netherlands.
(15)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Martini Hospital, Groningen, the 
Netherlands.
(16)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, the 
Netherlands.
(17)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Isala Hospital, Zwolle, the Netherlands.
(18)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, VieCuri Medical Center, Venlo, the 
Netherlands.
(19)Orion Statistical Consulting, Hilvarenbeek, the Netherlands.
(20)Sarcoidosis Patient Association, Alkmaar, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Prednisone is currently recommended as the first-line treatment for 
pulmonary sarcoidosis but is associated with many side effects. Methotrexate, 
which is recommended as a second-line treatment, appears to have fewer side 
effects than prednisone but a slower onset of action. Data are needed on the 
efficacy and side-effect profile of methotrexate as compared with prednisone as 
first-line treatment for pulmonary sarcoidosis.
METHODS: In this multicenter, open-label, noninferiority trial involving 
patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis who had not previously received treatment, 
we randomly assigned patients, in a 1:1 ratio, to receive prednisone or 
methotrexate according to a prespecified treatment schedule. The primary end 
point was the mean change from baseline to week 24 in the percentage of the 
predicted forced vital capacity (FVC), as estimated with the use of mixed models 
for repeated measures. The noninferiority margin for the primary end point was 5 
percentage points.
RESULTS: Of the 138 patients who underwent randomization, 70 were assigned to 
receive prednisone and 68 to receive methotrexate. The unadjusted mean change 
from baseline to week 24 in the percentage of the predicted FVC was 6.75 
percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI], 4.50 to 8.99) in the prednisone 
group and 6.11 percentage points (95% CI, 3.72 to 8.50) in the methotrexate 
group. Methotrexate was noninferior to prednisone with regard to the primary end 
point, with an adjusted between-group difference of -1.17 percentage points (95% 
CI, -4.27 to 1.93). Adverse events occurred in a similar percentage of patients 
in the two trial groups. Weight gain, insomnia, and increased appetite were the 
most common adverse events with prednisone, and nausea, fatigue, and any 
abnormal liver-function test were among the most common adverse events with 
methotrexate.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis, initial treatment with 
methotrexate was noninferior to that with prednisone with regard to the change 
from baseline to week 24 in the percentage of the predicted FVC. Differences in 
the side-effect profile between methotrexate and prednisone may inform shared 
decision making by providers and patients about the appropriate treatment 
approach. (Funded by the Dutch Lung Foundation; PREDMETH ClinicalTrials.gov 
number, NCT04314193.).

Copyright © 2025 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2501443
PMID: 40387020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]