---
reference_id: "PMID:22086061"
title: Tumor-specific retargeting of an oncogenic transcription factor chimera results in dysregulation of chromatin and transcription.
authors:
- Patel M
- Simon JM
- Iglesia MD
- Wu SB
- McFadden AW
- Lieb JD
- Davis IJ
journal: Genome Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1101/gr.125666.111
keywords:
- Binding Sites/genetics
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Chimerism
- "Chromatin/genetics, metabolism"
- Endothelial Cells/metabolism
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Silencing
- Humans
- Microfilament Proteins/metabolism
- Microsatellite Repeats
- "Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism"
- Nucleotide Motifs
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA-Binding Protein EWS/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/metabolism"
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/genetics, metabolism"
- Trans-Activators
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tumor-specific retargeting of an oncogenic transcription factor chimera results in dysregulation of chromatin and transcription.
**Authors:** Patel M, Simon JM, Iglesia MD, Wu SB, McFadden AW, Lieb JD, Davis IJ
**Journal:** Genome Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gr.125666.111](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.125666.111)

## Content

1. Genome Res. 2012 Feb;22(2):259-70. doi: 10.1101/gr.125666.111. Epub 2011 Nov
15.

Tumor-specific retargeting of an oncogenic transcription factor chimera results
in dysregulation of chromatin and transcription.

Patel M(1), Simon JM, Iglesia MD, Wu SB, McFadden AW, Lieb JD, Davis IJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Chromosomal translocations involving transcription factor genes have been
identified in an increasingly wide range of cancers. Some translocations can
create a protein "chimera" that is composed of parts from different proteins.
How such chimeras cause cancer, and why they cause cancer in some cell types but
not others, is not understood. One such chimera is EWS-FLI, the most frequently
occurring translocation in Ewing Sarcoma, a malignant bone and soft tissue tumor
of children and young adults. Using EWS-FLI and its parental transcription
factor, FLI1, we created a unique experimental system to address questions
regarding the genomic mechanisms by which chimeric transcription factors cause
cancer. We found that in tumor cells, EWS-FLI targets regions of the genome
distinct from FLI1, despite identical DNA-binding domains. In primary
endothelial cells, however, EWS-FLI and FLI1 demonstrate similar targeting. To
understand this mistargeting, we examined chromatin organization. Regions
targeted by EWS-FLI are normally repressed and nucleosomal in primary
endothelial cells. In tumor cells, however, bound regions are nucleosome
depleted and harbor the chromatin signature of enhancers. We next demonstrated
that through chimerism, EWS-FLI acquired the ability to alter chromatin.
Expression of EWS-FLI results in nucleosome depletion at targeted sites, whereas
silencing of EWS-FLI in tumor cells restored nucleosome occupancy. Thus, the
EWS-FLI chimera acquired chromatin-altering activity, leading to mistargeting,
chromatin disruption, and ultimately, transcriptional dysregulation.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.125666.111
PMCID: PMC3266033
PMID: 22086061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
