---
reference_id: "PMID:21072067"
title: "BEST1-related autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy: a degenerative disease with a range of developmental ocular anomalies."
authors:
- Vincent A
- McAlister C
- Vandenhoven C
- Héon E
journal: Eye (Lond)
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/eye.2010.165
keywords:
- Adult
- Bestrophins
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- "Choroid Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Electrophysiology
- Eye/pathology
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Retinal Diseases/genetics, physiopathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Visual Fields/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BEST1-related autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy: a degenerative disease with a range of developmental ocular anomalies.
**Authors:** Vincent A, McAlister C, Vandenhoven C, Héon E
**Journal:** Eye (Lond) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/eye.2010.165](https://doi.org/10.1038/eye.2010.165)

## Content

1. Eye (Lond). 2011 Jan;25(1):113-8. doi: 10.1038/eye.2010.165. Epub 2010 Nov 12.

BEST1-related autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy: a degenerative
disease with a range of developmental ocular anomalies.

Vincent A(1), McAlister C, Vandenhoven C, Héon E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PURPOSE: To describe the spectrum of phenotypic characteristics of BEST1-related
autosomal dominant vitreoretinochoroidopathy (ADVIRC) in a family with p.V86M
mutation.
METHODS: A retrospective review of the clinical, psychophysical, and
electrophysiological phenotypes of six subjects with ADVIRC. Five family members
were sequenced for mutations in the BEST1 gene.
RESULTS: A heterozygous change, p.V86M (c.256G > A), was identified in the BEST1
gene in the three affected subjects tested, and was shown to segregate with the
disease phenotype. The distance visual acuity ranged from ≥ 20/25 to absent
perception of light. Clinical features observed included angle closure glaucoma
(n = 2), microcornea with shallow anterior chamber (n = 1), iris dysgenesis (n =
2), cataracts (n = 4), classical peripheral concentric band of retinal
hyperpigmentation (n = 5), and optic nerve dysplasia (n = 1). Full-field
electroretinogram response amplitudes ranged from low normal (two cases; 27 and
32 years) to non-recordable (two cases; 42 and 63 years). Goldmann fields were
normal in two (27 and 28 years) but were abnormal in two older subjects. Optical
coherence tomography showed macular thinning in the proband, whereas his
affected daughter had normal macular thickness. Electro-oculography showed
borderline Arden's ratio (1.50) in the lone case tested (27 years).
CONCLUSION: ADVIRC is a slowly progressive vitreoretinal degeneration that
demonstrates marked intra-familial phenotypic variability. Optic nerve dysplasia
and iris dysgenesis are novel observations that extend the ocular phenotype of
ADVIRC.

DOI: 10.1038/eye.2010.165
PMCID: PMC3144636
PMID: 21072067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
