---
reference_id: "PMID:18325838"
title: Accelerated atherosclerosis in ApoE deficient lupus mouse models.
authors:
- Ma Z
- Choudhury A
- Kang SA
- Monestier M
- Cohen PL
- Eisenberg RA
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2008.01.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Accelerated atherosclerosis in ApoE deficient lupus mouse models.
**Authors:** Ma Z, Choudhury A, Kang SA, Monestier M, Cohen PL, Eisenberg RA
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2008.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2008.01.002)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2008 May;127(2):168-75. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2008.01.002. Epub
2008  Mar 5.

Accelerated atherosclerosis in ApoE deficient lupus mouse models.

Ma Z(1), Choudhury A, Kang SA, Monestier M, Cohen PL, Eisenberg RA.

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The accelerated development of atherosclerosis with increased risk of 
cardiovascular disease in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients is not 
well understood. An appropriate mouse model would greatly help to understand the 
mechanisms of this association. We have therefore combined the ApoE(-/-) model 
of atherosclerosis with three different murine models of SLE. We found that 
induction of cGVH in B6.ApoE(-/-) mice, breeding a Fas null gene onto the 
B6.ApoE(-/-) mice, and breeding the ApoE(-/-) defect onto MRL/lpr mice all 
caused a modest increase of atherosclerosis at 24 weeks of age compared to 
B6.ApoE(-/-) controls. B cells in B6.ApoE(-/-) mice had certain phenotypic 
differences compared to congenic C57BL/6 mice, as indicated by high expression 
of MHC II, Fas, CD86, and by increased number of cells bearing marginal zone 
phenotype. Furthermore, B6ApoE(-/-) mice had significant titers of anti-oxLDL 
and anti-cardiolipin autoantibodies compared to their B6 counterparts. Our 
studies also indicate that, following induction of cGVH, marginal zone B cells 
in B6.ApoE(-/-) are depleted, and there is considerable increase in anti-oxLDL 
and anti-cardiolipin abs along with secretion of lupus-specific autoantibodies, 
such as anti-dsDNA and anti-chromatin abs. Histological sections showed that 
cGVH and/or Fas deficiency could exacerbate atherosclerosis. The production of 
anti-oxLDL and anti-cardiolipin in ApoE(-/-) mice was also increased. These 
observations define a connection between induction of lupus-like symptoms and 
development of severe atherosclerosis in ApoE deficient lupus mouse models.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2008.01.002
PMCID: PMC2464279
PMID: 18325838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]