---
reference_id: "PMID:33085325"
title: Electrodiagnostic Evaluation of Motor Neuron Disease.
authors:
- Ramroop H
- Cruz R
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Electrodiagnostic Evaluation of Motor Neuron Disease.
**Authors:** Ramroop H, Cruz R

## Content

1. Electrodiagnostic Evaluation of Motor Neuron Disease.

Ramroop H(1), Cruz R(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2022 Nov 5.

Author information:
(1)Nassau University Medical Center
(2)South Nassau Communities Hospital

Motor neuron disorders can be thought of as residing on a spectrum, whether 
upper motor neurons, lower motor neurons, or both are affected. Motor neuron 
diseases include amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (affects both upper and lower 
motor neurons), primary lateral sclerosis (affects upper motor neurons), 
progressive muscular atrophy (affects lower motor neurons ), progressive bulbar 
palsy (affects lower motor neurons), spinal muscular atrophy (affects lower 
motor neurons), and post-polio syndrome (affects lower motor neurons). Motor 
neuron disease is used interchangeably with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
as ALS is the most common adult-onset presentation of this disease.  ALS is a 
neurodegenerative disorder leading to weakness of the bulbar, thoracic, limb, 
and abdominal muscles with sparing of sensory function. Death usually occurs 
within 2 to 5 years from respiratory failure. Roughly 85 to 90% of ALS cases are 
sporadic, with about 10% being of familial origin. According to the 2014 US 
Census data, the prevalence of ALS was 5 per 100,000 people.  Though there is 
variation in clinical presentation, the majority of the patients present with 
asymmetric limb weakness (80%) or bulbar dysfunction (20%). Bulbar dysfunction 
can manifest as dysphagia (trouble swallowing) and dysarthria (trouble 
speaking). There is progressive spread to other body areas with accompanying 
upper and lower motor neuron findings. Upper motor findings include spasticity, 
hyperactive reflexes, and a positive Babinski sign. Lower motor neuron signs 
include muscle atrophy, weakness, flaccid paralysis, absent reflexes, 
fasciculations, and fibrillations.  Patients can also display changes in 
behavior due to frontotemporal dysfunction, and about 15% of patients develop 
frontotemporal dementia. Some patients may also present with Pseudobulbar 
affect, which is dysregulation of emotional responses exhibited by excessive 
laughter or crying. Many other neurological disorders, such as strokes, 
Alzheimer’s disease, and multiple sclerosis, also present with pseudobulbar 
affect. Once the diagnosis of ALS is suspected, electrodiagnostic testing is 
needed. Electrodiagnostic testing assesses the integrity of lower motor neurons 
and is crucial to diagnosing motor neuron disease, as neuroimaging and 
laboratory studies are normal oftentimes. Nerve conduction studies (NCS) and 
needle electromyography (EMG)  are important for supporting the diagnosis of ALS 
and ruling out other potential mimics of the disease. Some disorders that can 
mimic motor neuron disease are multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction 
block, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy, central 
nervous system tumors, multiple sclerosis, and polyradiculopathy, among others.  
It is important to rule out such mimics with NCS and needle EMG as the treatment 
regimens and prognosis differ among the varying disorders. Since the prognosis 
of ALS is poor, it is imperative to accurately diagnose the disorder to 
appropriately manage the associated symptoms involved and develop a treatment 
plan.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 33085325

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Hillary Ramroop declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Ricardo Cruz 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.