---
reference_id: PMID:22505443
title: "Oral care practice for the ventilated patients in intensive care units: a pilot survey."
authors:
- Soh KL
- Shariff Ghazali S
- Soh KG
- Abdul Raman R
- Sharif Abdullah SS
- Ong SL
journal: J Infect Dev Ctries
year: '2012'
doi: 10.3855/jidc.1634
keywords:
- Attitude of Health Personnel
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Humans
- Intensive Care Units
- Nurses
- Oral Hygiene/methods
- Pilot Projects
- "Pneumonia, Ventilator-Associated/prevention & control"
- "Respiration, Artificial"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral care practice for the ventilated patients in intensive care units: a pilot survey.
**Authors:** Soh KL, Shariff Ghazali S, Soh KG, Abdul Raman R, Sharif Abdullah SS, Ong SL
**Journal:** J Infect Dev Ctries (2012)
**DOI:** [10.3855/jidc.1634](https://doi.org/10.3855/jidc.1634)

## Content

1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2012 Apr 13;6(4):333-9. doi: 10.3855/jidc.1634.

Oral care practice for the ventilated patients in intensive care units: a pilot 
survey.

Soh KL(1), Shariff Ghazali S, Soh KG, Abdul Raman R, Sharif Abdullah SS, Ong SL.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicines and Health Sciences, University Putra Malaysia, Serdang, 
Selangor, Malaysia. kim@medic.upm.edu.my

INTRODUCTION: Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) is the most common 
nosocomial infection in intensive care units (ICUs).  One factor causing VAP is 
aspiration of oral colonisation, which may result from poor oral care practice.  
Oral care using tooth brushing can prevent formulation of dental plaque that can 
be a reservoir for microbes causing VAP.
METHODOLOGY: A cross-sectional survey was conducted among 124 nurses, using a 
self-administered questionnaire, to determine methods used, frequency, and 
attitude of nurses toward oral care provided to mechanically ventilated patients 
in Malaysian ICUs. 
RESULTS: Methods for oral care and their frequency of use varied between nurses 
even in the same unit. Cotton with forceps was used by 73.4% of the nurses. Some 
nurses used forceps and gauze (65%) or spatulas and gauze (36%). Toothbrushes 
were used by 50.8% of the nurses. Nurses in this hospital reported to have 
positive attitude toward providing oral care.
CONCLUSIONS: The survey showed the need to have standardised oral care protocols 
in ICUs to improve quality of oral care provided to ventilated patients.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.1634
PMID: 22505443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]