---
reference_id: "PMID:26790708"
title: "Inborn errors of metabolism detectable by tandem mass spectrometry in Egypt: The first newborn screening pilot study."
authors:
- Hassan FA
- El-Mougy F
- Sharaf SA
- Mandour I
- Morgan MF
- Selim LA
- Hassan SA
- Salem F
- Oraby A
- Girgis MY
- Mahmoud IG
- El-Badawy A
- El-Nekhely I
- Moharam N
- Mehaney DA
- Elmonem MA
journal: J Med Screen
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1177/0969141315618229
keywords:
- Egypt/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- Pilot Projects
- Prevalence
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn errors of metabolism detectable by tandem mass spectrometry in Egypt: The first newborn screening pilot study.
**Authors:** Hassan FA, El-Mougy F, Sharaf SA, Mandour I, Morgan MF, Selim LA, Hassan SA, Salem F, Oraby A, Girgis MY, Mahmoud IG, El-Badawy A, El-Nekhely I, Moharam N, Mehaney DA, Elmonem MA
**Journal:** J Med Screen (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0969141315618229](https://doi.org/10.1177/0969141315618229)

## Content

1. J Med Screen. 2016 Sep;23(3):124-9. doi: 10.1177/0969141315618229. Epub 2016
Jan  20.

Inborn errors of metabolism detectable by tandem mass spectrometry in Egypt: The
first newborn screening pilot study.

Hassan FA(1), El-Mougy F(1), Sharaf SA(1), Mandour I(1), Morgan MF(1), Selim
LA(2), Hassan SA(2), Salem F(2), Oraby A(2), Girgis MY(2), Mahmoud IG(3),
El-Badawy A(3), El-Nekhely I(4), Moharam N(4), Mehaney DA(1), Elmonem MA(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Chemical Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo
University, Cairo, Egypt Inherited Metabolic Disease Unit, Center of Social and
Preventive Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Inherited Metabolic Disease Unit, Center of Social and Preventive Medicine,
Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt Pediatrics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo
University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Inherited Metabolic Disease Unit, Center of Social and Preventive Medicine,
Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(4)Ministry of Health & Population, Cairo, Egypt.
(5)Clinical and Chemical Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo
University, Cairo, Egypt Inherited Metabolic Disease Unit, Center of Social and
Preventive Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt
mohamed.abdelmonem@kasralainy.edu.eg.

OBJECTIVES: To estimate the burden of metabolic disorders detectable by tandem
mass spectrometry in Egypt, through a pilot expanded newborn screening programme
at Cairo University Children's Hospital in 2008, and examining the results of
3,900 clinically at-risk children, investigated at Cairo University Children's
Hospital for the same disorders over the past 7 years using the same technology.
METHODS: Dried blood spots of 25,276 healthy newborns from three governorates in
Upper, Middle, and Lower Egypt were screened, to give a representative sample of
the Egyptian newborn population. Based on the pilot study outcomes and the
results of clinically suspected children, we estimated the total birth
prevalence of tandem mass spectrometry detectable metabolic disorders, and the
relative frequency of several individual disorders.
RESULTS: Among the healthy newborns, 13 metabolic disorder cases (five
phenylketonuria [1:5,000], two methylmalonic acidemia, and isovaleric acidemia
[1:12,500], one each of maple syrup urine disease, propionic acidemia,
β-ketothiolase deficiency, and primary carnitine deficiency [1:25,000]) were
confirmed, giving a total birth prevalence of 1:1944 live births. Among the
clinically suspected children, 235 cases were diagnosed, representing a much
wider disease spectrum.
CONCLUSIONS: Egypt has one of the highest reported birth prevalence rates for
metabolic disorders detectable by tandem mass spectrometry. Early diagnosis and
management are crucial for the survival and well-being of affected children. A
nationwide NBS programme by tandem mass spectrometry is recommended.

© The Author(s) 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/0969141315618229
PMID: 26790708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
