---
reference_id: "PMID:15238624"
title: Endoscopic laser surgery versus serial amnioreduction for severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome.
authors:
- Senat MV
- Deprest J
- Boulvain M
- Paupe A
- Winer N
- Ville Y
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa032597
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endoscopic laser surgery versus serial amnioreduction for severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome.
**Authors:** Senat MV, Deprest J, Boulvain M, Paupe A, Winer N, Ville Y
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa032597](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa032597)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2004 Jul 8;351(2):136-44. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa032597. Epub 2004
Jul  6.

Endoscopic laser surgery versus serial amnioreduction for severe twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome.

Senat MV(1), Deprest J, Boulvain M, Paupe A, Winer N, Ville Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Université Paris-Ouest 
Versailles-St. Quentin, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunale Poissy-St. Germain, 
Poissy, France.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Jul 8;351(2):182-4. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe048047.

BACKGROUND: Monochorionic twin pregnancies complicated by severe twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome at midgestation can be treated by either serial 
amnioreduction (removal of large volumes of amniotic fluid) or selective 
fetoscopic laser coagulation of the communicating vessels on the chorionic 
plate. We conducted a randomized trial to compare the efficacy and safety of 
these two treatments.
METHODS: Pregnant women with severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome before 26 
weeks of gestation were randomly assigned to laser therapy or amnioreduction. We 
assessed perinatal survival of at least one twin (a prespecified primary 
outcome), survival of at least one twin at six months of age, and survival 
without neurologic complications at six months of age on the basis of the number 
of pregnancies or the number of fetuses or infants, as appropriate.
RESULTS: The study was concluded early, after 72 women had been assigned to the 
laser group and 70 to the amnioreduction group, because a planned interim 
analysis demonstrated a significant benefit in the laser group. As compared with 
the amnioreduction group, the laser group had a higher likelihood of the 
survival of at least one twin to 28 days of age (76 percent vs. 56 percent; 
relative risk of the death of both fetuses, 0.63; 95 percent confidence 
interval, 0.25 to 0.93; P=0.009) and 6 months of age (P=0.002). Infants in the 
laser group also had a lower incidence of cystic periventricular leukomalacia (6 
percent vs. 14 percent, P=0.02) and were more likely to be free of neurologic 
complications at six months of age (52 percent vs. 31 percent, P=0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: Endoscopic laser coagulation of anastomoses is a more effective 
first-line treatment than serial amnioreduction for severe twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome diagnosed before 26 weeks of gestation.

Copyright 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa032597
PMID: 15238624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]