---
reference_id: "PMID:36308388"
title: "Obstetrical and neonatal outcomes of cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome: Prenatal consequences of Ras/MAPK dysregulation."
authors:
- Jelin AC
- Mahle A
- Tran SH
- Sparks TN
- Rauen KA
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obstetrical and neonatal outcomes of cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome: Prenatal consequences of Ras/MAPK dysregulation.
**Authors:** Jelin AC, Mahle A, Tran SH, Sparks TN, Rauen KA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63020](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63020)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Feb;191(2):323-331. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63020. Epub
2022  Oct 29.

Obstetrical and neonatal outcomes of cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome: Prenatal 
consequences of Ras/MAPK dysregulation.

Jelin AC(1)(2), Mahle A(1), Tran SH(3), Sparks TN(4), Rauen KA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States.
(2)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States.
(3)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Legacy Medical Group, Portland, Oregon, 
United States.
(4)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States.
(5)Division of Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, MIND Institute, 
University of California Davis, Davis, California, United States.

We systematically delineated the prenatal phenotype, and obstetrical and 
neonatal outcomes of the RASopathy cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome. A 
comprehensive, retrospective medical history survey was distributed to parents 
of children with confirmed CFC in collaboration with CFC International, Inc. 
Data were collected on CFC gene variant, maternal characteristics, pregnancy 
course, delivery, and neonatal outcomes with the support of medical records. We 
identified 43 individuals with pathogenic variants in BRAF (81%), MEK1 (14%), or 
MEK2 (5%) genes. The median age was 8.5 years. Hyperemesis gravidarum, 
gestational diabetes, gestational hypertension, and preeclampsia occurred in 
5/43 (12%), 4/43 (9%), 3/43 (7%), and 3/43 (7%) of pregnancies, respectively. 
Second and third trimester ultrasound abnormalities included polyhydramnios, 
macrocephaly, macrosomia, and renal and cardiac abnormalities. Delivery occurred 
via spontaneous vaginal, operative vaginal, or cesarean delivery in 15/42 (36%), 
7/42 (16%), and 20/42 (48%), respectively. Median gestational age at delivery 
was 37 weeks and median birth weight was 3501 grams. Germline pathogenic vaiants 
had mutiple congenital consequences including polyhydramnios, renal and cardiac 
abnormalities, macrosomia, and macrocephaly on second and third trimester 
ultrasound. Elevated rates of operative delivery and neonatal complications were 
also noted. Understanding and defining a prenatal phenotype may improve prenatal 
prognostic counseling and outcomes.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63020
PMCID: PMC9839479
PMID: 36308388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors report no 
disclosures.