---
reference_id: "PMID:34731971"
title: "[Human herpes virus 8: molecules determinants of oncogenesis and modulation of the immune response]."
authors:
- Boulanger E
- Gessain A
journal: Virologie (Montrouge)
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1684/vir.2011.6723
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Human herpes virus 8: molecules determinants of oncogenesis and modulation of the immune response].
**Authors:** Boulanger E, Gessain A
**Journal:** Virologie (Montrouge) (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1684/vir.2011.6723](https://doi.org/10.1684/vir.2011.6723)

## Content

1. Virologie (Montrouge). 2006 Oct 1;10(5):369-382. doi: 10.1684/vir.2011.6723.

[Human herpes virus 8: molecules determinants of oncogenesis and modulation of 
the immune response].

[Article in French]

Boulanger E(1), Gessain A(1).

Author information:
(1)Unité d'épidémiologie et de physiopathologie des virus oncogènes, Département 
de virologie, Institut Pasteur, 28, rue du Docteur-Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15.

Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8), also called Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus 
(KSHV), is a human c2-herpesvirus, characterized by B lymphotropism and 
oncogenic properties. HHV8 is the etiological agent of Kaposi sarcoma, and of 
rare B cell lymphoproliferative disorders mostly observed in immunocompromised 
hosts (patients with AIDS, transplant organ recipients) such as primary effusion 
lymphoma and the plasma cell variant of multicentric Castleman disease. HHV8 
contains numerous open reading frames encoding homologs to cellular genes 
involved in cell growth and apoptosis control. Among these are 
signal-transducing transmembrane proteins, secreted cytokine and chemokine 
homologs, transcriptional modulators, cell cycle regulators and apoptosis 
inhibitors. Several immune modulation strategies are used by HHV8 to target both 
innate and adaptative immunity, including complement activity control, Th2 
chemotaxis, inhibition of type I and II interferons and B cell receptor 
signalling, and downregulation of class I histocompatibility antigens.

DOI: 10.1684/vir.2011.6723
PMID: 34731971