---
reference_id: "PMID:37057936"
title: "Mycobacterium Tuberculosis Infection in AECOPD Combined with Pulmonary Embolism: a Case Report."
authors:
- Bai JS
- Zhang Q
- Liu JX
- Wang JM
- Chen QC
- Zhou XY
- Liu RX
- Gao S
- Fu AS
- Ge YL
journal: Clin Lab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2022.220815
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycobacterium Tuberculosis Infection in AECOPD Combined with Pulmonary Embolism: a Case Report.
**Authors:** Bai JS, Zhang Q, Liu JX, Wang JM, Chen QC, Zhou XY, Liu RX, Gao S, Fu AS, Ge YL
**Journal:** Clin Lab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7754/Clin.Lab.2022.220815](https://doi.org/10.7754/Clin.Lab.2022.220815)

## Content

1. Clin Lab. 2023 Apr 1;69(4). doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2022.220815.

Mycobacterium Tuberculosis Infection in AECOPD Combined with Pulmonary Embolism: 
a Case Report.

Bai JS, Zhang Q, Liu JX, Wang JM, Chen QC, Zhou XY, Liu RX, Gao S, Fu AS, Ge YL.

BACKGROUND: Mycobacterium tuberculosis belongs to the group of mycobacteria, 
most of which can cause a delayed hypersensitivity reaction in the body and is a 
bacterium that causes tuberculosis. Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection often 
presents with symptoms of tuberculosis toxicity and rarely with respiratory 
distress. At the same time, chest imaging often shows an ill-defined solid 
shadow in the apical and posterior segments of the upper lobe and, less 
frequently, in the dorsal segment of the lower lobe, and less frequently a 
diffuse nodular shadow. We report a case of AECOPD combined with pulmonary 
embolism infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
METHODS: Bronchoscopy, Next-generation sequencing (NGS).
RESULTS: Antacid staining of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid suggested that a small 
amount of Mycobacterium antacid was visible. NGS was sent for examination and it 
suggested the presence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis with a sequence number of 5 
(reference range ≥ 0). Treatment such as bronchodilation and antituberculosis 
was given.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with dyspnea, it is crucial to find the causative agent 
and to promptly improve relevant examinations such as pulmonary arteriography 
and bronchoscopy, and if necessary, to make a definitive diagnosis by NGS.

DOI: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2022.220815
PMID: 37057936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]