---
reference_id: "PMID:34942119"
title: APC7 mediates ubiquitin signaling in constitutive heterochromatin in the developing mammalian brain.
authors:
- Ferguson CJ
- Urso O
- Bodrug T
- Gassaway BM
- Watson ER
- Prabu JR
- Lara-Gonzalez P
- Martinez-Chacin RC
- Wu DY
- Brigatti KW
- Puffenberger EG
- Taylor CM
- Haas-Givler B
- Jinks RN
- Strauss KA
- Desai A
- Gabel HW
- Gygi SP
- Schulman BA
- Brown NG
- Bonni A
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.11.031
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- "Antigens, CD"
- "Apc7 Subunit, Anaphase-Promoting Complex-Cyclosome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Behavior, Animal"
- "Brain/enzymology, growth & development"
- "Cadherins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Heterochromatin/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intellectual Disability/enzymology, pathology, physiopathology, psychology"
- Intelligence
- "Ki-67 Antigen/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mitosis
- Mutation
- "Neural Stem Cells/enzymology, pathology"
- Neurogenesis
- Proteolysis
- Signal Transduction
- Syndrome
- Ubiquitination
- Young Adult
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# APC7 mediates ubiquitin signaling in constitutive heterochromatin in the developing mammalian brain.
**Authors:** Ferguson CJ, Urso O, Bodrug T, Gassaway BM, Watson ER, Prabu JR, Lara-Gonzalez P, Martinez-Chacin RC, Wu DY, Brigatti KW, Puffenberger EG, Taylor CM, Haas-Givler B, Jinks RN, Strauss KA, Desai A, Gabel HW, Gygi SP, Schulman BA, Brown NG, Bonni A
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2021.11.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2021.11.031)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2022 Jan 6;82(1):90-105.e13. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.11.031. Epub
 2021 Dec 22.

APC7 mediates ubiquitin signaling in constitutive heterochromatin in the 
developing mammalian brain.

Ferguson CJ(1), Urso O(2), Bodrug T(3), Gassaway BM(4), Watson ER(5), Prabu 
JR(5), Lara-Gonzalez P(6), Martinez-Chacin RC(7), Wu DY(2), Brigatti KW(8), 
Puffenberger EG(8), Taylor CM(9), Haas-Givler B(9), Jinks RN(10), Strauss KA(8), 
Desai A(6), Gabel HW(2), Gygi SP(4), Schulman BA(5), Brown NG(7), Bonni A(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; 
Department of Pathology & Immunology, Neuropathology Division, 
Physician-Scientist Training Program, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 
63110, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02138, USA.
(5)Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Munich, Germany.
(6)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Division of Biological 
Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Ludwig 
Institute for Cancer Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(8)Clinic for Special Children, Strasburg, PA 17579, USA.
(9)Geisinger Autism & Developmental Medicine Institute, Lewisburg, PA 17837, 
USA.
(10)Department of Biology, Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, PA 17603, 
USA.
(11)Department of Neuroscience, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. 
Electronic address: bonni@wustl.edu.

Neurodevelopmental cognitive disorders provide insights into mechanisms of human 
brain development. Here, we report an intellectual disability syndrome caused by 
the loss of APC7, a core component of the E3 ubiquitin ligase anaphase promoting 
complex (APC). In mechanistic studies, we uncover a critical role for APC7 
during the recruitment and ubiquitination of APC substrates. In proteomics 
analyses of the brain from mice harboring the patient-specific APC7 mutation, we 
identify the chromatin-associated protein Ki-67 as an APC7-dependent substrate 
of the APC in neurons. Conditional knockout of the APC coactivator protein Cdh1, 
but not Cdc20, leads to the accumulation of Ki-67 protein in neurons in vivo, 
suggesting that APC7 is required for the function of Cdh1-APC in the brain. 
Deregulated neuronal Ki-67 upon APC7 loss localizes predominantly to 
constitutive heterochromatin. Our findings define an essential function for APC7 
and Cdh1-APC in neuronal heterochromatin regulation, with implications for 
understanding human brain development and disease.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.11.031
PMCID: PMC8741739
PMID: 34942119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests. A.B. is an employee of Roche. B.S. is on the scientific 
advisory board of BioTheryX and Interline Therapeutics, a shareholder of 
Interline Therapeutics, and a co-inventor of intellectual property licensed to 
Cinsano.