---
reference_id: "PMID:21617532"
title: Performance of enhanced liver fibrosis plasma markers in asymptomatic individuals with ZZ α1-antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Janciauskiene S
- Wallmark A
- Piitulainen E
- Köhnlein T
- Welte T
- Sveger T
journal: Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/MEG.0b013e328347daaf
keywords:
- Adult
- Apoptosis
- Biomarkers/blood
- C-Reactive Protein/metabolism
- Collagen Type III/blood
- Epidemiologic Methods
- Female
- Humans
- Hyaluronic Acid/blood
- Liver/pathology
- "Liver Cirrhosis/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
- Male
- Necrosis
- Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase-1/blood
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Performance of enhanced liver fibrosis plasma markers in asymptomatic individuals with ZZ α1-antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Janciauskiene S, Wallmark A, Piitulainen E, Köhnlein T, Welte T, Sveger T
**Journal:** Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MEG.0b013e328347daaf](https://doi.org/10.1097/MEG.0b013e328347daaf)

## Content

1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Aug;23(8):716-20. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0b013e328347daaf.

Performance of enhanced liver fibrosis plasma markers in asymptomatic
individuals with ZZ α1-antitrypsin deficiency.

Janciauskiene S(1), Wallmark A, Piitulainen E, Köhnlein T, Welte T, Sveger T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. annarosa.floreani@unipd.it

OBJECTIVES: Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a common genetic cause of
chronic liver disease. According to retrospective studies, up to 25% of those
with homozygous ZZ (Glu 342 to Lys) AATD suffer from liver cirrhosis and/or
liver cancer in late adulthood. We hypothesized that the plasma markers for
liver fibrosis, necrosis, and apoptosis may identify AATD individuals at higher
risk for liver diseases.
METHODS: The study cohort included 52 clinically healthy ZZ AATD individuals of
34 years of age, identified in the Swedish neonatal screening of 1972-1974, and
81 age-matched controls with normal MM AAT variant. We analyzed plasma levels of
the enhanced liver fibrosis (ELF) panel, including plasma tissue inhibitor of
metalloprotease-1, amino-terminal propeptide of type III collagen and hyaluronic
acid (HA), and the M30 and M65 antigens, markers for apoptosis/necrosis.
RESULTS: Higher levels of tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease-1 (52%, P<0.001),
amino-terminal propeptide of type III collagen (12%, P<0.05), HA (17% not
significant), and M65 (13.4%, P=0.043) were found in ZZ than in MM patients. In
the ZZ group, plasma levels of AAT correlated with M65 (P<0.01) and with HA
(P<0.05). On the basis of the ELF panel, M30 and M65, a logistic regression
model enabled us to correctly classify 81.2% of the originally grouped ZZ and MM
cases with a sensitivity of 73.1% and a specificity of 86.4%.
CONCLUSION: The ELF markers are associated with ZZ AATD at early adulthood, and
can be considered as a useful tool to identify ZZ cases at an increased risk of
developing liver diseases later in life.

DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0b013e328347daaf
PMID: 21617532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
