---
reference_id: "PMID:35571681"
title: "Autoimmune Retinopathy, Testing, and Its Controversies."
authors:
- Roisman L
- Rossetto JD
- Goldhardt R
journal: Curr Ophthalmol Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s40135-021-00276-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Retinopathy, Testing, and Its Controversies.
**Authors:** Roisman L, Rossetto JD, Goldhardt R
**Journal:** Curr Ophthalmol Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40135-021-00276-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40135-021-00276-y)

## Content

1. Curr Ophthalmol Rep. 2021 Dec;9(4):178-183. doi: 10.1007/s40135-021-00276-y. 
Epub 2021 Oct 8.

Autoimmune Retinopathy, Testing, and Its Controversies.

Roisman L(1)(2), Rossetto JD(1)(3), Goldhardt R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Federal University of São 
Paulo-UNIFESP/EPM.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology - Hospital Federal da Lagoa - Rio de Janeiro.
(3)Instituto de Puericultura e Pediatria Martagão Gesteira - Centro de Ciências 
da Saúde - Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this revision is to sumarize the most 
important clinical features of the autoimune retinopathies (AIRs).
RECENT FINDINGS: AIRs are a group of inflammatory conditions affecting the 
retina characterized by progressive unexplained visual loss, abnormalities and 
contraction in visual fields, photoreceptor and electroretinographic 
dysfunction, and the presence of circulating anti-retinal antibodies. The 
pathogenesis of AIR remains unclear and various antiretinal antibodies have been 
associated to the disease. The diagnosis of AIR is based on a particular 
clinical presentation along with the detection of serum antiretinal antibodies. 
Numerous anti-inflammatory therapeutic alternatives have been described for the 
treatment of AIR, nevertheless there is no consensus on treatment protocol.
SUMMARY: Because of its association with different types of malignant tumors, 
the early diagnosis, multi-disciplinary approach and prompt treatment should be 
warranted.

DOI: 10.1007/s40135-021-00276-y
PMCID: PMC9093165
PMID: 35571681

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Luiz Roisman and Julia 
Dutra Rossetto each declare no potential conflicts of interest.