---
reference_id: "PMID:38893152"
title: Prognostic Impact of TERT Promoter Mutations in Adult-Type Diffuse Gliomas Based on WHO2021 Criteria.
authors:
- Lee Y
- Park CK
- Park SH
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16112032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic Impact of TERT Promoter Mutations in Adult-Type Diffuse Gliomas Based on WHO2021 Criteria.
**Authors:** Lee Y, Park CK, Park SH
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16112032](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16112032)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 May 27;16(11):2032. doi: 10.3390/cancers16112032.

Prognostic Impact of TERT Promoter Mutations in Adult-Type Diffuse Gliomas Based 
on WHO2021 Criteria.

Lee Y(1), Park CK(2), Park SH(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hospital Pathology, St. Vincent's Hospital, The Catholic 
University of Korea College of Medicine, 93, Jungbu-daero, Paldal-gu, Suwon 
16247, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
103 Deahak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 03080, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 103 
Deahak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 03080, Republic of Korea.
(4)Neuroscience Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 103 
Deahak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 03080, Republic of Korea.

Mutation in the telomerase reverse transcriptase promoter (TERTp )is commonly 
observed in various malignancies, such as central nervous system (CNS) tumors, 
malignant melanoma, bladder cancer, and thyroid carcinoma. These mutations are 
recognized as significant poor prognostic factors for these tumors. In this 
investigation, a total of 528 cases of adult-type diffuse gliomas diagnosed at a 
single institution were reclassified according to the 2021 WHO classifications 
of CNS tumors, 5th edition (WHO2021). The study analyzed clinicopathological and 
genetic features, including TERTp mutations in each tumor. The impact of known 
prognostic factors on patient outcomes was analyzed through Kaplan-Meier 
survival and Cox regression analysis. TERTp mutations were predominantly 
identified in 94.1% of oligodendrogliomas (ODG), followed by 66.3% in 
glioblastoma, IDH-wildtype (GBM-IDHwt), and 9.2% of astrocytomas, IDH-mutant 
(A-IDHm). When considering A-IDHm and GBM as astrocytic tumors (Group 1) and 
ODGs (Group 2), TERTp mutations emerged as a significant adverse prognostic 
factor (p = 0.013) in Group 1. However, within each GBM-IDHwt and A-IDHm, the 
presence of TERTp mutations did not significantly impact patient prognosis (p = 
0.215 and 0.268, respectively). Due to the high frequency of TERTp mutations in 
Group 2 (ODG) and their consistent prolonged survival, a statistical analysis to 
evaluate their impact on overall survival was deemed impractical. When 
considering MGMTp status, the combined TERTp-mutated and MGMTp-unmethylated 
group exhibited the worst prognosis in OS (p = 0.018) and PFS (p = 0.034) of 
GBM. This study confirmed that the classification of tumors according to the 
WHO2021 criteria effectively reflected prognosis. Both uni- and multivariate 
analyses in GBM, age, MGMTp methylation, and CDKN2A/B homozygous deletion were 
statistically significant prognostic factors while in univariate analysis in 
A-IDHm, grade 4, the Ki-67 index and MYCN amplifications were statistically 
significant prognostic factors. This study suggests that it is important to 
classify and manage tumors based on their genetic characteristics in adult-type 
diffuse gliomas.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16112032
PMCID: PMC11171308
PMID: 38893152

Conflict of interest statement: The authors do not have any conflicts of 
interest to declare.