---
reference_id: "PMID:15557430"
title: A novel mutation in the ELOVL4 gene causes autosomal dominant Stargardt-like macular dystrophy.
authors:
- Maugeri A
- Meire F
- Hoyng CB
- Vink C
- Van Regemorter N
- Karan G
- Yang Z
- Cremers FP
- Zhang K
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.04-0078
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Atrophy
- "Blotting, Western"
- Cell Line
- "Codon, Terminator"
- Cytoplasm/metabolism
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- Humans
- Luminescent Proteins
- Macula Lutea/pathology
- "Macular Degeneration/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Tissue Distribution
- Transfection
- Tyrosine
- Visual Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation in the ELOVL4 gene causes autosomal dominant Stargardt-like macular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Maugeri A, Meire F, Hoyng CB, Vink C, Van Regemorter N, Karan G, Yang Z, Cremers FP, Zhang K
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.04-0078](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.04-0078)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Dec;45(12):4263-7. doi: 10.1167/iovs.04-0078.

A novel mutation in the ELOVL4 gene causes autosomal dominant Stargardt-like 
macular dystrophy.

Maugeri A(1), Meire F, Hoyng CB, Vink C, Van Regemorter N, Karan G, Yang Z, 
Cremers FP, Zhang K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Geert Grooteplein 10, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
a.maugeri@antrg.umcn.nl

PURPOSE: To conduct clinical and genetic studies in a European family with 
autosomal dominant Stargardt-like macular dystrophy (adSTGD-like MD) and to 
investigate the functional consequences of a novel ELOVL4 mutation.
METHODS: Ophthalmic examination and mutation screening by direct sequencing of 
the ELOVL4 gene was performed in two affected individuals. Wild-type and mutant 
ELOVL4 genes were expressed as enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) fusion 
proteins in transient transfection in NIH-3T3 and HEK293 cells. To determine the 
subcellular localization of ELOVL4, an endoplasmic-reticulum (ER)-specific 
marker for pDsRed2-ER was cotransfected with ELOVL4 constructs. Transfected 
cells were viewed by confocal microscopy. Western blot analysis was performed to 
assess protein expression using an anti-GFP antibody.
RESULTS: Affected patients exhibited macular atrophy with surrounding flecks 
characteristic of adSTGD-like MD. A novel ELOVL4 p.Tyr270X mutation was detected 
in affected individuals. In cell-transfection studies, wild-type ELOVL4 
localized preferentially to the ER. In contrast, the mutant protein appeared to 
be mislocalized within transfected cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In a European family with adSTGD-like MD, a novel ELOVL4 mutation 
was found to underlie the disorder. Transfection studies indicated that, unlike 
wild-type ELOVL4, the mutant protein does not localize to the ER but rather 
appears to be sequestered elsewhere in an aggregated pattern in the cytoplasm. 
Further analysis of the function of normal and mutant ELOVL4 will provide 
insight into the mechanism of macular degeneration.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.04-0078
PMID: 15557430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]