---
reference_id: "PMID:38535567"
title: "Inactivated Poliovirus Vaccine: Recent Developments and the Tortuous Path to Global Acceptance."
authors:
- Sutter RW
- Eisenhawer M
- Molodecky NA
- Verma H
- Okayasu H
journal: Pathogens
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/pathogens13030224
keywords:
- Humans
- Disease Eradication
- Global Health
- "Poliomyelitis/prevention & control, history, immunology"
- Poliovirus/immunology
- "Poliovirus Vaccine, Inactivated/immunology, history, administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inactivated Poliovirus Vaccine: Recent Developments and the Tortuous Path to Global Acceptance.
**Authors:** Sutter RW, Eisenhawer M, Molodecky NA, Verma H, Okayasu H
**Journal:** Pathogens (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pathogens13030224](https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens13030224)

## Content

1. Pathogens. 2024 Mar 4;13(3):224. doi: 10.3390/pathogens13030224.

Inactivated Poliovirus Vaccine: Recent Developments and the Tortuous Path to 
Global Acceptance.

Sutter RW(1), Eisenhawer M(2), Molodecky NA(3), Verma H(2), Okayasu H(4).

Author information:
(1)Tamayo Federal Solutions LLC, Virginia Beach, VA 23452, USA.
(2)Polio Eradication Department, World Health Organization, 1211 Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(3)Polio Surge Capacity Support Program, The Task Force for Global Health, Inc., 
Decatur, GE 30030, USA.
(4)Division of Healthy Environments and Population, Regional Office for the 
Western Pacific, World Health Organization, Manila 1000, Philippines.

Inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV), available since 1955, became the first 
vaccine to be used to protect against poliomyelitis. While the immunogenicity of 
IPV to prevent paralytic poliomyelitis continues to be irrefutable, its 
requirement for strong containment (due to large quantities of live virus used 
in the manufacturing process), perceived lack of ability to induce intestinal 
mucosal immunity, high cost and increased complexity to administer compared to 
oral polio vaccine (OPV), have limited its use in the global efforts to 
eradicate poliomyelitis. In order to harvest the full potential of IPV, a 
program of work has been carried out by the Global Polio Eradication Initiative 
(GPEI) over the past two decades that has focused on: (1) increasing the 
scientific knowledge base of IPV; (2) translating new insights and evidence into 
programmatic action; (3) expanding the IPV manufacturing infrastructure for 
global demand; and (4) continuing to pursue an ambitious research program to 
develop more immunogenic and safer-to-produce vaccines. While the knowledge base 
of IPV continues to expand, further research and product development are 
necessary to ensure that the program priorities are met (e.g., non-infectious 
production through virus-like particles, non-transmissible vaccine inducing 
humoral and intestinal mucosal immunity and new methods for house-to-house 
administration through micro-needle patches and jet injectors), the discussions 
have largely moved from whether to how to use this vaccine most effectively. In 
this review, we summarize recent developments on expanding the science base of 
IPV and provide insight into policy development and the expansion of IPV 
manufacturing and production, and finally we provide an update on the current 
priorities.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens13030224
PMCID: PMC10974833
PMID: 38535567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Roland W. Sutter works as a consultant in Tamayo 
Federal Solutions LLC, and Natalia A. Molodecky works as a Senior Epidemiologist 
Consultant at the Task Force for Global Health, Inc. The other authors declare 
no conflict of interest.