---
reference_id: "PMID:30472739"
title: Reduced pain thresholds and signs of sensitization in women with persistent pelvic pain and suspected endometriosis.
authors:
- Grundström H
- Gerdle B
- Alehagen S
- Berterö C
- Arendt-Nielsen L
- Kjølhede P
journal: Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/aogs.13508
keywords:
- Adult
- Anxiety/etiology
- "Endometriosis/complications, psychology"
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Pain Measurement
- Pain Threshold
- "Pelvic Pain/etiology, psychology"
- Quality of Life/psychology
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced pain thresholds and signs of sensitization in women with persistent pelvic pain and suspected endometriosis.
**Authors:** Grundström H, Gerdle B, Alehagen S, Berterö C, Arendt-Nielsen L, Kjølhede P
**Journal:** Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aogs.13508](https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.13508)

## Content

1. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2019 Mar;98(3):327-336. doi: 10.1111/aogs.13508.
Epub  2018 Dec 30.

Reduced pain thresholds and signs of sensitization in women with persistent
pelvic pain and suspected endometriosis.

Grundström H(1)(2), Gerdle B(3), Alehagen S(2), Berterö C(2), Arendt-Nielsen
L(4), Kjølhede P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Linköping University, Norrköping,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical and Health Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping,
Sweden.
(3)Pain and Rehabilitation Center and Department of Medical and Health Sciences,
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(4)Center for Sensory-Motor Interactions, Department of Health Science and
Technology, Faculty of Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Endometriosis is a gynecological disorder that may cause
considerable pelvic pain in women of fertile age. Determining pain mechanisms is
necessary in order to optimize the treatment of the disease. The objective of
the study was to evaluate pain thresholds in women with persistent pelvic pain
with and without confirmed endometriosis, and healthy, unaffected controls, and
analyze how pain thresholds in these cohorts related to duration of pelvic pain,
quality of life, and symptoms of anxiety and depression.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Pain thresholds for heat, cold and pressure were assessed
with quantitative sensory testing on six locations on a reference group of 55
healthy women and on 37 women with persistent pelvic pain who had been admitted
for diagnostic laparoscopy on the suspicion of endometriosis. Validated
instruments were applied to assess quality of life and symptoms of anxiety and
depression. Data were analyzed by means of uni- and multivariate analysis of
variance and Spearman's rank-order correlation.
RESULTS: The women with persistent pelvic pain had significantly lower pain
thresholds compared with the reference women. In the women with pain, no
differences were observed in pain thresholds between women with (n = 13) and
women without (n = 24) biopsy-proven endometriosis. The duration of pelvic pain
correlated significantly positively with reduced pain thresholds, ie, the longer
the duration, the more sensitization. In the persistent pelvic pain group, pain
thresholds for heat correlated significantly with the Short Form Health Survey
36 dimension of bodily pain, and thresholds for cold correlated with Short Form
Health Survey 36 bodily pain and with symptoms of depression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed widespread alterations in pain thresholds in
women with persistent pelvic pain that are indicative of central sensitization
and a time-dependent correlation. Women with pelvic pain and suspicion of
endometriosis should probably be treated more thoroughly to prevent or at least
minimize the concomitant development of central sensitization.

© 2018 Nordic Federation of Societies of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

DOI: 10.1111/aogs.13508
PMID: 30472739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
