---
reference_id: "PMID:37600660"
title: "HMG-boxes, ribosomopathies and neurodegenerative disease."
authors:
- Moss T
- LeDoux MS
- Crane-Robinson C
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1225832
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HMG-boxes, ribosomopathies and neurodegenerative disease.
**Authors:** Moss T, LeDoux MS, Crane-Robinson C
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1225832](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1225832)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Aug 3;14:1225832. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1225832.
eCollection  2023.

HMG-boxes, ribosomopathies and neurodegenerative disease.

Moss T(1)(2), LeDoux MS(3)(4), Crane-Robinson C(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Growth and Development, St-Patrick Research Group in Basic 
Oncology, Cancer Division of the Quebec University Hospital Research Centre, 
Québec, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Faculty 
of Medicine, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, United States.
(4)Veracity Neuroscience LLC, Memphis, TN, United States.
(5)Biophysics Laboratories, School of Biology, University of Portsmouth, 
Portsmouth, United Kingdom.

The UBTF E210K neuroregression syndrome is a predominantly neurological disorder 
caused by recurrent de novo dominant variants in Upstream Binding Factor, that 
is, essential for transcription of the ribosomal RNA genes. This unusual form of 
ribosomopathy is characterized by a slow decline in cognition, behavior, and 
sensorimotor functioning during the critical period of development. UBTF (or 
UBF) is a multi-HMGB-box protein that acts both as an epigenetic factor to 
establish "open" chromatin on the ribosomal genes and as a basal transcription 
factor in their RNA Polymerase I transcription. Here we review the possible 
mechanistic connections between the UBTF variants, ribosomal RNA gene 
transcription and the neuroregression syndrome, and suggest that DNA topology 
may play an important role.

Copyright © 2023 Moss, LeDoux and Crane-Robinson.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1225832
PMCID: PMC10435976
PMID: 37600660

Conflict of interest statement: Author ML was employed by company Veracity 
Neuroscience LLC. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted 
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.