---
reference_id: "PMID:23700391"
title: "Gene expression classification of colon cancer into molecular subtypes: characterization, validation, and prognostic value."
authors:
- Marisa L
- de Reyniès A
- Duval A
- Selves J
- Gaub MP
- Vescovo L
- Etienne-Grimaldi MC
- Schiappa R
- Guenot D
- Ayadi M
- Kirzin S
- Chazal M
- Fléjou JF
- Benchimol D
- Berger A
- Lagarde A
- Pencreach E
- Piard F
- Elias D
- Parc Y
- Olschwang S
- Milano G
- Laurent-Puig P
- Boige V
journal: PLoS Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001453
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene expression classification of colon cancer into molecular subtypes: characterization, validation, and prognostic value.
**Authors:** Marisa L, de Reyniès A, Duval A, Selves J, Gaub MP, Vescovo L, Etienne-Grimaldi MC, Schiappa R, Guenot D, Ayadi M, Kirzin S, Chazal M, Fléjou JF, Benchimol D, Berger A, Lagarde A, Pencreach E, Piard F, Elias D, Parc Y, Olschwang S, Milano G, Laurent-Puig P, Boige V
**Journal:** PLoS Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pmed.1001453](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001453)

## Content

1. PLoS Med. 2013;10(5):e1001453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001453. Epub 2013
May  21.

Gene expression classification of colon cancer into molecular subtypes: 
characterization, validation, and prognostic value.

Marisa L(1), de Reyniès A, Duval A, Selves J, Gaub MP, Vescovo L, 
Etienne-Grimaldi MC, Schiappa R, Guenot D, Ayadi M, Kirzin S, Chazal M, Fléjou 
JF, Benchimol D, Berger A, Lagarde A, Pencreach E, Piard F, Elias D, Parc Y, 
Olschwang S, Milano G, Laurent-Puig P, Boige V.

Author information:
(1)Cartes d'Identité des Tumeurs Program, Ligue Nationale Contre Cancer, Paris, 
France.

BACKGROUND: Colon cancer (CC) pathological staging fails to accurately predict 
recurrence, and to date, no gene expression signature has proven reliable for 
prognosis stratification in clinical practice, perhaps because CC is a 
heterogeneous disease. The aim of this study was to establish a comprehensive 
molecular classification of CC based on mRNA expression profile analyses.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Fresh-frozen primary tumor samples from a large 
multicenter cohort of 750 patients with stage I to IV CC who underwent surgery 
between 1987 and 2007 in seven centers were characterized for common DNA 
alterations, including BRAF, KRAS, and TP53 mutations, CpG island methylator 
phenotype, mismatch repair status, and chromosomal instability status, and were 
screened with whole genome and transcriptome arrays. 566 samples fulfilled RNA 
quality requirements. Unsupervised consensus hierarchical clustering applied to 
gene expression data from a discovery subset of 443 CC samples identified six 
molecular subtypes. These subtypes were associated with distinct 
clinicopathological characteristics, molecular alterations, specific enrichments 
of supervised gene expression signatures (stem cell phenotype-like, normal-like, 
serrated CC phenotype-like), and deregulated signaling pathways. Based on their 
main biological characteristics, we distinguished a deficient mismatch repair 
subtype, a KRAS mutant subtype, a cancer stem cell subtype, and three 
chromosomal instability subtypes, including one associated with down-regulated 
immune pathways, one with up-regulation of the Wnt pathway, and one displaying a 
normal-like gene expression profile. The classification was validated in the 
remaining 123 samples plus an independent set of 1,058 CC samples, including 
eight public datasets. Furthermore, prognosis was analyzed in the subset of 
stage II-III CC samples. The subtypes C4 and C6, but not the subtypes C1, C2, 
C3, and C5, were independently associated with shorter relapse-free survival, 
even after adjusting for age, sex, stage, and the emerging prognostic classifier 
Oncotype DX Colon Cancer Assay recurrence score (hazard ratio 1.5, 95% CI 
1.1-2.1, p = 0.0097). However, a limitation of this study is that information on 
tumor grade and number of nodes examined was not available.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe the first, to our knowledge, robust transcriptome-based 
classification of CC that improves the current disease stratification based on 
clinicopathological variables and common DNA markers. The biological relevance 
of these subtypes is illustrated by significant differences in prognosis. This 
analysis provides possibilities for improving prognostic models and therapeutic 
strategies. In conclusion, we report a new classification of CC into six 
molecular subtypes that arise through distinct biological pathways.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001453
PMCID: PMC3660251
PMID: 23700391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YP gave expert advice to Coloplast (France) for 
less than 1,000 euros last year. The other authors declare that no competing 
interests exist.