---
reference_id: "PMID:8175802"
title: Mutation in the COL2A1 gene in a patient with hypochondrogenesis. Expression of mutated COL2A1 gene is accompanied by expression of genes for type I procollagen in chondrocytes.
authors:
- Freisinger P
- Ala-Kokko L
- LeGuellec D
- Franc S
- Bouvier R
- Ritvaniemi P
- Prockop DJ
- Bonaventure J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation in the COL2A1 gene in a patient with hypochondrogenesis. Expression of mutated COL2A1 gene is accompanied by expression of genes for type I procollagen in chondrocytes.
**Authors:** Freisinger P, Ala-Kokko L, LeGuellec D, Franc S, Bouvier R, Ritvaniemi P, Prockop DJ, Bonaventure J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 May 6;269(18):13663-9.

Mutation in the COL2A1 gene in a patient with hypochondrogenesis. Expression of 
mutated COL2A1 gene is accompanied by expression of genes for type I procollagen 
in chondrocytes.

Freisinger P(1), Ala-Kokko L, LeGuellec D, Franc S, Bouvier R, Ritvaniemi P, 
Prockop DJ, Bonaventure J.

Author information:
(1)CNRS URA 584 Clinique M. Lamy, Hopital Necker, Paris, France.

A new dominant mutation in the COL2A1 gene was found in a 38-week-old fetus with 
hypochondrogenesis. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis was used to analyze 
all 44 exons coding for the triple-helical domain of COL2A1 gene and the 
corresponding exon-intron boundaries. The technique detected a new sequence 
variation in exon 35. Sequencing of exon 35 demonstrated a single base mutation 
that converted the codon for glycine at position 604 to a codon for alanine. 
Electrophoresis of pepsin-digested collagen extracted from the diseased 
cartilage showed a doublet band of the alpha 1(II) chain of type II collagen and 
the presence of alpha 1(I) and alpha 2(I) chains of type I collagen. 
Two-dimensional analysis of cyanogen bromide peptides from the type II collagen 
revealed post-translational overmodification of peptides CB12, CB11, CB8, and 
CB10.5, whereas peptide CB9.7 migrated normally. Microscopic examination of 
cartilage showed that the mutation altered the organization of the growth plate. 
Also, articular chondrocytes contained large cisternae of rough endoplasmic 
reticulum. The density of the extracellular matrix was reduced, and the 
intensity of the staining with an antibody to type II collagen was diminished. 
In contrast, a significant staining with an antibody to type I collagen was 
observed. In situ hybridization with cRNA probes revealed a significant level of 
alpha 1(I) mRNA in the cytoplasm of the patient's chondrocytes. The signal for 
alpha 1(II) mRNA was about the same in control samples. The results indicated, 
therefore, that the genes for both type I and type II procollagens were 
simultaneously expressed in chondrocytes from the patient.

PMID: 8175802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]