---
reference_id: "PMID:27641986"
title: "Host - hepatitis C viral interactions: The role of genetics."
authors:
- Heim MH
- Bochud PY
- George J
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2016.07.037
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Disease Progression
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Variation
- "Hepacivirus/genetics, immunology"
- "Hepatitis C/genetics, immunology, virology"
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/genetics, immunology, virology"
- "Host-Pathogen Interactions/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- Interferons
- "Interleukins/genetics, immunology"
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- Interferon Lambda
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Host - hepatitis C viral interactions: The role of genetics.
**Authors:** Heim MH, Bochud PY, George J
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2016.07.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2016.07.037)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2016 Oct;65(1 Suppl):S22-S32. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2016.07.037.

Host - hepatitis C viral interactions: The role of genetics.

Heim MH(1), Bochud PY(2), George J(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Basel,
Petersgraben 4, 4031 Basel, Switzerland; Department of Biomedicine, University
of Basel, Hebelstrasse 20, 4031 Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address:
Markus.heim@unibas.ch.
(2)Infectious Diseases Service, University Hospital and University of Lausanne,
Rue du Bugnon 46, 1011 Lausanne-CHUV, Switzerland. Electronic address:
Pierre-Yves.Bochud@chuv.ch.
(3)Storr Liver Centre, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, Westmead
Hospital and University of Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic address:
jacob.george@sydney.edu.au.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major cause of chronic viral hepatitis that can
lead to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Only a minority of patients can
clear the virus spontaneously. Elimination of HCV during acute infection
correlates with a rapid induction of innate, especially interferon (IFN)-induced
genes, and a delayed induction of adaptive immune responses. There is a strong
association between genetic variants in the IFNλ (IL28B) locus with the rate of
spontaneous clearance. Individuals with the ancestral IFNλ4 allele capable of
producing a fully active IFNλ4 are paradoxically not able to clear HCV in the
acute phase and develop chronic hepatitis C (CHC) with more than 90%
probability. In the chronic phase of HCV infection, the wild-type IFNλ4 genotype
is strongly associated with an induction of hundreds of classical type I/type
III IFN stimulated genes in hepatocytes. However, the activation of the
endogenous IFN system in the liver is ineffective in clearing HCV, and is even
associated with impaired therapeutic responses to pegylated (Peg)IFNα containing
treatments. While the role of genetic variation in the IFNλ locus to the outcome
of CHC treatment has declined, it is clear that variation not only at this
locus, but also at other loci, modulate clinically important liver phenotypes,
including inflammation, fibrosis progression and the development of
hepatocellular cancer. In this review, we summarize current knowledge about the
role of genetics in the host response to viral hepatitis and the potential
future evolution of knowledge in understanding host-viral interactions.

Copyright © 2016 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2016.07.037
PMID: 27641986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
