---
reference_id: "PMID:37395273"
title: Net39 protects muscle nuclei from mechanical stress during the pathogenesis of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Ramirez-Martinez A
- Chen K
- McAnally JR
- Cai C
- Durbacz MZ
- Chemello F
- Wang Z
- Xu L
- Bassel-Duby R
- Liu N
- Olson EN
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/JCI163333
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Stress, Mechanical"
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss/metabolism"
- Cell Nucleus/metabolism
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- Nuclear Envelope/metabolism
- Lamin Type A/genetics
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Net39 protects muscle nuclei from mechanical stress during the pathogenesis of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Ramirez-Martinez A, Chen K, McAnally JR, Cai C, Durbacz MZ, Chemello F, Wang Z, Xu L, Bassel-Duby R, Liu N, Olson EN
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI163333](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI163333)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2023 Jul 3;133(13):e163333. doi: 10.1172/JCI163333.

Net39 protects muscle nuclei from mechanical stress during the pathogenesis of 
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.

Zhang Y(1)(2)(3), Ramirez-Martinez A(1)(2)(3), Chen K(4), McAnally JR(1)(2)(3), 
Cai C(5), Durbacz MZ(1)(2)(3), Chemello F(1)(2)(3), Wang Z(1)(2)(3), Xu L(4), 
Bassel-Duby R(1)(2)(3), Liu N(1)(2)(3), Olson EN(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology.
(2)Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine.
(3)Senator Paul D. Wellstone Muscular Dystrophy Cooperative Research Center.
(4)Quantitative Biomedical Research Center, Peter O'Donnell Jr. School of Public 
Health, and.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Texas (UT) Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Mutations in genes encoding nuclear envelope proteins lead to diseases known as 
nuclear envelopathies, characterized by skeletal muscle and heart abnormalities, 
such as Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD). The tissue-specific role of 
the nuclear envelope in the etiology of these diseases has not been extensively 
explored. We previously showed that global deletion of the muscle-specific 
nuclear envelope protein NET39 in mice leads to neonatal lethality due to 
skeletal muscle dysfunction. To study the potential role of the Net39 gene in 
adulthood, we generated a muscle-specific conditional knockout (cKO) of Net39 in 
mice. cKO mice recapitulated key skeletal muscle features of EDMD, including 
muscle wasting, impaired muscle contractility, abnormal myonuclear morphology, 
and DNA damage. The loss of Net39 rendered myoblasts hypersensitive to 
mechanical stretch, resulting in stretch-induced DNA damage. Net39 was 
downregulated in a mouse model of congenital myopathy, and restoration of Net39 
expression through AAV gene delivery extended life span and ameliorated muscle 
abnormalities. These findings establish NET39 as a direct contributor to the 
pathogenesis of EDMD that acts by protecting against mechanical stress and DNA 
damage.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI163333
PMCID: PMC10313361
PMID: 37395273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]