---
reference_id: "PMID:41136907"
title: "Longitudinal characterization of clinical, developmental, and behavioral phenotypes in 101 children and adults with FOXG1 syndrome."
authors:
- Brimble E
- Ventola P
- Blomenberg E
- Frahlich K
- Kuhathaas K
- Hart CE
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Olson HE
- Marsh ED
- Ayalon G
journal: J Neurodev Disord
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s11689-025-09653-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longitudinal characterization of clinical, developmental, and behavioral phenotypes in 101 children and adults with FOXG1 syndrome.
**Authors:** Brimble E, Ventola P, Blomenberg E, Frahlich K, Kuhathaas K, Hart CE, Bahi-Buisson N, Olson HE, Marsh ED, Ayalon G
**Journal:** J Neurodev Disord (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s11689-025-09653-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s11689-025-09653-1)

## Content

1. J Neurodev Disord. 2025 Oct 24;17(1):64. doi: 10.1186/s11689-025-09653-1.

Longitudinal characterization of clinical, developmental, and behavioral
phenotypes in 101 children and adults with FOXG1 syndrome.

Brimble E(1)(2), Ventola P(3), Blomenberg E(4), Frahlich K(4), Kuhathaas K(5),
Hart CE(6), Bahi-Buisson N(7), Olson HE(8), Marsh ED(9), Ayalon G(5).

Author information:
(1)FOXG1 Research Foundation, Long Island, NY, USA. elli@foxg1research.org.
(2)Citizen Health, San Francisco, CA, USA. elli@foxg1research.org.
(3)Cogstate Ltd, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Citizen Health, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)FOXG1 Research Foundation, Long Island, NY, USA.
(6)Lilly Institute of Genetic Medicine, Eli Lilly and Company, CA, San Diego,
USA.
(7)Pediatric Neurology, Necker Enfants Malades, University Hospital Imagine
Institute, Paris, France.
(8)Division of Epilepsy and Clinical Neurophysiology and Epilepsy Genetics
Program, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Division of Child Neurology, Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics,
Perelman School of Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: FOXG1 syndrome is a severe genetic neurodevelopmental disorder
characterized by intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD), postnatal
microcephaly, epilepsy, and movement disorder. With the advent of molecular
therapies, establishing the natural history of FOXG1 syndrome is critical to
enable clinical trial readiness. However, traditional study designs are
challenging to implement for rare disorders without significant burden to
participants.
METHODS: The study population included 101 children and adults with (likely)
pathogenic variants in or involving FOXG1 (ages 0.4 - 34.8 years). Participant
medical records underwent systematic annotation and harmonization of recorded
clinical phenotypes, interventions, and outcomes through use of a
patient-centric real-world data (RWD) platform. Retrospective medical record
data were paired with prospective administration of validated measures of
development and behavior, including the Vineland-3, the Aberrant Behavior
Checklist, and the Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire. Descriptive and
inferential statistics were employed to characterize longitudinal phenotypes and
to explore genotype-phenotype correlations.
RESULTS: Through systematic evaluation of 101 people with FOXG1 syndrome, we
generated a robust dataset encompassing >40,000 annotated clinical terminology
concepts that represent >770 cumulative patient data years. Core clinical
phenotypes include IDD, gastrointestinal disorders, strabismus, epilepsy,
movement disorders, and sleep problems. The FOXG1 syndrome behavioral phenotype
is characterized by irritability, including aggressive behaviors, stereotypies,
social withdrawal, and lethargy; in those with missense variants, features of
autism spectrum disorders are also reported. Data derived from both medical
records and validated measures confirm and expand upon previously described
genotype-phenotype correlations, whereby truncating variants are associated with
greater limitations across motor and communication domains, as well as increased
frequency of core FOXG1 syndrome phenotypes. Further, individuals with
truncating variants had higher scores on a composite measure of FOXG1 syndrome
severity, which persists when modeled longitudinally. Employing the same
composite measure, we demonstrate that FOXG1 syndrome is a static encephalopathy
without evidence of neurodegeneration.
CONCLUSIONS: By combining retrospective RWD with prospective survey
administration in a large sample population, we establish the natural history of
FOXG1 syndrome and highlight candidate clinical endpoints for use in clinical
trials, including quantitative evaluations of communication and movement
disorders.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material
available at 10.1186/s11689-025-09653-1.

DOI: 10.1186/s11689-025-09653-1
PMCID: PMC12551263
PMID: 41136907

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: Caregivers and/or legal guardians of study participants provided
broad consent to share de-identified data for research. This study received
determinations of exemption through a central institutional review board via
exemption categories 2, 7, and 8 of the revised Common Rule. Consent for
publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: Elise Brimble, Elizabeth
Blomenberg, and Kelsey Frahlich are current employees of Citizen Health with
vested and unvested stock options. Kopika Kuhathaas and Gai Ayalon are current
employees of FOXG1 Research Foundation.
