---
reference_id: PMID:26004339
title: "Cushing's syndrome."
authors:
- Lacroix A
- Feelders RA
- Stratakis CA
- Nieman LK
journal: Lancet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61375-1
keywords:
- "ACTH Syndrome, Ectopic/complications"
- "Adrenal Hyperplasia, Congenital/complications"
- Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/metabolism
- "Cushing Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System/physiopathology
- Pituitary-Adrenal System/physiopathology
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cushing's syndrome.
**Authors:** Lacroix A, Feelders RA, Stratakis CA, Nieman LK
**Journal:** Lancet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61375-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61375-1)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2015 Aug 29;386(9996):913-27. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61375-1. Epub
 2015 May 21.

Cushing's syndrome.

Lacroix A(1), Feelders RA(2), Stratakis CA(3), Nieman LK(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine and Research Center, Centre 
hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CHUM), Montréal, QC, Canada. Electronic 
address: andre.lacroix@umontreal.ca.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Section on Genetics and Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Program on Reproductive and Adult Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.

Chronic exposure to excess glucorticoids results in diverse manifestations of 
Cushing's syndrome, including debilitating morbidities and increased mortality. 
Genetic and molecular mechanisms responsible for excess cortisol secretion by 
primary adrenal lesions and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) secretion from 
corticotroph or ectopic tumours have been identified. New biochemical and 
imaging diagnostic approaches and progress in surgical and radiotherapy 
techniques have improved the management of patients. The therapeutic goal is to 
normalise tissue exposure to cortisol to reverse increased morbidity and 
mortality. Optimum treatment consisting of selective and complete resection of 
the causative tumour is necessay to allow eventual normalisation of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, maintenance of pituitary function, and 
avoidance of tumour recurrence. The development of new drugs offers clinicians 
several choices to treat patients with residual cortisol excess. However, for 
patients affected by this challenging syndrome, the long-term effects and 
comorbidities associated with hypercortisolism need ongoing care.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61375-1
PMID: 26004339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]