---
reference_id: "PMID:9203175"
title: "Oligotyping for HLA-DQA, -DQB, and -DPB in idiopathic nephrotic syndrome."
authors:
- Haeffner A
- Abbal M
- Mytilineos J
- Konrad M
- Krammer I
- Bouissou F
- Opelz G
- Schärer K
- Cambon-Thomsen A
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1007/s004670050279
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alleles
- Female
- France
- "Genes, MHC Class II"
- "HLA-DP Antigens/analysis, genetics"
- "HLA-DQ Antigens/analysis, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/genetics, immunology"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Regression Analysis
- Risk
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oligotyping for HLA-DQA, -DQB, and -DPB in idiopathic nephrotic syndrome.
**Authors:** Haeffner A, Abbal M, Mytilineos J, Konrad M, Krammer I, Bouissou F, Opelz G, Schärer K, Cambon-Thomsen A
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004670050279](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004670050279)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 1997 Jun;11(3):291-5. doi: 10.1007/s004670050279.

Oligotyping for HLA-DQA, -DQB, and -DPB in idiopathic nephrotic syndrome.

Haeffner A(1), Abbal M, Mytilineos J, Konrad M, Krammer I, Bouissou F, Opelz G, 
Schärer K, Cambon-Thomsen A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

Associations of human leukocyte antigens (HLA) with the idiopathic nephrotic 
syndrome (NS) have mainly been described for alleles of the HLA-DR locus. In the 
present study the polymorphism of HLA-DQ and -DP at the molecular level was 
investigated in 167 children with NS (129 steroid-sensitive) using the 
polymerase chain reaction and sequence-specific oligonucleotides in a French and 
a German cohort. HLA-DR typing was also performed by classical serology. In 
steroid-sensitive patients we observed an increased frequency of the alleles 
HLA-DQA1*0201 and -DQB1*0201 in both populations with relative risks ranging 
from 3.8 to 8.5 (Pb < 0.01 to Pb < 0.00001 after Bonferoni's correction). In 
contrast, the frequency of HLA-DQA1*0102 and DQB1*0602 was significantly 
decreased. In children with frequent relapses the HLA associations were 
generally more pronounced than in those with infrequent or no relapses. Applying 
logistic regression analysis, a nephrotic child bearing DQA1*0201 or DR7 was 
five times more likely to be in the steroid-sensitive group of patients than in 
the steroid-resistant group compared with nephrotic children not bearing one of 
these alleles. These HLA alleles therefore seem to be useful indicators of a 
steroid-sensitive frequently relapsing course of NS. No associations with DPB 
alleles were observed, which narrows the region genetically involved in the 
disease susceptibility to the DR-DQ region. Steroid-resistant NS was not 
associated with HLA.

DOI: 10.1007/s004670050279
PMID: 9203175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]