---
reference_id: "PMID:30668708"
title: Bi-allelic AEBP1 mutations in two patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Syx D
- De Wandele I
- Symoens S
- De Rycke R
- Hougrand O
- Voermans N
- De Paepe A
- Malfait F
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bi-allelic AEBP1 mutations in two patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Syx D, De Wandele I, Symoens S, De Rycke R, Hougrand O, Voermans N, De Paepe A, Malfait F
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddz024](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddz024)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 Jun 1;28(11):1853-1864. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz024.

Bi-allelic AEBP1 mutations in two patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Syx D(1), De Wandele I(1), Symoens S(1), De Rycke R(2)(3), Hougrand O(4), 
Voermans N(5), De Paepe A(1), Malfait F(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent 
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology and Expertise Centre for 
Transmission Electron Microscopy, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Center for Inflammation Research and BioImaging Core, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Unit of Electron Microscopy, Department of Pathology, Unilab LG, University 
Hospital, Liège, Belgium.
(5)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Centre, HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDSs) are a clinically and molecularly diverse 
group of heritable connective tissue disorders caused by defects in a wide range 
of genes. Recently, bi-allelic loss-of-function mutations in the adipocyte 
enhancer-binding protein 1 (AEBP1) gene were reported in three families with an 
autosomal recessive EDS-like condition characterized by thin and hyperextensible 
skin, poor wound healing with prominent atrophic scarring, joint hypermobility 
and osteoporosis. Using whole exome sequencing, we identified novel bi-allelic 
AEBP1 variants in two unrelated adult patients, previously diagnosed with an 
undefined EDS type, which shows important clinical resemblance to several other 
EDS subtypes. Our patients present with similar cutaneous and musculoskeletal 
features as the previously reported patients. They also show unreported clinical 
features, including pectus deformity, premature aged appearance, sparse and 
frizzled hair, fatigue and pain. AEBP1 is ubiquitously expressed and encodes the 
secreted aortic carboxypeptidase-like protein (ACLP) that can bind fibrillar 
collagens and assist in collagen polymerization. Transmission electron 
microscopy studies on the patients' skin biopsies show ultrastructural 
alterations in collagen fibril diameter and appearance, underscoring an 
important role for ACLP in collagen fibril organization. This report further 
expands the clinical, molecular and ultrastructural spectrum associated with 
AEBP1 defects and highlights the complex and variable phenotype associated with 
this new EDS variant.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz024
PMID: 30668708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]