---
reference_id: "PMID:37223910"
title: Targeting BET Proteins Downregulates miR-33a To Promote Synergy with PIM Inhibitors in CMML.
authors:
- Letson CT
- Balasis ME
- Newman H
- Binder M
- Vedder A
- Kinose F
- Ball M
- Kruer T
- Quintana A
- Lasho TL
- Finke CM
- Almada LL
- Grants JM
- Zhang G
- Fernandez-Zapico ME
- Gaspar-Maia A
- Lancet J
- Komrokji R
- Haura E
- Sallman DA
- Reuther GW
- Karsan A
- Rix U
- Patnaik MM
- Padron E
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-3929
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Chronic"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Proteins
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting BET Proteins Downregulates miR-33a To Promote Synergy with PIM Inhibitors in CMML.
**Authors:** Letson CT, Balasis ME, Newman H, Binder M, Vedder A, Kinose F, Ball M, Kruer T, Quintana A, Lasho TL, Finke CM, Almada LL, Grants JM, Zhang G, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Gaspar-Maia A, Lancet J, Komrokji R, Haura E, Sallman DA, Reuther GW, Karsan A, Rix U, Patnaik MM, Padron E
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-3929](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-3929)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2023 Aug 1;29(15):2919-2932. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-3929.

Targeting BET Proteins Downregulates miR-33a To Promote Synergy with PIM
Inhibitors in CMML.

Letson CT(1), Balasis ME(1), Newman H(1), Binder M(2)(3), Vedder A(1), Kinose
F(1), Ball M(1), Kruer T(1), Quintana A(1), Lasho TL(3), Finke CM(3), Almada
LL(4), Grants JM(5), Zhang G(1), Fernandez-Zapico ME(2), Gaspar-Maia A(2)(6),
Lancet J(7), Komrokji R(7), Haura E(8), Sallman DA(7), Reuther GW(9), Karsan
A(10), Rix U(8), Patnaik MM(2)(3), Padron E(7).

Author information:
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(2)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Epigenomics Program, Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Division of Oncology Research, Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics,
Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(5)Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer, Vancouver, BC.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota.
(7)Malignant Hematology Department, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida.
(8)Department of Drug Discovery, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida.
(9)Department of Molecular Oncology, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa,
Florida.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC.

PURPOSE: Preclinical studies in myeloid neoplasms have demonstrated efficacy of
bromodomain and extra-terminal protein inhibitors (BETi). However, BETi
demonstrates poor single-agent activity in clinical trials. Several studies
suggest that combination with other anticancer inhibitors may enhance the
efficacy of BETi.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To nominate BETi combination therapies for myeloid
neoplasms, we used a chemical screen with therapies currently in clinical cancer
development and validated this screen using a panel of myeloid cell line,
heterotopic cell line models, and patient-derived xenograft models of disease.
We used standard protein and RNA assays to determine the mechanism responsible
for synergy in our disease models.
RESULTS: We identified PIM inhibitors (PIMi) as therapeutically synergistic with
BETi in myeloid leukemia models. Mechanistically, we show that PIM kinase is
increased after BETi treatment, and that PIM kinase upregulation is sufficient
to induce persistence to BETi and sensitize cells to PIMi. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that miR-33a downregulation is the underlying mechanism driving PIM1
upregulation. We also show that GM-CSF hypersensitivity, a hallmark of chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), represents a molecular signature for sensitivity
to combination therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of PIM kinases is a potential novel strategy for
overcoming BETi persistence in myeloid neoplasms. Our data support further
clinical investigation of this combination.

©2023 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-22-3929
PMCID: PMC10524644
PMID: 37223910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Conflicts of Interest E.P. has
received research funding from Incyte Pharmaceuticals, Kura Therapeutics, and
Bristol Myers Squib (BMS). He has received Honoria from Stemline therapeutics,
Blueprint medicines, and pharmaessentia. The remaining authors declare no
potential conflicts of interest.
