---
reference_id: "PMID:19338403"
title: "Treatment of diffuse intrinsic brainstem gliomas: failed approaches and future strategies."
authors:
- Frazier JL
- Lee J
- Thomale UW
- Noggle JC
- Cohen KJ
- Jallo GI
journal: J Neurosurg Pediatr
year: '2009'
doi: 10.3171/2008.11.PEDS08281
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antineoplastic Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Brain Stem Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, radiotherapy"
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Child
- Drug Delivery Systems
- "Glioma/drug therapy, pathology, radiotherapy"
- Humans
- "Radiotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Rats
- Treatment Failure
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of diffuse intrinsic brainstem gliomas: failed approaches and future strategies.
**Authors:** Frazier JL, Lee J, Thomale UW, Noggle JC, Cohen KJ, Jallo GI
**Journal:** J Neurosurg Pediatr (2009)
**DOI:** [10.3171/2008.11.PEDS08281](https://doi.org/10.3171/2008.11.PEDS08281)

## Content

1. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2009 Apr;3(4):259-69. doi: 10.3171/2008.11.PEDS08281.

Treatment of diffuse intrinsic brainstem gliomas: failed approaches and future
strategies.

Frazier JL(1), Lee J, Thomale UW, Noggle JC, Cohen KJ, Jallo GI.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2010 Jan;5(1):140-1; author reply 141-2. doi:
10.3171/2009.5.PEDS09265.

Diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas constitute ~ 60-75% of tumors found within the
pediatric brainstem. These malignant lesions present with rapidly progressive
symptoms such as cranial nerve, long tract, or cerebellar dysfunctions. Magnetic
resonance imaging is usually sufficient to establish the diagnosis and obviates
the need for surgical biopsy in most cases. The prognosis of the disease is
dismal, and the median survival is < 12 months. Resection is not a viable
option. Standard therapy involves radiotherapy, which produces transient
neurological improvement with a progression-free survival benefit, but provides
no improvement in overall survival. Clinical trials have been conducted to
assess the efficacy of chemotherapeutic and biological agents in the treatment
of diffuse pontine gliomas. In this review, the authors discuss recent studies
in which systemic therapy was administered prior to, concomitantly with, or
after radiotherapy. For future perspective, the discussion includes a rationale
for stereotactic biopsies as well as possible therapeutic options of local
chemotherapy in these lesions.

DOI: 10.3171/2008.11.PEDS08281
PMID: 19338403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
