---
reference_id: "PMID:39778952"
title: Lyme disease periprosthetic joint infection.
authors:
- Yang T
- Shweta F
- Greatens M
- Webb J
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2024-261837
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lyme disease periprosthetic joint infection.
**Authors:** Yang T, Shweta F, Greatens M, Webb J
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2024-261837](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2024-261837)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2025 Jan 8;18(1):e261837. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2024-261837.

Lyme disease periprosthetic joint infection.

Yang T(1), Shweta F(2), Greatens M(3), Webb J(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical College of Wisconsin - Central Wisconsin Campus, Wausau, Wisconsin, 
USA.
(2)Infectious Diseases, Mayo Clinic Health System in Eau Claire, Eau Claire, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(3)Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic Health System in Eau Claire, Eau Claire, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(4)Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic Health System in Eau Claire, Eau Claire, 
Wisconsin, USA Webb.Jonathan@mayo.edu.

Periprosthetic joint infection (PJI) is a devastating complication of total 
joint surgery. Surgical management of PJI has increased surgical risks and is 
costly to the healthcare system. This case study presents a unique clinical 
scenario involving a patient who was diagnosed with Lyme PJI at the total knee 
arthroplasty site after undergoing surgical management. Lyme PJI is a rare 
condition, and there is limited guidance on the diagnosis and management of this 
condition. It should be considered in the differential of certain individuals 
with appropriate epidemiological risk factors. This report aims to highlight the 
complexities associated with the diagnosis and management of periprosthetic Lyme 
infections.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2025. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2024-261837
PMCID: PMC11751606
PMID: 39778952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.