---
reference_id: "PMID:39371250"
title: "Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemias: Challenges in Diagnosis and Therapy."
authors:
- Barcellini W
- Fattizzo B
journal: Transfus Med Hemother
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000540475
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemias: Challenges in Diagnosis and Therapy.
**Authors:** Barcellini W, Fattizzo B
**Journal:** Transfus Med Hemother (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000540475](https://doi.org/10.1159/000540475)

## Content

1. Transfus Med Hemother. 2024 Aug 27;51(5):321-331. doi: 10.1159/000540475. 
eCollection 2024 Oct.

Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemias: Challenges in Diagnosis and Therapy.

Barcellini W(1), Fattizzo B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) is a rare disease due to 
increased destruction of erythrocytes by autoantibodies, with or without 
complement activation.
SUMMARY: AIHA is usually classified in warm AIHA (wAIHA) and cold agglutinin 
disease (CAD), based on isotype and thermal amplitude of the autoantibody. The 
direct antiglobulin test (DAT) or Coombs test is the cornerstone of AIHA 
diagnosis, as it is positive with anti-IgG in wAIHA, and with anti-C3d/IgM 
antisera plus high titer cold agglutinins in CAD. Therapy is quite different, as 
steroids and rituximab are effective in the former, but have a lower response 
rate and duration in the latter. Splenectomy, which is still a good option for 
young/fit wAIHA, is contraindicated in CAD, and classic immunosuppressants are 
moving to further lines. Several new drugs are increasingly used or are in 
trials for relapsed/refractory AIHAs, including B-cell (parsaclisib, ibrutinib, 
rilzabrutinib), and plasma cell target therapies (bortezomib, daratumumab), 
bispecific agents (ianalumab, obexelimab, povetacicept), neonatal Fc receptor 
blockers (nipocalimab), and complement inhibitors (sutimlimab, riliprubart, 
pegcetacoplan, iptacopan). Clinically, AIHAs are highly heterogeneous, from 
mild/compensated to life-threatening/fulminant, and may be primary or associated 
with infections, neoplasms, autoimmune diseases, transplants, 
immunodeficiencies, and drugs. Along with all these variables, there are rare 
forms like mixed (wAIHA plus CAD), atypical (IgA or warm IgM driven), and DAT 
negative, where the diagnosis and clinical management are particularly 
challenging.
KEY MESSAGES: This article covers the classic clinical features, diagnosis, and 
therapy of wAIHA and CAD, and focuses, with the support of clinical vignettes, 
on difficult diagnosis and refractory/relapsing cases requiring novel therapies.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000540475
PMCID: PMC11452171
PMID: 39371250

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose inherent to the present publication.