---
reference_id: "PMID:39547509"
title: Engineered bacterial lipoate protein ligase A (lplA) restores lipoylation in cell models of lipoylation deficiency.
authors:
- Bick NR
- Dreishpoon MB
- Perry A
- Rogachevskaya A
- Bottomley SS
- Fleming MD
- Ducamp S
- Tsvetkov P
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107995
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Engineered bacterial lipoate protein ligase A (lplA) restores lipoylation in cell models of lipoylation deficiency.
**Authors:** Bick NR, Dreishpoon MB, Perry A, Rogachevskaya A, Bottomley SS, Fleming MD, Ducamp S, Tsvetkov P
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107995](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107995)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2024 Dec;300(12):107995. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107995. Epub
2024  Nov 14.

Engineered bacterial lipoate protein ligase A (lplA) restores lipoylation in 
cell models of lipoylation deficiency.

Bick NR(1), Dreishpoon MB(2), Perry A(1), Rogachevskaya A(2), Bottomley SS(3), 
Fleming MD(4), Ducamp S(4), Tsvetkov P(5).

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusets, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma College of Medicine, Oklahoma 
City, Oklahoma, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusets, USA; Department 
of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Electronic address: ptsvetko@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Protein lipoylation, a vital lysine post-translational modification, plays a 
crucial role in the function of key mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid cycle 
enzymatic complexes. In eukaryotes, lipoyl post-translational modification 
synthesis occurs exclusively through de novo pathways, relying on lipoyl 
synthesis/transfer enzymes, dependent upon mitochondrial fatty acid and Fe-S 
cluster biosynthesis. Dysregulation in any of these pathways leads to diminished 
cellular lipoylation. Efficient restoration of lipoylation in lipoylation 
deficiency cell states using either chemical or genetic approaches has been 
challenging because of pathway complexity and multiple upstream regulators. To 
address this challenge, we explored the possibility that a bacterial lipoate 
protein ligase A (lplA) enzyme, which can salvage free lipoic acid bypassing the 
dependency on de novo synthesis, could be engineered to be functional in human 
cells. Overexpression of the engineered lplA in lipoylation null cells restored 
lipoylation levels, cellular respiration, and growth in low glucose conditions. 
Engineered lplA restored lipoylation in all tested lipoylation null cell models, 
mimicking defects in mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis (MECR KO), Fe-S cluster 
biosynthesis (BOLA3 KO), and specific lipoylation-regulating enzymes (FDX1 
[ferredoxin 1], LIAS [lipoyl synthase], and LIPT1 [lipoyl (octanoyl) transferase 
1] KOs). Furthermore, we describe a patient with a homozygous c.212C>T variant 
LIPT1 with a previously uncharacterized syndromic congenital sideroblastic 
anemia. K562 erythroleukemia cells engineered to harbor this missense LIPT1 
allele recapitulate the lipoylation-deficient phenotype and exhibit impaired 
proliferation in low glucose that is completely restored by engineered lplA. 
This synthetic approach offers a potential therapeutic strategy for treating 
lipoylation disorders.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107995
PMCID: PMC11665675
PMID: 39547509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.