---
reference_id: "PMID:37326792"
title: "Baricitinib: A Review in Severe Alopecia Areata."
authors:
- Fung S
- Shirley M
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40257-023-00799-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Baricitinib: A Review in Severe Alopecia Areata.
**Authors:** Fung S, Shirley M
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40257-023-00799-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40257-023-00799-z)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2023 Jul;24(4):661-668. doi: 10.1007/s40257-023-00799-z. 
Epub 2023 Jun 16.

Baricitinib: A Review in Severe Alopecia Areata.

Fung S(1), Shirley M(2).

Author information:
(1)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand. demail@springer.com.
(2)Springer Nature, Private Bag 65901, Mairangi Bay, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand.

Baricitinib (Olumiant®), a Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor, is the first drug 
approved for the treatment of severe alopecia areata in the USA and the EU. 
Severe alopecia areata is usually difficult to treat and relapse is common. 
Patients with this disorder are more likely to suffer from anxiety and 
depression. In two pivotal placebo-controlled phase 3 clinical trials in adults 
with severe alopecia areata, oral baricitinib once daily was associated with 
clinically meaningful scalp, eyebrow, and eyelash hair regrowth over 36 weeks. 
Baricitinib was generally well tolerated with the most common adverse events 
being infections, headaches, acne, and elevated levels of creatine 
phosphokinase. While longer-term data will be necessary to more fully understand 
the benefits and risks of the drug, currently available data suggest that 
baricitinib is a useful treatment for patients with severe alopecia areata.

Plain Language Summary: Alopecia areata is a disorder in which an autoimmune 
attack is mounted against hair follicles, resulting in hair loss ranging from 
patches of hair loss through to complete hair loss. Alopecia areata can recur 
throughout an individual’s lifetime and can cause significant psychological 
distress, with patients more likely to experience anxiety or depressive 
disorders within their lifetime. Baricitinib (Olumiant®) is a drug that blocks 
the signaling of immune messengers to halt autoimmune attack and allow hair 
regrowth. In two clinical trials, adults with severe alopecia areata receiving 
baricitinib were more likely to recover from an episode of alopecia areata 
(achieve 80% or more scalp coverage) than those receiving placebo. Eyebrow and 
eyelash regrowth was also more common in patients receiving baricitinib than 
placebo. Baricitinib was generally well tolerated, with infections being the 
most common adverse events. While longer-term data will be of interest, 
baricitinib appears to be a useful treatment for patients with severe alopecia 
areata.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-023-00799-z
PMID: 37326792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]