---
reference_id: "PMID:30231296"
title: Diagnosis of Atelosteogenesis Type I suggested by Fetal Ultrasonography and Atypical Paternal Phenotype with Mosaicism.
authors:
- Meira JGC
- Sarno MAC
- Faria ÁCO
- Yamamoto GL
- Bertola DR
- Scheibler GG
- Tavares DF
- Acosta AX
journal: Rev Bras Ginecol Obstet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1670684
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mosaicism
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Paternal Inheritance/genetics
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of Atelosteogenesis Type I suggested by Fetal Ultrasonography and Atypical Paternal Phenotype with Mosaicism.
**Authors:** Meira JGC, Sarno MAC, Faria ÁCO, Yamamoto GL, Bertola DR, Scheibler GG, Tavares DF, Acosta AX
**Journal:** Rev Bras Ginecol Obstet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0038-1670684](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0038-1670684)

## Content

1. Rev Bras Ginecol Obstet. 2018 Sep;40(9):570-576. doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1670684.
Epub 2018 Sep 19.

Diagnosis of Atelosteogenesis Type I suggested by Fetal Ultrasonography and
Atypical Paternal Phenotype with Mosaicism.

Meira JGC(1), Sarno MAC(2), Faria ÁCO(3), Yamamoto GL(3), Bertola DR(3),
Scheibler GG(1), Tavares DF(1), Acosta AX(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Universitário Professor Edgard
Santos, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, BA, Brazil.
(2)Maternidade Climério de Oliveira, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador,
BA, Brazil.
(3)Center for Studies of the Human Genome and of Stem Cells Department of
Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Biosciences, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Atelosteogenesis type I (AOI) is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia caused
by mutations in the filaminB (FLNB) gene with classic and well-recognizable
clinical findings. However, parents affected with a mild phenotype, probably
with somatic mosaicism, can generate offspring with a much more severe phenotype
of AOI. In the present report, we describe a female newborn with classic AOI
leading to early neonatal death, whose diagnostic was based on prenatal
radiological findings and on the physical examination of the father. Since her
father had limb deformities and corporal asymmetry, suggesting somatic
mosaicism, his biological samples were analyzed through a gene panel for
skeletal dysplasias. A missense mutation not previously described in the
literature was detected in the FLNB gene, affecting ∼ 20% of the evaluated cells
and, therefore, confirming the diagnosis of mosaic AOI in the father. The
molecular analysis of the father was crucial to suggest the diagnosis of AOI in
the newborn, since she died early and there were no biological samples
available.

Publisher: A atelosteogênese tipo I (AOI) é uma displasia esquelética
autossômica dominante causada por mutações no gene filamina B (FLNB) com achados
clínicos clássicos e bem reconhecíveis. No entanto, pais afetados com um
fenótipo mais leve, provavelmente com mosaicismo somático, podem gerar uma prole
com um fenótipo muito mais grave de AOI. No presente relato, descrevemos um
recém-nascido do sexo feminino com AOI clássica, que levou à morte neonatal
precoce, e cujo diagnóstico foi baseado em achados radiológicos pré-natais e no
exame físico de seu genitor. Como o genitor apresentava deformidades em membros
e assimetria corporal, que sugeriam mosaicismo somático, suas amostras
biológicas foram analisadas por meio de um painel de genes para displasias
esqueléticas. Uma mutação missense, não descrita anteriormente na literatura,
foi detectada no gene FLNB, afetando ∼ 20% das células avaliadas, e, portanto,
confirmando o diagnóstico de AOI em mosaico no genitor. A análise molecular
realizada no genitor foi fundamental para sugerir o diagnóstico de AOI na
recém-nascida, uma vez que esta morreu precocemente, e não havia amostras
biológicas disponíveis.

Thieme Revinter Publicações Ltda Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1670684
PMCID: PMC10316906
PMID: 30231296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have none to declare.
