---
reference_id: "PMID:37073653"
title: "Outbreak of Monkeypox Virus Disease: An Update on Epidemiology, Pathophysiology and Available Treatment Options."
authors:
- Kumar A
- Angaria N
- Singh G
- Kumar R
journal: Infect Disord Drug Targets
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2174/1871526523666230418121045
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outbreak of Monkeypox Virus Disease: An Update on Epidemiology, Pathophysiology and Available Treatment Options.
**Authors:** Kumar A, Angaria N, Singh G, Kumar R
**Journal:** Infect Disord Drug Targets (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1871526523666230418121045](https://doi.org/10.2174/1871526523666230418121045)

## Content

1. Infect Disord Drug Targets. 2023;23(6):e180423216001. doi: 
10.2174/1871526523666230418121045.

Outbreak of Monkeypox Virus Disease: An Update on Epidemiology, Pathophysiology 
and Available Treatment Options.

Kumar A(1), Angaria N(1), Singh G(1), Kumar R(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, 
Punjab, India.

The monkeypox virus is a zoonotic illness with a tropical distribution in 
Africa, and around the world. The disease is spread through contact with 
infected animals or humans, and can also be spread from person to person through 
close contact with respiratory or bodily fluids. Fever, swollen lymph nodes, 
blisters, and crusted rashes characterize the disease. The incubation period is 
five to twenty-one days. It is difficult to distinguish the rash caused by 
infection from varicella and smallpox. Laboratory investigations are essential 
aspects of illness diagnosis and surveillance, and novel tests are required for 
more accurate and faster diagnosis. Antiviral drugs are being used to treat 
monkeypox. Scarring as well as other comorbidities, are prevalent in survivors, 
with the case mortality rate varying from 1 to 11%. The virus was found in 
monkeys at a Danish research facility in 1958, from which the term 'monkeypox' 
is derived. The primary human case was found in a child in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (DRC) in 1970. The World Health Organisation (WHO) has 
recently declared monkeypox a public health emergency of international concern. 
This manuscript attempts to review the various aspects of monkeypox disease and 
its allopathic as well as alternative treatment options available and serves as 
a valuable resource for healthcare professionals, researchers, and the general 
public.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1871526523666230418121045
PMID: 37073653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]