---
reference_id: "PMID:36140816"
title: TBX3 and EFNA4 Variant in a Family with Ulnar-Mammary Syndrome and Sagittal Craniosynostosis.
authors:
- Tung ML
- Chandra B
- Kotlarek J
- Melo M
- Phillippi E
- Justice CM
- Musolf A
- Boyadijev SA
- Romitti PA
- Darbro B
- El-Shanti H
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13091649
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Breast Diseases/genetics
- Craniosynostoses/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- Ulna/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TBX3 and EFNA4 Variant in a Family with Ulnar-Mammary Syndrome and Sagittal Craniosynostosis.
**Authors:** Tung ML, Chandra B, Kotlarek J, Melo M, Phillippi E, Justice CM, Musolf A, Boyadijev SA, Romitti PA, Darbro B, El-Shanti H
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13091649](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13091649)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Sep 14;13(9):1649. doi: 10.3390/genes13091649.

TBX3 and EFNA4 Variant in a Family with Ulnar-Mammary Syndrome and Sagittal 
Craniosynostosis.

Tung ML(1)(2), Chandra B(1)(2), Kotlarek J(1), Melo M(1), Phillippi E(1), 
Justice CM(3), Musolf A(4), Boyadijev SA(5), Romitti PA(6), Darbro B(1), 
El-Shanti H(1).

Author information:
(1)Stead Family Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics and 
Genomics, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, 
USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117597, 
Singapore.
(3)Genometrics Section, Computational and Statistical Genomics Branch, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Baltimore, 
MD 20892, USA.
(4)Statistical Genetics Section, Computational and Statistical Genomics Branch, 
National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Baltimore, MD 20892, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA 
95616, USA.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) is a rare, autosomal dominant disorder 
characterized by anomalies affecting the limbs, apocrine glands, dentition, and 
genital development. This syndrome is caused by haploinsufficiency in the T-Box3 
gene (TBX3), with considerable variability in the clinical phenotype being 
observed even within families. We describe a one-year-old female with 
unilateral, postaxial polydactyly, and bilateral fifth fingernail duplication. 
Next-generation sequencing revealed a novel, likely pathogenic, variant 
predicted to affect the canonical splice site in intron 3 of the TBX3 gene 
(c.804 + 1G > A, IVS3 + 1G > A). This variant was inherited from the proband’s 
father who was also diagnosed with UMS with the additional clinical finding of 
congenital, sagittal craniosynostosis. Subsequent whole genome analysis in the 
proband’s father detected a variant in the EFNA4 gene (c.178C > T, p.His60Tyr), 
which has only been reported to be associated with sagittal craniosynostosis in 
one patient prior to this report but reported in other cranial suture 
synostosis. The findings in this family extend the genotypic spectrum of UMS, as 
well as the phenotypic spectrum of EFNA4-related craniosynostosis.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13091649
PMCID: PMC9498434
PMID: 36140816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.