---
reference_id: "PMID:38192829"
title: "Brachyolmia, dental anomalies and short stature (DASS): Phenotype and genotype analyses of Egyptian and Pakistani patients."
authors:
- Nawaz H
- Parveen A
- Khan SA
- Zalan AK
- Khan MA
- Muhammad N
- Hassib NF
- Mostafa MI
- Elhossini RM
- Roshdy NN
- Ullah A
- Arif A
- Khan S
- Ammerpohl O
- Wasif N
journal: Heliyon
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23688
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brachyolmia, dental anomalies and short stature (DASS): Phenotype and genotype analyses of Egyptian and Pakistani patients.
**Authors:** Nawaz H, Parveen A, Khan SA, Zalan AK, Khan MA, Muhammad N, Hassib NF, Mostafa MI, Elhossini RM, Roshdy NN, Ullah A, Arif A, Khan S, Ammerpohl O, Wasif N
**Journal:** Heliyon (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23688](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23688)

## Content

1. Heliyon. 2023 Dec 14;10(1):e23688. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23688. 
eCollection 2024 Jan 15.

Brachyolmia, dental anomalies and short stature (DASS): Phenotype and genotype 
analyses of Egyptian and Pakistani patients.

Nawaz H(1), Parveen A(2)(3), Khan SA(1)(4), Zalan AK(5), Khan MA(6), Muhammad 
N(1), Hassib NF(7)(8), Mostafa MI(7), Elhossini RM(9), Roshdy NN(10), Ullah 
A(11)(12), Arif A(3), Khan S(1), Ammerpohl O(13), Wasif N(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Kohat University of 
Science and Technology (KUST), Kohat, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Gulab Devi Educational 
Complex, Gulab Devi Hospital, 54000, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Central Punjab (UCP), 
Lahore, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Computer Science and Bioinformatics, Khushal Khan Khatak 
University, Karak, Pakistan.
(5)BDS, MDS Registrar Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Pediatric Dentistry, 
School of Dentistry, PIMS, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(6)Dental Material, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical 
University Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(7)Orodental Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research Institute, 
National Research Centre, Cairo, 12622, Egypt.
(8)School of Dentistry, New Giza University, Giza, Egypt.
(9)Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research Institute, 
National Research Centre, Cairo, 12622, Egypt.
(10)Endodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, Cairo University, Cairo, 11553, Egypt.
(11)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(12)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Genomic Mechanisms of Disease, Broad 
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm University and Ulm University Medical 
Center, 89081, Ulm, Germany.
(14)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus 
Kiel, D-24105, Kiel, Germany.

Brachyolmia is a heterogeneous group of developmental disorders characterized by 
a short trunk, short stature, scoliosis, and generalized platyspondyly without 
significant deformities in the long bones. DASS (Dental Abnormalities and Short 
Stature), caused by alterations in the LTBP3 gene, was previously considered as 
a subtype of brachyolmia. The present study investigated three unrelated 
consanguineous families (A, B, C) with Brachyolmia and DASS from Egypt and 
Pakistan. In our Egyptian patients, we also observed hearing impairment. Exome 
sequencing was performed to determine the genetic causes of the diverse clinical 
conditions in the patients. Exome sequencing identified a novel homozygous 
splice acceptor site variant (LTBP3:c.3629-1G > T; p. ?) responsible for DASS 
phenotypes and a known homozygous missense variant (CABP2: c.590T > C; 
p.Ile197Thr) causing hearing impairment in the Egyptian patients. In addition, 
two previously reported homozygous frameshift variants (LTBP3:c.132delG; 
p.Pro45Argfs*25) and (LTBP3:c.2216delG; p.Gly739Alafs*7) were identified in 
Pakistani patients. This study emphasizes the vital role of LTBP3 in the axial 
skeleton and tooth morphogenesis and expands the mutational spectrum of LTBP3. 
We are reporting LTBP3 variants in seven patients of three families, majorly 
causing brachyolmia with dental and cardiac anomalies. Skeletal assessment 
documented short webbed neck, broad chest, evidences of mild long bones 
involvement, short distal phalanges, pes planus and osteopenic bone texture as 
additional associated findings expanding the clinical phenotype of DASS. The 
current study reveals that the hearing impairment phenotype in Egyptian patients 
of family A has a separate transmission mechanism independent of LTBP3.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23688
PMCID: PMC10772639
PMID: 38192829

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial 
interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing 
interests:Naveed Wasif reports financial support was provided by 
10.13039/100005156Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. Saadullah Khan reports 
financial support was provided by Higher Education Commission Pakistan. Nehal F. 
Hassib reports financial support was provided by 10.13039/100007787National 
Research Centre, Cairo. The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.