---
reference_id: "PMID:8712801"
title: The lupus anticoagulant/antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Shapiro SS
journal: Annu Rev Med
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.47.1.533
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The lupus anticoagulant/antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Shapiro SS
**Journal:** Annu Rev Med (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.med.47.1.533](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.med.47.1.533)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Med. 1996;47:533-53. doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.47.1.533.

The lupus anticoagulant/antiphospholipid syndrome.

Shapiro SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardeza Foundation for Hematologic Research, Department of Medicine, 
Jefferson Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19107-5099, USA.

Lupus anticoagulants and anticardiolipin antibodies have been strongly 
associated with the risk of thrombosis, recurrent fetal loss, thrombocytopenia, 
and a number of other clinical manifestations that together have been referred 
to as the antiphospholipid syndrome. Despite growing evidence of the 
significance of this relationship, the pathogenetic mechanisms involved are 
largely unknown. Recent data suggest strongly that lupus anticoagulants (LACs) 
and anticardiolipin antibodies (ACAs) are antibodies to protein-phospholipid 
complexes rather than to phospholipids, as had originally been thought, and that 
other protein-phospholipid complexes, not recognized by standard assays for LACs 
or ACAs, may also exist in patients with the antiphospholipid syndrome. Although 
very recent experimental data may lead to new therapeutic approaches in this 
syndrome, at present we can only deal with the thrombotic risk by the use of 
long-term anticoagulation. This chapter reviews current methods of diagnosis, 
concepts of pathogenesis, and the basis for an approach to anticoagulation in 
patients at risk for thrombosis or other manifestations of the antiphospholipid 
syndrome.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.med.47.1.533
PMID: 8712801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]