---
reference_id: "PMID:15887282"
title: Immune abnormalities are a frequent manifestation of Kabuki syndrome.
authors:
- Hoffman JD
- Ciprero KL
- Sullivan KE
- Kaplan PB
- McDonald-McGinn DM
- Zackai EH
- Ming JE
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30722
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/pathology
- Ear/abnormalities
- Growth Disorders/pathology
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin A/immunology
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Immunoglobulin M/immunology
- Infant
- Intellectual Disability/pathology
- Karyotyping
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune abnormalities are a frequent manifestation of Kabuki syndrome.
**Authors:** Hoffman JD, Ciprero KL, Sullivan KE, Kaplan PB, McDonald-McGinn DM, Zackai EH, Ming JE
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30722](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30722)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jun 15;135(3):278-81. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30722.

Immune abnormalities are a frequent manifestation of Kabuki syndrome.

Hoffman JD(1), Ciprero KL, Sullivan KE, Kaplan PB, McDonald-McGinn DM, Zackai 
EH, Ming JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia and The University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Kabuki syndrome (KS) is associated with multiple organ system involvement. 
Characteristic features include long palpebral fissures with everted lower lids, 
prominent ears, skeletal abnormalities, mental retardation, and short stature. 
An increased incidence of infection has been reported in KS, and a few patients 
have been noted to have immune defects. However, the frequency and severity of 
the immune deficiency has not been clearly defined. Immunologic evaluation of 19 
consecutive individuals with KS was performed at The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia. Decreased IgA levels were noted in 15/19 individuals (79%), 2 of 
whom had undetectable levels. Eight patients (42%) also had low total IgG 
levels. Specific IgG subclass abnormalities were found in 6 of 13 patients 
evaluated. IgM levels were less frequently decreased. One patient failed to 
generate anti-tetanus antibodies despite immunization. This study suggests that 
hypogammaglobulinemia is a frequent finding in children with KS. The pattern of 
antibody abnormalities seen in children with KS resembles common variable immune 
deficiency (CVID). Due to this increased susceptibility to infection, children 
with KS should have immunologic evaluations at the time of diagnosis in order to 
reduce preventable morbidity and mortality.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30722
PMID: 15887282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]