---
reference_id: "PMID:32295853"
title: Risk of Renal Failure Within 10 or 20 Years of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Diagnosis.
authors:
- Petri M
- Barr E
- Magder LS
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.191094
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk of Renal Failure Within 10 or 20 Years of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Petri M, Barr E, Magder LS
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3899/jrheum.191094](https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.191094)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2021 Feb;48(2):222-227. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.191094. Epub 2020 Apr
 15.

Risk of Renal Failure Within 10 or 20 Years of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 
Diagnosis.

Petri M(1), Barr E(2), Magder LS(2).

Author information:
(1)M. Petri, MD, MPH, Division of Rheumatology, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine; mpetri@jhmi.edu.
(2)E. Barr, MPH, L.S. Magder, MPH, PhD, Department of Epidemiology and Public 
Health, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The frequency of endstage renal disease (ESRD) from systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) in the United States has not improved over the last few 
decades in large population datasets. Understanding the risk factors for renal 
failure in SLE could lead to earlier detection of lupus nephritis and 
potentially more effective treatments in those with markers of poor prognosis.
METHODS: The Hopkins Lupus Cohort, comprising 2528 patients was used. One 
hundred fifty-one patients experienced renal failure after SLE diagnosis, 
defined as dialysis or renal transplant. We estimated the risk of renal failure 
in subgroups defined by demographics, laboratory tests, and the American College 
of Rheumatology/Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (ACR/SLICC) 
classification criteria satisfied within 1 year of SLE diagnosis.
RESULTS: The overall incidence of renal failure within 20 years of SLE diagnosis 
was 8.4%. The risk was much higher (20.0%) among those who experienced 
proteinuria within the first year of diagnosis. Demographic predictors included 
African American ethnicity [rate ratio (RR) 1.82, P = 0.0012] and age ≥ 40 years 
at SLE diagnosis (RR 0.51 vs those with diagnosis at < 30 yrs of age, P = 
0.019). Among immunologic markers, low C3 was a strong predictor of renal 
failure (RR 2.00, P = 0.0011).
CONCLUSION: Proteinuria within the first year of diagnosis of SLE is one of the 
most important predictors of ESRD. Our data also confirm African American 
ethnicity, younger age at SLE diagnosis, and low C3 as strong predictors of 
renal failure.

Copyright © 2021 by the Journal of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.191094
PMCID: PMC7572868
PMID: 32295853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]