---
reference_id: "PMID:38542233"
title: "B-Cell Activation Biomarkers in Salivary Glands Are Related to Lymphomagenesis in Primary Sjögren's Disease: A Pilot Monocentric Exploratory Study."
authors:
- Bruno D
- Tolusso B
- Lugli G
- Di Mario C
- Petricca L
- Perniola S
- Bui L
- Benvenuto R
- Ferraccioli G
- Alivernini S
- Gremese E
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25063259
content_type: abstract_only
---

# B-Cell Activation Biomarkers in Salivary Glands Are Related to Lymphomagenesis in Primary Sjögren's Disease: A Pilot Monocentric Exploratory Study.
**Authors:** Bruno D, Tolusso B, Lugli G, Di Mario C, Petricca L, Perniola S, Bui L, Benvenuto R, Ferraccioli G, Alivernini S, Gremese E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25063259](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25063259)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Mar 13;25(6):3259. doi: 10.3390/ijms25063259.

B-Cell Activation Biomarkers in Salivary Glands Are Related to Lymphomagenesis 
in Primary Sjögren's Disease: A Pilot Monocentric Exploratory Study.

Bruno D(1)(2), Tolusso B(3), Lugli G(4), Di Mario C(3), Petricca L(5), Perniola 
S(1), Bui L(6), Benvenuto R(6), Ferraccioli G(7), Alivernini S(3)(5)(7), Gremese 
E(1)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Immunology Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. 
Gemelli-IRCCS, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Verona, 37129 Verona, Italy.
(3)Immunology Core Facility, Gemelli Science and Technology Park, Fondazione 
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli-IRCCS, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(4)Rare Disease Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, 50139 Florence, Italy.
(5)Rheumatology Division, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli-IRCCS, 
00168 Rome, Italy.
(6)Institute of Pathology, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. 
Gemelli-IRCCS, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, 
00168 Rome, Italy.

Primary Sjögren's disease is primarily driven by B-cell activation and is 
associated with a high risk of developing non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). Over the 
last few decades, microRNA-155 (miR-155) has arisen as a key regulator of 
B-cells. Nevertheless, its role in primary Sjögren's disease remains elusive. 
Thus, the purpose of this study was (i) to explore miR-155, B-cell activating 
factor (BAFF)-receptor (BAFF-R), and Interleukin 6 receptor (IL-6R) expression 
in the labial salivary glands (LSG) of patients with primary Sjögren's disease, 
aiming to identify potential B-cell activation biomarkers related to NHL 
development. Twenty-four patients with primary Sjögren's disease, and with 
available tissue blocks from a LSG biopsy performed at diagnosis, were enrolled. 
Among them, five patients developed B-cell NHL during follow-up (7.3 ± 3.1 
years). A comparison group of 20 individuals with sicca disease was included. 
Clinical and laboratory parameters were recorded and the LSG biopsies were 
evaluated to assess local inflammation in terms of miR-155/BAFF-R and IL-6R 
expression. Stratifying the primary Sjögren's disease cohort according to 
lymphomagenesis, miR-155 was upregulated in primary Sjögren's disease patients 
who experienced NHL, more so than those who did not experience NHL. Moreover, 
miR-155 expression correlated with the focus score (FS), as well as BAFF-R and 
IL-6R expression, which were increased in primary Sjögren's disease patients and 
in turn related to neoplastic evolution. In conclusion, epigenetic modulation 
may play a crucial role in the aberrant activation of B-cells in primary 
Sjögren's disease, profoundly impacting the risk of NHL development.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25063259
PMCID: PMC10969818
PMID: 38542233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.