---
reference_id: "PMID:37275239"
title: "Glutaric aciduria and L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: Clinical and molecular findings of 35 patients from Turkey."
authors:
- Bozaci AE
- Er E
- Ünal AT
- Taş İ
- Ayaz E
- Ozbek MN
- Durmaz A
- Aykut A
- Kose M
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.100979
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glutaric aciduria and L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: Clinical and molecular findings of 35 patients from Turkey.
**Authors:** Bozaci AE, Er E, Ünal AT, Taş İ, Ayaz E, Ozbek MN, Durmaz A, Aykut A, Kose M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.100979](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.100979)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2023 May 23;36:100979. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.100979. 
eCollection 2023 Sep.

Glutaric aciduria and L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: Clinical and molecular 
findings of 35 patients from Turkey.

Bozaci AE(1), Er E(2), Ünal AT(3), Taş İ(1), Ayaz E(4), Ozbek MN(5), Durmaz 
A(6), Aykut A(7), Kose M(8).

Author information:
(1)Diyarbakır Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Division of 
Pediatric Metabolism, Diyarbakir, Turkey.
(2)Tepecik Research and Training Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Division of 
Pediatric Metabolism, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Gaziyasargil Research and Training Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Diyarbakir, Turkey.
(4)Diyarbakır Children's Hospital, Department of Radiology, Division of 
Pediatric Radiology, Diyarbakir, Turkey.
(5)Mardin Artuklu University, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Mardin, Turkey.
(6)Ege University Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, 
Turkey.
(7)The Children Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Genetics, Mitochondrial 
Medicine Frontier Program, PA, USA.
(8)Izmir Katip Celebi University, Tepecik Research and Training Hospital, 
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Metabolism, Izmir, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral organic acid disorders are progressive neurometabolic 
diseases characterized by neurologic dysfunction. Glutaric aciduria type I 
(GA-I) and L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L2HGA) are the main cerebral organic 
acid disorders. They are both classified as, and it is suggested that these two 
disorders may share a common metabolic pathway. Current treatment strategies are 
based on levocarnitine, vitamin B2, and diet. Recent guidelines recommend a 
lysine-restricted diet up to six years of age, but there is no consensus for 
patients over the age of six. Vitamin B2 is exists in the blood as riboflavin 
and its cofactors, flavin mononucleotide and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). 
FAD, the cofactor of L2HGD, accelerates the conversion of L-2-hydoxy glutarate 
to alpha-ketoglutarate. Levocarnitine stimulates the formation and excretion of 
derivatives of glutaric acid. Also, lysine-associated organic acidurias some 
results provide principal proof for the beneficial effects of riboflavin in 
GA-I. It has been previously reported that combination therapy with riboflavin 
and levocarnitine is effective for L2HGA as well as GA-I. Riboflavin and 
levocarnitine have been reported to improve not only clinical symptoms but also 
urinary 2-HGA levels. In our study, we aimed to evaluate the effect of the 
current treatment strategies and genotype on urinary metabolites and IQ scores 
in GA-I and L2HGA patients.
METHODS: The presented retrospective multicenter study included patients 
followed up in Diyarbakir Children's Hospital and Izmir Katip Celebi University 
Faculty of Medicine, Division of Pediatric Metabolism. Between 2016 and 2021, we 
retrospectively evaluated 35 patients with confirmed diagnosis of GA-I and 
L-2HGA. We analyzed the clinical, biochemical, neuroradiological, molecular data 
and treatment of the patients. The follow-up period was every 2 months until 
12 months old, every 3 months until 6 years of age, and every 6 months 
thereafter. Therapy monitoring was undertaken during follow-up visits that 
included evaluation of clinical parameters, laboratory parameters, and dietary 
consumption records. Denver II was applied in order to evaluate children aged 
0-6 years in terms of development. Patients between 6 and 16 years of age were 
evaluated using the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised.
RESULTS: We identified 25 with GA-I and 10 with L2HGA. The most common clinical 
symptoms were developmental delay, intellectual disability, and movement 
disorders. Behavioural problems were more common in L2HGA than in GA-I patients. 
In the same family, there were patients with severe developmental delay despite 
early diagnosis and treatment and individuals with normal IQ scores. In our 
study group, we used diet (lysine restricted or protein controlled), 
levocarnitine and vitamin B2 for GA-I patients. The mean urinary glutaric acid 
levels were decreased with treatment in GA-I patients. Group I consisted of 
14/25 patients receiving lysine restricted diet and levocarnitine, Group II 
(8/25) received protein-controlled diet and levocarnitine. Group III (3/25) 
patients whom had p.Pro248Leu (P248L) variant, received riboflavin in 
combination with protein-controlled diet and levocarnitine. When we evaluated 
according to the treatment groups, a significant decrease was observed in 
urinary glutaric acid levels in group I. But there were no significant 
difference in Group II and III. The patients with c.1018C > T variant in GCDH 
gene had higher pre-treatment urinary metabolites and significant reduction in 
urinary metabolites with treatment was detected. In L2HGA patients, we used 
levocarnitine and vitamin B2. In all L2HGA patients, there was a significant 
decrease in the mean urinary 2- hydoxy glutarate with treatment. However, there 
was no significant difference between the c.164G > A and c.1115delT variants. 
The mean pre- and post-treatment IQ scores of GA-I patients, no significant 
difference was observed. Relative neurologic improvement was seen in three L2HGA 
patients. We found two novel variants, including the c.221A > G (p.Tyr74Cys) in 
the GCDH gene and the c.738 + 5A > G splice variant in the L2HGDH gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Glutaric aciduria type I and L2HGA are the most common cerebral 
organic acidurias. Early and correct diagnosis is crucial. Poor prognosis based 
on metabolic crises and progressive deterioration still appears. In countries 
where newborn screening is not performed, a clinical suspicion index is required 
for cerebral organic aciduria. GA-I and L-2HGA are difficult to examine by 
medical evidence standards because of the small sample size, regional 
differences in newborn screening, and medical care limits. More clinical studies 
are needed to identify effective treatments. However, the significant decrease 
in urinary glutaric acid levels after treatment in patients on lysine-restricted 
diet raises the question of whether lysine-restricted diet should be continued 
after six years of age. We also reported our experience in order to contribute 
to the literature.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.100979
PMCID: PMC10238566
PMID: 37275239

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose.