---
reference_id: "PMID:38578519"
title: "Pathogenic Aspergillus Strains Identification and Antifungal Susceptibility Analysis of 452 Cases with Otomycosis in Jingzhou, China."
authors:
- Peng D
- Li A
- Kong M
- Mao C
- Sun Y
- Shen M
journal: Mycopathologia
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11046-024-00836-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic Aspergillus Strains Identification and Antifungal Susceptibility Analysis of 452 Cases with Otomycosis in Jingzhou, China.
**Authors:** Peng D, Li A, Kong M, Mao C, Sun Y, Shen M
**Journal:** Mycopathologia (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11046-024-00836-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11046-024-00836-3)

## Content

1. Mycopathologia. 2024 Apr 5;189(2):30. doi: 10.1007/s11046-024-00836-3.

Pathogenic Aspergillus Strains Identification and Antifungal Susceptibility 
Analysis of 452 Cases with Otomycosis in Jingzhou, China.

Peng D(#)(1), Li A(#)(2), Kong M(1), Mao C(3), Sun Y(4), Shen M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Jingzhou Hospital 
Affiliated to Yangtze University, Jingzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Jingzhou Hospital Affiliated to Yangtze University, 
Jingzhou, China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Jingzhou Hospital 
Affiliated to Yangtze University, Jingzhou, China. 22101163@qq.com.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Jingzhou Hospital Affiliated to Yangtze 
University, Jingzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: To study the distribution of pathogenic Aspergillus strains of 
otomycosis in central China and the identification of their antifungal 
sensitivity.
METHODS: We collected external ear canal secretions clinically diagnosed as 
otomycosis from April 2020 to January 2023 from the Department of 
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery in central China. The pathogenic 
Aspergillus strains were identified through morphological examination and 
sequencing. The antifungal sensitivity was performed using the broth 
microdilution method described in the Clinical Laboratory Standard Institute 
document M38-A3.
RESULTS: In the 452 clinical strains isolated from the external ear canal, 284 
were identified as Aspergillus terreus (62.83%), 92 as Aspergillus flavus 
(20.35%), 55 as Aspergillus niger (12.17%). In antifungal susceptibility tests 
the MIC of Aspergillus strains to bifonazole and clotrimazole was high,all the 
MIC90 is > 16 ug/mL. However, most Aspergillus isolates show moderate greatly 
against terbinafine, itraconazole and voriconazole.
CONCLUSION: A. terreus is the most common pathogenic Aspergillus strain in 
otomycosis in central China. The selected topical antifungal drugs were 
bifonazole and clotrimazole; the drug resistance rate was approximately 30%. If 
the infection is persistent and requires systemic treatment, terbinafine and 
itraconazole can be used. The resistance of Aspergillus in otomycosis to 
voriconazole should be screened to avoid the systemic spread of infection in 
immunocompromised people and poor compliance with treatment. However, the 
pan-azole-resistant strain of Aspergillus should be monitored, particularly in 
high-risk patients with otomycosis.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s11046-024-00836-3
PMID: 38578519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]