---
reference_id: "PMID:33079008"
title: Frequency and types of EGFR mutations in Moroccan patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Lemine Sow M
- El Yacoubi H
- Moukafih B
- Balde S
- Akimana G
- Najem S
- El Khoyaali S
- Abahssain H
- Chaibi A
- Zeb Khan S
- Trapani D
- Benzekri A
- Ghaouti M
- Gamra L
- Mestari A
- Kettani F
- Rahali Y
- Mrabti H
- Elghissassi I
- Errihani H
journal: Tumori
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/0300891620964571
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma of Lung/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Morocco/epidemiology
- Mutation Rate
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency and types of EGFR mutations in Moroccan patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Lemine Sow M, El Yacoubi H, Moukafih B, Balde S, Akimana G, Najem S, El Khoyaali S, Abahssain H, Chaibi A, Zeb Khan S, Trapani D, Benzekri A, Ghaouti M, Gamra L, Mestari A, Kettani F, Rahali Y, Mrabti H, Elghissassi I, Errihani H
**Journal:** Tumori (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0300891620964571](https://doi.org/10.1177/0300891620964571)

## Content

1. Tumori. 2021 Aug;107(4):335-340. doi: 10.1177/0300891620964571. Epub 2020 Oct
20.

Frequency and types of EGFR mutations in Moroccan patients with non-small cell
lung cancer.

Lemine Sow M(1), El Yacoubi H(2), Moukafih B(1), Balde S(1), Akimana G(1), Najem
S(1), El Khoyaali S(1), Abahssain H(1), Chaibi A(2), Zeb Khan S(3), Trapani
D(4)(5), Benzekri A(1), Ghaouti M(1), Gamra L(1), Mestari A(1), Kettani F(1),
Rahali Y(2), Mrabti H(1), Elghissassi I(1), Errihani H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, National Institute of Oncology, Faculty of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Mohamed V University, Rabat, Morocco.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Mohamed V University, Rabat, Morocco.
(3)Department of Clinical Oncology, BINOR Cancer Hospital, Bannu, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Oncology and Hematology, University of Milan.
(5)Division of New Drug Development, European Institute of Oncology, Milan,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are
commonly observed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), particularly in
adenocarcinoma histology. The frequency of EGFR mutations is
ethnicity-dependent, with a higher proportion reported in Asian populations than
Caucasian populations. There is a lack of data on these mutations in north
Africa.
METHODS: Tumor specimens from Moroccan patients with NSCLC were collected from
five pathology laboratories between November 2010 and December 2017 to determine
frequency and types of EGFR mutations. Tumors were tested in a reference center
for EGFR by polymerase chain reaction and sequencing of exons 18, 19, 20, and
21.
RESULTS: A total of 334 patients were enrolled: 242 (72.5%) males and 92 females
(27.5%). A total of 56.9% had a history of smoking. EGFR testing of the 334 lung
adenocarcinoma samples demonstrated a wild-type EGFR in 261 (78.1%) and mutated
EGFR in 73 (21.9%). Mutations were mainly detected in the exon 19 deletion
(65.8%), followed by exon 21 L858 (17.8%) and other exon 21 codon mutations
(5.5%) and exon 18 (6.8%), whereas primary mutations of exon 20 were less
frequent (4.1%). In patients with advanced NSCLC, the detection of EGFR mutation
was independently associated with sex (41.3% female vs 14.5% male; p < 0.001)
and smoking status (34.8% nonsmokers vs 12.9% active smokers; p < 0.001). The
mean age was significantly different between the two groups (p = 0.041).
CONCLUSION: Our findings confirm the genetic heterogeneity of NSCLC worldwide,
reporting frequency of EGFR mutations in Moroccan patients with NSCLC between
those of Asian and Caucasian populations.

DOI: 10.1177/0300891620964571
PMID: 33079008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
