---
reference_id: "PMID:33988879"
title: Interobserver variability in the classification of childhood maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis.
authors:
- Torrelo A
- Vergara-de-la-Campa L
- Azaña JM
- Greenberger S
- Lam JM
- Lawley LP
- Morren MA
- Schaffer JV
- García-Doval I
- Matito A
- Alvarez-Twose I
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.17345
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Europe
- Humans
- Observer Variation
- Reproducibility of Results
- Urticaria Pigmentosa
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interobserver variability in the classification of childhood maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis.
**Authors:** Torrelo A, Vergara-de-la-Campa L, Azaña JM, Greenberger S, Lam JM, Lawley LP, Morren MA, Schaffer JV, García-Doval I, Matito A, Alvarez-Twose I
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.17345](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.17345)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2021 Oct;35(10):2079-2084. doi:
10.1111/jdv.17345.  Epub 2021 Jun 7.

Interobserver variability in the classification of childhood maculopapular 
cutaneous mastocytosis.

Torrelo A(1), Vergara-de-la-Campa L(2), Azaña JM(3), Greenberger S(4), Lam 
JM(5), Lawley LP(6), Morren MA(7), Schaffer JV(8), García-Doval I(9), Matito 
A(10), Alvarez-Twose I(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Hospital Universitario de Toledo, Toledo, Spain.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Complejo Hospitalario Universtario de Albacete, 
Albacete, Spain.
(4)Pediatric Dermatology Service, Department of Dermatology, Sheba Medical 
Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Department of Dermatology and Skin Science, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(7)Pediatric Dermatology Unit, Department of Pediatrics and Dermatology 
&Venereology, University hospital Lausanne and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(8)Division of Pediatric Dermatology, Hackensack Meridian School of Medicine, 
Hackensack, NJ, USA.
(9)Research Unit, Fundación Piel Sana, AEDV, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Instituto de Estudios de Mastocitosis de Castilla La Mancha (CLMast) - 
Spanish Reference Center for Mastocytosis, Hospital Virgen del Valle, Complejo 
Hospitalario Universitario de Toledo, Toledo, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis (MPCM) in children is 
classified in two variants: (i) monomorphic variant, presenting with the small 
macules or papules typically seen in adult patients; and (ii) polymorphic 
variant with larger lesions of variable size and shape, typically seen in 
children. The definition of polymorphic and monomorphic variants is mostly 
intuitive, and a validation of this classification has not been done.
OBJECTIVE: To study interobserver variability in the classification of MPCM in 
two groups of observers: mastocytosis experts and general dermatologists.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Nineteen cases of childhood MPCM were shown blindly, for 
classification as monomorphic or polymorphic type, to 10 independent observers 
(eight dermatologists, one allergist and one haematologist) from Europe and 
North America with a vast experience in the management of paediatric 
mastocytosis. Also, the same cases were shown on a screen to 129 general 
dermatologists attending a meeting; their votes were registered by remote 
controls. The interobserver variability kappa coefficient (with 95% confidence 
interval) was calculated to measure the reliability of the correlation.
RESULTS: The value of kappa interobserver variability coefficient for the group 
of 10 experts (95% confidence interval) was 0.39 (0.18-0.63), which is 
considered as 'fair'. The value of kappa interobserver variability coefficient 
for the group of 129 general dermatologists (95% confidence interval) was 0.17 
(0.06-0.39), which is considered as 'slight'. A complete agreement of all 10 
experts was achieved in only four of 19 cases (21.1%) The most voted choice was 
concordant between the two groups in only 11 of the 19 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: We failed to validate the classification system of childhood MPCM 
in monomorphic and polymorphic types. While the rate of agreement was low for 
mastocytosis experts, it was nearly the agreement expected by chance in general 
dermatologists.

© 2021 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.17345
PMID: 33988879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]