---
reference_id: "PMID:35810298"
title: "Severe ACTA1-related nemaline myopathy: intranuclear rods, cytoplasmic bodies, and enlarged perinuclear space as characteristic pathological features on muscle biopsies."
authors:
- Labasse C
- Brochier G
- Taratuto AL
- Cadot B
- Rendu J
- Monges S
- Biancalana V
- Quijano-Roy S
- Bui MT
- Chanut A
- Madelaine A
- Lacène E
- Beuvin M
- Amthor H
- Servais L
- de Feraudy Y
- Erro M
- Saccoliti M
- Neto OA
- Fauré J
- Lannes B
- Laugel V
- Coppens S
- Lubieniecki F
- Bello AB
- Laing N
- Evangelista T
- Laporte J
- Böhm J
- Romero NB
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-022-01400-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe ACTA1-related nemaline myopathy: intranuclear rods, cytoplasmic bodies, and enlarged perinuclear space as characteristic pathological features on muscle biopsies.
**Authors:** Labasse C, Brochier G, Taratuto AL, Cadot B, Rendu J, Monges S, Biancalana V, Quijano-Roy S, Bui MT, Chanut A, Madelaine A, Lacène E, Beuvin M, Amthor H, Servais L, de Feraudy Y, Erro M, Saccoliti M, Neto OA, Fauré J, Lannes B, Laugel V, Coppens S, Lubieniecki F, Bello AB, Laing N, Evangelista T, Laporte J, Böhm J, Romero NB
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-022-01400-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-022-01400-0)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2022 Jul 9;10(1):101. doi:
10.1186/s40478-022-01400-0.

Severe ACTA1-related nemaline myopathy: intranuclear rods, cytoplasmic bodies, 
and enlarged perinuclear space as characteristic pathological features on muscle 
biopsies.

Labasse C(#)(1), Brochier G(#)(1), Taratuto AL(2), Cadot B(3), Rendu J(4)(5), 
Monges S(6), Biancalana V(7)(8), Quijano-Roy S(9), Bui MT(1), Chanut A(1), 
Madelaine A(1), Lacène E(1), Beuvin M(1)(3), Amthor H(9), Servais L(10)(11), de 
Feraudy Y(7)(12), Erro M(13), Saccoliti M(2), Neto OA(7), Fauré J(4)(5), Lannes 
B(14), Laugel V(12), Coppens S(15), Lubieniecki F(6), Bello AB(16)(17), Laing 
N(18), Evangelista T(1)(3), Laporte J(7), Böhm J(7), Romero NB(19)(20).

Author information:
(1)Myology Institute, Neuromuscular Morphology Unit, Reference Center of 
Neuromuscular Diseases Nord-Est-IDF, GHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(2)Neuropathology and Neuromuscular Diseases Laboratory, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(3)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Center for Research in Myology, Myology 
Institute, APHP, GHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(4)Laboratoire de Biochimie Et Génétique Moléculaire, Pôle de Biologie, CHU 
Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.
(5)Université Grenoble Alpes, Inserm, U1216, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble 
Institut Neurosciences, Grenoble, France.
(6)Servucio de Neurología Et Neuropatología, Hospital de Pediatría J.P. 
Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(7)Institut de Génétique Et de Biologie Moléculaire Et Cellulaire (IGBMC), 
Inserm U 1258, CNRS UMR 7104, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(8)Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Faculté de Médecine, CHRU, Strasbourg, 
France.
(9)APHP Université Paris-Saclay, Pediatric Neuromuscular Unit, Hôpital 
Universitaire Raymond-Poincaré, Université de Versailles 
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, Garches, France.
(10)Centre de Références Des Maladies Neuromusculaires, Department of 
Paediatrics, University Hospital Liège & University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(11)Department of Paediatrics, MDUK Oxford Neuromuscular Centre, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(12)Department of Neuropediatrics, Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, 
France.
(13)Gutierrez Pediatric Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(14)Department of Pathology, Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, France.
(15)Center of Human Genetics, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(16)Université Paris-Saclay, Integrare Research Unit UMR S951, Inserm, Evry, 
France.
(17)Généthon, Université Evry, Evry, France.
(18)Centre for Medical Research, University of Western Australia, Harry Perkins 
Institute of Medical Research, Perth, Australia.
(19)Myology Institute, Neuromuscular Morphology Unit, Reference Center of 
Neuromuscular Diseases Nord-Est-IDF, GHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. 
nb.romero@institut-myologie.org.
(20)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Center for Research in Myology, Myology 
Institute, APHP, GHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. 
nb.romero@institut-myologie.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Nemaline myopathy (NM) is a muscle disorder with broad clinical and genetic 
heterogeneity. The clinical presentation of affected individuals ranges from 
severe perinatal muscle weakness to milder childhood-onset forms, and the 
disease course and prognosis depends on the gene and mutation type. To date, 14 
causative genes have been identified, and ACTA1 accounts for more than half of 
the severe NM cases. ACTA1 encodes α-actin, one of the principal components of 
the contractile units in skeletal muscle. We established a homogenous cohort of 
ten unreported families with severe NM, and we provide clinical, genetic, 
histological, and ultrastructural data. The patients manifested antenatal or 
neonatal muscle weakness requiring permanent respiratory assistance, and most 
deceased within the first months of life. DNA sequencing identified known or 
novel ACTA1 mutations in all. Morphological analyses of the muscle biopsy 
specimens showed characteristic features of NM histopathology including 
cytoplasmic and intranuclear rods, cytoplasmic bodies, and major myofibrillar 
disorganization. We also detected structural anomalies of the perinuclear space, 
emphasizing a physiological contribution of skeletal muscle α-actin to nuclear 
shape. In-depth investigations of the nuclei confirmed an abnormal localization 
of lamin A/C, Nesprin-1, and Nesprin-2, forming the main constituents of the 
nuclear lamina and the LINC complex and ensuring nuclear envelope integrity. To 
validate the relevance of our findings, we examined muscle samples from three 
previously reported ACTA1 cases, and we identified the same set of structural 
aberrations. Moreover, we measured an increased expression of cardiac α-actin in 
the muscle samples from the patients with longer lifespan, indicating a 
potential compensatory effect. Overall, this study expands the genetic and 
morphological spectrum of severe ACTA1-related nemaline myopathy, improves 
molecular diagnosis, highlights the enlargement of the perinuclear space as an 
ultrastructural hallmark, and indicates a potential genotype/phenotype 
correlation.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-022-01400-0
PMCID: PMC9271256
PMID: 35810298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors reports a conflict of 
interests.