---
reference_id: "PMID:32719287"
title: A metastatic histiocytic sarcoma case with primary involvement of the tonsil.
authors:
- Aytekin A
- Ozet A
- Bilgetekin I
- Ogut B
- Ciltas A
- Benekli M
journal: J Cancer Res Ther
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.188435
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A metastatic histiocytic sarcoma case with primary involvement of the tonsil.
**Authors:** Aytekin A, Ozet A, Bilgetekin I, Ogut B, Ciltas A, Benekli M
**Journal:** J Cancer Res Ther (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0973-1482.188435](https://doi.org/10.4103/0973-1482.188435)

## Content

1. J Cancer Res Ther. 2020 Apr-Jun;16(3):665-667. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.188435.

A metastatic histiocytic sarcoma case with primary involvement of the tonsil.

Aytekin A(1), Ozet A(1), Bilgetekin I(1), Ogut B(2), Ciltas A(1), Benekli M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Gazi University, Ankara, 
Turkey.

Histiocytic sarcoma (HS) is an extremely rare and aggressive hematopoietic 
tumor. Although it can be seen at any anatomic location, the most common primary 
sites are skin as extranodal region, locations including the lymph nodes and 
gastrointestinal tract. To the best of our knowledge, in light of PubMed search, 
this is the first primary tonsillar HS case presented with disseminated 
metastases at the time of diagnosis. A 58-year-old male patient applied with 
swelling on the right side of the neck, difficulty in swallowing, and weight 
loss. Positron emission tomography computed tomography was performed and 
increased pathological 18F fluorodeoxy D glucose uptake was detected in the 
right palatine tonsil, bilateral cervical multiple lymph nodes, liver masses, 
intra abdominal lymph nodes, and nodular lesion in the left adrenal gland. 
Tonsillectomy was performed and the pathological result was reported as HS. The 
patient did not respond to any treatment and had died after 5 months from the 
date of diagnosis. In conclusion, HS is generally diagnosed at advanced stage, 
it has limited chemotherapy response and high mortality rates. To understand 
this rare disease's pathophysiological and clinical features, further 
investigations are needed.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-1482.188435
PMID: 32719287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None