---
reference_id: "PMID:39371255"
title: "Inherited Telomere Biology Disorders: Pathophysiology, Clinical Presentation, Diagnostics, and Treatment."
authors:
- Rolles B
- Tometten M
- Meyer R
- Kirschner M
- Beier F
- Brümmendorf TH
journal: Transfus Med Hemother
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000540109
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited Telomere Biology Disorders: Pathophysiology, Clinical Presentation, Diagnostics, and Treatment.
**Authors:** Rolles B, Tometten M, Meyer R, Kirschner M, Beier F, Brümmendorf TH
**Journal:** Transfus Med Hemother (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000540109](https://doi.org/10.1159/000540109)

## Content

1. Transfus Med Hemother. 2024 Jul 30;51(5):292-309. doi: 10.1159/000540109. 
eCollection 2024 Oct.

Inherited Telomere Biology Disorders: Pathophysiology, Clinical Presentation, 
Diagnostics, and Treatment.

Rolles B(1)(2)(3)(4), Tometten M(3)(4), Meyer R(4)(5), Kirschner M(3)(4), Beier 
F(3)(4), Brümmendorf TH(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(4)Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Duesseldorf (CIO ABCD), 
Cologne, Germany.
(5)Institute for Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Medical Faculty, RWTH 
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Telomeres are the end-capping structures of all eukaryotic 
chromosomes thereby protecting the genome from damage and degradation. During 
the aging process, telomeres shorten continuously with each cell division until 
critically short telomeres prevent further proliferation whereby cells undergo 
terminal differentiation, senescence, or apoptosis. Premature aging due to 
critically short telomere length (TL) can also result from pathogenic germline 
variants in the telomerase complex or related genes that typically counteract 
replicative telomere shortening in germline and certain somatic cell 
populations, e.g., hematopoetic stem cells. Inherited diseases that result in 
altered telomere maintenance are summarized under the term telomere biology 
disorder (TBD).
SUMMARY: Since TL both reflects but more importantly restricts the replicative 
capacity of various human tissues, a sufficient telomere reserve is particularly 
important in cells with high proliferative activity (e.g., hematopoiesis, immune 
cells, intestinal cells, liver, lung, and skin). Consequently, altered telomere 
maintenance as observed in TBDs typically results in premature replicative 
cellular exhaustion in the respective organ systems eventually leading to 
life-threatening complications such as bone marrow failure (BMF), pulmonary 
fibrosis, and liver cirrhosis.
KEY MESSAGES: The recognition of a potential congenital origin in approximately 
10% of adult patients with clinical BMF is of utmost importance for the proper 
diagnosis, appropriate patient and family counseling, to prevent the use of 
inefficient treatment and to avoid therapy-related toxicities including 
appropriate donor selection when patients have to undergo stem cell 
transplantation from related donors. This review summarizes the current state of 
knowledge about TBDs with particular focus on the clinical manifestation 
patterns in children (termed early onset TBD) compared to adults (late-onset 
TBD) including typical treatment- and disease course-related complications as 
well as their prognosis and adequate therapy. Thereby, it aims to raise 
awareness for a disease group that is currently still highly underdiagnosed 
particularly when it first manifests itself in adulthood.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000540109
PMCID: PMC11452174
PMID: 39371255

Conflict of interest statement: FB receives scientific support from RepeatDx, 
Vancouver. For all other authors, there is no conflict of interest to disclose 
in relation to this work.