---
reference_id: "PMID:8184191"
title: "[Liver pathologies due to peroxisome disorders]."
authors:
- Lovisetto P
- Raviolo P
journal: Recenti Prog Med
year: '1994'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Liver pathologies due to peroxisome disorders].
**Authors:** Lovisetto P, Raviolo P
**Journal:** Recenti Prog Med (1994)

## Content

1. Recenti Prog Med. 1994 Feb;85(2):134-41.

[Liver pathologies due to peroxisome disorders].

[Article in Italian]

Lovisetto P(1), Raviolo P.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna, Università, Torino.

Peroxisomes or microbodies are peculiar subcellular organelles with an important 
role in the metabolism of a variety of different organic compounds. Particularly 
they are an important site of bile acids synthesis. Some hepatic diseases, 
mainly cholestatic, can to be reconnected at disorders of bile acids synthesis 
by these organelles. From the biochemical point some diseases present 
alterations of the cholesterol side chain (Zellweger syndrome, pseudo-Zellweger 
syndrome, infantile Refsum's disease, neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy), other 
diseases present errors involving the steroid nucleus (familial giant cell 
hepatitis). Zellweger disease or cerebro-hepato-renal syndrome is characterized 
clinically by skeletal changes, muscle hypotonia, renal cysts, psychosomatic 
retardation and persistent cholestasis and from the ultrastructural standpoint 
by the virtual absence of liver cell peroxisomes. Pseudo-Zellweger disease shows 
many of the clinical features of Zellweger disease but differs from this 
condition on account of the presence of abundant peroxisomes in the liver cells. 
Infantile Refsum's disease and neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy show typical 
clinical disorders and liver damage leading to cirrhosis. "Familial giant cell 
hepatitis" is characterized by jaundice from the first days of life, 
hepatosplenomegaly, cholestasis, lack of physical malformations. The disorder is 
due to defective biosynthesis of the bile acids with formation of allo-bile 
acids.

PMID: 8184191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]