---
reference_id: "PMID:27601257"
title: "3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency: Mutational spectrum derived from comprehensive newborn screening."
authors:
- Fonseca H
- Azevedo L
- Serrano C
- Sousa C
- Marcão A
- Vilarinho L
journal: Gene
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.09.003
keywords:
- Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mass Screening
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/enzymology, genetics"
- Mutation
- Portugal
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency: Mutational spectrum derived from comprehensive newborn screening.
**Authors:** Fonseca H, Azevedo L, Serrano C, Sousa C, Marcão A, Vilarinho L
**Journal:** Gene (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2016.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2016.09.003)

## Content

1. Gene. 2016 Dec 15;594(2):203-210. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.09.003. Epub 2016
Sep  4.

3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency: Mutational spectrum derived from
comprehensive newborn screening.

Fonseca H(1), Azevedo L(2), Serrano C(3), Sousa C(4), Marcão A(4), Vilarinho
L(4).

Author information:
(1)Newborn Screening, Metabolism & Genetics Unit, Human Genetics Department,
National Institute of Health Dr Ricardo Jorge, Porto, Portugal. Electronic
address: helena.fonseca@insa.min-saude.pt.
(2)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto,
Population Genetics and Evolution, Porto, Portugal; IPATIMUP-Institute of
Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;
Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto,
Population Genetics and Evolution, Porto, Portugal; IPATIMUP-Institute of
Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(4)Newborn Screening, Metabolism & Genetics Unit, Human Genetics Department,
National Institute of Health Dr Ricardo Jorge, Porto, Portugal.

The deficiency of 3-methycrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (3-MCC; EC 6.4.1.4) is an
autosomal recessive organic aciduria that is included in the newborn screening
programs of several countries. This study reports data mainly obtained from the
Portuguese newborn screening program collected over a ten-year period. Analysis
of the MCCC1 and MCCC2 genes yielded 26 previously unreported mutations and a
variant of clinically unknown significance. These mutations are discussed in the
context of their likely impact on the function of the 3-MCC enzyme, with a view
to exploring whether a phenotype-genotype correlation might be discerned.
Further, these mutations were analysed in the context of what is known of the
MCCC1 and MCCC2 mutational spectra, information that will be useful in both
clinical and laboratory practice.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.09.003
PMID: 27601257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
