---
reference_id: "PMID:35377828"
title: "Role of the bone marrow immune microenvironment in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia pathogenesis: novel mechanisms and insights into clonal propagation."
authors:
- Mangaonkar AA
- Patnaik MM
journal: Leuk Lymphoma
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/10428194.2022.2056175
keywords:
- Bone Marrow/metabolism
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics"
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Chronic/genetics, metabolism"
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile"
- Monocytes/metabolism
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the bone marrow immune microenvironment in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia pathogenesis: novel mechanisms and insights into clonal propagation.
**Authors:** Mangaonkar AA, Patnaik MM
**Journal:** Leuk Lymphoma (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10428194.2022.2056175](https://doi.org/10.1080/10428194.2022.2056175)

## Content

1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2022 Aug;63(8):1792-1800. doi: 10.1080/10428194.2022.2056175.
Epub 2022 Apr 4.

Role of the bone marrow immune microenvironment in chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia pathogenesis: novel mechanisms and insights into clonal propagation.

Mangaonkar AA(1), Patnaik MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA.

Recent studies in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) involving clonal
dendritic cell (DC) aggregates and association with systemic immune
dysregulation have highlighted novel and potentially targetable pathways of
disease progression. CMML DC aggregates are populated by heterogeneous cell
types such as CD123+ plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs),
CD11c + myeloid-derived DCs (mDCs), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs),
monocytes, and associate with an immune checkpoint called indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). Systemically, these IDO + DC aggregates are associated
with immune tolerance marked by regulatory T cell expansion, likely mediated by
aberrant DC-T cell interactions occurring within the bone marrow (BM)
microenvironment. Somatic mutational events in CMML such as ASXL1 and NRAS
mutations cooperate to induce T cell exhaustion and contribute toward disease
progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). In this review, we explore the role
of aging-induced alterations in the BM immune microenvironment, aberrant innate
immune and proinflammatory signaling, and the adaptive immune system in CMML.

DOI: 10.1080/10428194.2022.2056175
PMID: 35377828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
