---
reference_id: "PMID:10204840"
title: "Cleidocranial dysplasia: clinical and molecular genetics."
authors:
- Mundlos S
journal: J Med Genet
year: '1999'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cleidocranial dysplasia: clinical and molecular genetics.
**Authors:** Mundlos S
**Journal:** J Med Genet (1999)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 1999 Mar;36(3):177-82.

Cleidocranial dysplasia: clinical and molecular genetics.

Mundlos S(1).

Author information:
(1)Universitätskinderklinik, Mainz, Germany.

Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) (MIM 119600) is an autosomal dominant skeletal 
dysplasia characterised by abnormal clavicles, patent sutures and fontanelles, 
supernumerary teeth, short stature, and a variety of other skeletal changes. The 
disease gene has been mapped to chromosome 6p21 within a region containing 
CBFA1, a member of the runt family of transcription factors. Mutations in the 
CBFA1 gene that presumably lead to synthesis of an inactive gene product were 
identified in patients with CCD. The function of CBFA1 during skeletal 
development was further elucidated by the generation of mutated mice in which 
the Cbfa1 gene locus was targeted. Loss of one Cbfa1 allele (+/-) leads to a 
phenotype very similar to human CCD, featuring hypoplasia of the clavicles and 
patent fontanelles. Loss of both alleles (-/-) leads to a complete absence of 
bone owing to a lack of osteoblast differentiation. These studies show that 
haploinsufficiency of CBFA1 causes the CCD phenotype. CBFA1 controls 
differentiation of precursor cells into osteoblasts and is thus essential for 
membranous as well as endochondral bone formation.

PMCID: PMC1734317
PMID: 10204840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]