---
reference_id: "PMID:39930170"
title: Novel Potentially Pathogenic Variants in TBC1D32 Cause Non-syndromic Rod-Cone Degeneration.
authors:
- Sangermano R
- Place EM
- Pierce EA
- Bujakowska KM
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-76550-6_7
keywords:
- Humans
- Cone-Rod Dystrophies/genetics
- GTPase-Activating Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/pathology
- Retinal Rod Photoreceptor Cells/pathology
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Potentially Pathogenic Variants in TBC1D32 Cause Non-syndromic Rod-Cone Degeneration.
**Authors:** Sangermano R, Place EM, Pierce EA, Bujakowska KM
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-76550-6_7](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-76550-6_7)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2025;1468:41-44. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-76550-6_7.

Novel Potentially Pathogenic Variants in TBC1D32 Cause Non-syndromic Rod-Cone 
Degeneration.

Sangermano R(1), Place EM(1), Pierce EA(1), Bujakowska KM(2).

Author information:
(1)Ocular Genomics Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Department of 
Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Ocular Genomics Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Department of 
Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
kinga_bujakowska@meei.harvard.edu.

Inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs) are a group of Mendelian disorders 
characterized by progressive dysfunction and loss of rod and/or cone 
photoreceptors. The most common IRD is rod-cone degeneration (RCD, also known as 
retinitis pigmentosa), which starts with rod photoreceptor cell loss and 
eventually can lead to cone photoreceptor dysfunction and death. Thus, RCD 
initially manifests with loss of peripheral vision and night blindness and can 
lead to central vision loss as well. RCD is genetically heterogeneous with 
mutations in over 90 genes that have been so far associated with this disease. 
Recently, TBC1D32 has been proposed as a novel recessive RCD gene, as rare 
bi-allelic pathogenic variants were found in three unrelated European families. 
In this report, we describe a fourth RCD family of European descent carrying two 
novel mutations in TBC1D32, thus providing secondary evidence for this recent 
association.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-76550-6_7
PMID: 39930170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]