---
reference_id: "PMID:19542604"
title: The microtubule-associated protein tau is also phosphorylated on tyrosine.
authors:
- Lebouvier T
- Scales TM
- Williamson R
- Noble W
- Duyckaerts C
- Hanger DP
- Reynolds CH
- Anderton BH
- Derkinderen P
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1116
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The microtubule-associated protein tau is also phosphorylated on tyrosine.
**Authors:** Lebouvier T, Scales TM, Williamson R, Noble W, Duyckaerts C, Hanger DP, Reynolds CH, Anderton BH, Derkinderen P
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-2009-1116](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-2009-1116)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;18(1):1-9. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1116.

The microtubule-associated protein tau is also phosphorylated on tyrosine.

Lebouvier T(1), Scales TM, Williamson R, Noble W, Duyckaerts C, Hanger DP, 
Reynolds CH, Anderton BH, Derkinderen P.

Author information:
(1)Inserm, U913, Nantes, France.

Tau protein is the principal component of the neurofibrillary tangles found in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), where it is hyperphosphorylated on serine and 
threonine residues. It is hypothesized that this hyperphosphorylation 
contributes to neurodegeneration through the destabilization of microtubules. 
There is now evidence that phosphorylation of tau can also occur on tyrosine 
residues. Human tau has five tyrosines numbered 18, 29, 197, 310, and 394, 
according to the sequence of the longest CNS isoform. Tyrosines 18, 197, and 394 
have been shown to be phosphorylated in the brain of patients with AD whereas 
tyrosine 394 is the only residue that has been described to date that is 
phosphorylated in physiological conditions. Src family kinases and spleen 
tyrosine kinase (Syk) have been shown to phosphorylate tyrosine 18 while c-Abl 
is capable of phosphorylating tyrosine 394. Recently, a dual specificity kinase 
termed TTBK1 has been characterized in human brain and shown to be able to 
phosphorylate residue 197 of tau. Data about the role of tau tyrosine 
phosphorylation in neuronal physiology are still scarce and preliminary. In 
contrast, there is mounting evidence suggesting that tau tyrosine 
phosphorylation is an early event in the pathophysiology of AD and that Fyn and 
c-Abl are critical in the neurodegenerative process which occurs in tauopathies.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1116
PMID: 19542604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]