---
reference_id: "PMID:32281145"
title: "Solar ultraviolet-induced DNA damage response: Melanocytes story in transformation to environmental melanomagenesis."
authors:
- Sarkar S
- Gaddameedhi S
journal: Environ Mol Mutagen
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/em.22370
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Solar ultraviolet-induced DNA damage response: Melanocytes story in transformation to environmental melanomagenesis.
**Authors:** Sarkar S, Gaddameedhi S
**Journal:** Environ Mol Mutagen (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/em.22370](https://doi.org/10.1002/em.22370)

## Content

1. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2020 Aug;61(7):736-751. doi: 10.1002/em.22370. Epub 2020 
May 8.

Solar ultraviolet-induced DNA damage response: Melanocytes story in 
transformation to environmental melanomagenesis.

Sarkar S(1), Gaddameedhi S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Washington State University, Spokane, Washington, USA.
(2)Sleep and Performance Research Center, Washington State University, Spokane, 
Washington, USA.

Exposure to sunlight is both beneficial, as it heats the planet to a comfortable 
temperature, and potentially harmful, since sunlight contains ultraviolet 
radiation (UVR), which is deemed detrimental for living organisms. Earth's ozone 
layer plays a vital role in blocking most of the extremely dangerous UVC; 
however, low frequency/energy UVR (i.e., UVB and UVA) seeps through in minute 
amount and reaches the Earth's surface. Both UVB and UVA are physiologically 
responsible for a plethora of skin ailments, including skin cancers. The UVR is 
readily absorbed by the genomic DNA of skin cells, causing DNA bond distortion 
and UV-induced DNA damage. As a defense mechanism, the DNA damage response (DDR) 
signaling in skin cells activates nucleotide excision repair (NER), which is 
responsible for the removal of UVR-induced DNA photolesions and helps maintain 
the genomic integrity of the cells. Failure of proper NER function leads to 
mutagenesis and development of skin cancers. One of the deadliest form of skin 
cancers is melanoma which originates upon the genetic transformation of 
melanocytes, melanin producing skin cells. NER is a well-studied DNA repair 
system in the whole skin, as a tissue, but not much is known about it in 
melanocytes. Therefore, this review encapsulates NER in melanocytes, with a 
specific focus on its functional regulators and their cross talks due to skin 
heterogeneity and divulging the potential knowledge gap in the field.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/em.22370
PMCID: PMC9675355
PMID: 32281145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTERESTS The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.