---
reference_id: "PMID:18321250"
title: Neuroimaging findings in hyperargininemia.
authors:
- Güngör S
- Akinci A
- Firat AK
- Tabel Y
- Alkan A
journal: J Neuroimaging
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2007.00217.x
keywords:
- Arginine/metabolism
- "Aspartic Acid/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- Atrophy
- "Basal Ganglia Cerebrovascular Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
- Brain Diseases/diagnosis
- Cerebellum/pathology
- Cerebral Cortex/pathology
- "Child, Preschool"
- Choline/metabolism
- Consanguinity
- Creatine/metabolism
- "Dominance, Cerebral/physiology"
- Energy Metabolism/physiology
- Humans
- Hyperargininemia/diagnosis
- "Image Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Male
- "Nerve Fibers, Myelinated/pathology"
- Putamen/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroimaging findings in hyperargininemia.
**Authors:** Güngör S, Akinci A, Firat AK, Tabel Y, Alkan A
**Journal:** J Neuroimaging (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1552-6569.2007.00217.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1552-6569.2007.00217.x)

## Content

1. J Neuroimaging. 2008 Oct;18(4):457-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2007.00217.x.
Epub 2008 Jan 7.

Neuroimaging findings in hyperargininemia.

Güngör S(1), Akinci A, Firat AK, Tabel Y, Alkan A.

Author information:
(1)Inonu University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Malatya,
Turkey. gungorserdal@yahoo.com

In hyperarginenemia, there is a defect in argininase enzyme, which is a
catalyzer of urea cycle. Though the pathogenesis of neuronal damage in
hyperargininemia is not clear, high serum and cerebrospinal fluid arginine
levels can be directly related with neuronal damage. In this study, our aim was
to assess brain magnetic resonance images and magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS) patterns of two siblings with hyperarginenemia. We acquired single voxel
MRS from the white matter to show the myelination pattern and to figure out any
abnormal peak of metabolite stored due to enzymatic defect. We observed mild
cerebral and cerebellar atrophy and infarct at bilateral posterior putamen and
insular cortex localization on conventional images and elevated choline/creatine
ratios and abnormal peak at 3.8 ppm, most likely representing arginine
deposition. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first article revealing
the brain MRS pattern of hyperargininemia. We reported the clinical and imaging
findings of patients and discuss the correlation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2007.00217.x
PMID: 18321250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
