---
reference_id: "PMID:33137500"
title: "Dientamoeba fragilis in the North-East of Italy: Prevalence study and treatment."
authors:
- Clemente L
- Pasut M
- Carlet R
- Ruscio M
- Fontana F
journal: Parasitol Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2020.102227
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dientamoeba fragilis in the North-East of Italy: Prevalence study and treatment.
**Authors:** Clemente L, Pasut M, Carlet R, Ruscio M, Fontana F
**Journal:** Parasitol Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parint.2020.102227](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parint.2020.102227)

## Content

1. Parasitol Int. 2021 Feb;80:102227. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2020.102227. Epub
2020  Nov 1.

Dientamoeba fragilis in the North-East of Italy: Prevalence study and treatment.

Clemente L(1), Pasut M(2), Carlet R(2), Ruscio M(2), Fontana F(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital Giuliano Isontina (ASU 
GI), Trieste, Italy. Electronic address: libera.clemente@asugi.sanita.fvg.it.
(2)Division of Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital Giuliano Isontina (ASU 
GI), Trieste, Italy.

Dientamoeba fragilis is an intestinal protozoan, an inhabitant of the human 
gastrointestinal tract, with a worldwide distribution. The reported prevalence 
of D. fragilis varies worldwide in different populations between 0.3% and 82.9%, 
and its role as a pathogen is still unclear. The parasite has been identified in 
the faeces of asymptomatic patients and with different acute and chronic 
symptoms, like abdominal pain, diarrhoea, flatulence, nausea and vomiting. The 
aims of this study were to evaluate the prevalence of D. fragilis in the 
North-East of Italy, and the clinical improvement of symptoms after recommended 
treatment with paromomycin or metronidazole. Furthermore, a literature review of 
D. fragilis prevalence studies in Italy was carried out to show the Italian 
situation. Of 575 enrolled people, 85 (14.8%) were positive for D. fragilis. The 
most prevalent symptoms were abdominal pain 28.2%, anal itching 27.1%, watery 
diarrhoea 18.8%, meteorism 16.5% and nausea/lack of appetite 14.1%. The high 
rate of anal itching was unexpected, because it wasn't a common symptom. 32 
patients were co-infected with B. hominis (37.7%) and three with G. lamblia 
(3.5%). Our study showed paromomycin had a high efficacy for treatment of D. 
fragilis infections 100.0% (45/45), while caution must be used when using 
metronidazole 53.3% (24/40). We recommend paromomycin for empirical treatment, 
given its great effectiveness in our population.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2020.102227
PMID: 33137500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]