---
reference_id: "PMID:16364894"
title: "Spinal muscular atrophy: a deficiency in a ubiquitous protein; a motor neuron-specific disease."
authors:
- Monani UR
journal: Neuron
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.12.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal muscular atrophy: a deficiency in a ubiquitous protein; a motor neuron-specific disease.
**Authors:** Monani UR
**Journal:** Neuron (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2005.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2005.12.001)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2005 Dec 22;48(6):885-96. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.12.001.

Spinal muscular atrophy: a deficiency in a ubiquitous protein; a motor 
neuron-specific disease.

Monani UR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease, 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York 10032, USA. 
um2105@columbia.edu

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neurodegenerative disease in humans and the 
most common genetic cause of infant mortality. The disease results in motor 
neuron loss and skeletal muscle atrophy. Despite a range of disease phenotypes, 
SMA is caused by mutations in a single gene, the Survival of Motor Neuron 1 
(SMN1) gene. Recent advances have shed light on functions of the protein product 
of this gene and the pathophysiology of the disease, yet, fundamental questions 
remain. This review attempts to highlight some of the recent advances made in 
the understanding of the disease and how loss of the ubiquitously expressed 
survival of motor neurons (SMN) protein results in the SMA phenotype. Answers to 
some of the questions raised may ultimately result in a viable treatment for 
SMA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.12.001
PMID: 16364894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]