---
reference_id: "PMID:34807554"
title: SETBP1 Haploinsufficiency Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Morgan A
- Srivastava S
- Duis J
- van Bon B
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SETBP1 Haploinsufficiency Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Morgan A, Srivastava S, Duis J, van Bon B

## Content

1. SETBP1 Haploinsufficiency Disorder.

Morgan A(1), Srivastava S(2), Duis J(3), van Bon B(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2021 Nov 18 [updated 2024 May 9].

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, University of Melbourne, Royal 
Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia
(2)Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
(3)Children's Hospital Colorado, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, Colorado
(4)Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SETBP1 haploinsufficiency disorder (SETBP1-HD) is 
characterized by hypotonia and mild motor developmental delay; intellectual 
abilities ranging from normal to severe disability; speech and language 
disorder; behavioral problems (most commonly attention/concentration deficits 
and hyperactivity, impulsivity), and refractive errors and strabismus. Typically 
children with SETBP1-HD whose intellect is in the normal or borderline range (IQ 
80-90) were diagnosed following genetic testing for behavioral problems and/or 
severe speech and language disorders (respectively: the inability to produce 
sounds in words correctly, and deficits in the understanding and/or expression 
of words and sentences). To date, 47 individuals with SETBP1-HD have been 
reported.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SETBP1-HD is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic loss-of-function variant in 
SETBP1 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is supportive, often 
including multidisciplinary specialists from pediatrics, neurology, physiatry, 
occupational and physical therapy, speech-language pathology, psychiatry, 
ophthalmology, and medical genetics. Early intervention programs and special 
education programs may be needed to address developmental disabilities. 
Surveillance: Monitoring of: feeding and weight gain; developmental/educational 
progress and needs; speech and language progress and needs; psychiatric and 
behavioral interventions; ophthalmologic interventions.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SETBP1-HD is an autosomal dominant disorder typically caused 
by a de novo pathogenic variant. Most probands reported to date whose parents 
have undergone molecular genetic testing have the disorder as the result of a de 
novo SETBP1 pathogenic variant. Rarely, individuals with SETBP1-HD may have the 
disorder as the result of a SETBP1 pathogenic variant inherited from a parent 
with germline (or somatic and germline) mosaicism. Once the SETBP1 pathogenic 
variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 34807554