---
reference_id: "PMID:33960258"
title: "Pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes."
authors:
- Blaes F
journal: Expert Rev Neurother
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/14737175.2021.1927713
keywords:
- Autoantibodies
- Humans
- Neoplasms
- "Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System/diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes.
**Authors:** Blaes F
**Journal:** Expert Rev Neurother (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737175.2021.1927713](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737175.2021.1927713)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2021 Jun;21(6):675-686. doi: 
10.1080/14737175.2021.1927713. Epub 2021 May 27.

Pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes.

Blaes F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, KKH Gummersbach, Gummersbach, Germany.

Introduction: Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes (PNS) are a rare 
heterogeneous group of neurological diseases associated with tumors. These 
syndromes are the result of a cross-reactive immune response against antigens 
shared by the tumor and the nervous system. The discovery of an increasing 
number of autoantigens and the identification of tumoral factors leading to a 
substantial antitumoral immune response makes this topic highly innovative.Areas 
covered: This review covers the clinical, oncological, pathophysiological 
aspects of both immunological PNS groups. One is associated with autoantibodies 
against intracellular onconeural antibodies, which are highly specific for an 
underlying tumor, although the disease is mainly T-cell mediated. In contrast, 
PNS associated with pathogenic surface-binding/receptor autoantibodies, which 
are often responsive to immunosuppressive treatment, may manifest as 
paraneoplastic and non-paraneoplastic diseases. The most frequent tumors 
associated with PNS are (small cell) lung cancer, gynecological tumors, thymoma, 
lymphoma, and, in children, neuroblastoma. A special interest is given to PNS, 
induced by immune checkpoint-inhibitors (ICIs).Expert opinion: Research in PNS, 
including the group of ICI-induced PNS provide new insights in both the 
pathophysiology of PNS and tumor immune interactions and offers new treatment 
options for this group of severe neurological diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/14737175.2021.1927713
PMID: 33960258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]