---
reference_id: "PMID:19643914"
title: Transcriptional dysregulation of TrkA associates with neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 17.
authors:
- Shah AG
- Friedman MJ
- Huang S
- Roberts M
- Li XJ
- Li S
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp363
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- Cell Survival
- "Cerebellum/metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression
- "Green Fluorescent Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- Mutation
- "Nerve Degeneration/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neurites/metabolism, physiology"
- PC12 Cells
- Protein Binding
- "Purkinje Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Rats
- "Receptor, trkA/genetics, metabolism"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Transfection
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeats/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptional dysregulation of TrkA associates with neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 17.
**Authors:** Shah AG, Friedman MJ, Huang S, Roberts M, Li XJ, Li S
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp363](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp363)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Nov 1;18(21):4141-52. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp363. Epub 2009
Jul  30.

Transcriptional dysregulation of TrkA associates with neurodegeneration in
spinocerebellar ataxia type 17.

Shah AG(1), Friedman MJ, Huang S, Roberts M, Li XJ, Li S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA 30322, USA.

TATA binding protein (TBP), a universal transcription factor, is broadly
required by nuclear RNA polymerases for the initiation of transcription. TBP
contains a polymorphic polyglutamine tract in its N-terminal region, and
expansion of this tract leads to spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17), one of
nine dominantly inherited neurodegenerative diseases caused by polyglutamine
expansion in the affected proteins. The expanded polyglutamine proteins are
ubiquitously expressed, but cause selective and characteristic neurodegeneration
in distinct brain regions in each disease. Unlike many other polyglutamine
proteins, whose functions are not yet fully understood, TBP is a
well-characterized transcription factor that is restricted to the nucleus. Thus,
investigating how mutant TBP mediates neuropathology should help elucidate the
mechanisms by which transcriptional dysregulation contributes to neuronal
dysfunction and/or neurodegeneration in polyglutamine diseases. To this end, we
characterized cellular and mouse models expressing polyQ-expanded TBP. The cell
model exhibits characteristic features of neuronal dysfunction, including
decreased cell viability and defective neurite outgrowth. We found that the
high-affinity nerve growth factor receptor, TrkA, is down-regulated by mutant
TBP in cells. Down-regulation of TrkA also occurs in the cerebellum of SCA17
transgenic mice prior to Purkinje cell degeneration. Mutant TBP binds more Sp1,
reduces its occupancy of the TrkA promoter and inhibits the activity of the TrkA
promoter. These findings suggest that the transcriptional down-regulation of
TrkA by mutant TBP contributes to SCA17 pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp363
PMCID: PMC2758144
PMID: 19643914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
