---
reference_id: "PMID:27440879"
title: Viral Macro Domains Reverse Protein ADP-Ribosylation.
authors:
- Li C
- Debing Y
- Jankevicius G
- Neyts J
- Ahel I
- Coutard B
- Canard B
journal: J Virol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1128/JVI.00705-16
keywords:
- Adenosine Diphosphate Ribose/metabolism
- Hepatitis E virus/physiology
- Humans
- Hydrolysis
- Polyproteins/metabolism
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Viral Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Viral Macro Domains Reverse Protein ADP-Ribosylation.
**Authors:** Li C, Debing Y, Jankevicius G, Neyts J, Ahel I, Coutard B, Canard B
**Journal:** J Virol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.00705-16](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00705-16)

## Content

1. J Virol. 2016 Sep 12;90(19):8478-86. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00705-16. Print 2016 Oct
 1.

Viral Macro Domains Reverse Protein ADP-Ribosylation.

Li C(1), Debing Y(2), Jankevicius G(3), Neyts J(2), Ahel I(3), Coutard B(4),
Canard B(4).

Author information:
(1)CNRS, AFMB UMR 7257, Marseille, France Aix-Marseille Université, AFMB UMR
7257, Marseille, France.
(2)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(4)CNRS, AFMB UMR 7257, Marseille, France Aix-Marseille Université, AFMB UMR
7257, Marseille, France bruno.coutard@afmb.univ-mrs.fr
bruno.canard@afmb.univ-mrs.fr.

ADP-ribosylation is a posttranslational protein modification in which ADP-ribose
is transferred from NAD(+) to specific acceptors to regulate a wide variety of
cellular processes. The macro domain is an ancient and highly evolutionarily
conserved protein domain widely distributed throughout all kingdoms of life,
including viruses. The human TARG1/C6orf130, MacroD1, and MacroD2 proteins can
reverse ADP-ribosylation by acting on ADP-ribosylated substrates through the
hydrolytic activity of their macro domains. Here, we report that the macro
domain from hepatitis E virus (HEV) serves as an ADP-ribose-protein hydrolase
for mono-ADP-ribose (MAR) and poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) chain removal
(de-MARylation and de-PARylation, respectively) from mono- and
poly(ADP)-ribosylated proteins, respectively. The presence of the HEV helicase
in cis dramatically increases the binding of the macro domain to
poly(ADP-ribose) and stimulates the de-PARylation activity. Abrogation of the
latter dramatically decreases replication of an HEV subgenomic replicon. The
de-MARylation activity is present in all three pathogenic positive-sense,
single-stranded RNA [(+)ssRNA] virus families which carry a macro domain:
Coronaviridae (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus and human
coronavirus 229E), Togaviridae (Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus), and
Hepeviridae (HEV), indicating that it might be a significant tropism and/or
pathogenic determinant.
IMPORTANCE: Protein ADP-ribosylation is a covalent posttranslational
modification regulating cellular protein activities in a dynamic fashion to
modulate and coordinate a variety of cellular processes. Three viral families,
Coronaviridae, Togaviridae, and Hepeviridae, possess macro domains embedded in
their polyproteins. Here, we show that viral macro domains reverse cellular
ADP-ribosylation, potentially cutting the signal of a viral infection in the
cell. Various poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases which are notorious guardians of
cellular integrity are demodified by macro domains from members of these virus
families. In the case of hepatitis E virus, the adjacent viral helicase domain
dramatically increases the binding of the macro domain to PAR and simulates the
demodification activity.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00705-16
PMCID: PMC5021415
PMID: 27440879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
