---
reference_id: "PMID:30215301"
title: "Does occlusal splint affect posture? A randomized controlled trial."
authors:
- De Giorgi I DDS
- "Castroflorio T DDS, PhD"
- Cugliari G MSc
- "Deregibus A MD, DDS, PhD"
journal: Cranio
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/08869634.2018.1511265
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does occlusal splint affect posture? A randomized controlled trial.
**Authors:** De Giorgi I DDS, Castroflorio T DDS, PhD, Cugliari G MSc, Deregibus A MD, DDS, PhD
**Journal:** Cranio (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08869634.2018.1511265](https://doi.org/10.1080/08869634.2018.1511265)

## Content

1. Cranio. 2020 Jul;38(4):264-272. doi: 10.1080/08869634.2018.1511265. Epub 2018 
Sep 14.

Does occlusal splint affect posture? A randomized controlled trial.

De Giorgi I DDS(1), Castroflorio T DDS, PhD(2), Cugliari G MSc(3)(4), Deregibus 
A MD, DDS, PhD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Gnathology Unit, Dental School, University 
of Torino , Torino, Italy.
(2)Department of Surgical Sciences, Specialization School of Orthodontics, 
Dental School, University of Torino , Torino, Italy.
(3)Department of Statistics and Quantitative Methods, University of 
Milano-Bicocca , Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino , Torino, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of an occlusal 
splint on body posture of intra-articular temporomandibular joint (TMJ) 
disorders patients.
METHODS: The study was performed on 45 women affected by TMJ disorders divided 
into an occlusal splint group and a control group. Rasterstereographic 
recordings were performed at baseline and after 1, 3, and 6 months, in order to 
analyze the following postural parameters: trunk inclination, cervical and 
lumbar arrows, kyphotic and lordotic angles, trunk imbalance, pelvic tilt and 
torsion.
RESULTS: Regarding the postural parameters in the intragroup analysis, no 
significant differences were detected. The analysis between the two groups 
revealed significant differences concerning the cervical arrow, the kyphotic and 
lordotic angles.
DISCUSSION: Even if some differences were found between the control and the 
occlusal splint group, the low range of statistical significance made these 
results not significant from a clinical point of view.

DOI: 10.1080/08869634.2018.1511265
PMID: 30215301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]