---
reference_id: "PMID:35893124"
title: "The Core Splicing Factors EFTUD2, SNRPB and TXNL4A Are Essential for Neural Crest and Craniofacial Development."
authors:
- Park BY
- Tachi-Duprat M
- Ihewulezi C
- Devotta A
- Saint-Jeannet JP
journal: J Dev Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jdb10030029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Core Splicing Factors EFTUD2, SNRPB and TXNL4A Are Essential for Neural Crest and Craniofacial Development.
**Authors:** Park BY, Tachi-Duprat M, Ihewulezi C, Devotta A, Saint-Jeannet JP
**Journal:** J Dev Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jdb10030029](https://doi.org/10.3390/jdb10030029)

## Content

1. J Dev Biol. 2022 Jul 8;10(3):29. doi: 10.3390/jdb10030029.

The Core Splicing Factors EFTUD2, SNRPB and TXNL4A Are Essential for Neural 
Crest and Craniofacial Development.

Park BY(1), Tachi-Duprat M(1), Ihewulezi C(1), Devotta A(1), Saint-Jeannet 
JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathobiology, College of Dentistry, New York 
University, 345 East 24th Street, New York, NY 10010, USA.

Mandibulofacial dysostosis (MFD) is a human congenital disorder characterized by 
hypoplastic neural-crest-derived craniofacial bones often associated with outer 
and middle ear defects. There is growing evidence that mutations in components 
of the spliceosome are a major cause for MFD. Genetic variants affecting the 
function of several core splicing factors, namely SF3B4, SF3B2, EFTUD2, SNRPB 
and TXNL4A, are responsible for MFD in five related but distinct syndromes known 
as Nager and Rodriguez syndromes (NRS), craniofacial microsomia (CFM), 
mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM), cerebro-costo-mandibular 
syndrome (CCMS) and Burn-McKeown syndrome (BMKS), respectively. Animal models of 
NRS and MFDM indicate that MFD results from an early depletion of neural crest 
progenitors through a mechanism that involves apoptosis. Here we characterize 
the knockdown phenotype of Eftud2, Snrpb and Txnl4a in Xenopus embryos at 
different stages of neural crest and craniofacial development. Our results point 
to defects in cranial neural crest cell formation as the likely culprit for MFD 
associated with EFTUD2, SNRPB and TXNL4A haploinsufficiency, and suggest a 
commonality in the etiology of these craniofacial spliceosomopathies.

DOI: 10.3390/jdb10030029
PMCID: PMC9326569
PMID: 35893124

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.