---
reference_id: "PMID:24582806"
title: EFCAB7 and IQCE regulate hedgehog signaling by tethering the EVC-EVC2 complex to the base of primary cilia.
authors:
- Pusapati GV
- Hughes CE
- Dorn KV
- Zhang D
- Sugianto P
- Aravind L
- Rohatgi R
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.01.021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EFCAB7 and IQCE regulate hedgehog signaling by tethering the EVC-EVC2 complex to the base of primary cilia.
**Authors:** Pusapati GV, Hughes CE, Dorn KV, Zhang D, Sugianto P, Aravind L, Rohatgi R
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2014.01.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2014.01.021)

## Content

1. Dev Cell. 2014 Mar 10;28(5):483-96. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.01.021. Epub
2014  Feb 27.

EFCAB7 and IQCE regulate hedgehog signaling by tethering the EVC-EVC2 complex to 
the base of primary cilia.

Pusapati GV(1), Hughes CE(1), Dorn KV(1), Zhang D(2), Sugianto P(1), Aravind 
L(3), Rohatgi R(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA.
(3)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA. Electronic address: 
aravind@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.
(4)Departments of Biochemistry and Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address: rrohatgi@stanford.edu.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway depends on primary cilia in vertebrates, but the 
signaling machinery within cilia remains incompletely defined. We report the 
identification of a complex between two ciliary proteins, EFCAB7 and IQCE, which 
positively regulates the Hh pathway. The EFCAB7-IQCE module anchors the EVC-EVC2 
complex in a signaling microdomain at the base of cilia. EVC and EVC2 genes are 
mutated in Ellis van Creveld and Weyers syndromes, characterized by impaired Hh 
signaling in skeletal, cardiac, and orofacial tissues. EFCAB7 binds to a 
C-terminal disordered region in EVC2 that is deleted in Weyers patients. EFCAB7 
depletion mimics the Weyers cellular phenotype-the mislocalization of EVC-EVC2 
within cilia and impaired activation of the transcription factor GLI2. 
Evolutionary analysis suggests that emergence of these complexes might have been 
important for adaptation of an ancient organelle, the cilium, for an 
animal-specific signaling network.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.01.021
PMCID: PMC4027042
PMID: 24582806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]