---
reference_id: "PMID:33490061"
title: Modeling Poliovirus Infection Using Human Engineered Neural Tissue Enriched With Motor Neuron Derived From Embryonic Stem Cells.
authors:
- Cosset É
- Hibaoui Y
- Ilmjärv S
- Dietrich PY
- Tapparel C
- Krause KH
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.593106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling Poliovirus Infection Using Human Engineered Neural Tissue Enriched With Motor Neuron Derived From Embryonic Stem Cells.
**Authors:** Cosset É, Hibaoui Y, Ilmjärv S, Dietrich PY, Tapparel C, Krause KH
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2020.593106](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2020.593106)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Jan 6;8:593106. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.593106. 
eCollection 2020.

Modeling Poliovirus Infection Using Human Engineered Neural Tissue Enriched With 
Motor Neuron Derived From Embryonic Stem Cells.

Cosset É(1), Hibaoui Y(2), Ilmjärv S(2), Dietrich PY(1), Tapparel C(3), Krause 
KH(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology, Department of Oncology, Center for 
Translational Research in Onco-Hematology, Geneva University Hospitals, 
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Service de Gynécologie et Obstétrique, HFR Fribourg -Hôpital Cantonal, 
Fribourg, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Medical School, University 
of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Poliomyelitis is caused by poliovirus (PV), a positive strand non-enveloped 
virus. Since its discovery in the 1950s, several cell culture and molecular 
methods have been developed to detect and characterize the various strains of 
PV. Here, we provide an accurate and standardized protocol to differentiate 
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) toward engineered neural tissue enriched with 
motor neurons (MN ENTs). These MN ENTs expressed markers of motor neuron CHAT 
and Hb-9 as revealed by immunofluorescence staining and quantitative RT-PCR. 
Interestingly, our results suggest that motor neurons are responsible for the 
permissiveness of poliovirus within the MN ENTs. Moreover, our study revealed 
the molecular events occurring upon PV-3 infection in the MN ENTs and 
highlighted the modulation of a set of genes involved in EGR-EP300 complex. 
Collectively, we report the development of a reliable in vitro model to 
investigate the pathophysiology of PV infection, allowing to both design and 
assess novel therapeutic approaches against PV infection.

Copyright © 2021 Cosset, Hibaoui, Ilmjärv, Dietrich, Tapparel and Krause.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2020.593106
PMCID: PMC7815649
PMID: 33490061

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.