---
reference_id: "PMID:35106241"
title: "Persistent Clostridium Difficile Diarrhea, Thinking Beyond Pseudomembranous Colitis: A Case Report."
authors:
- Alharbi AK
- Ahmed MA
- Tashkandi A
- Alkhathaami FA
- Alshehri AI
journal: Cureus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.20704
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Persistent Clostridium Difficile Diarrhea, Thinking Beyond Pseudomembranous Colitis: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Alharbi AK, Ahmed MA, Tashkandi A, Alkhathaami FA, Alshehri AI
**Journal:** Cureus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.20704](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.20704)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2021 Dec 26;13(12):e20704. doi: 10.7759/cureus.20704. eCollection 2021
 Dec.

Persistent Clostridium Difficile Diarrhea, Thinking Beyond Pseudomembranous 
Colitis: A Case Report.

Alharbi AK(1), Ahmed MA(2), Tashkandi A(2), Alkhathaami FA(1), Alshehri AI(1).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, College of Medicine, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health 
Sciences, Riyadh, SAU.
(2)Emergency Medicine, Prince Mohammed Bin Abdulaziz, Ministry of National Guard 
Health Affairs, Medina, SAU.

The prevalence of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is increasing along with 
the availability of diagnostic tests and is becoming a common nosocomial 
infection. CDI is the cause of nearly all occurrences of pseudomembranous 
colitis as well as 10-25% of antibiotic-related diarrhea. In patients presenting 
with persistent C. difficile diarrhea, the most common cause is the recurrence 
of pseudomembranous colitis but other differential diagnoses may need to be 
considered. In this case, we report a case of C. difficile diarrhea associated 
with life-threatening colitis and bowel ischemia. We report the case of a 
60-year-old male with persistent C. difficile diarrhea complicated by bowel 
ischemia. He presented with one month of persistent diarrhea and vomiting that 
had been worsening over the past three days; these symptoms were precipitated 
with prolonged antibiotic use. The patient was not known to have any chronic 
diseases but was attending the oncology outpatient clinic for an undiagnosed 
colonic mass that needed further examination. The patient's vitals showed 
tachycardia (116 bpm), and a palpable left lumbar mass was noted on examination. 
The patient's laboratory tests revealed significantly high inflammatory markers 
and deranged renal functions, and x-ray images showed hemicolitis. The patient 
was admitted because of dehydration. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen was 
conducted which revealed bowel ischemia. A high index of suspicion for bowel 
ischemia should be held in C. difficile cases presenting with persistent 
symptoms. C. difficile infection is a very common healthcare-associated 
infection, its risk factors are older age, hospitalizations, and severe 
diseases. There is a need to increase the awareness of clinicians and prompt the 
diagnosis if suspicion of complicated C. difficile is present such as bowel 
ischemia.

Copyright © 2021, Alharbi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.20704
PMCID: PMC8788889
PMID: 35106241

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.