---
reference_id: "PMID:11392513"
title: Neurologic aspects of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.
authors:
- Ciardo F
- Salerno C
- Curatolo P
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1177/088307380101600501
keywords:
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency, genetics"
- Brain/enzymology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Developmental Disabilities/metabolism
- Energy Metabolism/physiology
- Epilepsy/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Purine Nucleotides/urine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurologic aspects of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.
**Authors:** Ciardo F, Salerno C, Curatolo P
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1177/088307380101600501](https://doi.org/10.1177/088307380101600501)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2001 May;16(5):301-8. doi: 10.1177/088307380101600501.

Neurologic aspects of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency.

Ciardo F(1), Salerno C, Curatolo P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Tor Vergata University of Rome, Italy.

Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency is an autosomal-recessive disorder of the
purine de novo synthesis pathway, diagnosed up to now in approximately 40
patients. The clinical presentation is characterized by severe neurologic
involvement including seizures, developmental delay, hypotonia, and autistic
features. Neonatal seizures and a severe infantile epileptic encephalopathy are
often the first manifestations of this disorder. The existence of genetic
heterogeneity for the adenylosuccinate lyase defect could account for
variability of the clinical presentation. Deficiency of purine nucleotides,
impairment of energy metabolism, and toxic effects are potential mechanisms of
cerebral damage. Laboratory investigations show the presence in urine and
cerebrospinal fluid of succinylpurines, which are normally undetectable.
Currently, no effective treatment is available for adenylosuccinate lyase
deficiency. A search for this disorder should be included in the screening
program of children with unexplained neonatal seizures or severe infantile
epileptic encephalopathy.

DOI: 10.1177/088307380101600501
PMID: 11392513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
