---
reference_id: "PMID:20829743"
title: Lack of autofluorescence in fundus albipunctatus associated with mutations in RDH5.
authors:
- Schatz P
- Preising M
- Lorenz B
- Sander B
- Larsen M
- Eckstein C
- Rosenberg T
journal: Retina
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/IAE.0b013e3181dc050a
keywords:
- Adult
- Alcohol Oxidoreductases/genetics
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Child
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Fluorescence
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- Lipofuscin/metabolism
- Male
- Microarray Analysis
- Mutation
- Photic Stimulation
- "Retinal Degeneration/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Field Tests
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lack of autofluorescence in fundus albipunctatus associated with mutations in RDH5.
**Authors:** Schatz P, Preising M, Lorenz B, Sander B, Larsen M, Eckstein C, Rosenberg T
**Journal:** Retina (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IAE.0b013e3181dc050a](https://doi.org/10.1097/IAE.0b013e3181dc050a)

## Content

1. Retina. 2010 Nov-Dec;30(10):1704-13. doi: 10.1097/IAE.0b013e3181dc050a.

Lack of autofluorescence in fundus albipunctatus associated with mutations in
RDH5.

Schatz P(1), Preising M, Lorenz B, Sander B, Larsen M, Eckstein C, Rosenberg T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Glostrup Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. patrik.schatz@med.lu.se

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to characterize the phenotype of fundus
albipunctatus associated with RDH5 mutations.
METHODS: Four unrelated patients (patients 1-4) aged 35, 32, 19, and 8 years
were examined with full-field electroretinography, multifocal
electroretinography, optical coherence tomography, and fundus autofluorescence
photography. Molecular genetic investigations included sequencing of RDH5 and
RLBP1.
RESULTS: Patients 1 to 3 harbored homozygous mutations (c.881G>C, c.625C>T, and
c.382G>A, respectively) and patient 4 harbored the compound heterozygous
mutations (c.95delT and c.712G>T) in RDH5. A large variability in retinal
dysfunction caused by RDH5 mutations was found but not fully explained by a
simple prediction of reduced enzymatic function. All patients showed lack of
autofluorescence of the fundus, indicating a reduced supply of 11-cis retinal to
the photoreceptors. The lesions corresponding to the white dots did not
autofluoresce and were seen on optical coherence tomography as discrete
hyperreflective elements in the outer retina extending from the external
limiting membrane to Bruch membrane.
CONCLUSION: Mutations in RDH5 associated with fundus albipunctatus seem to
prevent normal lipofuscin accumulation. A relatively good functional status of 2
of 3 adult patients indicates that interference with 11-cis retinol
dehydrogenase function may be a promising strategy for therapeutic intervention
in retinal disorders featuring excessive lipofuscin accumulation.

DOI: 10.1097/IAE.0b013e3181dc050a
PMID: 20829743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
