---
reference_id: "PMID:38211816"
title: Disruption of lysosomal nutrient sensing scaffold contributes to pathogenesis of a fatal neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disease.
authors:
- Bagh MB
- Appu AP
- Sadhukhan T
- Mondal A
- Plavelil N
- Raghavankutty M
- Supran AM
- Sadhukhan S
- Liu A
- Mukherjee AB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.105641
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Lysosomal Storage Diseases
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Mammals/metabolism
- Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 1/metabolism
- Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/metabolism
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/metabolism
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism
- "Thiolester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disruption of lysosomal nutrient sensing scaffold contributes to pathogenesis of a fatal neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disease.
**Authors:** Bagh MB, Appu AP, Sadhukhan T, Mondal A, Plavelil N, Raghavankutty M, Supran AM, Sadhukhan S, Liu A, Mukherjee AB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2024.105641](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2024.105641)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2024 Feb;300(2):105641. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.105641. Epub 2024
 Jan 9.

Disruption of lysosomal nutrient sensing scaffold contributes to pathogenesis of
a fatal neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disease.

Bagh MB(1), Appu AP(1), Sadhukhan T(1), Mondal A(1), Plavelil N(1),
Raghavankutty M(1), Supran AM(1), Sadhukhan S(1), Liu A(2), Mukherjee AB(3).

Author information:
(1)Section on Developmental Genetics, Division of Translational Medicine, Eunice
Kennedy-Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Branch (HNT72), Eunice Kennedy-Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Section on Developmental Genetics, Division of Translational Medicine, Eunice
Kennedy-Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. Electronic address:
mukherja@exchange.nih.gov.

The ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal 1 (CLN1) disease, formerly called infantile
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, is a fatal hereditary neurodegenerative
lysosomal storage disorder. This disease is caused by loss-of-function mutations
in the CLN1 gene, encoding palmitoyl-protein thioesterase-1 (PPT1). PPT1
catalyzes depalmitoylation of S-palmitoylated proteins for degradation and
clearance by lysosomal hydrolases. Numerous proteins, especially in the brain,
require dynamic S-palmitoylation (palmitoylation-depalmitoylation cycles) for
endosomal trafficking to their destination. While 23 palmitoyl-acyl transferases
in the mammalian genome catalyze S-palmitoylation, depalmitoylation is catalyzed
by thioesterases such as PPT1. Despite these discoveries, the pathogenic
mechanism of CLN1 disease has remained elusive. Here, we report that in the
brain of Cln1-/- mice, which mimic CLN1 disease, the mechanistic target of
rapamycin complex-1 (mTORC1) kinase is hyperactivated. The activation of mTORC1
by nutrients requires its anchorage to lysosomal limiting membrane by Rag
GTPases and Ragulator complex. These proteins form the lysosomal nutrient
sensing scaffold to which mTORC1 must attach to activate. We found that in
Cln1-/- mice, two constituent proteins of the Ragulator complex (vacuolar
(H+)-ATPase and Lamtor1) require dynamic S-palmitoylation for endosomal
trafficking to the lysosomal limiting membrane. Intriguingly, Ppt1 deficiency in
Cln1-/- mice misrouted these proteins to the plasma membrane disrupting the
lysosomal nutrient sensing scaffold. Despite this defect, mTORC1 was
hyperactivated via the IGF1/PI3K/Akt-signaling pathway, which suppressed
autophagy contributing to neuropathology. Importantly, pharmacological
inhibition of PI3K/Akt suppressed mTORC1 activation, restored autophagy, and
ameliorated neurodegeneration in Cln1-/- mice. Our findings reveal a previously
unrecognized role of Cln1/Ppt1 in regulating mTORC1 activation and suggest that
IGF1/PI3K/Akt may be a targetable pathway for CLN1 disease.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.105641
PMCID: PMC10862020
PMID: 38211816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.
