---
reference_id: "PMID:26982009"
title: Somatic GPR101 Duplication Causing X-Linked Acrogigantism (XLAG)-Diagnosis and Management.
authors:
- Rodd C
- Millette M
- Iacovazzo D
- Stiles CE
- Barry S
- Evanson J
- Albrecht S
- Caswell R
- Bunce B
- Jose S
- Trouillas J
- Roncaroli F
- Sampson J
- Ellard S
- Korbonits M
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-4366
keywords:
- Cabergoline
- "Child, Preschool"
- Ergolines/therapeutic use
- Gene Duplication
- "Gigantism/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Human Growth Hormone/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Male
- Pituitary Gland/diagnostic imaging
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Somatic GPR101 Duplication Causing X-Linked Acrogigantism (XLAG)-Diagnosis and Management.
**Authors:** Rodd C, Millette M, Iacovazzo D, Stiles CE, Barry S, Evanson J, Albrecht S, Caswell R, Bunce B, Jose S, Trouillas J, Roncaroli F, Sampson J, Ellard S, Korbonits M
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2015-4366](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2015-4366)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 May;101(5):1927-30. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-4366.
Epub 2016 Mar 16.

Somatic GPR101 Duplication Causing X-Linked Acrogigantism (XLAG)-Diagnosis and
Management.

Rodd C(1), Millette M(1), Iacovazzo D(1), Stiles CE(1), Barry S(1), Evanson
J(1), Albrecht S(1), Caswell R(1), Bunce B(1), Jose S(1), Trouillas J(1),
Roncaroli F(1), Sampson J(1), Ellard S(1), Korbonits M(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics and Child Health (C.R.), University of Manitoba, Winnipeg MB R3E
0Z2, Canada; Department of Pediatrics (M.M.), Centre mère-enfant Soleil, Centre
Hospitalier de l'Université de Quebec, QC G1V 4G2, Canada; Endocrinology (D.I.,
C.E.S., S.B., J.E., M.K.), Barts and the London School of Medicine, Queen Mary
University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom; Department of Pathology
(S.A.), McGill University, Montreal QC H4A 2J1, Canada; Molecular Genetics
(R.C., B.B., S.E.), University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4SB, United Kingdom;
Institute of Medical Genetics (S.J., J.S.), School of Medicine, Cardiff
University, Cardiff CF10 3XQ, United Kingdom; Centre de Pathologie Est (J.T.),
Hospices Civils de Lyon, University of Lyon, 69622 Lyon, France; and
Neuropathology (F.R.), University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, United
Kingdom.

CONTEXT: Recent reports have proposed that sporadic or familial germline Xq26.3
microduplications involving the GPR101 gene are associated with early-onset
X-linked acrogigantism (XLAG) with a female preponderance.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 4-year-old boy presented with rapid growth over the previous
2 years. He complained of sporadic headaches and had coarse facial features. His
height Z-score was +4.89, and weight Z-score was +5.57. Laboratory testing
revealed elevated serum prolactin (185 μg/L; normal, <18 μg/L), IGF-1 (745 μg/L;
normal, 64-369 μg/L), and fasting GH > 35.0 μg/L. Magnetic resonance imaging
demonstrated a homogenous bulky pituitary gland (18 × 15 × 13 mm) without
obvious adenoma. A pituitary biopsy showed hyperplastic pituitary tissue with
enlarged cords of GH and prolactin cells. Germline PRKAR1A, MEN1, AIP, DICER1,
CDKN1B, and somatic GNAS mutations were negative. Medical management was
challenging until institution of continuous sc infusion of short-acting
octreotide combined with sc pegvisomant and oral cabergoline. The patient
remains well controlled with minimal side effects 7 years after presentation.
His phenotype suggested XLAG, but his peripheral leukocyte-, saliva-, and buccal
cell-derived DNA tested negative for microduplication in Xq26.3 or GPR101.
However, DNA isolated from the pituitary tissue and forearm skin showed
duplicated dosage of GPR101, suggesting that he is mosaic for this genetic
abnormality.
CONCLUSIONS: Our patient is the first to be described with somatic
microduplication leading to typical XLAG phenotype. This patient demonstrates
that a negative test for Xq26.3 microduplication or GPR101 duplication on
peripheral blood DNA does not exclude the diagnosis of XLAG because it can
result from a mosaic mutation affecting the pituitary.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2015-4366
PMCID: PMC4870851
PMID: 26982009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
