---
reference_id: "PMID:34298578"
title: Determination of Factors to Distinguish MIS-C from Acute Appendicitis in Children with Acute Abdominal Pain.
authors:
- Azılı MN
- Güney D
- Oztorun CI
- Ertürk A
- Erten EE
- Demir S
- Ertoy A
- Emeksiz S
- Parlakay AO
- Celikel BA
- Senel E
journal: Eur J Pediatr Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1732320
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Determination of Factors to Distinguish MIS-C from Acute Appendicitis in Children with Acute Abdominal Pain.
**Authors:** Azılı MN, Güney D, Oztorun CI, Ertürk A, Erten EE, Demir S, Ertoy A, Emeksiz S, Parlakay AO, Celikel BA, Senel E
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0041-1732320](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0041-1732320)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2022 Jun;32(3):240-250. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1732320. Epub 
2021 Jul 23.

Determination of Factors to Distinguish MIS-C from Acute Appendicitis in 
Children with Acute Abdominal Pain.

Azılı MN(1)(2), Güney D(1)(2), Oztorun CI(1)(2), Ertürk A(2), Erten EE(2), Demir 
S(2), Ertoy A(2), Emeksiz S(3)(4), Parlakay AO(5)(6), Celikel BA(7), Senel 
E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Ankara City Children's Hospital, Ankara 
Yildirim Beyazit University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Ankara City Hospital, Cankaya, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care, Ankara City Hospital, Cankaya, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatric Infection, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Department of Pediatric Infection, Ankara City Hospital, Cankaya, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(7)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Ankara City Hospital, Cankaya, Ankara, 
Turkey.

INTRODUCTION:  The aim of this study was to make the differential diagnosis 
between acute appendicitis and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children 
(MIS-C) for patients presenting with the complaint of acute abdominal pain (AAP) 
and to identify the determining factors for the diagnosis of MIS-C.
MATERIALS AND METHODS:  Eighty-one children presenting with AAP/suspected AAP 
were evaluated. Of these, 24 (29.6%) were included in the MIS-C group (MIS-C/g) 
and 57 were included in the suspected appendicitis group (S-A/g), which 
consisted of two subgroups: appendicitis group (A/g) and control observation 
group (CO/g).
RESULTS:  Comparing MIS-C/g, A/g, and CO/g, duration of abdominal pain (2.4, 
1.5, 1.8 days), high-grade fever (38.8, 36.7, 37°C), severe vomiting, and severe 
diarrhea were higher in MIS-C/g. Lymphocytes count (LC) was lower, while values 
of C-reactive protein (CRP), ferritin, and coagulopathy were higher in MIS-C/g 
(p < 0.05). The optimal cutoffs for the duration of abdominal pain was 2.5 days; 
the duration of fever, 1.5 days; peak value of fever, 39°C; neutrophil count, 
13,225 × 1,000 cell/µMoL; LC, 600 × 1,000 cell/µMoL; ferritin, 233 µg/L; and 
D-dimer, 16.4 mg/L (p < 0.05). The optimal cutoff for CRP was 130 mg/L 
(sensitivity 88.9, specificity 100%, positive predictive value 100%, NPV, 
negative predictive value 92.5%, p < 0.001). All patients in MIS-C/g tested 
positive by serology by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2).
CONCLUSION:  The duration of abdominal pain, presence of high-grade and 
prolonged fever, and evaluation of hemogram in terms of high neutrophil count 
and low LC exhibit high sensitivity and negative predictive value for MIS-C 
presenting with AAP. In case of doubt, inflammatory markers such as CRP, 
ferritin, D-dimer, and serology for SARS-CoV-2 should be studied to confirm the 
diagnosis.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1732320
PMID: 34298578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.