---
reference_id: "PMID:20301571"
title: Xeroderma Pigmentosum.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Kraemer KH
- DiGiovanna JJ
- Tamura D
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Xeroderma Pigmentosum.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Kraemer KH, DiGiovanna JJ, Tamura D

## Content

1. Xeroderma Pigmentosum.

Kraemer KH(1), DiGiovanna JJ(1), Tamura D(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Jun 20 [updated 2022 Mar 24].

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics Center for Cancer Research National 
Cancer Institute Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is characterized by: Acute 
sun sensitivity (severe sunburn with blistering, persistent erythema on minimal 
sun exposure) with marked freckle-like pigmentation of the face before age two 
years; Sunlight-induced ocular involvement (photophobia, severe keratitis, 
atrophy of the skin of the lids, ocular surface neoplasms); Greatly increased 
risk of sunlight-induced cutaneous neoplasms (basal cell carcinoma, squamous 
cell carcinoma, melanoma) within the first decade of life. Approximately 25% of 
affected individuals have neurologic manifestations (acquired microcephaly, 
diminished or absent deep tendon stretch reflexes, progressive sensorineural 
hearing loss, progressive cognitive impairment, and ataxia). The most common 
causes of death are skin cancer, neurologic degeneration, and internal cancer. 
The median age at death in persons with XP with neurodegeneration (29 years) was 
found to be younger than that in persons with XP without neurodegeneration (37 
years).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of XP is established in a proband on the basis 
of clinical findings and family history and/or by the identification of 
biallelic pathogenic variants in DDB2, ERCC1, ERCC2, ERCC3, ERCC4, ERCC5, POLH, 
XPA, or XPC.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Premalignant skin lesions such as 
actinic keratoses can be treated by freezing with liquid nitrogen; larger areas 
can be treated with field treatments such as topical 5-fluorouracil or imiquimod 
preparations. Rarely, therapeutic dermatome shaving or dermabrasion has been 
used; skin neoplasms can be treated (as in persons without XP) with 
electrodesiccation and curettage or surgical excision; skin cancers that are 
recurrent or in locations at high risk for recurrence are best treated with Mohs 
micrographic surgery. Oral isotretinoin or acitretin can prevent new skin 
neoplasms but have many side effects. Neoplasms of the eyelids, conjunctiva, and 
cornea can be treated surgically; corneal injury associated with eyelid 
abnormality can be decreased with eye drops or soft contact lenses; corneal 
transplantation may improve the visual impairment resulting from severe 
keratitis. Hearing loss may be treated with hearing aids. Prevention of primary 
manifestations: Avoid sun and other UV exposure to the skin and eyes. Measure UV 
light with a light meter in an affected individual's home, school, and/or work 
environment so that high levels of environmental UV can be identified and 
eliminated. Surveillance: Skin examinations by a physician every three to 12 
months; eye exams for signs of UV exposure and damage every six months; routine 
eye and neurologic examinations for progressive neurologic abnormalities every 
12 months; audiograms every six to12 months. Agents/circumstances to avoid: UV 
exposure from sunlight and artificial sources of UV radiation; cigarette smoke. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: If family-specific pathogenic variants have 
been identified, molecular genetic testing of at-risk sibs can permit early 
diagnosis and rigorous sun protection from an early age. Pregnancy management: 
Systemic retinoids (isotretinoin, acitretin) may be used as skin cancer 
chemopreventive agents. These drugs are known to be teratogenic to a developing 
fetus and pose a high risk for birth defects. Women of reproductive age who are 
taking a systemic retinoid must use effective contraception and be monitored 
with regular pregnancy tests.
GENETIC COUNSELING: XP is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for an XP-related pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, 
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being 
unaffected and not a carrier. Once the XP-related pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at 
increased risk and preimplantation genetic testing for XP are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301571