---
reference_id: "PMID:31228046"
title: "Nemaline myopathies: a current view."
authors:
- Sewry CA
- Laitila JM
- Wallgren-Pettersson C
journal: J Muscle Res Cell Motil
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s10974-019-09519-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nemaline myopathies: a current view.
**Authors:** Sewry CA, Laitila JM, Wallgren-Pettersson C
**Journal:** J Muscle Res Cell Motil (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10974-019-09519-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10974-019-09519-9)

## Content

1. J Muscle Res Cell Motil. 2019 Jun;40(2):111-126. doi: 
10.1007/s10974-019-09519-9. Epub 2019 Jun 21.

Nemaline myopathies: a current view.

Sewry CA(1)(2), Laitila JM(3)(4), Wallgren-Pettersson C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond 
Street Hospital, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, UK. 
c.sewry@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Wolfson Centre of Inherited Neuromuscular Disorders, RJAH Orthopaedic 
Hospital, Oswestry, SY10 7AG, UK. c.sewry@imperial.ac.uk.
(3)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(4)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Medicum, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.

Nemaline myopathies are a heterogenous group of congenital myopathies caused by 
de novo, dominantly or recessively inherited mutations in at least twelve genes. 
The genes encoding skeletal α-actin (ACTA1) and nebulin (NEB) are the commonest 
genetic cause. Most patients have congenital onset characterized by muscle 
weakness and hypotonia, but the spectrum of clinical phenotypes is broad, 
ranging from severe neonatal presentations to onset of a milder disorder in 
childhood. Most patients with adult onset have an autoimmune-related myopathy 
with a progressive course. The wide application of massively parallel sequencing 
methods is increasing the number of known causative genes and broadening the 
range of clinical phenotypes. Nemaline myopathies are identified by the presence 
of structures that are rod-like or ovoid in shape with electron microscopy, and 
with light microscopy stain red with the modified Gömöri trichrome technique. 
These rods or nemaline bodies are derived from Z lines (also known as Z discs or 
Z disks) and have a similar lattice structure and protein content. Their shape 
in patients with mutations in KLHL40 and LMOD3 is distinctive and can be useful 
for diagnosis. The number and distribution of nemaline bodies varies between 
fibres and different muscles but does not correlate with severity or prognosis. 
Additional pathological features such as caps, cores and fibre type 
disproportion are associated with the same genes as those known to cause the 
presence of rods. Animal models are advancing the understanding of the effects 
of various mutations in different genes and paving the way for the development 
of therapies, which at present only manage symptoms and are aimed at maintaining 
muscle strength, joint mobility, ambulation, respiration and independence in the 
activities of daily living.

DOI: 10.1007/s10974-019-09519-9
PMCID: PMC6726674
PMID: 31228046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]