---
reference_id: PMID:11992121
title: Mutation of GABRA1 in an autosomal dominant form of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy.
authors:
- Cossette P
- Liu L
- Brisebois K
- Dong H
- Lortie A
- Vanasse M
- Saint-Hilaire JM
- Carmant L
- Verner A
- Lu WY
- Wang YT
- Rouleau GA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/ng885
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Epilepsy, Generalized/etiology, genetics"
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Myoclonic Epilepsy, Juvenile/etiology, genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, GABA-A/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of GABRA1 in an autosomal dominant form of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy.
**Authors:** Cossette P, Liu L, Brisebois K, Dong H, Lortie A, Vanasse M, Saint-Hilaire JM, Carmant L, Verner A, Lu WY, Wang YT, Rouleau GA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng885](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng885)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2002 Jun;31(2):184-9. doi: 10.1038/ng885. Epub 2002 May 6.

Mutation of GABRA1 in an autosomal dominant form of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy.

Cossette P(1), Liu L, Brisebois K, Dong H, Lortie A, Vanasse M, Saint-Hilaire 
JM, Carmant L, Verner A, Lu WY, Wang YT, Rouleau GA.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Neuroscience, McGill University Health Center Research 
Institute and McGill University, 1650 Cedar Avenue, Montréal, Québec H3G 1A4, 
Canada.

Although many genes that predispose for epilepsy in humans have been determined, 
those that underlie the classical syndromes of idiopathic generalized epilepsy 
(IGE) have yet to be identified. We report that an Ala322Asp mutation in GABRA1, 
encoding the alpha1 subunit of the gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor subtype A 
(GABA(A)), is found in affected individuals of a large French Canadian family 
with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Compared with wildtype receptors, GABA(A) 
receptors that contain the mutant subunit show a lesser amplitude of 
GABA-activated currents in vitro, indicating that seizures may result from loss 
of function of this inhibitory ligand-gated channel. Our results confirm that 
mutation of GABRA1 predisposes towards a common idiopathic generalized epilepsy 
syndrome in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/ng885
PMID: 11992121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]