---
reference_id: "PMID:36137255"
title: "Outcomes for Children With Type II and Type III Pleuropulmonary Blastoma Following Chemotherapy: A Report From the International PPB/DICER1 Registry."
authors:
- Schultz KAP
- Harris AK
- Nelson AT
- Watson D
- Lucas JT Jr
- Miniati D
- Stewart DR
- Hagedorn KN
- Mize W
- Kamihara J
- Mitchell SG
- Wilson DB
- Gettinger K
- Rangaswami AA
- Harney LA
- Rodriguez Galindo C
- Bisogno G
- Dehner LP
- Hill DA
- Messinger YH
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.21.02925
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- DEAD-box RNA Helicases
- Doxorubicin/therapeutic use
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- Pulmonary Blastoma/drug therapy
- Registries
- Ribonuclease III
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes for Children With Type II and Type III Pleuropulmonary Blastoma Following Chemotherapy: A Report From the International PPB/DICER1 Registry.
**Authors:** Schultz KAP, Harris AK, Nelson AT, Watson D, Lucas JT Jr, Miniati D, Stewart DR, Hagedorn KN, Mize W, Kamihara J, Mitchell SG, Wilson DB, Gettinger K, Rangaswami AA, Harney LA, Rodriguez Galindo C, Bisogno G, Dehner LP, Hill DA, Messinger YH
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.21.02925](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.21.02925)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2023 Feb 1;41(4):778-789. doi: 10.1200/JCO.21.02925. Epub 2022
Sep  22.

Outcomes for Children With Type II and Type III Pleuropulmonary Blastoma
Following Chemotherapy: A Report From the International PPB/DICER1 Registry.

Schultz KAP(1)(2)(3), Harris AK(1)(2)(3), Nelson AT(1)(2)(3)(4), Watson D(5),
Lucas JT Jr(6), Miniati D(7), Stewart DR(8), Hagedorn KN(9), Mize W(9), Kamihara
J(10), Mitchell SG(11), Wilson DB(12), Gettinger K(12), Rangaswami AA(13),
Harney LA(14), Rodriguez Galindo C(15), Bisogno G(16), Dehner LP(17), Hill
DA(18)(19), Messinger YH(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)International Pleuropulmonary Blastoma/DICER1 Registry, Children's Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN.
(2)International Ovarian and Testicular Stromal Tumor Registry, Children's
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(3)Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(4)University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN.
(5)Research Institute, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN.
(7)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Kaiser Permanente Northern California,
Roseville, CA.
(8)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD.
(9)Department of Radiology, Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(10)Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(11)Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis
Children's Hospital, St Louis, MO.
(13)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(14)Westat, Rockville, MD.
(15)Department of Global Pediatric Medicine, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN.
(16)Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplant Division, Department of
Women's and Children's Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(17)Lauren V. Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Department of Pathology
and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO.
(18)Division of Pathology, Children's National Medical Center, George Washington
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC.
(19)ResourcePath LLC, Sterling, VA.

PURPOSE: Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) is the most common primary lung neoplasm
of infancy and early childhood. Type II and type III PPB have historically been
associated with a poor prognosis.
METHODS: Patients with known or suspected PPB were enrolled in the International
PPB/DICER1 Registry. Medical records were abstracted with follow-up ascertained
annually. All PPB diagnoses were confirmed by central pathology review.
Beginning in 2007, the IVADo regimen (ifosfamide, vincristine, actinomycin-D,
and doxorubicin) was recommended as a potential treatment regimen for children
with type II and type III PPB. This regimen was compared with a historical
control cohort.
RESULTS: From 1987 to 2021, 314 children with centrally confirmed type II and
type III PPB who received upfront chemotherapy were enrolled; 132 children (75
with type II and 57 with type III) received IVADo chemotherapy. Adjusted
analyses suggest improved overall survival for children treated with IVADo in
comparison with historical controls with an estimated hazard ratio of 0.65 (95%
CI, 0.39 to 1.08). Compared with localized disease, distant metastasis at
diagnosis was associated with worse PPB event-free survival and overall survival
with hazard ratio of 4.23 (95% CI, 2.42 to 7.38) and 4.69 (95% CI, 2.50 to
8.80), respectively.
CONCLUSION: The use of IVADo in children with type II and type III PPB resulted
in similar-to-improved outcomes compared with historical controls. Inferior
outcomes with metastatic disease suggest the need for novel therapies. This
large cohort of uniformly treated children with advanced PPB serves as a
benchmark for future multicenter therapeutic studies for this rare pediatric
tumor.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.21.02925
PMCID: PMC9901992
PMID: 36137255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D. Ashley Hill Employment: ResourcePath
Leadership: ResourcePath Stock and Other Ownership Interests: ResourcePath No
other potential conflicts of interest were reported.
