---
reference_id: "PMID:36454652"
title: "Expansion of the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of CTCF-related disorder guides clinical management: 43 new subjects and a comprehensive literature review."
authors:
- Valverde de Morales HG
- Wang HV
- Garber K
- Cheng X
- Corces VG
- Li H
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63065
keywords:
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Genotype
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Language Development Disorders/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expansion of the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of CTCF-related disorder guides clinical management: 43 new subjects and a comprehensive literature review.
**Authors:** Valverde de Morales HG, Wang HV, Garber K, Cheng X, Corces VG, Li H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63065](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63065)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Mar;191(3):718-729. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63065. Epub
2022  Dec 1.

Expansion of the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of CTCF-related disorder
guides clinical management: 43 new subjects and a comprehensive literature
review.

Valverde de Morales HG(1), Wang HV(1), Garber K(1), Cheng X(2), Corces VG(1), Li
H(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.

Monoallelic variants of CTCF cause an autosomal dominant neurodevelopmental
disorder with a wide range of features, including impacts on the brain, growth,
and craniofacial development. A growing number of subjects with CTCF-related
disorder (CRD) have been identified due to the increased application of exome
sequencing, and further delineation of the clinical spectrum of CRD is needed.
Here, we examined the clinical features, including facial profiles, and
genotypic spectrum of 107 subjects with identified CTCF variants, including 43
new and 64 previously described subjects. Among the 43 new subjects, 23 novel
variants were reported. The cardinal clinical features in subjects with CRD
included intellectual disability/developmental delay (91%) with speech delay
(65%), motor delay (53%), feeding difficulties/failure to thrive (66%), ocular
abnormalities (56%), musculoskeletal anomalies (53%), and behavioral problems
(52%). Other congenital anomalies were also reported, but none of them were
common. Our findings expanded the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of CRD that
will guide genetic counseling, management, and surveillance care for patients
with CRD. Additionally, a newly built facial gestalt on the Face2Gene tool will
facilitate prompt recognition of CRD by physicians and shorten a patient's
diagnostic odyssey.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63065
PMCID: PMC9928606
PMID: 36454652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest All authors declare there
are no conflicts of interest associated with this study and publication.
