---
reference_id: "PMID:26059211"
title: Anetoderma in a patient with terminal osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects.
authors:
- Connor CJ
- Shchelochkov OA
- Ciliberto H
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37176
keywords:
- "Anetoderma/complications, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Fibroma, Ossifying/complications, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Filamins/genetics
- "Fingers/abnormalities, pathology"
- Gene Expression
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/complications, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Karyotype
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/complications, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/complications, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Pigmentation Disorders/complications, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Toes/abnormalities, pathology"
- X Chromosome Inactivation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anetoderma in a patient with terminal osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects.
**Authors:** Connor CJ, Shchelochkov OA, Ciliberto H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37176](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37176)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Oct;167A(10):2459-62. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37176. Epub 
2015 Jun 8.

Anetoderma in a patient with terminal osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects.

Connor CJ(1), Shchelochkov OA(2), Ciliberto H(3).

Author information:
(1)Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.
(2)Stead Family Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.

Terminal osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects (TODPD) is a rare, X-linked 
syndrome classically characterized by distal limb anomalies, pigmented skin 
defects of the face, and recurrent digital fibromas. X-inactivation plays a 
major role in determining the range of phenotypic expression. Thus, patients can 
demonstrate a wide spectrum of disease severity, making accurate diagnosis more 
challenging. Recent studies have identified a FLNA c.5217G>A mutation as the 
cause of TODPD, allowing for diagnostic genetic testing. We present a case of 
molecularly confirmed TODPD in a girl with the 47,XXX chromosomal complement and 
deformities of the hands and feet, craniofacial abnormalities, and discolored, 
linear facial lesions. Skin biopsy of the patient's facial lesion revealed 
absent papillary dermal elastic fibers, consistent with anetoderma, which 
contrasts with the dermal hypoplasia described in the only other such facial 
biopsy reported in the literature. The finding of absent elastic fibers in the 
skin lesions suggests that mutated filamin A, in part, exerts its effects 
through dysregulated elastin biology, which may explain the nature of many 
connective tissue pleotropic effects in FLNA-related disorders.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37176
PMID: 26059211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]