---
reference_id: "PMID:16751767"
title: Soluble endoglin contributes to the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.
authors:
- Venkatesha S
- Toporsian M
- Lam C
- Hanai J
- Mammoto T
- Kim YM
- Bdolah Y
- Lim KH
- Yuan HT
- Libermann TA
- Stillman IE
- Roberts D
- "D'Amore PA"
- Epstein FH
- Sellke FW
- Romero R
- Sukhatme VP
- Letarte M
- Karumanchi SA
journal: Nat Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/nm1429
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Antigens, CD/genetics, metabolism"
- Endoglin
- "Endothelial Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- Female
- Gestational Age
- Hemodynamics
- Humans
- "Kidney/metabolism, pathology"
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Nitric Oxide Synthase Type III/metabolism
- "Placenta/metabolism, pathology"
- "Pre-Eclampsia/etiology, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy, Animal"
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
- Transforming Growth Factor beta1
- "Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-1/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Soluble endoglin contributes to the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.
**Authors:** Venkatesha S, Toporsian M, Lam C, Hanai J, Mammoto T, Kim YM, Bdolah Y, Lim KH, Yuan HT, Libermann TA, Stillman IE, Roberts D, D'Amore PA, Epstein FH, Sellke FW, Romero R, Sukhatme VP, Letarte M, Karumanchi SA
**Journal:** Nat Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm1429](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1429)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2006 Jun;12(6):642-9. doi: 10.1038/nm1429. Epub 2006 Jun 4.

Soluble endoglin contributes to the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.

Venkatesha S(1), Toporsian M, Lam C, Hanai J, Mammoto T, Kim YM, Bdolah Y, Lim 
KH, Yuan HT, Libermann TA, Stillman IE, Roberts D, D'Amore PA, Epstein FH, 
Sellke FW, Romero R, Sukhatme VP, Letarte M, Karumanchi SA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Vascular Biology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Med. 2006 Jul;12(7):862.

Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-specific hypertensive syndrome that causes 
substantial maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. Maternal endothelial 
dysfunction mediated by excess placenta-derived soluble VEGF receptor 1 (sVEGFR1 
or sFlt1) is emerging as a prominent component in disease pathogenesis. We 
report a novel placenta-derived soluble TGF-beta coreceptor, endoglin (sEng), 
which is elevated in the sera of preeclamptic individuals, correlates with 
disease severity and falls after delivery. sEng inhibits formation of capillary 
tubes in vitro and induces vascular permeability and hypertension in vivo. Its 
effects in pregnant rats are amplified by coadministration of sFlt1, leading to 
severe preeclampsia including the HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low 
platelets) syndrome and restriction of fetal growth. sEng impairs binding of 
TGF-beta1 to its receptors and downstream signaling including effects on 
activation of eNOS and vasodilation, suggesting that sEng leads to dysregulated 
TGF-beta signaling in the vasculature. Our results suggest that sEng may act in 
concert with sFlt1 to induce severe preeclampsia.

DOI: 10.1038/nm1429
PMID: 16751767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]