---
reference_id: "PMID:36109338"
title: Elevated serum PAR-1 levels as an emerging biomarker of inflammation to predict the dengue infection severity.
authors:
- Sibia RS
- Sood A
- Subedi A
- Sharma A
- Mittal A
- Singh G
- Singh TG
- Jaura RS
- Goyal S
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.28152
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated serum PAR-1 levels as an emerging biomarker of inflammation to predict the dengue infection severity.
**Authors:** Sibia RS, Sood A, Subedi A, Sharma A, Mittal A, Singh G, Singh TG, Jaura RS, Goyal S
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.28152](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.28152)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2023 Jan;95(1):e28152. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28152. Epub 2022 Sep 22.

Elevated serum PAR-1 levels as an emerging biomarker of inflammation to predict 
the dengue infection severity.

Sibia RS(1), Sood A(2), Subedi A(2), Sharma A(2), Mittal A(2), Singh G(2), Singh 
TG(2), Jaura RS(2), Goyal S(1).

Author information:
(1)Government Medical College, Patiala, Punjab, India.
(2)Chitkara College of Pharmacy, Chitkara University, Punjab, India.

The present study was designed to check the serum levels of protease-activated 
receptor (PAR-1) in patients during different phases of dengue severity. 
Moreover, a correlation between serum PAR-1 levels and hematological parameters, 
inflammatory cytokine levels, and liver functional changes was also determined. 
Based on the World Health Organization criteria, the study population was 
divided into: nonsevere dengue fever (DF; n = 30), severe dengue hemorrhagic 
fever (DHF; n = 19), and severe dengue shock syndrome (DSS; n = 11). The 
platelet count (PLT) and hematocrit (HCT) were analyzed using an automated 
hematology analyzer and liver function enzymes aspartate transaminase (AST), 
alanine transaminase (ALT), and alkaline phosphate (ALP), bilirubin were checked 
by auto-analyzer using diagnostic kits. Moreover, the levels of inflammatory 
mediators C-reactive protein (CRP), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), 
interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-17 (IL-17), and PAR-1 were determined using 
respective ELISA kits. The HCT levels were elevated and platelet count decreased 
significantly during dengue complications (DHF and DSS) compared to the DF 
patients, while the levels of liver functional biomarkers AST, ALT, ALP, and 
bilirubin remained elevated in DHF and DSS groups than in the corresponding DF 
group. Similarly, the inflammatory cytokine levels of CRP, TNF-α, IL-6, and 
IL-17 in DHF and DSS subjects were markedly increased when observed against DF 
subjects. Notably, the PAR-1 levels were significantly elevated in DHF and DSS 
groups than in the DF group and positively correlated with changes in HCT 
levels, inflammatory biomarkers, and liver enzymes. Our findings conclude that 
PAR-1 levels persistently increased with the severity of the dengue infection 
and are strongly associated with various clinical manifestations. Thus, PAR-1 
levels can be used as a diagnostic marker for assessing dengue severity.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.28152
PMID: 36109338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]