---
reference_id: "PMID:31757659"
title: "Liver transplantation in propionic and methylmalonic acidemia: A single center study with literature review."
authors:
- Pillai NR
- Stroup BM
- Poliner A
- Rossetti L
- Rawls B
- Shayota BJ
- Soler-Alfonso C
- Tunuguntala HP
- Goss J
- Craigen W
- Scaglia F
- Sutton VR
- Himes RW
- Burrage LC
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.11.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver transplantation in propionic and methylmalonic acidemia: A single center study with literature review.
**Authors:** Pillai NR, Stroup BM, Poliner A, Rossetti L, Rawls B, Shayota BJ, Soler-Alfonso C, Tunuguntala HP, Goss J, Craigen W, Scaglia F, Sutton VR, Himes RW, Burrage LC
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.11.001)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2019 Dec;128(4):431-443. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.11.001.
Epub  2019 Nov 7.

Liver transplantation in propionic and methylmalonic acidemia: A single center 
study with literature review.

Pillai NR(1), Stroup BM(2), Poliner A(2), Rossetti L(1), Rawls B(3), Shayota 
BJ(1), Soler-Alfonso C(1), Tunuguntala HP(4), Goss J(5), Craigen W(1), Scaglia 
F(6), Sutton VR(1), Himes RW(7), Burrage LC(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA; Section of Pediatric Cardiology, 
Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA; Section of Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology and Nutrition, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA; Joint BCM-CUHK 
Center of Medical Genetics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region.
(7)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA; Section of Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology and Nutrition, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. 
Electronic address: ryan.himes@ochsner.org.
(8)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: burrage@bcm.edu.

BACKGROUND: Organic acidemias, especially propionic acidemia (PA) and 
methylmalonic acidemia (MMA), may manifest clinically within the first few hours 
to days of life. The classic presentation in the newborn period includes 
metabolic acidosis, hyperlactatemia, and hyperammonemia that is precipitated by 
unrestricted protein intake. Implementation of newborn screening to diagnose and 
initiate early treatment has facilitated a reduction in neonatal mortality and 
improved survival. Despite early diagnosis and appropriate management, these 
individuals are prone to have recurrent episodes of metabolic acidosis and 
hyperammonemia resulting in frequent hospitalizations. Liver transplantation 
(LT) has been proposed as a treatment modality to reduce metabolic 
decompensations which are not controlled by medical management. Published 
reports on the outcome of LT show heterogeneous results regarding clinical and 
biochemical features in the post transplantation period. As a result, we 
evaluated the outcomes of LT in our institution and compared it to the 
previously published data.
STUDY DESIGN/METHODS: We performed a retrospective chart review of nine 
individuals with PA or MMA who underwent LT and two individuals with MMA who 
underwent LT and kidney transplantation (KT). Data including number of 
hospitalizations, laboratory measures, cardiac and neurological outcomes, 
dietary protein intake, and growth parameters were collected.
RESULTS: The median age of transplantation for subjects with MMA was 7.2 years 
with a median follow up of 4.3 years. The median age of transplantation for 
subjects with PA was 1.9 years with a median follow up of 5.4 years. The 
survival rate at 1 year and 5 years post-LT was 100%. Most of our subjects did 
not have any episodes of hyperammonemia or pancreatitis post-LT. There was 
significant reduction in plasma glycine post-LT. One subject developed mild 
elevation in ammonia post-LT on an unrestricted protein diet, suggesting that 
protein restriction may be indicated even after LT.
CONCLUSION: In a large single center study of LT in MMA and PA, we show that LT 
may reduce the incidence of metabolic decompensation. Moreover, our data suggest 
that LT may be associated with reduced number of hospitalizations and improved 
linear growth in individuals with PA and MMA.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.11.001
PMCID: PMC6898966
PMID: 31757659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None