---
reference_id: "PMID:23924083"
title: "Neurological features of epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, tubulopathy syndrome."
authors:
- Cross JH
- Arora R
- Heckemann RA
- Gunny R
- Chong K
- Carr L
- Baldeweg T
- Differ AM
- Lench N
- Varadkar S
- Sirimanna T
- Wassmer E
- Hulton SA
- Ognjanovic M
- Ramesh V
- Feather S
- Kleta R
- Hammers A
- Bockenhauer D
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12171
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Ataxia/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Brain Stem/abnormalities
- Central Nervous System/abnormalities
- Cerebellar Ataxia/pathology
- Child
- Counseling
- Developmental Disabilities/etiology
- Female
- Hearing Loss
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/complications, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/complications, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Mutation
- Neuropsychological Tests
- Organ Size
- "Potassium Channels, Inwardly Rectifying/genetics"
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- "Seizures/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, therapy"
- Spinal Cord/abnormalities
- Young Adult
- Kcnj10 Channel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological features of epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, tubulopathy syndrome.
**Authors:** Cross JH, Arora R, Heckemann RA, Gunny R, Chong K, Carr L, Baldeweg T, Differ AM, Lench N, Varadkar S, Sirimanna T, Wassmer E, Hulton SA, Ognjanovic M, Ramesh V, Feather S, Kleta R, Hammers A, Bockenhauer D
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dmcn.12171](https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.12171)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2013 Sep;55(9):846-56. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12171.

Neurological features of epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, tubulopathy 
syndrome.

Cross JH(1), Arora R, Heckemann RA, Gunny R, Chong K, Carr L, Baldeweg T, Differ 
AM, Lench N, Varadkar S, Sirimanna T, Wassmer E, Hulton SA, Ognjanovic M, Ramesh 
V, Feather S, Kleta R, Hammers A, Bockenhauer D.

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Unit, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust and 
UCL-Institute of Child Health, London, UK. h.cross@ucl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Dev Med Child Neurol. 2013 Sep;55(9):783-4. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12189.

AIM: Recently, we reported a previously unrecognized symptom constellation 
comprising epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, and tubulopathy (EAST 
syndrome) associated with recessive mutations in the KCNJ10 gene. Here, we 
provide a detailed characterization of the clinical features of the syndrome to 
aid patient management with respect to diagnosis, prognostic counselling, and 
identification of best treatment modalities.
METHOD: We conducted a retrospective review of the detailed neurological and 
neuroradiological features of nine children (four females, five males; age range 
at last examination 6-20y) with genetically proven EAST syndrome.
RESULTS: All children presented with tonic-clonic seizures in infancy. Later, 
non-progressive, cerebellar ataxia and hearing loss were noted. Whilst seizures 
mostly responded well to treatment, ataxia proved to be the most debilitating 
feature, with three patients non-ambulant. All available magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) revealed subtle symmetrical signal changes in the cerebellar 
dentate nuclei. Moreover, four patients had a small corpus callosum and 
brainstem hypoplasia, and three had a small spinal cord. Regional quantitative 
volumetric analysis of the images confirmed the corpus callosum and brainstem 
hypoplasia and showed further patterns of variation from the norm.
INTERPRETATION: The neurological features of EAST syndrome appear to be 
non-progressive, which is important for prognostic counselling. The spectrum of 
EAST syndrome includes consistent abnormalities on brain MRI, which may aid 
diagnosis. Further longitudinal documentation is required to determine the true 
natural history of the disorder.

© 2013 Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.12171
PMCID: PMC4298033
PMID: 23924083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]