---
reference_id: "PMID:20301763"
title: Very Long-Chain Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Leslie ND
- Saenz-Ayala S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Very Long-Chain Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Leslie ND, Saenz-Ayala S

## Content

1. Very Long-Chain Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Leslie ND(1), Saenz-Ayala S(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2009 May 28 [updated 2025 Aug 7].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Clinical Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio
(2)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Deficiency of very long-chain acyl-coenzyme A 
dehydrogenase (VLCAD), which catalyzes the initial step of mitochondrial 
beta-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids with a chain length of 14 to 20 
carbons, is associated with three phenotypes. The severe early-onset cardiac and 
multiorgan failure form typically presents in the first months of life with 
hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy, pericardial effusion, and arrhythmias, 
as well as hypotonia, hepatomegaly, and intermittent hypoglycemia. The hepatic 
or hypoketotic hypoglycemic form typically presents during early childhood with 
hypoketotic hypoglycemia and hepatomegaly, but without cardiomyopathy. The 
later-onset episodic myopathic form presents with intermittent rhabdomyolysis 
provoked by exercise, muscle cramps and/or pain, and/or exercise intolerance. 
Hypoglycemia typically is not present at the time of symptoms.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of VLCAD deficiency is established in a proband 
with a specific pattern of abnormal acylcarnitine levels on biochemical testing 
and/or by identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in ACADVL by molecular 
genetic testing. If one ACADVL pathogenic variant is found and suspicion of 
VLCAD deficiency is high, specialized biochemical testing using cultured 
fibroblasts or lymphocytes may be needed for confirmation of the diagnosis.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Routine daily treatment: Low-fat 
formula or low long-chain fat / high medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) medical 
food, with 13%-39% of calories as total fat; total dietary protein above the 
dietary reference intake for age; MCT oil or triheptanoin supplementation; 
carnitine supplementation; consider supplementation with linoleic acid, 
arachidonic acid, alpha-linolenic acid, and docosahexaenoic acid; frequent 
feeding in infants and a bedtime snack high in complex carbohydrates in children 
and adults; nasogastric tube feeding for those with feeding issues; guided 
exercise and avoidance of severe exercise to address exercise intolerance in 
older individuals; standard treatment of cardiomyopathy; supportive 
developmental therapies as needed. Emergency outpatient treatment: Consider a 
trial outpatient treatment at home for up to 12 hours, including frequent high 
carbohydrate feedings, reduced fasting duration time, antipyretics, and 
antiemetics. Acute inpatient treatment: Administration of high-energy fluids 
(≥10% IV dextrose) with electrolytes at a rate of at least 1.5 times maintenance 
(minimum of 8 mg/kg/min of glucose) while avoiding the use of L-carnitine and IV 
lipids; standard treatment for cardiomyopathy / cardiac failure; ample hydration 
and alkalization of the urine for those with rhabdomyolysis. Prevention of 
secondary complications: Acute rhabdomyolysis is treated with ample hydration 
and alkalization of the urine to protect kidney function and to prevent acute 
kidney failure secondary to myoglobinuria; if a surgery or procedure is 
required, notify designated metabolic center in advance of the procedure to 
discuss perioperative management with surgeons and anesthesiologists; some 
anesthetics may be contraindicated. Surveillance: Measurement of growth 
parameters (including head circumference) and assessment of feeding skills (in 
infants/toddlers) at each visit; plasma carnitine panel, acylcarnitine profile, 
and creatine kinase level every three months for the first year of life, every 
three to six months for those between age one and seven years, and every six to 
12 months for those older than age seven years; red blood cell or plasma 
essential fatty acids every six months for those on long-chain fat restriction; 
measurement of vitamins A, D, and E annually or as clinically indicated for 
those on long-chain fat restriction; echocardiogram at least annually or as 
clinically indicated; DXA scan every five years in adults; measurement of 
complete blood count, ferritin level, comprehensive metabolic panel, troponin, 
and B-type natriuretic protein as clinically indicated. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Fasting; myocardial irritation; dehydration; high-fat diet; and volatile 
anesthetics and anesthetics that contain high doses of long-chain fatty acids 
such as propofol and etomidate. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Evaluation of 
all at-risk sibs of any age is warranted to identify those who would benefit 
from treatment and preventive measures. Pregnancy management: Labor and 
postpartum periods are catabolic states and place the mother at higher risk for 
rhabdomyolysis and subsequent myoglobinuria. A management plan for labor and 
delivery is necessary for the affected pregnant woman. In addition to regular 
assessment by a cardiologist and maternal fetal medicine specialist, the 
following are recommended: visit with a nutritionist familiar with VLCAD 
deficiency monthly or at least in each trimester; measurement of plasma 
carnitine panel (total, free, esters) and creatine kinase level at each visit; 
plasma acylcarnitine profile weekly to monthly; red blood cell or plasma 
essential fatty acids (for those on long-chain fat restriction) at least once 
during pregnancy; echocardiogram either prior to conception or as soon as a 
pregnancy is recognized; measurement of vitamins A, D, and E (for those on 
long-chain fat restriction), complete blood count, ferritin level, and metabolic 
panel as a baseline or as clinically indicated.
GENETIC COUNSELING: VLCAD deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an ACADVL pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance 
of inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Molecular genetic 
carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301763