---
reference_id: "PMID:39169855"
title: Role of osteoclast inhibitors in prostate cancer bone metastasis; a narrative review.
authors:
- Wani SA
- Qudrat S
- Zubair H
- Iqbal Z
- Gulzar B
- Aziz S
- Inayat A
- Safi D
- Kamran A
journal: J Oncol Pharm Pract
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/10781552241275943
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/pathology, drug therapy"
- "Bone Neoplasms/secondary, drug therapy"
- "Osteoclasts/drug effects, pathology"
- "Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Quality of Life
- Denosumab/therapeutic use
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of osteoclast inhibitors in prostate cancer bone metastasis; a narrative review.
**Authors:** Wani SA, Qudrat S, Zubair H, Iqbal Z, Gulzar B, Aziz S, Inayat A, Safi D, Kamran A
**Journal:** J Oncol Pharm Pract (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10781552241275943](https://doi.org/10.1177/10781552241275943)

## Content

1. J Oncol Pharm Pract. 2025 Jan;31(1):119-127. doi: 10.1177/10781552241275943. 
Epub 2024 Aug 22.

Role of osteoclast inhibitors in prostate cancer bone metastasis; a narrative 
review.

Wani SA(1), Qudrat S(2), Zubair H(3), Iqbal Z(4), Gulzar B(1), Aziz S(5), Inayat 
A(6), Safi D(7), Kamran A(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Government medical college, Srinagar, India.
(2)internal Medicine, Khyber teaching hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(3)Internal Medicine, Rawalpindi medical university, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(4)Internal Medicine, Virginia commonwealth university, Richmond, USA.
(5)Internal Medicine, Khyber medical university, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(6)Internal Medicine, HSHS St Mary's Hospital, Decatur, Illinois, USA.
(7)Internal Medicine, WVU hospital, Morgantown, WV, USA.
(8)Internal Medicine, Charleston Area Medical center, Charleston, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of Osteoclast inhibitors in advanced prostate 
cancer metastasis treatment and their efficacy in reducing skeletal related 
events.
METHODS: DATA SOURCE: A comprehensive search was done using search terms as 
"osteoclast inhibitors" "Bisphosphonates" "Zoledronic acid" " pamidronate" " 
Alendronate" "Denosumab" " Prostate cancer metastasis" in pubmed and Google 
scholar. Relevant articles were screened and collected . The collected articles 
were used to frame the review and data showing use of Osteoclast inhibitors In 
prostate cancer bone metastasis was collected.
DATA SUMMARY: Prostate cancer metastasizes most commonly to the skeleton thus 
leading to significant morbidity ranging from pain, pathological fractures to 
spinal cord compression and are the primary cause of patient disability and 
reduced quality of life.Initially, radiation therapy and radiopharmaceuticals 
were the mainstay of treatment however the role of Bisphosphonates and denosumab 
has become an integral part of therapy to manage metastatic prostate cancer. 
These agents significantly decrease skeletal related events and enhance patients 
quality of life. Emerging therapies like Radium-223 have also shown promise in 
reducing skeletal related events and also improving survival rates in patients 
with bone metastasis. Other treatment options which are being used are systemic 
agents like Docetaxel, cabazitaxel, hormonal therapies like abiraterone and 
enzalutamide. Immunotherapy with sipuleucel-T has demonstrated a reduction in 
mortality among prostate cancer patients with metastasis, highlighting the need 
for further research in this area. Ongoing studies are investigating novel 
agents that target both tumor cells and the bone microenvironment.
CONCLUSION: Osteoclast inhibitors are effective in reducing skeletal related 
events in advanced bone metastasis and improve the quality of life of patients.

DOI: 10.1177/10781552241275943
PMID: 39169855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.