---
reference_id: "PMID:23645670"
title: Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome mutations in type III collagen differently stall the triple helical folding.
authors:
- Mizuno K
- Boudko S
- Engel J
- B채chinger HP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.462002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome mutations in type III collagen differently stall the triple helical folding.
**Authors:** Mizuno K, Boudko S, Engel J, B채chinger HP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.462002](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.462002)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 28;288(26):19166-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.462002. Epub 
2013 May 3.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome mutations in type III collagen differently stall 
the triple helical folding.

Mizuno K(1), Boudko S, Engel J, B채chinger HP.

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospitals for Children Portland Research Center, Portland, Oregon 
97239, USA.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) type IV is the most severe form of EDS. In 
many cases the disease is caused by a point mutation of Gly in type III 
collagen. A slower folding of the collagen helix is a potential cause for 
over-modifications. However, little is known about the rate of folding of type 
III collagen in patients with EDS. To understand the molecular mechanism of the 
effect of mutations, a system was developed for bacterial production of 
homotrimeric model polypeptides. The C-terminal quarter, 252 residues, of the 
natural human type III collagen was attached to (GPP)7 with the type XIX 
collagen trimerization domain (NC2). The natural collagen domain forms a triple 
helical structure without 4-hydroxylation of proline at a low temperature. At 33 
째C, the natural collagenous part is denatured, but the C-terminal (GPP)7-NC2 
remains intact. Switching to a low temperature triggers the folding of the type 
III collagen domain in a zipper-like fashion that resembles the natural process. 
We used this system for the two known EDS mutations (Gly-to-Val) in the middle 
at Gly-910 and at the C terminus at Gly-1018. In addition, wild-type and 
Gly-to-Ala mutants were made. The mutations significantly slow down the overall 
rate of triple helix formation. The effect of the Gly-to-Val mutation is much 
more severe compared with Gly-to-Ala. This is the first report on the folding of 
collagen with EDS mutations, which demonstrates local delays in the triple helix 
propagation around the mutated residue.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.462002
PMCID: PMC3696688
PMID: 23645670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]