---
reference_id: "PMID:17603483"
title: Gain-of-function RAF1 mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Pandit B
- Sarkozy A
- Pennacchio LA
- Carta C
- Oishi K
- Martinelli S
- Pogna EA
- Schackwitz W
- Ustaszewska A
- Landstrom A
- Bos JM
- Ommen SR
- Esposito G
- Lepri F
- Faul C
- Mundel P
- López Siguero JP
- Tenconi R
- Selicorni A
- Rossi C
- Mazzanti L
- Torrente I
- Marino B
- Digilio MC
- Zampino G
- Ackerman MJ
- Dallapiccola B
- Tartaglia M
- Gelb BD
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/ng2073
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gain-of-function RAF1 mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Pandit B, Sarkozy A, Pennacchio LA, Carta C, Oishi K, Martinelli S, Pogna EA, Schackwitz W, Ustaszewska A, Landstrom A, Bos JM, Ommen SR, Esposito G, Lepri F, Faul C, Mundel P, López Siguero JP, Tenconi R, Selicorni A, Rossi C, Mazzanti L, Torrente I, Marino B, Digilio MC, Zampino G, Ackerman MJ, Dallapiccola B, Tartaglia M, Gelb BD
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng2073](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng2073)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2007 Aug;39(8):1007-12. doi: 10.1038/ng2073. Epub 2007 Jul 1.

Gain-of-function RAF1 mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Pandit B(1), Sarkozy A, Pennacchio LA, Carta C, Oishi K, Martinelli S, Pogna EA, 
Schackwitz W, Ustaszewska A, Landstrom A, Bos JM, Ommen SR, Esposito G, Lepri F, 
Faul C, Mundel P, López Siguero JP, Tenconi R, Selicorni A, Rossi C, Mazzanti L, 
Torrente I, Marino B, Digilio MC, Zampino G, Ackerman MJ, Dallapiccola B, 
Tartaglia M, Gelb BD.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics and Department of 
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. 
Levy Place, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes are developmental disorders with overlapping 
features, including cardiac abnormalities, short stature and facial dysmorphia. 
Increased RAS signaling owing to PTPN11, SOS1 and KRAS mutations causes 
approximately 60% of Noonan syndrome cases, and PTPN11 mutations cause 90% of 
LEOPARD syndrome cases. Here, we report that 18 of 231 individuals with Noonan 
syndrome without known mutations (corresponding to 3% of all affected 
individuals) and two of six individuals with LEOPARD syndrome without PTPN11 
mutations have missense mutations in RAF1, which encodes a serine-threonine 
kinase that activates MEK1 and MEK2. Most mutations altered a motif flanking 
Ser259, a residue critical for autoinhibition of RAF1 through 14-3-3 binding. Of 
19 subjects with a RAF1 mutation in two hotspots, 18 (or 95%) showed 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), compared with the 18% prevalence of HCM among 
individuals with Noonan syndrome in general. Ectopically expressed RAF1 mutants 
from the two HCM hotspots had increased kinase activity and enhanced ERK 
activation, whereas non-HCM-associated mutants were kinase impaired. Our 
findings further implicate increased RAS signaling in pathological cardiomyocyte 
hypertrophy.

DOI: 10.1038/ng2073
PMID: 17603483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]