---
reference_id: PMID:33091071
title: "Candida auris: Epidemiology, biology, antifungal resistance, and virulence."
authors:
- Du H
- Bing J
- Hu T
- Ennis CL
- Nobile CJ
- Huang G
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008921
keywords:
- Antifungal Agents/pharmacology
- "Candida/genetics, pathogenicity"
- "Candidiasis/epidemiology, microbiology"
- "Drug Resistance, Fungal/drug effects"
- Humans
- "Saccharomycetales/drug effects, pathogenicity"
- Virulence/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Candida auris: Epidemiology, biology, antifungal resistance, and virulence.
**Authors:** Du H, Bing J, Hu T, Ennis CL, Nobile CJ, Huang G
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1008921](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1008921)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Oct 22;16(10):e1008921. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008921. 
eCollection 2020 Oct.

Candida auris: Epidemiology, biology, antifungal resistance, and virulence.

Du H(1)(2), Bing J(1), Hu T(1), Ennis CL(3)(4), Nobile CJ(4), Huang G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital and State Key Laboratory 
of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Quantitative and Systems Biology Graduate Program, University of California, 
Merced, Merced, United States of America.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Merced, 
Merced, United States of America.

First described in 2009 in Japan, the emerging multidrug-resistant fungal 
pathogen Candida auris is becoming a worldwide public health threat that has 
been attracting considerable attention due to its rapid and widespread emergence 
over the past decade. The reasons behind the recent emergence of this fungus 
remain a mystery to date. Genetic analyses indicate that this fungal pathogen 
emerged simultaneously in several different continents, where 5 genetically 
distinct clades of C. auris were isolated from distinct geographical locations. 
Although C. auris belongs to the CTG clade (its constituent species translate 
the CTG codon as serine instead of leucine, as in the standard code), C. auris 
is a haploid fungal species that is more closely related to the haploid and 
often multidrug-resistant species Candida haemulonii and Candida lusitaniae and 
is distantly related to the diploid and clinically common fungal pathogens 
Candida albicans and Candida tropicalis. Infections and outbreaks caused by C. 
auris in hospitals settings have been rising over the past several years. 
Difficulty in its identification, multidrug resistance properties, evolution of 
virulence factors, associated high mortality rates in patients, and long-term 
survival on surfaces in the environment make C. auris particularly problematic 
in clinical settings. Here, we review progress made over the past decade on the 
biological and clinical aspects of C. auris. Future efforts should be directed 
toward understanding the mechanistic details of its biology, epidemiology, 
antifungal resistance, and pathogenesis with a goal of developing novel tools 
and methods for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of C. auris infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008921
PMCID: PMC7581363
PMID: 33091071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Clarissa J. Nobile is a cofounder of BioSynesis, 
Inc., a company developing inhibitors and diagnostics of biofilms.