---
reference_id: "PMID:24839464"
title: PAX3 gene deletion detected by microarray analysis in a girl with hearing loss.
authors:
- Drozniewska M
- Haus O
journal: Mol Cytogenet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-7-30
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PAX3 gene deletion detected by microarray analysis in a girl with hearing loss.
**Authors:** Drozniewska M, Haus O
**Journal:** Mol Cytogenet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1755-8166-7-30](https://doi.org/10.1186/1755-8166-7-30)

## Content

1. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 Apr 29;7:30. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-7-30. eCollection
2014.

PAX3 gene deletion detected by microarray analysis in a girl with hearing loss.

Drozniewska M(1), Haus O(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Collegium Medicum Nicolaus Copernicus
University, Skłodowskiej-Curie 9, 85-094 Bydgoszcz, Poland ; West Midlands
Genetics Laboratories, Birmingham Women's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust,
Edgbaston, B15 2TG Birmingham, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Collegium Medicum Nicolaus Copernicus
University, Skłodowskiej-Curie 9, 85-094 Bydgoszcz, Poland ; Department of
Hematology, Blood Cancer and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Medical University,
Pasteura 4, 50-367 Wroclaw, Poland.

Deletions of the PAX3 gene have been rarely reported in the literature.
Mutations of this gene are a common cause of Waardenburg syndrome type 1 and 3.
We report a 16 year old female presenting hearing loss and normal intellectual
development, without major features of Waardenburg syndrome type 1, and without
family history of the syndrome. Her phenotype, however, overlaps with features
of craniofacial-deafness-hand syndrome. Microarray analysis showed ~862 kb de
novo deletion at 2q36.1 including PAX3. The above findings suggest that the
rearrangement found in our patient appeared de novo and with high probability is
a cause of her phenotype.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8166-7-30
PMCID: PMC4023700
PMID: 24839464
