---
reference_id: "PMID:28784167"
title: "Identification of a novel mutation in PEX10 in a patient with attenuated Zellweger spectrum disorder: a case report."
authors:
- Blomqvist M
- Ahlberg K
- Lindgren J
- Ferdinandusse S
- Asin-Cayuela J
journal: J Med Case Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13256-017-1365-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Female
- Genetic Testing
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Peroxins/genetics
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/genetics"
- "Zellweger Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a novel mutation in PEX10 in a patient with attenuated Zellweger spectrum disorder: a case report.
**Authors:** Blomqvist M, Ahlberg K, Lindgren J, Ferdinandusse S, Asin-Cayuela J
**Journal:** J Med Case Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13256-017-1365-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13256-017-1365-5)

## Content

1. J Med Case Rep. 2017 Aug 8;11(1):218. doi: 10.1186/s13256-017-1365-5.

Identification of a novel mutation in PEX10 in a patient with attenuated
Zellweger spectrum disorder: a case report.

Blomqvist M(1), Ahlberg K(2), Lindgren J(3), Ferdinandusse S(4), Asin-Cayuela
J(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion
Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden.
maria.k.blomqvist@vgregion.se.
(2)Paediatric Clinic, Central Hospital, S-65185, Karlstad, Sweden.
(3)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion
Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Department of Clinical Chemistry,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The peroxisome biogenesis disorders, which are caused by mutations
in any of 13 different PEX genes, include the Zellweger spectrum disorders.
Severe defects in one of these PEX genes result in the absence of functional
peroxisomes which is seen in classical Zellweger syndrome. These patients
present with hypotonia and seizures shortly after birth. Other typical symptoms
are dysmorphic features, liver disease, retinal degeneration, sensorineural
deafness, polycystic kidneys, and the patient does not reach any developmental
milestones.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of a patient with Zellweger spectrum
disorder due to a novel mutation in the PEX10 gene, presenting with a mild
late-onset neurological phenotype. The patient, an Assyrian girl originating
from Iraq, presented with sensorineural hearing impairment at the age of 5
followed by sensorimotor polyneuropathy, cognitive delay, impaired gross and
fine motor skills, and tremor and muscle weakness in her teens. Analyses of
biochemical markers for peroxisomal disease suggested a mild peroxisomal defect
and functional studies in fibroblasts confirmed the existence of a peroxisome
biogenesis disorder. Diagnosis was confirmed by next generation sequencing
analysis, which showed a novel homozygous mutation (c.530 T > G (p.Leu177Arg)
(NM_153818.1)) in the PEX10 gene predicted to be pathogenic.
CONCLUSIONS: This case highlights the importance of performing biochemical,
functional, and genetic peroxisomal screening in patients with clinical
presentations milder than those usually observed in Zellweger spectrum
disorders.

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-017-1365-5
PMCID: PMC5547663
PMID: 28784167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All
procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the
responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and
with Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2000. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION:
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardians for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
