---
reference_id: "PMID:35383683"
title: "Auditory Verbal Hallucinations in Schizophrenia, Part II: Phenomenological Qualities and Evolution."
authors:
- Yttri JE
- Urfer-Parnas A
- Parnas J
journal: J Nerv Ment Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001514
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Auditory Verbal Hallucinations in Schizophrenia, Part II: Phenomenological Qualities and Evolution.
**Authors:** Yttri JE, Urfer-Parnas A, Parnas J
**Journal:** J Nerv Ment Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/NMD.0000000000001514](https://doi.org/10.1097/NMD.0000000000001514)

## Content

1. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2022 Sep 1;210(9):659-664. doi: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001514.
 Epub 2022 Apr 6.

Auditory Verbal Hallucinations in Schizophrenia, Part II: Phenomenological 
Qualities and Evolution.

Yttri JE(1), Urfer-Parnas A(1), Parnas J.

Author information:
(1)Mental Health Centre Amager, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Copenhagen.

Hallucination is defined in the diagnostic systems as an experience resembling 
true perception without causal stimulus. In this second report from an in-depth 
phenomenological study of schizophrenia patients experiencing auditory verbal 
hallucinations (AVHs), we focused on the phenomenological qualities of AVHs. We 
found that a substantial proportion of patients could not clearly distinguish 
between thinking and hallucinating. The emotional tone of the voices increased 
in negativity. AVHs became more complex. Spatial localization was ambiguous and 
only 10% experienced only external hallucinations. There was an overlap with 
passivity phenomena in one third of the cases. The patients occasionally acted 
upon the content of AVHs. In the discussion section, we criticize the perceptual 
model of AVHs. We conclude that the definition of AVH in schizophrenia is 
misleading and exerts negative consequences on the clinical work and empirical 
research.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001514
PMCID: PMC9426732
PMID: 35383683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]