---
reference_id: "PMID:36130069"
title: Eosinophilic fasciitis (Shulman syndrome)-recognition of the histological spectrum allows for new insights into possible pathomechanisms.
authors:
- Pehl D
- Preuße C
- Allenbach Y
- Benveniste O
- Dittert P
- Alten R
- Krause A
- Görl N
- Zänker M
- Goebel HH
- Schneider U
- Stenzel W
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keac526
keywords:
- Humans
- Fasciitis/diagnosis
- Eosinophilia/pathology
- Inflammation
- Atrophy
- Hypoxia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eosinophilic fasciitis (Shulman syndrome)-recognition of the histological spectrum allows for new insights into possible pathomechanisms.
**Authors:** Pehl D, Preuße C, Allenbach Y, Benveniste O, Dittert P, Alten R, Krause A, Görl N, Zänker M, Goebel HH, Schneider U, Stenzel W
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keac526](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keac526)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2023 May 2;62(5):2005-2014. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keac526.

Eosinophilic fasciitis (Shulman syndrome)-recognition of the histological 
spectrum allows for new insights into possible pathomechanisms.

Pehl D(1)(2), Preuße C(1)(3), Allenbach Y(4), Benveniste O(4), Dittert P(5), 
Alten R(6), Krause A(7), Görl N(8), Zänker M(9), Goebel HH(1)(10), Schneider 
U(5), Stenzel W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate 
member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin.
(2)Department of Pathology, Vivantes Klinikum Neukölln, Berlin.
(3)Department of Neurology with Institute for Translational Neurology, 
University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunlogy, Pitié Salpêtrière 
Hospital, Paris, APHP, INSERM, Sorbonne University, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate 
member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Schlosspark Klinik, Berlin.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Immanuel Krankenhaus, Berlin.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine and Rheumatology, Klinikum Südstadt, Rostock.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Immanuel Klinikum Bernau Herzzentrum 
Brandenburg, Bernau.
(10)Department of Neuropathology, Universitätsmedizin der Johannes 
Gutenberg-Universität, Mainz, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: EF is a rare disease characterized by fibrosis and inflammation of 
the fascia, scleroderma-like skin indurations and optional blood eosinophilia. 
We aimed to expand the knowledge about its aetiology and pathogenesis.
METHODS: Biopsy specimens from 16 EF patients were assessed by histology, 
immunohistochemistry and quantitative reverse transcription PCR in comparison 
with anti-Mi-2+ DM patients and non-disease controls.
RESULTS: Histologically, EF shows mild to severe inflammation at the 
muscle-fascia interface, with frequent involvement of the underlying muscle 
tissue, though varying in degree. CD206+ macrophages predominate and eosinophils 
are detected within the fascia in the majority of cases, however in quite small 
numbers, and seen infrequently within the muscle. Activators of the so-called 
Th2-M2 pathway like STAT6 and IL-4 are upregulated leading to high expression 
levels of CD206. Activators of the so-called Th1-M1 pathway like STAT1 and IFN-γ 
(IFNG) are also upregulated, though not translating into a significant 
upregulation of the effector molecule COX2. Interestingly, activators or 
chemoattractants of eosinophils show no significant upregulation in EF compared 
with DM. EF shows features of perifascicular pathology comparable to DM, with 
upregulation of MHC class I and II; however, this is not accompanied by 
perifascicular atrophy or any signs of a type I IFN response or hypoxia-mediated 
processes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight a specific immune phenotype of leucocyte 
infiltrates in EF along features of perifascicular pathology similar to DM, 
while there is no evidence of hypoxia-mediated or type I IFN-associated 
processes with perifascicular fibre atrophy, indicating different 
pathomechanisms of muscle involvement.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keac526
PMID: 36130069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]