---
reference_id: "PMID:34140529"
title: Williams syndrome.
authors:
- Kozel BA
- Barak B
- Kim CA
- Mervis CB
- Osborne LR
- Porter M
- Pober BR
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-021-00276-z
keywords:
- Cognition
- Elastin
- Humans
- Transcription Factors
- "Williams Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Bromodomain Containing Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Williams syndrome.
**Authors:** Kozel BA, Barak B, Kim CA, Mervis CB, Osborne LR, Porter M, Pober BR
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-021-00276-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-021-00276-z)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2021 Jun 17;7(1):42. doi: 10.1038/s41572-021-00276-z.

Williams syndrome.

Kozel BA(1), Barak B(2), Kim CA(3), Mervis CB(4), Osborne LR(5), Porter M(6), 
Pober BR(7).

Author information:
(1)Translational Vascular Medicine Branch, National Heart Lung and Blood 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)The Sagol School of Neuroscience and The School of Psychological Sciences, 
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Psychology, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA. POBER.BARBARA@MGH.HARVARD.EDU.

Williams syndrome (WS) is a relatively rare microdeletion disorder that occurs 
in as many as 1:7,500 individuals. WS arises due to the mispairing of low-copy 
DNA repetitive elements at meiosis. The deletion size is similar across most 
individuals with WS and leads to the loss of one copy of 25-27 genes on 
chromosome 7q11.23. The resulting unique disorder affects multiple systems, with 
cardinal features including but not limited to cardiovascular disease 
(characteristically stenosis of the great arteries and most notably supravalvar 
aortic stenosis), a distinctive craniofacial appearance, and a specific 
cognitive and behavioural profile that includes intellectual disability and 
hypersociability. Genotype-phenotype evidence is strongest for ELN, the gene 
encoding elastin, which is responsible for the vascular and connective tissue 
features of WS, and for the transcription factor genes GTF2I and GTF2IRD1, which 
are known to affect intellectual ability, social functioning and anxiety. 
Mounting evidence also ascribes phenotypic consequences to the deletion of 
BAZ1B, LIMK1, STX1A and MLXIPL, but more work is needed to understand the 
mechanism by which these deletions contribute to clinical outcomes. The age of 
diagnosis has fallen in regions of the world where technological advances, such 
as chromosomal microarray, enable clinicians to make the diagnosis of WS without 
formally suspecting it, allowing earlier intervention by medical and 
developmental specialists. Phenotypic variability is considerable for all 
cardinal features of WS but the specific sources of this variability remain 
unknown. Further investigation to identify the factors responsible for these 
differences may lead to mechanism-based rather than symptom-based therapies and 
should therefore be a high research priority.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-021-00276-z
PMCID: PMC9437774
PMID: 34140529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.