---
reference_id: "PMID:20361012"
title: A mutation in the FOXE3 gene causes congenital primary aphakia in an autosomal recessive consanguineous Pakistani family.
authors:
- Anjum I
- Eiberg H
- Baig SM
- Tommerup N
- Hansen L
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2010'
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Aphakia/congenital, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Cataract/genetics
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Family
- Female
- "Forkhead Transcription Factors/chemistry, genetics"
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Genetic Loci/genetics
- Haplotypes/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Lod Score
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pakistan
- Pedigree
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in the FOXE3 gene causes congenital primary aphakia in an autosomal recessive consanguineous Pakistani family.
**Authors:** Anjum I, Eiberg H, Baig SM, Tommerup N, Hansen L
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2010)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2010 Mar 30;16:549-55.

A mutation in the FOXE3 gene causes congenital primary aphakia in an autosomal 
recessive consanguineous Pakistani family.

Anjum I(1), Eiberg H, Baig SM, Tommerup N, Hansen L.

Author information:
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Health Biotechnology Division, National 
Institute for Biotechnology & Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan.

PURPOSE: Aphakia is the complete absence of any lens in the eye, either due to 
surgical removal of the lens as a result of a perforating wound or ulcer, or due 
to a congenital anomaly. The purpose of this study was to elucidate the 
molecular genetics for a large consanguineous Pakistani family with a clear 
aphakia phenotype.
METHODS: The initial homozygosity screening of the family was extended to all 
the known autosomal recessive cataract loci in order to exclude the possibility 
of surgical cataract removal leading to aphakia. The screening was performed 
using polymorphic nucleotide repeat markers, followed by DNA sequencing of a 
possible candidate gene, the forkhead box protein E3 gene (FOXE3). The 
identified mutation was counter-checked by a diagnostic restriction enzyme 
digest of all the family members, and an analysis of the normal population.
RESULTS: The initial homozygosity screening of 13 known autosomal recessive loci 
resulted in negative LOD (logarithm of odds) scores. The aphakia phenotype 
suggested a mutation in FOXE3 close to the AR-locus 1p34.3-p32.2, and sequence 
analyses revealed the nonsense mutation c.720C>A, changing cysteine 240 to a 
stop codon. Segregation in the family was shown by diagnostic restriction enzyme 
digest, and marker analysis of another aphakia family from Madagascar carrying 
the same mutation excluded the presence of a founder mutation. Clinical 
re-examination of the family was not possible due to the escalating security 
concerns and internal displacement of the population in this region of Pakistan 
which has prevailed for many months.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXE3 is responsible for the early developmental arrest of the lens 
placode, and the complete loss of a functional FOXE3 protein results in primary 
aphakia. It can also be deduced that this mutation is quite primitive in origin 
since the same mutation is responsible for the same phenotypic outcome in two 
families of geographically different descent.

PMCID: PMC2846847
PMID: 20361012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]