---
reference_id: "PMID:39571736"
title: Future projections for mammalian whole-brain simulations based on technological trends in related fields.
authors:
- Igarashi J
journal: Neurosci Res
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2024.11.005
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/physiology
- Humans
- Computer Simulation
- "Models, Neurological"
- Connectome/trends
- Neurons/physiology
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Future projections for mammalian whole-brain simulations based on technological trends in related fields.
**Authors:** Igarashi J
**Journal:** Neurosci Res (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neures.2024.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neures.2024.11.005)

## Content

1. Neurosci Res. 2025 Jun;215:64-76. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2024.11.005. Epub 2024
 Nov 19.

Future projections for mammalian whole-brain simulations based on technological 
trends in related fields.

Igarashi J(1).

Author information:
(1)High Performance Artificial Intelligence Systems Research Team, Center for 
Computational Science, RIKEN, Japan. Electronic address: jigarashi@riken.jp.

Large-scale brain simulation allows us to understand the interaction of vast 
numbers of neurons having nonlinear dynamics to help understand the information 
processing mechanisms in the brain. The scale of brain simulations continues to 
rise as computer performance improves exponentially. However, a simulation of 
the human whole brain has not yet been achieved as of 2024 due to insufficient 
computational performance and brain measurement data. This paper examines 
technological trends in supercomputers, cell type classification, connectomics, 
and large-scale activity measurements relevant to whole-brain simulation. Based 
on these trends, we attempt to predict the feasible timeframe for mammalian 
whole-brain simulation. Our estimates suggest that mouse whole-brain simulation 
at the cellular level could be realized around 2034, marmoset around 2044, and 
human likely later than 2044.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neures.2024.11.005
PMID: 39571736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]