---
reference_id: "PMID:33438240"
title: Multimodal Biomarkers Quantify Recovery in Autoimmune Autonomic Ganglionopathy.
authors:
- Koay S
- Vichayanrat E
- Bremner F
- Panicker JN
- Lang B
- Lunn MP
- Watson L
- Ingle GT
- Hagen EM
- McNamara P
- Jacobson L
- Provitera V
- Nolano M
- Vincent A
- Mathias CJ
- Iodice V
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ana.26018
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Autonomic Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
- Biomarkers/analysis
- Blood Pressure
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- "Ganglia, Autonomic"
- Humans
- Immunotherapy
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nerve Fibers/pathology
- Orthostatic Intolerance
- Prognosis
- "Receptors, Cholinergic/immunology"
- Skin/pathology
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multimodal Biomarkers Quantify Recovery in Autoimmune Autonomic Ganglionopathy.
**Authors:** Koay S, Vichayanrat E, Bremner F, Panicker JN, Lang B, Lunn MP, Watson L, Ingle GT, Hagen EM, McNamara P, Jacobson L, Provitera V, Nolano M, Vincent A, Mathias CJ, Iodice V
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.26018](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.26018)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2021 Apr;89(4):753-768. doi: 10.1002/ana.26018. Epub 2021 Feb 1.

Multimodal Biomarkers Quantify Recovery in Autoimmune Autonomic Ganglionopathy.

Koay S(1)(2), Vichayanrat E(2), Bremner F(1)(3), Panicker JN(1)(4), Lang B(5), 
Lunn MP(6)(7), Watson L(2), Ingle GT(2), Hagen EM(2), McNamara P(2), Jacobson 
L(5), Provitera V(8)(9), Nolano M(8)(9), Vincent A(5)(8), Mathias CJ(1)(10), 
Iodice V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain, Repair and Rehabilitation, University College London 
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(2)Autonomic Unit, The National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, 
UK.
(3)Neuro-Ophthalmology Department, The National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(4)Department of Uro-Neurology, The National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(5)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Oxford University, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(6)Neuroimmunology Unit, University College London Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK.
(7)MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, The National Hospital for Neurology 
and Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(8)Neurology Department, Skin Biopsy Laboratory, Istituti Clinici Scientifici 
Maugeri IRCCS, Telese Terme, Italy.
(9)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive Sciences and Odontostomatology, 
University Federico II of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(10)Autonomic and Neurovascular Medicine Centre, Hospital of St. John and St. 
Elizabeth, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to evaluate patients with ganglionic 
acetylcholine receptor antibody (gAChR-Ab) positive autoimmune autonomic 
ganglionopathy using a multimodal testing protocol to characterize their full 
clinical phenotype and explore biomarkers to quantify immunotherapy response.
METHODS: We conducted a cohort study of 13 individuals (7 women, 21-69 years of 
age) with autonomic failure and gAChR-Ab >100 pM identified between 2005 and 
2019. From 2018, all patients were longitudinally assessed with cardiovascular, 
pupillary, urinary, sudomotor, lacrimal and salivary testing, and Composite 
Autonomic Symptom Score (COMPASS-31) autonomic symptom questionnaires. The 
orthostatic intolerance ratio was calculated by dividing change in systolic 
blood pressure over time tolerated on head-up tilt. Eleven patients received 
immunotherapy.
RESULTS: At first assessment, all 13 patients had cardiovascular and pupillary 
impairments, 7 of 8 had postganglionic sudomotor dysfunction, 9 of 11 had 
urinary retention and xeropthalmia, and 6 of 8 had xerostomia. After 
immunotherapy, there were significant improvements in orthostatic intolerance 
ratio (33.3 [17.8-61.3] to 5.2 [1.4-8.2], p = 0.007), heart rate response to 
deep breathing (1.5 [0.0-3.3] to 4.5 [3.0-6.3], p = 0.02), pupillary 
constriction to light (12.0 [5.5-18.0] to 19.0 [10.6-23.8]%, p = 0.02), saliva 
production (0.01 [0.01-0.05] to 0.08 [0.02-0.20] g/min, p = 0.03), and 
COMPASS-31 scores (52 to 17, p = 0.03). Orthostatic intolerance ratio correlated 
with autonomic symptoms at baseline (r = 0.841, p = 0.01) and following 
immunotherapy (r = 0.889, p = 0.02). Immunofluorescence analyses of skin samples 
from a patient 32 years after disease onset showed loss of nerve fibers 
supplying the dermal autonomic adnexa and epidermis, with clear improvements 
following immunotherapy.
INTERPRETATION: Patients with autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy demonstrated 
objective evidence of widespread sympathetic and parasympathetic autonomic 
failure, with significant improvements after immunotherapy. Quantitative 
autonomic biomarkers should be used to define initial deficits, guide 
therapeutic decisions, and document treatment response. ANN NEUROL 
2021;89:753-768.

© 2021 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.26018
PMID: 33438240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]