---
reference_id: "PMID:39870870"
title: Preclinical use of a clinically-relevant scAAV9/SUMF1 vector for the treatment of multiple sulfatase deficiency.
authors:
- Presa M
- Bailey RM
- Ray S
- Bailey L
- Tata S
- Murphy T
- Piec PA
- Combs H
- Gray SJ
- Lutz C
journal: Commun Med (Lond)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s43856-025-00734-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preclinical use of a clinically-relevant scAAV9/SUMF1 vector for the treatment of multiple sulfatase deficiency.
**Authors:** Presa M, Bailey RM, Ray S, Bailey L, Tata S, Murphy T, Piec PA, Combs H, Gray SJ, Lutz C
**Journal:** Commun Med (Lond) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s43856-025-00734-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-025-00734-9)

## Content

1. Commun Med (Lond). 2025 Jan 27;5(1):29. doi: 10.1038/s43856-025-00734-9.

Preclinical use of a clinically-relevant scAAV9/SUMF1 vector for the treatment
of multiple sulfatase deficiency.

Presa M(#)(1), Bailey RM(#)(2)(3), Ray S(1), Bailey L(2), Tata S(1), Murphy
T(1), Piec PA(1), Combs H(1), Gray SJ(4), Lutz C(5).

Author information:
(1)Rare Disease Translational Center, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME,
USA.
(2)Center for Alzheimer's and Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA. Steven.Gray@UTSouthwestern.edu.
(5)Rare Disease Translational Center, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME,
USA. Cat.Lutz@jax.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency (MSD) is a rare inherited lysosomal
storage disorder characterized by loss of function mutations in the SUMF1 gene
that manifests as a severe pediatric neurological disease. There are no
available targeted therapies for MSD.
METHODS: We engineered a viral vector (AAV9/SUMF1) to deliver working copies of
the SUMF1 gene and tested the vector in Sumf1 knock out mice that generally
display a median lifespan of 10 days. Mice were injected as pre-symptomatic
neonates via intracerebroventricular administration, or as post-symptomatic
juveniles via intrathecal alone or combination intrathecal and intravenous
delivery. Cohorts were assessed for survival, behavioral outcomes, and
post-mortem for sulfatase activity.
RESULTS: We show that treatment of neonates extends survival up to 1-year
post-injection. Importantly, delivery of SUMF1 through cerebral spinal fluid at
7 days of age alleviates MSD symptoms. The treated mice show wide distribution
of the SUMF1 gene, no signs of toxicity or neuropathy, improved vision and
cardiac function, and no behavioral deficits. One-year post treatment, tissues
show increased sulfatase activity, indicating functional SUMF1. Further, a GLP
toxicology study conducted in rats demonstrates favorable overall safety of this
approach.
CONCLUSIONS: These preclinical studies highlight the potential of our AAV9/SUMF1
vector, the design of which is directly translatable for clinical use, as a gene
replacement therapy for MSD patients.

Plain Language Summary: Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency (MSD) is a rare genetic
disorder caused by mutations in the SUMF1 gene, leading to severe problems with
the brain and other organs in children. Currently, there is no available
treatment. Here we tested an approach called gene therapy in which the deficient
Sumf1 gene is replaced with the normal gene in a mouse model of MSD. Mice
treated shortly after birth showed no major problems in brain and other organs
and lived up to a year, while those treated after symptoms appeared also lived
longer, with over half surviving beyond 15 months. This study suggests that this
gene therapy approach could be a promising and safe treatment for MSD.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s43856-025-00734-9
PMCID: PMC11772666
PMID: 39870870

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: R.M.B and S.J.G. received
royalty income from Neurogene Inc. and Taysha Gene Therapies (World patent:
WO2020223215A1, “Optimized SUMF1 Genes and Expression Cassettes and Their Use”).
The other authors declare no competing interests.
