---
reference_id: "PMID:28012523"
title: Digenic mutations involving both the BSND and GJB2 genes detected in Bartter syndrome type IV.
authors:
- Wang HH
- Feng Y
- Li HB
- Wu H
- Mei LY
- Wang XW
- Jiang L
- He CF
journal: Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2016.10.028
keywords:
- "Bartter Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- Connexin 26
- Connexins/genetics
- Exons
- Female
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Digenic mutations involving both the BSND and GJB2 genes detected in Bartter syndrome type IV.
**Authors:** Wang HH, Feng Y, Li HB, Wu H, Mei LY, Wang XW, Jiang L, He CF
**Journal:** Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijporl.2016.10.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2016.10.028)

## Content

1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2017 Jan;92:17-20. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2016.10.028. Epub 2016 Oct 26.

Digenic mutations involving both the BSND and GJB2 genes detected in Bartter
syndrome type IV.

Wang HH(1), Feng Y(2), Li HB(3), Wu H(4), Mei LY(4), Wang XW(4), Jiang L(4), He
CF(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Hunan Cancer Hospital and the Affiliated
Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, 410013, China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China; State Key Laboratory of
Medical Genetics, Changsha, 410078, Hunan, China; Province Key Laboratory of
Otolaryngology Critical Diseases, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China.
(3)Department of Ophtalmology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China. Electronic address:
hechufeng2013@163.com.

Bartter syndrome type IV, characterized by salt-losing nephropathies and
sensorineural deafness, is caused by mutations of BSND or simultaneous mutations
of both CLCNKA and CLCNKB. GJB2 is the primary causative gene for non-syndromic
sensorineural deafness and associated with several syndromic sensorineural
deafness. Owing to the rarity of Bartter syndrome, only a few mutations have
been reported in the abovementioned causative genes. To investigate the
underlying mutations in a Chinese patient with Bartter syndrome type IV, genetic
analysis of BSND, CLCNKA, CLCNKB and GJB2 were performed by polymerase chain
reaction and direct sequencing. Finally, double homozygous mutations c.22C > T
(p.Arg8Trp) and c.127G > A (Val43Ile) were detected in exon 1 of BSND.
Intriguingly, compound heterozygous mutations c.235delC (p.Leu79CysfsX3) and
c.109G > A (p.Val37Ile) were also revealed in exon 2 of GJB2 in the same
patient. No pathogenic mutations were found in CLCNKA and CLCNKB. Our results
indicated that the homozygous mutation c.22C > T was the key genetic reason for
the proband, and a digenic effect of BSND and GJB2 might contributed to
sensorineural deafness. To our knowledge, it was the first report showing that
the GJB2 gene mutations were detected in Bartter syndrome.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2016.10.028
PMID: 28012523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
