---
reference_id: "PMID:22411257"
title: Tourette syndrome.
authors:
- Cavanna AE
- Termine C
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0653-2_28
keywords:
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder/epidemiology
- "Tourette Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tourette syndrome.
**Authors:** Cavanna AE, Termine C
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4614-0653-2_28](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-0653-2_28)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;724:375-83. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0653-2_28.

Tourette syndrome.

Cavanna AE(1), Termine C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
a.cavanna@ion.ucl.ac.uk

Tourette syndrome (TS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder consisting of multiple
motor and one or more vocal/phonic tics. TS is increasingly recognized as a
common neuropsychiatric disorder usually diagnosed in early childhood and
comorbid neuropsychiatric disorders occur in approximately 90% of patients, with
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD) being the most common ones. Moreover, a high prevalence of
depression and personality disorders has been reported. Although the mainstream
of tic management is represented by pharmacotherapy, different kinds of
psychotherapy, along with neurosurgical interventions (especially deep brain
stimulation, DBS) play a major role in the treatment of TS. The current
diagnostic systems have dictated that TS is a unitary condition. However, recent
studies have demonstrated that there may be more than one TS phenotype. In
conclusion, it appears that TS probably should no longer be considered merely a
motor disorder and, most importantly, that TS is no longer a unitary condition,
as it was previously thought.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0653-2_28
PMID: 22411257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
