---
reference_id: "PMID:10207931"
title: The pitfall of silent neurosarcoidosis.
authors:
- Koné-Paut I
- Portas M
- Wechsler B
- Girard N
- Raybaud C
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0887-8994(98)00149-0
keywords:
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- Child
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- "Furosemide/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Methylprednisolone/administration & dosage"
- Prednisone/therapeutic use
- "Sarcoidosis/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pitfall of silent neurosarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Koné-Paut I, Portas M, Wechsler B, Girard N, Raybaud C
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0887-8994(98)00149-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0887-8994(98)00149-0)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 1999 Mar;20(3):215-8. doi: 10.1016/s0887-8994(98)00149-0.

The pitfall of silent neurosarcoidosis.

Koné-Paut I(1), Portas M, Wechsler B, Girard N, Raybaud C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital Nord, Marseilles, France.

Sarcoidosis in childhood is seldom reported. Most cases are observed in older
children and preadolescents as bilateral pulmonary disease and eye lesions.
Arthritic features are more likely to be observed in infants and children
younger than 4 years of age who do not develop pulmonary disease.
Neurosarcoidosis is exceptional in this age group and seldom suspected when the
neurologic symptoms are present. The authors report a pediatric patient with
systemic sarcoidosis who developed a severe but silent neurologic involvement.
Numerous masslike lesions were discovered on systematic cranial magnetic
resonance imaging. The authors recommend a complete screening of extrapulmonary
manifestations in children with sarcoidosis. The proper management of patients
with incidentally discovered neurosarcoidosis has yet to be established.

DOI: 10.1016/s0887-8994(98)00149-0
PMID: 10207931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
