---
reference_id: "PMID:32862441"
title: The catalytic domain of the histone methyltransferase NSD2/MMSET is required for the generation of B1 cells in mice.
authors:
- Dobenecker MW
- Marcello J
- Becker A
- Rudensky E
- Bhanu NV
- Carrol T
- Garcia BA
- Prinjha R
- Yurchenko V
- Tarakhovsky A
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13903
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- B-Lymphocytes/metabolism
- Catalytic Domain
- Germinal Center/metabolism
- "Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/chemistry, metabolism"
- Histones/metabolism
- "Immunity, Humoral"
- Immunoglobulin Class Switching
- Lysine/metabolism
- Methylation
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Survival Analysis
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# The catalytic domain of the histone methyltransferase NSD2/MMSET is required for the generation of B1 cells in mice.
**Authors:** Dobenecker MW, Marcello J, Becker A, Rudensky E, Bhanu NV, Carrol T, Garcia BA, Prinjha R, Yurchenko V, Tarakhovsky A
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1873-3468.13903](https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.13903)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2020 Oct;594(20):3324-3337. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13903. Epub 2020
 Aug 29.

The catalytic domain of the histone methyltransferase NSD2/MMSET is required for
the generation of B1 cells in mice.

Dobenecker MW(1)(2), Marcello J(1), Becker A(1)(3), Rudensky E(1)(4), Bhanu
NV(5), Carrol T(6), Garcia BA(5), Prinjha R(7), Yurchenko V(1)(8)(9),
Tarakhovsky A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Epigenetics and Signaling, Rockefeller University,
New York, NY, USA.
(2)Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics, Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY, USA.
(4)NYU Langone Medical Center and School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Penn Epigenetics Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Bioinformatics Resource Center, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Epinova DPU, Immuno-Inflammation Therapy Area, GlaxoSmithKline R&D,
Stevenage, UK.
(8)Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.
(9)Life Science Research Centre, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic.

Humoral immunity in mammals relies on the function of two developmentally and
functionally distinct B-cell subsets-B1 and B2 cells. While B2 cells are
responsible for the adaptive response to environmental antigens, B1 cells
regulate the production of polyreactive and low-affinity antibodies for innate
humoral immunity. The molecular mechanism of B-cell specification into different
subsets is understudied. In this study, we identified lysine methyltransferase
NSD2 (MMSET/WHSC1) as a critical regulator of B1 cell development. In contrast
to its minor impact on B2 cells, deletion of the catalytic domain of NSD2 in
primary B cells impairs the generation of B1 lineage. Thus, NSD2, a histone H3
K36 dimethylase, is the first-in-class epigenetic regulator of a B-cell lineage
in mice.

© 2020 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.13903
PMCID: PMC7722058
PMID: 32862441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Authors declare no
conflict of interest.

Two developmentally and functionally distinct B cell populations support the humoral immunity in mice and man [1]. Most peripheral B cells, which are defined as B2 cells, are generated in the bone marrow and have an immensely diverse, mostly non self-directed antibody repertoire [2, 3]. B2 cells can expand rapidly upon infection or antigen stimulation, followed either by immediate differentiation into antibody producing plasma cells or by the germinal center reaction and ensuing generation of cells expressing high affinity antibody [4].

In contrast to B2 cells, the majority of B1 cells are generated by late fetal and/or neonatal definitive hematopoiesis and reside predominately within well-defined anatomical compartments, such as peritoneal cavity and pleural cavity [5, 6]. They do not proliferate in response to antigen stimulation, but divide in a seemingly autonomous fashion at a low rate [7]. The antibody repertoire of B1 cells is represented largely by self-reactive or poly-reactive low affinity antibodies, mostly of the IgM or IgG3 (and IgA in mucosal surfaces) isotypes [8-10]. In addition to the markedly different developmental and functional features, B1 cells display a distinct pattern of surface proteins, including CD5 or CD11b that are expressed normally on T cells or macrophages, respectively [6, 11, 12]. Accordingly, the CD5-positive B1 cells are defined as B1a cells and the CD5-negative B1 cells as B1b cells. The ontogeny of B1 cells is not well understood and opposing ideas have been posited. Some findings suggested these cells develop from a distinctive fetal lineage [13, 14], while others indicated that B1 differentiation is “instructed” by signals downstream of their surface antigen receptors [15]. These concepts may not be mutually exclusive, since B1 cells expresses poly-reactive antigen receptors [16] that could be particularly amenable to stimulation from self or environmental antigens, leading to the surface expression of characteristic markers. The discovery of lin28b as a key regulator of B1 cell development [17] support the existence of a separate lineage for these cells.

NSD2 (nuclear receptor SET domain-containing protein 2, also known as MMSET, multiple myeloma SET-domain containing protein or WHSC1, Wolf–Hirschhorn syndrome candidate 1) is one of three members of the NSD family of histone lysine methyltransferases [18] that contains, in addition to the catalytic SET domain, PHD (plant homeodomain) fingers, PWWP (Pro-Trp-Trp-Pro) domains, and a NSD specific Cys-His-rich C5HCH domain. Hereafter, we will refer to this protein as NSD2.

The substrate specificity of NSD2, while most likely being the Lys36 of histone H3 in vivo, remains somewhat controversial and in vitro depends on the nature of a substrate [19, 20]. The methylation of Lys36 of histone H3 has been implicated in the process of RNA elongation during transcription, thus suggesting that NSD2 contributes to the generation of full-length transcripts [21]. NSD2 function is essential for normal development in mice and humans, and NSD2 deficiency in mice leads to neonatal death due to severe growth retardation [22]. NSD2 is often deleted in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome [23] and a great deal of attention for NSD2 stems from its link to aggressive multiple myeloma in humans [24], whereby the t(4;14) translocation places the Nsd2 gene, which encodes NSD2, under the control of the IgH Eμ-enhancer and leads to NSD2 over-expression [25]. This molecular signature is linked to aggressive myeloma and poor prognosis [26]. The mechanism of NSD2 contribution to myelomagenesis and/or tumor progression is not well understood.

Here, we present data on the essential and selective role of the NSD2 histone methyltransferase in mouse B cells, as it is required for generation of the B1 lineage.

Nsd2loxSET/ loxSET and Nsd2ΔSET/ ΔSET mice on C57/BL6 background were generated in our laboratory. Nsd2loxSET/ loxSET littermates (not crossed to the mice expressing Cre recombinase) were used as controls. Mice were housed under specific pathogen-free conditions and experimental protocols were approved by the Rockefeller University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. All studies were conducted in accordance with the GlaxoSmithKline plc (GSK) Policy on the Care, Welfare and Treatment of Laboratory Animals and were reviewed the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee either at GSK or by the ethical review process at the Institution, where the work was performed.

To create the targeting vector pBSmmsetflox, a single loxP site [27], a BsoBI (Ava I) restriction site, and a NeoR selection marker cassette flanked by FRT sites [28], were introduced into a HindIII site in intron 19 and an additional loxP site was inserted in a BglII site in intron 17 of the mouse Nsd2 locus (Fig. 1A). ES cells at embryonic day 14.1 were transfected and selected by standard techniques. Successful recombinants were identified by Southern blot analysis (BsoBI digested total DNA with 5’ or 3’ probe; NcoI digested total DNA with 3’ probe). Targeted ES cells were used to generate mice. The FRT site-flanked NeoR cassette was removed by breeding to FLP deleter mice [29]. The resulting mice were designated Nsd2loxSET/ loxSET (Fig. 1A).

To ablate NSD2 SET domain in germline, the Nsd2loxSET/ loxSET mice were crossed with the B6.C-Tg(CMV-cre)1Cgn/J [30]. For B-cell-specific ablation, the following deletor mice were used: B6.C(Cg)-Cd79atm1(cre)Reth/EhobJ (Mb1-Cre) [31], B6.Cg-Commd10Tg(Vav1-icre)A2Kio/J (Vav1-Cre) [32], and B6.129P2(C)-Cd19tm1(cre)Cgn/J (CD19-Cre) [33]. All Cre deletor mice were from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, USA). All experiments were performed with 8-16 week old mice.

The following antibodies were purchased from either BD Biosciences (San Jose, USA), eBioscience/Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, USA) or the Jackson Laboratory: B220 (RA3-6B2), IAb (AF6-120.1), IgM (115-116-075), IgD (11-26c.2a), CD5 (53-7-3), CD11b (M1/70), CD21/35 (7G6), CD19 (B3B4), CD23 (1D3), CD43 (S7), CD86 (GL1), CD90 (53-2.1). The B cell receptor specific antibodies PE-3H7 (anti-VH11id), and APC-13B5 (anti-Vk9id) were kindly provided by Kyoko Hayakawa (Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, USA) and the NSD2 antibody (29D1) was purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, UK).

Bone marrow pro-B cells (IgM−B220+CD43+), bone marrow pre-B cells (IgM−B220+CD43−), bone marrow immature B cells (IgM+B220+), bone marrow recirculating B cells (IgM+B220hi), splenic T1 (IgM+CD21/35−), splenic T2 (IgM+CD21/35hi), splenic marginal zone (MZ) B cells (CD19+CD21highCD23low/-), splenic follicular B cells (CD19+CD21medCD23hi), splenic T cells (CD3ε+), lymph nodes B cells (CD19+), Peyer’s Patch IgA expressing B cells (B220+IgM−IgA+), Peyer’s Patch T cells (CD3ε+), splenic germinal center (GC) B cells (B220+ CD95+CD38dull), splenic GC B cells in the light zone (LZ) (B220+CD95+CD38dull CD86+CXCR4lo) and dark zone (B220+CD95+CD38dullCD86−CXCR4+), peritoneal cavity (PeC) T cells (CD5+IgM−), PeC B1a cells (IgMhiCD11b+CD5+), PeC B1b cells (IgMhiCD11b+ CD5−) PeC B2 cells (IgM+CD11b−CD5−).

ChIP was performed as previously described [34, 35]. In brief, 107 cells were cross-linked with 0.5% formaldehyde at room temperature for 10 min. Chromatin was sonicated to 300–500 bp in RIPA buffer with 0.3 M NaCl. 5–10 μg antibodies were pre-incubated with Dynabead Protein A/G (Invitrogen/ Thermo Fisher Scientific) for at least 8 h before incubating with sonicated chromatin overnight. After that, beads were washed in modified RIPA wash buffer (100 μM LiCl) and 1× in TE. After overnight cross-link reversal at 65°C, RNase digestion, and proteinase K digestion, ChIP DNA and input DNA were purified using the QuiaQuick PCR purification kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). For validation of ChIP-Seq, ChIP DNA was analyzed via qPCR using SYBR Green PCR Master Mix and the LightCycler 480 (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Primer sequences are available upon request.

For ChIP-Seq, 30 μl of ChIP DNA were used to generate blunt-ended DNA using reagents supplied with the Epicenter DNA EndRepair kit (Epicentre Biotechnologies, Madison, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The end-repaired DNA was purified using the QuiaQuick PCR purification kit. Using Klenow Fragment (3′ to 5′ exo-, New England Biolabs, Ipswich, USA), the “A” bases were added to the DNA. The DNA was purified using the MinElute PCR purification kit (Qiagen). The T4 DNA ligase (New England Biolabs) was used for ligation of Illumina/Solexa adapters to the DNA fragments. The adaptor-ligated DNA was purified with the MinElute PCR purification kit (Qiagen). The DNA fragments were subjected to 18 cycles of PCR using the Illumina/Solexa primers 1.0 and 2.0 to generate the ChIP-Seq libraries. The ChIP-Seq libraries were purified with the MinElute PCR purification kit (Qiagen).

Samples were sequenced on the Illumina Hiseq2000 platform for 50 cycles, and raw sequencing data were processed using the CASAVA_v1.8.2 software to generating fastq files. Sequencing reads were aligned to the mouse genome (mm9) using Bowtie v0.12.7 [36]. Reads were kept if they aligned with two errors or fewer and did not align to more than one location in the genome. A 25-bp density coverage map was created by extending each read for 100 bp to account for mean library fragment length and mapping the number of reads per 25 bp bin using IGVtools [37]. Values in each sample were normalized to fpkm values by calculating the fraction of mapped reads per bin in one million total reads.

For comparative analysis of promoter regions, the number of aligned reads in the area surrounding the transcriptional start site (±3 kb) of each gene was used.

2 μg total RNA were used per sample, ribosomal RNA was removed with the Ribo-Zero Magnetic kit (Epicentre Biotechnologies), and libraries were prepared with the ScripSeq v2 RNA-Seq Library Prepapration kit (Epicentre Biotechnologies) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were sequenced in the same manner as the ChIP-seq samples, but using 100 cycles instead of 50. Fastq reads were aligned to the mouse reference genome mm9 using Tophat [38] to account for splicing and alternative promoter usage as well as insertions and deletions. Subsequently, the cufflinks RNA-seq analysis tool cuffdiff [39] was used to assess differential gene expression, alternative promoter usage, and splicing variation between experimental datasets. The resulting fpkm values were used for further data analysis and visualization.

Total RNA was extracted from freshly isolated cells using an RNase minikit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA was DNase treated using an RNase free DNase set (Qiagen) and cDNA was synthesized using reagents supplied with a first strand cDNA synthesis kit (Roche). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using SYBR Green (Roche) on a Roche Lightcycler 480. Primers were designed with the Primer3 program. MMSET-F: TCATGGGAAACACAATTCAGCA; MMSET-R: AAGTAGCTTCAAAGGGTGTCG; TBP-F: GCTCTGGAATTGTACCGCAG; TBP-R: CTGGCTCATAGCTCTTGGCTC

Analysis of immunoglobulin gene rearrangements was conducted as described previously [40] in 3-fold dilutions using Thy1.2 as a loading control.

His6-NSD2 (cloned into pET19b) was expressed in E. coli and purified over Ni-NTA spin columns (Qiagen). Methyltransferase assay was performed as described previously with 10 mM of Adenosyl-L-methionine, S- [methyl-3H] (GE Healthcare, Chicago, USA) for 45 min at 30°C [41]. Protein gels were incubated with EN3HANCE (PerkinElmer, Waltham, USA), dried, and exposed to Kodak Biomax XAR film (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) for 2 – 10 days at −80°C.

Single-cell suspensions from indicated tissues were prepared. All antibodies were used at dilutions ranging from 1:100-1:3,000 and incubated for 30 min at 4°C. Flow cytometric analysis and cell sorting were performed using a FACS LSR II or Aria (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, USA) and data were analyzed with FlowJo software (Becton Dickinson).

Splenic B cells were purified by depleting CD43+ cells, using anti-CD43 beads and magnetic columns (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) and stimulated in vitro with 10 μg/ml F(ab’)2 fragment of goat anti-mouse IgM (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, USA) in combination with 25U/ml of recombinant mouse IL-4 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, USA), 5μg/ml bacterial LPS (Sigma-Aldrich), or 5 μg/ml of bacterial LPS in combination with 25 U/ml of recombinant mouse IL-4. Labeling of cells with 5-(6-) carboxyfluorescein diacetate, succinimidyl ester (CFSE, Molecular Probes, Eugene, USA) for analysis of proliferation was performed following the manufacturer’s instructions. The decline in CFSE fluorescence as a measure of B cell proliferation was determined by FACS analysis.

Histones were extracted in acid and chemically derivatized twice, digested with trypsin, followed two more rounds of derivatization and the peptides were desalted by using C18 stage-tips, as described earlier [42]. Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC nanoHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a gradient of 0-35% solvent B (A = 0.1% formic acid; B = 95% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) over 30 min and from 34% to 100% solvent B in 20 minutes at a flow-rate of 250 nL/min. Nano-liquid chromatography was coupled with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectrum (m/z 290−1650) was performed in the Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a resolution of 30,000 (at 400 m/z) with an AGC target of 1×10e6. The MS/MS events included both data-dependent acquisition and target, the latter for isobaric peptides to enable MS/MS-based quantification. The relative abundance of histone H3 and H4 peptides were calculated by using EpiProfile [43].

Purified B cells were cultured either in medium alone or in the presence of 1.56-25ng ml− of recombinant BAFF (R&D Systems) for the indicated time and stained with Annexin V (Roche) and 7-aminoactinomycin D (7-AAD; Sigma-Aldrich).

was performed in Prism (GraphPad Software, San Diego, USA) with the unpaired t-test.

To determine whether the catalytic (SET) domain of NSD2 is essential for survival, we generated mutant mice by gene targeting in ES cells. The loxP sites were introduced in introns 17 and 19 of the NSD2-encoding gene (Nsd2) and Nsd2loxSET/ loxSET mice were produced (Fig. 1A). These mice were bred to the CMVcre germline deleter mice and then intercrossed to produce the Nsd2ΔSET/ ΔSET offspring. Similar to NSD2−/− [22], homozygous Nsd2ΔSET/ ΔSET mice die early after birth (data not shown). Therefore, the SET domain of NSD2 is required for postnatal survival.

To measure Nsd2 expression in the B cell compartment, we purified RNA from the wild type B cells of different developmental stages and measured its RNA level by qRT-PCR (Fig. 1B). Nsd2 is expressed in early B2 cell progenitors (pre- and pro-B cells) and its transcription is decreased at later stages. Of note, Nsd2 expression in B1 cells was below the level of detection (Fig 1B). In vitro activation of B2 cells by a variety of stimuli upregulated Nsd2 transcripts (Fig. 1C). We conclude that Nsd2 expression levels vary throughout B cell development.

To define the contribution of the NSD2 SET domain to B and plasma cell development, we conditionally deleted it in the B cell lineage. Nsd2loxSET/loxSET mice were crossed to Mb1cre mice for conditional deletion in pro-B cells [31] or to CD19cre mice for conditional deletion in pre-B cells [33]. They were also crossed to Vav1cre mice for conditional ablation in multiple lineages during the early stages of definitive hematopoiesis [32]. The deletion of the NSD2 SET domain in B cells was incomplete in CD19creNsd2loxSET/loxSET (Suppl. Fig. 1) and complete in Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET and Vav1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET (Fig. 1D). We therefore chose Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET for all subsequent experiments and Nsd2loxSET/loxSET littermates were used as control.

Splenic B cells were present in mutant mice, and successful deletion of Nsd2 exons 18 and 19 was confirmed by RNA-seq analysis of purified B cells (Fig. 1E). By Western blot, the NSD2ΔSET protein displayed the expected shift in size and was less stable compared to the wild type NSD2 (Fig. 1F). We conclude that the NSD2 SET domain is largely deleted from B2 cells.

In vitro, NSD2 is a histone methyltransferase with broad specificity [19, 20]. In contrast, on intact nucleosomes NSD2 predominantly methylates histone H3 with only some residual activity toward histone H4 (Suppl. Fig. 2). To evaluate the catalytic function of NSD2 in B2 cells, we compared the pattern of histone modifications in NSD2 versus NSD2ΔSET expressing cells by mass spectrometry. Selective changes were noted in the pattern of histone H3 modification. In agreement with the previously reported specificity of NSD2 towards dimethylation of lysine 36 of histone H3 (H3K36me2) [19], overall H3K36me2 and H3K36me3 levels were reduced in NSD2ΔSET B cells, correlating with a corresponding increase in the level of unmodified H3K36 (Fig. 2A-C). The reduction in H3K36me2/3 methylation affected over 50% of all modified histones and the loss of H3K36me2/3 appears to be independent of other modifications on the same histone. We conclude that in B2 cells H3K36me2 is the main substrate of NSD2.

To evaluate changes in the distribution of H3K36me2 across the genome, we performed ChIP-seq on wild type and NSD2ΔSET mutant B2 cells (Fig. 2D). This analysis showed significant (p-adjusted <0.05) locus-specific changes: signal reduction of over two-fold was observed at 6,582 peaks and increase of over two-fold at 548 peaks. The gain of H3K36me2 in NSD2ΔSET B cells occurred mainly in genic (64%) and promoter regions (19.4%) while the loss of H3K36me2 was observed mainly in intergenic regions (51.2%; Figure 2E). We conclude that changes in H3K36me2 occur at specific sites in the genome.

Sequencing data generated for this study are available through the GEO database: H3K36me2 ChIP-sequencing and RNA-Seq (accession no. GSE155689).

Flow cytometric analysis of bone marrows showed a similar distribution of B cell progenitors in mice with NSD2 versus NSD2ΔSET expressing B cells (Suppl. Fig. 3A), while the number of recirculating B cell progenitors and of follicular B cells in the spleen were mildly reduced in the mutant (Suppl. Fig. 3B). We tested the impact of NSD2ΔSET on proliferation in response to antigen receptor- or polyclonaly-triggered B cell proliferation in vitro and found no defect (Suppl. Fig. 3C). The ability of B2 cells to respond to pro-survival signals such as BAFF was not affected by NSD2ΔSET (Suppl. Fig. 3D). Thus, the catalytic function of NSD2 has only mild effects on the steady-state size and composition of the B2 cell compartment.

Previous studies reported that NSD2 is required for B cell class switch recombination [44, 45]. In agreement with these studies, we found reduced serum levels of IgM, IgG3, and IgA in Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET mice compared to their Nsd2loxSET/loxSET littermate controls (Fig. 3A) and a reduced percentage of IgA positive B cells in the Peyer’s Patches (Fig. 3B). To determine whether NSD2ΔSET B cells have impaired switching to IgA in vitro, we stimulated B2 cells in the presence of TGF-β or all trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) and measured class switch recombination by flow cytometry (Fig. 3C). IgA switching was consistently decreased in NSD2ΔSET B cells, while their ability to upregulate the integrin α4β7 – a known target of RA-signaling [46] – was maintained. Switching to IgG3 in response to LPS was also significantly impaired, while switching to IgG1 in response to LPS+IL4 showed no defect (Fig. 3D).

In response to infection or vaccination B cells form germinal centers (GC) in lymphoid organs [47]. To evaluate the role of the NSD2 SET domain in GC formation, we immunized mice with sheep red blood (SRB) cells and analyzed splenic GCs by flow cytometry. NSD2ΔSET GCs were smaller both under steady state conditions and upon immunization, while the distribution of GC light versus dark zone was similar (Fig. 4A). To evaluate the antigen-specific humoral response, mice were immunized with model antigens. The T-independent antigen NP-Ficoll induced the typical antigen-specific IgM, IgG3, and λ-chain response [48], with a slight reduction in the number of IgM specific antibodies at day 14 post immunization in mice with NSD2ΔSET B cells (Fig. 4B). In response to immunization with the T-cell dependent antigen NP22-CGG we found a mild antigen-specific IgG1 defect and more pronounced IgG3 defect in the recall response to secondary immunization (Fig. 4C). We conclude that NSD2ΔSET in B cells mildly alters isotype class switching, splenic germinal center formation and the humoral immune response.

Contrary to the mild effects on B2 cells, peritoneal B1 cells were strongly reduced in Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET mice. FACS analysis of peritoneal cells derived from these animals revealed an over 12-fold reduction in the number of IgMhiCD5hiCD11bhi B1a cells and a nearly 3-fold reduction of the IgMhiCD5loCD11bhi B1b cells (Fig. 5A, B). Phosphotidylcholine-specific antibodies in B1 cells are enriched for Vh11 or Vh12 heavy chains paired with Vκ4 or Vκ9 light chains [49]. Peritoneal B cells expressing Vh11/Vκ9 antibodies were nearly absent in Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET mice (Fig. 5C). In agreement with this finding, Vh12 – Jh rearrangements revealed a defect in Vh12-Jh1/Jh3 junctions in NSD2ΔSET B1 cells (Fig. 5D). We conclude that intact NSD2 is required for the generation of B1 cells.

To address the question whether NSD2 is essential for the generation or the maintenance of B1 cells, we analyzed 3-week old mice. While littermate control mice (Nsd2loxSET/loxSET) had a large percentage of B1a and B1b cells, young Nsd2ΔSET/ΔSET mice displayed a significant reduction in the percent and number of these populations, indicating that the development, and not the maintenance of B1 cells, is impaired (Suppl. Fig. 4).

In this work we demonstrate that NSD2 (MMSET), a SET domain-containing histone lysine methyltransferase, dimethylates lysine 36 of histone H3 (H3K36me2) in vivo, affecting majority of all modified histones. The selectivity of H3K36me2 down-regulation only at some gene targets suggest a locus-specific mechanism of NSD2 targeting to the chromatin in B2 cells. How such specificity is achieved remains to be investigated further. A likely scenario is that NSD2 is recruited to chromatin with the help of its non-catalytic domains, which differ between distinct NSD family members [20].

While being dispensable for B2 cell development sensu stricto, this enzyme appears to contribute to the control of isotype class switching, splenic germinal center formation and the humoral immune response. We propose that NSD2 might play a role in the regulation of peripheral B2 cell maintenance. One of the important conclusions of this study is related to the obvious lack of NSD2 contribution to the B cell division. This particular finding argues against the current view on NSD2 as an important regulator of cell proliferation [50-53]. The unaltered pro-B to pre-B cell transition in Nsd2ΔSET/ΔSET mice implies that NSD2 does not play a critical role in IgH gene rearrangement and expression, as well as division of B cell progenitors. The wild-type like pattern of immature B2 cell generation in the bone marrow of Nsd2ΔSET/ΔSET mice also suggests that NSD2 is not crucial for surface expression of IgM and signaling, required for the generation of immature B cells.

In contrast to the fairly minor effects on B2 cells, peritoneal B1 cells are strongly affected when the NSD2-encoding gene, Nsd2, was ablated in B cell-specific manner. NSD2 mRNA is expressed at lower levels in adult B1 cells as compared to B2 cells. This observation, combined with the selective reduction of the B1 cells following NSD2 gene ablation suggests that NSD2 is likely to contribute to fetal B lymphopoiesis rather than to B1 cell maintenance during adulthood The major reduction of B1 cells numbers is mirrored by a decrease in serum antibody titers. It is well established that B1 cells are the largest contributors to the overall serum levels of IgM and IgG3 [54, 55], which, in addition to the switching defect in B2 cells, can explain the reduction in serum levels of these immunoglobulins.

Understanding the exact mechanisms of NSD2 contribution to B1 cell differentiation will require the development of approaches that allow for efficient inactivation of NSD2 in B1 cells during embryonic development, as well as after establishment of the mature B1 cell compartment. However, already at this point, our highly unexpected findings revealed NSD2 as the first-in-class epigenetic master regulator of a major B cell compartment in mice. This observation, while currently limited to studies in experimental animals, may help to understand the contribution of NSD2 malfunction to lymphoid tumor development in human.

Suppl. Fig. 2. NSD2 methylates histones H3 and H4 only in the context of nucleosomes.

NSD2SET or NSD2SET Y1092A (NSD2SETmut) were incubated with purified histone H3 (H3), intact nucleosomes (N), octamers of histones (O) or mixed histones, not assembled into nucleosomes (H) in the presence of Adenosyl-L-methionine, S-[methyl-3H]. Coomassie (top) and autoradiograph (methyl-3H, bottom) are shown.

Suppl. Fig. 1. CD19Cre- mediated deletion of the SET-domain encoding exons 18 and 19 of the Nsd2 gene in splenic B cells. Southern blot analysis of DNA isolated from purified splenic B cell with the 5’ probe after BsoBI digest is shown. The 7.7 kb band corresponds to the targeted locus (floxed) and the 14 kb and the 10.9 kb bands correspond to the wild type (WT) and CD19-Cre modified Nsd2 gene (Δ), respectively. The genotype of the purified B cells is indicated above each lane. Nsd2+/+ (wild type), Nsd2loxSET/loxSET (floxed SET), CD19creNsd2loxSET/loxSET (ΔSET; CD19-cre).

Suppl. Fig. 4. B1 cells do not develop in young Nsd2ΔSET/ΔSET mice. FACS plots show relative abundance of B1a (IgMhiCD11b+CD5+) and B1b (IgMhiCD11b+ CD5−) cells in the peritoneal cavity of 3 weeks old Nsd2loxSET/loxSET control (WT) and Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET (NSD2ΔSET) mice. Absolute numbers of distinct lymphoid cells in the peritoneal cavity (bottom left) and percent (bottom right) are indicated. Nsd2loxSET/loxSET (WT, open symbols) and Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET (NSD2ΔSET, red symbols). Representative plots of one experiment with 4-5 mice per group are shown. Significance was determined by unpaired t-test *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001.

Suppl. Fig. 3: NSD2 is not essential for the development and maturation of B2 cells. A) FACS dot plots show distribution of developing and mature peripheral B2 cells. The percentage of cells in Nsd2loxSET/loxSET (WT) and Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET (NSD2ΔSET) mice in bone marrow (BM) and spleen (SPL) is indicated. Abbreviations used in the figure: pre/pro-B cells (pre/pro), immature B cells (imm), recirculating B cells (reci), pro-B cells (pro), T cells (T), B cells (B), follicular B cells (Fol), marginal zone B cells (MZ), transitional 1 B cells (T1), and transitional 2 B cells (T2). Representative plots of more than 3 independent experiments with 3 or more mice per group are shown. B) The absolute numbers of developing and mature B2 cells in the bone marrow (top) and spleen (bottom) of Nsd2loxSET/loxSET control (white symbols) and Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET (red symbols) mice are shown. Each symbol represents one mouse. The experiments were performed 3-4 times with 2-3 mice per genotype. Significance was determined by unpaired t-test *: p ≤ 0.05, **: p ≤ 0.01. C) NSD2 catalytic function is dispensable for B cell proliferation. Expression of CD86 and IAb on freshly isolated Nsd2loxSET/loxSET control (grey) and Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET (red) splenic B cells in the absence (filled histograms) or presence of stimuli (open histograms). Proliferation of freshly isolated Nsd2loxSET/loxSET (WT) and Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET (NSD2ΔSET) B cells in the absence (filled histograms) or presence of stimuli (open histograms) was measured by CFSE dilution. The experiments were performed 3-4 times with 2-3 mice per genotype. D) Dispensable role of NSD2 catalytic function in B cell survival. Frequencies of viable Nsd2loxSET/loxSET control (open symbols) and Mb1creNsd2loxSET/loxSET (red symbols) splenic B cells in the presence of 0 – 25 ng of recombinant BAFF. Data are means ± s.d. from 3 independent experiments.
