---
reference_id: "PMID:33453301"
title: "Performance evaluation of Xpert HBV viral load (VL) assay: Point-of-care molecular test to strengthen and decentralize management of chronic hepatitis B (CHB) infection."
authors:
- Gupta E
- Khodare A
- Rani N
- Singh G
- Aggarwal K
- Sharma M
journal: J Virol Methods
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114063
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Performance evaluation of Xpert HBV viral load (VL) assay: Point-of-care molecular test to strengthen and decentralize management of chronic hepatitis B (CHB) infection.
**Authors:** Gupta E, Khodare A, Rani N, Singh G, Aggarwal K, Sharma M
**Journal:** J Virol Methods (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114063](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114063)

## Content

1. J Virol Methods. 2021 Apr;290:114063. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114063.
Epub  2021 Jan 13.

Performance evaluation of Xpert HBV viral load (VL) assay: Point-of-care 
molecular test to strengthen and decentralize management of chronic hepatitis B 
(CHB) infection.

Gupta E(1), Khodare A(2), Rani N(2), Singh G(2), Aggarwal K(2), Sharma M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Virology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences 
(ILBS), New Delhi, India. Electronic address: ektagaurisha@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Virology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences 
(ILBS), New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Hepatology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences (ILBS), New 
Delhi, India.

INTRODUCTION: Estimation of hepatitis B (HBV) viral load (VL) is critical in 
hepatitis-B cascade-of-care and at present there is no point of care (POC) 
molecular assay available for the same. This study evaluated the performance of 
a new near point of care molecular assay Xpert HBV- VL assay against the 
approved assays.
MATERIALS & METHODS: In this study 172 archived previously tested samples, were 
simultaneously re-tested for HBV DNA on 3 real-time PCR assays: Abbott Real-Time 
HBV, Roche TaqMan® HBV and Xpert HBV assay.
RESULTS: Out of 172 samples, 119 were previously positive for HBV DNA with a 
median VL 4.46 (IQR: 1-8.76)log10IU/mL and 53 were HBV DNA negative. Genotyping 
could be done in 95 (79.8 %) samples and genotype D (83; 87.3 %) was the 
commonest type. The Xpert assay demonstrated a good correlation with Abbott (R2 
= 0.94) and Roche (R2 = 0.96). On comparison, the mean difference with 95 % 
Confidence Interval of Xpert assay was -0.018 and -0.043 log10 IU/mL with Abbott 
and Roche assay, respectively. The overall sensitivity, specificity, negative 
predictive value, and positive predictive value of the Xpert assay was found 
97.5 %, 100 %, 94.65 & 100 % respectively.
CONCLUSION: Xpert HBV-VL assay which has a potential for near point of care 
molecular testing has shown excellent performance and found to be a reliable 
method for HBV DNA quantification.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2021.114063
PMID: 33453301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]