---
reference_id: "PMID:23607545"
title: Abnormal RNA structures (RNA foci) containing a penta-nucleotide repeat (UGGAA)n in the Purkinje cell nucleus is associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 pathogenesis.
authors:
- Niimi Y
- Takahashi M
- Sugawara E
- Umeda S
- Obayashi M
- Sato N
- Ishiguro T
- Higashi M
- Eishi Y
- Mizusawa H
- Ishikawa K
journal: Neuropathology
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/neup.12032
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cell Nucleus/genetics
- DNA Repeat Expansion/genetics
- Flow Cytometry
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nucleic Acid Conformation
- Purkinje Cells/pathology
- RNA/genetics
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal RNA structures (RNA foci) containing a penta-nucleotide repeat (UGGAA)n in the Purkinje cell nucleus is associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Niimi Y, Takahashi M, Sugawara E, Umeda S, Obayashi M, Sato N, Ishiguro T, Higashi M, Eishi Y, Mizusawa H, Ishikawa K
**Journal:** Neuropathology (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/neup.12032](https://doi.org/10.1111/neup.12032)

## Content

1. Neuropathology. 2013 Dec;33(6):600-11. doi: 10.1111/neup.12032. Epub 2013 Apr
22.

Abnormal RNA structures (RNA foci) containing a penta-nucleotide repeat (UGGAA)n
in the Purkinje cell nucleus is associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 31
pathogenesis.

Niimi Y(1), Takahashi M, Sugawara E, Umeda S, Obayashi M, Sato N, Ishiguro T,
Higashi M, Eishi Y, Mizusawa H, Ishikawa K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 (SCA31) is an autosomal-dominant cerebellar
ataxia showing a Purkinje cell (PC)-predominant neurodegeneration in humans. The
mutation is a complex penta-nucleotide repeat containing (TGGAA)n , (TAGAA)n ,
(TAAAA)n and (TAGAATAAAA)n inserted in an intron shared by two different genes
BEAN1 and TK2 located in the long arm of the human chromosome 16. Previous
studies have shown that (TGGAA)n is the critical component of SCA31 pathogenesis
while the three other repeats, also present in normal Japanese, are not
essential. Importantly, it has been shown that BEAN1 and TK2 are transcribed in
mutually opposite directions in the human brain. Furthermore, abnormal RNA
structures called "RNA foci" are observed by a probe against (UAGAAUAAAA)n in
SCA31 patients' PC nuclei, indicating that the BEAN1-direction mutant transcript
appears instrumental for the pathogenesis. However, it is not known whether the
critical repeat (TGGAA)n contributes to the formation of RNA foci, neither do we
understand how the RNA foci formation is relevant to the pathogenesis. To
address these issues, we investigated two SCA31 cerebella by fluorescence in
situ hybridization using a probe against (UGGAA)n . We also asked whether the
mutant BEAN1-transcript containing (UGGAA)n exerts toxicity compared to the
other three repeats in cultured cells. Histopathologically, we confirm that the
PC is the main target of SCA31 pathogenesis. We find that the RNA foci
containing (UGGAA)n are indeed observed in PC nuclei of both SCA31 patients,
whereas similar foci were not observed in control individuals. In both
transiently and stably expressed cultured cell models, we also find that the
mutation transcribed in the BEAN1-direction yields more toxicity than control
transcripts and forms RNA foci detected with probes against (UGGAA)n and
(UAGAAUAAAA)n . Taking these findings together, we conclude that the RNA foci
containing BEAN1-direction transcript (UGGAA)n are associated with PC
degeneration in SCA31.

© 2013 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12032
PMID: 23607545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
