---
reference_id: "PMID:35183224"
title: "Congenital hyperinsulinism in infancy and childhood: challenges, unmet needs and the perspective of patients and families."
authors:
- Banerjee I
- Raskin J
- Arnoux JB
- De Leon DD
- Weinzimer SA
- Hammer M
- Kendall DM
- Thornton PS
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02214-y
keywords:
- Blood Glucose
- Blood Glucose Self-Monitoring
- Child
- "Congenital Hyperinsulinism/diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- Hyperinsulinism
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Monitoring, Physiologic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital hyperinsulinism in infancy and childhood: challenges, unmet needs and the perspective of patients and families.
**Authors:** Banerjee I, Raskin J, Arnoux JB, De Leon DD, Weinzimer SA, Hammer M, Kendall DM, Thornton PS
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02214-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02214-y)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Feb 19;17(1):61. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02214-y.

Congenital hyperinsulinism in infancy and childhood: challenges, unmet needs and 
the perspective of patients and families.

Banerjee I(1), Raskin J(2), Arnoux JB(3), De Leon DD(4), Weinzimer SA(5), Hammer 
M(6), Kendall DM(6), Thornton PS(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9WL, UK. indi.banerjee@manchester.ac.uk.
(2)Congenital Hyperinsulinism International, Glen Ridge, NJ, USA.
(3)Reference Center for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Necker-Enfants Malades 
Hospital, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(4)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics, The 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(6)Zealand Pharma A/S, Søborg, Denmark.
(7)Congenital Hyperinsulinism Center, Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort 
Worth, TX, USA.

Erratum in
    Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 May 18;17(1):205. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02363-0.

BACKGROUND: Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is the most common cause of 
persistent hypoglycemia in infants and children, and carries a considerable risk 
of neurological damage and developmental delays if diagnosis and treatment are 
delayed. Despite rapid advances in diagnosis and management, long-term 
developmental outcomes have not significantly improved in the past years. CHI 
remains a disease that is associated with significant morbidity, and 
psychosocial and financial burden for affected families, especially concerning 
the need for constant blood glucose monitoring throughout patients' lives.
RESULTS: In this review, we discuss the key clinical challenges and unmet needs, 
and present insights on patients' and families' perspective on their daily life 
with CHI. Prevention of neurocognitive impairment and successful management of 
patients with CHI largely depend on early diagnosis and effective treatment by a 
multidisciplinary team of specialists with experience in the disease.
CONCLUSIONS: To ensure the best outcomes for patients and their families, 
improvements in effective screening and treatment, and accelerated referral to 
specialized centers need to be implemented. There is a need to develop a wider 
range of centers of excellence and networks of specialized care to optimize the 
best outcomes both for patients and for clinicians. Awareness of the 
presentation and the risks of CHI has to be raised across all professions 
involved in the care of newborns and infants. For many patients, the limited 
treatment options currently available are insufficient to manage the disease 
effectively, and they are associated with a range of adverse events. New 
therapies would benefit all patients, even those that are relatively stable on 
current treatments, by reducing the need for constant blood glucose monitoring 
and facilitating a personalized approach to treatment.

Plain Language Summary: Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a rare disease that 
causes newborn babies and children to have low blood sugar because of the 
abnormal release of insulin. Insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas that 
promotes the transfer of sugar from the blood into the body’s cells. In a 
healthy person, insulin is released only after a meal when the level of blood 
sugar is high, but infants and children with CHI make insulin even if the blood 
sugar is low. This can lead to dangerously low blood sugar levels, which can 
cause brain damage if left untreated. Unfortunately, diagnosis and treatment are 
often delayed, resulting in avoidable brain damage and developmental delays in 
these children. CHI is associated with substantial stress and anxiety for the 
families, especially due to the need for frequent feeding and the fear of low 
blood sugars added to the constant need to measure blood sugar levels. This 
article discusses the most important challenges and unmet needs in this rare 
disease, including the limited treatment options, the side effects of available 
treatment options and the heavy psychological, social and financial burden on 
affected families. Effective screening of newborns for CHI needs to be improved, 
and quick referral to specialized treatment centers is necessary to ensure the 
best outcomes for patients and families. In addition, awareness of CHI has to be 
raised in all medical professions caring for newborns and infants, and new 
medications are urgently needed to ensure the best possible treatment for all 
patients with CHI.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02214-y
PMCID: PMC8858501
PMID: 35183224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IB has been involved (independently of this 
work) in research contracts with Crinetics Pharmaceuticals, Dexcom Incorporated, 
Merck Serono and Zealand Pharma. He has received fees for advisory board 
meetings with Merck Serono. He has national commitments as Chair of the British 
Society of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes Clinical Study Group, Audit and 
Peer Review Officer of the BSPED, Chair of the European Society for Paediatric 
Endocrinology, and co-opted member of the Head Injury Guidelines Committee for 
the National Institute of Health and Care Excellence in the UK. JR is an 
employee of CHI International, who have received sponsorship for events from 
Amidebio, Betabionics, Crinetics Pharmaceuticals, Eiger, Hanmi, Rezolute, Twist 
and Zealand Pharma over the past 3 years. Crinetics Pharmaceuticals, Eiger, 
Hanmi Pharmaceuticals, Rezolute and Zealand Pharma are current sponsors of the 
HI Global Registry. JR does not receive any fees directly from the companies. 
J-BA received consulting fees (independent of this work) from Alexion, BioMarin, 
Immedica, Lucane Pharma and Zealand Pharma, and speaker fees from Pierre Fabre 
and Sanofi Genzyme. DDDL received consulting fees (independent of this work) 
from Crinetics Pharmaceuticals, Hanmi Pharmaceuticals, Heptares Therapeutics, 
Poxel Inc., Soleno Therapeutics and Zealand Pharma, and research support from 
Crinetics Pharmaceuticals, Tiburio Pharma, Twist Pharma and Zealand Pharma. DDDL 
owns stock options from Merck & Co through spouse employment. SAW received 
speaker fees (independent of this work) from Abbott, Dexcom and Medtronic, and 
serves as a consultant for Zealand Pharma A/S. MH and DMK are full-time 
employees and shareholders of Zealand Pharma A/S, Soborg, Denmark. PST received 
payments (independent of this work) from Ascendis, Novo Nordisk, Opko Biologics, 
Rezolute, Spruce, Xeris Pharmaceuticals and Zealand Pharma for performing 
research studies, and payments from Johnson and Johnson and Nutricia for expert 
testimony.