---
reference_id: "PMID:20301426"
title: "Optic Atrophy Type 1 – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Delettre-Cribaillet C
- Hamel CP
- Lenaers G
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optic Atrophy Type 1 – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Delettre-Cribaillet C, Hamel CP, Lenaers G

## Content

1. Optic Atrophy Type 1 – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.

Delettre-Cribaillet C(1), Hamel CP(1), Lenaers G(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 Jul 13 [updated 2015 Nov 12].

Author information:
(1)Inserm U1051, INM Hôpital Saint Eloi, Montpellier, France
(2)UMR CNRS 6214, Inserm U1083, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Angers, France

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Optic atrophy type 1 (OPA1, or Kjer type optic 
atrophy) is characterized by bilateral and symmetric optic nerve pallor 
associated with insidious decrease in visual acuity (usually between ages 4 and 
6 years), visual field defects, and color vision defects. Visual impairment is 
usually moderate (6/10 to 2/10), but ranges from mild or even insignificant to 
severe (legal blindness with acuity <1/20). The visual field defect is typically 
centrocecal, central, or paracentral; it is often large in those with severe 
disease. The color vision defect is often described as acquired blue-yellow loss 
(tritanopia). Other findings can include auditory neuropathy resulting in 
sensorineural hearing loss that ranges from severe and congenital to subclinical 
(i.e., identified by specific audiologic testing only). Visual evoked potentials 
are typically absent or delayed; pattern electroretinogram shows an abnormal 
N95:P50 ratio. Tritanopia is the classic feature of color vision defect, but 
more diffuse nonspecific dyschromatopsia is not uncommon. Ophthalmoscopic 
examination discloses temporal or diffuse pallor of the optic discs, sometimes 
associated with optic disc excavation. The neuroretinal rim shows some pallor in 
most cases, sometimes associated with a temporal pigmentary gray crescent.
DIAGNOSIS: The diagnosis of OPA1 is made based on a combination of clinical 
findings, electrophysiologic studies, and family history and/or by the 
identification of a heterozygous pathogenic variant in OPA1, the only gene known 
to be associated with OPA1, by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Low-vision aids for decreased visual 
acuity. Surveillance: Annual ophthalmologic evaluations (including measurement 
of visual acuity, visual fields, and optical coherence tomography) and hearing 
evaluations. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Smoking, excessive alcohol intake, 
medications (antibiotics, antivirals) that interfere with mitochondrial 
metabolism.
GENETIC COUNSELING: OPA1 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most 
individuals diagnosed with OPA1 have an affected parent; however, de novo 
pathogenic variants have been reported. Each child of an individual with OPA1 
has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Prenatal testing for a 
pregnancy at increased risk is possible if the pathogenic variant has been 
identified in an affected family member, but genetic counseling remains 
complicated by the incomplete penetrance and the markedly variable inter- and 
intrafamilial expressivity of the disease.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301426