---
reference_id: "PMID:24443025"
title: The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Malfait F
- De Paepe A
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-7893-1_9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Malfait F, De Paepe A
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-94-007-7893-1_9](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-7893-1_9)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;802:129-43. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-7893-1_9.

The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Malfait F(1), De Paepe A.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.

The Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes comprise a heterogeneous group of diseases, which 
are characterized by fragility of the soft connective tissues and widespread 
manifestations in skin, ligaments and joints, blood vessels and internal organs. 
The clinical spectrum varies from mild skin and joint hyperlaxity to severe 
physical disability and life-threatening vascular complications. The current 
Villefranche classification recognizes six subtypes, most of which are linked to 
mutations in one of the genes encoding fibrillar collagen proteins or enzymes 
involved in post-translational modification of these proteins. Establishing the 
correct EDS subtype has important implications for genetic counselling and 
management and is supported by specific biochemical and molecular 
investigations. Over the last years, the characterisation of several new EDS 
variants has broadened insights into the molecular pathogenesis of EDS by 
implicating genetic defects in the biosynthesis of other extracellular matrix 
molecules, such as proteoglycans and tenascin-X, or genetic defects in molecules 
involved in intracellular trafficking, secretion and assembly of extracellular 
matrix proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-7893-1_9
PMID: 24443025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]