---
reference_id: "PMID:19247573"
title: "Cognitive-behavioral therapy for premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder: a systematic review."
authors:
- Lustyk MK
- Gerrish WG
- Shaver S
- Keys SL
journal: Arch Womens Ment Health
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s00737-009-0052-y
keywords:
- Adult
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
- Female
- Humans
- "Premenstrual Syndrome/diagnosis, psychology, therapy"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive-behavioral therapy for premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Lustyk MK, Gerrish WG, Shaver S, Keys SL
**Journal:** Arch Womens Ment Health (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00737-009-0052-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00737-009-0052-y)

## Content

1. Arch Womens Ment Health. 2009 Apr;12(2):85-96. doi: 10.1007/s00737-009-0052-y.
 Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Cognitive-behavioral therapy for premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual 
dysphoric disorder: a systematic review.

Lustyk MK(1), Gerrish WG, Shaver S, Keys SL.

Author information:
(1)Lustyk Women's Health Lab, School of Psychology, Family, and Community, 
Seattle Pacific University, Seattle, WA, USA. klustyk@spu.edu

We systematically reviewed empirical studies that investigated the use of 
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for premenstrual syndrome (PMS) or 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). Our multi-database search identified 
seven published empirical reports. Three were identified as randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs). The methods utilized to investigate therapeutic 
efficacy of CBT in these studies varied widely from case reports to RCTs with 
pharmacotherapy comparison groups. Initially we provide a brief overview of CBT 
and justifications for its potential use to treat PMS/PMDD. Next, we provide 
critical evaluations of the analyses used in each study focusing on the 
detection of intervention effects assessed by statistically significant time by 
group interactions. When possible we calculate effect sizes to elucidate the 
clinical significance of results. Our review revealed a dearth of evidence 
providing statistically significant CBT intervention effects. Issues such as 
overall time investment, latency to treatment effects, and complementary and 
combined therapies are considered. We present a theoretical argument for 
applying mindfulness- and acceptance-based CBT interventions to PMS/PMDD and 
suggest future research in this area. In conclusion, to produce the necessary 
evidence-base support for PMS/PMDD given the limited empirical evidence reported 
here, researchers are called on to produce methodologically rigorous 
investigations of psychosocial interventions for PMS/PMDD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00737-009-0052-y
PMID: 19247573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]