---
reference_id: "PMID:35690244"
title: "Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: Clinical manifestations, pathogenetic features, and management approach."
authors:
- Bjørklund G
- Pivin M
- Hangan T
- Yurkovskaya O
- Pivina L
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2022.103135
keywords:
- Adrenal Insufficiency
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1/genetics"
- Humans
- "Hypoparathyroidism/complications, genetics"
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Thyroiditis, Autoimmune/complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: Clinical manifestations, pathogenetic features, and management approach.
**Authors:** Bjørklund G, Pivin M, Hangan T, Yurkovskaya O, Pivina L
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2022.103135](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2022.103135)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2022 Aug;21(8):103135. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2022.103135. Epub 
2022 Jun 9.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: Clinical manifestations, pathogenetic 
features, and management approach.

Bjørklund G(1), Pivin M(2), Hangan T(3), Yurkovskaya O(2), Pivina L(4).

Author information:
(1)Council for Nutritional and Environmental Medicine (CONEM), Mo i Rana, 
Norway. Electronic address: bjorklund@conem.org.
(2)Semey Medical University, Semey, Kazakhstan.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Ovidius University of Constanta, Constanta, Romania. 
Electronic address: tony@medcon.ro.
(4)Semey Medical University, Semey, Kazakhstan; CONEM Kazakhstan Environmental 
Health and Safety Research Group, Semey Medical University, Semey, Kazakhstan.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1) is an autosomal recessive 
hereditary pathology that develops with endocrine and non-endocrine 
manifestations in childhood. The classic triad of APS-1 includes chronic 
candidiasis of the skin and mucous membranes, adrenal insufficiency, and 
hypoparathyroidism. APS-1 is often accompanied by hypogonadism, type 1 diabetes, 
autoimmune thyroiditis, vitiligo, alopecia, asplenia, pneumonitis, gastritis, 
pernicious anemia, and intestinal dysfunction, nephritis, and hepatitis. The 
prevalence rate is highest in genetically isolated populations (up to 
1:6500-1:9000). APS-1 occurs because of mutations in the autoimmune regulator 
(AIRE) gene, leading to a disrupted mechanism of normal antigen expression, the 
formation of abnormal clones of immune cells, and autoimmune damage to various 
organs. Analysis of the AIRE gene is the main diagnostic method for early 
detection of APS-1 and the choice of methods for its treatment. Timely genetic 
counseling makes it possible to identify the disease early, prescribe 
appropriate treatment and prevent serious complications. This paper analyzes 
scientific information characterizing clinical manifestations of autoimmune 
polyendocrine syndrome type 1 in association with its pathogenetic features, 
epidemiology, and current management.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2022.103135
PMID: 35690244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]