---
reference_id: "PMID:28393351"
title: Whole-exome sequencing identifies a homozygous donor splice-site mutation in STAG3 that causes primary ovarian insufficiency.
authors:
- He WB
- Banerjee S
- Meng LL
- Du J
- Gong F
- Huang H
- Zhang XX
- Wang YY
- Lu GX
- Lin G
- Tan YQ
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13034
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- China/epidemiology
- Consanguinity
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-exome sequencing identifies a homozygous donor splice-site mutation in STAG3 that causes primary ovarian insufficiency.
**Authors:** He WB, Banerjee S, Meng LL, Du J, Gong F, Huang H, Zhang XX, Wang YY, Lu GX, Lin G, Tan YQ
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13034](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13034)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2018 Feb;93(2):340-344. doi: 10.1111/cge.13034. Epub 2017 Aug 17.

Whole-exome sequencing identifies a homozygous donor splice-site mutation in 
STAG3 that causes primary ovarian insufficiency.

He WB(1)(2), Banerjee S(3), Meng LL(1), Du J(1)(2), Gong F(1)(2), Huang H(3), 
Zhang XX(3), Wang YY(3), Lu GX(1)(2), Lin G(1)(2), Tan YQ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Reproduction and Stem Cell Engineering, Central South 
University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(2)Reproductive and Genetic Hospital of CITIC-Xiangya, Changsha, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China.

Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is the depletion or loss of normal ovarian 
function, which cause infertility in women before the age of 40 years. Two 
homozygous germline truncation mutations in STAG3 gene had been reported to 
causes POI in consanguineous families. Here, we aimed to identify the genetic 
cause of POI in 2 affected sisters manifested with primary amenorrhea and 
partial development of secondary sexual characters with normal range of height 
of a consanguineous Han Chinese family. Whole-exome and Sanger sequencing 
identified a homozygous donor splice-site mutation (NM_012447.2: c.1573+5G>A) in 
the STAG3 gene. RT-PCR revealed that the mutation causes loss of wild-type donor 
splice-site which leads to aberrant splicing of STAG3 mRNA and consecutive 
formation of STAG3 alternative transcript (p.Leu490Thrfs*10) . This is the first 
report of splice-site mutation of STAG3 gene causes POI in 2 Han Chinese 
patients.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13034
PMID: 28393351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]