---
reference_id: "PMID:12949970"
title: Homozygous and heterozygous inheritance of PAX3 mutations causes different types of Waardenburg syndrome.
authors:
- Wollnik B
- Tukel T
- Uyguner O
- Ghanbari A
- Kayserili H
- Emiroglu M
- Yuksel-Apak M
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20260
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Transcription Factors
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous and heterozygous inheritance of PAX3 mutations causes different types of Waardenburg syndrome.
**Authors:** Wollnik B, Tukel T, Uyguner O, Ghanbari A, Kayserili H, Emiroglu M, Yuksel-Apak M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.20260](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.20260)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Sep 15;122A(1):42-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20260.

Homozygous and heterozygous inheritance of PAX3 mutations causes different types 
of Waardenburg syndrome.

Wollnik B(1), Tukel T, Uyguner O, Ghanbari A, Kayserili H, Emiroglu M, 
Yuksel-Apak M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Child Health Institute, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey. wollnik@superonline.com

Type I Waardenburg syndrome (WS-I) is an auditory-pigmentary syndrome caused by 
heterozygous loss of function mutations in the PAX3 gene. Klein-Waardenburg 
syndrome (WS-III) is a very rare condition and represents an extreme 
presentation of WS-I, additionally associated with musculoskeletal 
abnormalities. We present an 18-months old Turkish child with typical 
Klein-Waardenburg syndrome (WS) including dystopia canthorum, partial albinism, 
and upper-limb defects. The child was born to a consanguineous couple and both 
parents had WS-I. We screened the entire coding region of the PAX3 gene for 
mutations and identified a novel missense mutation, Y90H, within the paired box 
domain of PAX3. Both parents were heterozygous for the mutation and the 
proposita was homozygous. This is the third report of a homozygous PAX3 mutation 
causing the WS-III phenotype. Molecular analysis of four additional Turkish 
families with variable clinical expression of WS-I identified two missense 
mutations, one splice-site mutation, and one small insertion in the PAX3 gene.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20260
PMID: 12949970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]