---
reference_id: "PMID:40050757"
title: "Location based BRAF V600E mutation status and dimension patterns of sporadic thyroid nodules: a population-based study."
authors:
- Tang H
- Guo D
- Yang B
- Huang SH
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-025-13776-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Thyroid Nodule/genetics, pathology, diagnostic imaging"
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Mutation
- Retrospective Studies
- "Biopsy, Fine-Needle"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/genetics, pathology"
- Aged
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- Young Adult
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Location based BRAF V600E mutation status and dimension patterns of sporadic thyroid nodules: a population-based study.
**Authors:** Tang H, Guo D, Yang B, Huang SH
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-025-13776-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-025-13776-y)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2025 Mar 6;25(1):406. doi: 10.1186/s12885-025-13776-y.

Location based BRAF V600E mutation status and dimension patterns of sporadic
thyroid nodules: a population-based study.

Tang H(1), Guo D(2)(3), Yang B(4)(5), Huang SH(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310003, China. huitang0905@zju.edu.cn.
(2)Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital Affiliated to Yangzhou University,
Yangzhou, 225000, China.
(3)Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital, Yangzhou, 225000, China.
(4)Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital Affiliated to Yangzhou University,
Yangzhou, 225000, China. 992594325@qq.com.
(5)Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital, Yangzhou, 225000, China.
992594325@qq.com.
(6)Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital Affiliated to Yangzhou University,
Yangzhou, 225000, China. 157838242@qq.com.
(7)Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital, Yangzhou, 225000, China.
157838242@qq.com.

Fine-Needle Aspiration (FNA) has been routinely used for papillary thyroid
carcinoma (PTC) diagnosis. One single liquid based tissue sample collected from
FNA can be used for both cytological diagnosis and genetic testing at the same
time. BRAF V600E mutation exhibits 100% specificity and high sensitivity for
papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). However, FNA based studies on the genotypic
(BRAF V600E) and ultrasonic (US) imaging characteristics (location and diameter)
are exceedingly rare. Here, we aimed to study the genotypic (BRAF V600E) and US
imaging characteristics (location and diameter) in a large retrospective cohort.
A total of 4808 patients with thyroid nodules from a tertiary center underwent
FNA, and 2430 patients underwent molecular testing. Our data demonstrated that
the thyroid nodules were predominantly located on the right side (p = 0.0004).
Patients diagnosed with Bethesda VI cytology had significantly more right-sided
thyroid nodules (p = 0.0041). Interestingly, among patients with PTC with lymph
node metastasis (LNM), right-side-affected LNM was significantly more common
than left-side-affected LNM, which implies a biased regional LNM of
right-side-located thyroid nodules (p = 0.0007). The size of BRAF-V600E mutated
or right-lobe located nodules was significantly larger than that in the control
group (p = 0.0156), and patients with a BRAF V600E mutation were considerably
younger than those with wild-type BRAF.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-025-13776-y
PMCID: PMC11884127
PMID: 40050757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: This study was approved by the ethics committee of the First
Affiliated Hospital of the Medical College of Zhejiang University (No:
2024 − 1234). The Committee waived the need for written informed consent, as the
data were analyzed anonymously. We confirm that all experiments were performed
in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. Consent for publication:
All the participants have written consent to participate and publish the data.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
