---
reference_id: "PMID:38853254"
title: "Diabetic ketoacidosis in an adult with beta-ketothiolase deficiency (BKD) involving a novel ACAT1 variant : first report of established diabetes in BKD and a review of the literature."
authors:
- Zhen XM
- Twigg SM
- Wu T
- Tabet E
- McGill MJ
- Constantino M
- Mallawaarachchi A
- Luo C
- Thillainadesan S
- Rahman Y
- Wong J
journal: Clin Diabetes Endocrinol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s40842-024-00174-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetic ketoacidosis in an adult with beta-ketothiolase deficiency (BKD) involving a novel ACAT1 variant : first report of established diabetes in BKD and a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Zhen XM, Twigg SM, Wu T, Tabet E, McGill MJ, Constantino M, Mallawaarachchi A, Luo C, Thillainadesan S, Rahman Y, Wong J
**Journal:** Clin Diabetes Endocrinol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40842-024-00174-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40842-024-00174-9)

## Content

1. Clin Diabetes Endocrinol. 2024 Jun 10;10(1):17. doi:
10.1186/s40842-024-00174-9.

Diabetic ketoacidosis in an adult with beta-ketothiolase deficiency (BKD) 
involving a novel ACAT1 variant : first report of established diabetes in BKD 
and a review of the literature.

Zhen XM(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Twigg SM(6)(7)(8), Wu T(6)(7), Tabet E(6)(7)(8), McGill 
MJ(6)(7)(8), Constantino M(6)(7), Mallawaarachchi A(9), Luo C(6)(7), 
Thillainadesan S(6), Rahman Y(10), Wong J(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia. xi.zhen@uqconnect.edu.au.
(2)Diabetes Centre, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
xi.zhen@uqconnect.edu.au.
(3)Sydney Medical School (Central), Faculty of Medicine and Health, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. xi.zhen@uqconnect.edu.au.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Blacktown Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
xi.zhen@uqconnect.edu.au.
(5)School of Medicine, Western Sydney University, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
xi.zhen@uqconnect.edu.au.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(7)Diabetes Centre, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(8)Sydney Medical School (Central), Faculty of Medicine and Health, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(9)Clinical Genetics Service, Institute of Precision Medicine and 
Bioinformatics, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(10)Department of Genetic Medicine and ICPMR Chemical Pathology, Westmead 
Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes presenting in young adults is often challenging to 
classify. Diabetic ketoacidosis is typically seen in autoimmune type 1 diabetes 
mellitus and more rarely in young onset type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Beta-ketothiolase deficiency (BKD) is a rare autosomal recessive condition 
affecting isoleucine catabolism and ketone body metabolism. BKD typically 
manifests in childhood as recurrent episodes of ketoacidosis, the frequency of 
which tends to reduce with age. There is a paucity of data with respect to the 
co-existence of persistent dysglycemia with BKD.
CASE PRESENTATION AND LITERATURE REVIEW: We present a novel case of diabetes 
presenting as diabetic ketoacidosis in a 34-year-old man with BKD, with 
genetically confirmed compound heterozygosity for variants in ACAT1, including a 
novel ACAT1 c.481T>C, p.(Tyr161His) variant. Diabetes in people with BKD 
presents unique diagnostic and management challenges. To further contextualize 
our findings, we conducted a comprehensive narrative review of the existing 
literature with respect to dysglycemia in those with BKD, especially in 
adulthood. There are no existing reports describing diabetes in adults with BKD. 
Stress hyperglycemia is not uncommon when children with BKD are acutely unwell, 
with several pediatric case reports describing short-lived hyperglycemia but 
normal HbA1c measurements during metabolic crises (indicating the absence of 
persistent hyperglycemia).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of diabetic ketoacidosis in an adult with 
BKD, with an elevated HbA1c consistent with persistent hyperglycemia. This case 
highlights the importance of checking HbA1c in people with BKD and hyperglycemia 
in order to uncover potential coexisting diabetes, facilitating timely 
management and preventing complications. Increased reporting on the longitudinal 
outcomes of those with rare metabolic disorders is essential for identifying 
potential associations with conditions like diabetes.

© 2024. Crown.

DOI: 10.1186/s40842-024-00174-9
PMCID: PMC11163784
PMID: 38853254

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose in relation to this paper.