---
reference_id: "PMID:20301368"
title: Saethre-Chotzen Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Gallagher ER
- Ratisoontorn C
- Cunningham ML
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Saethre-Chotzen Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Gallagher ER, Ratisoontorn C, Cunningham ML

## Content

1. Saethre-Chotzen Syndrome.

Gallagher ER(1), Ratisoontorn C(2), Cunningham ML(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 May 16 [updated 2019 Jan 24].

Author information:
(1)Children's Craniofacial Center Seattle Children's Hospital; Department of 
Pediatrics University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
(2)Department of Operative Dentistry Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
(3)Medical Director, Children's Craniofacial Center Seattle Children's Hospital; 
Departments of Pediatrics, Biological Structure, Pediatric Dentistry, and Oral 
Biology University of Washington Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, Seattle, 
Washington

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Classic Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS) is 
characterized by coronal synostosis (unilateral or bilateral), facial asymmetry 
(particularly in individuals with unicoronal synostosis), strabismus, ptosis, 
and characteristic appearance of the ear (small pinna with a prominent superior 
and/or inferior crus). Syndactyly of digits two and three of the hand is 
variably present. Cognitive development is usually normal, although those with a 
large genomic deletion are at an increased risk for intellectual challenges. 
Less common manifestations of SCS include other skeletal findings (parietal 
foramina, vertebral segmentation defects, radioulnar synostosis, maxillary 
hypoplasia, ocular hypertelorism, hallux valgus, duplicated or curved distal 
hallux), hypertelorism, palatal anomalies, obstructive sleep apnea, increased 
intracranial pressure, short stature, and congenital heart malformations.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SCS is established in a proband with typical 
clinical findings and a heterozygous pathogenic (or likely pathogenic) variant 
in TWIST1 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Ongoing management by an established 
craniofacial team which may include cranioplasty in the first year of life and 
midface surgery in childhood as needed for dental malocclusion, swallowing 
difficulties, and respiratory problems. If a cleft palate is present, surgical 
repair usually follows cranioplasty. As needed: orthodontic treatment and/or 
orthognathic surgery at the completion of facial growth; developmental 
intervention; routine treatment of hearing loss; ophthalmologic evaluation and, 
if ptosis is present, intervention to prevent amblyopia, with surgical repair 
during early childhood as needed. Surveillance: Annual ophthalmologic evaluation 
for papilledema; brain imaging for additional evaluation when there is evidence 
of increased intracranial pressure; clinical examination for facial asymmetry as 
needed; annual speech evaluation starting at age 12 months in those with a cleft 
palate. Audiology evaluations every 6-12 months; annual clinical evaluation for 
sleep-disordered breathing and developmental delays. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: If cervical spine abnormality with instability is present in an 
individual, activities that put the spine at risk should be limited.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SCS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Many 
individuals diagnosed with SCS have an affected parent; the proportion of cases 
caused by a de novo pathogenic variant is unknown. The family history of some 
individuals diagnosed with SCS may appear to be negative because of failure to 
recognize the disorder in family members (wide phenotypic variability is 
observed within families with SCS) or reduced penetrance. Each child of an 
individual with SCS has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. 
Prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible if the pathogenic variant has been identified in the 
family.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301368