---
reference_id: "PMID:36435868"
title: Targeted Therapy for Melanomas Without BRAF V600 Mutation.
authors:
- Choi JS
- Chandra S
journal: Curr Oncol Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11912-022-01306-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted Therapy for Melanomas Without BRAF V600 Mutation.
**Authors:** Choi JS, Chandra S
**Journal:** Curr Oncol Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11912-022-01306-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11912-022-01306-z)

## Content

1. Curr Oncol Rep. 2022 Dec;24(12):1873-1881. doi: 10.1007/s11912-022-01306-z.
Epub  2022 Nov 26.

Targeted Therapy for Melanomas Without BRAF V600 Mutation.

Choi JS(1), Chandra S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, 676 North St. Clair Street, Arkes Suite 
2330, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, 676 North St. Clair Street, Arkes Suite 
2330, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. sunandana.chandra@northwestern.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have revolutionized the 
treatment paradigm for patients with metastatic melanoma; however, there remains 
an unmet clinical need for alternative treatment options for those patients who 
are either intolerant or refractory to immunotherapy. Here we review the role 
and clinical efficacy of targeted therapies for BRAFV600 wild-type melanoma.
RECENT FINDINGS: Genomic analyses in BRAFV600 wild-type melanoma have previously 
identified driver mutations along the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
and phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT pathways that can be targeted with 
small molecule inhibitors. New drugs such as bispecific antibodies and antibody 
drug conjugates may have significant clinical activity even in rare subtypes of 
melanoma that are less responsive to ICIs. Historically, molecular-targeted 
therapies have modest clinical success in treating BRAFV600 wild-type melanoma; 
nevertheless, they may have a significant clinical role in select, genetically 
distinct groups of patients. Next-generation immunotherapies or immunomodulators 
may represent the latest breakthrough in the treatment of melanoma. Additional 
studies are needed to identify novel drug targets and synergistic drug 
combinations to expand treatment options and optimize clinical outcomes.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11912-022-01306-z
PMID: 36435868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]