---
reference_id: "PMID:26867606"
title: Criteria for radiologic diagnosis of hypochondroplasia in neonates.
authors:
- Saito T
- Nagasaki K
- Nishimura G
- Wada M
- Nyuzuki H
- Takagi M
- Hasegawa T
- Amano N
- Murotsuki J
- Sawai H
- Yamada T
- Sato S
- Saitoh A
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-015-3518-2
keywords:
- Anatomic Landmarks/diagnostic imaging
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- "Dwarfism/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- "Femur/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Japan
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Lordosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Neonatology/standards
- "Pelvic Bones/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Radiography, Abdominal/standards"
- "Radiography, Thoracic/standards"
- Radiology/standards
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- Reproducibility of Results
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Spine/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Criteria for radiologic diagnosis of hypochondroplasia in neonates.
**Authors:** Saito T, Nagasaki K, Nishimura G, Wada M, Nyuzuki H, Takagi M, Hasegawa T, Amano N, Murotsuki J, Sawai H, Yamada T, Sato S, Saitoh A
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-015-3518-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-015-3518-2)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2016 Apr;46(4):513-8. doi: 10.1007/s00247-015-3518-2. Epub
2016  Feb 11.

Criteria for radiologic diagnosis of hypochondroplasia in neonates.

Saito T(1), Nagasaki K(2), Nishimura G(3), Wada M(1), Nyuzuki H(1), Takagi 
M(4)(5), Hasegawa T(5), Amano N(5), Murotsuki J(6), Sawai H(7), Yamada T(8), 
Sato S(9), Saitoh A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 1-757 
Asahimachi-Dori, Chu-Ou-Ku, Niigata, 951-8510, Japan.
(2)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 1-757 
Asahimachi-Dori, Chu-Ou-Ku, Niigata, 951-8510, Japan. 
nagasaki@med.niigata-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Radiology, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical Center, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical Center, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Maternal and Fetal Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Miyagi Children's Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(7)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Hyogo, 
Japan.
(8)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hokkaido University Hospital, 
Hokkaido, Japan.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Aomori Rosai Hospital, Aomori, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: A radiologic diagnosis of hypochondroplasia is hampered by the 
absence of age-dependent radiologic criteria, particularly in the neonatal 
period.
OBJECTIVE: To establish radiologic criteria and scoring system for identifying 
neonates with fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3)-associated 
hypochondroplasia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This retrospective study included 7 hypochondroplastic 
neonates and 30 controls. All subjects underwent radiologic examination within 
28 days after birth. We evaluated parameters reflecting the presence of (1) 
short ilia, (2) squared ilia, (3) short greater sciatic notch, (4) horizontal 
acetabula, (5) short femora, (6) broad femora, (7) metaphyseal flaring, (8) 
lumbosacral interpedicular distance narrowing and (9) ovoid radiolucency of the 
proximal femora.
RESULTS: Only parameters 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 were statistically different between 
the two groups. Parameters 3, 5 and 6 did not overlap between the groups, while 
parameters 1 and 4 did. Based on these results, we propose a scoring system for 
hypochondroplasia. Two major criteria (parameters 3 and 6) were assigned scores 
of 2, whereas 4 minor criteria (parameters 1, 4, 5 and 9) were assigned scores 
of 1. All neonates with hypochondroplasia in our material scored ≥6.
CONCLUSION: Our set of diagnostic radiologic criteria might be useful for early 
identification of hypochondroplastic neonates.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-015-3518-2
PMID: 26867606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]