---
reference_id: "PMID:28594258"
title: First-line chemotherapy with pemetrexed plus cisplatin for malignant peritoneal mesothelioma.
authors:
- Fujimoto E
- Kijima T
- Kuribayashi K
- Negi Y
- Kanemura S
- Mikami K
- Doi H
- Kitajima K
- Nakano T
journal: Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1340157
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Cisplatin/administration & dosage"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Fluorodeoxyglucose F18
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Male
- "Mesothelioma/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Mesothelioma, Malignant"
- Middle Aged
- "Pemetrexed/administration & dosage"
- "Pleural Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First-line chemotherapy with pemetrexed plus cisplatin for malignant peritoneal mesothelioma.
**Authors:** Fujimoto E, Kijima T, Kuribayashi K, Negi Y, Kanemura S, Mikami K, Doi H, Kitajima K, Nakano T
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anticancer Ther (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737140.2017.1340157](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737140.2017.1340157)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2017 Sep;17(9):865-872. doi:
10.1080/14737140.2017.1340157. Epub 2017 Jun 15.

First-line chemotherapy with pemetrexed plus cisplatin for malignant peritoneal
mesothelioma.

Fujimoto E(1), Kijima T(1), Kuribayashi K(1), Negi Y(1), Kanemura S(1), Mikami
K(1), Doi H(2), Kitajima K(2), Nakano T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine , Hyogo
College of Medicine , Hyogo , Japan.
(2)b Department of Radiology , Hyogo College of Medicine , Hyogo , Japan.
(3)c Center for Respiratory Diseases , Otemae Hospital , Osaka , Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mesothelioma of peritoneal origin has wider variation in treatment
outcomes than mesothelioma of pleural origin, likely because peritoneal
mesothelioma comprises borderline malignant variants and aggressive malignant
peritoneal mesothelioma (MPeM). This study retrospectively evaluates the
efficacy of first-line systemic pemetrexed and cisplatin chemotherapy in MPeM.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Twenty-four patients with histologically proven
MPeM were treated with pemetrexed plus cisplatin as a first-line systemic
chemotherapy. The response was evaluated radiologically according to standard
Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria. Twenty-two
patients underwent 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography/(FDG-PET)/computed tomography(CT) at baseline, and 13 were eligible
for metabolic assessment.
RESULTS: Two complete responses and 9 partial responses were achieved. Overall
response rate and disease control rate were 45.8% and 91.7%, respectively.
Median progression-free survival and median overall survival were 11.0 months
and 15.8 months, respectively. Wet- type MPeM had significantly longer survival
(40.9 months median) than other clinical types (15.5 months) (P = 0.045). The
baseline maximum standardized uptake value in 22 patients was 8.93 (range,
2.5-16.77).
CONCLUSIONS: Systemic pemetrexed plus cisplatin is active for MPeM. Disparity
with the outcome of cytoreductive surgery with hyperthermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy (CRS/HIPEC) needs to receive more emphasis, since peritoneal
mesothelioma has a 5-year survival rate of 50%.

DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1340157
PMID: 28594258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
