---
reference_id: "PMID:39555201"
title: "Cone-Rod Dystrophy and Progressive Visual Loss as the First Manifestation of Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis Type 7: A Case Report."
authors:
- Hosseini SM
- Nejad Shahrokh Abadi R
- Babaei M
- Eghbal F
- Hashemi N
journal: Clin Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ccr3.9566
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cone-Rod Dystrophy and Progressive Visual Loss as the First Manifestation of Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis Type 7: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Hosseini SM, Nejad Shahrokh Abadi R, Babaei M, Eghbal F, Hashemi N
**Journal:** Clin Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ccr3.9566](https://doi.org/10.1002/ccr3.9566)

## Content

1. Clin Case Rep. 2024 Nov 15;12(11):e9566. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.9566. eCollection
2024 Nov.

Cone-Rod Dystrophy and Progressive Visual Loss as the First Manifestation of
Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis Type 7: A Case Report.

Hosseini SM(1), Nejad Shahrokh Abadi R(2), Babaei M(3), Eghbal F(4), Hashemi
N(5).

Author information:
(1)Eye Research Center Mashhad University of Medical Sciences Mashhad Iran.
(2)Faculty of Medicine Mashhad University of Medical Sciences Mashhad Iran.
(3)Department of Pediatrics North Khorasan University of Medical Sciences
Bojnurd Iran.
(4)Next Generation Genetic Polyclinic Mashhad Iran.
(5)Department of Pediatrics School of Medicine Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences Mashhad Iran.

This case report documents the experience of a 5-year-old girl who showed signs
of retinal degeneration as the initial symptom of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
(NCLs). She originally presented with visual failure, which rapidly progressed
to near total bilateral blindness. Two years later, she developed seizures and
cognitive impairment, leading to a diagnosis of NCL7 resulting from a homozygote
mutation in the MFSD8 gene. This case underscores the importance of considering
NCLs as a potential diagnosis in cases of cone-rod dystrophy and visual loss as
the primary clinical feature. It also emphasizes the early onset and initial
presentation of retinal degeneration associated with NCL7, before other signs
and symptoms manifest, as the second documented case of its kind. Due to the
potential for NCL7 to present initially with visual loss before other hallmark
signs, it is crucial to consider it among various syndromic and non-syndromic
disorders in the differential diagnosis.

© 2024 The Author(s). Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.9566
PMCID: PMC11565442
PMID: 39555201

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.