---
reference_id: "PMID:15723108"
title: "[Respiratory emergencies]."
authors:
- Martínez E
- Martínez M
- Romero P
- Manterola A
- Michel J
- Guelbenzu JJ
- Vila E
- Boldú J
journal: An Sist Sanit Navar
year: '2004'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Respiratory emergencies].
**Authors:** Martínez E, Martínez M, Romero P, Manterola A, Michel J, Guelbenzu JJ, Vila E, Boldú J
**Journal:** An Sist Sanit Navar (2004)

## Content

1. An Sist Sanit Navar. 2004;27 Suppl 3:87-97.

[Respiratory emergencies].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez E(1), Martínez M, Romero P, Manterola A, Michel J, Guelbenzu JJ, Vila 
E, Boldú J.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Oncología Radioterápica, Hospital de Navarra, Pamplona. 
emartinl@cfnavarra.es

Respiratory emergencies in a patient with cancer can have their origin in 
pathologies of the airway, of the pulmonary parenchyma or the large vessels. The 
cause can be the tumour itself or concomitant complications. Obstruction of the 
airway should be initially evaluated with endoscopic procedures. Surgery is 
rarely possible in serious situations. The endobronchial placement of stents or 
radioactive isotopes (brachytherapy), tumoural ablation by laser or photodynamic 
therapy can quickly alleviate the symptoms and re-establish the air flow. 
Treatment of haemoptysis depends on the cause that is provoking it and on its 
quantity. Bronchoscopy continues to be the front line procedure in the majority 
of cases; it provides diagnostic information and can interrupt bleeding through 
washes with ice-cold serum, endobronchial plugging or topical injections of 
adrenaline or thrombin. External radiotherapy continues to be an extraordinarily 
useful procedure in treating haemoptysis caused by tumours and in carefully 
selected situations of endobronchial therapy with laser or brachytherapy, and 
bronchial arterial embolisation can provide a great palliative effect. 
Respiratory emergencies due to pulmonary parenchyma disease in the oncology 
patient can have a tumoural, iatrogenic or infectious cause. Early recognition 
of each of these will determine the administration of a specific treatment and 
the possibilities of success.

PMID: 15723108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]