---
reference_id: "PMID:19591980"
title: A novel mutation of HOXA13 in a family with hand-foot-genital syndrome and the role of polyalanine expansions in the spectrum of Müllerian fusion anomalies.
authors:
- Jorgensen EM
- Ruman JI
- Doherty L
- Taylor HS
journal: Fertil Steril
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.05.057
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation of HOXA13 in a family with hand-foot-genital syndrome and the role of polyalanine expansions in the spectrum of Müllerian fusion anomalies.
**Authors:** Jorgensen EM, Ruman JI, Doherty L, Taylor HS
**Journal:** Fertil Steril (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.05.057](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.05.057)

## Content

1. Fertil Steril. 2010 Sep;94(4):1235-1238. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.05.057.  Epub 2009 Jul 9.

A novel mutation of HOXA13 in a family with hand-foot-genital syndrome and the 
role of polyalanine expansions in the spectrum of Müllerian fusion anomalies.

Jorgensen EM(1), Ruman JI(2), Doherty L(1), Taylor HS(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of 
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Science, Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine, New York, New York.
(3)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of 
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. Electronic address: hugh.taylor@yale.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To report a novel mutation found in a family with hand-foot-genital 
syndrome (HFGS). To characterize the genetic basis of true HFGS versus presence 
of non-HFGS-related uterovaginal septa.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Academic medical center.
PATIENT(S): The HFGS patients and family members; women with uterine or 
uterovaginal septa without other sequelae of HFGS.
INTERVENTION(S): Sequence analysis of HOXA13 in members of a family with HFGS (3 
affected, 1 unaffected); sequence analysis of HOXA13 in biopsy samples obtained 
from 17 non-HFGS patients with idiopathic uterine or uterovaginal septa and in 
11 normal controls.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Presence or absence of mutations of HOXA13.
RESULT(S): Affected members of a family with HFGS showed a novel expansion of 
the third polyalanine tract of HOXA13, inserting 10 alanines in-frame. None of 
the patients with idiopathic uterovaginal septa displayed mutations of HOXA13.
CONCLUSION(S): The cause of uterovaginal septa without hand and foot symptoms 
differs from true HFGS. When patients present with septa, it is not necessary to 
subject them to roentgenograms of the distal limbs or to sequence analysis of 
HOXA13 unless they show clear signs of the other sequelae characteristic of true 
HFGS.

Copyright (c) 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.05.057
PMCID: PMC2889242
PMID: 19591980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]