---
reference_id: "PMID:38076483"
title: "Clinical and functional characterization of COL2A1 p.Gly444Ser variant: From a fetal phenotype to a previously undisclosed postnatal phenotype."
authors:
- Marchionni E
- "D'Apice MR"
- Lupo V
- Lattanzi G
- Mattioli E
- Lisignoli G
- Gabusi E
- Pepe G
- Helmer Citterich M
- Campione E
- Nardone AM
- Spitalieri P
- Pucci N
- Cocciadiferro D
- Picchi E
- Garaci F
- Novelli A
- Novelli G
journal: Bone Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.bonr.2023.101728
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and functional characterization of COL2A1 p.Gly444Ser variant: From a fetal phenotype to a previously undisclosed postnatal phenotype.
**Authors:** Marchionni E, D'Apice MR, Lupo V, Lattanzi G, Mattioli E, Lisignoli G, Gabusi E, Pepe G, Helmer Citterich M, Campione E, Nardone AM, Spitalieri P, Pucci N, Cocciadiferro D, Picchi E, Garaci F, Novelli A, Novelli G
**Journal:** Bone Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bonr.2023.101728](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bonr.2023.101728)

## Content

1. Bone Rep. 2023 Nov 27;19:101728. doi: 10.1016/j.bonr.2023.101728. eCollection 
2023 Dec.

Clinical and functional characterization of COL2A1 p.Gly444Ser variant: From a 
fetal phenotype to a previously undisclosed postnatal phenotype.

Marchionni E(1), D'Apice MR(1), Lupo V(1)(2), Lattanzi G(3)(4), Mattioli 
E(3)(4), Lisignoli G(5), Gabusi E(5), Pepe G(6), Helmer Citterich M(6), Campione 
E(7), Nardone AM(1), Spitalieri P(2), Pucci N(8), Cocciadiferro D(9), Picchi 
E(8), Garaci F(10), Novelli A(9), Novelli G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Policlinico Tor Vergata, University of Rome Tor 
Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome Tor Vergata, 
Rome, Italy.
(3)CNR Institute of Molecular Genetics "Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza" Unit of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(4)Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy.
(5)IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Laboratorio di Immunoreumatologia e 
Rigenerazione Tissutale Bologna, Italy.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(7)Dermatologic Unit, Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor 
Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(8)Diagnostic Imaging Unit, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University 
of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(9)Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(10)Neuroradiology Unit, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of 
Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

COL2A1 gene encodes the alpha-1 chain of type-II procollagen. Heterozygous 
pathogenic variants are associated with the broad clinical spectrum of genetic 
diseases known as type-II collagenopathies. We aimed to characterize the 
NM_001844.5:c.1330G>A;p.Gly444Ser variant detected in the COL2A1 gene through 
trio-based prenatal exome sequencing in a fetus presenting a severe skeletal 
phenotype at 31 Gestational Weeks and in his previously undisclosed 
mild-affected father. Functional studies on father's cutaneous fibroblasts, 
along with in silico protein modeling and in vitro chondrocytes differentiation, 
showed intracellular accumulation of collagen-II, its localization in external 
Golgi vesicles and nuclear morphological alterations. Extracellular matrix 
showed a disorganized fibronectin network. These results showed that p.Gly444Ser 
variant alters procollagen molecules processing and the assembly of mature 
type-II collagen fibrils, according to COL2A1-chain disorganization, displayed 
by protein modeling. Clinical assessment at 38 y.o., through a 
reverse-phenotyping approach, revealed limp gait, short and stocky appearance. 
X-Ray and MRI showed pelvis asymmetry with severe morpho-structural alterations 
of the femoral heads bilaterally, consistent with a mild form of type-II 
collagenopathy. This study shows how the fusion of genomics and clinical 
expertise can drive a diagnosis supported by cellular and bioinformatics studies 
to effectively establish variants pathogenicity.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bonr.2023.101728
PMCID: PMC10698255
PMID: 38076483

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.