---
reference_id: "PMID:35977131"
title: "Multiple Sclerosis: A Primary Care Perspective."
authors:
- Saguil A
- Farnell Iv EA
- Jordan TS
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Sclerosis: A Primary Care Perspective.
**Authors:** Saguil A, Farnell Iv EA, Jordan TS
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2022)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2022 Aug;106(2):173-183.

Multiple Sclerosis: A Primary Care Perspective.

Saguil A(1), Farnell Iv EA(2), Jordan TS(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida.
(2)Dwight D. Eisenhower Army Medical Center, Fort Gordon, Georgia.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating disorder of the central nervous 
system and the most common cause of nontraumatic neurologic disability in young 
adults. Types of MS include relapsing-remitting (most common), secondary 
progressive, and primary progressive. Clinically isolated syndrome and 
radiologically isolated syndrome are additional categories for patients with 
findings concerning for MS who do not yet meet the diagnostic criteria for the 
disease. Symptoms of MS depend on the areas of neuronal involvement. Common 
symptoms include sensory disturbances, motor weakness, impaired gait, 
incoordination, optic neuritis, and Lhermitte sign. A patient history, 
neurologic examination, and application of the 2017 McDonald Criteria are needed 
to diagnose MS accurately. Patients with MS should be treated by a 
multidisciplinary team that may include physical and occupational therapists, 
speech and language therapists, mental health professionals, pharmacists, 
dietitians, neurologists, and family physicians. Steroids are the mainstay of 
treatment for the initial presentation of MS and relapses. Patients who do not 
adequately respond to steroids may benefit from plasmapheresis. Patients with MS 
who smoke tobacco should be strongly encouraged to quit. Disease-modifying 
therapy has been shown to slow disease progression and disability; options 
include injectable agents, infusions, and oral medications targeting different 
sites in the inflammatory pathway. Symptom-based care is important to address 
the bowel and bladder dysfunction, depression, fatigue, movement disorders, and 
pain that often complicate MS.

PMID: 35977131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]