---
reference_id: "PMID:37321636"
title: "Relapse Risk and Safety of Long-Term Tocilizumab Use Among Patients With Giant Cell Arteritis: A Single-Enterprise Cohort Study."
authors:
- Samec MJ
- Rakholiya J
- Langenfeld H
- Crowson CS
- Abril A
- Wang B
- Mertz L
- Rodriguez-Pla A
- Bansal P
- Burke M
- Jaquith J
- Weyand C
- Warrington KJ
- Koster MJ
journal: J Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.2022-1214
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relapse Risk and Safety of Long-Term Tocilizumab Use Among Patients With Giant Cell Arteritis: A Single-Enterprise Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Samec MJ, Rakholiya J, Langenfeld H, Crowson CS, Abril A, Wang B, Mertz L, Rodriguez-Pla A, Bansal P, Burke M, Jaquith J, Weyand C, Warrington KJ, Koster MJ
**Journal:** J Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3899/jrheum.2022-1214](https://doi.org/10.3899/jrheum.2022-1214)

## Content

1. J Rheumatol. 2023 Oct;50(10):1310-1317. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.2022-1214. Epub
2023  Jun 15.

Relapse Risk and Safety of Long-Term Tocilizumab Use Among Patients With Giant 
Cell Arteritis: A Single-Enterprise Cohort Study.

Samec MJ(1), Rakholiya J(1), Langenfeld H(2), Crowson CS(3), Abril A(4), Wang 
B(4), Mertz L(5), Rodriguez-Pla A(5), Bansal P(6), Burke M(1), Jaquith J(1), 
Weyand C(1), Warrington KJ(1), Koster MJ(7).

Author information:
(1)M.J. Samec, MD, J. Rakholiya, MBBS, M. Burke, APRN, CNP, J. Jaquith, CCRC, C. 
Weyand, MD, PhD, K.J. Warrington, MD, M.J. Koster, MD, Division of Rheumatology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)H. Langenfeld, MPH, Division of Clinical Trials and Biostatistics, Department 
of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)C.S. Crowson, PhD, Division of Rheumatology, and Division of Clinical Trials 
and Biostatistics, Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)A. Abril, MD, B. Wang, MD, Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic, 
Jacksonville, Florida.
(5)L. Mertz, MD, A. Rodriguez-Pla, MD, PhD, Division of Rheumatology, Mayo 
Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(6)P. Bansal, MBBS, Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic Health System, Eau 
Claire, Wisconsin, USA.
(7)M.J. Samec, MD, J. Rakholiya, MBBS, M. Burke, APRN, CNP, J. Jaquith, CCRC, C. 
Weyand, MD, PhD, K.J. Warrington, MD, M.J. Koster, MD, Division of Rheumatology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; koster.matthew@mayo.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of tocilizumab (TCZ) in giant 
cell arteritis (GCA) in a large North American cohort.
METHODS: Patients with GCA treated with TCZ between January 1, 2010, and May 15, 
2020, were retrospectively identified. Kaplan-Meier methods were used to 
estimate time to TCZ discontinuation and time to first relapse after TCZ 
discontinuation. Poisson regression models were used to compare annualized 
relapse rates before, during, and after TCZ use. Age- and sex-adjusted risk 
factors associated with relapse on and off TCZ and development of adverse events 
of significant interest (AESIs) were examined using Cox models.
RESULTS: One hundred fourteen patients (60.5% female) were included with mean 
(SD) age 70.4 (8.2) years. Median duration from GCA diagnosis to TCZ start was 
4.5 months. Median overall duration of TCZ treatment was 2.3 years. Relapse rate 
prior to TCZ start (0.84 relapses/person-year) was 3-fold reduced while on TCZ 
(0.28 relapses/person-year; P < 0.001) but increased to 0.64 
relapses/person-year after TCZ discontinuation. Fifty-two patients stopped TCZ 
after a median of 16.8 months; 27 relapsed after discontinuation (median: 8.4 
months; 58% relapsed within 12 months). Only 14.9% of patients stopped TCZ 
because of AESIs. Neither dose/route of TCZ, presence of large-vessel 
vasculitis, nor duration of TCZ therapy prior to discontinuation predicted 
relapse after TCZ stop.
CONCLUSION: TCZ is well tolerated in GCA, with low rates of discontinuation for 
AESIs. However, relapse occurred in > 50% despite median treatment > 12 months. 
Since the duration of TCZ prior to discontinuation did not significantly affect 
subsequent risk of GCA recurrence, further research is needed to determine the 
optimal duration of therapy.

Copyright © 2023 by the Journal of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.2022-1214
PMCID: PMC10543396
PMID: 37321636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]