---
reference_id: "PMID:33275305"
title: "Hair and skin predict cardiomyopathies: Carvajal and erythrokeratodermia cardiomyopathy syndromes."
authors:
- Sun Q
- Wine Lee L
- Hall EK
- Choate KA
- Elder RW
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/pde.14478
keywords:
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnosis, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Skin
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hair and skin predict cardiomyopathies: Carvajal and erythrokeratodermia cardiomyopathy syndromes.
**Authors:** Sun Q, Wine Lee L, Hall EK, Choate KA, Elder RW
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.14478](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.14478)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2021 Jan;38(1):31-38. doi: 10.1111/pde.14478. Epub 2020 Dec
4.

Hair and skin predict cardiomyopathies: Carvajal and erythrokeratodermia
cardiomyopathy syndromes.

Sun Q(1), Wine Lee L(2), Hall EK(3), Choate KA(1), Elder RW(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Dermatology, Genetics, and Pathology, Yale School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Medical University of South Carolina Health, Charleston, SC, USA.
(3)Section of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA.

Comment in
    Pediatr Dermatol. 2021 Sep;38(5):1406. doi: 10.1111/pde.14809.

Carvajal and erythrokeratodermia cardiomyopathy syndromes (EKC) are rare,
inherited cardiocutaneous disorders with potentially fatal consequences in young
children. Some patients display features of congestive heart failure and rapidly
deteriorate; others exhibit no evident warning signs until sudden death reveals
underlying heart disease. We present two patients to illustrate the
characteristic hair, skin, teeth, and nail abnormalities, which-especially when
distinct from that of other family members-should prompt cardiac evaluation and
genetic analysis. In this article, we discuss established treatments as well as
a promising, novel therapeutic that has led to nearly complete resolution of the
cutaneous and cardiac pathology in EKC syndrome.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.14478
PMID: 33275305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
