---
reference_id: "PMID:35613396"
title: "[Adenosquamous carcinoma of the colon: a case report and review of the literature]."
authors:
- Bravo-Taxa M
- Chuquillanqui Llimpe J
- Taxa-Rojas L
journal: Rev Gastroenterol Peru
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Adenosquamous carcinoma of the colon: a case report and review of the literature].
**Authors:** Bravo-Taxa M, Chuquillanqui Llimpe J, Taxa-Rojas L
**Journal:** Rev Gastroenterol Peru (2021)

## Content

1. Rev Gastroenterol Peru. 2021 Oct-Dec;41(4):254-256.

[Adenosquamous carcinoma of the colon: a case report and review of the 
literature].

[Article in Spanish]

Bravo-Taxa M(1), Chuquillanqui Llimpe J(2), Taxa-Rojas L(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio Oncológico Taxa. Lima, Perú.
(2)Clínica Detecta. Lima, Perú.
(3)Laboratorio Oncológico Taxa. Lima, Perú; Universidad de San Martín de Porres. 
Lima, Perú.

Colorectal cancer is the third most frequently diagnosed cancer in both men and 
women. Adenocarcinoma is the most common pathologic subtype of colon cancer and 
constitutes 86% of all colon cancers. Nontheless, there are other less frequent 
sybtyes of colorectal carcinomas, such as adenosquamous carcinoma, an extremely 
rare form of colon cancer, but with worse prognosis and greater potential of 
metástasis. We present the case of a 68-year-old female presented with a 
two-month history of anemia, hematochezia and abdominal pain. The colonoscopic 
study presented a tumor in the ascending colon, which after surgical resection 
and pathological studies, turned out to be a primary colonoc adenosquamous 
carcinoma.

PMID: 35613396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]