---
reference_id: "PMID:17704068"
title: -463 G/A myeloperoxidase promoter polymorphism in giant cell arteritis.
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Casali B
- Farnetti E
- Pipitone N
- Nicoli D
- Macchioni PL
- Cimino L
- Bajocchi GL
- Catanoso MG
- Pattacini L
- Ghinoi A
- Restuccia G
- Boiardi L
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1136/ard.2007.074666
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/complications, genetics"
- Humans
- "Ischemia/etiology, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Peroxidase/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Polymyalgia Rheumatica/complications, genetics"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# -463 G/A myeloperoxidase promoter polymorphism in giant cell arteritis.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Casali B, Farnetti E, Pipitone N, Nicoli D, Macchioni PL, Cimino L, Bajocchi GL, Catanoso MG, Pattacini L, Ghinoi A, Restuccia G, Boiardi L
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard.2007.074666](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard.2007.074666)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2008 Apr;67(4):485-8. doi: 10.1136/ard.2007.074666. Epub 2007
Aug  17.

-463 G/A myeloperoxidase promoter polymorphism in giant cell arteritis.

Salvarani C(1), Casali B, Farnetti E, Pipitone N, Nicoli D, Macchioni PL, Cimino 
L, Bajocchi GL, Catanoso MG, Pattacini L, Ghinoi A, Restuccia G, Boiardi L.

Author information:
(1)Unitè Operativa di Reumatologia, Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Viale 
Risorgimento n 80, Reggio Emilia, 42100, Italy. salvarani.carlo@asmn.re.it

OBJECTIVE: To investigate potential associations between-463 G/A myeloperoxidase 
(MPO) promoter polymorphism and susceptibility to, and clinical features of 
giant cell arteritis (GCA).
METHODS: A total of 156 patients with biopsy-proven GCA who were residents of 
Reggio Emilia, Italy, and 235 population-based controls from the same geographic 
area were genotyped for-463 G/A promoter polymorphism of the MPO gene by 
molecular methods. The patients were subgrouped according to the presence or 
absence of polymyalgia rheumatica and severe ischaemic complications (visual 
loss and/or cerebrovascular accidents).
RESULTS: The distribution of the MPO-G/A genotype differed significantly between 
patients with GCA and the controls (p(corr) = 0.003). Allele G was significantly 
more frequent in patients with GCA than in the controls (p(corr) = 0.0002, OR 
2.0, 95% CI 1.4 to 2.9). Homozygosity for the G allele was significantly more 
frequent in patients with GCA than in controls (p(corr) = 0.0002, OR 2.2, 95% CI 
1.4 to 3.4). No significant associations were found when patients with GCA with 
and without polymyalgia rheumatica or with and without severe ischaemic 
complications were compared.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show that the-463 G/A promoter polymorphism of the MPO 
gene is associated with GCA susceptibility and support a role for MPO in the 
pathophysiology of GCA.

DOI: 10.1136/ard.2007.074666
PMID: 17704068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]