---
reference_id: "PMID:34065235"
title: "Imprecise Medicine: BRCA2 Variants of Uncertain Significance (VUS), the Challenges and Benefits to Integrate a Functional Assay Workflow with Clinical Decision Rules."
authors:
- Jimenez-Sainz J
- Jensen RB
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/genes12050780
keywords:
- "BRCA2 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Clinical Decision-Making/methods
- Female
- Genetic Complementation Test/methods
- Genetic Testing/methods
- "Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Workflow
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imprecise Medicine: BRCA2 Variants of Uncertain Significance (VUS), the Challenges and Benefits to Integrate a Functional Assay Workflow with Clinical Decision Rules.
**Authors:** Jimenez-Sainz J, Jensen RB
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes12050780](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12050780)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2021 May 20;12(5):780. doi: 10.3390/genes12050780.

Imprecise Medicine: BRCA2 Variants of Uncertain Significance (VUS), the
Challenges and Benefits to Integrate a Functional Assay Workflow with Clinical
Decision Rules.

Jimenez-Sainz J(1), Jensen RB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Pathological mutations in homology-directed repair (HDR) genes impact both
future cancer risk and therapeutic options for patients. HDR is a high-fidelity
DNA repair pathway for resolving DNA double-strand breaks throughout the genome.
BRCA2 is an essential protein that mediates the loading of RAD51 onto resected
DNA breaks, a key step in HDR. Germline mutations in BRCA2 are associated with
an increased risk for breast, ovarian, prostate, and pancreatic cancer. Clinical
findings of germline or somatic BRCA2 mutations in tumors suggest treatment with
platinum agents or PARP inhibitors. However, when genetic analysis reveals a
variant of uncertain significance (VUS) in the BRCA2 gene, precision
medicine-based decisions become complex. VUS are genetic changes with unknown
pathological impact. Current statistics indicate that between 10-20% of BRCA
sequencing results are VUS, and of these, more than 50% are missense mutations.
Functional assays to determine the pathological outcome of VUS are urgently
needed to provide clinical guidance regarding cancer risk and treatment options.
In this review, we provide a brief overview of BRCA2 functions in HDR, describe
how BRCA2 VUS are currently assessed in the clinic, and how genetic and
biochemical functional assays could be integrated into the clinical decision
process. We suggest a multi-step workflow composed of robust and accurate
functional assays to correctly evaluate the potential pathogenic or benign
nature of BRCA2 VUS. Success in this precision medicine endeavor will offer
actionable information to patients and their physicians.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12050780
PMCID: PMC8161351
PMID: 34065235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
