---
reference_id: "PMID:38245797"
title: "Late-onset methylmalonic acidemia and homocysteinemia (cblC disease): systematic review."
authors:
- Arhip L
- Brox-Torrecilla N
- Romero I
- Motilla M
- Serrano-Moreno C
- Miguélez M
- Cuerda C
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03021-3
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Pregnancy
- Humans
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis"
- Hyperhomocysteinemia
- Homocystinuria/diagnosis
- Methylmalonic Acid
- Vitamin B 12/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-onset methylmalonic acidemia and homocysteinemia (cblC disease): systematic review.
**Authors:** Arhip L, Brox-Torrecilla N, Romero I, Motilla M, Serrano-Moreno C, Miguélez M, Cuerda C
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03021-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03021-3)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Jan 20;19(1):20. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03021-3.

Late-onset methylmalonic acidemia and homocysteinemia (cblC disease): systematic 
review.

Arhip L(#)(1)(2), Brox-Torrecilla N(#)(3), Romero I(4), Motilla M(5)(6), 
Serrano-Moreno C(5)(6), Miguélez M(7), Cuerda C(5)(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Nutrición Clínica y Dietética, Hospital General Universitario 
Gregorio Marañón, Calle del Doctor Esquerdo 46, 28007, Madrid, Spain. 
loredanarhip@gmail.com.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain. 
loredanarhip@gmail.com.
(3)Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Unidad de Nutrición Clínica y Dietética, Hospital General Universitario 
Gregorio Marañón, Calle del Doctor Esquerdo 46, 28007, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Hospital Universitario Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Universidad Complutense Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Combined methylmalonic acidemia and homocystinuria, cblC type is 
an inborn error of intracellular cobalamin metabolism and the most common one. 
The age of onset ranges from prenatal to adult. The disease is characterised by 
an elevation of methylmalonic acid (MMA) and homocysteine and a decreased 
production of methionine. The aim is to review existing scientific literature of 
all late onset cblC patients in terms of clinical symptoms, diagnosis, and 
outcome.
METHODS: A bibliographic database search was undertaken in PubMed (MEDLINE) 
complemented by a reference list search. We combined search terms regarding cblC 
disease and late onset. Two review authors performed the study selection, data 
extraction and quality assessment.
RESULTS: Of the sixty-five articles included in this systematic review, we 
collected a total of 199 patients. The most frequent clinical symptoms were 
neuropathy/myelopathy, encephalopathy, psychiatric symptoms, thrombotic 
microangiopathy, seizures, kidney disease, mild to severe pulmonary hypertension 
with heart failure and thrombotic phenomena. There were different forms of 
supplementation used in the different studies collected and, within these 
studies, some patients received several treatments sequentially and/or 
concomitantly. The general outcome was: 64 patients recovered, 78 patients 
improved, 4 patients did not improve, or the disease progressed, and 12 patients 
died.
CONCLUSIONS: Most scientific literature regarding the late onset cblC disease 
comes from case reports and case series. In most cases treatment initiation led 
to an improvement and even recovery of some patients. The lack of complete 
recovery underlines the necessity for increased vigilance in unclear clinical 
symptoms for cblC disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03021-3
PMCID: PMC10799514
PMID: 38245797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.