---
reference_id: "PMID:17613166"
title: The pathogenesis of transaldolase deficiency.
authors:
- Perl A
journal: IUBMB Life
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1080/15216540701387188
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/physiology
- Humans
- Liver Cirrhosis/enzymology
- Membrane Potentials/physiology
- Mitochondria/physiology
- Multiple Sclerosis/enzymology
- Oxidation-Reduction
- Pentose Phosphate Pathway/physiology
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- "Transaldolase/deficiency, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pathogenesis of transaldolase deficiency.
**Authors:** Perl A
**Journal:** IUBMB Life (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15216540701387188](https://doi.org/10.1080/15216540701387188)

## Content

1. IUBMB Life. 2007 Jun;59(6):365-73. doi: 10.1080/15216540701387188.

The pathogenesis of transaldolase deficiency.

Perl A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, State University of New York Upstate Medical
University, College of Medicine, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

The signaling networks that mediate cell growth, differentiation, and survival
are dependent on complex metabolic and redox pathways. Metabolism of glucose
through the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) fulfills two unique functions:
formation of ribose 5-phosphate for the synthesis of nucleotides, RNA, and DNA
in support cell growth and formation of NADPH for biosynthetic reactions and
neutralization of reactive oxygen intermediates (ROI). Balancing of NADPH and
ROI levels by the PPP enzyme transaldolase (TAL) regulates the mitochondrial
trans-membrane potential (Deltapsi(m)), a critical checkpoint of ATP synthesis
and cell survival. While complete deficiency of glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD) or transketolase (TK) is lethal, TAL-deficient mice
developed normally with the exception of male sterility due to structural and
functional damage of sperm cell mitochondria. Recently, two cases of complete
TAL deficiency have been reported in patients with liver cirrhosis which results
from increased cell death of hepatocytes. Delineation of the cell type-specific
role that TAL plays in the PPP and cell death signal processing will be critical
for understanding the pathogenesis of TAL deficiency.

DOI: 10.1080/15216540701387188
PMID: 17613166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
