---
reference_id: "PMID:33650466"
title: "Chorioretinal dystrophy, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and cerebellar ataxia: Boucher-Neuhauser syndrome due to a homozygous (c.3524C>G (p.Ser1175Cys)) variant in PNPLA6 gene."
authors:
- Doğan M
- Eröz R
- Öztürk E
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2021.1894461
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Hypogonadism/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Phospholipases/genetics
- "Retinal Dystrophies/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Exome Sequencing
- Young Adult
- Acyltransferases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chorioretinal dystrophy, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and cerebellar ataxia: Boucher-Neuhauser syndrome due to a homozygous (c.3524C>G (p.Ser1175Cys)) variant in PNPLA6 gene.
**Authors:** Doğan M, Eröz R, Öztürk E
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2021.1894461](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2021.1894461)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2021 Jun;42(3):276-282. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2021.1894461. 
Epub 2021 Mar 2.

Chorioretinal dystrophy, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and cerebellar ataxia: 
Boucher-Neuhauser syndrome due to a homozygous (c.3524C>G (p.Ser1175Cys)) 
variant in PNPLA6 gene.

Doğan M(1), Eröz R(2), Öztürk E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Malatya Turgut Özal University Medical 
Faculty, Malatya, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Duzce University Medical Faculty, Duzce, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Malatya Training and Research Hospital, Malatya, 
Turkey.

Purpose: The current study aims to raise awareness of Boucher - Neuhauser 
syndrome (BNHS) that occurs as a rare phenotype due to biallelic pathogenic 
variants in the PNPLA6 gene.Methods: Detailed family histories and clinical data 
were recorded. Whole exome sequencing was performed and co-segregation analysis 
of the family was done by sanger sequencing. Also, review of 28 molecularly 
confirmed patients with BNHS from the literature was evaluated.Results: We 
identified a missense homozygous variant (c.3524 C > G (p.Ser1175Cys)) in the 
PNPLA6 gene, which explains the phenotype of the patient and neurologic, 
ophthalmologic, endocrine, and genetic evaluations established a diagnosis of 
BNHS. Symptoms, ethnicity, clinical and genetic findings of 28 molecularly 
confirmed patients with BNHS from the literature were also presented.Conclusion: 
We present the main findings of a Turkish family with BNHS together with 
detailed clinical and genetic profiles of patients diagnosed as BNHS that have 
been molecularly confirmed in the literature so far.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2021.1894461
PMID: 33650466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]