---
reference_id: "PMID:36176336"
title: Biallelic COX10 Mutations and PMP22 Deletion in a Family With Leigh Syndrome and Hereditary Neuropathy With Liability to Pressure Palsy.
authors:
- Kuroha Y
- Ishiguro T
- Tada M
- Hara N
- Murayama K
- Kawachi I
- Kasuga K
- Miyashita A
- Hasegawa A
- Takahashi T
- Matsubara N
- Onodera O
- Kakita A
- Koike R
- Ikeuchi T
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic COX10 Mutations and PMP22 Deletion in a Family With Leigh Syndrome and Hereditary Neuropathy With Liability to Pressure Palsy.
**Authors:** Kuroha Y, Ishiguro T, Tada M, Hara N, Murayama K, Kawachi I, Kasuga K, Miyashita A, Hasegawa A, Takahashi T, Matsubara N, Onodera O, Kakita A, Koike R, Ikeuchi T
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200030](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200030)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2022 Sep 27;8(5):e200030. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200030. 
eCollection 2022 Oct.

Biallelic COX10 Mutations and PMP22 Deletion in a Family With Leigh Syndrome and 
Hereditary Neuropathy With Liability to Pressure Palsy.

Kuroha Y(1), Ishiguro T(1), Tada M(1), Hara N(1), Murayama K(1), Kawachi I(1), 
Kasuga K(1), Miyashita A(1), Hasegawa A(1), Takahashi T(1), Matsubara N(1), 
Onodera O(1), Kakita A(1), Koike R(1), Ikeuchi T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology (Y.K., A.H., T.T., N.M., R.K.), Nishiniigata Chuo 
Hospital, Niigata; Department of Molecular Genetics (Y.K., T. Ishiguro, N.H., 
K.K., A.M., T. Ikeuchi), Department of Neurology (T. Ishiguro, I.K., O.O.), and 
Department of Pathology (M.T., A.K.), Brain Research Institute, Niigata 
University; and Department of Metabolism (K.M.), Chiba Children's Hospital, 
Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Leigh syndrome is a progressive encephalopathy characterized by 
symmetrical lesions in brain. This study aimed to investigate the 
clinicopathologic and genetic characteristics of a family with Leigh syndrome 
and hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsy (HNPP).
METHODS: Data from a Japanese family's clinical features, MRIs, muscle biopsy, 
and an autopsy were analyzed. A whole-exome sequence was performed, as well as 
real-time PCR analysis to determine copy number variations and Western blot 
analyses.
RESULTS: The proband and her 2 siblings developed spastic paraplegia and mental 
retardation during childhood. The proband and her sister had peripheral 
neuropathy, whereas their father developed compression neuropathy. Leigh 
encephalopathy was diagnosed neuropathologically. Brain MRI revealed changes in 
cerebral white matter as well as multiple lesions in the brainstem and 
cerebellum. Muscle biopsy revealed type 2 fiber uniformity and decreased 
staining of cytochrome c oxidase. The COX10 missense mutation was identified 
through whole-exome sequence. A 1.4-Mb genomic deletion extending from intron 5 
of COX10 to PMP22 was detected.
DISCUSSION: These findings suggest that in this family, Leigh syndrome is 
associated with a mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IV deficiency caused 
by biallelic COX10 mutations coexisting with HNPP caused by heterozygous PMP22 
deletion.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200030
PMCID: PMC9516616
PMID: 36176336