---
reference_id: "PMID:20301466"
title: Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Napolitano C
- Mazzanti A
- Bloise R
- Priori SG
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Napolitano C, Mazzanti A, Bloise R, Priori SG

## Content

1. Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia.

Napolitano C(1), Mazzanti A(2), Bloise R(3), Priori SG(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2004 Oct 14 [updated 2022 Jun 23].

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor, Department of Molecular Medicine University of Pavia;
Molecular Cardiology ICS Maugeri Pavia, Italy
(2)Assistant Professor, Department of Molecular Medicine University of Pavia;
Molecular Cardiology ICS Maugeri Pavia, Italy
(3)Medical Geneticist, Molecular Cardiology ICS Maugeri Pavia, Italy
(4)Professor of Cardiology, Department of Molecular Medicine University of
Pavia; Molecular Cardiology ICS Maugeri Pavia, Italy

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
(CPVT) is characterized by episodic syncope occurring during exercise or acute
emotion. The underlying cause of these episodes is the onset of fast ventricular
tachycardia (bidirectional or polymorphic). Spontaneous recovery may occur when
these arrhythmias self-terminate. In other instances, ventricular tachycardia
may degenerate into ventricular fibrillation and cause sudden death if
cardiopulmonary resuscitation is not readily available. The mean onset of
symptoms (usually a syncopal episode) is between age seven and 12 years; onset
as late as the fourth decade of life has been reported. If untreated, CPVT is
highly lethal, as approximately 30% of affected individuals experience at least
one cardiac arrest and up to 80% have one or more syncopal spells. Sudden death
may be the first manifestation of the disease.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CPVT is established in the presence of a
structurally normal heart, normal resting EKG, and exercise- or emotion-induced
bidirectional or polymorphic ventricular tachycardia OR in individuals who have
a heterozygous pathogenic variant in RYR2, CALM1, CALM2, CALM3, CASQ2, or KCNJ2
or biallelic pathogenic variants in CASQ2, TECRL, or TRDN.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Recent studies have demonstrated that
(1) nadolol is the most effective beta blocker in CPVT; (2) nonselective beta
blockers (nadolol and propranolol) are superior to selective beta blockers; (3)
a significant burden of life-threatening arrhythmias persists after left cardiac
sympathetic denervation; (4) an implantable cardioverter defibrillator is
effective for those individuals in whom arrhythmias are not adequately
controlled by drug therapy. Prevention of primary manifestations: Beta blockers
are indicated for all clinically affected individuals, and for individuals with
a pathogenic variant(s) in one of the genes associated with CPVT with a negative
exercise stress test, since sudden death can be the first manifestation of the
disease. Flecainide can be added for primary prevention of a cardiac arrest when
beta blockers alone cannot control the onset of arrhythmias during an exercise
stress test. Surveillance: Follow-up visits with a cardiologist every six to 12
months (depending on disease severity) are very important, especially until
puberty, since body weight increases rapidly and drug dosages must be
continually adjusted. Limitation on physical activity can be defined on the
basis of an exercise stress test done in the hospital setting; the use of
commercially available heart rate-monitoring devices for sports participation
can be helpful in keeping the heart rate in a safe range during physical
activity, but should not be considered as an alternative to medical follow-up
visits; allowed exercise intensity should be individualized based on exercise
stress test results. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Competitive sports and other
strenuous exercise; use of digitalis. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Because
treatment and surveillance are available to reduce morbidity and mortality,
first-degree relatives of a proband should be offered molecular genetic testing
if the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) are known; if the family-specific
variant(s) are not known, all first-degree relatives of an affected individual
should be evaluated with resting EKG, Holter monitoring, echocardiography, and –
most importantly – exercise stress testing.
GENETIC COUNSELING: RYR2-, CALM1-, CALM2-, CALM3-, and KCNJ2-related CPVT are
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. CASQ2-related CPVT is typically
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. However, because a subset of
individuals (still unquantified but rare) with heterozygous CASQ2 pathogenic
variants show a mild CPVT phenotype, autosomal dominant inheritance may not be
ruled out for CASQ2-related CPVT, and clinical screening is indicated
accordingly in individuals who are heterozygous for a CASQ2 pathogenic variant.
TECRL- and TRDN-related CPVT are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
Autosomal dominant inheritance. Each child of an individual with autosomal
dominant CPVT has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Autosomal
recessive inheritance. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a CASQ2,
TECRL, or TRDN pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at
conception a 25% chance of inheriting biallelic pathogenic variants and being
affected, a 50% chance of inheriting one pathogenic variant and being
heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic
variants. Heterozygote testing for at-risk relatives requires prior
identification of the CASQ2, TECRL, or TRDN pathogenic variants in the family.
Once the CPVT-related pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected
family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20301466
