---
reference_id: "PMID:15664543"
title: The neuro-ophthalmology of multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Frohman EM
- Frohman TC
- Zee DS
- McColl R
- Galetta S
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)00992-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The neuro-ophthalmology of multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Frohman EM, Frohman TC, Zee DS, McColl R, Galetta S
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(05)00992-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(05)00992-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2005 Feb;4(2):111-21. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)00992-0.

The neuro-ophthalmology of multiple sclerosis.

Frohman EM(1), Frohman TC, Zee DS, McColl R, Galetta S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, TX 75235, USA. elliot.frohman@utsouthwestern.edu 
<elliot.frohman@utsouthwestern.edu>

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2005 Apr;4(4):209. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70029-6.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common disabling neurological disease in 
young people. Most CNS lesions involve neuroanatomically non-eloquent zones that 
often do not result in symptomatic complaints. By contrast, tissue-injury 
mechanisms involving inflammatory demyelination can involve more eloquent sites, 
such as the optic nerve and brainstem, which can correspondingly produce the 
development of well recognised syndromes such as optic neuritis and internuclear 
ophthalmoplegia, respectively. In this review we discuss the broad landscape of 
abnormalities that affect the afferent visual system and the ocular motor 
apparatus, and emphasise relevant features, the recognition and treatment of 
which are of importance to general neurological practice. The commonness of 
visual sensory and eye movement abnormalities in MS highlights the importance of 
understanding the principles addressed in this review.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)00992-0
PMID: 15664543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]