---
reference_id: "PMID:39795113"
title: Primary Roles of Branched Chain Amino Acids (BCAAs) and Their Metabolism in Physiology and Metabolic Disorders.
authors:
- Bo T
- Fujii J
journal: Molecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/molecules30010056
keywords:
- "Amino Acids, Branched-Chain/metabolism"
- Humans
- Metabolic Diseases/metabolism
- "Transaminases/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- 3-Methyl-2-Oxobutanoate Dehydrogenase (Lipoamide)/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Roles of Branched Chain Amino Acids (BCAAs) and Their Metabolism in Physiology and Metabolic Disorders.
**Authors:** Bo T, Fujii J
**Journal:** Molecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/molecules30010056](https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules30010056)

## Content

1. Molecules. 2024 Dec 27;30(1):56. doi: 10.3390/molecules30010056.

Primary Roles of Branched Chain Amino Acids (BCAAs) and Their Metabolism in 
Physiology and Metabolic Disorders.

Bo T(1), Fujii J(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Animal Center, Institute for Promotion of Medical Science 
Research, Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata University, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medical 
Science, Yamagata University, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan.

Leucine, isoleucine, and valine are collectively known as branched chain amino 
acids (BCAAs) and are often discussed in the same physiological and pathological 
situations. The two consecutive initial reactions of BCAA catabolism are 
catalyzed by the common enzymes referred to as branched chain aminotransferase 
(BCAT) and branched chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase (BCKDH). BCAT transfers the 
amino group of BCAAs to 2-ketoglutarate, which results in corresponding branched 
chain 2-keto acids (BCKAs) and glutamate. BCKDH performs an oxidative 
decarboxylation of BCKAs, which produces their coenzyme A-conjugates and NADH. 
BCAT2 in skeletal muscle dominantly catalyzes the transamination of BCAAs. Low 
BCAT activity in the liver reduces the metabolization of BCAAs, but the abundant 
presence of BCKDH promotes the metabolism of muscle-derived BCKAs, which leads 
to the production of glucose and ketone bodies. While mutations in the genes 
responsible for BCAA catabolism are involved in rare inherited disorders, an 
aberrant regulation of their enzymatic activities is associated with major 
metabolic disorders such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. 
Therefore, an understanding of the regulatory process of metabolic enzymes, as 
well as the functions of the BCAAs and their metabolites, make a significant 
contribution to our health.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules30010056
PMCID: PMC11721030
PMID: 39795113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.