---
reference_id: "PMID:37549532"
title: "Efficacy and safety of crizotinib in ALK-positive systemic anaplastic large-cell lymphoma in children, adolescents, and adult patients: results of the French AcSé-crizotinib trial."
authors:
- Brugières L
- Cozic N
- Houot R
- Rigaud C
- Sibon D
- Arfi-Rouche J
- Bories P
- Cottereau AS
- Delmer A
- Ducassou S
- Garnier N
- Lamant L
- Leruste A
- Millot F
- Moalla S
- Morschhauser F
- Nolla M
- Pagnier A
- Reguerre Y
- Renaud L
- Schmitt A
- Simonin M
- Verschuur A
- Hoog Labouret N
- Mahier Ait Oukhatar C
- Vassal G
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2023.112984
keywords:
- Humans
- Adult
- Child
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Crizotinib/therapeutic use
- "Lymphoma, Large-Cell, Anaplastic/drug therapy"
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/therapeutic use
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/therapeutic use
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of crizotinib in ALK-positive systemic anaplastic large-cell lymphoma in children, adolescents, and adult patients: results of the French AcSé-crizotinib trial.
**Authors:** Brugières L, Cozic N, Houot R, Rigaud C, Sibon D, Arfi-Rouche J, Bories P, Cottereau AS, Delmer A, Ducassou S, Garnier N, Lamant L, Leruste A, Millot F, Moalla S, Morschhauser F, Nolla M, Pagnier A, Reguerre Y, Renaud L, Schmitt A, Simonin M, Verschuur A, Hoog Labouret N, Mahier Ait Oukhatar C, Vassal G
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2023.112984](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2023.112984)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2023 Sep;191:112984. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2023.112984. Epub 2023
Jul 17.

Efficacy and safety of crizotinib in ALK-positive systemic anaplastic large-cell
lymphoma in children, adolescents, and adult patients: results of the French
AcSé-crizotinib trial.

Brugières L(1), Cozic N(2), Houot R(3), Rigaud C(4), Sibon D(5), Arfi-Rouche
J(6), Bories P(7), Cottereau AS(8), Delmer A(9), Ducassou S(10), Garnier N(11),
Lamant L(12), Leruste A(13), Millot F(14), Moalla S(7), Morschhauser F(15),
Nolla M(16), Pagnier A(17), Reguerre Y(18), Renaud L(19), Schmitt A(20), Simonin
M(21), Verschuur A(22), Hoog Labouret N(23), Mahier Ait Oukhatar C(24), Vassal
G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Children and Adolescent Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus,
Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, France. Electronic address:
laurence.brugieres@gustaveroussy.fr.
(2)Service de Biostatistique et d'Epidémiologie, Gustave Roussy, Oncostat U1018
INSERM, Labeled Ligue Contre le Cancer, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif,
France.
(3)Department of Hematology, CHU de Rennes, Université de Rennes, Rennes,
France.
(4)Department of Children and Adolescent Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus,
Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, France.
(5)Lymphoid Malignancies Department, Henri Mondor University Hospital, AP-HP,
Creteil, France.
(6)Department of Radiology, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Paris-Saclay
University, Villejuif, France.
(7)Institut Universitaire du Cancer - Oncopole, Toulouse, France.
(8)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Cochin Hospital, AP-HP, University of Paris,
Paris, France.
(9)Department of Hematology, University Hospital of Reims and UFR Médecine,
Reims, France.
(10)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Bordeaux, France.
(11)Institut d'Hematologie et d'Oncologie Pediatrique, Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Lyon, France.
(12)Department of Pathology, Institut Universitaire du Cancer de Toulouse
Oncopole, Toulouse, France Université Toulouse III-Paul Sabatier; UMR1037
CRCT, Toulouse, France.
(13)SIREDO Oncology Center (Care, Innovation and Research for Children and AYA
with Cancer), Institut Curie, PSL Research University, Paris, France.
(14)Inserm CIC 1402, University Hospital, Poitiers, France.
(15)ULR 7365 - GRITA - Groupe de Recherche sur les formes Injectables et les
Technologies Associées, Univ. Lille, CHU Lille, Lille, France.
(16)Pediatric Hematology-Immunology, CHU Toulouse Purpan, France.
(17)Pediatric Immunology Hematology and Oncology, CHU Grenoble Alpes, France.
(18)CHU de Saint Denis de La Réunion Service d'Oncologie et d'Hématologie
Pédiatrique, Saint Denis, France.
(19)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Saint-Louis,
Hemato-Oncologie, DMU DHI; Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(20)Hématologie, Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France.
(21)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris Armand Trousseau Hospital, Sorbonne Université,
Paris, France.
(22)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, La Timone University Hospital,
APHM, Marseille, France.
(23)Institut National du Cancer, Boulogne Billancourt, Paris, France.
(24)UNICANCER, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The French phase II AcSé-crizotinib trial aimed to evaluate the
safety and efficacy of crizotinib in patients with ALK, ROS1, and MET-driven
malignancies, including ALK-positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALK+ ALCL).
METHODS: ALK+ ALCL patients 12 months or older with measurable disease and no
standard care options available received crizotinib twice daily at 165 mg/m2 in
children and adolescents and 250 mg in adults. The primary end-point was the
response rate at 8 weeks.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight patients were enroled between February 2014 and March
2018. Three patients who were not treated were excluded from the analysis. The
median age was 19 years. The median previous line of chemotherapy was two. In
the 24 patients with an evaluable response, the response rate at 8 weeks was 67%
(95% CI: 47-82%). All patients discontinued crizotinib after a median treatment
duration of 3.7 months: eight for progression, two for adverse events
(AEs) related to prior treatments, and 15 by choice, including six for
allogeneic stem-cell transplantation. The median follow-up was 45 months. Nine
patients experienced an event: eight relapses (seven after crizotinib
discontinuation and one after dose reduction), and one died in complete
remission. The median duration of response was 43.3 months (95% CI: 8.3-not
reached). The 3-year progression-free and overall survival rates were 40% (95%
CI: 23-59%) and 63% (95% CI: 43-79%). Grade 3 or 4 treatment-related AEs
occurred in 32% of patients.
CONCLUSION: Crizotinib shows efficacy and an acceptable safety profile in ALK+
ALCL relapsed/refractory patients. However, a large proportion of patients
experience a relapse after crizotinib discontinuation. Future studies will
assess if prolonged ALK inhibitor exposure has curative potential without
consolidation.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2023.112984
PMID: 37549532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
