---
reference_id: "PMID:24832708"
title: "Infant case of lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: Wolman's disease."
authors:
- Sadhukhan M
- Saha A
- Vara R
- Bhaduri B
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2013-202652
keywords:
- "Failure to Thrive/diagnosis, etiology"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Gastrostomy/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Hepatomegaly/diagnosis, etiology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Parenteral Nutrition/methods
- Risk Assessment
- Sequence Analysis
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Splenomegaly/diagnosis, etiology"
- Sterol Esterase/genetics
- "Wolman Disease/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infant case of lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: Wolman's disease.
**Authors:** Sadhukhan M, Saha A, Vara R, Bhaduri B
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2013-202652](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2013-202652)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2014 May 15;2014:bcr2013202652. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2013-202652.

Infant case of lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: Wolman's disease.

Sadhukhan M(1), Saha A(2), Vara R(3), Bhaduri B(4).

Author information:
(1)Maidstone & Tunbridge Wells NHS Trust, Pembury, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatrics & Neonatology, Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells
Hospitals NHS Trust, Pembury, Kent, UK.
(3)Department of Paediatric Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Evelina Children's
Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells, Kent, UK.

Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder
which causes two distinct clinical phenotypes: Wolman's disease and cholesterol
ester storage disease. LAL hydrolyses LDL-derived triglycerides and cholesterol
esters to glycerol or cholesterol and free fatty acids. Its deficiency leads to
accumulation of intracellular triglycerides and/or cholesterol esters. In early
onset LAL deficiency, clinical manifestations start in the first few weeks of
life with persistent vomiting, failure to thrive, hepatosplenomegaly, liver
dysfunction and hepatic failure. Adrenal calcification is a striking feature but
is present in only about 50% of cases. We report a case of an infant presenting
with vomiting, diarrhoea, hepatosplenomegaly and poor weight gain that was
subsequently diagnosed as Wolman's disease. He was entered into a clinical trial
for LAL replacement therapy. This case reinforces that early onset LAL
deficiency should be considered in a baby presenting with failure to thrive,
gastrointestinal symptoms and hepatosplenomegaly.

2014 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2013-202652
PMCID: PMC4024536
PMID: 24832708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
