---
reference_id: "PMID:25220021"
title: Forty years of research on xeroderma pigmentosum at the US National Institutes of Health.
authors:
- Kraemer KH
- DiGiovanna JJ
journal: Photochem Photobiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/php.12345
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Anticarcinogenic Agents/therapeutic use
- DNA Damage
- DNA Repair
- "DNA, Neoplasm/genetics, metabolism"
- "History, 20th Century"
- "History, 21st Century"
- Humans
- Isotretinoin/therapeutic use
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, epidemiology, etiology, genetics"
- National Institutes of Health (U.S.)/history
- "Skin/metabolism, pathology, radiation effects"
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, epidemiology, etiology, genetics"
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
- United States/epidemiology
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/complications, drug therapy, epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Forty years of research on xeroderma pigmentosum at the US National Institutes of Health.
**Authors:** Kraemer KH, DiGiovanna JJ
**Journal:** Photochem Photobiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/php.12345](https://doi.org/10.1111/php.12345)

## Content

1. Photochem Photobiol. 2015 Mar-Apr;91(2):452-9. doi: 10.1111/php.12345. Epub
2015  Jan 8.

Forty years of research on xeroderma pigmentosum at the US National Institutes 
of Health.

Kraemer KH(1), DiGiovanna JJ.

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

In 1968, Dr. James Cleaver reported defective DNA repair in cultured cells from 
patients with xeroderma pigmentosum. This link between clinical disease and 
molecular pathophysiology has sparked interest in understanding not only the 
clinical characteristics of sun sensitivity, damage and cancer that occurred in 
XP patients but also the mechanisms underlying the damage and repair. While 
affected patients are rare, their exaggerated UV damage provides a window into 
the workings of DNA repair. These studies have clarified the importance of a 
functioning DNA repair system to the maintenance of skin and neurologic health 
in the general population. Understanding the role of damage in causing cancer, 
neurologic degeneration, hearing loss and internal cancers provides an 
opportunity for prevention and treatment. Characterizing complementation groups 
pointed to the importance of different underlying genes. Studying differences in 
cancer age of onset and underlying molecular signatures in cancers occurring 
either in XP patients or the general population has led to insights into 
differences in carcinogenic mechanisms. The accelerated development of cancers 
in XP has been used as a model to discover new cancer chemopreventive agents. An 
astute insight can be a "tipping point" triggering decades of productive 
inquiry.

© 2015 The American Society of Photobiology.

DOI: 10.1111/php.12345
PMCID: PMC4355260
PMID: 25220021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]