---
reference_id: "PMID:37087871"
title: Efficacy of the modified vaccinia Ankara virus vaccine and the replication-competent vaccine ACAM2000 in monkeypox prevention.
authors:
- Kandeel M
- Morsy MA
- Abd El-Lateef HM
- Marzok M
- El-Beltagi HS
- Al Khodair KM
- Albokhadaim I
- Venugopala KN
journal: Int Immunopharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2023.110206
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of the modified vaccinia Ankara virus vaccine and the replication-competent vaccine ACAM2000 in monkeypox prevention.
**Authors:** Kandeel M, Morsy MA, Abd El-Lateef HM, Marzok M, El-Beltagi HS, Al Khodair KM, Albokhadaim I, Venugopala KN
**Journal:** Int Immunopharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.intimp.2023.110206](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2023.110206)

## Content

1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2023 Jun;119:110206. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2023.110206. 
Epub 2023 Apr 21.

Efficacy of the modified vaccinia Ankara virus vaccine and the 
replication-competent vaccine ACAM2000 in monkeypox prevention.

Kandeel M(1), Morsy MA(2), Abd El-Lateef HM(3), Marzok M(4), El-Beltagi HS(5), 
Al Khodair KM(6), Albokhadaim I(7), Venugopala KN(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, King 
Faisal University, Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia; Department of Pharmacology, 
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Kafrelsheikh University, Kafrelsheikh 33516, 
Egypt. Electronic address: mkandeel@kfu.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Clinical Pharmacy, King 
Faisal University, Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia; Department of Pharmacology, 
Faculty of Medicine, Minia University, El-Minia 61511, Egypt.
(3)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa 
31982, Saudi Arabia; Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Sohag 
University, Sohag 82524, Egypt.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, King Faisal 
University, Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia; Department of Surgery, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Kafrelsheikh University, Kafrelsheikh 33516, Egypt.
(5)Agricultural Biotechnology Department, College of Agriculture and Food 
Sciences, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia; Biochemistry 
Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University, Giza 12613, Egypt.
(6)Department of Anatomy, College of Veterinary Medicine, King Faisal 
University, Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, King 
Faisal University, Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Clinical Pharmacy, King 
Faisal University, Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia; Department of Biotechnology and 
Food Science, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Durban University of Technology, 
Durban 4000, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Recently, there has been an uptick in reported cases of monkeypox 
(Mpox) in Africa and across the globe. This prompted us to investigate the 
efficacy of the two vaccines that can prevent Mpox, the modified vaccinia Ankara 
virus (MVA) vaccine and ACAM2000 vaccine. We analyzed them to determine their 
rates of humoral cell responses, adverse events, and rash reactions and used 
these factors as the primary indicators.
METHODS: This study adapted primary data obtained from the Medline, Google 
Scholar, and Cochrane Library databases. We included a total of eight studies, 
three of which explored the ACAM2000 vaccine and five of which explored the 
JYNNEOS MVA vaccine.
RESULTS: There were significant differences in the rates of humoral responses 
after inoculation by the two vaccines. JYNNEOS MVA vaccine immunization resulted 
in a statistically significant increased humoral immune response with an effect 
size of 81.00 (42.80, 119.21) at a 95% CI and a rash reaction with an effect 
size of 96.50 (42.09, 235.09.21) at a 95% CI. ACAM2000 resulted in a lesser 
increase in neutralizing antibodies than JYNNEOS MVA vaccine. Similar findings 
were identified for the rates of adverse reactions, but the difference was not 
statistically significant. The differences in rash reaction rates in the two 
vaccination groups were also not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: ACAM2000 and JYNNEOS vaccines have proven to be efficient in 
preventing Mpox even though variations exist in their modes of action and 
associated significant effects. The nonreplicating nature of JYNNEOS prevents 
the occurrence of the adverse effects seen with other vaccines.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2023.110206
PMCID: PMC10120163
PMID: 37087871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.