---
reference_id: "PMID:38016974"
title: Evaluation of the efficacy of cystinosin supplementation through CTNS mRNA delivery in experimental models for cystinosis.
authors:
- Bondue T
- Berlingerio SP
- Siegerist F
- Sendino-Garví E
- Schindler M
- Baelde HJ
- Cairoli S
- Goffredo BM
- Arcolino FO
- Dieker J
- Janssen MJ
- Endlich N
- Brock R
- Gijsbers R
- van den Heuvel L
- Levtchenko E
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-47085-w
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cystinosis/genetics, therapy"
- Cystine/metabolism
- "Zebrafish/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, therapeutic use"
- "Models, Theoretical"
- Dietary Supplements
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Neutral/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of the efficacy of cystinosin supplementation through CTNS mRNA delivery in experimental models for cystinosis.
**Authors:** Bondue T, Berlingerio SP, Siegerist F, Sendino-Garví E, Schindler M, Baelde HJ, Cairoli S, Goffredo BM, Arcolino FO, Dieker J, Janssen MJ, Endlich N, Brock R, Gijsbers R, van den Heuvel L, Levtchenko E
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-47085-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-47085-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Nov 28;13(1):20961. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-47085-w.

Evaluation of the efficacy of cystinosin supplementation through CTNS mRNA 
delivery in experimental models for cystinosis.

Bondue T(1), Berlingerio SP(#)(1), Siegerist F(#)(2), Sendino-Garví E(3), 
Schindler M(2), Baelde HJ(4), Cairoli S(5), Goffredo BM(5), Arcolino FO(1)(6), 
Dieker J(7), Janssen MJ(3), Endlich N(2), Brock R(8)(9), Gijsbers R(10)(11), van 
den Heuvel L(#)(1)(12), Levtchenko E(#)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Development and 
Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Division Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Laboratory of Metabolic Biochemistry, Department of Pediatric Medicine, 
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Emma Children's Hospital and Emma Center 
for Personalized Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Mercurna B.V., Oss, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Medical Biosciences, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Medical Biochemistry, College of Medicine and Medical Sciences, 
Arabian Gulf University, Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain.
(10)Laboratory for Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, Department of 
Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)Leuven Viral Vector Core (LVVC), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(12)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(13)Laboratory of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Development and 
Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. e.n.levtchenko@amsterdamumc.nl.
(14)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, 
H7-234, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
e.n.levtchenko@amsterdamumc.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

Messenger RNA (mRNA) therapies are emerging in different disease areas, but have 
not yet reached the kidney field. Our aim was to study the feasibility to treat 
the genetic defect in cystinosis using synthetic mRNA in cell models and ctns-/- 
zebrafish embryos. Cystinosis is a prototype lysosomal storage disorder caused 
by mutations in the CTNS gene, encoding the lysosomal cystine-H+ symporter 
cystinosin, and leading to cystine accumulation in all cells of the body. The 
kidneys are the first and the most severely affected organs, presenting 
glomerular and proximal tubular dysfunction, progressing to end-stage kidney 
failure. The current therapeutic standard cysteamine, reduces cystine levels, 
but has many side effects and does not restore kidney function. Here, we show 
that synthetic mRNA can restore lysosomal cystinosin expression following 
lipofection into CTNS-/- kidney cells and injection into ctns-/- zebrafish. A 
single CTNS mRNA administration decreases cellular cystine accumulation for up 
to 14 days in vitro. In the ctns-/- zebrafish, CTNS mRNA therapy improves 
proximal tubular reabsorption, reduces proteinuria, and restores brush border 
expression of the multi-ligand receptor megalin. Therefore, this 
proof-of-principle study takes the first steps in establishing an mRNA-based 
therapy to restore cystinosin expression, resulting in cystine reduction in 
vitro and in the ctns-/- larvae, and restoration of the zebrafish pronephros 
function.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-47085-w
PMCID: PMC10684520
PMID: 38016974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Roland Brock and Jürgen Dieker are cofounders of 
Mercurna B.V. and RIBOPRO B.V., companies that develop mRNA therapeutics 
(Mercurna B.V.) and offer mRNA services (RIBOPRO B.V.). Other authors declare no 
competing interests.