---
reference_id: "PMID:3159974"
title: "Alzheimer's disease in Down's syndrome: clinicopathologic studies."
authors:
- Wisniewski KE
- Dalton AJ
- McLachlan C
- Wen GY
- Wisniewski HM
journal: Neurology
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.35.7.957
keywords:
- Adult
- "Alzheimer Disease/complications, pathology, psychology"
- Brain/pathology
- "Down Syndrome/complications, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alzheimer's disease in Down's syndrome: clinicopathologic studies.
**Authors:** Wisniewski KE, Dalton AJ, McLachlan C, Wen GY, Wisniewski HM
**Journal:** Neurology (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.35.7.957](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.35.7.957)

## Content

1. Neurology. 1985 Jul;35(7):957-61. doi: 10.1212/wnl.35.7.957.

Alzheimer's disease in Down's syndrome: clinicopathologic studies.

Wisniewski KE, Dalton AJ, McLachlan C, Wen GY, Wisniewski HM.

Clinical and neuropathologic evidence points to the development of Alzheimer's
disease (AD) in seven Down's syndrome patients above age 40. Dementia was
observed in these patients over periods of 2.5 to 9.2 years. The first clinical
sign of AD, visual memory loss, was succeeded by impaired learning capacity and
decreased occupational and social functioning, and culminated in seizures and
urinary incontinence. The morphometric observations of the brains of these seven
patients with AD showed that the numbers of plaques and tangles exceeded 20 per
1.5 X 10(6) microns2 area, in both the prefrontal and hippocampal cortices.
Plaques and tangles were also evident in the basal ganglia, thalamus,
hypothalamus, and midbrain. In addition, we found that four of the seven brains
showed small strokes, and five of the seven amyloid angiopathy. This study also
indicates that by longitudinal neuropsychological evaluations and lab tests,
which exclude other causes of dementia, the diagnosis of AD can be made even in
severely and profoundly retarded patients.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.35.7.957
PMID: 3159974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
