---
reference_id: "PMID:37529714"
title: Antihistamines improve cardiovascular manifestations and other symptoms of long-COVID attributed to mast cell activation.
authors:
- Salvucci F
- Codella R
- Coppola A
- Zacchei I
- Grassi G
- Anti ML
- Nitisoara N
- Luzi L
- Gazzaruso C
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1202696
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antihistamines improve cardiovascular manifestations and other symptoms of long-COVID attributed to mast cell activation.
**Authors:** Salvucci F, Codella R, Coppola A, Zacchei I, Grassi G, Anti ML, Nitisoara N, Luzi L, Gazzaruso C
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2023.1202696](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2023.1202696)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Jul 17;10:1202696. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1202696. 
eCollection 2023.

Antihistamines improve cardiovascular manifestations and other symptoms of 
long-COVID attributed to mast cell activation.

Salvucci F(1), Codella R(2), Coppola A(3), Zacchei I(4), Grassi G(4), Anti 
ML(4), Nitisoara N(1), Luzi L(2)(5), Gazzaruso C(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Clinica Santa Rita del Gruppo Policlinico di Monza, 
Vercelli, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.
(3)Centre for Applied Clinical Research (Ce.R.C.A.), Istituto Clinico Beato 
Matteo, Vigevano, Italy.
(4)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Department, Ticinello Cardiovascular and 
Metabolic Centre, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, IRCCS Multimedica, Milan, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Long-COVID is a broadly defined condition and there are no 
effective therapies. Cardiovascular manifestations of long-COVID include high 
heart rate, postural tachycardia, and palpitations. Previous studies have 
suggested that mast cell activation (MCA) may play a role in the pathophysiology 
of long-COVID, including in the mechanisms of its cardiovascular manifestations. 
The present study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of a treatment with 
blockers of histamine receptors in patients with long-COVID who did not respond 
to other therapies.
METHODS: In all, 14 patients (F/M = 9/5; 49.5 ± 11.5 years) and 13 controls 
(F/M = 8/5; 47.3 ± 8.0 years) with long-COVID symptoms attributed to MCA were 
evaluated. Patients were treated with fexofenadine (180 mg/day) and famotidine 
(40 mg/day). Fatigue, brain fog, abdominal disorders, and increased heart rate 
were evaluated in treated and untreated patients at baseline and 20 days later.
RESULTS: Long-COVID symptoms disappeared completely in 29% of treated patients. 
There was a significant improvement in each of the considered symptoms (improved 
or disappeared) in all treated patients, and the improvement grade was 
significantly greater in treated patients compared to controls. No significant 
differences in the outcomes were observed in the controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data confirm that histamine receptors blockade may be an 
effective target to successfully treat long-COVID. Our finding supports the 
underlying role of MCA in the pathophysiology of long-COVID.

© 2023 Salvucci, Codella, Coppola, Zacchei, Grassi, Anti, Nitisoara, Luzi and 
Gazzaruso.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1202696
PMCID: PMC10388239
PMID: 37529714

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.