---
reference_id: "PMID:19049553"
title: "Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy: hearing loss and other atypical features of patients with large 4q35 deletions."
authors:
- Trevisan CP
- Pastorello E
- Tomelleri G
- Vercelli L
- Bruno C
- Scapolan S
- Siciliano G
- Comacchio F
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02314.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Audiometry
- Chromosome Aberrations
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 4/genetics"
- Comorbidity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Phenotype
- "Retinal Degeneration/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy: hearing loss and other atypical features of patients with large 4q35 deletions.
**Authors:** Trevisan CP, Pastorello E, Tomelleri G, Vercelli L, Bruno C, Scapolan S, Siciliano G, Comacchio F
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02314.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02314.x)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2008 Dec;15(12):1353-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02314.x.

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy: hearing loss and other atypical features
of patients with large 4q35 deletions.

Trevisan CP(1), Pastorello E, Tomelleri G, Vercelli L, Bruno C, Scapolan S,
Siciliano G, Comacchio F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
carlopietro.trevisan@unipd.it

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Patients affected by facioscapulohumeral muscular
dystrophy (FSHD) with unusual large 4q35 deletions tend to present atypical
features in early childhood. We explored the clinical presentation of patients
with a very short 4q35 fragment (10-13 kb) focusing on hearing loss, a still
debated FSHD extra-muscular manifestation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We evaluated six cases with EcoRI 4q35 fragment size
ranging from 10 to 13 kb. Assessment of hearing function was carried out by
otoscopy, audiometry and auditory-evoked brainstem responses (ABR). Patient data
were compared with those of 28 similar subjects reported in the literature.
RESULTS: Sensorineural hearing loss was found in four patients, who presented
infantile-onset dystrophic phenotype. Hearing loss was associated with mental
retardation in three of them and with epilepsy in two. Auditory ability of the
other two cases was mildly impaired. If findings related to 28 similar cases
reported to date are also considered, auditory impairment appears evident in 68%
of these subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Hearing loss represents a characteristic feature of FSHD patients
with a large 4q35 deletion. Moreover, when considering only cases with 10-11 kb,
it appears to be associated with early-onset dystrophic phenotype, with mental
retardation (92%) and possibly with epilepsy (58%).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02314.x
PMID: 19049553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
