---
reference_id: "PMID:20181069"
title: "Depression, extrapyramidal symptoms, dementia and an unexpected outcome: a case report."
authors:
- Tsolaki M
- Messini CZ
- Siapera M
- Fotiadou F
- Delaporta D
- Karatolias A
journal: Cases J
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1757-1626-3-47
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Depression, extrapyramidal symptoms, dementia and an unexpected outcome: a case report.
**Authors:** Tsolaki M, Messini CZ, Siapera M, Fotiadou F, Delaporta D, Karatolias A
**Journal:** Cases J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1757-1626-3-47](https://doi.org/10.1186/1757-1626-3-47)

## Content

1. Cases J. 2010 Feb 2;3:47. doi: 10.1186/1757-1626-3-47.

Depression, extrapyramidal symptoms, dementia and an unexpected outcome: a case 
report.

Tsolaki M(1), Messini CZ, Siapera M, Fotiadou F, Delaporta D, Karatolias A.

Author information:
(1)3rd Department of Neurology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, General 
Hospital "G Papanikolaou", Exohi Thessaloniki, 57010, Greece. 
tsolakim@the.forthnet.gr.

INTRODUCTION: The diagnosis of Parkinson's disease is mainly clinical. DaT SCAN 
may help in difficult cases. Depression is also a clinical diagnosis and is 
common and persistent symptom in Parkinson's disease. Dementia is very often in 
Parkinson's disease, but usually not at the first stages. The treatment of each 
of the above symptoms is difficult and a lot of times individualized.
CASE PRESENTATION: Female 64 years old patient with history of hypothyroidism, 
depression and anxiety disorder was examined at outpatient Memory and Dementia 
clinic of 3rd Department of Neurology. The patient's major problems were 
functional and cognitive decline, severe extrapyramidal symptoms and depression. 
According to UKPDS Brain Bank criteria the patient had bradykinesia, muscular 
rigidity, postural instability and rest tremor present with unilateral onset of 
the symptoms affecting left side most and progressive course. The modified Hoehn 
and Yahr scale was 3: mild to moderate bilateral disease; some postural 
instability; physically independent. The symptoms remained during nine months 
follow up, despite the pharmaceutical treatment. Nine months later, the patient 
made an attempt to suicide. Firstly, she was transferred to intensive care 
department with 2nd degree burns and respiratory problems, then she was 
hospitalized at the Burn Unit and afterwards at the Psychiatric clinic. One 
month later the patient had no depression, a clear reduction of the 
extrapyramidal symptoms, functional and cognitive improvement.
CONCLUSION: An astonishing improvement occurred after the threat of life. Two 
years after the attempt to suicide, the depressive symptoms remain in remission 
and functional and cognitive status is normal. The extrapyramidal symptoms have 
disappeared.

DOI: 10.1186/1757-1626-3-47
PMCID: PMC2831020
PMID: 20181069