---
reference_id: "PMID:15989694"
title: "Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17: report of a family with reduced penetrance of an unstable Gln49 TBP allele, haplotype analysis supporting a founder effect for unstable alleles and comparative analysis of SCA17 genotypes."
authors:
- Zühlke C
- Dalski A
- Schwinger E
- Finckh U
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-6-27
keywords:
- Adult
- Adult Children
- Aged
- Alleles
- Female
- Founder Effect
- Gene Frequency/genetics
- Genotype
- Glutamic Acid/genetics
- Haplotypes/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pedigree
- Penetrance
- Phenotype
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
- Spinocerebellar Degenerations/genetics
- TATA-Box Binding Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17: report of a family with reduced penetrance of an unstable Gln49 TBP allele, haplotype analysis supporting a founder effect for unstable alleles and comparative analysis of SCA17 genotypes.
**Authors:** Zühlke C, Dalski A, Schwinger E, Finckh U
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2350-6-27](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2350-6-27)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2005 Jul 1;6:27. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-6-27.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17: report of a family with reduced penetrance of an
unstable Gln49 TBP allele, haplotype analysis supporting a founder effect for
unstable alleles and comparative analysis of SCA17 genotypes.

Zühlke C(1), Dalski A, Schwinger E, Finckh U.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160,
23538 Lübeck, Germany. zuehlke@uni-luebeck.de

BACKGROUND: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17), a neurodegenerative disorder
in man, is caused by an expanded polymorphic polyglutamine-encoding
trinucleotide repeat in the gene for TATA-box binding protein (TBP), a main
transcription factor. Observed pathogenic expansions ranged from 43-63 glutamine
(Gln) codons (Gln43-63). Reduced penetrance is known for Gln43-48 alleles. In
the vast majority of families with SCA17 an expanded CAG repeat interrupted by a
CAA CAG CAA element is inherited stably.
RESULTS: Here, we report the first pedigree with a Gln49 allele that is a) not
interrupted, b) unstable upon transmission, and c) associated with reduced
penetrance or very late age of onset. The 76-year-old father of two SCA17
patients carries the Gln49 TBP allele but presents without obvious neurological
symptoms. His children with Gln53 and Gln52 developed ataxia at the age of 41
and 50. Haplotype analysis of this and a second family both with uninterrupted
expanded and unstable pathological SCA17 alleles revealed a common core genotype
not present in the interrupted expansion of an unrelated SCA17 patient. Review
of the literature did not present instability in SCA17 families with expanded
alleles interrupted by the CAA CAG CAA element.
CONCLUSION: The presence of a Gln49 SCA17 allele in an asymptomatic 76-year-old
male reams the discussion of reduced penetrance and genotypes producing very
late disease onset. In SCA17, uninterrupted expanded alleles of TBP are
associated with repeat instability and a common founder haplotype. This suggests
for uninterrupted expanded alleles a mutation mechanism and some clinical
genetic features distinct from those alleles interrupted by a CAA CAG CAA
element.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-6-27
PMCID: PMC1177950
PMID: 15989694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
