---
reference_id: "PMID:31232173"
title: "Successful treatment of psychosis in a patient with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome with low dose aripiprazole: a case report."
authors:
- McNeil-Gauthier AL
- Brais B
- Rouleau G
- Anoja N
- Ducharme S
journal: Neurocase
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/13554794.2019.1625928
keywords:
- Adult
- Antipsychotic Agents/therapeutic use
- Aripiprazole/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- Parkinsonian Disorders/complications
- "Psychotic Disorders/drug therapy, etiology"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful treatment of psychosis in a patient with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome with low dose aripiprazole: a case report.
**Authors:** McNeil-Gauthier AL, Brais B, Rouleau G, Anoja N, Ducharme S
**Journal:** Neurocase (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13554794.2019.1625928](https://doi.org/10.1080/13554794.2019.1625928)

## Content

1. Neurocase. 2019 Jun-Aug;25(3-4):133-137. doi: 10.1080/13554794.2019.1625928. 
Epub 2019 Jun 24.

Successful treatment of psychosis in a patient with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome with 
low dose aripiprazole: a case report.

McNeil-Gauthier AL(1), Brais B(2), Rouleau G(2), Anoja N(2), Ducharme S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)a Faculty of Medicine , University of Sherbrooke , Sherbrooke , Canada.
(2)b Department of Neurology & Neurosurgery , Montreal , Canada.
(3)c McConnell Brain Imaging Centre , Montreal Neurological Institute , McGill 
University , Montreal Canada.
(4)d Department of Psychiatry , McGill University Health Center , Montreal , 
Canada.

We present a case of a 32-year-old male with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome (KRS), a form 
of juvenile parkinsonism due to mutations of the ATP13A2 gene at PARK9 locus. 
The patient was seen for daily behavioral outbursts and psychotic symptoms. At 
first assessment, CGI scale was estimated at 5; "Markedly ill". Aripiprazole was 
started at 2 mg and then increased to 3 mg. Two years later, psychotic symptoms 
were judged to be "much improved" (CGI-C = 2). This significant improvement 
without drug-induced motor side effects suggests that aripiprazole at low 
doses (2-5 mg) is effective and tolerated in patients with KRS.

DOI: 10.1080/13554794.2019.1625928
PMID: 31232173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]