---
reference_id: "PMID:40013364"
title: "Intradialytic Hypotension Pathophysiology and Therapy Update: Review and Update."
authors:
- Habas E
- Rayani A
- Habas A
- Farfar K
- Habas E
- Alarbi K
- Habas A
- Errayes E
- Alfitori G
journal: Blood Press
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/08037051.2025.2469260
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intradialytic Hypotension Pathophysiology and Therapy Update: Review and Update.
**Authors:** Habas E, Rayani A, Habas A, Farfar K, Habas E, Alarbi K, Habas A, Errayes E, Alfitori G
**Journal:** Blood Press (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08037051.2025.2469260](https://doi.org/10.1080/08037051.2025.2469260)

## Content

1. Blood Press. 2025 Feb 27:1-18. doi: 10.1080/08037051.2025.2469260. Online
ahead  of print.

Intradialytic Hypotension Pathophysiology and Therapy Update: Review and Update.

Habas E(1), Rayani A(2), Habas A(3), Farfar K(4), Habas E(5), Alarbi K(6), Habas
A(7), Errayes E(8), Alfitori G(9).

Author information:
(1)Senior consultant, Hamad General Hospital, The Open Libyan University. Doha,
Qatar.
(2)Hematology Department, Tripoli Pediatric Hospital, The Open Libyan
University, Tripoli, Libya.
(3)Hematology Department, Tripoli Pediatric Hospital, Tripoli Libya.
(4)Consultant physician, HGH, Doha-Qatar.
(5)Medical Department, Tripoli Central Hospital, Tripoli University,
Tripoli-Libya.
(6)Specialist, Medicine Department, Hamad General Hospital, Doha, Qatar.
(7)Medicine Department, Tripoli Central Hospital, Tripoli-Libya.
(8)Consultant physician, Hamad General Hospital, Doha-Qatar.
(9)Senior Consultant of Internal Medicine, Medical Department, Hamad General
Hospital, Qatar University, Doha-Qatar.

BackgroundIntradialytic hypotension (IDH) is the most prevalent complication
during hemodialysis (HD) sessions, affecting 10% to 12% of patients. It is
linked with temporary ischemic stress in vital organs, increasing patient
mortality. Various definitions of IDH have been proposed, and a strong
correlation has been found between patient outcomes and the absolute lowest
systolic blood pressure. The most probable underlying pathophysiology of IDH
involves a reduced effective blood volume and decreased plasma tonicity.
Optimizing the dialysis prescription and interventions during and after the
dialysis session is sometimes effective for reducing IDH risk.Aim and MethodThis
review discusses the pathophysiology, prevention, and therapy of IDH updates. To
achieve this aim, Scopus, EMBASE, PubMed, Google, and Google Scholar were
searched for articles published in the last two decades using phrases and
keywords.ConclusionIntradialytic pathophysiology is ambiguous and unclear. The
evidence for the effectiveness of the known therapies and maneuvers is limited.
Ideally, IDH prevention should be the target; however, IDH management is
sometimes needed. Different obstacles require further clinical research.

Plain Language Summary: Intradialytic hypotension (low blood pressure) (IDH)
occurs during hemodialysis (HD) sessions or just after the HD session finishes,
which affects 10% to 12% of patients. It is linked to brief vascular stress in
important organs, raising death risk. There are different ideas about what IDH
means, and there is a strong link between how well a patient does and having the
lowest high blood pressure. A lower effective blood volume and lower plasma
tonicity are most likely to be at the root of intellectual disability. IDH risk
can sometimes be lowered by ensuring that the dialysis prescription and
treatments during and after the session are as good as possible. This review
aims to study the etiology, prevention, and treatment of IDH updates.The cause
of IDH is unclear, and there is little proof that the known treatments and
interventions work. The goal should be to prevent IDH from happening, but
sometimes, it's necessary to handle it. More clinical studies are needed to
solve several problems.

DOI: 10.1080/08037051.2025.2469260
PMID: 40013364
