---
reference_id: PMID:30084541
title: Black Phosphorus Nanosheets Passivation Using a Tripeptide.
authors:
- Wang H
- Hu K
- Li Z
- Wang C
- Yu M
- Li Z
- Li Z
journal: Small
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/smll.201801701
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Black Phosphorus Nanosheets Passivation Using a Tripeptide.
**Authors:** Wang H, Hu K, Li Z, Wang C, Yu M, Li Z, Li Z
**Journal:** Small (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/smll.201801701](https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201801701)

## Content

1. Small. 2018 Aug;14(35):e1801701. doi: 10.1002/smll.201801701. Epub 2018 Aug 7.

Black Phosphorus Nanosheets Passivation Using a Tripeptide.

Wang H(1), Hu K(1)(2)(3), Li Z(1)(2)(3), Wang C(1), Yu M(1), Li Z(4), Li 
Z(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, Beijing Key Laboratory of 
Micro-nano Energy and Sensor, Beijing Institute of Nanoenergy and Nanosystems, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100083, China.
(2)School of Nanoscience and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
(3)Center on Nanoenergy Research, School of Physical Science and Technology, 
Guangxi University, Nanning, 530004, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Oncogenomics, School of Chemical Biology and 
Biotechnology, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, 518055, 
China.

In the past several years, 2D black phosphorus (BP) has captured the research 
community's interest because of its unique electronic, photonic, and mechanical 
properties. However, the intrinsic instability of BP limits its preservation and 
practical application. Despite kinds of BP passivation strategies being 
well-documented, the use of metal ligand coordination or polymer modification 
may have potential long-term detrimental effects on human bodies. Here, a 
tailored tripeptide Fmoc-Lys-Lys-Phe (Fmoc-KKF) is synthesized for surface 
modification of BP nanosheets. Compared with bare BP with rapid degradation, the 
BP@FKK complex exhibits excellent stability, thereby significantly increasing 
the life span. Significantly, the BP@FKK shows favorable cell compatibility and 
enhanced cellular uptake compared to the bare BP.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/smll.201801701
PMID: 30084541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]