---
reference_id: "PMID:15677540"
title: Stromal CD10 expression in mammary fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumours.
authors:
- Tse GM
- Tsang AK
- Putti TC
- Scolyer RA
- Lui PC
- Law BK
- Karim RZ
- Lee CS
journal: J Clin Pathol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1136/jcp.2004.020917
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stromal CD10 expression in mammary fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumours.
**Authors:** Tse GM, Tsang AK, Putti TC, Scolyer RA, Lui PC, Law BK, Karim RZ, Lee CS
**Journal:** J Clin Pathol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jcp.2004.020917](https://doi.org/10.1136/jcp.2004.020917)

## Content

1. J Clin Pathol. 2005 Feb;58(2):185-9. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2004.020917.

Stromal CD10 expression in mammary fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumours.

Tse GM(1), Tsang AK, Putti TC, Scolyer RA, Lui PC, Law BK, Karim RZ, Lee CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, 
Ngan Shing Street, Shatin, NT, HKSAR, China. garytse@cuhk.edu.hk

BACKGROUND/AIMS: CD10 (CALLA) has recently been reported to be expressed in 
spindle cell neoplasia, and has been used to differentiate endometrial stromal 
sarcoma from leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma. In the breast, myoepithelial cells 
express CD10, but there are few studies of the expression of CD10 in mammary 
fibroepithelial lesions.
METHODS: Stromal CD10 expression was studied in 181 mammary phyllodes tumours 
(102 benign, 51 borderline malignant, and 28 frankly malignant) and 33 
fibroadenomas using immunohistochemistry, to evaluate whether differences in 
expression correlated with the degree of malignancy.
RESULTS: There was a progressive increase in the patients' age and tumour size, 
from fibroadenoma to phyllodes tumours with an increasing degree of malignancy 
(p < 0.001). Stromal CD10 expression was positive in one of 33 fibroadenomas, 
six of 102 benign phyllodes tumours, 16 of 51 borderline malignant phyllodes 
tumours, and 14 of 28 frankly malignant phyllodes tumours. The difference was 
significant (p < 0.001) and an increasing trend was established. Strong staining 
was seen in subepithelial areas with higher stromal cellularity and activity. 
Stromal CD10 expression had a high specificity (95%) for differentiating between 
benign lesions (fibroadenomas and benign phyllodes tumours) and malignant 
(borderline and frankly malignant) phyllodes tumours.
CONCLUSIONS: CD10 may be a useful adjunct in assessing malignancy in mammary 
fibroepithelial lesions.

DOI: 10.1136/jcp.2004.020917
PMCID: PMC1770579
PMID: 15677540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]