---
reference_id: "PMID:27040960"
title: Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Luzzatto L
- Nannelli C
- Notaro R
journal: Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.hoc.2015.11.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Luzzatto L, Nannelli C, Notaro R
**Journal:** Hematol Oncol Clin North Am (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hoc.2015.11.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hoc.2015.11.006)

## Content

1. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2016 Apr;30(2):373-93. doi: 
10.1016/j.hoc.2015.11.006.

Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Luzzatto L(1), Nannelli C(2), Notaro R(2).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Direction, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Viale Pieraccini 6, Florence 
50139, Italy; University of Florence, Florence, Italy. Electronic address: 
lluzzatto@blood.ac.tz.
(2)Core Research Laboratory-Istituto Toscano Tumori, Azienda 
Universitaria-Ospedaliera Careggi, Viale Pieraccini 6, Florence 50139, Italy.

G6PD is a housekeeping gene expressed in all cells. Glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD) is part of the pentose phosphate pathway, and its main 
physiologic role is to provide NADPH. G6PD deficiency, one of the commonest 
inherited enzyme abnormalities in humans, arises through one of many possible 
mutations, most of which reduce the stability of the enzyme and its level as red 
cells age. G6PD-deficient persons are mostly asymptomatic, but they can develop 
severe jaundice during the neonatal period and acute hemolytic anemia when they 
ingest fava beans or when they are exposed to certain infections or drugs. G6PD 
deficiency is a global health issue.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hoc.2015.11.006
PMID: 27040960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]