---
reference_id: "PMID:37481904"
title: Sonic hedgehog signaling in craniofacial development.
authors:
- Xu J
- Iyyanar PPR
- Lan Y
- Jiang R
journal: Differentiation
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2023.07.002
keywords:
- Animals
- "Hedgehog Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Neural Crest/metabolism
- "Holoprosencephaly/genetics, metabolism"
- Morphogenesis/genetics
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sonic hedgehog signaling in craniofacial development.
**Authors:** Xu J, Iyyanar PPR, Lan Y, Jiang R
**Journal:** Differentiation (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diff.2023.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diff.2023.07.002)

## Content

1. Differentiation. 2023 Sep-Oct;133:60-76. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2023.07.002. Epub
 2023 Jul 13.

Sonic hedgehog signaling in craniofacial development.

Xu J(1), Iyyanar PPR(2), Lan Y(3), Jiang R(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. Electronic address: Jingyue.Xu@cchmc.org.
(2)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA.
(3)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA; Division of Plastic Surgery, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA; Departments of
Pediatrics and Surgery, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, 45267, USA.
(4)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA; Division of Plastic Surgery, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA; Departments of
Pediatrics and Surgery, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, 45267, USA. Electronic address: Rulang.Jiang@cchmc.org.

Mutations in SHH and several other genes encoding components of the Hedgehog
signaling pathway have been associated with holoprosencephaly syndromes, with
craniofacial anomalies ranging in severity from cyclopia to facial cleft to
midfacial and mandibular hypoplasia. Studies in animal models have revealed that
SHH signaling plays crucial roles at multiple stages of craniofacial
morphogenesis, from cranial neural crest cell survival to growth and patterning
of the facial primordia to organogenesis of the palate, mandible, tongue, tooth,
and taste bud formation and homeostasis. This article provides a summary of the
major findings in studies of the roles of SHH signaling in craniofacial
development, with emphasis on recent advances in the understanding of the
molecular and cellular mechanisms regulating the SHH signaling pathway activity
and those involving SHH signaling in the formation and patterning of
craniofacial structures.

Copyright © 2023 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diff.2023.07.002
PMCID: PMC10529669
PMID: 37481904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
