---
reference_id: "PMID:32474372"
title: Epidemiology of Toscana virus in South Tuscany over the years 2011-2019.
authors:
- Gori Savellini G
- Gandolfo C
- Cusi MG
journal: J Clin Virol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104452
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of Toscana virus in South Tuscany over the years 2011-2019.
**Authors:** Gori Savellini G, Gandolfo C, Cusi MG
**Journal:** J Clin Virol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104452](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104452)

## Content

1. J Clin Virol. 2020 Jul;128:104452. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104452. Epub 2020
May  22.

Epidemiology of Toscana virus in South Tuscany over the years 2011-2019.

Gori Savellini G(1), Gandolfo C(2), Cusi MG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. 
Electronic address: gianni.gori@unisi.it.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy; S. 
Maria delle Scotte Hospital, Viale Bracci, 1, 53100, Siena, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Toscana virus (TOSV) is a Phlebovirus transmitted to humans by 
phlebotomines and represent an etiological agent of acute aseptic meningitis 
(AAM) in countries where the virus is endemic, including Italy. Incidence of 
TOSV infections is closely associated with the geographical distribution of the 
phlebotomine vectors which in turn is affected by climate changes that determine 
survival and spread. As a result, TOSV infections show a seasonal trend with a 
peak of incidence in summer months.
OBJECTIVES: To measure the prevalence of TOSV infections in AAM patients in 
central Italy and evaluate the climate changes in phlebotomine vectors ecology 
and virus propagation.
STUDY DESIGN: One thousand and seventy-three cerebrospinal fluid samples (CSFs), 
collected from patients with suspected viral meningitis, were collected over 
nine years (2011-2019) during the May to October period and tested for viruses 
most commonly associated with AAM. Serum samples addressed to the Microbiology 
and Virology Unit of "S. Maria delle Scotte" Hospital for confirmation acute 
TOSV infection (n = 324) were tested for TOSV-specific IgM and IgG.
RESULTS: Among the CSF samples, 1.3% were positive for Enteroviruses; 0.9% for 
Varicella zoster virus, 1.9% for Herpes simplex virus type-1/2 and 4.6% for 
TOSV. Serum IgM analyses disclosed TOSV-specific IgM in 27.1% of sera suggesting 
the predominant involvement of TOSV in neuroinvasive infections.
CONCLUSIONS: This data confirms the predominant role of TOSV as causative agent 
of AAM during the summer time in endemic countries. Moreover, climate changes 
affecting phlebotomine vectors persistence, reproduction and activity could be 
involved in the cyclic nature of TOSV infection reported during the last nine 
years.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104452
PMID: 32474372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]