---
reference_id: "PMID:12140559"
title: Deletion of brain dystroglycan recapitulates aspects of congenital muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Moore SA
- Saito F
- Chen J
- Michele DE
- Henry MD
- Messing A
- Cohn RD
- Ross-Barta SE
- Westra S
- Williamson RA
- Hoshi T
- Campbell KP
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/nature00838
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/abnormalities, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Cell Movement
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Dystroglycans
- Electrophysiology
- Gene Deletion
- Glycosylation
- "Hippocampus/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- Laminin/metabolism
- Learning/physiology
- Long-Term Potentiation
- "Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Memory/physiology
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Muscular Dystrophies/congenital, genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Organ Specificity
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletion of brain dystroglycan recapitulates aspects of congenital muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Moore SA, Saito F, Chen J, Michele DE, Henry MD, Messing A, Cohn RD, Ross-Barta SE, Westra S, Williamson RA, Hoshi T, Campbell KP
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature00838](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature00838)

## Content

1. Nature. 2002 Jul 25;418(6896):422-5. doi: 10.1038/nature00838.

Deletion of brain dystroglycan recapitulates aspects of congenital muscular
dystrophy.

Moore SA(1), Saito F, Chen J, Michele DE, Henry MD, Messing A, Cohn RD,
Ross-Barta SE, Westra S, Williamson RA, Hoshi T, Campbell KP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242-1101,
USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Jul 25;418(6896):376-7. doi: 10.1038/418376a.

Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD), muscle-eye-brain disease (MEB),
and Walker-Warburg syndrome are congenital muscular dystrophies (CMDs) with
associated developmental brain defects. Mutations reported in genes of FCMD and
MEB patients suggest that the genes may be involved in protein glycosylation.
Dystroglycan is a highly glycosylated component of the muscle
dystrophin-glycoprotein complex that is also expressed in brain, where its
function is unknown. Here we show that brain-selective deletion of dystroglycan
in mice is sufficient to cause CMD-like brain malformations, including disarray
of cerebral cortical layering, fusion of cerebral hemispheres and cerebellar
folia, and aberrant migration of granule cells. Dystroglycan-null brain loses
its high-affinity binding to the extracellular matrix protein laminin, and shows
discontinuities in the pial surface basal lamina (glia limitans) that probably
underlie the neuronal migration errors. Furthermore, mutant mice have severely
blunted hippocampal long-term potentiation with electrophysiologic
characterization indicating that dystroglycan might have a postsynaptic role in
learning and memory. Our data strongly support the hypothesis that defects in
dystroglycan are central to the pathogenesis of structural and functional brain
abnormalities seen in CMD.

DOI: 10.1038/nature00838
PMID: 12140559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
