---
reference_id: "PMID:37705574"
title: "Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy: genetics, clinical features and management."
authors:
- Lu Q
- Xu Y
- Zhang Z
- Li S
- Zhang Z
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1235040
keywords:
- Humans
- Dinoprostone
- "Osteoarthropathy, Primary Hypertrophic/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Cyclooxygenase 2
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions
- Organic Anion Transporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy: genetics, clinical features and management.
**Authors:** Lu Q, Xu Y, Zhang Z, Li S, Zhang Z
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1235040](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1235040)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Aug 29;14:1235040. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1235040. eCollection 2023.

Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy: genetics, clinical features and 
management.

Lu Q(1), Xu Y(1), Zhang Z(2), Li S(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Clinical Research Center of Bone Disease, Department of Osteoporosis 
and Bone Diseases, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated 
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO) is a genetic disorder mainly 
characterized by clubbing fingers, pachydermia and periostosis. Mutations in the 
HPGD or SLCO2A1 gene lead to impaired prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) degradation, thus 
elevating PGE2 levels. The identification of the causative genes has provided a 
better understanding of the underlying mechanisms. PHO can be divided into three 
subtypes according to its pathogenic gene and inheritance patterns. The onset 
age, sex ratio and clinical features differ among subtypes. The synthesis and 
signaling pathways of PGE2 are outlined in this review. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) 
is the key enzyme that acts as the rate-limiting step for prostaglandin 
production, thus COX-2 inhibitors have been used to treat this disease. Although 
this treatment showed effective results, it has side effects that restrain its 
use. Here, we reviewed the genetics, clinical features, differential diagnosis 
and current treatment options of PHO according to our many years of clinical 
research on the disease. We also discussed probable treatment that may be an 
option in the future.

Copyright © 2023 Lu, Xu, Zhang, Li and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1235040
PMCID: PMC10497106
PMID: 37705574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.