---
reference_id: "PMID:28685698"
title: Medical Therapy for Long QT Syndrome.
authors:
- Adamos G
- Iacovidou N
- Xanthos T
journal: Mini Rev Med Chem
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2174/1389557517666170707110000
keywords:
- "Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Age Factors
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/drug therapy, epidemiology, genetics"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy/methods
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medical Therapy for Long QT Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adamos G, Iacovidou N, Xanthos T
**Journal:** Mini Rev Med Chem (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1389557517666170707110000](https://doi.org/10.2174/1389557517666170707110000)

## Content

1. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2018;18(6):495-506. doi: 10.2174/1389557517666170707110000.

Medical Therapy for Long QT Syndrome.

Adamos G(1)(2), Iacovidou N(1)(2), Xanthos T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical School, Athens,
Greece.
(2)Hellenic Society of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation.
(3)European University Cyprus, Nicosia.

Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is an arrhythmogenic disorder characterized by
repolarization abnormalities with a tendency to cause life threatening cardiac
events. The first manifestation of the syndrome may be sudden death, therefore,
early diagnosis and therapy is of great importance. LQTS can be congenital or
acquired. The latter is most commonly seen in hospitalized patients and such
individuals have an easily recognizable and reversible precipitating factor
(electrolyte disturbances, certain drugs etc.). Congenital LQTS, a less
prevalent condition, is considered to be part of the greater family of disorders
called channelopathies. Extensive research over the past decade allowed better
understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms and unmasking of the
genetic substrate of these patients. Both pharmacological and interventional
therapies (left cardiac sympathetic denervation, ICDs) have been used in the
treatment of congenital long-QT syndrome. This review will focus solely on the
pharmacologic therapy of this potentially lethal inherited disorder summarizing
current knowledge regarding b-blocker use, taking into account novel and more
targeted approaches such as gene-specific therapy.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1389557517666170707110000
PMID: 28685698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
