---
reference_id: "PMID:14604992"
title: P16INK4a is required for hSNF5 chromatin remodeler-induced cellular senescence in malignant rhabdoid tumor cells.
authors:
- Oruetxebarria I
- Venturini F
- Kekarainen T
- Houweling A
- Zuijderduijn LM
- Mohd-Sarip A
- Vries RG
- Hoeben RC
- Verrijzer CP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M309333200
keywords:
- Apoptosis
- Cell Cycle
- Cell Division
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cellular Senescence
- Chromatin/metabolism
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone"
- Cyclin D1/metabolism
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/physiology
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Down-Regulation
- "Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel"
- G1 Phase
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Hyaluronan Receptors/biosynthesis
- Immunoblotting
- Lentivirus/genetics
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Precipitin Tests
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "RNA, Small Interfering/metabolism"
- "Resting Phase, Cell Cycle"
- Retinoblastoma Protein/metabolism
- Rhabdoid Tumor/metabolism
- SMARCB1 Protein
- Time Factors
- Transcription Factors
- Transcriptional Activation
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p14ARF/metabolism
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# P16INK4a is required for hSNF5 chromatin remodeler-induced cellular senescence in malignant rhabdoid tumor cells.
**Authors:** Oruetxebarria I, Venturini F, Kekarainen T, Houweling A, Zuijderduijn LM, Mohd-Sarip A, Vries RG, Hoeben RC, Verrijzer CP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M309333200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M309333200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 30;279(5):3807-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M309333200. Epub
2003  Nov 6.

P16INK4a is required for hSNF5 chromatin remodeler-induced cellular senescence 
in malignant rhabdoid tumor cells.

Oruetxebarria I(1), Venturini F, Kekarainen T, Houweling A, Zuijderduijn LM, 
Mohd-Sarip A, Vries RG, Hoeben RC, Verrijzer CP.

Author information:
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Leiden 
University Medical Center, The Netherlands.

The hSNF5 chromatin-remodeling factor is a tumor suppressor that is inactivated 
in malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs). A number of studies have shown that hSNF5 
re-expression blocks MRT cell proliferation. However, the pathway through which 
hSNF5 acts remains unknown. To address this question, we generated MRT-derived 
cell lines in which restoration of hSNF5 expression leads to an accumulation in 
G(0)/G(1), induces cellular senescence and increased apoptosis. Following hSNF5 
expression, we observed transcriptional activation of the tumor suppressor 
p16(INK4a) but not of p14(ARF), repression of several cyclins and CD44, a cell 
surface glycoprotein implicated in metastasis. Chromatin immunoprecipitations 
indicated that hSNF5 activates p16(INK4a) transcription and CD44 down-regulation 
by mediating recruitment of the SWI/SNF complex. Thus, hSNF5 acts as a dualistic 
co-regulator that, depending on the promoter context, can either mediate 
activation or repression. Three lines of evidence established that p16(INK4a) is 
an essential effector of hSNF5-induced cell cycle arrest. 1) Overexpression of 
p16(INK4a) mimics the effect of hSNF5 induction and leads to cellular 
senescence. 2) Expression of a p16(INK4a)-insensitive form of CDK4 obstructs 
hSNF5-induced cell cycle arrest. 3) Inhibition of p16(INK4a) activation by siRNA 
blocks hSNF5-mediated cellular senescence. Collectively, these results indicate 
that in human MRT cells, the p16(INK4a)/pRb, rather than the p14(ARF)/p53 
pathway, mediates hSNF5-induced cellular senescence.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M309333200
PMID: 14604992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]