---
reference_id: "PMID:32554211"
title: Sleep disorders in tourette syndrome.
authors:
- Jiménez-Jiménez FJ
- Alonso-Navarro H
- García-Martín E
- Agúndez JAG
journal: Sleep Med Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2020.101335
keywords:
- Disorders of Excessive Somnolence/epidemiology
- Humans
- Polysomnography
- Sleep Initiation and Maintenance Disorders/epidemiology
- Tourette Syndrome/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sleep disorders in tourette syndrome.
**Authors:** Jiménez-Jiménez FJ, Alonso-Navarro H, García-Martín E, Agúndez JAG
**Journal:** Sleep Med Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.smrv.2020.101335](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2020.101335)

## Content

1. Sleep Med Rev. 2020 Oct;53:101335. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2020.101335. Epub 2020
May 20.

Sleep disorders in tourette syndrome.

Jiménez-Jiménez FJ(1), Alonso-Navarro H(2), García-Martín E(3), Agúndez JAG(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, Hospital Universitario del Sureste, Arganda del Rey,
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: fjavier.jimenez@salud.madrid.org.
(2)Section of Neurology, Hospital Universitario del Sureste, Arganda del Rey,
Madrid, Spain.
(3)University Institute of Molecular Pathology Biomarkers, UNEx, ARADyAL
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Cáceres, Spain.

Sleep disorders are very common in patients diagnosed with Tourette syndrome
(TS). The present review focuses on sleep disorders and the results of
polysomnographic studies performed in patients with TS. We made a search using
the PubMed, Embase, MedLine, and Web of Science Databases, from 1966 until
November 14, 2019, crossing the search term "Tourette syndrome" with "sleep",
"sleep disorders", "sleep disturbances", and "polysomnography", and with each of
the specific sleep disorders listed according to the International
Classification of the Sleep Disorders-Third Edition. Then we identified the
references of interest for the topic. Insomnia, excessive daytime sleepiness,
disorders of arousal (sleepwalking, sleeptalking, sleep terrors, and enuresis),
the persistence of tics during sleep, and presence of periodic limb movements
during sleep (PLMS) were very frequent in patients with TS. These disturbances
were more frequent in children and in patients with comorbid Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder. Decreased sleep efficiency, decreased percentage of
delta sleep, increased nocturnal awakenings and increased PLMS were the most
consistent findings in the polysomnographic studies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smrv.2020.101335
PMID: 32554211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors do not have
any conflicts of interest to disclose.
