---
reference_id: "PMID:29682504"
title: Targeting the Interleukin-5 Pathway for Treatment of Eosinophilic Conditions Other than Asthma.
authors:
- Roufosse F
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2018.00049
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting the Interleukin-5 Pathway for Treatment of Eosinophilic Conditions Other than Asthma.
**Authors:** Roufosse F
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2018.00049](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2018.00049)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2018 Apr 6;5:49. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2018.00049.
eCollection  2018.

Targeting the Interleukin-5 Pathway for Treatment of Eosinophilic Conditions 
Other than Asthma.

Roufosse F(1).

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Erasme, Department of Internal Medicine, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Improved understanding of the contribution of eosinophils to various chronic 
inflammatory conditions, most notably allergic asthma, has encouraged 
development of monoclonal antibodies specifically targeting mediators and 
surface receptors involved in eosinophil expansion and activation. The pivotal 
role of interleukin-5 (IL-5) in eosinophil biology, its high specificity for 
this leukocyte subset, and its involvement in the majority of eosinophilic 
conditions make it a very enticing target for treatment of eosinophil-mediated 
disorders. Two types of antibodies have been developed to target eosinophils: 
antibodies against IL-5 (mepolizumab and reslizumab), and an antibody against 
the IL-5-receptor-alpha-chain (IL-5Rα) (benralizumab). Both types of antibodies 
prevent IL-5 from engaging its receptor and in addition, anti-IL-5Rα antibodies 
induce target-cell lysis. They have been shown to reduce circulating eosinophil 
counts rapidly in humans with various disorders. Herein, a brief overview of the 
role of IL-5 in eosinophil biology will be presented, followed by a description 
of the development and characteristics of antibodies targeting IL-5 or its 
receptor. Results of clinical trials evaluating the efficacy and safety of these 
new antibodies in diseases (other than eosinophilic asthma) with prominent 
tissue eosinophilia are reviewed, followed by safety considerations and 
potential future applications.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2018.00049
PMCID: PMC5897501
PMID: 29682504