---
reference_id: "PMID:20301786"
title: STAT3 Hyper IgE Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Hsu AP
- Davis J
- Puck JM
- Holland SM
- Freeman AF
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STAT3 Hyper IgE Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Hsu AP, Davis J, Puck JM, Holland SM, Freeman AF

## Content

1. STAT3 Hyper IgE Syndrome.

Hsu AP(1), Davis J(1), Puck JM(2), Holland SM(3), Freeman AF(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2010 Feb 23 [updated 2020 Mar 26].

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of 
Health Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Professor of Pediatrics University of California San Francisco San Francisco, 
California
(3)Chief, Immunopathogenesis Section National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: STAT3 hyper IgE syndrome (STAT3-HIES) is a primary 
immune deficiency syndrome characterized by elevated serum IgE, eczema, and 
recurrent skin and respiratory tract infections, together with several nonimmune 
features. This disorder typically manifests in the newborn period with a rash 
(often diagnosed as eosinophilic pustulosis) that subsequently evolves into an 
eczematoid dermatitis. Recurrent staphylococcal skin boils and bacterial 
pneumonias usually manifest in the first years of life. Pneumatoceles and 
bronchiectasis often result from aberrant healing of pneumonias. Mucocutaneous 
candidiasis is common. Nonimmune features may include retained primary teeth, 
scoliosis, bone fractures following minimal trauma, joint hyperextensibility, 
and characteristic facial appearance, which typically emerges in adolescence. 
Vascular abnormalities have been described and include middle-sized artery 
tortuosity and aneurysms, with infrequent clinical sequelae of myocardial 
infarction and subarachnoid hemorrhage. Gastrointestinal (GI) manifestations 
include gastroesophageal reflux disease, esophageal dysmotility, and spontaneous 
intestinal perforations (some of which are associated with diverticuli). Fungal 
infections of the GI tract (typically histoplasmosis, Cryptococcus, and 
Coccidioides) also occur infrequently. Survival is typically into adulthood, 
with most individuals now living into or past the sixth decade. Most deaths are 
associated with gram-negative (Pseudomonas) or filamentous fungal pneumonias 
resulting in hemoptysis. Lymphomas occur at an increased frequency.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of STAT3-HIES is established in a proband with 
typical clinical findings and a heterozygous dominant-negative pathogenic 
variant in STAT3 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: The mainstay of treatment is prevention 
of staphylococcal abscesses and pneumonias with anti-staphylococcal prophylactic 
antibiotics as well as early aggressive treatment of infections. Use of 
antibiotics and antifungal agents depends on the nature of the infection and the 
extent of involvement. Antiseptic therapies for the skin such as dilute bleach 
baths and chlorhexidine are beneficial. Medications such as histamine-1 
antagonists to control pruritus are helpful for more significant eczema. There 
is no known treatment or prevention for the nonimmunologic characteristics, 
although optimization of calcium and vitamin D intake may be considered to 
improve bone health. The role of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HSCT) in 
STAT3-HIES is emerging; while successful transplant recipients have improved 
infection phenotype, the effect of HSCT on the nonimmunologic aspects of the 
disease remains unclear. Surveillance: Periodic chest imaging and high clinical 
suspicion assist in early detection of lung infections. Culture of skin lesions 
and sputum samples helps direct therapy. Routine screening of adolescents for 
early signs of scoliosis is recommended. Dental monitoring is necessary to 
ensure timely removal of primary teeth to allow eruption of secondary teeth. 
Evaluation for coronary artery and cerebral aneurysms every three years in 
adulthood is recommended as well as monitoring for lymphadenopathy in case of 
increased incidence of lymphoma.
GENETIC COUNSELING: STAT3-HIES is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The 
majority of affected individuals have the disorder as the result of a de novo 
pathogenic variant. Each child of an individual with STAT3-HIES has a 50% chance 
of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Prenatal testing for a pregnancy at 
increased risk and preimplantation genetic testing are possible once the STAT3 
pathogenic variant in the family has been identified.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301786