---
reference_id: "PMID:15304120"
title: "Genetic polymorphisms of bilirubin uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase gene in Japanese patients with Crigler-Najjar syndrome or Gilbert's syndrome as well as in healthy Japanese subjects."
authors:
- Takeuchi K
- Kobayashi Y
- Tamaki S
- Ishihara T
- Maruo Y
- Araki J
- Mifuji R
- Itani T
- Kuroda M
- Sato H
- Kaito M
- Adachi Y
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2004.03370.x
keywords:
- Adult
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Crigler-Najjar Syndrome/enzymology, genetics"
- DNA/analysis
- Female
- Genotype
- "Gilbert Disease/enzymology, genetics"
- Glucuronosyltransferase/genetics
- Humans
- Incidence
- Japan
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- UGT1A1 Enzyme
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic polymorphisms of bilirubin uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase gene in Japanese patients with Crigler-Najjar syndrome or Gilbert's syndrome as well as in healthy Japanese subjects.
**Authors:** Takeuchi K, Kobayashi Y, Tamaki S, Ishihara T, Maruo Y, Araki J, Mifuji R, Itani T, Kuroda M, Sato H, Kaito M, Adachi Y
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1440-1746.2004.03370.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1746.2004.03370.x)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2004 Sep;19(9):1023-8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2004.03370.x.

Genetic polymorphisms of bilirubin uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase 
gene in Japanese patients with Crigler-Najjar syndrome or Gilbert's syndrome as 
well as in healthy Japanese subjects.

Takeuchi K(1), Kobayashi Y, Tamaki S, Ishihara T, Maruo Y, Araki J, Mifuji R, 
Itani T, Kuroda M, Sato H, Kaito M, Adachi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
Mie University School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan.

Comment in
    J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2004 Sep;19(9):955-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2004.03524.x.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Numerous mutations of bilirubin uridine 
diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase gene (UGT1A1) have been reported in patients 
with familial unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. The UGT1A1 mutation appears to be 
considerably different among ethnic groups. To clarify the incidence of this 
gene mutation in the Japanese population, the presence of UGT1A1 mutation was 
investigated in a group of Japanese patients with Crigler-Najjar syndrome type 2 
(CNS2) and Gilbert's syndrome (GS), as well as in healthy anicteric subjects.
METHODS: Four patients with CNS2, 63 patients with GS, and 71 healthy subjects 
were enrolled in the study. The promoter and coding regions of UGT1A1 were 
amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from genomic DNA isolated from 
leukocytes. The PCR products were directly sequenced by a dye terminating 
method. The UGT1A1 enzyme activity was determined in COS7 cells transfected with 
wild or P364L (1091 C > T) mutant DNA.
RESULTS: Homozygous Y486D was observed in all four patients with CNS2. The GS 
patients had UGT1A1 mutations with 13 different genotypes in the promoter and 
coding region. Homozygous TA insertion in the TATA box (TA7) of the promoter 
region (TA7/7; 33%), homozygous G71R (9%), and combination of TA7/6 and 
heterozygous G71R (17%) were the most frequent findings in GS patients. 
Homozygous or heterozygous Y486D (8%) and P229Q (8%) were also observed in GS. A 
novel mutation, heterozygous P364L, was also identified in a GS patient. In 
addition to GS patients, homozygous or heterozygous TA7, G71R, and heterozygous 
Y486D were also observed in healthy subjects. The allele frequency of G71R and 
TA7 was 0.183 and 0.113 in healthy subjects, respectively. The P364L UGT1A1 
enzyme activity was 64.4% lower than the wild-type enzyme activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in the coding region of UGT1A1 were commonly observed 
in Japanese patients with GS and in healthy subjects. The genetic basis of 
hyperbilirubinemia appears to be different between the Japanese and Caucasian 
populations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2004.03370.x
PMID: 15304120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]