---
reference_id: "PMID:12860726"
title: "Extra-articular disease manifestations in rheumatoid arthritis: incidence trends and risk factors over 46 years."
authors:
- Turesson C
- O'Fallon WM
- Crowson CS
- Gabriel SE
- Matteson EL
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1136/ard.62.8.722
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extra-articular disease manifestations in rheumatoid arthritis: incidence trends and risk factors over 46 years.
**Authors:** Turesson C, O'Fallon WM, Crowson CS, Gabriel SE, Matteson EL
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard.62.8.722](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard.62.8.722)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2003 Aug;62(8):722-7. doi: 10.1136/ard.62.8.722.

Extra-articular disease manifestations in rheumatoid arthritis: incidence trends 
and risk factors over 46 years.

Turesson C(1), O'Fallon WM, Crowson CS, Gabriel SE, Matteson EL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Malmö University Hospital, Lund University, 
Sweden. turesson.carl@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the trends in incidence of extra-articular rheumatoid 
arthritis (ExRA) in a well defined community based cohort of patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and to examine possible predictors of ExRA 
occurrence.
METHODS: Using the resources of the Rochester Epidemiology Project, a 
retrospective medical record review was conducted of a cohort of 609 cases of RA 
in Olmsted County, MN, diagnosed during 1955-94. These cases had been previously 
classified using the ACR 1987 criteria for RA. Patients were followed up from 
1955 to 2000 (median follow up 11.8 years; range 0.1-42.8), and incident ExRA 
manifestations were recorded according to predefined criteria. Time to first 
presentation of ExRA was compared in patients with RA by decade of diagnosis. 
Possible ExRA risk factors were identified in case record reviews.
RESULTS: ExRA occurred in 247 patients (40.6%). A subgroup of 78 patients 
(12.8%) had ExRA manifestations considered to be severe in a previous study from 
Malmö, Sweden. The incidence of severe ExRA did not change significantly over 
the decades (p=0.165). In a multivariate analysis the main predictors of severe 
ExRA were smoking at RA diagnosis (risk ratio (RR)=2.94; 95% confidence interval 
(95% CI) 1.68 to 5.13) and early disability (Steinbrocker class III-IV at 
diagnosis) (RR=2.45; 95% CI 1.51 to 4.00). The effect of smoking overwhelmed the 
weaker effect of rheumatoid factor seropositivity.
CONCLUSION: There was no decrease in the incidence of extra-articular 
manifestations in patients with RA diagnosed up to 1995. Smoking and early 
disability are independent risk factors for extra-articular RA.

DOI: 10.1136/ard.62.8.722
PMCID: PMC1754626
PMID: 12860726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]