---
reference_id: "PMID:34602978"
title: MFN2 Deficiency Impairs Mitochondrial Transport and Downregulates Motor Protein Expression in Human Spinal Motor Neurons.
authors:
- Mou Y
- Dein J
- Chen Z
- Jagdale M
- Li XJ
journal: Front Mol Neurosci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.727552
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MFN2 Deficiency Impairs Mitochondrial Transport and Downregulates Motor Protein Expression in Human Spinal Motor Neurons.
**Authors:** Mou Y, Dein J, Chen Z, Jagdale M, Li XJ
**Journal:** Front Mol Neurosci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnmol.2021.727552](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2021.727552)

## Content

1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2021 Sep 16;14:727552. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.727552. 
eCollection 2021.

MFN2 Deficiency Impairs Mitochondrial Transport and Downregulates Motor Protein 
Expression in Human Spinal Motor Neurons.

Mou Y(1)(2), Dein J(3), Chen Z(1)(2), Jagdale M(1)(2), Li XJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Illinois College of Medicine 
Rockford, Rockford, IL, United States.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
United States.
(3)MD Program, University of Illinois College of Medicine Rockford, Rockford, 
IL, United States.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is one of the most common genetically 
inherited neurological disorders and CMT type 2A (CMT 2A) is caused by dominant 
mutations in the mitofusin-2 (MFN2) gene. MFN2 is located in the outer 
mitochondrial membrane and is a mediator of mitochondrial fusion, with an 
essential role in maintaining normal neuronal functions. Although loss of MFN2 
induces axonal neuropathy, the detailed mechanism by which MFN2 deficiency 
results in axonal degeneration of human spinal motor neurons remains largely 
unknown. In this study, we generated MFN2-knockdown human embryonic stem cell 
(hESC) lines using lentivirus expressing MFN2 short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Using 
these hESC lines, we found that MFN2 loss did not affect spinal motor neuron 
differentiation from hESCs but resulted in mitochondrial fragmentation and 
dysfunction as determined by live-cell imaging. Notably, MFN2-knockodwn spinal 
motor neurons exhibited CMT2A disease-related phenotypes, including extensive 
perikaryal inclusions of phosphorylated neurofilament heavy chain (pNfH), 
frequent axonal swellings, and increased pNfH levels in long-term cultures. 
Importantly, MFN2 deficit impaired anterograde and retrograde mitochondrial 
transport within axons, and reduced the mRNA and protein levels of kinesin and 
dynein, indicating the interfered motor protein expression induced by MFN2 
deficiency. Our results reveal that MFN2 knockdown induced axonal degeneration 
of spinal motor neurons and defects in mitochondrial morphology and function. 
The impaired mitochondrial transport in MFN2-knockdown spinal motor neurons is 
mediated, at least partially, by the altered motor proteins, providing potential 
therapeutic targets for rescuing axonal degeneration of spinal motor neurons in 
CMT2A disease.

Copyright © 2021 Mou, Dein, Chen, Jagdale and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.727552
PMCID: PMC8482798
PMID: 34602978

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.