---
reference_id: "PMID:39455645"
title: New functions of B9D2 in tight junctions and epithelial polarity.
authors:
- Caenen-Braz C
- Bouzhir L
- Dupuis-Williams P
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-75577-w
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Rats
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Polarity
- "Cerebellum/metabolism, abnormalities, pathology"
- Cilia/metabolism
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Encephalocele
- "Epithelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Eye Abnormalities/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Kidney Diseases, Cystic/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- "MARVEL Domain Containing 2 Protein/metabolism, genetics"
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- Signal Transduction
- Tight Junctions/metabolism
- Retina/abnormalities
- Ciliary Motility Disorders
- Polycystic Kidney Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New functions of B9D2 in tight junctions and epithelial polarity.
**Authors:** Caenen-Braz C, Bouzhir L, Dupuis-Williams P
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-75577-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-75577-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Oct 25;14(1):25293. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-75577-w.

New functions of B9D2 in tight junctions and epithelial polarity.

Caenen-Braz C(1), Bouzhir L(1), Dupuis-Williams P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, Inserm, physiopathogenèse et traitement des maladies 
du foie, 94800, Villejuif, France.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, Inserm, physiopathogenèse et traitement des maladies 
du foie, 94800, Villejuif, France. 
pascale.dupuis-williams@universite-paris-saclay.fr.
(3)ESPCI Paris, Université PSL, 75005, Paris, France. 
pascale.dupuis-williams@universite-paris-saclay.fr.

Ciliopathies are a diverse group of disorders resulting from abnormalities in 
the development or function of multiple organs. While significant research has 
clarified the role of the primary cilium in transducing numerous signalling 
pathways, elucidating causes of neuronal and skeletal development disorders, the 
origins of other ciliopathy-related conditions, such as hepatic fibrocystic 
diseases, remain elusive. Additionally, attempts to correlate specific ciliary 
proteins with distinct phenotypes have been largely unsuccessful due to the 
variable and overlapping symptoms of ciliopathies. This study aims to elucidate 
the extraciliary roles of the protein B9D2 in the development of biliary 
dysgenesis, a condition present in Meckel-Gruber and Joubert syndromes caused by 
mutations in this protein. Traditionally, B9D2 is known for its role at the 
transition zone of the primary cilium in the transduction of signalling pathways 
notably Wingless and Hedgehog. Our work demonstrates that before ciliogenesis 
occurs, B9D2 is crucial for the maturation and maintenance of tight junctions 
ensuring epithelial barrier tightness and appropriate biliary lumen formation. 
This study provides new insights into the mechanisms underlying biliary 
dysgenesis in hepatic ciliopathies, suggesting that further exploration of the 
non-ciliary functions of proteins involved in ciliopathies could lead to a 
better understanding and treatment of these complex disorders.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-75577-w
PMCID: PMC11512030
PMID: 39455645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.