---
reference_id: "PMID:31194824"
title: ZEB1 insufficiency causes corneal endothelial cell state transition and altered cellular processing.
authors:
- Frausto RF
- Chung DD
- Boere PM
- Swamy VS
- Duong HNV
- Kao L
- Azimov R
- Zhang W
- Carrigan L
- Wong D
- Morselli M
- Zakharevich M
- Hanser EM
- Kassels AC
- Kurtz I
- Pellegrini M
- Aldave AJ
journal: PLoS One
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218279
keywords:
- Cadherins/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation
- Cornea/metabolism
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/genetics, metabolism"
- Endothelial Cells/metabolism
- "Endothelium, Corneal/metabolism"
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition/physiology
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Transcriptome
- "Zinc Finger E-box-Binding Homeobox 1/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ZEB1 insufficiency causes corneal endothelial cell state transition and altered cellular processing.
**Authors:** Frausto RF, Chung DD, Boere PM, Swamy VS, Duong HNV, Kao L, Azimov R, Zhang W, Carrigan L, Wong D, Morselli M, Zakharevich M, Hanser EM, Kassels AC, Kurtz I, Pellegrini M, Aldave AJ
**Journal:** PLoS One (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0218279](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0218279)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2019 Jun 13;14(6):e0218279. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218279. 
eCollection 2019.

ZEB1 insufficiency causes corneal endothelial cell state transition and altered 
cellular processing.

Frausto RF(1), Chung DD(1), Boere PM(1), Swamy VS(1), Duong HNV(1)(2), Kao L(3), 
Azimov R(3), Zhang W(1), Carrigan L(4), Wong D(4), Morselli M(5)(6), Zakharevich 
M(1), Hanser EM(1), Kassels AC(1), Kurtz I(3)(7), Pellegrini M(5)(6)(8)(9), 
Aldave AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)The Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Ho Chi Minh 
City, Vietnam.
(3)Division of Nephrology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(4)Department of Statistics, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States of 
America.
(5)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(6)Institute for Quantitative and Computational Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(7)Brain Research Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States of 
America.
(8)Molecular Biology Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States of 
America.
(9)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United 
States of America.

The zinc finger e-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) transcription factor is a master 
regulator of the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), and of the reverse 
mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) processes. ZEB1 plays an integral 
role in mediating cell state transitions during cell lineage specification, 
wound healing and disease. EMT/MET are characterized by distinct changes in 
molecular and cellular phenotype that are generally context-independent. 
Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD), associated with ZEB1 
insufficiency, provides a new biological context in which to understand and 
evaluate the classic EMT/MET paradigm. PPCD is characterized by a 
cadherin-switch and transition to an epithelial-like transcriptomic and cellular 
phenotype, which we study in a cell-based model of PPCD generated using 
CRISPR-Cas9-mediated ZEB1 knockout in corneal endothelial cells (CEnCs). 
Transcriptomic and functional studies support the hypothesis that CEnC undergo a 
MET-like transition in PPCD, termed endothelial to epithelial transition (EnET), 
and lead to the conclusion that EnET may be considered a corollary to the 
classic EMT/MET paradigm.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218279
PMCID: PMC6564028
PMID: 31194824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.