---
reference_id: "PMID:37627647"
title: "Primary Coenzyme Q10 Deficiency: An Update."
authors:
- Mantle D
- Millichap L
- Castro-Marrero J
- Hargreaves IP
journal: Antioxidants (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/antiox12081652
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Coenzyme Q10 Deficiency: An Update.
**Authors:** Mantle D, Millichap L, Castro-Marrero J, Hargreaves IP
**Journal:** Antioxidants (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/antiox12081652](https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox12081652)

## Content

1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2023 Aug 21;12(8):1652. doi: 10.3390/antiox12081652.

Primary Coenzyme Q10 Deficiency: An Update.

Mantle D(1), Millichap L(2), Castro-Marrero J(3), Hargreaves IP(2).

Author information:
(1)Pharma Nord (UK) Ltd., Morpeth NE61 2DB, UK.
(2)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Liverpool L3 3AF, UK.
(3)Rheumatology Research Group, ME/CFS Research Unit, Vall d'Hebron Research 
Institute, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.

Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) has a number of vital functions in all cells, both 
mitochondrial and extra-mitochondrial. In addition to its key role in 
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, CoQ10 serves as a lipid soluble 
antioxidant and plays an important role in fatty acid beta-oxidation and 
pyrimidine and lysosomal metabolism, as well as directly mediating the 
expression of a number of genes, including those involved in inflammation. Due 
to the multiplicity of roles in cell function, it is not surprising that a 
deficiency in CoQ10 has been implicated in the pathogenesis of a wide range of 
disorders. CoQ10 deficiency is broadly divided into primary and secondary types. 
Primary CoQ10 deficiency results from mutations in genes involved in the CoQ10 
biosynthetic pathway. In man, at least 10 genes are required for the 
biosynthesis of functional CoQ10, a mutation in any one of which can result in a 
deficit in CoQ10 status. Patients may respond well to oral CoQ10 
supplementation, although the condition must be recognised sufficiently early, 
before irreversible tissue damage has occurred. In this article, we have 
reviewed clinical studies (up to March 2023) relating to the identification of 
these deficiencies, and the therapeutic outcomes of CoQ10 supplementation; we 
have attempted to resolve the disparities between previous review articles 
regarding the usefulness or otherwise of CoQ10 supplementation in these 
disorders. In addition, we have highlighted several of the potential problems 
relating to CoQ10 supplementation in primary CoQ10 deficiency, as well as 
identifying unresolved issues relating to these disorders that require further 
research.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox12081652
PMCID: PMC10451954
PMID: 37627647

Conflict of interest statement: Mantle is a medical adviser to Pharma Nord (UK) 
Ltd.