---
reference_id: "PMID:28355112"
title: "Final Results of the IELSG-19 Randomized Trial of Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue Lymphoma: Improved Event-Free and Progression-Free Survival With Rituximab Plus Chlorambucil Versus Either Chlorambucil or Rituximab Monotherapy."
authors:
- Zucca E
- Conconi A
- Martinelli G
- Bouabdallah R
- Tucci A
- Vitolo U
- Martelli M
- Pettengell R
- Salles G
- Sebban C
- Guillermo AL
- Pinotti G
- Devizzi L
- Morschhauser F
- Tilly H
- Torri V
- Hohaus S
- Ferreri AJM
- Zachée P
- Bosly A
- Haioun C
- Stelitano C
- Bellei M
- Ponzoni M
- Moreau A
- Jack A
- Campo E
- Mazzucchelli L
- Cavalli F
- Johnson P
- Thieblemont C
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2016.70.6994
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Chlorambucil/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Endpoint Determination
- Female
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell, Marginal Zone/drug therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Rituximab/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Final Results of the IELSG-19 Randomized Trial of Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue Lymphoma: Improved Event-Free and Progression-Free Survival With Rituximab Plus Chlorambucil Versus Either Chlorambucil or Rituximab Monotherapy.
**Authors:** Zucca E, Conconi A, Martinelli G, Bouabdallah R, Tucci A, Vitolo U, Martelli M, Pettengell R, Salles G, Sebban C, Guillermo AL, Pinotti G, Devizzi L, Morschhauser F, Tilly H, Torri V, Hohaus S, Ferreri AJM, Zachée P, Bosly A, Haioun C, Stelitano C, Bellei M, Ponzoni M, Moreau A, Jack A, Campo E, Mazzucchelli L, Cavalli F, Johnson P, Thieblemont C
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2016.70.6994](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2016.70.6994)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2017 Jun 10;35(17):1905-1912. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2016.70.6994.
Epub  2017 Mar 29.

Final Results of the IELSG-19 Randomized Trial of Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid 
Tissue Lymphoma: Improved Event-Free and Progression-Free Survival With 
Rituximab Plus Chlorambucil Versus Either Chlorambucil or Rituximab Monotherapy.

Zucca E(1), Conconi A(1), Martinelli G(1), Bouabdallah R(1), Tucci A(1), Vitolo 
U(1), Martelli M(1), Pettengell R(1), Salles G(1), Sebban C(1), Guillermo AL(1), 
Pinotti G(1), Devizzi L(1), Morschhauser F(1), Tilly H(1), Torri V(1), Hohaus 
S(1), Ferreri AJM(1), Zachée P(1), Bosly A(1), Haioun C(1), Stelitano C(1), 
Bellei M(1), Ponzoni M(1), Moreau A(1), Jack A(1), Campo E(1), Mazzucchelli 
L(1), Cavalli F(1), Johnson P(1), Thieblemont C(1).

Author information:
(1)Emanuele Zucca and Franco Cavalli, Oncology Institute of Southern 
Switzerland, Bellinzona; Luca Mazzucchelli, Cantonal Institute of Pathology, 
Locarno, Switzerland; Annarita Conconi, Ospedale degli Infermi, Biella; Giovanni 
Martinelli, European Institute of Oncology; Liliana Devizzi, Fondazione Istituto 
Nazionale Tumori; Valter Torri, Mario Negri Institute; Andrés J.M. Ferreri, San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute; Maurilio Ponzoni, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan; 
Alessandra Tucci, Spedali Civili, Brescia; Umberto Vitolo, University-Hospital 
Città della Salute e della Scienza, Turin; Maurizio Martelli, Sapienza 
University; Stefan Hohaus, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome; 
Graziella Pinotti, Fondazione Macchi Hospital, Varese; Caterina Stelitano, 
Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli Hospitals, Reggio Calabria; Monica Bellei, University 
of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy; Reda Bouabdallah, Institut 
Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille; Gilles Salles, Hospices Civils de Lyon and 
Université Claude Bernard Lyon-1, Pierre-Benite; Catherine Sebban, Centre Léon 
Bérard, Lyon; Franck Morschhauser, Claude Huriez Hospital, Lille; Anne Moreau, 
University Hospital of Nantes, Nantes; Hervé Tilly, Centre Henri Becquerel, 
Rouen; Corinne Haioun, Henri-Mondor Hospital, Paris Créteil; Corinne Haioun, 
UPEC, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris; Catherine Thieblemont, Assistance 
Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Hôpital-Saint-Louis, Hematooncology-Université Paris 
Diderot, Sorbonne Paris-Cité, Paris, France; Ruth Pettengell, St George's 
University of London, London; Andrew Jack, St James's University Hospital, 
Leeds; Peter Johnson, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom; 
Armando Lopez Guillermo and Elias Campo, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; 
Pierre Zachée, ZNA Stuivenberg, Antwerp; and André Bosly, Mont-Godinne UCL, 
Yvoir, Belgium.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2017 Jul 10;35(20):2342. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2017.74.4441.

Purpose There is no consensus on the optimal systemic treatment of patients with 
extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. The 
IELSG-19 phase III study, to our knowledge, was the first such study to address 
the question of first-line treatment in a randomized trial. Patients and Methods 
Eligible patients were initially randomly assigned (1:1 ratio) to receive either 
chlorambucil monotherapy (6 mg/m2/d orally on weeks 1 to 6, 9 to 10, 13 to 14, 
17 to 18, and 21 to 22) or a combination of chlorambucil (same schedule as 
above) and rituximab (375 mg/m2 intravenously on day 1 of weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 
13, 17, and 21). After the planned enrollment of 252 patients, the protocol was 
amended to continue with a three-arm design (1:1:6 ratio), with a new arm that 
included rituximab alone (same schedule as the combination arm) and with a final 
sample size of 454 patients. The main end point was event-free survival (EFS). 
Analysis of chlorambucil versus the combination arm was performed and reported 
separately before any analysis of the third arm. Results At a median follow-up 
of 7.4 years, addition of rituximab to chlorambucil led to significantly better 
EFS (hazard ratio, 0.54; 95% CI, 0.38 to 0.77). EFS at 5 years was 51% (95% CI, 
42 to 60) with chlorambucil alone, 50% (95% CI, 42 to 59) with rituximab alone, 
and 68% (95% CI, 60 to 76) with the combination ( P = .0009). Progression-free 
survival was also significantly better with the combination ( P = .0119). 
Five-year overall survival was approximately 90% in each arm. All treatments 
were well tolerated. No unexpected toxicities were recorded. Conclusion 
Rituximab in combination with chlorambucil demonstrated superior efficacy in 
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma; however, improvements in EFS and 
progression-free survival did not translate into longer overall survival.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2016.70.6994
PMID: 28355112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]