---
reference_id: "PMID:18948778"
title: "The longitudinal gracilis myocutaneous flap: broadening options in breast reconstruction."
authors:
- Kind GM
- Foster RD
journal: Ann Plast Surg
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1097/SAP.0b013e318168db64
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The longitudinal gracilis myocutaneous flap: broadening options in breast reconstruction.
**Authors:** Kind GM, Foster RD
**Journal:** Ann Plast Surg (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SAP.0b013e318168db64](https://doi.org/10.1097/SAP.0b013e318168db64)

## Content

1. Ann Plast Surg. 2008 Nov;61(5):513-20. doi: 10.1097/SAP.0b013e318168db64.

The longitudinal gracilis myocutaneous flap: broadening options in breast 
reconstruction.

Kind GM(1), Foster RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Davies Campus of California-Pacific Medical 
Center, San Francisco, California 94114, USA. drkind@drkind.com

Many patients who present for autogenous breast reconstruction are not suitable 
candidates for abdominal wall flaps, either because of previous abdominal 
surgery (most commonly transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap for prior 
breast reconstruction) or because of the lack of enough adipose tissue. Another 
donor site option is the medial thigh that has more recently been recognized as 
a source of tissue for breast reconstruction. Prior reports have described the 
harvest of a gracilis myocutaneous flap through a transverse incision. From 
August 2004 to April 2007, 12 patients underwent autogenous breast 
reconstruction of 15 breasts with the longitudinal gracilis myocutaneous 
microvascular flap. The patients' ages ranged from 41 to 60 years (average, 48 
years). In all patients the longitudinal gracilis flap was chosen because of a 
desire for autogenous reconstruction and a lack of available abdominal wall 
tissue. Mean follow-up of the 12 patients was 16.8 months (range, 5-36 months). 
There was no microvascular thrombosis or free-flap failure in this series. Donor 
sites were well tolerated by all patients. Three patients underwent 
suction-assisted lipectomy of 5 donor site areas to improve contour and/or 
symmetry. The longitudinal gracilis myocutaneous flap is a useful alternative 
for breast reconstruction in properly selected patients.

DOI: 10.1097/SAP.0b013e318168db64
PMID: 18948778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]