---
reference_id: "PMID:29066387"
title: Clinical Course of Sarcoidosis in World Trade Center-Exposed Firefighters.
authors:
- Hena KM
- Yip J
- Jaber N
- Goldfarb D
- Fullam K
- Cleven K
- Moir W
- Zeig-Owens R
- Webber MP
- Spevack DM
- Judson MA
- Maier L
- Krumerman A
- Aizer A
- Spivack SD
- Berman J
- Aldrich TK
- Prezant DJ
- "FDNY Sarcoidosis Clinical Research Group*"
journal: Chest
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.10.014
keywords:
- Adult
- Firefighters
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- New York City/epidemiology
- Occupational Exposure/adverse effects
- Sarcoidosis/epidemiology
- September 11 Terrorist Attacks
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Course of Sarcoidosis in World Trade Center-Exposed Firefighters.
**Authors:** Hena KM, Yip J, Jaber N, Goldfarb D, Fullam K, Cleven K, Moir W, Zeig-Owens R, Webber MP, Spevack DM, Judson MA, Maier L, Krumerman A, Aizer A, Spivack SD, Berman J, Aldrich TK, Prezant DJ, FDNY Sarcoidosis Clinical Research Group*
**Journal:** Chest (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2017.10.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2017.10.014)

## Content

1. Chest. 2018 Jan;153(1):114-123. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.10.014. Epub 2017
Oct  21.

Clinical Course of Sarcoidosis in World Trade Center-Exposed Firefighters.

Hena KM(1), Yip J(2), Jaber N(2), Goldfarb D(2), Fullam K(2), Cleven K(3), Moir
W(2), Zeig-Owens R(2), Webber MP(2), Spevack DM(4), Judson MA(5), Maier L(6),
Krumerman A(4), Aizer A(7), Spivack SD(3), Berman J(8), Aldrich TK(3), Prezant
DJ(9); FDNY Sarcoidosis Clinical Research Group*.

Collaborators: Christodoulou V, Hena Z, Plotycia SM, Soghier I, Gritz D, Acuna
DS, Weiden MD, Nolan A, Diaz K, Ortiz V, Kelly K.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary & Critical Care Division, Department of Medicine, NYU School of
Medicine, New York, NY.
(2)Bureau of Health Services, Fire Department of the City of New York, Brooklyn,
NY.
(3)Pulmonary Division, Department of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center and the
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY.
(4)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center and
the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY.
(5)Pulmonary & Critical Care Division, Albany Medical College, Albany, NY.
(6)Division of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, Department of
Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO.
(7)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine, NYU School of Medicine, New
York, NY.
(8)Rheumatology Division, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY.
(9)Bureau of Health Services, Fire Department of the City of New York, Brooklyn,
NY; Pulmonary Division, Department of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center and
the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY. Electronic address:
david.prezant@fdny.nyc.gov.

Comment in
    Chest. 2018 Apr;153(4):1072-1073. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.11.045.

BACKGROUND: Sarcoidosis is believed to represent a genetically primed, abnormal
immune response to an antigen exposure or inflammatory trigger, with both
genetic and environmental factors playing a role in disease onset and phenotypic
expression. In a population of firefighters with post-World Trade Center (WTC)
9/11/2001 (9/11) sarcoidosis, we have a unique opportunity to describe the
clinical course of incident sarcoidosis during the 15 years postexposure and, on
average, 8 years following diagnosis.
METHODS: Among the WTC-exposed cohort, 74 firefighters with post-9/11
sarcoidosis were identified through medical records review. A total of 59 were
enrolled in follow-up studies. For each participant, the World Association of
Sarcoidosis and Other Granulomatous Diseases organ assessment tool was used to
categorize the sarcoidosis involvement of each organ system at time of diagnosis
and at follow-up.
RESULTS: The incidence of sarcoidosis post-9/11 was 25 per 100,000. Radiographic
resolution of intrathoracic involvement occurred in 24 (45%) subjects. Lung
function for nearly all subjects was within normal limits. Extrathoracic
involvement increased, most prominently joints (15%) and cardiac (16%)
involvement. There was no evidence of calcium dysmetabolism. Few subjects had
ocular (5%) or skin (2%) involvement, and none had beryllium sensitization. Most
(76%) subjects did not receive any treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Extrathoracic disease was more prevalent in WTC-related sarcoidosis
than reported for patients with sarcoidosis without WTC exposure or for other
exposure-related granulomatous diseases (beryllium disease and hypersensitivity
pneumonitis). Cardiac involvement would have been missed if evaluation stopped
after ECG, 48-h recordings, and echocardiogram. Our results also support the
need for advanced cardiac screening in asymptomatic patients with strenuous,
stressful, public safety occupations, given the potential fatality of a missed
diagnosis.

Copyright © 2017 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.10.014
PMCID: PMC6026251
PMID: 29066387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
