---
reference_id: "PMID:39014349"
title: Sleep EEG signatures in mouse models of 15q11.2-13.1 duplication (Dup15q) syndrome.
authors:
- Saravanapandian V
- Madani M
- Nichols I
- Vincent S
- Dover M
- Dikeman D
- Philpot BD
- Takumi T
- Colwell CS
- Jeste S
- Paul KN
- Golshani P
journal: J Neurodev Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s11689-024-09556-7
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
- Electroencephalography
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Male
- Female
- "Sleep Wake Disorders/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Sleep/physiology, genetics"
- "Trisomy/physiopathology, genetics"
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Intellectual Disability
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sleep EEG signatures in mouse models of 15q11.2-13.1 duplication (Dup15q) syndrome.
**Authors:** Saravanapandian V, Madani M, Nichols I, Vincent S, Dover M, Dikeman D, Philpot BD, Takumi T, Colwell CS, Jeste S, Paul KN, Golshani P
**Journal:** J Neurodev Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s11689-024-09556-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s11689-024-09556-7)

## Content

1. J Neurodev Disord. 2024 Jul 16;16(1):39. doi: 10.1186/s11689-024-09556-7.

Sleep EEG signatures in mouse models of 15q11.2-13.1 duplication (Dup15q) 
syndrome.

Saravanapandian V(1), Madani M(2), Nichols I(3), Vincent S(2), Dover M(2), 
Dikeman D(2), Philpot BD(4), Takumi T(5), Colwell CS(2)(6), Jeste S(7), Paul 
KN(2), Golshani P(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Semel Institute for Neuroscience, David Geffen 
School of Medicine, 710 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. 
vidyasaravanapandian@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of California 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Spelman College, 350 Spelman Lane, Atlanta, GA, 30314, 
USA.
(4)Neuroscience Center, Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, and the 
Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, UNC-Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, 
USA.
(5)Kobe University School of Medicine, Chuo, Kobe, 650-0017, Japan.
(6)Department of Psychiatry & Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(7)Children's Hospital Los Angeles, 4650 Sunset Blvd, MS 82, Los Angeles, CA, 
90027, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology and Semel Institute for Neuroscience, David Geffen 
School of Medicine, 710 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(9)West Los Angeles VA Medical Center, 11301 Wilshire Blvd, Los Angeles, CA, 
90073, USA.

BACKGROUND: Sleep disturbances are a prevalent and complex comorbidity in 
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Dup15q syndrome (duplications of 
15q11.2-13.1) is a genetic disorder highly penetrant for NDDs such as autism and 
intellectual disability and it is frequently accompanied by significant 
disruptions in sleep patterns. The 15q critical region harbors genes crucial for 
brain development, notably UBE3A and a cluster of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A 
receptor (GABAAR) genes. We previously described an electrophysiological 
biomarker of the syndrome, marked by heightened beta oscillations (12-30 Hz) in 
individuals with Dup15q syndrome, akin to electroencephalogram (EEG) alterations 
induced by allosteric modulation of GABAARs. Those with Dup15q syndrome 
exhibited increased beta oscillations during the awake resting state and during 
sleep, and they showed profoundly abnormal NREM sleep. This study aims to assess 
the translational validity of these EEG signatures and to delve into their 
neurobiological underpinnings by quantifying sleep physiology in 
chromosome-engineered mice with maternal (matDp/ + mice) or paternal 
(patDp/ + mice) inheritance of the full 15q11.2-13.1-equivalent duplication, and 
mice with duplication of just the UBE3A gene (Ube3a overexpression mice; Ube3a 
OE mice) and comparing the sleep metrics with their respective wildtype (WT) 
littermate controls.
METHODS: We collected 48-h EEG/EMG recordings from 35 (23 male, 12 female) 
12-24-week-old matDp/ + , patDp/ + , Ube3a OE mice, and their WT littermate 
controls. We quantified baseline sleep, sleep fragmentation, spectral power 
dynamics during sleep states, and recovery following sleep deprivation. Within 
each group, distinctions between Dup15q mutant mice and WT littermate controls 
were evaluated using analysis of variance (ANOVA) and student's t-test. The 
impact of genotype and time was discerned through repeated measures ANOVA, and 
significance was established at p < 0.05.
RESULTS: Our study revealed that across brain states, matDp/ + mice mirrored the 
elevated beta oscillation phenotype observed in clinical EEGs from individuals 
with Dup15q syndrome. Time to sleep onset after light onset was significantly 
reduced in matDp/ + and Ube3a OE mice. However, NREM sleep between Dup15q mutant 
and WT littermate mice remained unaltered, suggesting a divergence from the 
clinical presentation in humans. Additionally, while increased beta oscillations 
persisted in matDp/ + mice after 6-h of sleep deprivation, recovery NREM sleep 
remained unaltered in all groups, thus suggesting that these mice exhibit 
resilience in the fundamental processes governing sleep-wake regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Quantification of mechanistic and translatable EEG biomarkers is 
essential for advancing our understanding of NDDs and their underlying 
pathophysiology. Our study of sleep physiology in the Dup15q mice underscores 
that the beta EEG biomarker has strong translational validity, thus opening the 
door for pre-clinical studies of putative drug targets, using the biomarker as a 
translational measure of drug-target engagement. The unaltered NREM sleep may be 
due to inherent differences in neurobiology between mice and humans. These 
nuanced distinctions highlight the complexity of sleep disruptions in Dup15q 
syndrome and emphasize the need for a comprehensive understanding that 
encompasses both shared and distinct features between murine models and clinical 
populations.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s11689-024-09556-7
PMCID: PMC11251350
PMID: 39014349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.