---
reference_id: "PMID:38813446"
title: "Vosoritide treatment for children with hypochondroplasia: a phase 2 trial."
authors:
- Dauber A
- Zhang A
- Kanakatti Shankar R
- Boucher K
- McCarthy T
- Shafaei N
- Seaforth R
- Castro MG
- Dham N
- Merchant N
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102591
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vosoritide treatment for children with hypochondroplasia: a phase 2 trial.
**Authors:** Dauber A, Zhang A, Kanakatti Shankar R, Boucher K, McCarthy T, Shafaei N, Seaforth R, Castro MG, Dham N, Merchant N
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102591](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102591)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2024 Apr 11;71:102591. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102591. 
eCollection 2024 May.

Vosoritide treatment for children with hypochondroplasia: a phase 2 trial.

Dauber A(1)(2), Zhang A(3), Kanakatti Shankar R(1)(2), Boucher K(1), McCarthy 
T(1), Shafaei N(1), Seaforth R(1), Castro MG(1), Dham N(2)(4), Merchant N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC 
20010, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The George Washington University School of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Washington, DC 20052, USA.
(3)Division of Biostatistics, Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC 
20010, USA.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC 20010, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Hypochondroplasia is a rare autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia 
due to activating variants in FGFR3. It presents with disproportionate short 
stature with a wide range of clinical severity. There are currently no approved 
medications to treat short stature in children with hypochondroplasia. 
Vosoritide is a C-type natriuretic peptide analog that was recently approved for 
improving growth in children with achondroplasia. We aimed to evaluate the 
safety and efficacy of vosoritide in children with hypochondroplasia.
METHODS: We conducted a single-arm, phase 2, open-label trial at a single centre 
in the USA and enrolled 26 children with hypochondroplasia. The trial consists 
of a 6-month observation period to establish a baseline annualized growth 
velocity followed by a 12-month intervention period during which vosoritide is 
administered daily via subcutaneous injection at a dose of 15 μg/kg/day. The 
trial's co-primary endpoints included the incidence of adverse events and the 
change from baseline in age-sex standardized annualized growth velocity and 
height standardized deviation score (SDS) after 12 months of treatment. This 
trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT04219007).
FINDINGS: Twenty-four participants with a mean age of 5.86 years received 
vosoritide therapy. The first participant was enrolled on August 4, 2020, and 
the final participant completed the 18-month trial on September 8, 2023. 
Vosoritide was well tolerated with no treatment-related serious adverse events. 
Injection site reactions occurred in 83.3% of participants. No participants 
discontinued therapy due to an adverse event. Annualized growth velocity 
increased by 2.26 standard deviations (SD) and height SDS increased by 0.36 SD 
during the treatment period versus the observation period. Hypochondroplasia 
specific height SDS increased by 0.38 SD. There was a 1.81 cm/year increase in 
absolute annualized growth velocity.
INTERPRETATION: Vosoritide was safe and effective in increasing growth velocity 
in children with hypochondroplasia. Efficacy was similar to what has been 
reported in children with achondroplasia.
FUNDING: This study was supported by an investigator-initiated grant from 
BioMarin Pharmaceutical.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102591
PMCID: PMC11133798
PMID: 38813446

Conflict of interest statement: AD and NM have served as consultants for 
BioMarin, but all compensation has been paid to Children's National Hospital and 
neither author has received any personal compensation from BioMarin. AD received 
an investigator-initiated grant from BioMarin to fund the current study. RKS has 
received an investigator-initiated grant from BioMarin to fund a study of 
vosoritide in girls with Turner syndrome. The remaining authors have nothing to 
disclose.