---
reference_id: "PMID:20889952"
title: Cervical disc arthroplasty.
authors:
- Zindrick M
- Harris MB
- Humphreys SC
- "O'Leary PT"
- Schneiderman G
- Watters WC 3rd
- Turkelson CM
- Wies JL
- Raymond L
journal: J Am Acad Orthop Surg
year: '2010'
doi: 10.5435/00124635-201010000-00006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cervical disc arthroplasty.
**Authors:** Zindrick M, Harris MB, Humphreys SC, O'Leary PT, Schneiderman G, Watters WC 3rd, Turkelson CM, Wies JL, Raymond L
**Journal:** J Am Acad Orthop Surg (2010)
**DOI:** [10.5435/00124635-201010000-00006](https://doi.org/10.5435/00124635-201010000-00006)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2010 Oct;18(10):631-7. doi: 
10.5435/00124635-201010000-00006.

Cervical disc arthroplasty.

Zindrick M(1), Harris MB, Humphreys SC, O'Leary PT, Schneiderman G, Watters WC 
3rd, Turkelson CM, Wies JL, Raymond L.

Author information:
(1)Hinsdale Orthopedic Associates, Hinsdale, IL, USA.

This technology overview addressed four questions that compared the difference 
in outcomes between patients undergoing cervical disc arthroplasty with patients 
undergoing anterior cervical diskectomy fusion. Most studies did not either 
report or conduct the appropriate statistical analyses to examine predictive 
characteristics in patients with successful clinical outcomes. Most studies were 
inconclusive or unreliable regarding clinical outcomes and revision and/or 
complication rates in patients who present with neck and/or arm pain. No 
significant difference in the length of hospital stay was reported; however, two 
studies included in the overview reported that patients treated with cervical 
disc arthroplasty returned to work in significantly fewer days (range, 14 to 16 
days) than did patients treated with anterior cervical diskectomy fusion.

DOI: 10.5435/00124635-201010000-00006
PMID: 20889952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]