---
reference_id: "PMID:37355021"
title: The gene therapy for corneal pathology with novel nonsense cystinosis mouse lines created by CRISPR Gene Editing.
authors:
- Dong F
- Amlal H
- Venkatakrishnan J
- Zhang J
- Fry M
- Yuan Y
- Cheng YC
- Hu YC
- Kao WW
journal: Ocul Surf
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtos.2023.06.002
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- Infant
- "Cystinosis/therapy, drug therapy"
- "Cystine/genetics, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
- Gene Editing
- Cornea/pathology
- Genetic Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The gene therapy for corneal pathology with novel nonsense cystinosis mouse lines created by CRISPR Gene Editing.
**Authors:** Dong F, Amlal H, Venkatakrishnan J, Zhang J, Fry M, Yuan Y, Cheng YC, Hu YC, Kao WW
**Journal:** Ocul Surf (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtos.2023.06.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtos.2023.06.002)

## Content

1. Ocul Surf. 2023 Jul;29:432-443. doi: 10.1016/j.jtos.2023.06.002. Epub 2023 Jun
 23.

The gene therapy for corneal pathology with novel nonsense cystinosis mouse 
lines created by CRISPR Gene Editing.

Dong F(1), Amlal H(2), Venkatakrishnan J(1), Zhang J(1), Fry M(1), Yuan Y(1), 
Cheng YC(1), Hu YC(3), Kao WW(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 
USA.
(3)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. 
Electronic address: kaoww@ucmail.uc.edu.

PURPOSE: Cystinosis is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease (LSDs) 
caused by mutations in the gene encoding cystinosin (CTNS) that leads to cystine 
crystal accumulation in the lysosome that compromises cellular functions 
resulting in tissue damage and organ failure, especially in kidneys and eyes. 
However, the underlying molecular mechanism of its pathogenesis remains elusive. 
Two novel mice lines created via CRISPR are used to examine the pathogenesis of 
cystinosis in the kidney and cornea and the treatment efficacy of corneal 
pathology using self-complimentary Adeno-associated viral (scAAV-CTNS) vector.
METHODS: The CRISPR technique generated two novel cystinotic mouse lines, 
Ctnsis1 (an insertional mutation) and Ctnsis2 (a nonsense mutation). Immune 
histochemistry, renal functions test and HRT2 in vivo confocal microscopy were 
used to evaluate the age-related renal pathogenesis and treatment efficacy of 
the scAAV-CTNS virus in corneal pathology.
RESULTS: Both mutations lead to the production of truncated Ctns proteins. 
Ctnsis1 and Ctnsis 2 mice exhibit the characteristic of cystinotic corneal 
crystal phenotype at four-week-old. Treatment with the scAAV-CTNS viral vector 
decreased the corneal crystals in the treated mice cornea. Ctnsis 1 show renal 
abnormalities manifested by increased urine volume, reduced urine osmolality, 
and the loss of response to Desmopressin (dDAVP) at 22-month-old but Ctnsis2 
don't manifest renal pathology up to 2 years of age.
CONCLUSIONS: Both Ctnsis1 and Ctnsis2 mice exhibit phenotypes resembling human 
intermediate nephropathic and ocular cystinosis, respectively. scAAV-CTNS viral 
vectors reduce the corneal cystine crystals and have a great potential as a 
therapeutic strategy for treating patients suffering from cystinosis.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtos.2023.06.002
PMCID: PMC10725217
PMID: 37355021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to declare.