---
reference_id: "PMID:21358337"
title: Familial Mediterranean fever--a review.
authors:
- Shohat M
- Halpern GJ
journal: Genet Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182060456
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean fever--a review.
**Authors:** Shohat M, Halpern GJ
**Journal:** Genet Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182060456](https://doi.org/10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182060456)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2011 Jun;13(6):487-98. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182060456.

Familial Mediterranean fever--a review.

Shohat M(1), Halpern GJ.

Author information:
(1)From the 1Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, 
Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Petah Tikva, Israel.

Familial Mediterranean fever is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. 
There are two phenotypes: types 1 and 2. Familial Mediterranean fever type 1 is 
characterized by recurrent short episodes of inflammation and serositis, 
including fever, peritonitis, synovitis, pleuritis, and, rarely, pericarditis. 
The symptoms and severity vary among affected individuals, sometimes even among 
members of the same family. Amyloidosis, which can lead to renal failure, is the 
most severe complication. Familial Mediterranean fever type 2 is characterized 
by amyloidosis as the first clinical manifestation of familial Mediterranean 
fever in an otherwise asymptomatic individual. Routine treatment of end-stage 
renal disease, including renal transplantation, is advised. Lifelong treatment 
with colchicine is required for homozygotes for the p.Met694Val mutation or 
compound heterozygotes for p.Met694Val and another disease-causing allele; this 
prevents the inflammatory attacks and the deposition of amyloid. Individuals who 
do not have the p.Met694Val mutation and who are only mildly affected should be 
either treated with colchicine or monitored every 6 months for the presence of 
proteinuria. Molecular genetic testing of the MEFV gene, the only gene currently 
known to be associated with familial Mediterranean fever, can be offered to 
family members, especially when the p.Met694Val allele is present, because renal 
amyloidosis can be prevented by colchicine.

DOI: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182060456
PMID: 21358337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]