---
reference_id: "PMID:37752723"
title: "Psychosocial functioning in patients with altered facial expression: a scoping review in five neurological diseases."
authors:
- Rasing NB
- van de Geest-Buit W
- Chan OYA
- Mul K
- Lanser A
- Erasmus CE
- Groothuis JT
- Holler J
- Ingels KJAO
- Post B
- Siemann I
- Voermans NC
journal: Disabil Rehabil
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/09638288.2023.2259310
keywords:
- Humans
- Facial Expression
- Parkinson Disease/psychology
- Psychosocial Functioning
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Facioscapulohumeral/psychology"
- Bell Palsy/psychology
- Mobius Syndrome/psychology
- Myotonic Dystrophy/psychology
- Nervous System Diseases/psychology
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychosocial functioning in patients with altered facial expression: a scoping review in five neurological diseases.
**Authors:** Rasing NB, van de Geest-Buit W, Chan OYA, Mul K, Lanser A, Erasmus CE, Groothuis JT, Holler J, Ingels KJAO, Post B, Siemann I, Voermans NC
**Journal:** Disabil Rehabil (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09638288.2023.2259310](https://doi.org/10.1080/09638288.2023.2259310)

## Content

1. Disabil Rehabil. 2024 Aug;46(17):3772-3791. doi:
10.1080/09638288.2023.2259310.  Epub 2023 Sep 26.

Psychosocial functioning in patients with altered facial expression: a scoping 
review in five neurological diseases.

Rasing NB(1), van de Geest-Buit W(1), Chan OYA(2), Mul K(1), Lanser A(3), 
Erasmus CE(4), Groothuis JT(5), Holler J(6), Ingels KJAO(7), Post B(1), Siemann 
I(8), Voermans NC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Medical Library, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Patient Representative and Chairman FSHD Advocacy Group, Patient Organization 
for Muscular Disease Spierziekten Nederland, Baarn, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Rehabilitation, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, and 
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Medical Psychology, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: To perform a scoping review to investigate the psychosocial impact of 
having an altered facial expression in five neurological diseases.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was performed. Studies were on Bell's 
palsy, facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD), Moebius syndrome, myotonic 
dystrophy type 1, or Parkinson's disease patients; had a focus on altered facial 
expression; and had any form of psychosocial outcome measure. Data extraction 
focused on psychosocial outcomes.
RESULTS: Bell's palsy, myotonic dystrophy type 1, and Parkinson's disease 
patients more often experienced some degree of psychosocial distress than 
healthy controls. In FSHD, facial weakness negatively influenced communication 
and was experienced as a burden. The psychosocial distress applied especially to 
women (Bell's palsy and Parkinson's disease), and patients with more severely 
altered facial expression (Bell's palsy), but not for Moebius syndrome patients. 
Furthermore, Parkinson's disease patients with more pronounced hypomimia were 
perceived more negatively by observers. Various strategies were reported to 
compensate for altered facial expression.
CONCLUSIONS: This review showed that patients with altered facial expression in 
four of five included neurological diseases had reduced psychosocial 
functioning. Future research recommendations include studies on observers' 
judgements of patients during social interactions and on the effectiveness of 
compensation strategies in enhancing psychosocial functioning.

Plain Language Summary: Negative effects of altered facial expression on 
psychosocial functioning are common and more abundant in women and in more 
severely affected patients with various neurological disorders.Health care 
professionals should be alert to psychosocial distress in patients with altered 
facial expression.Learning of compensatory strategies could be a beneficial 
therapy for patients with psychosocial distress due to an altered facial 
expression.

DOI: 10.1080/09638288.2023.2259310
PMID: 37752723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]