---
reference_id: "PMID:38840685"
title: "Early onset stage III diabetic nephropathy in a child with Prader-Willi syndrome treated with dulaglutide: a case report."
authors:
- He Y
- Xu R
- Ma X
- Zhou J
- Qiu L
journal: Transl Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.21037/tp-23-518
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early onset stage III diabetic nephropathy in a child with Prader-Willi syndrome treated with dulaglutide: a case report.
**Authors:** He Y, Xu R, Ma X, Zhou J, Qiu L
**Journal:** Transl Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tp-23-518](https://doi.org/10.21037/tp-23-518)

## Content

1. Transl Pediatr. 2024 May 31;13(5):833-839. doi: 10.21037/tp-23-518. Epub 2024 
May 21.

Early onset stage III diabetic nephropathy in a child with Prader-Willi syndrome 
treated with dulaglutide: a case report.

He Y(#)(1), Xu R(#)(1)(2)(3), Ma X(1), Zhou J(1), Qiu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Key Laboratory for Molecular Diagnosis of Hubei Province, The Central 
Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a multisystem genetic disorder caused 
by chromosomal imprinting gene defects, with approximately 70% of cases 
resulting from paternal deletion of the chromosomal region 15. The main clinical 
features include severe infantile hypotonia, early-onset childhood obesity, 
hyperphagia, and underdeveloped external genitalia. As individuals with PWS age, 
they may exhibit irritability, social dysfunction, impaired gonadal development, 
and metabolic syndrome. Previous literature places the prevalence of type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in PWS at approximately 7-24%. Oxytocin is a 
neuropeptide secreted by the paraventricular (PVN) and supraoptic (SON) nuclei 
of the hypothalamus and regulates energy metabolism, which is involved in PWS. 
Due to age limitations, very few patients progress to diabetic nephropathy 
during childhood, and reports of typical diabetic nephropathy in PWS during 
childhood are extremely rare. Dulaglutide is a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) 
receptor agonist which can be used in the treatment of T2DM.
CASE DESCRIPTION: This article reports a case of a child with PWS complicated by 
stage III diabetic nephropathy, providing a retrospective analysis of the 
diagnosis and treatment process, as well as a review of domestic and 
international literature, to enhance understanding of this condition. And this 
article provides a treatment idea for PWS patients with diabetic nephropathy.
CONCLUSIONS: It is very important to enhance understanding of PWS. And we offer 
new diagnostic and possible therapeutic approaches for pediatric patients with 
diabetic nephropathy.

2024 Translational Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tp-23-518
PMCID: PMC11148744
PMID: 38840685

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://tp.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tp-23-518/coif). The authors have 
no conflicts of interest to declare.