---
reference_id: "PMID:35205796"
title: Immunophenotypic Analysis of Hairy Cell Leukemia (HCL) and Hairy Cell Leukemia-like (HCL-like) Disorders.
authors:
- Maitre E
- Cornet E
- Salaün V
- Kerneves P
- Chèze S
- Repesse Y
- Damaj G
- Troussard X
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cancers14041050
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunophenotypic Analysis of Hairy Cell Leukemia (HCL) and Hairy Cell Leukemia-like (HCL-like) Disorders.
**Authors:** Maitre E, Cornet E, Salaün V, Kerneves P, Chèze S, Repesse Y, Damaj G, Troussard X
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers14041050](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers14041050)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Feb 18;14(4):1050. doi: 10.3390/cancers14041050.

Immunophenotypic Analysis of Hairy Cell Leukemia (HCL) and Hairy Cell
Leukemia-like (HCL-like) Disorders.

Maitre E(1)(2), Cornet E(2), Salaün V(2), Kerneves P(2), Chèze S(3), Repesse
Y(2), Damaj G(1)(3), Troussard X(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)INSERM1245, MICAH, Normandie University of Caen and Rouen, UNIROUEN, UNICAEN,
Avenue de la Côte de Nacre, 14033 Caen, France.
(2)Laboratory of Hematology, University Hospital Caen, Avenue de la Côte de
Nacre, 14033 Caen, France.
(3)Hematology Institute, University Hospital Caen, Avenue de la Côte de Nacre,
14033 Caen, France.

Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is characterized by abnormal villous lymphoid cells
that express CD103, CD123, CD25 and CD11c. HCL-like disorders, including hairy
cell leukemia variant (vHCL) and splenic diffuse red pulp lymphoma (SDRPL), have
similar morphologic criteria and a distinct phenotypic and genetic profile. We
investigated the immunophenotypic features of a large cohort of 82 patients: 68
classical HCL, 5 vHCL/SDRPL and 9 HCL-like NOS. The HCL immunophenotype was
heterogeneous: positive CD5 expression in 7/68 (10%), CD10 in 12/68 (18%), CD38
in 24/67 (36%), CD23 in 22/68 (32%) and CD43 in 19/65 (31%) patients. CD26 was
expressed in 35/36 (97%) of HCL patients, none of vHCL/SDRPL and one of seven
HCL-like NOS (14%). When adding CD26 to the immunologic HCL scoring system (one
point for CD103, CD123, CD25, CD11c and CD26), the specificity was improved,
increasing from 78.6% to 100%. We used unsupervised analysis of flow cytometry
raw data (median fluorescence, percentage of expression) and the mutational
profile of BRAF, MAP2K1 and KLF2. The analysis showed good separation between
HCL and vHCL/SDRPL. The HCL score is not sufficient, and the use of unsupervised
analysis could be promising to achieve a distinction between HCL and HCL-like
disorders. However, these preliminary results have to be confirmed in a further
study with a higher number of patients.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14041050
PMCID: PMC8870214
PMID: 35205796

Conflict of interest statement: Xavier Troussard, consultant for Innate Pharma,
Astra Zeneca, and Abbvie; the other authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest.
