---
reference_id: "PMID:29260317"
title: Effects of long-term cysteamine treatment in patients with cystinosis.
authors:
- Ariceta G
- Giordano V
- Santos F
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-017-3856-4
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Neutral/genetics"
- "Cysteamine/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Cystine Depleting Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Cystinosis/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Disease Progression
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Mutation
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of long-term cysteamine treatment in patients with cystinosis.
**Authors:** Ariceta G, Giordano V, Santos F
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-017-3856-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-017-3856-4)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2019 Apr;34(4):571-578. doi: 10.1007/s00467-017-3856-4. Epub 
2017 Dec 19.

Effects of long-term cysteamine treatment in patients with cystinosis.

Ariceta G(1)(2), Giordano V(3), Santos F(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Nephrology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat 
Autónoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. gariceta@vhebron.net.
(2)Servicio de Nefrología Pediátrica, Hospital Universitari Vall d' Hebron, Pg/ 
Vall d'Hebron 119-129, 08035, Barcelona, Spain. gariceta@vhebron.net.
(3)Orphan Europe, Puteaux, France.
(4)Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias & University of Oviedo, Oviedo, 
Spain.

Cystinosis is a rare autosomal-recessive lysosomal storage disease with high 
morbidity and mortality. It is caused by mutations in the CTNS gene that encodes 
the cystine transporter, cystinosin, which leads to lysosomal cystine 
accumulation. Patients with infantile nephropathic cystinosis, the most common 
and most severe clinical form of cystinosis, commonly present with renal Fanconi 
syndrome by 6-12 months of age, and without specific treatment, almost all will 
develop end-stage renal disease (ESRD) by 10-12 years of age. Early corneal 
cystine crystal deposition is a hallmark of the disease. Cystinosis also 
presents with gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., vomiting, decreased appetite, and 
feeding difficulties) and severe growth retardation and may affect several other 
organs over time, including the eye, thyroid gland, gonads, pancreas, muscles, 
bone marrow, liver, nervous system, lungs, and bones. Cystine-depleting therapy 
with cysteamine orally is the only specific targeted therapy available for 
managing cystinosis and needs to be combined with cysteamine eye drops for 
corneal disease involvement. In patients with early treatment initiation and 
good compliance to therapy, long-term cysteamine treatment delays progression to 
ESRD, significantly improves growth, decreases the frequency and severity of 
extrarenal complications, and is associated with extended life expectancy. 
Therefore, early diagnosis of cystinosis and adequate life-long treatment with 
cysteamine are essential for preventing end-organ damage and improving the 
overall prognosis in these patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-017-3856-4
PMCID: PMC6394685
PMID: 29260317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]