---
reference_id: "PMID:36125794"
title: "Neurologic Complications of Smallpox and Monkeypox: A Review."
authors:
- Billioux BJ
- Mbaya OT
- Sejvar J
- Nath A
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.3491
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurologic Complications of Smallpox and Monkeypox: A Review.
**Authors:** Billioux BJ, Mbaya OT, Sejvar J, Nath A
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.3491](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.3491)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2022 Nov 1;79(11):1180-1186. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.3491.

Neurologic Complications of Smallpox and Monkeypox: A Review.

Billioux BJ(1), Mbaya OT(2), Sejvar J(3), Nath A(1).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of 
Congo.
(3)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.

IMPORTANCE: Orthopox viruses include smallpox virus, a once feared but now 
eradicated virus, as well as monkeypox virus. Monkeypox is an emerging virus 
initially isolated in 1958, previously unrecognized outside sub-Saharan Africa 
until a worldwide outbreak in May 2022. It is important to review known 
neurologic consequences of both these viruses, as complications of smallpox may 
be relevant to monkeypox, though complications of monkeypox may be rarer and 
perhaps less severe.
OBSERVATIONS: This was a literature review of the known neurologic complications 
of smallpox, which include encephalitis, transverse myelitis, and acute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis among others; historical complications of 
smallpox vaccination, including postvaccinal encephalomyelitis; and the known 
neurologic complications of monkeypox, which include headaches and mood 
disturbances, as well as rare presentations of encephalitis, transverse 
myelitis, and seizures. Of concern is the possibility of viral persistence and 
systemic complications in immunocompromised individuals. Also provided were 
considerations for diagnosis, current treatment, and prevention of monkeypox.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Monkeypox should be considered in high-risk 
populations who present with neurologic syndromes. Diagnosis may require 
serology and polymerase chain reaction testing of blood and spinal fluid. 
Antiviral therapy should be initiated early in the course of the illness.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.3491
PMID: 36125794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]