---
reference_id: "PMID:20301582"
title: "Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy Overview – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Pegoraro E
- Hoffman EP
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy Overview – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Pegoraro E, Hoffman EP

## Content

1. Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy Overview – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY.

Pegoraro E(1), Hoffman EP(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Jun 8 [updated 2012 Aug 30].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
(2)Research Center for Genetic Medicine, Children's National Medical Center, 
Washington, DC

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) is a purely 
descriptive term, generally reserved for childhood- or adult-onset muscular 
dystrophies that are distinct from the much more common X-linked 
dystrophinopathies. LGMDs are typically nonsyndromic, with clinical involvement 
typically limited to skeletal muscle. Individuals with LGMD generally show 
weakness and wasting restricted to the limb musculature, proximal greater than 
distal, and muscle degeneration/regeneration on muscle biopsy. Most individuals 
with LGMD show relative sparing of the bulbar muscles, although exceptions 
occur, depending on the genetic subtype. Onset, progression, and distribution of 
the weakness and wasting vary considerably among individuals and genetic 
subtypes.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The limb-girdle muscular dystrophies typically show 
degeneration/regeneration (dystrophic changes) on muscle biopsy, which is 
usually associated with elevated serum creatine kinase concentration. For any 
male or female suspected of having limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, it is 
necessary to first rule out an X-linked dystrophinopathy. Biochemical testing 
(i.e., protein testing by immunostaining or immunblotting) performed on a muscle 
biopsy can establish the diagnosis of the following LGMD types: 
sarcoglycanopathy, calpainopathy, dysferlinopathy, and O-linked glycosylation 
defects (also known as dystroglycanopathy). In some cases, demonstration of 
complete or partial deficiencies for any particular protein can then be followed 
by mutation studies of the corresponding gene. Pathogenic variants in a number 
of genes have been associated with types of LGMD.
GENETIC COUNSELING: The term LGMD1 (including, e.g., LGMD1A, LGMD1B) refers to 
genetic types showing dominant inheritance, whereas LGMD2 refers to types with 
autosomal recessive inheritance. Pathogenic variants at more than 50 loci have 
been reported, making accurate diagnosis and genetic counseling a challenge. In 
most instances, the proband represents a simplex case, and the families can be 
counseled for recurrence risks associated with rare autosomal recessive 
conditions, which leaves a "significant" risk only for the sibs of the proband. 
If the causative pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in the family, 
prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk is possible.
MANAGEMENT: No definitive treatments for the limb-girdle muscular dystrophies 
exist. Management should be tailored as much as possible to each individual and 
each specific LGMD type. Management to prolong survival and improve quality of 
life includes weight control to avoid obesity, physical therapy and stretching 
exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures, use of mechanical aids 
to help ambulation and mobility, surgical intervention for orthopedic 
complications, use of respiratory aids when indicated, monitoring for 
cardiomyopathy in LGMD types with cardiac involvement, and social and emotional 
support and stimulation.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301582