---
reference_id: "PMID:31319185"
title: Clinical Factors Associated With Gastric Cancer in Individuals With Lynch Syndrome.
authors:
- Kim J
- Braun D
- Ukaegbu C
- Dhingra TG
- Kastrinos F
- Parmigiani G
- Syngal S
- Yurgelun MB
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2019.07.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Factors Associated With Gastric Cancer in Individuals With Lynch Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kim J, Braun D, Ukaegbu C, Dhingra TG, Kastrinos F, Parmigiani G, Syngal S, Yurgelun MB
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cgh.2019.07.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2019.07.012)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020 Apr;18(4):830-837.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2019.07.012. Epub 2019 Jul 15.

Clinical Factors Associated With Gastric Cancer in Individuals With Lynch 
Syndrome.

Kim J(1), Braun D(2), Ukaegbu C(3), Dhingra TG(3), Kastrinos F(4), Parmigiani 
G(2), Syngal S(5), Yurgelun MB(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Data Sciences, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, 
Korea.
(2)Department of Data Sciences, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public 
Health, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Division of Population Sciences, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Digestive and Liver 
Diseases, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York.
(5)Division of Population Sciences, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(6)Division of Population Sciences, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts. Electronic address: Matthew_Yurgelun@dfci.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020 Apr;18(4):780-782. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2019.10.003.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Lynch syndrome is the most common inherited cause of 
gastrointestinal cancer and increases risk for a variety of malignancies, 
including gastric cancer. We aimed to identify clinical factors associated with 
gastric cancer in carriers of germline variants causing Lynch syndrome.
METHODS: We collected data from 52,758 consecutive individuals tested for 
genetic variants associated with Lynch syndrome from June 2006 through July 2013 
at a commercial laboratory. We obtained clinical and demographic data, as well 
as information on personal and family histories of cancer (first- and 
second-degree relatives) from forms completed by ordering providers. We 
performed multivariate logistic regression to identify clinical factors 
associated with gastric cancer in carriers of mutations that cause Lynch 
syndrome (pathogenic mutations).
RESULTS: After we excluded individuals with missing clinical data (n = 1664) or 
with multiple pathogenic mutations (n = 8), we analyzed data from 51,086 
individuals. Of these, 3828 persons carried pathogenic mutations (1346 with 
mutations in MLH1, 1639 with mutations in MSH2, 670 with mutations in MSH6, 145 
with mutations in PMS2, and 28 with mutations in EPCAM). Of the 3828 carriers of 
pathogenic mutations, 41 (1.1%) had a previous gastric cancer and 350 (9.1%) had 
1 or more first- or second-degree relatives with gastric cancer. In multivariate 
analysis, male sex (odds ratio [OR], 2.82; 95% CI, 1.48-5.38), older age (OR, 
2.07 per 10 years; 95% CI, 1.64-2.61), mutations in MLH1 (OR, 6.53; 95% CI, 
1.50-28.42) or MSH2 (OR, 5.23 compared to mutations in MSH6, PMS2, or EPCAM; 95% 
CI, 1.21-22.71), and number of first-degree relatives with gastric cancer (OR, 
2.52; 95% CI, 1.42-4.45), but not second-degree relatives (OR, 1.12; 95% CI, 
0.40-3.18) were independently associated with gastric cancer among carriers of 
pathogenic mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: In an analysis of data from almost 4000 carriers of Lynch 
syndrome-associated mutations, we found history of gastric cancer to be 
independently associated with male sex, older age, mutations in MLH1 or MSH2, 
and number of first-degree relatives with gastric cancer. These findings suggest 
that personalized, risk-stratified approaches to gastric cancer surveillance may 
be appropriate for individuals with Lynch syndrome-associated mutations.

Copyright © 2020 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2019.07.012
PMCID: PMC6960373
PMID: 31319185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Dr. Syngal is a consultant for 
Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. and has rights to an inventor portion of 
licensing revenues from PREMM5. The remaining authors report no other conflicts 
of interest.