---
reference_id: "PMID:28293406"
title: "β-Thalassemia Distribution in the Old World: an Ancient Disease Seen from a Historical Standpoint."
authors:
- De Sanctis V
- Kattamis C
- Canatan D
- Soliman AT
- Elsedfy H
- Karimi M
- Daar S
- Wali Y
- Yassin M
- Soliman N
- Sobti P
- Al Jaouni S
- El Kholy M
- Fiscina B
- Angastiniotis M
journal: Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2017.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# β-Thalassemia Distribution in the Old World: an Ancient Disease Seen from a Historical Standpoint.
**Authors:** De Sanctis V, Kattamis C, Canatan D, Soliman AT, Elsedfy H, Karimi M, Daar S, Wali Y, Yassin M, Soliman N, Sobti P, Al Jaouni S, El Kholy M, Fiscina B, Angastiniotis M
**Journal:** Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4084/MJHID.2017.018](https://doi.org/10.4084/MJHID.2017.018)

## Content

1. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2017 Feb 20;9(1):e2017018. doi: 
10.4084/MJHID.2017.018. eCollection 2017.

β-Thalassemia Distribution in the Old World: an Ancient Disease Seen from a 
Historical Standpoint.

De Sanctis V(1), Kattamis C(2), Canatan D(3), Soliman AT(4), Elsedfy H(5), 
Karimi M(6), Daar S(7), Wali Y(8), Yassin M(9), Soliman N(10), Sobti P(11), Al 
Jaouni S(12), El Kholy M(5), Fiscina B(13), Angastiniotis M(14).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric and Adolescent Outpatient Clinic, Quisisana Hospital, Ferrara, 
Italy.
(2)First Department of Paediatrics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(3)Director of Thalassemia Diagnosis Center of Mediterranean Blood Diseases 
Foundation, Antalya, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Endocrinology, Alexandria University 
Children's Hospital, Alexandria, Egypt.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.
(6)Hematology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran.
(7)Department of Haematology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sultan 
Qaboos University, Sultanate of Oman.
(8)Pediatric Hematology Unit, Child Health Department, Sultan Qaboos University 
Hospital, Muscat, Oman and Department of Pediatrics, Alexandria University 
Children's Hospital, Egypt.
(9)National Center for Cancer Care and Research, Medical Oncology Hematology 
Section HMC, Doha, Qatar.
(10)Primary Health Care, Ministry of Health, Alexandria, Egypt.
(11)Professor, Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Christian Medical College and 
Hospital, Ludhiana, Punjab, India.
(12)Head, Division of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Deputy Chair of Hematology 
and Head, Section of Hematology Research Lab, King Fahd Medical Research Center, 
Department of Hematology Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, NYU School of Medicine, New York, USA.
(14)Medical Advisor, Thalassemia International Federation (TIF), Nicosia, 
Cyprus.

BACKGROUND: Haemoglobinopathies constitute the commonest recessive monogenic 
disorders worldwide, and the treatment of affected individuals presents a 
substantial global disease burden. β-thalassaemia is characterised by the 
reduced synthesis (β+) or absence (βo) of the β-globin chains in the HbA 
molecule, resulting in accumulation of excess unbound α-globin chains that 
precipitate in erythroid precursors in the bone marrow and in the mature 
erythrocytes, leading to ineffective erythropoiesis and peripheral haemolysis. 
Approximately 1.5% of the global population are heterozygotes (carriers) of the 
β-thalassemias; there is a high incidence in populations from the Mediterranean 
basin, throughout the Middle East, the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia, and 
Melanesia to the Pacific Islands.
AIM: The principal aim of this paper is to review, from a historical standpoint, 
our knowledge about an ancient disease, the β-thalassemias, and in particular, 
when, how and in what way β-thalassemia spread worldwide to reach such high 
incidences in certain populations.
RESULTS: Mutations involving the β-globin gene are the most common cause of 
genetic disorders in humans. To date, more than 350 β-thalassaemia mutations 
have been reported. Considering the current distribution of β- thalassemia, the 
wide diversity of mutations and the small number of specific mutations in 
individual populations, it seems unlikely that β-thalassemia originated in a 
single place and time.
CONCLUSIONS: Various processes are known to determine the frequency of genetic 
disease in human populations. However, it is almost impossible to decide to what 
extent each process is responsible for the presence of a particular genetic 
disease. The wide spectrum of β-thalassemia mutations could well be explained by 
looking at their geographical distribution, the history of malaria, wars, 
invasions, mass migrations, consanguinity, and settlements. An analysis of the 
distribution of the molecular spectrum of haemoglobinopathies allows for the 
development and improvement of diagnostic tests and management of these 
disorders.

DOI: 10.4084/MJHID.2017.018
PMCID: PMC5333734
PMID: 28293406