---
reference_id: "PMID:36416133"
title: MET kinase inhibitor reverses resistance to entrectinib induced by hepatocyte growth factor in tumors with NTRK1 or ROS1 rearrangements.
authors:
- Takumi Y
- Arai S
- Suzuki C
- Fukuda K
- Nishiyama A
- Takeuchi S
- Sato H
- Matsumoto K
- Sugio K
- Yano S
journal: Cancer Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/cam4.5342
keywords:
- Humans
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Hepatocyte Growth Factor/genetics, pharmacology"
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Benzamides
- Imidazoles
- Triazines
- Indazoles
- "Receptor, trkA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MET kinase inhibitor reverses resistance to entrectinib induced by hepatocyte growth factor in tumors with NTRK1 or ROS1 rearrangements.
**Authors:** Takumi Y, Arai S, Suzuki C, Fukuda K, Nishiyama A, Takeuchi S, Sato H, Matsumoto K, Sugio K, Yano S
**Journal:** Cancer Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cam4.5342](https://doi.org/10.1002/cam4.5342)

## Content

1. Cancer Med. 2023 Mar;12(5):5809-5820. doi: 10.1002/cam4.5342. Epub 2022 Nov
23.

MET kinase inhibitor reverses resistance to entrectinib induced by hepatocyte
growth factor in tumors with NTRK1 or ROS1 rearrangements.

Takumi Y(1)(2), Arai S(1), Suzuki C(1), Fukuda K(1), Nishiyama A(1), Takeuchi
S(1), Sato H(3), Matsumoto K(3), Sugio K(2), Yano S(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University,
Kanazawa, Japan.
(2)Department of Thoracic and Breast Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Oita
University, Yufu, Japan.
(3)Division of Tumor Dynamics and Regulation, Cancer Research Institute,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of
Medical, Pharmaceutical, and Health Sciences, Kanazawa, Japan.
(5)WPI-Nano Life Science Institute (WPI-Nano LSI), Kanazawa University,
Kanazawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Entrectinib is an effective drug for treating solid tumors with NTRK
gene rearrangement and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with ROS1 gene
rearrangement. However, its efficacy is limited by tolerance and acquired
resistance, the mechanisms of which are not fully understood. The growth factors
produced by the tumor microenvironment, including hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
produced by tumor-associated fibroblasts, critically affect the sensitivity to
targeted drugs.
METHODS: We investigated whether growth factors that can be produced by the
microenvironment affect sensitivity of NTRK1-rearranged colon cancer KM12SM
cells and ROS1-rearranged NSCLC HCC78 cells to entrectinib both in vitro and in
vivo.
RESULTS: Among the growth factors assessed, HGF most potently induced
entrectinib resistance in KM12SM and HCC78 cells by activating its receptor MET.
HGF-induced entrectinib resistance was reversed by the active-HGF-specific
macrocyclic peptide HiP-8 and the MET kinase inhibitor capmatinib in vitro. In
addition, HGF-producing fibroblasts promoted entrectinib resistance in vitro
(culture model) and in vivo (subcutaneous tumor model). The use of capmatinib
circumvented entrectinib resistance in a subcutaneous tumor model inoculated
with KM12SM and HGF-producing fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that growth factors in the tumor
microenvironment, such as HGF, may induce resistance to entrectinib in tumors
with NTRK1 or ROS1 rearrangements. Our results further suggest that optimally
co-administering inhibitors of resistance-inducing growth factors may maximize
the therapeutic efficacy of entrectinib.

© 2022 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.5342
PMCID: PMC10028024
PMID: 36416133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Yano obtained commercial research grants and
speaking honoraria from Chugai Pharmaceutical. All the other authors have
declared no conflicts of interest.
