---
reference_id: "PMID:37075130"
title: Rescue of glutaric aciduria type I in mice by liver-directed therapies.
authors:
- Barzi M
- Johnson CG
- Chen T
- Rodriguiz RM
- Hemmingsen M
- Gonzalez TJ
- Rosales A
- Beasley J
- Peck CK
- Ma Y
- Stiles AR
- Wood TC
- Maeso-Diaz R
- Diehl AM
- Young SP
- Everitt JI
- Wetsel WC
- Lagor WR
- Bissig-Choisat B
- Asokan A
- El-Gharbawy A
- Bissig KD
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adf4086
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rescue of glutaric aciduria type I in mice by liver-directed therapies.
**Authors:** Barzi M, Johnson CG, Chen T, Rodriguiz RM, Hemmingsen M, Gonzalez TJ, Rosales A, Beasley J, Peck CK, Ma Y, Stiles AR, Wood TC, Maeso-Diaz R, Diehl AM, Young SP, Everitt JI, Wetsel WC, Lagor WR, Bissig-Choisat B, Asokan A, El-Gharbawy A, Bissig KD
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.adf4086](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.adf4086)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2023 Apr 19;15(692):eadf4086. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.adf4086.  Epub 2023 Apr 19.

Rescue of glutaric aciduria type I in mice by liver-directed therapies.

Barzi M(1), Johnson CG(2), Chen T(1), Rodriguiz RM(3), Hemmingsen M(1), Gonzalez 
TJ(4), Rosales A(4), Beasley J(1), Peck CK(5), Ma Y(1), Stiles AR(1), Wood 
TC(5), Maeso-Diaz R(6), Diehl AM(6), Young SP(1), Everitt JI(7), Wetsel WC(3), 
Lagor WR(8), Bissig-Choisat B(1), Asokan A(4)(9)(10)(11), El-Gharbawy A(1), 
Bissig KD(1)(6)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Y.T. and Alice Chen Center for Genetics and Genomics, Division of Medical 
Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 
27710, USA.
(2)Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine 
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Cell Biology and 
Neurobiology, Mouse Behavioral and Neuroendocrine Analysis Core Facility, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(5)Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Children's Hospital Colorado Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.
(8)Department of Integrative Physiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.
(9)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(10)Department of Biomedical Engineering (BME) at the Duke University Pratt 
School of Engineering, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(11)Duke Cancer Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(12)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Glutaric aciduria type I (GA-1) is an inborn error of metabolism with a severe 
neurological phenotype caused by the deficiency of glutaryl-coenzyme A 
dehydrogenase (GCDH), the last enzyme of lysine catabolism. Current literature 
suggests that toxic catabolites in the brain are produced locally and do not 
cross the blood-brain barrier. In a series of experiments using knockout mice of 
the lysine catabolic pathway and liver cell transplantation, we uncovered that 
toxic GA-1 catabolites in the brain originated from the liver. Moreover, the 
characteristic brain and lethal phenotype of the GA-1 mouse model was rescued by 
two different liver-directed gene therapy approaches: Using an adeno-associated 
virus, we replaced the defective Gcdh gene or we prevented flux through the 
lysine degradation pathway by CRISPR deletion of the aminoadipate-semialdehyde 
synthase (Aass) gene. Our findings question the current pathophysiological 
understanding of GA-1 and reveal a targeted therapy for this devastating 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adf4086
PMCID: PMC10676743
PMID: 37075130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]