---
reference_id: "PMID:34000449"
title: "Management of CLN1 Disease: International Clinical Consensus."
authors:
- Augustine EF
- Adams HR
- de Los Reyes E
- Drago K
- Frazier M
- Guelbert N
- Laine M
- Levin T
- Mink JW
- Nickel M
- Peifer D
- Schulz A
- Simonati A
- Topcu M
- Turunen JA
- Williams R
- Wirrell EC
- King S
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.04.002
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Infant
- Caregivers
- Consensus
- Disease Progression
- Membrane Proteins
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Palliative Care
- Phenotype
- Rare Diseases
- Stakeholder Participation
- Thiolester Hydrolases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of CLN1 Disease: International Clinical Consensus.
**Authors:** Augustine EF, Adams HR, de Los Reyes E, Drago K, Frazier M, Guelbert N, Laine M, Levin T, Mink JW, Nickel M, Peifer D, Schulz A, Simonati A, Topcu M, Turunen JA, Williams R, Wirrell EC, King S
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.04.002)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2021 Jul;120:38-51. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.04.002.
Epub 2021 Apr 9.

Management of CLN1 Disease: International Clinical Consensus.

Augustine EF(1), Adams HR(2), de Los Reyes E(3), Drago K(4), Frazier M(5),
Guelbert N(6), Laine M(7), Levin T(8), Mink JW(9), Nickel M(10), Peifer D(11),
Schulz A(10), Simonati A(12), Topcu M(13), Turunen JA(14), Williams R(15),
Wirrell EC(16), King S(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurogenetics, Kennedy Krieger Institute,
Baltimore, Maryland; Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, University of
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York. Electronic
address: augustinee@kennedykrieger.org.
(2)Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Neurology, Nationwide Children's Hospital, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(4)Hospice Consultant, Lake Zurich, Illinois.
(5)Rare Disease Advocate and Consultant, Columbus, Ohio.
(6)Metabolic Diseases Section, Children's Hospital of Cordoba, Cordoba,
Argentina.
(7)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Helsinki University Hospital and
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Medical Writing Consultant, Atlanta, Georgia.
(9)Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience, and Pediatrics, University of
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.
(11)Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio.
(12)Department of Surgery, Dentistry, Paediatrics and Gynaecology, University of
Verona School of Medicine, Verona, Italy.
(13)Professor Emeritus, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hacettepe University,
Ankara, Turkey.
(14)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(15)Children's Neurosciences Centre, Evelina London Children's Hospital, London,
United Kingdom.
(16)Divisions of Epilepsy and Child and Adolescent Neurology, Department of
Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(17)Taylor's Tale, Charlotte, North Carolina.

BACKGROUND: CLN1 disease (neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 1) is a rare,
genetic, neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorder caused by
palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1 (PPT1) enzyme deficiency. Clinical features
include developmental delay, psychomotor regression, seizures, ataxia, movement
disorders, visual impairment, and early death. In general, the later the age at
symptom onset, the more protracted the disease course. We sought to evaluate
current evidence and to develop expert practice consensus to support clinicians
who have not previously encountered patients with this rare disease.
METHODS: We searched the literature for guidelines and evidence to support
clinical practice recommendations. We surveyed CLN1 disease experts and
caregivers regarding their experiences and recommendations, and a meeting of
experts was conducted to ascertain points of consensus and clinical practice
differences.
RESULTS: We found a limited evidence base for treatment and no clinical
management guidelines specific to CLN1 disease. Fifteen CLN1 disease experts and
39 caregivers responded to the surveys, and 14 experts met to develop
consensus-based recommendations. The resulting management recommendations are
uniquely informed by family perspectives, due to the inclusion of caregiver and
advocate perspectives. A family-centered approach is supported, and
individualized, multidisciplinary care is emphasized in the recommendations.
Ascertainment of the specific CLN1 disease phenotype (infantile-, late
infantile-, juvenile-, or adult-onset) is of key importance in informing the
anticipated clinical course, prognosis, and care needs. Goals and strategies
should be periodically reevaluated and adapted to patients' current needs, with
a primary aim of optimizing patient and family quality of life.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2021.04.002
PMID: 34000449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
