---
reference_id: "PMID:25573453"
title: Myocardial collagen deposition and inflammatory cell infiltration in cats with pre-clinical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Khor KH
- Campbell FE
- Owen H
- Shiels IA
- Mills PC
journal: Vet J
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2014.11.018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myocardial collagen deposition and inflammatory cell infiltration in cats with pre-clinical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Khor KH, Campbell FE, Owen H, Shiels IA, Mills PC
**Journal:** Vet J (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tvjl.2014.11.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tvjl.2014.11.018)

## Content

1. Vet J. 2015 Feb;203(2):161-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2014.11.018. Epub 2014 Dec
8.

Myocardial collagen deposition and inflammatory cell infiltration in cats with 
pre-clinical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Khor KH(1), Campbell FE(2), Owen H(2), Shiels IA(2), Mills PC(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Veterinary Science, The University of Queensland, Gatton, 
Queensland, Australia; Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University Putra 
Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)School of Veterinary Science, The University of Queensland, Gatton, 
Queensland, Australia.
(3)School of Veterinary Science, The University of Queensland, Gatton, 
Queensland, Australia. Electronic address: p.mills@uq.edu.au.

The histological features of feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) have been 
well documented, but there are no reports describing the histological features 
in mild pre-clinical disease, since cats are rarely screened for the disease in 
the early stages before clinical signs are apparent. Histological changes at the 
early stage of the disease in pre-clinical cats could contribute to an improved 
understanding of disease aetiology or progression. The aim of this study was to 
evaluate the histological features of HCM in the left ventricular (LV) 
myocardium of cats diagnosed with pre-clinical HCM. Clinically healthy cats with 
normal (n = 11) and pre-clinical HCM (n = 6) were identified on the basis of 
echocardiography; LV free wall dimensions (LVFWd) and/or interventricular septal 
wall (IVSd) dimensions during diastole of 6-7 mm were defined as HCM, while 
equivalent dimensions <5.5 mm were defined as normal. LV myocardial sections 
were assessed and collagen content and inflammatory cell infiltrates were 
quantified objectively. Multifocal areas of inflammatory cell infiltration, 
predominantly lymphocytes, were observed frequently in the left myocardium of 
cats with pre-clinical HCM. Tissue from cats with pre-clinical HCM also had a 
higher number of neutrophils and a greater collagen content than the myocardium 
of normal cats. The myocardium variably demonstrated other features 
characteristic of HCM, including arteriolar mural hypertrophy and interstitial 
fibrosis and, to a lesser extent, myocardial fibre disarray and cardiomyocyte 
hypertrophy. These results suggest that an inflammatory process could contribute 
to increased collagen content and the myocardial fibrosis known to be associated 
with HCM.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2014.11.018
PMID: 25573453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]