---
reference_id: "PMID:33249395"
title: Clinical and genetic risk factors define two risk groups of extracranial malignant rhabdoid tumours (eMRT/RTK).
authors:
- Nemes K
- Bens S
- Kachanov D
- Teleshova M
- Hauser P
- Simon T
- Tippelt S
- Woessmann W
- Beck O
- Flotho C
- Grigull L
- Driever PH
- Schlegel PG
- Khurana C
- Hering K
- Kolb R
- Leipold A
- Abbink F
- Gil-Da-Costa MJ
- Benesch M
- Kerl K
- Lowis S
- Marques CH
- Graf N
- Nysom K
- Vokuhl C
- Melchior P
- Kröncke T
- Schneppenheim R
- Kordes U
- Gerss J
- Siebert R
- Furtwängler R
- Frühwald MC
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.10.004
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Rhabdoid Tumor/epidemiology
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic risk factors define two risk groups of extracranial malignant rhabdoid tumours (eMRT/RTK).
**Authors:** Nemes K, Bens S, Kachanov D, Teleshova M, Hauser P, Simon T, Tippelt S, Woessmann W, Beck O, Flotho C, Grigull L, Driever PH, Schlegel PG, Khurana C, Hering K, Kolb R, Leipold A, Abbink F, Gil-Da-Costa MJ, Benesch M, Kerl K, Lowis S, Marques CH, Graf N, Nysom K, Vokuhl C, Melchior P, Kröncke T, Schneppenheim R, Kordes U, Gerss J, Siebert R, Furtwängler R, Frühwald MC
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2020.10.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2020.10.004)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2021 Jan;142:112-122. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.10.004. Epub 2020
 Nov 27.

Clinical and genetic risk factors define two risk groups of extracranial
malignant rhabdoid tumours (eMRT/RTK).

Nemes K(1), Bens S(2), Kachanov D(3), Teleshova M(3), Hauser P(4), Simon T(5),
Tippelt S(6), Woessmann W(7), Beck O(8), Flotho C(9), Grigull L(10), Driever
PH(11), Schlegel PG(12), Khurana C(13), Hering K(14), Kolb R(15), Leipold A(16),
Abbink F(17), Gil-Da-Costa MJ(18), Benesch M(19), Kerl K(20), Lowis S(21),
Marques CH(22), Graf N(23), Nysom K(24), Vokuhl C(25), Melchior P(26), Kröncke
T(27), Schneppenheim R(28), Kordes U(28), Gerss J(29), Siebert R(2), Furtwängler
R(23), Frühwald MC(30).

Author information:
(1)Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Swabian Children's Cancer Center,
University Medical Center Augsburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm University & Ulm University Medical Center,
Ulm, Germany.
(3)National Scientific and Practical Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology
and Immunology named after Dmitry Rogachev, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(4)Department of Pediatric Oncology, 2nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's
Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Pediatrics III, University
Hospital of Essen, Essen, Germany.
(7)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology & Hemostaseology, University
Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Division of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; German Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany.
(10)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital of
Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(11)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, Charité - University
Hospital Berlin, Corporate Member of Free University Berlin, Humboldt-University
Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany.
(13)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital of
Bielefeld, Germany.
(14)Department of Radiotherapy and Radiation Oncology, Leipzig University,
Leipzig, Germany.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Center, Hospital of Oldenburg,
Oldenburg, Germany.
(16)Children's Hospital Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany.
(17)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(18)Pediatric Hemathology and Oncology Division, University Hospital S. João
Alameda Hernani Monteiro, Porto, Portugal.
(19)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Austria.
(20)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's
Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(21)School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, London, UK.
(22)Pediatric Onco-hematology Unit, Niño Jesús Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(23)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of Saarland,
Homburg, Germany.
(24)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Neuroscience Center,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(25)Department of Pathology, Section of Pediatric Pathology, University Hospital
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(26)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Saarland, Homburg, Germany.
(27)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University Hospital
Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany.
(28)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(29)Institute of Biostatistics and Clinical Research, University of Münster,
Münster, Germany.
(30)Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Swabian Children's Cancer Center,
University Medical Center Augsburg, Germany. Electronic address:
Michael.fruehwald@uk-augsburg.de.

INTRODUCTION: Extracranial rhabdoid tumours are rare, highly aggressive
malignancies primarily affecting young children. The EU-RHAB registry was
initiated in 2009 to prospectively collect data of rhabdoid tumour patients
treated according to the EU-RHAB therapeutic framework.
METHODS: We evaluated 100 patients recruited within EU-RHAB (2009-2018). Tumours
and matching blood samples were examined for SMARCB1 mutations by sequencing and
cytogenetics.
RESULTS: A total of 70 patients presented with extracranial, extrarenal tumours
(eMRT) and 30 with renal rhabdoid tumours (RTK). Nine patients demonstrated
synchronous tumours. Distant metastases at diagnosis (M+) were present in 35%
(35/100), localised disease (M0) with (LN+) and without (LN-) loco-regional
lymph node involvement in 65% (65/100). SMARCB1 germline mutations (GLM) were
detected in 21% (17/81 evaluable) of patients. The 5-year overall survival (OS)
and event-free survival (EFS) rates were 45.8 ± 5.4% and 35.2 ± 5.1%,
respectively. On univariate analyses, age at diagnosis (≥12 months), M0-stage,
absence of synchronous tumours, absence of a GLM, gross total resection (GTR),
radiotherapy and achieving a CR were significantly associated with favourable
outcomes. In an adjusted multivariate model presence of a GLM, M+ and lack of a
GTR were the strongest significant negative predictors of outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest to stratify patients with localised disease (M0), GTR+
and without proof of a GLM (5-year OS 72.2 ± 9.9%) as 'standard risk'. Patients
presenting with one of the features M+ and/or GTR- and/or GLM+ belong to a high
risk group (5-year, OS 32.5 ± 6.2%). These patients need novel therapeutic
strategies such as combinations of targeted agents with conventional
chemotherapy or novel experimental approaches ideally within international phase
I/II trials.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2020.10.004
PMID: 33249395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement We hereby
confirm, that there are no conflict of interest disclosures from any authors.
Pablo Hernáiz Driever has received travel grants from Novartis. Reiner Siebert
has received speaker's honoraries from Astra Zeneca und Roche. None of the other
authors declare any conflict of interest.
