---
reference_id: "PMID:32690349"
title: "Transportin 3 (TNPO3) and related proteins in limb girdle muscular dystrophy D2 muscle biopsies: A morphological study and pathogenetic hypothesis."
authors:
- Costa R
- Rodia MT
- Vianello S
- Santi S
- Lattanzi G
- Angelini C
- Pegoraro E
- Cenacchi G
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2020.05.006
keywords:
- Biopsy
- Computer Simulation
- Exome
- Female
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- Muscle Proteins
- Muscles/pathology
- "Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Tripartite Motif Proteins
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases
- beta Karyopherins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transportin 3 (TNPO3) and related proteins in limb girdle muscular dystrophy D2 muscle biopsies: A morphological study and pathogenetic hypothesis.
**Authors:** Costa R, Rodia MT, Vianello S, Santi S, Lattanzi G, Angelini C, Pegoraro E, Cenacchi G
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2020.05.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2020.05.006)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2020 Aug;30(8):685-692. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2020.05.006.
Epub  2020 May 26.

Transportin 3 (TNPO3) and related proteins in limb girdle muscular dystrophy D2 
muscle biopsies: A morphological study and pathogenetic hypothesis.

Costa R(1), Rodia MT(1), Vianello S(2), Santi S(3), Lattanzi G(3), Angelini 
C(4), Pegoraro E(2), Cenacchi G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences DIBINEM, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy; Centre for Applied Biomedical Research - CRBA, 
University of Bologna, St. Orsola Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(3)Institute of Molecular Genetics - CNR Unit of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; IRCCS 
Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy.
(4)Neuromuscular Unit, Neurobiology Research Group, IRCCS San Camillo Hospital, 
Venice, Italy.
(5)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences DIBINEM, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy; Centre for Applied Biomedical Research - CRBA, 
University of Bologna, St. Orsola Hospital, Bologna, Italy. Electronic address: 
giovanna.cenacchi@unibo.it.

LGMD D2 is a disease caused by TNPO3 mutation. We describe the expression of 
TNPO3 and selected proteins, likely modified by TNPO3 mutation, in muscle 
biopsies of affected patients. We also aim to find other genes involved in 
pathways correlated to TNPO3. Our morphological study on LGMD D2 muscle 
described the expression of TNPO3 and SRSF1, a splicing factor transported by 
TNPO3. Moreover, we investigated some sarcomeric and nuclear proteins, likely 
altered by TNPO3 mutation. Through an in silico approach we tried to identify 
genes involved in pathways that include, besides TNPO3 and SRSF1, p62 and 
Murf-1, altered in LGMD D2. In patients' muscles TNPO3 appeared weaker and 
randomly organized, with sporadic cytoplasmic aggregates positive for TNPO3; 
both SRSF1 and sarcomeric alpha actinin showed a different expression, while 
there were no alterations in the expression of the nuclear proteins. The in 
silico study lead to identify five genes, all coding for proteins responsible 
for muscle contraction. Our data suggest a possible interference in the 
morphology and function of myofibrillar network by mutated TNPO3; these findings 
are supported by the in silico identification of genes involved in muscle 
contraction that could help to explain the pathogenic mechanisms of LGMD D2.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2020.05.006
PMID: 32690349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]