---
reference_id: "PMID:30199915"
title: "[The Changing Appearance of Cardiac Amyloidosis]."
authors:
- Mahrholdt H
- Klingel K
- Sechtem U
journal: Dtsch Med Wochenschr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1055/s-0043-109420
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [The Changing Appearance of Cardiac Amyloidosis].
**Authors:** Mahrholdt H, Klingel K, Sechtem U
**Journal:** Dtsch Med Wochenschr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0043-109420](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-109420)

## Content

1. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2018 Sep;143(18):1335-1343. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-109420. 
Epub 2018 Sep 10.

[The Changing Appearance of Cardiac Amyloidosis].

[Article in German]

Mahrholdt H, Klingel K, Sechtem U.

A fast and reliable diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis requires a significant 
amount of clinical awareness. It is especially important to come to an early 
diagnosis in patients with cardiac AL amyloidosis in order to improve the 
otherwise unfavourable clinical course in these patients. There is a significant 
increase in the number of patients with cardiac amyloidosis of the ATTR 
wild-type variety. These patients are often elderly males presenting with 
predominantly right sided heart failure. We present a diagnostic pathway 
enabling a structured approach to these patients using multimodality cardiac 
imaging and endomyocardial biopsy. Early chemotherapy is the key to improving 
symptoms in patients with AL amyloidosis. In contrast, pharmacologic approaches 
for treating cardiac ATTR amyloidosis need further research and clinical trials.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-109420
PMID: 30199915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.