---
reference_id: "PMID:37848274"
title: Characterisation of a novel missense mutation in the ERCC5 gene leading to group G xeroderma pigmentosum/Cockayne syndrome overlap.
authors:
- Stehnach WC
- Cantor A
- Bongiorno M
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-253358
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/complications, genetics"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Cockayne Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, complications"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterisation of a novel missense mutation in the ERCC5 gene leading to group G xeroderma pigmentosum/Cockayne syndrome overlap.
**Authors:** Stehnach WC, Cantor A, Bongiorno M
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2022-253358](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2022-253358)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2023 Oct 17;16(10):e253358. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-253358.

Characterisation of a novel missense mutation in the ERCC5 gene leading to group 
G xeroderma pigmentosum/Cockayne syndrome overlap.

Stehnach WC(1), Cantor A(2), Bongiorno M(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Medical Education, Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine, 
Virginia Campus, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.
(2)Dermatology, Naval Medical Center Portsmouth, Portsmouth, Virginia, USA.
(3)Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland, USA 
dr.michellebongiorno@gmail.com.

Xeroderma pigmentosum-Cockayne syndrome complex (XP-CS) is exceedingly rare, 
with 43 cases described over the past five decades; 21 of these cases exhibited 
mutations in the ERCC5 endonuclease associated with xeroderma pigmentosum, group 
G.We report the first known phenotypic characterisation of the homozygous 
chromosome 13 ERCC5, Exon 11, c.2413G>A (p.Gly805Arg) missense mutation in a 
female toddler presenting with findings of both XP and CS.Her severe 
presentation also questions previous hypotheses that only truncating mutations 
and early missense mutations of XPG are capable of producing the dire findings 
of XP-CS.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2022-253358
PMCID: PMC10583051
PMID: 37848274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.