---
reference_id: "PMID:29672553"
title: Memory deficits for facial identity in patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
authors:
- Savaskan E
- Summermatter D
- Schroeder C
- Schächinger H
journal: PLoS One
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195693
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Memory deficits for facial identity in patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
**Authors:** Savaskan E, Summermatter D, Schroeder C, Schächinger H
**Journal:** PLoS One (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0195693](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195693)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2018 Apr 19;13(4):e0195693. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195693. 
eCollection 2018.

Memory deficits for facial identity in patients with amnestic mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI).

Savaskan E(1), Summermatter D(1), Schroeder C(1), Schächinger H(2).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital of Psychiatry, Department for Geriatric Psychiatry, 
Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Division of Clinical Psychophysiology, Institute of Psychobiology, University 
of Trier, Trier, Germany.

Faces are among the most relevant social stimuli revealing an encounter's 
identity and actual emotional state. Deficits in facial recognition may be an 
early sign of cognitive decline leading to social deficits. The main objective 
of the present study is to investigate if individuals with amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment show recognition deficits in facial identity. Thirty-seven 
individuals with amnestic mild cognitive impairment, multiple-domain (15 female; 
age: 75±8 yrs.) and forty-one healthy volunteers (24 female; age 71±6 yrs.) 
participated. All participants completed a human portrait memory test presenting 
unfamiliar faces with happy and angry emotional expressions. Five and thirty 
minutes later, old and new neutral faces were presented, and discrimination 
sensitivity (d') and response bias (C) were assessed as signal detection 
parameters of cued facial identity recognition. Memory performance was lower in 
amnestic mild cognitive impairment as compared to control subjects, mainly 
because of an altered response bias towards an increased false alarm rate 
(favoring false OLD ascription of NEW items). In both groups, memory performance 
declined between the early and later testing session, and was always better for 
acquired happy than angry faces. Facial identity memory is impaired in patients 
with amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Liberalization of the response bias may 
reflect a socially motivated compensatory mechanism maintaining an almost 
identical recognition hit rate of OLD faces in individuals with amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195693
PMCID: PMC5908082
PMID: 29672553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.