---
reference_id: "PMID:18095921"
title: Oral nabilone capsules in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and pain.
authors:
- Davis MP
journal: Expert Opin Investig Drugs
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1517/13543784.17.1.85
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- "Analgesics, Non-Narcotic/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- "Antiemetics/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- "Dronabinol/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- "Nausea/chemically induced, drug therapy"
- Pain/drug therapy
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vomiting/chemically induced, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral nabilone capsules in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and pain.
**Authors:** Davis MP
**Journal:** Expert Opin Investig Drugs (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1517/13543784.17.1.85](https://doi.org/10.1517/13543784.17.1.85)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2008 Jan;17(1):85-95. doi:
10.1517/13543784.17.1.85.

Oral nabilone capsules in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting and pain.

Davis MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Director of Research The Harry R Horvitz Center for Palliative Medicine,
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, R35, Cleveland OH 44195, USA.
davism6@ccf.org

BACKGROUND: Nabilone has been approved to treat chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting. Recent studies have explored cannabinoids in pain management.
OBJECTIVES: To review the evidence for the use of cannabinoids in general and
nabilone in particular; i) in managing chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting;
and ii) in treating pain.
METHOD: A systematic review of published English literature used the terms:
cancer, cannabinoid, nabilone, nausea, pain, tetrahydrocannabinol and vomiting
as search terms. Reviews, meta-analyses and treatment trials were reviewed.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: Nabilone is superior to placebo, domperidone and
prochlorperazine but not metoclopramide or chlorpromazine. Cannabinoids do not
add to benefits of 5-HT(3) receptor antagonists. Side effects are greater for
nabilone than for prochlorperazine, in most studies patients prefered nabilone
over prochlorperazine. Nabilone is ineffective in acute pain but benefits in
neuropathic pain and central hypersensitization. Recent guidelines place
nabilone as a second to fourth line drug for neuropathic pain.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.17.1.85
PMID: 18095921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
