---
reference_id: "PMID:35110372"
title: Precise gene models using long-read sequencing reveal a unique poly(A) signal in Giardia lamblia.
authors:
- Bilodeau DY
- Sheridan RM
- Balan B
- Jex AR
- Rissland OS
journal: RNA
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1261/rna.078793.121
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Precise gene models using long-read sequencing reveal a unique poly(A) signal in Giardia lamblia.
**Authors:** Bilodeau DY, Sheridan RM, Balan B, Jex AR, Rissland OS
**Journal:** RNA (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1261/rna.078793.121](https://doi.org/10.1261/rna.078793.121)

## Content

1. RNA. 2022 May;28(5):668-682. doi: 10.1261/rna.078793.121. Epub 2022 Feb 2.

Precise gene models using long-read sequencing reveal a unique poly(A) signal in 
Giardia lamblia.

Bilodeau DY(1)(2), Sheridan RM(2), Balan B(3), Jex AR(3)(4), Rissland OS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.
(2)RNA Bioscience Initiative, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
Colorado 80045, USA.
(3)Population Health and Immunity Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute 
of Medical Research, Parkville, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia.
(4)Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.

During pre-mRNA processing, the poly(A) signal is recognized by a protein 
complex that ensures precise cleavage and polyadenylation of the nascent 
transcript. The location of this cleavage event establishes the length and 
sequence of the 3' UTR of an mRNA, thus determining much of its 
post-transcriptional fate. Using long-read sequencing, we characterize the 
polyadenylation signal and related sequences surrounding Giardia lamblia 
cleavage sites for over 2600 genes. We find that G. lamblia uses an AGURAA 
poly(A) signal, which differs from the mammalian AAUAAA. We also describe how G. 
lamblia lacks common auxiliary elements found in other eukaryotes, along with 
the proteins that recognize them. Further, we identify 133 genes with evidence 
of alternative polyadenylation. These results suggest that despite pared-down 
cleavage and polyadenylation machinery, 3' end formation still appears to be an 
important regulatory step for gene expression in G. lamblia.

© 2022 Bilodeau et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the 
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.078793.121
PMCID: PMC9014877
PMID: 35110372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]