---
reference_id: "PMID:34895150"
title: "A novel MAGED2 variant in a Chinese preterm newborn with transient antenatal Bartter's syndrome with 4 years follow-up."
authors:
- Ma M
- Zhang M
- Zhou Y
- Yao F
- Wei M
- Li Z
- Qiu Z
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-021-02553-1
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Asian People
- Bartter Syndrome/genetics
- Fetal Diseases/genetics
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infant, Premature"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Remission, Spontaneous"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel MAGED2 variant in a Chinese preterm newborn with transient antenatal Bartter's syndrome with 4 years follow-up.
**Authors:** Ma M, Zhang M, Zhou Y, Yao F, Wei M, Li Z, Qiu Z
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-021-02553-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-021-02553-1)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2021 Dec 11;22(1):408. doi: 10.1186/s12882-021-02553-1.

A novel MAGED2 variant in a Chinese preterm newborn with transient antenatal
Bartter's syndrome with 4 years follow-up.

Ma M(1), Zhang M(1), Zhou Y(1), Yao F(2), Wei M(1), Li Z(3), Qiu Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, No 1, Shuaifuyuan,
Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Genetics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China.
(3)Department of pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, No 1, Shuaifuyuan,
Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730, China. worldlizhengh@outlook.com.
(4)Department of pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, No 1, Shuaifuyuan,
Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730, China. zhengqingqiu33@aliyun.com.

BACKGROUND: Transient antenatal Bartter's syndrome caused by MAGED2 mutation is
a rare X-linked recessive renal tubular disorder. Cases reported are mostly
infants, and the long-term prognosis of the disease is still under
investigation.
CASE PRESENTATION: We encountered a preterm male infant with polyhydramnios,
polyuria, salt loss, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis and alkalosis. Antenatal
Bartter's syndrome was suspected, but these clinical symptoms surprisingly
disappeared after about 2 months. This led to the clinical diagnosis of
transient antenatal Bartter's syndrome. Gene analysis in this patient disclosed
a novel variant (c.1598C > T, p.Ala533Val) in exon 12 of MAGED2 gene, and his
mother was a heterozygous carrier. This patient was followed up in clinic for
4 years without recurrence of imbalance of potassium, sodium and chloride. His
height and weight were in normal range, and all laboratory examinations and
nephrotic ultrasound were also normal.
CONCLUSIONS: We reported the first Chinese case of transient antenatal Bartter's
syndrome caused by MAGED2 mutation. The 4-year follow-up of our case further
demonstrates the benign prognosis of the disease and indicates that early
recognition of this phenotype could avoid unnecessary treatments.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-021-02553-1
PMCID: PMC8665482
PMID: 34895150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.
