---
reference_id: "PMID:19150989"
title: Requirement of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins for leptin receptor signaling.
authors:
- Seo S
- Guo DF
- Bugge K
- Morgan DA
- Rahmouni K
- Sheffield VC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Requirement of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins for leptin receptor signaling.
**Authors:** Seo S, Guo DF, Bugge K, Morgan DA, Rahmouni K, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp031](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp031)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Apr 1;18(7):1323-31. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp031. Epub 2009
Jan  15.

Requirement of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins for leptin receptor signaling.

Seo S(1), Guo DF, Bugge K, Morgan DA, Rahmouni K, Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, 
Iowa, IA 52242, USA.

Obesity is a major public health problem in most developed countries and a major 
risk factor for diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Emerging evidence indicates 
that ciliary dysfunction can contribute to human obesity but the underlying 
molecular and cellular mechanisms are unknown. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a 
genetically heterogeneous human obesity syndrome associated with ciliary 
dysfunction. BBS proteins are thought to play a role in cilia function and 
intracellular protein/vesicle trafficking. Here, we show that BBS proteins are 
required for leptin receptor (LepR) signaling in the hypothalamus. We found that 
Bbs2(-/-), Bbs4(-/-) and Bbs6(-/-) mice are resistant to the action of leptin to 
reduce body weight and food intake regardless of serum leptin levels and 
obesity. In addition, activation of hypothalamic STAT3 by leptin is 
significantly decreased in Bbs2(-/-), Bbs4(-/-) and Bbs6(-/-) mice. In contrast, 
downstream melanocortin receptor signaling is unaffected, indicating that LepR 
signaling is specifically impaired in Bbs2(-/-), Bbs4(-/-) and Bbs6(-/-) mice. 
Impaired LepR signaling in BBS mice was associated with decreased Pomc gene 
expression. Furthermore, we found that BBS1 protein physically interacts with 
the LepR and that loss of BBS proteins perturbs LepR trafficking. Our data 
indicate that BBS proteins mediate LepR trafficking and that impaired LepR 
signaling underlies energy imbalance in BBS. These findings represent a novel 
mechanism for leptin resistance and obesity.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp031
PMCID: PMC2655773
PMID: 19150989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]