---
reference_id: "PMID:37755460"
title: Update on leukodystrophies and developing trials.
authors:
- Ceravolo G
- Zhelcheska K
- Squadrito V
- Pellerin D
- Gitto E
- Hartley L
- Houlden H
journal: J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-023-11996-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hereditary Central Nervous System Demyelinating Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Demyelinating Diseases
- Lysosomal Storage Diseases
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- White Matter
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on leukodystrophies and developing trials.
**Authors:** Ceravolo G, Zhelcheska K, Squadrito V, Pellerin D, Gitto E, Hartley L, Houlden H
**Journal:** J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-023-11996-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-023-11996-5)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2024 Jan;271(1):593-605. doi: 10.1007/s00415-023-11996-5. Epub 2023
Sep 27.

Update on leukodystrophies and developing trials.

Ceravolo G(1)(2), Zhelcheska K(3), Squadrito V(4), Pellerin D(3), Gitto E(5),
Hartley L(6), Houlden H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, Institute of Neurology, University
College London (UCL), London, UK. g.ceravolo@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Messina,
Messina, Italy. g.ceravolo@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, Institute of Neurology, University
College London (UCL), London, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Messina,
Messina, Italy.
(5)Neonatal and Paediatric Intensive Care Unit, Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(6)Royal London Hospital, Barts NHS, London, UK.

Leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of rare genetic disorders primarily
affecting the white matter of the central nervous system. These conditions can
present a diagnostic challenge, requiring a comprehensive approach that combines
clinical evaluation, neuroimaging, metabolic testing, and genetic testing. While
MRI is the main tool for diagnosis, advances in molecular diagnostics,
particularly whole-exome sequencing, have significantly improved the diagnostic
yield. Timely and accurate diagnosis is crucial to guide symptomatic treatment
and assess eligibility to participate in clinical trials. Despite no specific
cure being available for most leukodystrophies, gene therapy is emerging as a
potential treatment avenue, rapidly advancing the therapeutic prospects in
leukodystrophies. This review will explore diagnostic and therapeutic strategies
for leukodystrophies, with particular emphasis on new trials.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-023-11996-5
PMCID: PMC10770198
PMID: 37755460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All other authors declare no conflicts of
interest.
