---
reference_id: "PMID:27335400"
title: Rescue of the Functional Alterations of Motor Cortical Circuits in Arginase Deficiency by Neonatal Gene Therapy.
authors:
- Cantero G
- Liu XB
- Mervis RF
- Lazaro MT
- Cederbaum SD
- Golshani P
- Lipshutz GS
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0897-16.2016
keywords:
- "Action Potentials/drug effects, physiology"
- Ammonia/blood
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Arginase/genetics, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genetic Therapy
- "Hyperargininemia/blood, pathology, therapy"
- In Vitro Techniques
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Motor Cortex/cytology, physiology, ultrastructure"
- "Nerve Net/pathology, physiology, ultrastructure"
- "Neurons/physiology, ultrastructure"
- Picrotoxin/pharmacology
- Recovery of Function/physiology
- Sodium Channel Blockers/pharmacology
- Synapses/ultrastructure
- Tetrodotoxin/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rescue of the Functional Alterations of Motor Cortical Circuits in Arginase Deficiency by Neonatal Gene Therapy.
**Authors:** Cantero G, Liu XB, Mervis RF, Lazaro MT, Cederbaum SD, Golshani P, Lipshutz GS
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0897-16.2016](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0897-16.2016)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2016 Jun 22;36(25):6680-90. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0897-16.2016.

Rescue of the Functional Alterations of Motor Cortical Circuits in Arginase
Deficiency by Neonatal Gene Therapy.

Cantero G(1), Liu XB(2), Mervis RF(3), Lazaro MT(4), Cederbaum SD(5), Golshani
P(6), Lipshutz GS(7).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Surgery.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California
Davis, School of Medicine, Sacramento, California 95817.
(3)Neurostructural Research Labs, Tampa, Florida 33637.
(4)Neurology.
(5)Pediatrics, Human Genetics, Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities
Research Center, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
90095, Semel Institute for Neuroscience, Los Angeles, California 90095, and.
(6)Neurology, Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, Semel
Institute for Neuroscience, Los Angeles, California 90095, and West Los Angeles
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Los Angeles, California 90073.
(7)Departments of Surgery, Psychiatry, Medicine, and Molecular and Medical
Pharmacology, David Geffen School of Medicine, and Intellectual and
Developmental Disabilities Research Center, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, Semel Institute for Neuroscience, Los
Angeles, California 90095, and glipshutz@mednet.ucla.edu.

Arginase 1 deficiency is a urea cycle disorder associated with hyperargininemia,
spastic diplegia, loss of ambulation, intellectual disability, and seizures. To
gain insight on how loss of arginase expression affects the excitability and
synaptic connectivity of the cortical neurons in the developing brain, we used
anatomical, ultrastructural, and electrophysiological techniques to determine
how single-copy and double-copy arginase deletion affects cortical circuits in
mice. We find that the loss of arginase 1 expression results in decreased
dendritic complexity, decreased excitatory and inhibitory synapse numbers,
decreased intrinsic excitability, and altered synaptic transmission in layer 5
motor cortical neurons. Hepatic arginase 1 gene therapy using adeno-associated
virus rescued nearly all these abnormalities when administered to neonatal
homozygous knock-out animals. Therefore, gene therapeutic strategies can reverse
physiological and anatomical markers of arginase 1 deficiency and therefore may
be of therapeutic benefit for the neurological disabilities in this syndrome.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: These studies are one of the few investigations to try
to understand the underlying neurological dysfunction that occurs in urea cycle
disorders and the only to examine arginase deficiency. We have demonstrated by
multiple modalities that, in murine layer 5 cortical neurons, a gradation of
abnormalities exists based on the functional copy number of arginase: intrinsic
excitability is altered, there is decreased density in asymmetrical and
perisomatic synapses, and analysis of the dendritic complexity is lowest in the
homozygous knock-out. With neonatal administration of adeno-associated virus
expressing arginase, there is near-total recovery of the abnormalities in
neurons and cortical circuits, supporting the concept that neonatal gene therapy
may prevent the functional abnormalities that occur in arginase deficiency.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/366680-11$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0897-16.2016
PMCID: PMC4916246
PMID: 27335400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
