---
reference_id: "PMID:26775836"
title: "[Infectious aortitis caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae]."
authors:
- Zizi O
- Jiber H
- Bouarhroum A
journal: J Mal Vasc
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jmv.2015.12.003
keywords:
- Abdominal Pain/etiology
- Aged
- Amoxicillin/therapeutic use
- "Aneurysm, Infected/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, microbiology, surgery"
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- "Aorta, Abdominal/diagnostic imaging, microbiology, pathology"
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Abdominal/complications, drug therapy, surgery"
- "Aortitis/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, microbiology, surgery"
- "Bacteremia/complications, drug therapy, microbiology"
- Blood Vessel Prosthesis Implantation
- Ceftriaxone/therapeutic use
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Fever/etiology
- Humans
- "Image Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional"
- Male
- "Pneumococcal Infections/drug therapy, microbiology, surgery"
- "Streptococcus pneumoniae/isolation & purification"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Infectious aortitis caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae].
**Authors:** Zizi O, Jiber H, Bouarhroum A
**Journal:** J Mal Vasc (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmv.2015.12.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmv.2015.12.003)

## Content

1. J Mal Vasc. 2016 Feb;41(1):36-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jmv.2015.12.003. Epub 2016
Jan  5.

[Infectious aortitis caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae].

[Article in French]

Zizi O(1), Jiber H(2), Bouarhroum A(2).

Author information:
(1)Service de chirurgie vasculaire, CHU Hassan II, route Sidi Hrazem, Fès,
Maroc. Electronic address: dr.massawi@gmail.com.
(2)Service de chirurgie vasculaire, CHU Hassan II, route Sidi Hrazem, Fès,
Maroc.

Infectious aortitis is a rare clinical entity that most often manifests itself
by an aortic aneurysm. The syphilitic or tubercular forms can be subacute. When
it is caused by Salmonella sp., Staphylococcus sp. or Streptococcus pneumoniae,
the aortitis is acute with alarming symptoms. Germs found in most cases are
Salmonella and Staphylococcus aureus. S. pneumoniae rarely causes infectious
aortitis. We report the case of a 75-year-old patient seen in an emergency
setting for sudden-onset abdominal pain with fever. An abdominal angio-computed
tomography (CT) scan showed a sacciform infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm,
with an inflammatory aspect and periaortic hematoma. Surgical cure was
undertaken because of the impending rupture. An interposition aortic replacement
graft was implanted. Blood cultures and bacteriological study of the aortic wall
isolated a S. pneumoniae. The anatomical pathology study reported fibrin clot
leukocyte remodeling of the aortic wall. An intravenous antibiotic regimen was
started. Several organisms, including Streptococcus, can cause infectious
aortitis. We found 36 cases described in the literature in addition to our
patient.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmv.2015.12.003
PMID: 26775836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
