---
reference_id: "PMID:34091542"
title: "Pediatric Wilson's Disease: Phenotypic, Genetic Characterization and Outcome of 182 Children in France."
authors:
- Couchonnal E
- Lion-François L
- Guillaud O
- Habes D
- Debray D
- Lamireau T
- Broué P
- Fabre A
- Vanlemmens C
- Sobesky R
- Gottrand F
- Bridoux-Henno L
- Dumortier J
- Belmalih A
- Poujois A
- Jacquemin E
- Brunet AS
- Bost M
- Lachaux A
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000003196
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Wilson's Disease: Phenotypic, Genetic Characterization and Outcome of 182 Children in France.
**Authors:** Couchonnal E, Lion-François L, Guillaud O, Habes D, Debray D, Lamireau T, Broué P, Fabre A, Vanlemmens C, Sobesky R, Gottrand F, Bridoux-Henno L, Dumortier J, Belmalih A, Poujois A, Jacquemin E, Brunet AS, Bost M, Lachaux A
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPG.0000000000003196](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.0000000000003196)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2021 Oct 1;73(4):e80-e86. doi: 
10.1097/MPG.0000000000003196.

Pediatric Wilson's Disease: Phenotypic, Genetic Characterization and Outcome of 
182 Children in France.

Couchonnal E(1), Lion-François L(1), Guillaud O(1), Habes D(2)(3), Debray 
D(3)(4), Lamireau T(3)(5), Broué P(3)(6), Fabre A(3)(7)(8), Vanlemmens C(3)(9), 
Sobesky R(3)(10), Gottrand F(3)(11), Bridoux-Henno L(3)(12), Dumortier 
J(13)(14), Belmalih A(1), Poujois A(15), Jacquemin E(2)(3)(16), Brunet AS(1), 
Bost M(1), Lachaux A(1)(13).

Author information:
(1)Hospices Civils de Lyon, National Center for Wilson's Disease and Department 
of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Children's Hospital of 
Lyon.
(2)Pediatric Hepatology and Liver Transplantation Unit, National Reference 
Centre for Biliary Atresia and Genetic Cholestasis, FILFOIE, ERN RARE LIVER, 
Bicêtre Hospital, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre.
(3)Competence Centre for Wilson Disease.
(4)Pediatric Hepatology Unit, Reference Center for Biliary Atresia and Genetic 
cholestasis, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Université Paris Centre, 
Paris.
(5)Children's Hospital, Paediatric Gastroenterology Unit, Bordeaux.
(6)Children University Hospital, Metabolic Disease Department, Toulouse.
(7)APH, Timone Enfant, Service de pédiatrie multidisciplinaire.
(8)Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM, MMG, Marseille.
(9)University Hospital of Besancon, Paediatric Gastroenterology Unit, Besacon.
(10)Paul Brousse Hospital, Hepatobiliary Centre, Hepatobiliary Centre.
(11)Univ-Lille, CHU Lille, UMR1286, Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology 
Hepatology and Nutrition, Lille.
(12)CHU Rennes, Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Rennes.
(13)Claude Bernard Lyon 1 University Lyon.
(14)Unité de Transplantation Hépatique, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Lyon.
(15)French National Rare Disease Reference Centre "Wilson's disease and other 
copper-related rare diseases", Rothschild Foundation Hospital, Neurology 
Department, Paris.
(16)Inserm U1193, Hepatinov, University of Paris Saclay, Orsay, France.

OBJECTIVES: To describe a cohort of Wilson disease (WD) pediatric cases, and to 
point out the diagnostic particularities of this age group and the long-term 
outcome.
METHODS: Clinical data of 182 pediatric patients included in the French WD 
national registry from 01/03/1995 to 01/06/2019 were gathered.
RESULTS: Diagnosis of WD was made at a mean age of 10.7 ± 4.2 years (range 
1-18 years). At diagnosis, 154 patients (84.6%) had hepatic manifestations, 19 
(10.4%) had neurological manifestations, and 9 patients (4.9%) were 
asymptomatic. The p.His1069Gln mutation was the most frequently encountered (14% 
of patients).Neurological patients were diagnosed at least 1 year after they 
presented their first symptoms. At diagnosis, the median urinary copper 
excretion (UCE) was 4.2 μmol/24 hours (0.2-253). The first-line treatment was 
d-penicillamine (DP) for 131 (72%) patients, zinc salts for 24 (13%) patients, 
and Trientine for 17 (9%) patients. Liver transplantation was performed in 39 
(21.4%) patients, for hepatic indications in 33 of 39 patients or for 
neurological deterioration in 6 of 39 patients, mean Unified Wilson's Disease 
Rating Scale of the latter went from 90 ± 23.1 before liver transplantation (LT) 
to 26.8 ± 14.1 (P < 0.01) after a mean follow-up of 4.3 ± 2.5 years. Overall 
survival rate at 20 years of follow-up was 98%, patient and transplant-free 
combined survival was 84% at 20 years.
CONCLUSION: Diagnosis of WD can be challenging in children, particularly at the 
early stages of liver disease and in case of neurological presentation; hence 
the support of clinical scores and genetic testing is essential. Diagnosis at 
early stages and proper treatment ensure excellent outcomes, subject to good 
long-term treatment compliance. LT is a valid option for end-stage liver disease 
not responding to treatment and can be discussed for selected cases of 
neurological deterioration.

Copyright © 2021 by European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, 
and Nutrition and North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology, and Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000003196
PMID: 34091542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.