---
reference_id: "PMID:21463231"
title: "Diagnosis of sporadic transthyretin Val30Met familial amyloid polyneuropathy: a practical analysis."
authors:
- Koike H
- Hashimoto R
- Tomita M
- Kawagashira Y
- Iijima M
- Tanaka F
- Sobue G
journal: Amyloid
year: '2011'
doi: 10.3109/13506129.2011.565524
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of sporadic transthyretin Val30Met familial amyloid polyneuropathy: a practical analysis.
**Authors:** Koike H, Hashimoto R, Tomita M, Kawagashira Y, Iijima M, Tanaka F, Sobue G
**Journal:** Amyloid (2011)
**DOI:** [10.3109/13506129.2011.565524](https://doi.org/10.3109/13506129.2011.565524)

## Content

1. Amyloid. 2011 Jun;18(2):53-62. doi: 10.3109/13506129.2011.565524. Epub 2011
Apr  5.

Diagnosis of sporadic transthyretin Val30Met familial amyloid polyneuropathy: a 
practical analysis.

Koike H(1), Hashimoto R, Tomita M, Kawagashira Y, Iijima M, Tanaka F, Sobue G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Japan.

Transthyretin (TTR) Val30Met-associated familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP 
ATTR Val30Met) is the most common form of FAP and is now prevalent in areas 
other than those seen within conventional endemic foci. We investigated 15 
patients with FAP ATTR Val30Met without a family history of FAP who were 
referred for sural nerve biopsy. Initial symptoms included somatic neuropathy in 
all patients, while sensory dissociation and autonomic symptoms were apparent 
only in two and seven patients, respectively. Nonspecific neuropathic features 
and slight abnormalities in cerebrospinal fluid protein levels and in 
electrophysiological indices related to nerve conduction led clinicians to 
initially suspect chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) in 
some patients. Small-fiber predominant loss was observed in a minority of 
patients. In terms of cardiac involvement, findings suggestive of subclinical 
cardiomyopathy due to amyloid deposition, such as cardiomegaly on chest X-ray, 
thickening of the interventricular septum, and granular sparkling echo on 
echocardiography, were seen alone or in combination in 11 of 14 examined 
patients. In conclusion, clinicians should consider the possibility of FAP ATTR 
Val30Met in patients presenting with neuropathy of undetermined etiology to 
avoid misdiagnosis. Detecting subclinical cardiac involvement may help to 
diagnose late-onset FAP ATTR Val30Met in those without a family history of the 
disease.

DOI: 10.3109/13506129.2011.565524
PMID: 21463231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]