---
reference_id: "PMID:39904499"
title: AXL-Mediated Drug Resistance in ALK-Rearranged NSCLC Enhanced by GAS6 From Macrophages and MMP11 Positive Fibroblasts.
authors:
- Utsumi T
- Mizuta H
- Seto Y
- Uchibori K
- Nishio M
- Okamoto I
- Katayama R
journal: Cancer Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1111/cas.70006
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, pathology, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics, metabolism"
- Axl Receptor Tyrosine Kinase
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, drug therapy, pathology, metabolism"
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Macrophages/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Mice, Nude"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- "Carbazoles/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Piperidines/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- Gene Rearrangement
- Female
- Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Tumor Microenvironment
- Growth Arrest-Specific Protein 6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AXL-Mediated Drug Resistance in ALK-Rearranged NSCLC Enhanced by GAS6 From Macrophages and MMP11 Positive Fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Utsumi T, Mizuta H, Seto Y, Uchibori K, Nishio M, Okamoto I, Katayama R
**Journal:** Cancer Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cas.70006](https://doi.org/10.1111/cas.70006)

## Content

1. Cancer Sci. 2025 Apr;116(4):1034-1047. doi: 10.1111/cas.70006. Epub 2025 Feb
4.

AXL-Mediated Drug Resistance in ALK-Rearranged NSCLC Enhanced by GAS6 From
Macrophages and MMP11 Positive Fibroblasts.

Utsumi T(1)(2), Mizuta H(1)(3), Seto Y(1), Uchibori K(1)(4), Nishio M(4),
Okamoto I(2), Katayama R(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Chemotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio
University, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, The Cancer Institute Hospital,
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of
Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearranged non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
shows marked tumor shrinkage by ALK-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). However,
tumors almost inevitably relapse owing to the development of acquired
resistance. Resistance mechanisms include secondary ALK mutations and the
activation of bypass pathways, such as cMET, cKIT, or EGFR, though some remain
unknown. In this study, we analyzed alectinib-resistant patient samples and
identified a significant increase in AXL expression in the tumor, and a high
level of GAS6, the ligand for AXL, in the pleural effusion. AXL-overexpressing
H3122 ALK-rearranged NSCLC cells exhibited partial resistance to alectinib,
which was enhanced by GAS6 supplementation but could be overcome by the ALK/AXL
inhibitor gilteritinib. Moreover, GAS6-overexpressing NIH3T3 cells and
AXL-expressing H3122 cells were subcutaneously injected into the left and right
sides of nude mice simultaneously, followed by alectinib treatment. The supply
of GAS6 from NIH3T3 may have accelerated tumor relapse under alectinib
treatment. However, even without GAS6-overexpressing NIH3T3, AXL-overexpressing
H3122 tumor relapsed within 1 month possibly due to increased host mouse Gas6
expression. Single-cell RNA sequencing revealed that specific cancer-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) and a subset of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are the
primary sources of Gas6 in the tumor microenvironment (TME). During alectinib
treatment, TAMs increased their infiltration into the TME, whereas CAFs altered
their expression patterns, substantially upregulating Mmp11. These findings
suggest that AXL expression in resistant cancer cells, combined with increased
Gas6 production in the TME, contributes to enhanced ALK-TKI resistance.

© 2025 The Author(s). Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia,
Ltd on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.70006
PMCID: PMC11967273
PMID: 39904499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R. Katayama is an editorial board member of
Cancer Science. R. Katayama reports receiving research funding from Chugai
Pharma, TOPPAN, and UBE. I. Okamoto reports receiving research funding and
lecture fees from Chugai Pharma, as well as lecture fees from Takeda Pharma, and
Pfizer. The others declare no conflicts of interest.
