---
reference_id: "PMID:36096782"
title: "Characteristics of different asthma phenotypes associated with cough: a prospective, multicenter survey in China."
authors:
- Zhou J
- Yi F
- Wu F
- Xu P
- Chen M
- Shen H
- Lin L
- Zhang Y
- Li S
- Wu C
- Yuan Y
- Wang G
- Ye X
- Zhang P
- Tang H
- Ma Q
- Huang L
- Qiu Z
- Deng H
- Qiu C
- Shi G
- Pan J
- Luo W
- Chung KF
- Zhong N
- Lai K
- CPA Cohort Study Group
journal: Respir Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12931-022-02104-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics of different asthma phenotypes associated with cough: a prospective, multicenter survey in China.
**Authors:** Zhou J, Yi F, Wu F, Xu P, Chen M, Shen H, Lin L, Zhang Y, Li S, Wu C, Yuan Y, Wang G, Ye X, Zhang P, Tang H, Ma Q, Huang L, Qiu Z, Deng H, Qiu C, Shi G, Pan J, Luo W, Chung KF, Zhong N, Lai K, CPA Cohort Study Group
**Journal:** Respir Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12931-022-02104-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12931-022-02104-8)

## Content

1. Respir Res. 2022 Sep 12;23(1):243. doi: 10.1186/s12931-022-02104-8.

Characteristics of different asthma phenotypes associated with cough: a 
prospective, multicenter survey in China.

Zhou J(#)(1), Yi F(#)(1), Wu F(2), Xu P(3), Chen M(4), Shen H(5), Lin L(6), 
Zhang Y(7), Li S(8), Wu C(9), Yuan Y(10), Wang G(11), Ye X(12), Zhang P(13), 
Tang H(14), Ma Q(15), Huang L(16), Qiu Z(17), Deng H(18), Qiu C(19), Shi G(20), 
Pan J(1), Luo W(1), Chung KF(#)(21), Zhong N(#)(1), Lai K(22); CPA Cohort Study 
Group.

Collaborators: Chen R, Guan W, Xie Y, Jiang M, Gao J, Hua W, Cai G, Chen C, Zhou 
M, Xu Y, Wang M, Guo Y, Li X, Liu L, Yao H, Wen H, Chen J, Zhang X, Zhang Z, Yu 
L, Chen D, Du W, Chen Q, Li H, Peng W, Zhang L, Tang J, Liu B, Zhan C, Huang L, 
Chen X.

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, State Key Laboratory of 
Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, 
National Center for Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou Medical University, 151 Yanjiang Rd., 
Guangzhou, 510120, China.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Huizhou Third People's 
Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Huizhou, China.
(3)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(4)Dongguan Third People's Hospital, Dongguan, China.
(5)The Second Hospital Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(6)The Second Clinical College of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 
Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Academy 
of Chinese Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(7)The First People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, Kunming, China.
(8)The First Affiliated Hospital of Henan University of Chinese Medicine, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(9)Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(10)The Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China.
(11)West China School of Medicine/West China Hospital of Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(12)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Guizhou Provincial 
People's Hospital, Guiyang, China.
(13)Dongguan People's Hospital, Dongguan, China.
(14)Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao, China.
(15)Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University (Army Medical 
University), Chongqing, China.
(16)The People's Hospital of Jiangmen, Jiangmen, China.
(17)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(18)The Second People's Hospital of Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(19)Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen, China.
(20)Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(21)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, & Royal Brompton 
and Harefield Foundation NHS Trust, London, UK.
(22)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, State Key Laboratory of 
Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, 
National Center for Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou Medical University, 151 Yanjiang Rd., 
Guangzhou, 510120, China. klai@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a heterogeneous disease with variable symptoms, which 
presents with cough either as the sole or predominant symptom with or without 
wheezing. We compared the clinical and pathophysiological characteristics of 
cough predominant asthma (CPA), cough variant asthma (CVA) and classic asthma 
(CA) in order to determine any differential phenotypic traits.
METHODS: In 20 clinics across China, a total of 2088 patients were finally 
recruited, including 327 CVA, 1041 CPA and 720 CA patients. We recorded cough 
and wheezing visual analogue scale, Leicester cough questionnaire (LCQ) and 
asthma control test scores. Fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO), induced 
sputum cell counts, and capsaicin cough challenge were also measured and 
compared.
RESULTS: CPA patients more frequently presented with cough as the initial 
symptom, and laryngeal symptoms (p < 0.001), had less symptoms related with 
rhinitis/sinusitis and gastroesophageal reflux (p < 0.05) than CA patients. 
Comorbidities including rhinitis and gastroesophageal reflux were similar, while 
the proportion of COPD and bronchiectasis was higher in CA patients. There were 
no differences in FeNO levels, sputum eosinophil and neutrophil counts, FEV1 
(%pred) decreased from CVA to CPA to CA patients (p < 0.001). Cough sensitivity 
was higher in CVA and CPA compared to CA (p < 0.001), and was positively 
correlated with LCQ scores.
CONCLUSIONS: CVA, CPA and CA can be distinguished by the presence of laryngeal 
symptoms, cough sensitivity and airflow obstruction. Asthma-associated chronic 
cough was not associated with airway inflammation or comorbidities in our 
cohort. Trial registration The Chinese Clinical Trial Registration Center, 
ChiCTR-POC-17011646, 13 June 2017.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-022-02104-8
PMCID: PMC9469623
PMID: 36096782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.