---
reference_id: "PMID:32265181"
title: "Dengue hemorrhagic fever - A systemic literature review of current perspectives on pathogenesis, prevention and control."
authors:
- Wang WH
- Urbina AN
- Chang MR
- Assavalapsakul W
- Lu PL
- Chen YH
- Wang SF
journal: J Microbiol Immunol Infect
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jmii.2020.03.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue hemorrhagic fever - A systemic literature review of current perspectives on pathogenesis, prevention and control.
**Authors:** Wang WH, Urbina AN, Chang MR, Assavalapsakul W, Lu PL, Chen YH, Wang SF
**Journal:** J Microbiol Immunol Infect (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmii.2020.03.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmii.2020.03.007)

## Content

1. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2020 Dec;53(6):963-978. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmii.2020.03.007. Epub 2020 Mar 26.

Dengue hemorrhagic fever - A systemic literature review of current perspectives 
on pathogenesis, prevention and control.

Wang WH(1), Urbina AN(2), Chang MR(3), Assavalapsakul W(4), Lu PL(5), Chen 
YH(6), Wang SF(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung 
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, 80708, 
Taiwan; Center for Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan. Electronic address: bole0918@gmail.com.
(2)Program in Tropical Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung City, 80708, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
aspiro.urbina@hotmail.com.
(3)Program in Tropical Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung City, 80708, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
chisenc@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, 10330, Thailand. Electronic address: Wanchai.A@chula.ac.th.
(5)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung 
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, 80708, 
Taiwan; Center for Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan. Electronic address: d830166@kmu.edu.tw.
(6)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung 
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, 80708, 
Taiwan; Center for Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan. Electronic address: d810070@kmu.edu.tw.
(7)Center for Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan; Department of Medical Laboratory Science 
and Biotechnology, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan. 
Electronic address: wasf1234@kmu.du.tw.

BACKGROUND: Dengue is an arboviral disease caused by dengue virus. Symptomatic 
dengue infection causes a wide range of clinical manifestations, from mild 
dengue fever (DF) to potentially fatal disease, such as dengue hemorrhagic fever 
(DHF) or dengue shock syndrome (DSS). We conducted a literature review to 
analyze the risks of DHF and current perspectives for DHF prevention and 
control.
METHODS: According to the PRISMA guidelines, the references were selected from 
PubMed, Web of Science and Google Scholar database using search strings 
containing a combination of terms that included dengue hemorrhagic fever, 
pathogenesis, prevention and control. Quality of references were evaluated by 
independent reviewers.
RESULTS: DHF was first reported in the Philippines in 1953 and further 
transmitted to the countries in the region of South-East Asia and Western 
Pacific. Plasma leakages is the main pathophysiological hallmark that 
distinguishes DHF from DF. Severe plasma leakage can result in hypovolemic 
shock. Various factors are thought to impact disease presentation and severity. 
Virus virulence, preexisting dengue antibodies, immune dysregulation, lipid 
change and host genetic susceptibility are factors reported to be correlated 
with the development of DHF. However, the exact reasons and mechanisms that 
triggers DHF remains controversial. Currently, no specific drugs and licensed 
vaccines are available to treat dengue disease in any of its clinical 
presentations.
CONCLUSION: This study concludes that antibody-dependent enhancement, cytokine 
dysregulation and variation of lipid profiles are correlated with DHF 
occurrence. Prompt diagnosis, appropriate treatment, active and continuous 
surveillance of cases and vectors are the essential determinants for dengue 
prevention and control.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmii.2020.03.007
PMID: 32265181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The author 
reports no conflicts of interest in this work.