---
reference_id: "PMID:30867665"
title: "Gitelman Syndrome: A Rare Cause of Seizure Disorder and a Systematic Review."
authors:
- Shahzad MA
- Mukhtar M
- Ahmed A
- Ullah W
- Saeed R
- Hamid M
journal: Case Rep Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1155/2019/4204907
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gitelman Syndrome: A Rare Cause of Seizure Disorder and a Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Shahzad MA, Mukhtar M, Ahmed A, Ullah W, Saeed R, Hamid M
**Journal:** Case Rep Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2019/4204907](https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/4204907)

## Content

1. Case Rep Med. 2019 Feb 5;2019:4204907. doi: 10.1155/2019/4204907. eCollection
2019.

Gitelman Syndrome: A Rare Cause of Seizure Disorder and a Systematic Review.

Shahzad MA(1), Mukhtar M(2), Ahmed A(3), Ullah W(3), Saeed R(3), Hamid M(3).

Author information:
(1)Resident Physician, Louis Weiss Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Independent Research Scholar, Fauji Foundation Hospital, Rawalpindi,
Pakistan.
(3)Resident Physician, Abington Hospital-Jefferson Health, Abington, PA, USA.

Gitelman syndrome is one of the few inherited causes of metabolic alkalosis due
to salt losing tubulopathy. It is caused by tubular defects at the level of
distal convoluted tubules, mimicking a thiazide-like tumor. It usually presents
in late childhood or in teenage as nonspecific weakness, fatigability, polyuria,
and polydipsia but very rarely with seizures. It is classically associated with
hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypocalciuria, hyperreninemia, and
hyperaldosteronism. However, less frequently, it can present with normal
magnesium levels. It is even rarer to find normomagnesemic patients of GS who
develop seizures as the main complication since hypomagnesemia is considered the
principal etiology of abnormal foci of seizure-related brain activity in GS
cases. Interestingly, patients with GS are oftentimes diagnosed during pregnancy
when the classic electrolyte pattern consistent with GS is noticed. Our case
presents GS with normal serum magnesium in a patient, with seizures being the
main clinical presentation. We also did a comprehensive literature review of 122
reported cases to show the prevalence of normal magnesium in GS cases and an
overview of clinical and biochemical variability in GS. We suggest that further
studies and in-depth analysis are required to understand the pathophysiology of
seizures in GS patients with both normal and low magnesium levels.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/4204907
PMCID: PMC6379858
PMID: 30867665
