---
reference_id: "PMID:28328130"
title: Targeted molecular investigation in patients within the clinical spectrum of Auriculocondylar syndrome.
authors:
- Romanelli Tavares VL
- Zechi-Ceide RM
- Bertola DR
- Gordon CT
- Ferreira SG
- Hsia GS
- Yamamoto GL
- Ezquina SA
- Kokitsu-Nakata NM
- Vendramini-Pittoli S
- Freitas RS
- Souza J
- Raposo-Amaral CA
- Zatz M
- Amiel J
- Guion-Almeida ML
- Passos-Bueno MR
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38101
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Ear/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Ear Diseases/classification, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Endothelin-1/genetics
- Female
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gi-Go/genetics"
- Gene Expression
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Male
- "Micrognathism/classification, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Phospholipase C beta/genetics
- "Pierre Robin Syndrome/classification, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted molecular investigation in patients within the clinical spectrum of Auriculocondylar syndrome.
**Authors:** Romanelli Tavares VL, Zechi-Ceide RM, Bertola DR, Gordon CT, Ferreira SG, Hsia GS, Yamamoto GL, Ezquina SA, Kokitsu-Nakata NM, Vendramini-Pittoli S, Freitas RS, Souza J, Raposo-Amaral CA, Zatz M, Amiel J, Guion-Almeida ML, Passos-Bueno MR
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38101](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38101)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Apr;173(4):938-945. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38101.

Targeted molecular investigation in patients within the clinical spectrum of 
Auriculocondylar syndrome.

Romanelli Tavares VL(1), Zechi-Ceide RM(2), Bertola DR(1)(3), Gordon CT(4)(5), 
Ferreira SG(1), Hsia GS(1), Yamamoto GL(1)(3), Ezquina SA(1), Kokitsu-Nakata 
NM(2), Vendramini-Pittoli S(2), Freitas RS(6), Souza J(6), Raposo-Amaral CA(7), 
Zatz M(1), Amiel J(4)(5)(8), Guion-Almeida ML(2), Passos-Bueno MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Pesquisas Sobre o Genoma Humano e Células-Tronco, Departamento de 
Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Genética Clínica, Hospital de Reabilitação de Anomalias 
Craniofaciais, Universidade de São Paulo (HRAC-USP), Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Instituto da Criança do Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da 
USP, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Embryology and Genetics of Congenital Malformations, Institut 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U11163, Institut 
Imagine, Paris, France.
(5)Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Institut Imagine, Paris, 
France.
(6)Centro de Atendimento Integral ao Fissurado Lábio Palatal (CAIF), Curitiba, 
Paraná, Brazil.
(7)Hospital de Crânio e Face, Sociedade Brasileira de Pesquisa e Assistência 
para Reabilitação Craniofacial (SOBRAPAR), Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.

Auriculocondylar syndrome, mainly characterized by micrognathia, small 
mandibular condyle, and question mark ears, is a rare disease segregating in an 
autosomal dominant pattern in the majority of the families reported in the 
literature. So far, pathogenic variants in PLCB4, GNAI3, and EDN1 have been 
associated with this syndrome. It is caused by a developmental abnormality of 
the first and second pharyngeal arches and it is associated with great inter- 
and intra-familial clinical variability, with some patients not presenting the 
typical phenotype of the syndrome. Moreover, only a few patients of each 
molecular subtype of Auriculocondylar syndrome have been reported and sequenced. 
Therefore, the spectrum of clinical and genetic variability is still not 
defined. In order to address these questions, we searched for alterations in 
PLCB4, GNAI3, and EDN1 in patients with typical Auriculocondylar syndrome 
(n = 3), Pierre Robin sequence-plus (n = 3), micrognathia with additional 
craniofacial malformations (n = 4), or non-specific auricular dysplasia (n = 1), 
which could represent subtypes of Auriculocondylar syndrome. We found novel 
pathogenic variants in PLCB4 only in two of three index patients with typical 
Auriculocondylar syndrome. We also performed a detailed comparative analysis of 
the patients presented in this study with those previously published, which 
showed that the pattern of auricular abnormality and full cheeks were associated 
with molecularly characterized individuals with Auriculocondylar syndrome. 
Finally, our data contribute to a better definition of a set of parameters for 
clinical classification that may be used as a guidance for geneticists ordering 
molecular testing for Auriculocondylar syndrome. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38101
PMID: 28328130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]