---
reference_id: "PMID:40911847"
title: A new gut pathogenic bacteria and its metabolites promote colorectal cancer development and act as non-invasive early diagnostic biomarkers.
authors:
- Zhang R
- Li M
- Tan H
- Liu J
- Wang L
- Dai W
- Fan Z
- Liu J
journal: Gut Microbes
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/19490976.2025.2555446
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new gut pathogenic bacteria and its metabolites promote colorectal cancer development and act as non-invasive early diagnostic biomarkers.
**Authors:** Zhang R, Li M, Tan H, Liu J, Wang L, Dai W, Fan Z, Liu J
**Journal:** Gut Microbes (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19490976.2025.2555446](https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2025.2555446)

## Content

1. Gut Microbes. 2025 Dec;17(1):2555446. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2025.2555446. Epub
 2025 Sep 5.

A new gut pathogenic bacteria and its metabolites promote colorectal cancer 
development and act as non-invasive early diagnostic biomarkers.

Zhang R(1), Li M(1), Tan H(1), Liu J(1), Wang L(2), Dai W(1), Fan Z(2), Liu 
J(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of TCM Evaluation and Translational Research, School 
of Traditional Chinese Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, China.
(2)Jiangsu Clinical Innovation Center for Anorectal Diseases of T.C.M, Nanjing 
Hospital of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, School of Traditional Chinese 
Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Gut microbiota dysbiosis is strongly linked to colorectal cancer (CRC), but 
reliable early diagnostic markers remain elusive. This study investigates the 
role of a novel Shigella flexneri strain in CRC pathogenesis. Metabolomic 
analysis of CRC patient feces identified elevated agmatine levels. A unique 
agmatine-producing strain (S. flexneri C.11) was isolated and validated in cell 
models and pseudo-sterile mice. Affinity fishing combined with HPLC-QTOF-MS 
characterized bacterial metabolites, while RNA sequencing elucidated mechanistic 
pathways. Repeated S. flexneri C.11 exposure-induced DNA damage and 
inflammatory-to-neoplastic transformation. Three genotoxic cyclodipeptides 
(CDP1-3) were identified, driving malignant transformation and accelerating 
colitis-associated tumorigenesis. Mechanistically, S. flexneri C.11 upregulated 
ERBB3, activating the PI3K-AKT pathway. Clinically, combined detection of S. 
flexneri C.11 and its metabolites differentiated CRC patients from healthy 
controls (AUC = 0.887), suggesting its potential as noninvasive diagnostic 
biomarkers for CRC. We identify S. flexneri C.11 as a pro-carcinogenic pathogen 
and propose ERBB3/PI3K - AKT signaling as a therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2025.2555446
PMCID: PMC12416176
PMID: 40911847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).