---
reference_id: "PMID:27939641"
title: Loss-of-Function Mutations in YY1AP1 Lead to Grange Syndrome and a Fibromuscular Dysplasia-Like Vascular Disease.
authors:
- Guo DC
- Duan XY
- Regalado ES
- Mellor-Crummey L
- Kwartler CS
- Kim D
- Lieberman K
- de Vries BBA
- Pfundt R
- Schinzel A
- Kotzot D
- Shen X
- Yang ML
- University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics
- Bamshad MJ
- Nickerson DA
- Gornik HL
- Ganesh SK
- Braverman AC
- Grange DK
- Milewicz DM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss-of-Function Mutations in YY1AP1 Lead to Grange Syndrome and a Fibromuscular Dysplasia-Like Vascular Disease.
**Authors:** Guo DC, Duan XY, Regalado ES, Mellor-Crummey L, Kwartler CS, Kim D, Lieberman K, de Vries BBA, Pfundt R, Schinzel A, Kotzot D, Shen X, Yang ML, University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics, Bamshad MJ, Nickerson DA, Gornik HL, Ganesh SK, Braverman AC, Grange DK, Milewicz DM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.008)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Jan 5;100(1):21-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.008. Epub
 2016 Dec 8.

Loss-of-Function Mutations in YY1AP1 Lead to Grange Syndrome and a Fibromuscular 
Dysplasia-Like Vascular Disease.

Guo DC(1), Duan XY(1), Regalado ES(1), Mellor-Crummey L(1), Kwartler CS(1), Kim 
D(2), Lieberman K(3), de Vries BBA(4), Pfundt R(4), Schinzel A(5), Kotzot D(6), 
Shen X(7), Yang ML(8); University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics; 
Bamshad MJ(9), Nickerson DA(9), Gornik HL(10), Ganesh SK(8), Braverman AC(11), 
Grange DK(12), Milewicz DM(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston McGovern Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston McGovern Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Pediatric Nephrology, Joseph M. Sanzari Children's Hospital, Hackensack, NJ 
07601, USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, 
6525 Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(5)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, 8006 Zurick, 
Switzerland.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology of the 
Medical University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(7)Department of Epigenetics &Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
USA.
(9)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA.
(10)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Heart and Vascular 
Institute, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston McGovern Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic 
address: dianna.m.milewicz@uth.tmc.edu.

Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a heterogeneous group of non-atherosclerotic 
and non-inflammatory arterial diseases that primarily involves the renal and 
cerebrovascular arteries. Grange syndrome is an autosomal-recessive condition 
characterized by severe and early-onset vascular disease similar to FMD and 
variable penetrance of brachydactyly, syndactyly, bone fragility, and learning 
disabilities. Exome-sequencing analysis of DNA from three affected siblings with 
Grange syndrome identified compound heterozygous nonsense variants in YY1AP1, 
and homozygous nonsense or frameshift YY1AP1 variants were subsequently 
identified in additional unrelated probands with Grange syndrome. YY1AP1 encodes 
yin yang 1 (YY1)-associated protein 1 and is an activator of the YY1 
transcription factor. We determined that YY1AP1 localizes to the nucleus and is 
a component of the INO80 chromatin remodeling complex, which is responsible for 
transcriptional regulation, DNA repair, and replication. Molecular studies 
revealed that loss of YY1AP1 in vascular smooth muscle cells leads to cell cycle 
arrest with decreased proliferation and increased levels of the cell cycle 
regulator p21/WAF/CDKN1A and disrupts TGF-β-driven differentiation of smooth 
muscle cells. Identification of YY1AP1 mutations as a cause of FMD indicates 
that this condition can result from underlying genetic variants that 
significantly alter the phenotype of vascular smooth muscle cells.

Copyright © 2017 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.008
PMCID: PMC5223026
PMID: 27939641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]