---
reference_id: "PMID:39307617"
title: "Soluble biomarkers for immune checkpoint inhibitor-related encephalitis: A mini-review."
authors:
- Farina A
- Villagrán-García M
- Joubert B
journal: Rev Neurol (Paris)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2024.08.007
keywords:
- Humans
- "Encephalitis/blood, diagnosis, cerebrospinal fluid, drug therapy"
- "Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Biomarkers/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Soluble biomarkers for immune checkpoint inhibitor-related encephalitis: A mini-review.
**Authors:** Farina A, Villagrán-García M, Joubert B
**Journal:** Rev Neurol (Paris) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurol.2024.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2024.08.007)

## Content

1. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2024 Nov;180(9):982-988. doi:
10.1016/j.neurol.2024.08.007.  Epub 2024 Sep 21.

Soluble biomarkers for immune checkpoint inhibitor-related encephalitis: A 
mini-review.

Farina A(1), Villagrán-García M(2), Joubert B(3).

Author information:
(1)French Reference Centre on Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndromes and 
Autoimmune Encephalitis, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Neurologique, Bron, 
France; MeLiS-UCBL-CNRS UMR 5284, Inserm U1314, Université Claude-Bernard Lyon 
1, Lyon, France. Electronic address: ext-antonio.farina@chu-lyon.fr.
(2)French Reference Centre on Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndromes and 
Autoimmune Encephalitis, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Neurologique, Bron, 
France; MeLiS-UCBL-CNRS UMR 5284, Inserm U1314, Université Claude-Bernard Lyon 
1, Lyon, France.
(3)French Reference Centre on Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndromes and 
Autoimmune Encephalitis, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Neurologique, Bron, 
France; MeLiS-UCBL-CNRS UMR 5284, Inserm U1314, Université Claude-Bernard Lyon 
1, Lyon, France; ImmuCare, Institute of Cancerology, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 
69002 Lyon, France.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors lead to effective antitumour responses but also to 
immune-related adverse events (irAEs), which affect the nervous system in 1-5% 
of patients. Encephalitis is the most frequent central nervous system irAE and 
is clinically relevant due to its high severity and mortality. Early diagnosis 
is crucial but is hampered by the broad list of alternative diagnoses, the lack 
of established diagnostic criteria, and the need of extensive diagnostic 
procedures (e.g., spinal tap, brain MRI) alongside expert neurological 
evaluation. Additionally, the response to corticosteroids is inconsistent, and 
the management of corticosteroid-refractory patients remains poorly defined. 
This mini-review discusses the role of various soluble biomarkers in the 
diagnosis, prognostication, and management of ICI-encephalitis. Neural 
antibodies, which are well-established biomarkers of autoimmune and 
paraneoplastic encephalitis, are found in only a subset of ICI-encephalitis, in 
which they can aid to establish the diagnosis. The most prevalent are 
paraneoplastic neurological syndromes (PNS)-associated antibodies, which are 
found almost exclusively in focal ICI-encephalitis syndromes and are associated 
with poor outcomes, possibly due to predominantly cytotoxic T cell involvement 
leading to irreversible neuronal loss. Beside antibodies, serum brain injury 
biomarkers such as NfL and S100B are elevated in ICI-encephalitis and, even if 
non-specific, may be useful as a routine test to quickly identify patients in 
whom neurological evaluation and second-level diagnostic procedures should be 
prioritized. Additionally, higher serum and CSF NfL levels have been associated 
with lack of treatment response in ICI-encephalitis, suggesting they may have a 
prognostic role. Among cytokines, elevated interleukin 6 (IL6) levels have been 
observed in serum and/or CSF samples of some patients with ICI-encephalitis, but 
the role of IL6 as a biomarker for response to IL6-directed therapies requires 
further investigation. Likewise, the value of other biomarkers, including T 
cells markers and HLA haplotypes, still needs to be evaluated in large cohorts. 
Overall, neural antibodies are important diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in 
ICI-encephalitis, and other soluble biomarkers, especially NfL, deserve further 
investigation since they have a promising application in clinical practice.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2024.08.007
PMID: 39307617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]