---
reference_id: PMID:18302341
title: Vancomycin derivative with damaged D-Ala-D-Ala binding cleft binds to cross-linked peptidoglycan in the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus.
authors:
- Kim SJ
- Matsuoka S
- Patti GJ
- Schaefer J
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1021/bi702232a
keywords:
- Binding Sites
- Cell Wall/metabolism
- Cross-Linking Reagents
- Dipeptides/chemistry
- Molecular Conformation
- Peptidoglycan/metabolism
- Staphylococcus aureus/metabolism
- "Vancomycin/analogs & derivatives, chemical synthesis, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vancomycin derivative with damaged D-Ala-D-Ala binding cleft binds to cross-linked peptidoglycan in the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus.
**Authors:** Kim SJ, Matsuoka S, Patti GJ, Schaefer J
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi702232a](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi702232a)

## Content

1. Biochemistry. 2008 Mar 25;47(12):3822-31. doi: 10.1021/bi702232a. Epub 2008
Feb  27.

Vancomycin derivative with damaged D-Ala-D-Ala binding cleft binds to 
cross-linked peptidoglycan in the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus.

Kim SJ(1), Matsuoka S, Patti GJ, Schaefer J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130, 
USA.

Des-N-methylleucyl-4-(4-fluorophenyl)benzyl-vancomycin (DFPBV) retains activity 
against vancomycin-resistant pathogens despite its damaged d-Ala-d-Ala binding 
cleft. Using solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), a DFPBV binding site 
in the cell walls of whole cells of Staphylococcus aureus has been identified. 
The cell walls were labeled with d-[1-(13)C]alanine, [1-(13)C]glycine, and 
l-[epsilon-(15)N]lysine. Internuclear distances from (19)F of the DFPBV to the 
(13)C and (15)N labels of the cell-wall peptidoglycan were determined by 
rotational-echo double-resonance (REDOR) NMR. The (13)C{(19)F} and (15)N{(19)F} 
REDOR spectra show that, in situ, DFPBV binds to the peptidoglycan as a monomer 
with its vancosamine hydrophobic side chain positioned near a pentaglycyl 
bridge. This result suggests that the antimicrobial activity of other 
vancosamine-modified glycopeptides depends upon both d-Ala-d-Ala stem-terminus 
recognition (primary binding site) and stem-bridge recognition (secondary 
binding site).

DOI: 10.1021/bi702232a
PMCID: PMC2778263
PMID: 18302341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]