---
reference_id: "PMID:8781571"
title: "Alterations of the p53, Rb and MDM2 genes in osteosarcoma."
authors:
- Miller CW
- Aslo A
- Won A
- Tan M
- Lampkin B
- Koeffler HP
journal: J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1007/BF01213553
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alterations of the p53, Rb and MDM2 genes in osteosarcoma.
**Authors:** Miller CW, Aslo A, Won A, Tan M, Lampkin B, Koeffler HP
**Journal:** J Cancer Res Clin Oncol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01213553](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01213553)

## Content

1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1996;122(9):559-65. doi: 10.1007/BF01213553.

Alterations of the p53, Rb and MDM2 genes in osteosarcoma.

Miller CW(1), Aslo A, Won A, Tan M, Lampkin B, Koeffler HP.

Author information:
(1)Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Molecular defects affecting tumor-suppressor genes are an important step in the 
genesis of sarcomas. For example, inheritance of a defective Rb or p53 gene 
predisposes the carrier to develop osteosarcoma, among other malignancies. In 
this study, we have assessed the occurrence of p53, Rb and MDM2 alterations in 
the same samples of osteosarcomas, along with representative samples of various 
other sarcomas. Point mutations of the p53 gene were found in 13 of 42 
osteosarcomas and 1 of 8 leiomyosarcomas, and gross rearrangement of the p53 
gene was demonstrated in 5 of 37 osteosarcomas. The retinoblastoma 
susceptibility gene (Rb) was either rearranged or deleted in 7 of 37 
osteosarcomas, 1 of 7 soft-tissue sarcomas and 1 of 4 Ewing sarcomas. 
Remarkably, 5 of the osteosarcomas having Rb alterations also had p53 mutations. 
Amplification and overexpression of the MDM2 oncogene may lead to increased 
MDM2-p53 binding resulting in inactivation of p53 function. A two- to threefold 
increase in the copy number of MDM2 was detected in 7 of 37 samples, 5 of which 
were osteosarcomas. Amplification of the MDM2 gene occurred independently of p53 
mutation; one sample having threefold amplification of MDM2 also had a p53 
mutation. In summary, 34 alterations of the p53, Rb and MDM2 genes were found in 
26 of 42 (62%) osteosarcomas.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01213553
PMCID: PMC12200418
PMID: 8781571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]