---
reference_id: "PMID:37780566"
title: "Prognostic assessment of liver cirrhosis and its complications: current concepts and future perspectives."
authors:
- Gülcicegi DE
- Goeser T
- Kasper P
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1268102
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic assessment of liver cirrhosis and its complications: current concepts and future perspectives.
**Authors:** Gülcicegi DE, Goeser T, Kasper P
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2023.1268102](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2023.1268102)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 Sep 14;10:1268102. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1268102. 
eCollection 2023.

Prognostic assessment of liver cirrhosis and its complications: current concepts 
and future perspectives.

Gülcicegi DE(1), Goeser T(1), Kasper P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Liver cirrhosis is an irreversible stage of chronic liver disease with varying 
clinical course. Acute decompensation of liver cirrhosis represents a watershed 
in prognosis and is characterized by the occurrence of clinical complications 
such as ascites, jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy, infections, or 
portal-hypertensive hemorrhages. Emergent data indicate that an acute 
decompensation can be subdivided into stable decompensated cirrhosis (SDC), 
unstable decompensated cirrhosis (UDC), pre-acute-on chronic liver failure 
(pre-ACLF) and acute-on chronic liver failure (ACLF), while the mortality risk 
varies greatly between the respective subgroups. ACLF is the most severe form of 
acutely decompensated cirrhosis and characterized by the development of organ 
failure(s) and a high short-term mortality. Due to the dynamic disease course of 
acute decompensation, it is paramount to detect patients at particular risk for 
severe complications those at high risk for developing ACLF as early as possible 
in order to initiate optimal management. This review describes new concepts and 
perspectives in the definition and classification of decompensated cirrhosis and 
provides on overview on emerging predictive scoring systems, non-invasive 
measurement methods and new biomarkers, which allow an early identification of 
patients with acute decompensation at risk.

Copyright © 2023 Gülcicegi, Goeser and Kasper.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1268102
PMCID: PMC10537916
PMID: 37780566

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.