---
reference_id: "PMID:20301650"
title: Hypochondroplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Bober MB
- Bellus GA
- Cheung MS
- Jain M
- Nikkel SM
- Tiller GE
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypochondroplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bober MB, Bellus GA, Cheung MS, Jain M, Nikkel SM, Tiller GE

## Content

1. Hypochondroplasia.

Bober MB(1), Bellus GA(2), Cheung MS(3), Jain M(4), Nikkel SM(5), Tiller GE(6).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Jul 15 [updated 2025 Sep 25].

Author information:
(1)Alfred I duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware
(2)Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania
(3)Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom
(4)Nemours Children’s Hospital, Wilmington, Delaware
(5)BC Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, Canada
(6)Southern California Permanente Medical Group, Los Angeles, California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hypochondroplasia is a skeletal dysplasia 
characterized by short stature; stocky build; disproportionately short arms and 
legs; broad, short hands and feet; mild joint laxity; and relative macrocephaly. 
Radiologic features include shortening of long bones with mild metaphyseal 
flare; a lack of widening or a narrowing of the lumbar interpedicular distances 
with shortening of the pedicle length and posterior scalloping of the vertebral 
bodies; short, broad femoral neck; and squared, shortened ilia. The skeletal 
features are similar to those seen in achondroplasia but tend to be milder. 
Medical complications common to achondroplasia (e.g., foramen magnum stenosis, 
spinal stenosis, tibial bowing, obstructive apnea) occur less frequently in 
hypochondroplasia, but intellectual disability and epilepsy may be more 
prevalent. Children usually present as toddlers or at early school age with 
decreased growth velocity leading to short stature and limb disproportion. Other 
features also become more prominent over time. Infants may present with temporal 
lobe seizures.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of hypochondroplasia is established in a 
proband with characteristic clinical and radiographic features. Identification 
of a heterozygous FGFR3 pathogenic variant known to be associated with 
hypochondroplasia can confirm the diagnosis and help distinguish 
hypochondroplasia from achondroplasia and other related skeletal dysplasias in 
individuals with overlapping phenotypes.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management of short stature in 
hypochondroplasia is influenced by parental expectations and concerns; one 
approach is to address these concerns rather than trying to treat the child. 
Foramen magnum stenosis, thoracolumbar kyphosis, genu varum, and spinal stenosis 
are management by orthopedists and neurosurgeons using similar strategies 
employed in achondroplasia. Seizures are treated in the standard manner. 
Developmental and educational support as needed. Connecting families with local 
resources and support is important. Surveillance: The following should be 
performed at routine well-child visits: measurement and assessment of height, 
weight, and head circumference using hypochondroplasia-standardized growth 
curves; assessment for signs and symptoms of spinal cord compression, sleep 
apnea, thoracolumbar kyphosis, and leg bowing; development assessment and 
monitoring of all developmental domains including speech and language; audiology 
evaluation if speech and/or hearing concerns arise. Evaluation of social 
adjustment at well-child visits and then annually, most important during the 
grade-school years. Pregnancy management: Vaginal deliveries are possible, 
although for each pregnancy, pelvic outlet capacity should be assessed in 
relation to fetal head size; epidural or spinal anesthetic can be used, but a 
consultation with an anesthesiologist prior to delivery is recommended to assess 
the spinal anatomy; spinal stenosis may be aggravated during pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Hypochondroplasia is inherited in an autosomal dominant 
manner. The majority of individuals with hypochondroplasia have parents of 
average stature and have hypochondroplasia as the result of a de novo pathogenic 
variant. An individual with hypochondroplasia who has a reproductive partner of 
average stature has a 50% chance of having a child with hypochondroplasia. When 
the proband and the proband's reproductive partner have the same or different 
skeletal dysplasias, genetic counseling is more complex. In general, if both 
members of a couple have a dominantly inherited skeletal dysplasia, each child 
has a 25% chance of having average stature, a 25% chance of having the same 
skeletal dysplasia as the father, a 25% chance of having the same skeletal 
dysplasia as the mother, and a 25% chance of inheriting a pathogenic variant 
from both parents and being at risk for a potentially poor pregnancy outcome. It 
is not possible to provide information about prognosis for all at-risk 
offspring. If one parent has hypochondroplasia and the other parent is of 
average stature, has hypochondroplasia, or has another dominantly inherited 
skeletal dysplasia, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible if 
the causative pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in the affected 
parent(s).

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301650