---
reference_id: "PMID:21876069"
title: "Prevalence and characteristics of familial hyperaldosteronism: the PATOGEN study (Primary Aldosteronism in TOrino-GENetic forms)."
authors:
- Mulatero P
- Tizzani D
- Viola A
- Bertello C
- Monticone S
- Mengozzi G
- Schiavone D
- Williams TA
- Einaudi S
- La Grotta A
- Rabbia F
- Veglio F
journal: Hypertension
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.175083
keywords:
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/epidemiology
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Hyperaldosteronism/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Italy/epidemiology
- Male
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and characteristics of familial hyperaldosteronism: the PATOGEN study (Primary Aldosteronism in TOrino-GENetic forms).
**Authors:** Mulatero P, Tizzani D, Viola A, Bertello C, Monticone S, Mengozzi G, Schiavone D, Williams TA, Einaudi S, La Grotta A, Rabbia F, Veglio F
**Journal:** Hypertension (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.175083](https://doi.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.175083)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 2011 Nov;58(5):797-803. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.175083.
 Epub 2011 Aug 29.

Prevalence and characteristics of familial hyperaldosteronism: the PATOGEN study 
(Primary Aldosteronism in TOrino-GENetic forms).

Mulatero P(1), Tizzani D, Viola A, Bertello C, Monticone S, Mengozzi G, 
Schiavone D, Williams TA, Einaudi S, La Grotta A, Rabbia F, Veglio F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Experimental Oncology, Division of Internal 
Medicine and Hypertension, University of Torino, Torino, Italy. 
paolo.mulatero@libero.it

Primary aldosteronism (PA) is the most frequent cause of secondary hypertension, 
and patients display an increased prevalence of cardiovascular events compared 
with essential hypertensives. To date, 3 familial forms of PA have been 
described and termed familial hyperaldosteronism types I, II, and III (FH-I to 
-III). The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence and clinical 
characteristics of the 3 forms of FH in a large population of PA patients. 
Three-hundred consecutive PA patients diagnosed in our unit were tested by 
long-PCR of the CYP11B1/CYP11B2 hybrid gene that causes FH-I, and all of the 
available relatives of PA patients were screened to confirm or exclude PA and, 
thus, FH-II. Urinary 18-hydroxycortisol and 18-oxocortisol were measured in all 
of the familial PA patients. Two patients were diagnosed with FH-I (prevalence: 
0.66%), as well as 21 of their relatives, and clinical phenotypes of the 2 
affected families varied markedly. After exclusion of families who refused 
testing and those who were not informative, 199 families were investigated, of 
which 12 were diagnosed with FH-II (6%) and an additional 15 individuals had 
confirmed PA; clinical and biochemical phenotypes of FH-II families were not 
significantly different from sporadic PA patients. None of the families 
displayed a phenotype compatible with FH-III diagnosis. Our study demonstrates 
that familial forms of hyperaldosteronism are more frequent than previously 
expected and reinforces the recommendation of the Endocrine Society Guidelines 
to screen all first-degree hypertensive relatives of PA patients.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.175083
PMID: 21876069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]