---
reference_id: "PMID:36221002"
title: "Adverse prognostic impact of the loss of STAG2 protein expression in patients with newly diagnosed localised Ewing sarcoma: A report from the Children's Oncology Group."
authors:
- Shulman DS
- Chen S
- Hall D
- Nag A
- Thorner AR
- Lessnick SL
- Stegmaier K
- Janeway KA
- DuBois SG
- Krailo MD
- Barkauskas DA
- Church AJ
- Crompton BD
journal: Br J Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41416-022-01977-2
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Prognosis
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/genetics"
- Retrospective Studies
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Cohesins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adverse prognostic impact of the loss of STAG2 protein expression in patients with newly diagnosed localised Ewing sarcoma: A report from the Children's Oncology Group.
**Authors:** Shulman DS, Chen S, Hall D, Nag A, Thorner AR, Lessnick SL, Stegmaier K, Janeway KA, DuBois SG, Krailo MD, Barkauskas DA, Church AJ, Crompton BD
**Journal:** Br J Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41416-022-01977-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-022-01977-2)

## Content

1. Br J Cancer. 2022 Dec;127(12):2220-2226. doi: 10.1038/s41416-022-01977-2. Epub
 2022 Oct 11.

Adverse prognostic impact of the loss of STAG2 protein expression in patients
with newly diagnosed localised Ewing sarcoma: A report from the Children's
Oncology Group.

Shulman DS(1), Chen S(2), Hall D(3), Nag A(4), Thorner AR(4), Lessnick SL(2),
Stegmaier K(1), Janeway KA(1), DuBois SG(1), Krailo MD(3)(5), Barkauskas
DA(3)(5), Church AJ(6), Crompton BD(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Children's Oncology Group, Monrovia, CA, USA.
(4)Center for Cancer Genomics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. briand_crompton@dfci.harvard.edu.
(8)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA. briand_crompton@dfci.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is an aggressive sarcoma with no validated
molecular biomarkers. We aimed to determine the frequency of STAG2 protein loss
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and whether loss of expression is associated with
outcome.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective cohort study of patients with EWS enrolled
to Children's Oncology Group studies. We obtained unstained slides from 235
patients and DNA for sequencing from 75 patients. STAG2 expression was tested
for association with clinical features and survival was estimated using
Kaplan-Meier methods with log-rank tests.
RESULTS: In total, 155 cases passed quality control for STAG2 IHC. STAG2
expression in 20/155 cases could not be categorised with the limited available
tissue, leaving 135 patients with definitive STAG2 IHC. In localised and
metastatic disease, STAG2 was lost in 29/108 and 6/27 cases, respectively. Among
patients with IHC and sequencing, 0/17 STAG2 expressing cases had STAG2
mutations, and 2/7 cases with STAG2 loss had STAG2 mutations. Among patients
with localised disease, 5-year event-free survival was 54% (95% CI 34-70%) and
75% (95% CI 63-84%) for patients with STAG2 loss vs. expression (P = 0.0034).
CONCLUSION: STAG2 loss of expression is identified in a population of patients
without identifiable STAG2 mutations and carries a poor prognosis.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-022-01977-2
PMCID: PMC9726932
PMID: 36221002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DSS has received fees for consulting from
Boehringer Ingelheim. KAJ has received fees for consulting, travel support or
honoraria for speaking from Bayer, Roche, Foundation Medicine and Ipsen. SGD has
received fees for consulting and advisory board roles from Amgen, Bayer and Jazz
Pharmaceuticals and has received travel expenses from Loxo Oncology, Roche, and
Salarius. KS receives grant funding as part of the DFCI/Novartis Drug Discovery
Program and from Kronos Bio, is a SAB member with stock options with Auron
Therapeutics, and has previously consulted for AstraZeneca. AJC has received
consulting fees from Bayer. BDC has received funding for unrelated experiments
from Gradalis, and his spouse was previously employed and received equity from
Acceleron Pharma.
