---
reference_id: "PMID:37078237"
title: New insights into the pathophysiology of methylmalonic acidemia.
authors:
- Head PE
- Meier JL
- Venditti CP
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12617
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into the pathophysiology of methylmalonic acidemia.
**Authors:** Head PE, Meier JL, Venditti CP
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12617](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12617)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2023 May;46(3):436-449. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12617.

New insights into the pathophysiology of methylmalonic acidemia.

Head PE(1)(2), Meier JL(3), Venditti CP(2).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of General Medical Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research, Chemical Biology 
Laboratory, Epigenetics and Metabolism Section, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) is a severe inborn error of metabolism that is 
characterized by pleiotropic metabolic perturbations and multiorgan pathology. 
Treatment options are limited and non-curative as the underlying causative 
molecular mechanisms remain unknown. While earlier studies have focused on the 
potential direct toxicity of metabolites such as methylmalonic and propionic 
acid as a mechanism to explain disease pathophysiology, new observations have 
revealed that aberrant acylation, specifically methylmalonylation, is a 
characteristic feature of MMA. The mitochondrial sirtuin enzyme SIRT5 is capable 
of recognizing and removing this PTM, however, reduced protein levels of SIRT5 
along with other mitochondrial SIRTs 3 and 4 in MMA and potentially reduced 
function of all three indicates aberrant acylation may require clinical 
intervention. Therefore, targeting posttranslational modifications may represent 
a new therapeutic approach to treat MMA and related organic acidemias.

Published 2023. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12617
PMCID: PMC10715492
PMID: 37078237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT Venditti reports 
previous nonfinancial support and other from Moderna Therapeutics, nonfinancial 
support and other from LogicBio Therapeutics, nonfinancial support and other 
from Translate Bio, nonfinancial support and other from AskBio, all outside the 
submitted work. Venditti currently receives nonfinancial support and other from 
Selecta Biosciences. In addition, on the behalf of Venditti and Head, the NIH 
has filed of number of patents related to medical devices, gene therapy, and 
biomarkers. Meier reports no conflicts.