---
reference_id: "PMID:31741331"
title: "Hepatitis B Virus Infection: Overview."
authors:
- Li H
- Yan L
- Shi Y
- Lv D
- Shang J
- Bai L
- Tang H
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-9151-4_1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B Virus Infection: Overview.
**Authors:** Li H, Yan L, Shi Y, Lv D, Shang J, Bai L, Tang H
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-981-13-9151-4_1](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-9151-4_1)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1179:1-16. doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-9151-4_1.

Hepatitis B Virus Infection: Overview.

Li H(1), Yan L(1), Shi Y(1), Lv D(1), Shang J(1), Bai L(1), Tang H(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Infectious Diseases, Division of Infectious Diseases, State Key 
Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China.
(2)Center of Infectious Diseases, Division of Infectious Diseases, State Key 
Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China. htang6198@hotmail.com.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a DNA virus, belonging to the Hepadnaviridae family. 
It is a partially double-stranded DNA virus with a small viral genome (3.2 kb). 
Chronic HBV infection remains a global public health problem. If left untreated, 
chronic HBV infection can progress to end-stage liver disease, such as liver 
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In recent years, tremendous 
advances in the field of HBV basic and clinical research have been achieved, 
ranging from the HBV biological characteristics, immunopathogenesis, and animal 
models to the development of new therapeutic strategies and new drugs against 
HBV. In this overview, we begin with a brief history of HBV discovery and 
treatment milestones. We then briefly summarize the HBV research advances, which 
will be detailed in the following chapters.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-13-9151-4_1
PMID: 31741331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]