---
reference_id: "PMID:36775874"
title: EHBP1L1 Drives Immune Evasion in Renal Cell Carcinoma through Binding and Stabilizing JAK1.
authors:
- Pan Y
- Shu G
- Fu L
- Huang K
- Zhou X
- Gui C
- Liu H
- Jin X
- Chen M
- Li P
- Cen J
- Feng Z
- Lu J
- Chen Z
- Li J
- Xu Q
- Wang Y
- Liang H
- Wang Z
- Deng Q
- Chen W
- Luo J
- Yang J
- Zhang J
- Wei J
journal: Adv Sci (Weinh)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/advs.202206792
keywords:
- Humans
- B7-H1 Antigen/metabolism
- "Carcinoma, Renal Cell/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- Immune Evasion
- Janus Kinase 1/metabolism
- "Kidney Neoplasms/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- Signal Transduction
- "Tumor Escape/genetics, immunology"
- Carrier Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EHBP1L1 Drives Immune Evasion in Renal Cell Carcinoma through Binding and Stabilizing JAK1.
**Authors:** Pan Y, Shu G, Fu L, Huang K, Zhou X, Gui C, Liu H, Jin X, Chen M, Li P, Cen J, Feng Z, Lu J, Chen Z, Li J, Xu Q, Wang Y, Liang H, Wang Z, Deng Q, Chen W, Luo J, Yang J, Zhang J, Wei J
**Journal:** Adv Sci (Weinh) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/advs.202206792](https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202206792)

## Content

1. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2023 Apr;10(11):e2206792. doi: 10.1002/advs.202206792. Epub
2023 Feb 12.

EHBP1L1 Drives Immune Evasion in Renal Cell Carcinoma through Binding and
Stabilizing JAK1.

Pan Y(1)(2), Shu G(1), Fu L(1), Huang K(3)(4), Zhou X(1), Gui C(1), Liu H(5),
Jin X(1), Chen M(1), Li P(1), Cen J(1), Feng Z(1), Lu J(1), Chen Z(1), Li J(1),
Xu Q(1), Wang Y(1), Liang H(6), Wang Z(6), Deng Q(6), Chen W(1), Luo J(1), Yang
J(1), Zhang J(7), Wei J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(2)Department of Urology, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Soochow University,
Changzhou, Jiangsu, 213003, China.
(3)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou,
510060, China.
(4)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
510060, China.
(5)Department of Colorectal Surgery and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Colorectal and Pelvic Floor Diseases, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, 510655, China.
(6)Department of Urology, Affiliated Longhua People's Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Shenzhen, 518109, China.
(7)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, 510080, China.

High lymphocyte infiltration and immunosuppression characterize the tumor
microenvironment (TME) in renal cell carcinoma (RCC). There is an urgent need to
elucidate how tumor cells escape the immune attack and to develop novel
therapeutic targets to enhance the efficacy of immune checkpoint blockade (ICB)
in RCC. Overactivated IFN-γ-induced JAK/STAT signaling involves in such TME, but
the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here, EH domain-binding protein 1-like
protein 1 (EHBP1L1) is identified as a crucial mediator of
IFN-γ/JAK1/STAT1/PD-L1 signaling in RCC. EHBP1L1 is highly expressed in RCC, and
high EHBP1L1 expression levels are correlated with poor prognosis and resistance
to ICB. EHBP1L1 depletion significantly inhibits tumor growth, which is
attributed to enhanced CD8+ T cell-mediated antitumor immunity. Mechanistically,
EHBP1L1 interacts with and stabilizes JAK1. By competing with SOCS1, EHBP1L1
protects JAK1 from proteasomal degradation, which leads to elevated JAK1 protein
levels and JAK1/STAT1/PD-L1 signaling activity, thereby forming an
immunosuppressive TME. Furthermore, the combination of EHBP1L1 inhibition and
ICB reprograms the immunosuppressive TME and prevents tumor immune evasion, thus
significantly reinforcing the therapeutic efficacy of ICB in RCC patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) models. These findings reveal the vital role of EHBP1L1 in
immune evasion in RCC, which may be a potential complement for ICB therapy.

© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202206792
PMCID: PMC10104659
PMID: 36775874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
