---
reference_id: "PMID:35854386"
title: "Clinical and genetic spectrum of primary ciliary dyskinesia in Chinese patients: a systematic review."
authors:
- Peng B
- Gao YH
- Xie JQ
- He XW
- Wang CC
- Xu JF
- Zhang GJ
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02427-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic spectrum of primary ciliary dyskinesia in Chinese patients: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Peng B, Gao YH, Xie JQ, He XW, Wang CC, Xu JF, Zhang GJ
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-022-02427-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-022-02427-1)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2022 Jul 19;17(1):283. doi: 10.1186/s13023-022-02427-1.

Clinical and genetic spectrum of primary ciliary dyskinesia in Chinese patients: 
a systematic review.

Peng B(1), Gao YH(2), Xie JQ(3), He XW(4), Wang CC(1), Xu JF(5), Zhang GJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 1 Jianshe East Road, Zhengzhou, 450052, Henan, 
China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Pulmonary 
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, No. 507 Zhengmin Road, Shanghai, 
200433, China. gaoyonghuahust@163.com.
(3)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Xiangyang Central 
Hospital, Xiangyang, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Xuchang Central 
Hospital, Xuchang, China.
(5)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Pulmonary 
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, No. 507 Zhengmin Road, Shanghai, 
200433, China.
(6)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 1 Jianshe East Road, Zhengzhou, 450052, Henan, 
China. zhanggj1966@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) represents a highly heterogenous 
disorder with extensive clinical and genetic patterns among populations of 
different geographic location and ethnic origin. However, data about Chinese 
patients are limited. We aimed to summarize the clinical and genetic spectrum of 
Chinese PCD patients based on all available literatures.
METHODS: We searched Embase, Pubmed, Web of Science and Chinese databases 
including CNKI, SinoMed and Wanfang from 1981 to 2021, to identify articles 
reporting patients with PCD in China, which had included information about 
transmission electron microscopy and/or genetic testing.
RESULTS: A total of 244 Chinese PCD patients in 52 articles were included. Of 
these patients, the mean age was 13.1 years, and 55 patients (22.5%) were 
diagnosed with PCD after 18 years old. Compared with patients diagnosed with PCD 
in childhood or infancy, patients diagnosed with PCD in adulthood had a higher 
prevalence of chronic wet cough, sinusitis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) 
isolation and radiological bronchiectasis as well as worse lung function. 25 
PCD-related genes were identified in 142 patients, and DNAH5, DNAH11, CCDC39 and 
CCDC40 were the most frequently detected mutations. More than half of genetic 
variants were loss-of-function mutations, and the majority of these variants 
were seen only once. Correlations between PCD phenotype, genotype and ciliary 
ultrastructure were also evidenced.
CONCLUSIONS: Diagnostic delay and under-recognition of PCD remain a big issue in 
China, which contributes to progressive lung disease and PA infection indicating 
worse outcome. Specialist equipment and expertise are urgently required to 
facilitate the early diagnosis and treatment of PCD.
TRIAL REGISTRY: PROSPERO; No.: CRD42021257804; URL: 
www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-022-02427-1
PMCID: PMC9295413
PMID: 35854386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no competing interests.