---
reference_id: "PMID:33527560"
title: "Mask-induced Koebner phenomenon and its clinical phenotypes: A multicenter, real-life study focusing on 873 dermatological consultations during COVID-19 pandemics."
authors:
- Damiani G
- Gironi LC
- Kridin K
- Pacifico A
- Buja A
- Bragazzi NL
- Spalkowska M
- Pigatto PDM
- Santus P
- Young Dermatologists Italian Network
- Savoia P
journal: Dermatol Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/dth.14823
keywords:
- COVID-19
- Humans
- Italy/epidemiology
- Masks
- Pandemics
- Phenotype
- Prospective Studies
- Referral and Consultation
- SARS-CoV-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mask-induced Koebner phenomenon and its clinical phenotypes: A multicenter, real-life study focusing on 873 dermatological consultations during COVID-19 pandemics.
**Authors:** Damiani G, Gironi LC, Kridin K, Pacifico A, Buja A, Bragazzi NL, Spalkowska M, Pigatto PDM, Santus P, Young Dermatologists Italian Network, Savoia P
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dth.14823](https://doi.org/10.1111/dth.14823)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther. 2021 Mar;34(2):e14823. doi: 10.1111/dth.14823. Epub 2021 Feb 8.

Mask-induced Koebner phenomenon and its clinical phenotypes: A multicenter, 
real-life study focusing on 873 dermatological consultations during COVID-19 
pandemics.

Damiani G(1)(2)(3), Gironi LC(4), Kridin K(5), Pacifico A(6), Buja A(7), 
Bragazzi NL(8), Spalkowska M(9)(10), Pigatto PDM(1)(2), Santus P(11); Young 
Dermatologists Italian Network; Savoia P(12).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Dermatology, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical, Surgical, and Dental Sciences, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, University of 
Padua, Padua, Italy.
(4)AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy.
(5)Lübeck Institute of Experimental Dermatology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, 
Germany.
(6)Clinical Dermatology Department, IRCCS S. Gallicano Dermatological Institute, 
Rome, Italy.
(7)Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public Health, Unit of 
Hygiene and Public Health, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(8)Laboratory for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (LIAM), Department of 
Mathematics and Statistics, York University, Toronto, Canada.
(9)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Jagellonian University 
Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(10)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, University Hospital of Krakow, 
Krakow, Poland.
(11)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (DIBIC), Università degli 
Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy.
(12)Department of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, 
Italy.

During COVID-19 pandemic, wearing masks for prevention became mandatory but 
evidence suggest that is also detrimental for skin. Although facial dermatoses 
due to masks increase in both healthcare workers and general population, a 
pathogenetic hypothesis remains still elusive. We aimed to evaluate the 
prevalence of dermatological consultations due to Koebner triggered dermatoses 
In this prospective, multicenter, real life study carried out in Italy from 
March 11th to December 11th 2020 during COVID-19 pandemics, dermatological 
consultations (in-person and telemedicine) to study the prevalence of Koebner 
(KB) phenomenon due to masks were evaluated. Boyd and Nelder classification was 
adopted for Koebner phenomenon and Bizzozero's for KB intensity. A total of 
229/873 (26.2%) dermatological consultations were KB triggered dermatoses and 
lesions were located in mask-covered ear area (76 [33.2%]), malar area (73 
[31.8%]), perioral area (53 [23.1%]), and nose (27 [11.8%]). The first KB 
category grouped 142 patients (psoriasis, vitiligo, maskne, and mask rosacea), 
the second one 24 (warts, molluscum contagiosum, and impetigo), the third one 46 
(atopic dermatitis), and the fourth one 17 (eczema). Among previously KB 
negative psoriatic patients that became KB positive, 9/13 (69.2%) had 
discontinued or modified the prescribed antipsoriatic treatment. Mask-related 
Koebner phenomenon is an important clinical sign to orient clinician's 
therapeutic protocols during COVID-19 pandemic, especially in patients with 
psoriasis.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/dth.14823
PMCID: PMC7995036
PMID: 33527560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.