---
reference_id: "PMID:32103184"
title: Clinical and biochemical improvement with galactose supplementation in SLC35A2-CDG.
authors:
- Witters P
- Tahata S
- Barone R
- Õunap K
- Salvarinova R
- Grønborg S
- Hoganson G
- Scaglia F
- Lewis AM
- Mori M
- Sykut-Cegielska J
- Edmondson A
- He M
- Morava E
journal: Genet Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-020-0767-8
keywords:
- Child
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/drug therapy, genetics"
- Dietary Supplements
- Epilepsy
- Galactose
- Glycosylation
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and biochemical improvement with galactose supplementation in SLC35A2-CDG.
**Authors:** Witters P, Tahata S, Barone R, Õunap K, Salvarinova R, Grønborg S, Hoganson G, Scaglia F, Lewis AM, Mori M, Sykut-Cegielska J, Edmondson A, He M, Morava E
**Journal:** Genet Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-020-0767-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-020-0767-8)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2020 Jun;22(6):1102-1107. doi: 10.1038/s41436-020-0767-8. Epub 2020
 Feb 27.

Clinical and biochemical improvement with galactose supplementation in 
SLC35A2-CDG.

Witters P(1)(2), Tahata S(3), Barone R(4), Õunap K(5)(6), Salvarinova R(7), 
Grønborg S(8), Hoganson G(9), Scaglia F(10)(11)(12), Lewis AM(10), Mori M(13), 
Sykut-Cegielska J(14), Edmondson A(#)(15), He M(#)(16), Morava E(#)(17)(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Metabolic Center, University Hospitals Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Clinical Genomics, Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Catania, 
Catania, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University 
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University 
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(7)Children's & Women's Health Centre of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(8)Center for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Copenhagen 
University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois, IL, Chicago, USA.
(10)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(11)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(12)Joint BCM-CUHK Center of Medical Genetics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, 
Hong Kong.
(13)Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, 
USA.
(14)Department of Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Paediatrics, Institute of 
Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(16)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(17)Department of Paediatrics and Metabolic Center, University Hospitals Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium. peter.witters@uzleuven.be.
(18)Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
peter.witters@uzleuven.be.
(19)Department of Clinical Genomics, Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. peter.witters@uzleuven.be.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: We studied galactose supplementation in SLC35A2-congenital disorder of 
glycosylation (SLC35A2-CDG), caused by monoallelic pathogenic variants in 
SLC35A2 (Xp11.23), encoding the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi 
UDP-galactose transporter. Patients present with epileptic encephalopathy, 
developmental disability, growth deficiency, and dysmorphism.
METHODS: Ten patients with SLC35A2-CDG were supplemented with oral D-galactose 
for 18 weeks in escalating doses up to 1.5 g/kg/day. Outcome was assessed using 
the Nijmegen Pediatric CDG Rating Scale (NPCRS, ten patients) and by glycomics 
(eight patients).
RESULTS: SLC35A2-CDG patients demonstrated improvements in overall Nijmegen 
Pediatric CDG Rating Scale (NPCRS) score (P = 0.008), the current clinical 
assessment (P = 0.007), and the system specific involvement (P = 0.042) domains. 
Improvements were primarily in growth and development with five patients 
resuming developmental progress, which included postural control, response to 
stimuli, and chewing and swallowing amelioration. Additionally, there were 
improvements in gastrointestinal symptoms and epilepsy. One patient in our study 
did not show any clinical improvement. Galactose supplementation improved 
patients' glycosylation with decreased ratios of incompletely formed to fully 
formed glycans (M-gal/disialo, P = 0.012 and monosialo/disialo, P = 0.017) and 
increased levels of a fully galactosylated N-glycan (P = 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Oral D-galactose supplementation results in clinical and 
biochemical improvement in SLC35A2-CDG. Galactose supplementation may partially 
overcome the Golgi UDP-galactose deficiency and improves galactosylation. Oral 
galactose is well tolerated and shows promise as dietary therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-020-0767-8
PMCID: PMC7275909
PMID: 32103184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests There are no conflicts of 
interests for any of the authors.