---
reference_id: "PMID:33209464"
title: Paraneoplastic syndromes in small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Soomro Z
- Youssef M
- Yust-Katz S
- Jalali A
- Patel AJ
- Mandel J
journal: J Thorac Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.21037/jtd.2020.03.88
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paraneoplastic syndromes in small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Soomro Z, Youssef M, Yust-Katz S, Jalali A, Patel AJ, Mandel J
**Journal:** J Thorac Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.21037/jtd.2020.03.88](https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2020.03.88)

## Content

1. J Thorac Dis. 2020 Oct;12(10):6253-6263. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2020.03.88.

Paraneoplastic syndromes in small cell lung cancer.

Soomro Z(1), Youssef M(1), Yust-Katz S(2), Jalali A(3), Patel AJ(3), Mandel 
J(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Paraneoplastic syndromes can commonly occur due to lung cancer, especially small 
cell lung cancer. Frequently paraneoplastic syndromes can precede the diagnosis 
of the neoplasm or present with limited stage disease. However, these syndromes 
can also occur at the time of recurrence or metastasis of disease. This review 
focuses on the epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, and current 
management of the most common paraneoplastic syndromes encountered in patients 
with small cell lung cancer. Manifestations of paraneoplastic syndromes in small 
cell lung cancer include endocrine syndromes with secretion of excess hormones, 
and neurologic syndromes due to the production of antibodies causing an 
autoimmune condition. Recent advances have allowed for greater understanding of 
these syndromes and for the development of improved diagnostic as well as 
therapeutic tools. Awareness of paraneoplastic syndromes in small cell lung 
cancer can lead to an earlier diagnosis and recognition of both the condition 
and in some cases the disease potentially improving the overall survival and 
prognosis for patients. Further research examining effective methods to improve 
recovery from neurologic deficits in patients with a paraneoplastic neurologic 
illness is warranted.

2020 Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2020.03.88
PMCID: PMC7656388
PMID: 33209464

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2020.03.88). The series “Small Cell Lung Cancer” 
was commissioned by the editorial office without any funding or sponsorship. JM 
reports other from Bayer Pharmaceuticals, outside the submitted work. Other 
authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.