---
reference_id: "PMID:33397523"
title: Genetic and Epidemiological Study of Adult Ataxia and Spastic Paraplegia in Eastern Quebec.
authors:
- Haj Salem I
- Beaudin M
- Stumpf M
- Estiar MA
- Côté PO
- Brunet F
- Gamache PL
- Rouleau GA
- Mourabit-Amari K
- Gan-Or Z
- Dupré N
journal: Can J Neurol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1017/cjn.2020.277
keywords:
- Adult
- Cerebellar Ataxia
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Humans
- Mutation
- Paraplegia
- Quebec/epidemiology
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and Epidemiological Study of Adult Ataxia and Spastic Paraplegia in Eastern Quebec.
**Authors:** Haj Salem I, Beaudin M, Stumpf M, Estiar MA, Côté PO, Brunet F, Gamache PL, Rouleau GA, Mourabit-Amari K, Gan-Or Z, Dupré N
**Journal:** Can J Neurol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1017/cjn.2020.277](https://doi.org/10.1017/cjn.2020.277)

## Content

1. Can J Neurol Sci. 2021 Sep;48(5):655-665. doi: 10.1017/cjn.2020.277. Epub 2021
 Jan 5.

Genetic and Epidemiological Study of Adult Ataxia and Spastic Paraplegia in 
Eastern Quebec.

Haj Salem I(1), Beaudin M(1)(2), Stumpf M(1), Estiar MA(3), Côté PO(1), Brunet 
F(1)(2), Gamache PL(1)(2), Rouleau GA(3)(4), Mourabit-Amari K(5), Gan-Or 
Z(3)(4), Dupré N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculté de médecine, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(2)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Québec (QC), Canada (Department 
of Medicine, CHU de Québec - Université Laval, Québec, Canada).
(3)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(4)Department of Neurology & Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Québec, QC, Canada (Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, CHU de Québec - Université Laval, Québec, Canada).

Comment in
    Can J Neurol Sci. 2021 Sep;48(5):601-602. doi: 10.1017/cjn.2021.15.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the minimum prevalence of adult hereditary ataxias (HA) 
and spastic paraplegias (HSP) in Eastern Quebec and to evaluate the proportion 
of associated mutations in identified genes.
METHODS: We conducted a descriptive cross-sectional study of patients who met 
clinical criteria for the diagnosis of HA (n = 241) and HSP (n = 115) in the 
East of the Quebec province between January 2007 and July 2019. The primary 
outcome was the prevalence per 100,000 persons with a 95% confidence interval 
(CI). The secondary outcome was the frequency of mutations identified by 
targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) approach. Minimum carrier frequency 
for identified variants was calculated based on allele frequency values and the 
Hardy-Weinberg (HW) equation.
RESULTS: The minimum prevalence of HA in Eastern Quebec was estimated at 
6.47/100 000 [95% CI; 6.44-6.51]; divided into 3.73/100 000 for autosomal 
recessive (AR) ataxias and 2.67/100 000 for autosomal dominant (AD) ataxias. The 
minimum prevalence of HSP was 4.17/100 000 [95% CI; 4.14-4.2]; with 2.05/100 000 
for AD-HSP and 2.12/100 000 for AR-HSP. In total, 52.4% of patients had a 
confirmed genetic diagnosis. AR cerebellar ataxia type 1 (2.67/100 000) and AD 
spastic paraplegia SPG4 (1.18/100 000) were the most prevalent disorders 
identified. Mutations were identified in 23 genes and molecular alterations in 7 
trinucleotides repeats expansion; the most common mutations were c.15705-12 A > 
G in SYNE1 and c.1529C > T (p.A510V) in SPG7.
CONCLUSIONS: We described the minimum prevalence of genetically defined adult HA 
and HSP in Eastern Quebec. This study provides a framework for international 
comparisons and service planning.

DOI: 10.1017/cjn.2020.277
PMID: 33397523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]