---
reference_id: "PMID:35454811"
title: Deciphering Genetic Alterations of Hairy Cell Leukemia and Hairy Cell Leukemia-like Disorders in 98 Patients.
authors:
- Maitre E
- Tomowiak C
- Lebecque B
- Bijou F
- Benabed K
- Naguib D
- Kerneves P
- Cornet E
- Viailly PJ
- Arsham J
- Sola B
- Jardin F
- Troussard X
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cancers14081904
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deciphering Genetic Alterations of Hairy Cell Leukemia and Hairy Cell Leukemia-like Disorders in 98 Patients.
**Authors:** Maitre E, Tomowiak C, Lebecque B, Bijou F, Benabed K, Naguib D, Kerneves P, Cornet E, Viailly PJ, Arsham J, Sola B, Jardin F, Troussard X
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers14081904](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers14081904)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Apr 10;14(8):1904. doi: 10.3390/cancers14081904.

Deciphering Genetic Alterations of Hairy Cell Leukemia and Hairy Cell
Leukemia-like Disorders in 98 Patients.

Maitre E(1)(2)(3), Tomowiak C(4), Lebecque B(5), Bijou F(6), Benabed K(7)(8),
Naguib D(2)(3), Kerneves P(2)(3), Cornet E(1)(2), Viailly PJ(1)(8)(9), Arsham
J(4), Sola B(1), Jardin F(1)(8), Troussard X(1)(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1245, Normandie University, UNIROUEN, UNICAEN, 14032 Caen, France.
(2)Laboratory of Hematology, University Hospital Caen, Avenue de la Côte de
Nacre, CEDEX, 14033 Caen, France.
(3)Structure Fédérative SF-MOCAE, University Hospital Caen, Avenue de la Côte de
Nacre, CEDEX, 14033 Caen, France.
(4)Department of Hematology, University Hospital Poitiers, 2 rue Milétrie, 86000
Poitiers, France.
(5)Laboratory Hematology, University Hospital Clermont-Ferrand, 58 rue
Montalembert, 63000 Clermont-Ferrrand, France.
(6)Department of Hematology, Institut Bergonié, 229 Cours de l'Argonne, CEDEX,
33079 Bordeaux, France.
(7)Department of Hematology, Centre Hospitalier Public du Cotentin, 46 rue du
Val de Saire, 50100 Cherbourg-en-Cotentin, France.
(8)Department of Hematology, Centre Henri Becquerel, 1 rue d'Amiens, CEDEX,
76038 Rouen, France.
(9)Hematology Institute, University Hospital Caen, Avenue de la Côte de Nacre,
14033 Caen, France.

Hairy cell leukemia (cHCL) patients have, in most cases, a specific clinical and
biological presentation with splenomegaly, anemia, leukopenia, neutropenia,
monocytopenia and/or thrombocytopenia, identification of hairy cells that
express CD103, CD123, CD25, CD11c and identification of the V600E mutation in
the B-Raf proto-oncogene (BRAF) in 90% of cases. Monocytopenia is absent in vHCL
and SDRPL patients and the abnormal cells do not express CD25 or CD123 and do
not present the BRAFV600E mutation. Ten percent of cHCL patients are BRAFWT and
the distinction between cHCL and HCL-like disorders including the variant form
of HCL (vHCL) and splenic diffuse red pulp lymphoma (SDRPL) can be challenging.
We performed deep sequencing in a large cohort of 84 cHCL and 16 HCL-like
disorders to improve insights into the pathogenesis of the diseases. BRAF
mutations were detected in 76/82 patients of cHCL (93%) and additional mutations
were identified in Krüppel-like Factor 2 (KLF2) in 19 patients (23%) or CDKN1B
in 6 patients (7.5%). Some KLF2 genetic alterations were localized on the
cytidine deaminase (AID) consensus motif, suggesting AID-induced mutations. When
analyzing sequential samples, a clonal evolution was identified in half of the
cHCL patients (6/12 pts). Among the 16 patients with HCL-like disorders, we
observed an enrichment of MAP2K1 mutations in vHCL/SDRPL (3/5 pts) and genes
involved in the epigenetic regulation (KDM6A, EZH2, CREBBP, ARID1A) (3/5 pts).
Furthermore, MAP2K1 mutations were associated with a bad prognosis and a shorter
time to next treatment (TTNT) and progression-free survival (PFS), independently
of the HCL classification.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14081904
PMCID: PMC9028144
PMID: 35454811

Conflict of interest statement: Xavier Troussard is a consultant for Innate
Pharma, Astra Zeneca, Abbvie, the other authors declare that there are no
conflicts of interest.
