---
reference_id: "PMID:28484680"
title: "Superior Semicircular Canal Dehiscence in a Patient with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Chung LK
- Lagman C
- Nagasawa DT
- Gopen Q
- Yang I
journal: Cureus
year: '2017'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.1141
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Superior Semicircular Canal Dehiscence in a Patient with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Chung LK, Lagman C, Nagasawa DT, Gopen Q, Yang I
**Journal:** Cureus (2017)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.1141](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.1141)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2017 Apr 6;9(4):e1141. doi: 10.7759/cureus.1141.

Superior Semicircular Canal Dehiscence in a Patient with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: 
A Case Report.

Chung LK(1), Lagman C(1), Nagasawa DT(1), Gopen Q(2), Yang I(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurosurgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los 
Angeles.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles.

Superior semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD) is a bony defect in the middle 
cranial fossa floor that results in an abnormal connection between the inner ear 
and cranial vault. Although the etiology of SSCD remains unclear, an 
inappropriately thin or fragile temporal bone likely predisposes an individual 
towards developing SSCD. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) constitutes a group of 
genetic connective tissue disorders caused by a defect in the production, 
processing, or structure of collagen, or its associated proteins. The possible 
association between SSCD and EDS has not been previously described in the 
literature. We herein report a case of a 50-year-old female with 
EDS-hypermobility type who presented with a 15-year history of migraines, 
vertigo, and tinnitus. The patient was subsequently diagnosed with bilateral 
SSCD and underwent a right middle fossa (pre-auricular infratemporal) craniotomy 
for SSCD repair. She reported significant improvement in her auditory and 
vestibular symptoms, with the exception of continued mild dizziness and 
disequilibrium at the 3-month follow-up. Due to the rare reports of auditory 
symptoms in EDS, this case study highlights the importance of considering an 
otological consultation for auditory manifestations in a patient with EDS and 
illustrates a potential association between EDS and SSCD.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.1141
PMCID: PMC5419820
PMID: 28484680

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared financial 
relationships, which are detailed in the next section.