---
reference_id: "PMID:33276277"
title: Optimized interferon-gamma release assays for detection of Mycobacterium bovis infection in African buffaloes (Syncerus caffer).
authors:
- Smith K
- Bernitz N
- Goldswain S
- Cooper DV
- Warren RM
- Goosen WJ
- Miller MA
journal: Vet Immunol Immunopathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2020.110163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optimized interferon-gamma release assays for detection of Mycobacterium bovis infection in African buffaloes (Syncerus caffer).
**Authors:** Smith K, Bernitz N, Goldswain S, Cooper DV, Warren RM, Goosen WJ, Miller MA
**Journal:** Vet Immunol Immunopathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vetimm.2020.110163](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vetimm.2020.110163)

## Content

1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2021 Jan;231:110163. doi: 
10.1016/j.vetimm.2020.110163. Epub 2020 Nov 19.

Optimized interferon-gamma release assays for detection of Mycobacterium bovis 
infection in African buffaloes (Syncerus caffer).

Smith K(1), Bernitz N(1), Goldswain S(1), Cooper DV(2), Warren RM(1), Goosen 
WJ(1), Miller MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Science and Innovation, National Research Foundation Centre of 
Excellence for Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, South African Medical Research 
Council Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of Molecular Biology and 
Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch 
University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Ezemvelo KwaZulu-Natal Wildlife, PO Box 25, Mtubatuba 3935, South Africa.
(3)Department of Science and Innovation, National Research Foundation Centre of 
Excellence for Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, South African Medical Research 
Council Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of Molecular Biology and 
Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch 
University, Cape Town, South Africa. Electronic address: miller@sun.ac.za.

The African buffalo (Syncerus caffer) is an economically and ecologically 
important wildlife species in South Africa; it is also a primary wildlife 
maintenance host of Mycobacterium bovis. Accurate and early detection of M. 
bovis infection in buffaloes is important for controlling transmission. Assays 
that detect cell-mediated immune responses to M. bovis in buffaloes have been 
developed although these often display suboptimal sensitivity or specificity. 
Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the newly available Mabtech 
bovine interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) ELISAPRO kit and optimize its use for detection 
of buffalo IFN-γ in whole blood samples stimulated with the QuantiFERON® TB Gold 
Plus antigens. Additionally, the test performance of the Mabtech IFN-γ release 
assay (IGRA) was compared to the currently used Cattletype® IGRA by determining 
buffalo-specific cut-off values for the two IGRAs and using gold 
standard-positive (M. bovis culture-confirmed) and M. bovis-unexposed negative 
cohorts. Validation of the Mabtech ELISA revealed negligible matrix interference 
and a linear and parallel response for recombinant bovine and native buffalo 
IFN-γ in the range 1.95-250 pg/mL. Intra- and inter-assay reproducibility 
produced coefficients of variation <5.5 % and <6.1 %, respectively, with a limit 
of detection at 3.2 pg/mL. Using receiver operator characteristic curve 
analyses, buffalo-specific cut-off values were calculated as 8 pg/mL for the 
Mabtech IGRA and 5 % (signal to positive control ratio) for the Cattletype® 
IGRA. The sensitivities were 89 % and 83 % for the Mabtech and Cattletype IGRAs 
with specificities of 94 % and 97 %, respectively. Although the species-specific 
cut-off values require further evaluation in a relevant test group, the results 
suggest that the Mabtech IGRA is a promising, sensitive and specific diagnostic 
tool for M. bovis detection in African buffaloes.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2020.110163
PMID: 33276277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]