---
reference_id: "PMID:37746493"
title: "Chanarin-Dorfman Syndrome (CDS): A Rare Lipid Metabolism Disorder."
authors:
- Mangukiya NP
- Kaleem S
- Meghana DR
- Ishfaq L
- Kochhar G
- Mathew B
- Pulekar S
- Lainingwala AC
- Parmar MP
- Venugopal V
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.43889
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chanarin-Dorfman Syndrome (CDS): A Rare Lipid Metabolism Disorder.
**Authors:** Mangukiya NP, Kaleem S, Meghana DR, Ishfaq L, Kochhar G, Mathew B, Pulekar S, Lainingwala AC, Parmar MP, Venugopal V
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.43889](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.43889)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Aug 21;15(8):e43889. doi: 10.7759/cureus.43889. eCollection 2023 
Aug.

Chanarin-Dorfman Syndrome (CDS): A Rare Lipid Metabolism Disorder.

Mangukiya NP(1), Kaleem S(2)(1), Meghana DR(3)(1), Ishfaq L(4)(1), Kochhar 
G(5)(1), Mathew B(6)(1), Pulekar S(7)(1), Lainingwala AC(1), Parmar MP(1), 
Venugopal V(8)(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Gujarat Medical Education & Research Society Medical 
College, Vadnagar, IND.
(2)Internal Medicine, Shadan Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, IND.
(3)Internal Medicine, Kakatiya Medical College, Warangal, IND.
(4)Internal Medicine, Directorate of Health Services Kashmir, Srinagar, IND.
(5)Internal Medicine, Punjab Institute of Medical Sciences, Jalandhar, IND.
(6)Internal Medicine, Sri Devaraj Urs Medical College, Kolar, IND.
(7)Internal Medicine, Davao Medical School Foundation, Davao, PHL.
(8)Internal Medicine, Bhaarath Medical College & Hospital, Chennai, IND.

Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome (CDS) is a rare medical condition that is inherited in 
an autosomal recessive pattern. In CDS, a comparative gene identification-58 
gene mutation causes the accumulation of triglycerides in neutrophils, which can 
be observed as vacuoles on a peripheral smear. CDS patients present with a 
characteristic dermatological finding, ichthyosis, which is a non-bullous white 
scaling of the skin. Here, we describe a case report of a one-year-old boy who 
presented to the pediatric outpatient department (OPD) with chief complaints of 
peeling of the skin and ballooning of the abdomen since birth. Our patient had 
achieved all the developmental milestones pertaining to his age. Genetic testing 
was positive for heterozygous alleles in both parents.

Copyright © 2023, Mangukiya et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.43889
PMCID: PMC10515467
PMID: 37746493

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.