---
reference_id: "PMID:40373178"
title: VEXAS Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Hadjadj J
- Beck D
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# VEXAS Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Hadjadj J, Beck D

## Content

1. VEXAS Syndrome.

Hadjadj J(1)(2), Beck D(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2025 May 15.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Genomics, New York University Grossman School 
of Medicine, New York, New York
(2)Sorbonne Université, Service de médecine interne, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, 
AP-HP, Paris, France

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: VEXAS syndrome is an autoinflammatory syndrome caused 
by a somatic UBA1 (i.e., mosaic or postzygotic) pathogenic variant in 
hematopoietic stem cells. Because UBA1 is an X-linked gene, VEXAS syndrome 
mostly affects males; however, females account for about 4% of affected 
individuals. VEXAS syndrome, characterized by inflammatory and hematologic 
findings, typically affects males older than age 50 years. The most common 
inflammatory findings include recurrent fever, skin lesions, pulmonary 
infiltrates, recurrent chondritis, arthritis, pan ocular inflammation, and 
unprovoked venous thrombosis. Hematologic involvement includes macrocytic 
anemia, myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), thrombocytopenia, monoclonal gammopathy 
of unknown significance, and vacuoles in myeloid and erythroid precursor cells.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of VEXAS syndrome is established in an 
individual with suggestive findings and a UBA1 somatic (also known as mosaic or 
postzygotic) pathogenic variant identified by molecular genetic testing in 
peripheral blood and/or bone marrow aspirate, but not skin fibroblasts. 
Pathogenic variants, although somatic, are typically present at a high variant 
allele fraction and can be detected in whole peripheral blood.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Because large prospective trials are 
lacking, the therapeutic management of individuals with VEXAS syndrome is 
currently poorly standardized and is based on retrospective studies and expert 
opinion. The two main approaches to treatment are targeting inflammation and 
targeting the UBA1-mutated hematopoietic population. Targeting inflammation: 
Because conventional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) such as 
methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporine, or cyclophosphamide have no or minimal 
anecdotal efficacy, glucocorticoids are generally used as a first-line 
treatment. Although inflammatory manifestations are typically glucocorticoid 
sensitive, the complications of high-level corticosteroid dependence often 
require use – with varying success – of second-line steroid-sparing agents 
including interleukin (IL)-6 inhibitors, Janus kinase inhibitors (JAKi), and 
anti-IL-1 therapies. Targeting the UBA1-mutated hematopoietic population: 
Similar to classic MDS without VEXAS syndrome, hypomethylating agents like 
azacitidine are used to treat individuals with VEXAS syndrome with concurrent 
MDS with varying success. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT) is currently the only curative treatment for VEXAS syndrome; however, it 
is sometimes associated with considerable morbidity and even mortality and 
should be only be considered in selected individuals after discussion with 
multidisciplinary care providers. Surveillance: Monitoring existing 
manifestations, the individual's response to treatment of manifestations, and 
the emergence of new manifestations requires routinely scheduled follow up with 
the treating physicians.
GENETIC COUNSELING: VEXAS syndrome is an X-linked disorder caused by somatic 
pathogenic variants in UBA1. To date, all identified pathogenic variants are 
acquired (i.e., postzygotic) and lineage restricted in the blood. No confirmed 
occurrences of vertical transmission or sib recurrence have been reported.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 40373178