---
reference_id: "PMID:39219259"
title: Epithelial‑derived head and neck squamous tumourigenesis (Review).
authors:
- Shirima CA
- Bleotu C
- Spandidos DA
- El-Naggar AK
- Gradisteanu Pircalabioru G
- Michalopoulos I
journal: Oncol Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3892/or.2024.8800
keywords:
- Humans
- "Head and Neck Neoplasms/pathology, virology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Squamous Cell Carcinoma of Head and Neck/virology, pathology, genetics"
- Tumor Microenvironment
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism, genetics"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/pathology, virology, genetics, metabolism"
- Carcinogenesis/genetics
- Prognosis
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, metabolism"
- "Papillomavirus Infections/complications, virology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epithelial‑derived head and neck squamous tumourigenesis (Review).
**Authors:** Shirima CA, Bleotu C, Spandidos DA, El-Naggar AK, Gradisteanu Pircalabioru G, Michalopoulos I
**Journal:** Oncol Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3892/or.2024.8800](https://doi.org/10.3892/or.2024.8800)

## Content

1. Oncol Rep. 2024 Oct;52(4):141. doi: 10.3892/or.2024.8800. Epub 2024 Sep 2.

Epithelial‑derived head and neck squamous tumourigenesis (Review).

Shirima CA(1), Bleotu C(2), Spandidos DA(3), El-Naggar AK(4), Gradisteanu 
Pircalabioru G(5), Michalopoulos I(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Systems Biology, Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, 
11527 Athens, Greece.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Pathology Department, Stefan S. Nicolau Institute of 
Virology, Romanian Academy, 030304 Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical Virology, Medical School, University of Crete, 71003 
Heraklion, Greece.
(4)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, United 
States.
(5)eBio‑hub Research‑Center, University 'Politehnica' of Bucharest, Bucharest 
061344, Romania.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs), a heterogeneous group of 
cancers that arise from the mucosal epithelia cells in the head and neck areas, 
present great challenges in diagnosis, treatment and prognosis due to their 
complex aetiology and various clinical manifestations. Several factors, 
including smoking, alcohol consumption, oncogenic genes, growth factors, 
Epstein‑Barr virus and human papillomavirus infections can contribute to HNSCC 
development. The unpredictable tumour microenvironment adds to the complexity of 
managing HNSCC. Despite significant advances in therapies, the prediction of 
outcome after treatment for patients with HNSCC remains poor, and the 5‑year 
overall survival rate is low due to late diagnosis. Early detection greatly 
increases the chances of successful treatment. The present review aimed to bring 
together the latest findings related to the molecular mechanisms of HNSCC 
carcinogenesis and progression. Comprehensive genomic, transcriptomic, 
metabolomic, microbiome and proteomic analyses allow researchers to identify 
important biological markers such as genetic alterations, gene expression 
signatures and protein markers that drive HNSCC tumours. These biomarkers 
associated with the stages of initiation, progression and metastasis of cancer 
are useful in the management of patients with cancer in order to improve their 
life expectancy and quality of life.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2024.8800
PMCID: PMC11358675
PMID: 39219259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DAS is the Editor‑in‑Chief for the journal, but 
had no personal involvement in the reviewing process, or any influence in terms 
of adjudicating on the final decision, for this article.