---
reference_id: "PMID:18454408"
title: "Retinal dysfunction in combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria (Cblc) disease: a spectrum of disorders."
authors:
- Gaillard MC
- Matthieu JM
- Borruat FX
journal: Klin Monbl Augenheilkd
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1027310
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Homocystinuria/complications, diagnosis"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Macular Degeneration/complications, diagnosis"
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, diagnosis"
- Methylmalonic Acid/urine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinal dysfunction in combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria (Cblc) disease: a spectrum of disorders.
**Authors:** Gaillard MC, Matthieu JM, Borruat FX
**Journal:** Klin Monbl Augenheilkd (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2008-1027310](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2008-1027310)

## Content

1. Klin Monbl Augenheilkd. 2008 May;225(5):491-4. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1027310.

Retinal dysfunction in combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria (Cblc)
disease: a spectrum of disorders.

Gaillard MC(1), Matthieu JM, Borruat FX.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Ophtalmique Jules Gonin, Lausanne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Cobalamin C methylmalonic aciduria with homocystinuria (cblC
disease) is a rare hereditary inborn error of cobalamin metabolism,
characterised by neurological, haematological and ophthalmological
abnormalities.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Three consecutive patients with Cblc disease were
examined. Investigations included slit lamp and fundus examination and
full-field ERG.
RESULTS: A maculopathy associated with both photopic and scotopic abnormal ERG
was present in two cases and a salt and pepper retinopathy with abnormal
photopic ERG was detected in the third patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite early treatment and regular metabolic controls, all our
patients exhibited both retinal and ERG abnormalities. There was no correlation
between funduscopic appearance and the type of photoreceptor dysfunction. A
literature review disclosed a retinopathy in 29 / 70 cases with cblC disease,
with an abnormal ERG in 8 of the 12 tested cases, most with retinopathy. Retinal
dysfunction in cblC disease may be more frequent than previously thought, and
can involve cones only or both rods and cones. We recommend a formal ocular
examination with full-field ERG in patients with Cblc disease.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2008-1027310
PMID: 18454408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
