---
reference_id: "PMID:24857124"
title: Management and future directions in non-small cell lung cancer with known activating mutations.
authors:
- Gerber DE
- Gandhi L
- Costa DB
journal: Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book
year: '2014'
doi: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2014.34.e353
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management and future directions in non-small cell lung cancer with known activating mutations.
**Authors:** Gerber DE, Gandhi L, Costa DB
**Journal:** Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book (2014)
**DOI:** [10.14694/EdBook_AM.2014.34.e353](https://doi.org/10.14694/EdBook_AM.2014.34.e353)

## Content

1. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2014:e353-65. doi:
10.14694/EdBook_AM.2014.34.e353.

Management and future directions in non-small cell lung cancer with known 
activating mutations.

Gerber DE(1), Gandhi L(1), Costa DB(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX; Department of Medical 
Oncology, Thoracic Oncology Section, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA; Department of Medicine, Division of 
Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA.

Lung cancer accounts for a quarter of all cancer deaths. Non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) is currently segregated by the presence of actionable driver 
oncogenes. This review will provide an overview of molecular subsets of lung 
cancer, including descriptions of the defining oncogenes (EGFR, ALK, KRAS, ROS1, 
RET, BRAF, ERBB2, NTRK1, FGFR, among others) and how these predict for response 
to small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) that are either clinically 
available or in clinical trial development for advanced NSCLC. Particular focus 
will be placed on subsets with EGFR mutated and ALK rearranged NSCLC. Somatic 
TKI-sensitizing EGFR mutations (such as exon 19 deletions and L858R 
substitutions) are the most robust predictive biomarker for symptom improvement, 
radiographic response, and increment in progression-free survival (PFS) when 
EGFR TKIs (gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib) are used for patients with 
advanced NSCLC. However, the palliative benefits that EGFR TKIs afford are 
limited by multiple biologic mechanisms of tumor adaptation/resistance (such as 
the EGFR-T790M mutation and oncogene bypass tracks), and future efforts toward 
delaying, preventing, and treating resistance are underway. Similar to EGFR 
mutations, ALK rearrangements exemplify an oncogene-driven NSCLC that can be 
effectively palliated with a precision TKI therapy (the multitargeted 
ALK/MET/ROS1 TKI crizotinib). When resistance to first-line crizotinib therapy 
occurs, multiple second generation ALK TKIs have demonstrated impressive rates 
of disease control in clinical trials, and these may modify long-term outcomes 
for patients with ALK-positive NSCLC. The development of TKIs for other 
oncogene-driven NSCLCs may expand the portfolio of precision therapies for this 
recalcitrant cancer.

DOI: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2014.34.e353
PMID: 24857124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]