---
reference_id: "PMID:25287451"
title: "Grommets for otitis media with effusion in children with cleft palate: a systematic review."
authors:
- Kuo CL
- Tsao YH
- Cheng HM
- Lien CF
- Hsu CH
- Huang CY
- Shiao AS
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2014-0323
keywords:
- Child
- "Cleft Palate/diagnosis, epidemiology, surgery"
- Cohort Studies
- "Hearing Loss/diagnosis, epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Humans
- Middle Ear Ventilation/methods
- "Otitis Media with Effusion/diagnosis, epidemiology, surgery"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Grommets for otitis media with effusion in children with cleft palate: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Kuo CL, Tsao YH, Cheng HM, Lien CF, Hsu CH, Huang CY, Shiao AS
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2014-0323](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2014-0323)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2014 Nov;134(5):983-94. doi: 10.1542/peds.2014-0323. Epub 2014 Oct
 6.

Grommets for otitis media with effusion in children with cleft palate: a 
systematic review.

Kuo CL(1), Tsao YH(2), Cheng HM(3), Lien CF(4), Hsu CH(5), Huang CY(4), Shiao 
AS(6).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and Department of 
Otolaryngology, Institute of Brain Science, and Department of Otolaryngology, 
Taoyuan Armed Forces General Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China; 
Department of Otolaryngology, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, 
Republic of China; and asshiao@gmail.com drkuochinlung@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Taoyuan Armed Forces General Hospital, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan, Republic of China; Department of Otolaryngology, National Defense 
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China; and.
(3)Medical Research and Education, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan, Republic of China; Cardiovascular Research Center, National Yang-Ming 
University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China;
(4)Departments of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and Department of 
Otolaryngology.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic 
of China.
(6)Departments of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and Department of 
Otolaryngology, Department of Otolaryngology, National Defense Medical Center, 
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China; and asshiao@gmail.com 
drkuochinlung@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: No consensus has yet been reached with regard to the 
link between otitis media with effusion (OME), hearing loss, and language 
development in children with cleft palate. The objective of this study was to 
address the effectiveness of ventilation tube insertion (VTI) for OME in 
children with cleft palate.
METHODS: A dual review process was used to assess eligible studies drawn from 
PubMed, Medline via Ovid, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health 
Literature, Cochrane Library, and reference lists between 1948 and November 
2013. Potentially relevant papers were selected according to the full text of 
the articles. Relevant data were extracted onto a data extraction sheet.
RESULTS: Nine high- or moderate-quality cohort studies were included in this 
study. VTI was administered in 38% to 53% of the OME cases, and more severe 
cases appeared more likely to undergo VTI. Compared with conservative forms of 
management (eg, watchful waiting), VTI has been shown to be beneficial to the 
recovery of hearing in children with cleft palate and OME. A growing body of 
evidence demonstrates the benefits of VTI in the development of speech and 
language in children with cleft palate and OME. These children face a higher 
risk of complications than those undergoing conservative treatments, the most 
common of which are eardrum retraction and tympanosclerosis, with an incidence 
of ∼ 11% to 37%.
CONCLUSIONS: This review provides evidence-based information related to the 
selection of treatment for OME in children with cleft palate. Additional 
randomized controlled trials are required to obtain bias-resistant evidence 
capable of reliably guiding treatment decisions. The conclusions in this review 
are based on underpowered cohort studies and very-low-strength evidence.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2014-0323
PMID: 25287451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]