---
reference_id: "PMID:34610625"
title: Underlying conditions contributing to breathlessness in the population.
authors:
- Sandberg J
- Olsson M
- Ekström M
journal: Curr Opin Support Palliat Care
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/SPC.0000000000000568
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Underlying conditions contributing to breathlessness in the population.
**Authors:** Sandberg J, Olsson M, Ekström M
**Journal:** Curr Opin Support Palliat Care (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SPC.0000000000000568](https://doi.org/10.1097/SPC.0000000000000568)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care. 2021 Dec 1;15(4):219-225. doi: 
10.1097/SPC.0000000000000568.

Underlying conditions contributing to breathlessness in the population.

Sandberg J(1), Olsson M, Ekström M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Respiratory Medicine & 
Allergology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Assessment of underlying conditions that contribute to 
breathlessness is fundamental for symptom management. This review aims to 
summarize the knowledge from the past two years on the most common underlying 
conditions among individuals with breathlessness in the general population and 
to identify research gaps.
RECENT FINDINGS: Nine studies from the last two years were included in the 
review; two studies systematically assessed underlying conditions among 
breathless individuals in the general population. The modified Medical Research 
Council (mMRC) scale was used in eight of nine studies. Respiratory diseases 
were the main underlying condition (40-57%), of which asthma was the most common 
(approx. 25%), and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was particularly 
strongly associated with breathlessness. Other conditions prevalent among 
breathless individuals included heart diseases, anxiety, depression, and 
obesity, and several conditions often co-existed.
SUMMARY: Breathlessness in the general population is common and associated with 
several underlying conditions. Respiratory disease is the most commonly reported 
underlying condition. Refined methods such as machine learning could be useful 
to study the complex interplay between multiple underlying causes of 
breathlessness and impact on outcomes such as quality of life and survival.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/SPC.0000000000000568
PMCID: PMC8631149
PMID: 34610625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.