---
reference_id: "PMID:38003003"
title: MLH1 Promoter Methylation Could Be the Second Hit in Lynch Syndrome Carcinogenesis.
authors:
- Carnevali IW
- Cini G
- Libera L
- Sahnane N
- Facchi S
- Viel A
- Sessa F
- Tibiletti MG
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14112060
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MLH1 Promoter Methylation Could Be the Second Hit in Lynch Syndrome Carcinogenesis.
**Authors:** Carnevali IW, Cini G, Libera L, Sahnane N, Facchi S, Viel A, Sessa F, Tibiletti MG
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14112060](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14112060)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Nov 9;14(11):2060. doi: 10.3390/genes14112060.

MLH1 Promoter Methylation Could Be the Second Hit in Lynch Syndrome 
Carcinogenesis.

Carnevali IW(1)(2), Cini G(3), Libera L(2)(4), Sahnane N(1)(2), Facchi S(2)(4), 
Viel A(3), Sessa F(1)(2)(4), Tibiletti MG(2).

Author information:
(1)UO Anatomia Patologica Ospedale di Circolo ASST-Settelaghi, 21100 Varese, 
Italy.
(2)Centro di Ricerca per lo Studio dei Tumori Eredo-Famigliari, Università 
dell'Insubria, 21100 Varese, Italy.
(3)Unit of Functional Oncogenomics and Genetics, Centro di Riferimento 
Oncologico di Aviano (CRO) IRCCS, 33081 Aviano, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine and Thecnological Innovation, Università 
dell'Insubria, 21100 Varese, Italy.

(1) Background: MLH1 hypermethylation is an epigenetic alteration in the 
tumorigenesis of colorectal cancer (CRC) and endometrial cancer (EC), causing 
gene silencing, and, as a consequence, microsatellite instability. Commonly, 
MLH1 hypermethylation is considered a somatic and sporadic event in cancer, and 
its detection is recognized as a useful tool to distinguish sporadic from 
inherited conditions (such as, Lynch syndrome (LS)). However, MLH1 
hypermethylation has been described in rare cases of CRC and EC in LS patients. 
(2) Methods: A total of 61 cancers (31 CRCs, 27 ECs, 2 ovarian cancers, and 1 
stomach cancer) from 56 patients referred to cancer genetic counselling were 
selected for loss of MLH1 protein expression and microsatellite instability. All 
cases were investigated for MLH1 promoter methylation and MLH1/PMS2 germline 
variants. (3) Results: Somatic MLH1 promoter hypermethylation was identified in 
16.7% of CRC and in 40% of EC carriers of MLH1 germline pathogenic variants. In 
two families, primary and secondary MLH1 epimutations were demonstrated. (4) 
Conclusions: MLH1 hypermethylation should not be exclusively considered as a 
sporadic cancer mechanism, as a non-negligible number of LS-related cancers are 
MLH1 hypermethylated. Current flow charts for universal LS screening, which 
include MLH1 methylation, should be applied, paying attention to a patient's 
family and personal history.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14112060
PMCID: PMC10670941
PMID: 38003003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.