---
reference_id: "PMID:21549221"
title: "Role of the complement system in rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic arthritis: relationship with anti-TNF inhibitors."
authors:
- Ballanti E
- Perricone C
- di Muzio G
- Kroegler B
- Chimenti MS
- Graceffa D
- Perricone R
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2011.04.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the complement system in rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic arthritis: relationship with anti-TNF inhibitors.
**Authors:** Ballanti E, Perricone C, di Muzio G, Kroegler B, Chimenti MS, Graceffa D, Perricone R
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2011.04.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2011.04.012)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2011 Aug;10(10):617-23. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2011.04.012. Epub
 2011 Apr 27.

Role of the complement system in rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic arthritis: 
relationship with anti-TNF inhibitors.

Ballanti E(1), Perricone C, di Muzio G, Kroegler B, Chimenti MS, Graceffa D, 
Perricone R.

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology, Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Italy.

The complement system is an essential component of innate immunity and also 
plays an important role in modulating adaptive immunity. It comprises more than 
30 plasma and membrane-bound proteins and can be activated through three 
pathways: the classical, the alternative and the lectin pathways. Its activation 
contributes to the pathogenesis of several autoimmune and inflammatory 
conditions. The evidence of complement activation in synovial fluid of 
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) patients is abundant, while few data exist in 
Psoriatic Arthritis (PsA) patients. Levels of complement proteins are generally 
depressed in the synovial fluid of patients with RA, reflecting consumption of 
complement. On the other hand, elevated levels of several complement cleavage 
products have been observed in synovial fluid. Involvement of complement in the 
pathogenesis of RA was also confirmed in animal models of arthritis: mice 
deficient for complement proteins are protected against the development of 
collagen-induced arthritis and administration of the anti-C5 monoclonal antibody 
prevents the onset of this arthritis. In the last decade anti-tumor necrosis 
factor agents have shown to be effective for the treatment of both RA and PsA 
and some studies suggest that the interaction between TNFα and complement system 
may contribute to the pathogenesis of these diseases. Reduction of the 
complement activation could be one of the mechanism by which TNFα-inhibitors 
exert their effectiveness in inflammatory arthritides. Because of these 
findings, complement could be an attractive therapeutic target both in RA and in 
PsA.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2011.04.012
PMID: 21549221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]