---
reference_id: "PMID:26225154"
title: Evolution of Choroidal Neovascular Membrane in Best Disease after Single Intravitreal Bevacizumab. Case Report.
authors:
- Celea C
- Pop M
- Avidis-Zamfiroiu N
- Celea C
journal: Maedica (Bucur)
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolution of Choroidal Neovascular Membrane in Best Disease after Single Intravitreal Bevacizumab. Case Report.
**Authors:** Celea C, Pop M, Avidis-Zamfiroiu N, Celea C
**Journal:** Maedica (Bucur) (2015)

## Content

1. Maedica (Bucur). 2015 Mar;10(1):61-4.

Evolution of Choroidal Neovascular Membrane in Best Disease after Single
Intravitreal Bevacizumab. Case Report.

Celea C(1), Pop M(1), Avidis-Zamfiroiu N(1), Celea C(1).

Author information:
(1)Emergency Clinical Hospital of Ophthalmology, Bucharest, Romania.

BACKGROUND: Best's disease is a hereditary form of macular dystrophy that starts
in childhood and progresses until visual symptoms occur. In evolution it can be
complicated with choroidal neovascularization, condition very rare in children.
We report an important visual improvement in a 8-year-old caucasian girl after
successful treatment with one intravitreal bevacizumab injection. There are few
cases reported in literature (1-7), and the patient presented here have
important particularities: one of the youngest children ever-mentioned with this
complication, the third-member of her family with this disease and the first
patient who didn't receive a second intravitreal bevacizumab at six weeks after
first treatment, even though BCVA was lower than expected. The girl accused
decrease of vision in the RE for the past 3-4 months. BCVA at presentation was
1/10. After 6 weeks from the intravitreal treatment, BCVA improved, but not very
satisfactory (5/10). Because fundus and OCT aspects were encouraging, we waited
another 4 weeks before the second injection. BCVA doubled in this period (8/10).
Visual acuity, fundus and OCT aspects stabilized for 18 months of follow-up.
CONCLUSION: We note that choroidal neovascular membrane associated with Best's
disease can appear at such young children, this fact being very important in the
phase of diagnosis, when the clinician should also take in consideration this
possibility. Another important idea underlined here is the long-term efficacy of
a single intravitreal anti-VEGF injection and also the no-need for imminent,
fast re-treatment when the fundus and OCT aspects are encouraging through the
follow-up.

PMCID: PMC4496771
PMID: 26225154
