---
reference_id: "PMID:29925572"
title: "From post-traumatic stress disorder to absolute dependence in an intensive care unit: reflections on a clinical account."
authors:
- Sideris T
journal: Med Humanit
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1136/medhum-2017-011435
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From post-traumatic stress disorder to absolute dependence in an intensive care unit: reflections on a clinical account.
**Authors:** Sideris T
**Journal:** Med Humanit (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1136/medhum-2017-011435](https://doi.org/10.1136/medhum-2017-011435)

## Content

1. Med Humanit. 2019 Mar;45(1):37-44. doi: 10.1136/medhum-2017-011435. Epub 2018 
Jun 20.

From post-traumatic stress disorder to absolute dependence in an intensive care 
unit: reflections on a clinical account.

Sideris T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Psychologist Private Practice Wits Donald Gordon Medical Centre, 
Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Research Associate WISER, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 
South Africa.

This paper tells the story of one man's experience of terrifying hallucinations 
and nightmares in an intensive care unit (ICU), drawing attention to the reality 
that intensive care treatment induces emotional suffering severe enough to be 
identified as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). A body of international 
research, confirmed by South African studies, links life-saving critical care to 
symptoms which qualify for secondary psychiatric diagnosis including of 
post-traumatic stress. Risk factors include pre-ICU comorbid psychopathology. 
Early on in the clinical encounter with the patient in this paper it emerged 
that he bore the scars of another trauma. He had been a soldier. Recounting the 
terror he experienced when he was being weaned off mechanical ventilation evoked 
memories of his military history. Paradoxically, these shifted the focus away 
from the symptoms of PTSD, to make the helplessness and dependency of ICU 
patients more visible. This patient's clinical account and patient experiences 
in other studies reveal the relational vulnerability of ICU patients. In as much 
as experiences of ICU treatment can be terrifying, the non-response of carers 
distresses patients. This interplay of wounding and care provides a starting 
point from which to explore how we account for the neglect of relational care 
that is a recurring theme in medical contexts, without blaming the carers. These 
questions find resonance in a South African novel to which the paper refers. A 
novel about war and trauma movingly portrays the internal conflict of the 
central character, a nurse and her quest not to care, as a defence against 
vulnerability. In these ways writing about the relational vulnerability of 
patients opened up questions about the social and institutional context of carer 
vulnerability.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2019. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/medhum-2017-011435
PMID: 29925572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.