---
reference_id: "PMID:40397306"
title: Olaparib Monotherapy or in Combination with Abiraterone for the Treatment of Patients with Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer (mCRPC) and a BRCA Mutation.
authors:
- Saad F
- Armstrong AJ
- Shore N
- George DJ
- Oya M
- Sugimoto M
- McKay RR
- Hussain M
- Clarke NW
journal: Target Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s11523-025-01146-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Androstenes/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- "Phthalazines/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- "Piperazines/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Olaparib Monotherapy or in Combination with Abiraterone for the Treatment of Patients with Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer (mCRPC) and a BRCA Mutation.
**Authors:** Saad F, Armstrong AJ, Shore N, George DJ, Oya M, Sugimoto M, McKay RR, Hussain M, Clarke NW
**Journal:** Target Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11523-025-01146-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11523-025-01146-4)

## Content

1. Target Oncol. 2025 May;20(3):445-466. doi: 10.1007/s11523-025-01146-4. Epub
2025  May 21.

Olaparib Monotherapy or in Combination with Abiraterone for the Treatment of
Patients with Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer (mCRPC) and a BRCA
Mutation.

Saad F(1), Armstrong AJ(2), Shore N(3), George DJ(4), Oya M(5), Sugimoto M(6),
McKay RR(7), Hussain M(8), Clarke NW(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Urology and GU Oncology, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de
Montréal, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada. fred.saad@umontreal.ca.
(2)Divisions of Medical Oncology and Urology, Duke Cancer Institute Center for
Prostate and Urologic Cancer, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Carolina Urologic Research Center, Myrtle Beach, SC, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA.
(5)Department of Urology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Urology, Kagawa University Hospital, Kagawa, Japan.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA,
USA.
(8)Division of Hem/Onc, Robert H Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(9)Department of Surgery, The Christie and Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trusts,
Manchester, UK.

Treatment strategies to improve outcomes in patients with metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) are evolving. Of particular
interest are therapies that target DNA damage responses in tumor cells by
inhibiting poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) activity. Several PARP inhibitors
have recently received regulatory approval for the treatment of patients with
mCRPC, of which olaparib was the first for prostate cancer. Olaparib received
approval as a monotherapy following the PROfound study (NCT02987543) and in
combination with abiraterone following the PROpel study (NCT03732820) for mCRPC.
Both PROfound (homologous recombination repair mutation biomarker-selected) and
PROpel (biomarker unselected) patients demonstrated statistically significant
longer radiographic progression-free survival (rPFS) with olaparib versus their
respective control arms in the intention-to-treat population. In both studies,
the greatest clinical benefit with olaparib was seen in patients with BRCA1
and/or BRCA2 mutations (BRCAm): PROfound rPFS hazard ratio (HR) 0.22 (95%
confidence interval [CI] 0.15-0.32); PROpel rPFS HR 0.23 (95% CI 0.12-0.43).
Clinical benefit was also observed in terms of overall survival: PROfound HR
0.63 (95% CI 0.42-0.95); PROpel HR 0.29 (95% CI 0.14-0.56). We provide a
comprehensive overview of the utility of olaparib for patients with mCRPC
harboring a BRCAm. Key clinical and safety data in BRCAm subgroup populations
are discussed, predominantly based on findings from PROfound and PROpel, as well
as investigator-initiated studies, to help inform treatment decision-making in
this patient population. We also discuss the importance of genetic testing to
identify patients who may optimally benefit from treatment with olaparib, either
as a monotherapy or in combination with abiraterone.

Plain Language Summary: In the USA, prostate cancer is the most commonly
diagnosed cancer in men. It affects approximately one in eight men during their
lifetime. Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) occurs when
the cancer spreads beyond the prostate gland and the disease progresses despite
treatment with standard hormonal therapy. Patients who have cancers with
mutations in BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 genes have poor outcomes, and additional
life-prolonging treatments are needed. Olaparib is a drug approved to treat
certain patients with mCRPC, both alone and in combination with abiraterone.
Approval was based on two landmark clinical trials called PROfound and PROpel.
PROfound compared olaparib directly with the hormonal therapies abiraterone or
enzalutamide. PROpel evaluated whether combining olaparib with abiraterone would
delay the progression of cancer compared with just abiraterone. After these two
studies were completed, results were analyzed specifically in patients who had a
BRCA mutation in their cancer. We have compiled the results in patients with
mCRPC with BRCA mutations and show that both olaparib on its own or in
combination with abiraterone resulted in substantial clinical benefits in
delaying disease progression and improving survival over standard treatments for
mCRPC. The side effects that patients with a BRCA mutation experienced were
similar to those in the overall patient population originally analyzed. We also
discuss the importance of testing men with prostate cancer for these genetic
mutations before starting treatment to help identify patients who may benefit
the most from olaparib on its own or in combination with abiraterone.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-025-01146-4
PMCID: PMC12106333
PMID: 40397306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Funding: Financial support was
provided by AstraZeneca and Merck Sharp & Dohme LLC, a subsidiary of Merck &
Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA, who are codeveloping olaparib. Conflict of interest:
Fred Saad has received consultancy and advisory fees from AbbVie, Advanced
Accelerator Applications, Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Bayer, Janssen
Oncology, Knight Therapeutics, Myovant Sciences, Novartis, Pfizer, and Sanofi;
honoraria from AbbVie, Advanced Accelerator Applications, Astellas Pharma,
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen Oncology, Knight Therapeutics,
Merck, Myovant Sciences, Novartis, Pfizer, and Sanofi; and institutional
research funding from Advanced Accelerator Applications, Astellas Pharma,
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen Oncology, Merck, Novartis,
Pfizer, and Sanofi. Andrew J. Armstrong has received consultancy or advisory
fees from Astellas, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Clovis Oncology,
Dendreon, Exelixis, FORMA Therapeutics, GoodRX, Janssen, Merck, Myovant
Sciences, Novartis, and Pfizer; travel and accommodation expenses from Astellas;
and institutional research funding from Amgen, Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca,
Bayer, BeiGene, Bristol Myers Squibb, Constellation Pharmaceuticals, Dendreon,
FORMA Therapeutics, Janssen Oncology, Gilead Sciences, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer,
and Roche/Genentech and holds institutional patents, royalties, and other
intellectual property for circulating tumor cell novel capture technology. Neal
Shore has acted in a consulting or advisory role for AbbVie, Accord, Alessa
Therapeutics, Amgen, Antev, Asieris, Astellas, AstraZeneca, Aura Biosciences,
Bayer, Bioprotect, Bristol Myers Squibb, Boston Scientific, CGOncology, Clarity,
Dendreon, Exact Imaging, Ferring, Fize Medical, Foundation Medicine, Invitae,
Janssen, Lantheus, Lilly, Dxhealth, Merck, Minomic, Myriad, Novartis, Pfizer,
Photocure, Promaxo, Protara, Sanofi Genzyme, Telix, Tolmar, and Urogen; and in a
leadership or fiduciary role for Alessa Photocure and Tuteix. Neal Shore is an
editorial board member of Targeted Oncology and as such was not involved in the
selection of peer reviewers for the manuscript or any of the subsequent
editorial decisions. Daniel J. George has received grants from Calithera,
Convergence, and Corvus; grants and personal fees from Astellas, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Johnson and Johnson Pharmaceuticals, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, and
Pfizer; personal fees from AstraZeneca, Axess Oncology, Capio Bioscience,
Flatiron, Michael J Hennessey Associates, Millennium Medical Publishing, Myovant
Sciences Inc, NCI Genitourinary, Nektar Therapeutics, Physician Education
Resource, UroGPO, Vizuri Health Sciences, Platform Q, Propella Therapeutics,
RevHealth, Seattle Genetics, WebMD, and Xcures; grants, personal fees, and
non-financial support from Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals, and Exelixis Inc;
personal fees and non-financial support from UroToday; and other support from
the American Association for Cancer Research, all outside of the submitted work.
Mototsugu Oya has received consultancy or advisory fees from Bayer; honoraria
from Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb Japan, Chugai,
Janssen, MSD, Novartis, Ono Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, Sanofi, and Takeda and
research funding from Astellas Pharma, Novartis, and Pfizer. Mikio Sugimoto has
received honoraria from Astellas, AstraZeneca, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, and
Takeda; research funding from Astellas, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Janssen, MSD, and Pfizer; and travel and accommodation expenses from Astellas,
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen, and MSD. Rana R. McKay has
received institutional grant/research support from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol
Myers Squibb, Exelixis, Oncternal, and Tempus; consultancy fees from Arcus,
Ambrx, AstraZeneca, Aveo, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Calithera, Caris,
Dendreon, Eisai, Exelixis, Johnson & Johnson, Lilly, Merck, Myovant, NeoMorph,
Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, SeaGen, Sorrento Therapeutics, Telix, and Tempus. Maha
Hussain has received honoraria from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Convergent, Novartis,
and Tango; has served on advisory boards and received honoraria for the
following invited educational events/lectures/manuscripts: PROST8 Consensus
Conference Steering Committee member and session chair (honorarium received from
MJH, RTP Lecture, AACR Satellite Symposium Lecture, Academic CME and travel
expenses); South Africa Oncology Society lecture (honorarium received from
AstraZeneca); Bayer APEX meeting (travel/accommodation, honorarium); 2nd
International Genitourinary Cancer Conference Prostate Cancer Educational
program (honorarium received from AstraZeneca); PER/NYGU – co-chair/speaker,
RTP, Prostate Cancer Diagnostic Medical Education (Virtual) program (honorarium
from AstraZeneca). Maha Hussain has also had clinical trials funding contracts
with Arvinas, AstraZeneca, Bayer, and Northwestern University. Noel W. Clarke
has received institutional consultancy or advisory fees from Astellas Pharma,
Bayer, Ferring, Janssen-Cilag, and Sanofi; speaker bureau fees from Astellas
Pharma, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Janssen-Cilag, Pfizer, and Sanofi; and travel and
accommodation expenses associated with lectures and advisory board meetings from
Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Ferring, Ipsen, Janssen-Cilag, and Sanofi.
Ethics approval: Not applicable. Consent to participate: Not applicable. Consent
for publication: Not applicable. Availability of data and material: No new data
were generated or analyzed in support of this research. Code availability: Not
applicable. Author contributions: All authors contributed to the concept and
development of this review article, including drafting and critical revision of
the manuscript. All authors have approved the submitted version.
