---
reference_id: "PMID:25913853"
title: "Novel homozygous mutation, c.400C>T (p.Arg134*), in the PVRL1 gene underlies cleft lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia syndrome in an Asian patient."
authors:
- Yoshida K
- Hayashi R
- Fujita H
- Kubota M
- Kondo M
- Shimomura Y
- Niizeki H
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.12882
keywords:
- Cell Adhesion Molecules/genetics
- Child
- Cleft Palate/genetics
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Japan
- Male
- Nectins
- Pedigree
- Syndactyly/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel homozygous mutation, c.400C>T (p.Arg134*), in the PVRL1 gene underlies cleft lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia syndrome in an Asian patient.
**Authors:** Yoshida K, Hayashi R, Fujita H, Kubota M, Kondo M, Shimomura Y, Niizeki H
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.12882](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.12882)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2015 Jul;42(7):715-9. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.12882. Epub 2015 Apr 
24.

Novel homozygous mutation, c.400C>T (p.Arg134*), in the PVRL1 gene underlies 
cleft lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia syndrome in an Asian patient.

Yoshida K(1), Hayashi R(2), Fujita H(3), Kubota M(4), Kondo M(5), Shimomura 
Y(2), Niizeki H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, National Center for Child Health and Development, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Genetic Skin Diseases, Niigata University Graduate School of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, National Center for Child Health and Development, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Allergy, National Center for Child Health and Development, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Cleft lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia syndrome is a rare, autosomal recessive 
disorder caused by homozygous loss-of-function mutations of the poliovirus 
receptor-like 1 (PVRL1) gene encoding nectin-1. Nectin-1 is a cell-cell adhesion 
molecule that is important for the initial step in the formation of adherens 
junctions and tight junctions; it is expressed in keratinocytes, neurons, and 
the developing face and palate. Clinical manifestations comprise a unique facial 
appearance with cleft lip/palate, ectodermal dysplasia, cutaneous syndactyly of 
the fingers and/or toes, and in some cases, mental retardation. We present the 
first report, to our knowledge, of an Asian individual with cleft 
lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia syndrome with a novel PVRL1 mutation. A 
7-year-old Japanese boy, the first child of a consanguineous marriage, showed 
hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with sparse, brittle, fine, dry hair and 
hypodontia, the unique facial appearance with cleft lip/palate, cutaneous 
syndactyly of the fingers and mild mental retardation. Scanning electron 
microscopic examination of the hair demonstrated pili torti and pili trianguli 
et canaliculi. Mutation analysis of exon 2 of PVRL1 revealed a novel homozygous 
nonsense mutation, c.400C>T (p.Arg134*). His parents were heterozygous for the 
mutant alleles. All four PVRL1 mutations identified in cleft 
lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia syndrome to date, including this study, resulted 
in truncated proteins that lack the transmembrane domain and intracellular 
domain of nectin-1, which is necessary to initiate the cell-cell adhesion 
process.

© 2015 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.12882
PMID: 25913853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]