---
reference_id: "PMID:37672694"
title: Atezolizumab for Advanced Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma.
authors:
- Chen AP
- Sharon E
- "O'Sullivan-Coyne G"
- Moore N
- Foster JC
- Hu JS
- Van Tine BA
- Conley AP
- Read WL
- Riedel RF
- Burgess MA
- Glod J
- Davis EJ
- Merriam P
- Naqash AR
- Fino KK
- Miller BL
- Wilsker DF
- Begum A
- Ferry-Galow KV
- Deshpande HA
- Schwartz GK
- Ladle BH
- Okuno SH
- Beck JC
- Chen JL
- Takebe N
- Fogli LK
- Rosenberger CL
- Parchment RE
- Doroshow JH
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2303383
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "B7-H1 Antigen/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Body Weight
- "Sarcoma, Alveolar Soft Part/drug therapy"
- "Administration, Intravenous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atezolizumab for Advanced Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma.
**Authors:** Chen AP, Sharon E, O'Sullivan-Coyne G, Moore N, Foster JC, Hu JS, Van Tine BA, Conley AP, Read WL, Riedel RF, Burgess MA, Glod J, Davis EJ, Merriam P, Naqash AR, Fino KK, Miller BL, Wilsker DF, Begum A, Ferry-Galow KV, Deshpande HA, Schwartz GK, Ladle BH, Okuno SH, Beck JC, Chen JL, Takebe N, Fogli LK, Rosenberger CL, Parchment RE, Doroshow JH
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2303383](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2303383)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2023 Sep 7;389(10):911-921. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2303383.

Atezolizumab for Advanced Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma.

Chen AP(1), Sharon E(1), O'Sullivan-Coyne G(1), Moore N(1), Foster JC(1), Hu 
JS(1), Van Tine BA(1), Conley AP(1), Read WL(1), Riedel RF(1), Burgess MA(1), 
Glod J(1), Davis EJ(1), Merriam P(1), Naqash AR(1), Fino KK(1), Miller BL(1), 
Wilsker DF(1), Begum A(1), Ferry-Galow KV(1), Deshpande HA(1), Schwartz GK(1), 
Ladle BH(1), Okuno SH(1), Beck JC(1), Chen JL(1), Takebe N(1), Fogli LK(1), 
Rosenberger CL(1), Parchment RE(1), Doroshow JH(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (A.P. Chen, E.S., 
G.O.-C., N.M., J.C.F., A.R.N., N.T., L.K.F., C.L.R., J.H.D.) and the Center for 
Cancer Research (J.G., J.H.D.), National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, the 
Clinical Pharmacodynamics Biomarker Program, Applied and Developmental Research 
Directorate, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick 
(K.K.F., B.L.M., D.F.W., A.B., K.V.F.-G., R.E.P.), and the Department of 
Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and Sidney Kimmel 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore (B.H.L.) - all in Maryland; the Division 
of Oncology, University of Southern California Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Los Angeles (J.S.H.); the Division of Oncology, Washington University 
School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis (B.A.V.T.); the University of Texas 
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (A.P. Conley); Emory University, Atlanta 
(W.L.R.); Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 
(R.F.R.); University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Hillman Cancer Center, 
Pittsburgh (M.A.B.); the Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of 
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville (E.J.D.); the 
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston (P.M.); the Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Medical 
Oncology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT (H.A.D.); the 
Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University 
Irving Medical Center, New York (G.K.S.); Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (S.H.O.); 
the Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha (J.C.B.); the Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus (J.L.C.); and Stephenson Cancer Center 
at the University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City (A.R.N.).

BACKGROUND: Alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is a rare soft-tissue sarcoma with 
a poor prognosis and no established therapy. Recently, encouraging responses to 
immune checkpoint inhibitors have been reported.
METHODS: We conducted an investigator-initiated, multicenter, single-group, 
phase 2 study of the anti-programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) agent atezolizumab 
in adult and pediatric patients with advanced ASPS. Atezolizumab was 
administered intravenously at a dose of 1200 mg (in patients ≥18 years of age) 
or 15 mg per kilogram of body weight with a 1200-mg cap (in patients <18 years 
of age) once every 21 days. Study end points included objective response, 
duration of response, and progression-free survival according to Response 
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), version 1.1, as well as 
pharmacodynamic biomarkers of multistep drug action.
RESULTS: A total of 52 patients were evaluated. An objective response was 
observed in 19 of 52 patients (37%), with 1 complete response and 18 partial 
responses. The median time to response was 3.6 months (range, 2.1 to 19.1), the 
median duration of response was 24.7 months (range, 4.1 to 55.8), and the median 
progression-free survival was 20.8 months. Seven patients took a treatment break 
after 2 years of treatment, and their responses were maintained through the 
data-cutoff date. No treatment-related grade 4 or 5 adverse events were 
recorded. Responses were noted despite variable baseline expression of 
programmed death 1 and PD-L1.
CONCLUSIONS: Atezolizumab was effective at inducing sustained responses in 
approximately one third of patients with advanced ASPS. (Funded by the National 
Cancer Institute and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03141684.).

Copyright © 2023 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2303383
PMCID: PMC10729808
PMID: 37672694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]