---
reference_id: "PMID:35792384"
title: HIV nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors.
authors:
- Amblard F
- Patel D
- Michailidis E
- Coats SJ
- Kasthuri M
- Biteau N
- Tber Z
- Ehteshami M
- Schinazi RF
journal: Eur J Med Chem
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2022.114554
keywords:
- "Anti-HIV Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Antiretroviral Therapy, Highly Active"
- "Drug Resistance, Viral"
- HIV Infections/drug therapy
- HIV Reverse Transcriptase/metabolism
- Humans
- "Nucleosides/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HIV nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors.
**Authors:** Amblard F, Patel D, Michailidis E, Coats SJ, Kasthuri M, Biteau N, Tber Z, Ehteshami M, Schinazi RF
**Journal:** Eur J Med Chem (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmech.2022.114554](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmech.2022.114554)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Chem. 2022 Oct 5;240:114554. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2022.114554. Epub
 2022 Jun 20.

HIV nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors.

Amblard F(1), Patel D(1), Michailidis E(1), Coats SJ(1), Kasthuri M(1), Biteau 
N(1), Tber Z(1), Ehteshami M(1), Schinazi RF(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for ViroScience and Cure, Laboratory of Biochemical Pharmacology, 
Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, and Children's 
Healthcare of Atlanta, 1760 Haygood Drive, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
(2)Center for ViroScience and Cure, Laboratory of Biochemical Pharmacology, 
Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, and Children's 
Healthcare of Atlanta, 1760 Haygood Drive, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA. Electronic 
address: rschina@emory.edu.

More than 40 years into the pandemic, HIV remains a global burden and as of now, 
there is no cure in sight. Fortunately, highly active antiretroviral therapy 
(HAART) has been developed to manage and suppress HIV infection. Combinations of 
two to three drugs targeting key viral proteins, including compounds inhibiting 
HIV reverse transcriptase (RT), have become the cornerstone of HIV treatment. 
This review discusses nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), 
including chain terminators, delayed chain terminators, nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase translocation inhibitors (NRTTIs), and nucleotide competing RT 
inhibitors (NcRTIs); focusing on their history, mechanism of action, resistance, 
and current clinical application, including long-acting regimens.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2022.114554
PMID: 35792384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]