---
reference_id: "PMID:37892343"
title: "Small Intestinal Polyp Burden in Pediatric Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Assessed through Capsule Endoscopy: A Longitudinal Study."
authors:
- Stewart J
- Fleishman NR
- Staggs VS
- Thomson M
- Stoecklein N
- Lawson CE
- Washburn MP
- Umar S
- Attard TM
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/children10101680
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small Intestinal Polyp Burden in Pediatric Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Assessed through Capsule Endoscopy: A Longitudinal Study.
**Authors:** Stewart J, Fleishman NR, Staggs VS, Thomson M, Stoecklein N, Lawson CE, Washburn MP, Umar S, Attard TM
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children10101680](https://doi.org/10.3390/children10101680)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2023 Oct 12;10(10):1680. doi: 10.3390/children10101680.

Small Intestinal Polyp Burden in Pediatric Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome Assessed 
through Capsule Endoscopy: A Longitudinal Study.

Stewart J(1), Fleishman NR(2), Staggs VS(3), Thomson M(4), Stoecklein N(5), 
Lawson CE(6), Washburn MP(7), Umar S(8), Attard TM(5)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Children's Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75235, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Levine Children's Hospital, Charlotte, NC 
28203, USA.
(3)Biostatistics and Epidemiology Core, Division of Health Services and Outcomes 
Research, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.
(4)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Sheffield Children's Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust, Sheffield University, Sheffield S10 2TH, UK.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO 
64108, USA.
(6)Division of Genetics, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.
(7)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas 
City, KS 66160, USA.
(8)Department of Surgery, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, 
KS 66160, USA.
(9)University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Medicine, 2464 Charlotte St, 
Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.

The management of pediatric Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS) focuses on the 
prevention of intussusception complicating small intestinal (SI) polyposis. This 
hinges on the accurate appraisal of the polyp burden to tailor therapeutic 
interventions. Video Capsule Endoscopy (VCE) is an established tool to study SI 
polyps in children, but an in-depth characterization of polyp burden in this 
population is lacking. Methods: We performed a retrospective longitudinal 
cross-sectional analysis of VCE studies in pediatric PJS patients at our 
institution (CMKC) from 2010 to 2020. Demographic, clinical, and VCE findings 
reported by three reviewers in tandem were accrued. Polyp burden variables were 
modeled as functions of patient and study characteristics using linear mixed 
models adjusted for clustering. Results: The cohort included 15 patients. The 
total small bowel polyp count and largest polyp size clustered under 30 polyps 
and <20 mm in size. Luminal occlusion correlated closely with the estimated 
polyp size. Polyp distribution favored proximal (77%) over distal (66%) small 
bowel involvement. The adjusted largest polyp size was greater in males. Double 
Balloon Enteroscopy was associated with a decreased polyp burden. Conclusions: 
The polyp burden in pediatric PJS patients favors the proximal third of the 
small intestine, with relatively small numbers and a polyp size amenable to 
resection through enteroscopy. Male gender and older age were related to an 
increased polyp burden.

DOI: 10.3390/children10101680
PMCID: PMC10605554
PMID: 37892343

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.