---
reference_id: "PMID:24034380"
title: "Kawasaki disease: part II. Complications and treatment."
authors:
- Bayers S
- Shulman ST
- Paller AS
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2013.06.040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease: part II. Complications and treatment.
**Authors:** Bayers S, Shulman ST, Paller AS
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2013.06.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2013.06.040)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013 Oct;69(4):513.e1-8; quiz 521-2. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaad.2013.06.040.

Kawasaki disease: part II. Complications and treatment.

Bayers S(1), Shulman ST, Paller AS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.

Kawasaki disease, or mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome, is the leading cause of 
acquired heart disease in children in the United States and other developed 
countries. Coronary artery lesions are the most significant cause of morbidity 
and mortality. Treatment should ideally be provided within 10 days of symptom 
onset to reduce the risk of coronary artery complications. The standard of care 
for treatment is intravenous immunoglobulin plus aspirin, but adding 
corticosteroids may provide additional benefit for high-risk patients. Some 
patients do not respond to intravenous immunoglobulin and require additional 
therapy. Part II of this continuing medical education article will focus on the 
complications of Kawasaki disease and potential treatment options.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Mosby, Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2013.06.040
PMID: 24034380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]