---
reference_id: "PMID:37230937"
title: Increased anti-oxidative action compensates for collagen tissue degeneration in vitiligo dermis.
authors:
- Yokoi K
- Yasumizu Y
- Ohkura N
- Shinzawa K
- Okuzaki D
- Shimoda N
- Ando H
- Yamada N
- Fujimoto M
- Tanemura A
journal: Pigment Cell Melanoma Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/pcmr.13094
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased anti-oxidative action compensates for collagen tissue degeneration in vitiligo dermis.
**Authors:** Yokoi K, Yasumizu Y, Ohkura N, Shinzawa K, Okuzaki D, Shimoda N, Ando H, Yamada N, Fujimoto M, Tanemura A
**Journal:** Pigment Cell Melanoma Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pcmr.13094](https://doi.org/10.1111/pcmr.13094)

## Content

1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2023 Sep;36(5):355-364. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.13094.
Epub  2023 May 25.

Increased anti-oxidative action compensates for collagen tissue degeneration in 
vitiligo dermis.

Yokoi K(1), Yasumizu Y(2), Ohkura N(2), Shinzawa K(3), Okuzaki D(4), Shimoda 
N(5), Ando H(5), Yamada N(6), Fujimoto M(1), Tanemura A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Experimental Immunology, Immunology Frontier Research Center, 
Faculty of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Departments of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Genome Information Research Center, Research Institute for Microbial 
Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Department of Applied Chemistry and Biotechnology, Okayama University of 
Science, Okayama, Japan.
(6)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine of Sensory and Motor Organs, 
Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Tottori, Japan.

Vitiligo is a common depigmentation disorder characterized by the selective loss 
of melanocytes. In our daily clinic experience, we noticed that the skin 
tightness of hypopigmented lesions would be more evident in comparison to that 
of uninvolved perilesional skin in vitiligo patients. Therefore, we hypothesized 
that collagen homeostasis might be maintained in vitiligo lesions, irrespective 
of the substantial excessive oxidative stress that occurs in association with 
the disease. We found that the expression levels of collagen-related genes and 
anti-oxidative enzymes were upregulated in vitiligo-derived fibroblasts. 
Abundant collagenous fibers were observed in the papillary dermis of vitiligo 
lesions in comparison to uninvolved perilesional skin by electron microscopy. 
The production of matrix metalloproteinases that degraded collagen fibers was 
suppressed. The deposition of acrolein adduct protein, which is a product of 
oxidative stress, was significantly reduced in vitiligo dermis and fibroblasts. 
As part of the mechanism, we found upregulation of the NRF2 signaling pathway 
activity, which is an important defense system against oxidative stress. Taken 
together, we demonstrated that the anti-oxidative action and collagen production 
were upregulated and that the collagen degeneration was attenuated in vitiligo 
dermis. These new findings may provide important clues for the maintenance of 
antioxidant ability in vitiligo lesions.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pcmr.13094
PMID: 37230937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]