---
reference_id: "PMID:34512419"
title: "Comorbid Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder and Bipolar Disorder: A Review."
authors:
- Slyepchenko A
- Minuzzi L
- Frey BN
journal: Front Psychiatry
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.719241
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comorbid Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder and Bipolar Disorder: A Review.
**Authors:** Slyepchenko A, Minuzzi L, Frey BN
**Journal:** Front Psychiatry (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fpsyt.2021.719241](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2021.719241)

## Content

1. Front Psychiatry. 2021 Aug 25;12:719241. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.719241. 
eCollection 2021.

Comorbid Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder and Bipolar Disorder: A Review.

Slyepchenko A(1)(2), Minuzzi L(1)(2), Frey BN(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Women's Health Concerns Clinic and Mood Disorders Treatment and Research 
Centre, St Joseph's Healthcare Hamilton, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.

Bipolar disorder (BD) differs in its clinical presentation in females compared 
to males. A number of clinical characteristics have been associated with BD in 
females: more rapid cycling and mixed features; higher number of depressive 
episodes; and a higher prevalence of BD type II. There is a strong link between 
BD and risk for postpartum mood episodes, and a substantial percentage of 
females with BD experience premenstrual mood worsening of varying degrees of 
severity. Females with premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD)-the most severe 
form of premenstrual disturbances-comorbid with BD appear to have a more complex 
course of illness, including increased psychiatric comorbidities, earlier onset 
of BD, and greater number of mood episodes. Importantly, there may be a link 
between puberty and the onset of BD in females with comorbid PMDD and BD, marked 
by a shortened gap between the onset of BD and menarche. In terms of 
neurobiology, comorbid BD and PMDD may have unique structural and functional 
neural correlates. Treatment of BD comorbid with PMDD poses challenges, as the 
first line treatment of PMDD in the general population is selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors, which produce risk of treatment-emergent manic symptoms. 
Here, we review current literature concerning the clinical presentation, illness 
burden, and unique neurobiology of BD comorbid with PMDD. We additionally 
discuss obstacles faced in symptom tracking, and management of these comorbid 
disorders.

Copyright © 2021 Slyepchenko, Minuzzi and Frey.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.719241
PMCID: PMC8423998
PMID: 34512419

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.