---
reference_id: "PMID:30539779"
title: Genetic variants in RORA are associated with asthma and allergy markers in an admixed population.
authors:
- Lima LC
- Queiroz GA
- Costa RDS
- Alcantara-Neves NM
- Marques CR
- Costa GNO
- Barreto ML
- Figueiredo CAV
- Carneiro VL
journal: Cytokine
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2018.07.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic variants in RORA are associated with asthma and allergy markers in an admixed population.
**Authors:** Lima LC, Queiroz GA, Costa RDS, Alcantara-Neves NM, Marques CR, Costa GNO, Barreto ML, Figueiredo CAV, Carneiro VL
**Journal:** Cytokine (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cyto.2018.07.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cyto.2018.07.004)

## Content

1. Cytokine. 2019 Jan;113:177-184. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2018.07.004. Epub 2018 Jul
 7.

Genetic variants in RORA are associated with asthma and allergy markers in an 
admixed population.

Lima LC(1), Queiroz GA(2), Costa RDS(2), Alcantara-Neves NM(2), Marques CR(3), 
Costa GNO(4), Barreto ML(4), Figueiredo CAV(2), Carneiro VL(5).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Universidade do Estado da Bahia, Salvador, 
BA, Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, BA, 
Brazil.
(3)Instituto Multidisciplinar em Saúde, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, 
BA, Brazil.
(4)Instituto de Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, BA, 
Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Universidade do Estado da Bahia, Salvador, 
BA, Brazil. Electronic address: vcarneiro@uneb.br.

Asthma and allergy affect hundreds of millions of people from childhood to old 
age. In most of them, the inflammatory process of respiratory allergies involves 
the participation of type 2 cytokines, derived from T helper-2 (Th2)-cell, and 
Group 2 Innate Lymphoid (ILC2) Cells. An efficient memory Th2 cell response is 
dependent on IL-13 produced by ILC2s, causing allergic lung inflammation and 
elevated serum levels of immunoglobulin E. ILC2 cells are derived from common 
lymphoid progenitors and their growing depends on the transcription factor RORA. 
The aim of this work was to identify genetic variants in RORA associated with 
asthma phenotypes and allergy markers. Genomic DNA samples of 1246 individuals 
participating from Social Changes Asthma and Allergy in Latin America Program 
(SCAALA) have been genotyped using Illumina Human 2.5 Omni Beadchip. Logistics 
regressions have been performed to analyze the association among RORA variants 
and asthma, skin prick tests (SPT), specific IgE and type 2 cytokine production. 
Twelve single nucleotide variants (SNVs) were significantly associated with 
atopy (P < 0.01), in which four of them, rs10162630, rs17191519, rs17270243, and 
rs55796775 and their haplotypes were strongly and positively associated 
(P < 0.001). Furthermore, these variants increased the RORA gene expression in 
silico analysis. Other SNVs in RORA were associated with allergy markers, atopic 
and non-atopic asthma. Therefore, it is believed that variants in RORA gene may 
influence immunologic features of asthma and allergies and could be possible 
targets for future treatment of allergic diseases.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2018.07.004
PMID: 30539779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]