---
reference_id: "PMID:40101432"
title: "Adjuvant chemotherapy compared to observation in resected biliary tract cancers: Survival meta-analysis of phase-III randomized controlled trials."
authors:
- Akkus E
- Lamarca A
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115342
keywords:
- Humans
- "Biliary Tract Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality, surgery, pathology"
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Clinical Trials, Phase III as Topic"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Watchful Waiting
- Gemcitabine
- "Deoxycytidine/analogs & derivatives, administration & dosage"
- "Fluorouracil/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adjuvant chemotherapy compared to observation in resected biliary tract cancers: Survival meta-analysis of phase-III randomized controlled trials.
**Authors:** Akkus E, Lamarca A
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115342](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115342)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2025 May 2;220:115342. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115342. Epub
2025  Mar 7.

Adjuvant chemotherapy compared to observation in resected biliary tract cancers: 
Survival meta-analysis of phase-III randomized controlled trials.

Akkus E(1), Lamarca A(2).

Author information:
(1)Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Oncology, 
Ankara, Türkiye; Ankara University Cancer Research Institute, Ankara, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Oncology, OncoHealth Institute, Instituto de Investigaciones 
Sanitarias FJD, Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain. 
Electronic address: angela.lamarca@quironsalud.es.

BACKGROUND: A limited number of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) investigated 
adjuvant chemotherapy in biliary tract cancers (BTCs). Recurrences and deaths 
are common in the first 2 years and survival remains poor despite adjuvant 
treatment.
METHODS: Phase-III RCTs were included comparing adjuvant chemotherapy and 
observation in resected BTCs. The primary endpoints were recurrence-free (RFS) 
and overall survival (OS). Proportional hazard results were used for trial-based 
analyses. Patient data was curated from published Kaplan-Meier curves to analyze 
short-term (2-year) hazards. The Parmar and generic inverse variance methods 
were used.
RESULTS: 1308 patients in 4 trials (BILCAP, ASCOT, BCAT, PRODIGE-12) were 
included. Capecitabine (BILCAP) and S-1 (ASCOT) were grouped as 5-FU-based, 
gemcitabine (BCAT) and gemcitabine-oxaliplatin (PRODIGE-12) were grouped as 
gemcitabine-based chemotherapy. Adjuvant 5FU-based chemotherapy improved RFS 
[HR: 0.80 (95 % CI:0.68-0.95), p = 0.012] and OS [HR: 0.78 (95 % CI:0.65-0.94), 
p = 0.009]. However, gemcitabine-based chemotherapy did not provide benefit in 
RFS [HR: 0.90 (95 % CI:0.70-1.15), p = 0.428] and OS [HR: 1.03 (95 % 
CI:0.78-1.36), p = 0.794]. The benefit of 5-FU-based chemotherapy was more 
apparent in the short-term (2-year hazards) (RFS: [HR: 0.67 (95 %CI:57-0.79), 
p < 0.001] and OS: [HR: 0.61 (95 % CI:59-0.64), p < 0.001]). However, 
gemcitabine-based chemotherapy did not provide RFS benefit in the short term 
either [HR: 0.80 (95 % CI:0.64-0.1.01), p = 0.067] and seemed to be even 
detrimental for OS [HR: 1.22 (95 % CI:1.14-1.31), p < 0.001] in the first 2 
years.
CONCLUSION: This study confirms using 5FU-based monotherapy in the adjuvant 
treatment of resected BTCs. The more prominent benefit in the first 2 years 
emphasizes that more effective adjuvant treatments with sustained long-term 
benefits are needed. Two-year proportional hazards OS and RFS are proposed here 
as an additional secondary end-point to consider in future clinical trials. in 
this setting. Registration ID (PROSPERO): CRD42024614444.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115342
PMID: 40101432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Dr. Erman Akkus declares no 
conflict of interest. Dr. Angela Lamarca declares Travel and educational support 
from Ipsen, Pfizer, Bayer, AAA, SirtEx, Novartis, Mylan, Delcath Advanz Pharma 
and Roche; Speaker honoraria from Merck, Pfizer, Ipsen, Incyte, AAA/Novartis, 
QED, Servier, Astra Zeneca, EISAI, Roche, Advanz Pharma and MSD; Advisory and 
consultancy honoraria from EISAI, Nutricia, Ipsen, QED, Roche, Servier, Boston 
Scientific, Albireo Pharma, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GENFIT, 
TransThera Biosciences, Taiho and MSD; Principal Investigator-associated 
Institutional Funding form QED, Merck, Boehringer Ingelheim, Servier, Astra 
Zeneca, GenFit, Panbela Therapeutics, Novocure GmbH, Camurus AB, Albireo Pharma, 
Taiho, TransThera, Jazz Therapeutics and Roche; Member of the Knowledge Network 
and NETConnect Initiatives funded by Ipsen.