---
reference_id: "PMID:26857345"
title: Newly developed and validated eosinophilic esophagitis histology scoring system and evidence that it outperforms peak eosinophil count for disease diagnosis and monitoring.
authors:
- Collins MH
- Martin LJ
- Alexander ES
- Boyd JT
- Sheridan R
- He H
- Pentiuk S
- Putnam PE
- Abonia JP
- Mukkada VA
- Franciosi JP
- Rothenberg ME
journal: Dis Esophagus
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/dote.12470
keywords:
- Area Under Curve
- "Biopsy/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- Child
- Eosinophilic Esophagitis/diagnosis
- Eosinophils
- Esophagus/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Leukocyte Count/methods
- Logistic Models
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- Reproducibility of Results
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newly developed and validated eosinophilic esophagitis histology scoring system and evidence that it outperforms peak eosinophil count for disease diagnosis and monitoring.
**Authors:** Collins MH, Martin LJ, Alexander ES, Boyd JT, Sheridan R, He H, Pentiuk S, Putnam PE, Abonia JP, Mukkada VA, Franciosi JP, Rothenberg ME
**Journal:** Dis Esophagus (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dote.12470](https://doi.org/10.1111/dote.12470)

## Content

1. Dis Esophagus. 2017 Feb 1;30(3):1-8. doi: 10.1111/dote.12470.

Newly developed and validated eosinophilic esophagitis histology scoring system
and evidence that it outperforms peak eosinophil count for disease diagnosis and
monitoring.

Collins MH(1), Martin LJ(2), Alexander ES(3)(4), Boyd JT(1), Sheridan R(1), He
H(2), Pentiuk S(5), Putnam PE(5), Abonia JP(6), Mukkada VA(5), Franciosi JP(5),
Rothenberg ME(6).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(2)Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(3)Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(4)Department of Health Services Administration, Xavier University, Cincinnati,
Ohio, USA.
(5)Gastroenterology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(6)Allergy and Immunology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.

Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is diagnosed by symptoms, and at least 15
intraepithelial eosinophils per high power field in an esophageal biopsy. Other
pathologic features have not been emphasized. We developed a histology scoring
system for esophageal biopsies that evaluates eight features: eosinophil
density, basal zone hyperplasia, eosinophil abscesses, eosinophil surface
layering, dilated intercellular spaces (DIS), surface epithelial alteration,
dyskeratotic epithelial cells, and lamina propria fibrosis. Severity (grade) and
extent (stage) of abnormalities were scored using a 4-point scale (0 normal; 3
maximum change). Reliability was demonstrated by strong to moderate agreement
among three pathologists who scored biopsies independently (P ≤ 0.008). Several
features were often abnormal in 201 biopsies (101 distal, 100 proximal) from 104
subjects (34 untreated, 167 treated). Median grade and stage scores were
significantly higher in untreated compared with treated subjects (P ≤ 0.0062).
Grade scores for features independent of eosinophil counts were significantly
higher in biopsies from untreated compared with treated subjects (basal zone
hyperplasia P ≤ 0.024 and DIS P ≤ 0.005), and were strongly correlated (R-square
>0.67). Principal components analysis identified three principal components that
explained 78.2% of the variation in the features. In logistic regression models,
two principal components more closely associated with treatment status than log
distal peak eosinophil count (PEC) (R-square 17, area under the curve (AUC) 77.8
vs. R-square 9, AUC 69.8). In summary, the EoE histology scoring system provides
a method to objectively assess histologic changes in the esophagus beyond
eosinophil number. Importantly, it discriminates treated from untreated
patients, uses features commonly found in such biopsies, and is utilizable by
pathologists after minimal training. These data provide rationales and a method
to evaluate esophageal biopsies for features in addition to PEC.

© 2016 International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

DOI: 10.1111/dote.12470
PMCID: PMC5373936
PMID: 26857345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
