---
reference_id: "PMID:10618671"
title: Abolished nocturnal blood pressure fall in a boy with glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism.
authors:
- Seeman T
- Widimský J
- Hampf M
- Bernhardt R
journal: J Hum Hypertens
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/sj.jhh.1000918
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Base Sequence
- "Blood Pressure Monitoring, Ambulatory"
- Circadian Rhythm
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Glucocorticoids/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Hyperaldosteronism/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- "Hypertension/diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Hypotension/diagnosis, etiology"
- Male
- "Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists/administration & dosage"
- Molecular Biology
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Spironolactone/administration & dosage"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abolished nocturnal blood pressure fall in a boy with glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism.
**Authors:** Seeman T, Widimský J, Hampf M, Bernhardt R
**Journal:** J Hum Hypertens (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.jhh.1000918](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jhh.1000918)

## Content

1. J Hum Hypertens. 1999 Dec;13(12):823-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.jhh.1000918.

Abolished nocturnal blood pressure fall in a boy with glucocorticoid-remediable
aldosteronism.

Seeman T(1), Widimský J, Hampf M, Bernhardt R.

Author information:
(1)1st Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Motol V úvalu 84, CZ-150
06, Prague 5, Czech Republic.

Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (GRA) is a rarely recognised cause of
arterial hypertension. We report the features of a 13-year-old boy with
hypertension (casual blood pressure (BP) 140-180/95-110 mm Hg) discovered during
a routine paediatric check. Ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) revealed significant
hypertension with an abolished nocturnal BP fall (mean daytime BP 155/108 mm Hg,
mean night-time BP 156/104 mm Hg, nocturnal BP fall 0/4%) which was indicative
of secondary hypertension. Despite triple antihypertensive drug therapy the
hypertensive control was unsatisfactory. Laboratory tests revealed hypokalaemia
(3.0 mmol/l), suppressed plasma renin activity (0.012 nmol/l/h) and high plasma
aldosterone (1.190 nmol/l). The diagnosis of primary hyperaldosteronism was
established and GRA was further confirmed by the presence of the chimaeric
GRA-gene and dexamethasone therapy was initiated. During the next 2 months of
dexamethasone therapy all three antihypertensive drugs were discontinued and BP
remained under control with restoration to a normal nocturnal BP fall (mean
daytime BP 129/77 mm Hg, mean night-time BP 113/64, nocturnal BP fall 12/17%). A
change of therapy from dexamethasone to spironolactone was necessary due to the
side effects of corticosteroids after 3 months. Spironolactone alone (0.8-2
mg/kg/day) was able to control the BP sufficiently. In conclusion, to our
knowledge, this is the first reported case of abolished nocturnal BP fall in a
patient with genetically proven GRA. This study indicates that GRA can cause
severe hypertension even in children, associated with an abolished nocturnal BP
fall. GRA thus should be excluded in all hypertensive patients with circadian BP
rhythm disturbances.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.jhh.1000918
PMID: 10618671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
