---
reference_id: "PMID:32712016"
title: "Alport Syndrome: Achieving Early Diagnosis and Treatment."
authors:
- Kashtan CE
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.03.026
keywords:
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Biopsy
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- Disease Progression
- Early Diagnosis
- Early Medical Intervention
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Hematuria
- Humans
- Kidney/pathology
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology, therapy"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alport Syndrome: Achieving Early Diagnosis and Treatment.
**Authors:** Kashtan CE
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.03.026](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.03.026)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2021 Feb;77(2):272-279. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.03.026. Epub
 2020 Jul 22.

Alport Syndrome: Achieving Early Diagnosis and Treatment.

Kashtan CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Nephrology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, 
MN. Electronic address: kasht001@umn.edu.

Alport syndrome is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous disorder of 
glomerular, cochlear, and ocular basement membranes resulting from mutations in 
the collagen IV genes COL4A3, COL4A4, and COL4A5. Alport syndrome can be 
transmitted as an X-linked, autosomal recessive, or autosomal dominant disorder. 
Individuals with Alport syndrome have a significant lifetime risk for kidney 
failure, as well as sensorineural deafness and ocular abnormalities. The 
availability of effective intervention for Alport syndrome-related kidney 
disease makes early diagnosis crucial, but this can be impeded by the genotypic 
and phenotypic complexity of the disorder. This review presents an approach to 
enhancing early diagnosis and achieving optimal outcomes.

Copyright © 2020 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2020.03.026
PMID: 32712016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]