---
reference_id: "PMID:35653192"
title: Multimodal analyses of vitiligo skin identify tissue characteristics of stable disease.
authors:
- Shiu J
- Zhang L
- Lentsch G
- Flesher JL
- Jin S
- Polleys C
- Jo SJ
- Mizzoni C
- Mobasher P
- Kwan J
- Rius-Diaz F
- Tromberg BJ
- Georgakoudi I
- Nie Q
- Balu M
- Ganesan AK
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.154585
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multimodal analyses of vitiligo skin identify tissue characteristics of stable disease.
**Authors:** Shiu J, Zhang L, Lentsch G, Flesher JL, Jin S, Polleys C, Jo SJ, Mizzoni C, Mobasher P, Kwan J, Rius-Diaz F, Tromberg BJ, Georgakoudi I, Nie Q, Balu M, Ganesan AK
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.154585](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.154585)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2022 Jul 8;7(13):e154585. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.154585.

Multimodal analyses of vitiligo skin identify tissue characteristics of stable 
disease.

Shiu J(1), Zhang L(2)(3), Lentsch G(4), Flesher JL(5), Jin S(2)(3), Polleys 
C(6), Jo SJ(7), Mizzoni C(6), Mobasher P(1), Kwan J(6), Rius-Diaz F(8), Tromberg 
BJ(3), Georgakoudi I(6), Nie Q(2)(3)(9), Balu M(4)(10), Ganesan AK(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology.
(2)Department of Mathematics.
(3)NSF-Simons Center for Multiscale Cell Fate Research, and.
(4)Beckman Laser Institute and Medical Clinic, University of California, Irvine 
(UC Irvine), Irvine, California, USA.
(5)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, University of Malaga, 
Malaga, Spain.
(9)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology and.
(10)Skin Biology Resource Center, UC Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.

Vitiligo is an autoimmune skin disease characterized by the destruction of 
melanocytes by autoreactive CD8+ T cells. Melanocyte destruction in active 
vitiligo is mediated by CD8+ T cells, but the persistence of white patches in 
stable disease is poorly understood. The interaction between immune cells, 
melanocytes, and keratinocytes in situ in human skin has been difficult to study 
due to the lack of proper tools. We combine noninvasive multiphoton microscopy 
(MPM) imaging and single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) to identify subpopulations of 
keratinocytes in stable vitiligo patients. We show that, compared with 
nonlesional skin, some keratinocyte subpopulations are enriched in lesional 
vitiligo skin and shift their energy utilization toward oxidative 
phosphorylation. Systematic investigation of cell-to-cell communication networks 
show that this small population of keratinocyte secrete CXCL9 and CXCL10 to 
potentially drive vitiligo persistence. Pseudotemporal dynamics analyses predict 
an alternative differentiation trajectory that generates this new population of 
keratinocytes in vitiligo skin. Further MPM imaging of patients undergoing punch 
grafting treatment showed that keratinocytes favoring oxidative phosphorylation 
persist in nonresponders but normalize in responders. In summary, we couple 
advanced imaging with transcriptomics and bioinformatics to discover 
cell-to-cell communication networks and keratinocyte cell states that can 
perpetuate inflammation and prevent repigmentation.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.154585
PMCID: PMC9310536
PMID: 35653192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.