---
reference_id: "PMID:1754916"
title: "Case report 693: Schneckenbecken dysplasia."
authors:
- Giedion A
- Biedermann K
- Briner J
- Soler R
- Spycher M
journal: Skeletal Radiol
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1007/BF00194254
keywords:
- "Dwarfism/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Female
- Fetal Diseases/diagnostic imaging
- "Fetus/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Radiography
- Syndrome
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case report 693: Schneckenbecken dysplasia.
**Authors:** Giedion A, Biedermann K, Briner J, Soler R, Spycher M
**Journal:** Skeletal Radiol (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00194254](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00194254)

## Content

1. Skeletal Radiol. 1991;20(7):534-8. doi: 10.1007/BF00194254.

Case report 693: Schneckenbecken dysplasia.

Giedion A(1), Biedermann K, Briner J, Soler R, Spycher M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.

Three siblings with SBD from consangineous parents are reported. The prenatal 
diagnosis of a short-limbed form of dwarfism was made by ultrasonography and the 
final diagnosis in the index case by radiography, demonstrating a short-limbed, 
platyspondylic dwarf with a snail-like configuration of the ilium and vertebral 
bodies, flat on AP and round on lateral view. The histological examination 
showed a generalized, severe disturbance of cartilage formation with marked 
hypercellularity of proliferating and resting zones, reduction of intercellular 
matrix, and shortening of the irregular columns of proliferating cartilage. The 
ultramicroscopic findings were nonspecific. This is the first report of SBD 
after the original description, bringing the total to 14 cases in 5 families. 
The correct radiological diagnosis and the differential diagnosis, in particular 
thanatophoric dysplasia, are essential for genetic counselling and obstetrical 
guidance of families affected with this autosomal recessive dysplasia.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00194254
PMID: 1754916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]