---
reference_id: "PMID:38034003"
title: X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy and primary adrenal insufficiency.
authors:
- Cappa M
- Todisco T
- Bizzarri C
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1309053
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Child
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/metabolism
- "Addison Disease/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- Adrenal Cortex/metabolism
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy and primary adrenal insufficiency.
**Authors:** Cappa M, Todisco T, Bizzarri C
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1309053](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1309053)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Nov 16;14:1309053. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2023.1309053. eCollection 2023.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy and primary adrenal insufficiency.

Cappa M(1), Todisco T(1), Bizzarri C(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Area for Innovative Therapies in Endocrinopathies, Bambino Gesù
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Unit of Paediatric Endocrinology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS,
Rome, Italy.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD; OMIM:300100) is a progressive
neurodegenerative disorder caused by a congenital defect in the ATP-binding
cassette transporters sub-family D member 1 gene (ABCD1) producing
adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP). According to population studies, X-ALD has
an estimated birth prevalence of 1 in 17.000 subjects (considering both
hemizygous males and heterozygous females), and there is no evidence that this
prevalence varies among regions or ethnic groups. ALDP deficiency results in a
defective peroxisomal β-oxidation of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA). As a
consequence of this metabolic abnormality, VLCFAs accumulate in nervous system
(brain white matter and spinal cord), testis and adrenal cortex. All X-ALD
affected patients carry a mutation on the ABCD1 gene. Nevertheless, patients
with a defect on the ABCD1 gene can have a dramatic difference in the clinical
presentation of the disease. In fact, X-ALD can vary from the most severe
cerebral paediatric form (CerALD), to adult adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN),
Addison-only and asymptomatic forms. Primary adrenal insufficiency (PAI) is one
of the main features of X-ALD, with a prevalence of 70% in ALD/AMN patients and
5% in female carriers. The pathogenesis of X-ALD related PAI is still unclear,
even if a few published data suggests a defective adrenal response to ACTH,
related to VLCFA accumulation with progressive disruption of adrenal cell
membrane function and ACTH receptor activity. The reason why PAI develops only
in a proportion of ALD/AMN patients remains incompletely understood. A growing
consensus supports VLCFA assessment in all male children presenting with PAI, as
early diagnosis and start of therapy may be essential for X-ALD patients.
Children and adults with PAI require individualized glucocorticoid replacement
therapy, while mineralocorticoid therapy is needed only in a few cases after
consideration of hormonal and electrolytes status. Novel approaches, such as
prolonged release glucocorticoids, offer potential benefit in optimizing
hormonal replacement for X-ALD-related PAI. Although the association between PAI
and X-ALD has been observed in clinical practice, the underlying mechanisms
remain poorly understood. This paper aims to explore the multifaceted
relationship between PAI and X-ALD, shedding light on shared pathophysiology,
clinical manifestations, and potential therapeutic interventions.

Copyright © 2023 Cappa, Todisco and Bizzarri.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1309053
PMCID: PMC10687143
PMID: 38034003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
