---
reference_id: "PMID:11949933"
title: Molecular characterization of glycogen storage disease type III.
authors:
- Shen JJ
- Chen YT
journal: Curr Mol Med
year: '2002'
doi: 10.2174/1566524024605752
keywords:
- Animals
- "DNA, Complementary/metabolism"
- Gene Deletion
- Glycogen/metabolism
- "Glycogen Debranching Enzyme System/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type III/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular characterization of glycogen storage disease type III.
**Authors:** Shen JJ, Chen YT
**Journal:** Curr Mol Med (2002)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1566524024605752](https://doi.org/10.2174/1566524024605752)

## Content

1. Curr Mol Med. 2002 Mar;2(2):167-75. doi: 10.2174/1566524024605752.

Molecular characterization of glycogen storage disease type III.

Shen JJ(1), Chen YT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center Science Park, Smithville 78957, USA.

Deficiency of the glycogen debranching enzyme (gene, AGL) causes glycogen
storage disease type III (GSD-III), an autosomal recessive disease affecting
glycogen metabolism. Most GSD-III patients have AGL deficiency in both the liver
and muscle (type IIIa), but some have it in the liver but not muscle (type
IIIb). Cloning of human AGL cDNAs and determination of the genomic structure and
mRNA isoforms of AGL have allowed for the study of GSD-III at the molecular
level. In turn, the resulting information has greatly facilitated our
understanding of the molecular basis of this storage disease with remarkable
clinical and enzymatic variability. In this review, we summarize all 31 GSD-III
mutations in the literature and discuss their clinical and laboratory
implications. Most of the mutations are nonsense mutations caused by a
nucleotide substitution or small insertion or deletion; only one is caused by a
missense amino acid change. Some important genotype-phenotype correlation have
emerged, in particular, that exon 3 mutations (17delAG and Q6X) are specifically
associated with GSD-IIIb. Three other mutations have appeared to have some
phenotype correlation. Specifically, the splice mutation IVS32-12A>G was found
in GSD-III patients having mild clinical symptoms, while the mutations 3965delT
and 4529insA are associated with a severe phenotype and early onset of clinical
manifestations. A molecular diagnostic scheme has been proposed to diagnose
GSD-III noninvasively. The characterization of AGL mutations in GSD-III patients
has also helped the structure-function analysis of this bifunctional enzyme
important for glycogen metabolism.

DOI: 10.2174/1566524024605752
PMID: 11949933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
