---
reference_id: "PMID:21331924"
title: Virological Methods for the Generation and Characterization of Influenza Viruses with Reduced Sensitivity to 4-Guanidino-Neu5Ac2en.
authors:
- McKimm-Breschkin JL
- Sahasrabudhe A
- Blick TJ
- Jowett AJ
- Bethell RC
journal: Methods Mol Med
year: '2000'
doi: "10.1385/1-59259-245-7:375"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Virological Methods for the Generation and Characterization of Influenza Viruses with Reduced Sensitivity to 4-Guanidino-Neu5Ac2en.
**Authors:** McKimm-Breschkin JL, Sahasrabudhe A, Blick TJ, Jowett AJ, Bethell RC
**Journal:** Methods Mol Med (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1385/1-59259-245-7:375](https://doi.org/10.1385/1-59259-245-7:375)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Med. 2000;24:375-82. doi: 10.1385/1-59259-245-7:375.

Virological Methods for the Generation and Characterization of Influenza Viruses 
with Reduced Sensitivity to 4-Guanidino-Neu5Ac2en.

McKimm-Breschkin JL, Sahasrabudhe A, Blick TJ, Jowett AJ, Bethell RC.

The compound 4-guanidino-Neu5Ac2en (zanamivir) has been described as a selective 
inhibitor of the influenza virus neuraminidase (NA) (1). Viruses that are less 
sensitive to this inhibitor can be isolated after several passages in MDCK cells 
in the presence of the inhibitor. Variants isolated so far have had mutations 
predominantly in the hemagglutinin (HA) gene (2). Many of these mutations appear 
to lower the affinity of the HA for the cellular receptor, so that there is less 
requirement for significant NA activity for the newly synthesized progeny virus 
to elute. There are three reports of a mutation in the NA gene, all at the same 
conserved site, glu 119 (3-5). In this chapter, the authors describe methods for 
the isolation of the mutants, and for their characterization in cell culture 
based assays.

DOI: 10.1385/1-59259-245-7:375
PMID: 21331924