---
reference_id: "PMID:39697716"
title: "Immunotherapy for locally advanced and metastatic basal cell carcinoma: a narrative review."
authors:
- Li X
- Wang H
- Lu Q
journal: Transl Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.21037/tcr-24-742
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunotherapy for locally advanced and metastatic basal cell carcinoma: a narrative review.
**Authors:** Li X, Wang H, Lu Q
**Journal:** Transl Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tcr-24-742](https://doi.org/10.21037/tcr-24-742)

## Content

1. Transl Cancer Res. 2024 Nov 30;13(11):6565-6575. doi: 10.21037/tcr-24-742.
Epub  2024 Nov 6.

Immunotherapy for locally advanced and metastatic basal cell carcinoma: a
narrative review.

Li X(1)(2), Wang H(1), Lu Q(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Binhaiwan Central Hospital of Dongguan, Dongguan,
China.
(3)The First Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common
malignancy of humankind, characterized by its low propensity for metastasis and
its high recurrence rate. Surgical intervention is the predominant therapeutic
approach. However, for cases of locally advanced BCC (laBCC) and metastatic BCC
(mBCC), systematic therapy may be the first option. In recent years, tumor
immunotherapy has garnered significant attention within the scientific
community. And it has progressively demonstrated its efficacy in the treatment
of laBCC and mBCC. This review aims to summarize the characteristics of immune
microenvironment, biomarkers, and immunotherapies of BCC, and provide a
reference for further research on BCC immunotherapy.
METHODS: We searched literature in PubMed database and Web of Science and
considered all study types written in English from 2013 to 2024.
KEY CONTENT AND FINDINGS: The alteration of the immune microenvironment is a
pivotal factor in the progression of BCC. The expression levels of sex
determining region Y (SRY)-box 2 (SOX2) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)
have emerged as potential prognostic biomarkers for BCC. And they are promising
therapeutic targets for laBCC and mBCC. For patients presenting with laBCC or
mBCC, a spectrum of immunotherapeutic approaches is being explored, including
inhibition of the programmed death receptor 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand
1 (PD-L1), blockade of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4), lymphocyte
activation gene 3 (LAG-3) inhibition therapy, the use of chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR)-T cells, and vaccination. Cemiplimab is the first immune
checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) approved by the Food and Drug Administration for
refractory BCC, marking a major breakthrough in BCC immunotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunotherapies have shown efficacy in clinical studies. In the
future, more multicenter studies with large samples are needed to further
explore the efficacy and safety of immunotherapy for BCC.

2024 AME Publishing Company. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tcr-24-742
PMCID: PMC11651781
PMID: 39697716

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://tcr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tcr-24-742/coif). The authors
have no conflicts of interest to declare.
