---
reference_id: PMID:29063640
title: "Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia complex of the Hohara focus of the Kii Peninsula: A multiple proteinopathy?"
authors:
- Mimuro M
- Yoshida M
- Kuzuhara S
- Kokubo Y
journal: Neuropathology
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/neup.12434
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/pathology
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Inclusion Bodies/pathology
- Japan
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neurofibrillary Tangles/pathology
- alpha-Synuclein/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia complex of the Hohara focus of the Kii Peninsula: A multiple proteinopathy?
**Authors:** Mimuro M, Yoshida M, Kuzuhara S, Kokubo Y
**Journal:** Neuropathology (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/neup.12434](https://doi.org/10.1111/neup.12434)

## Content

1. Neuropathology. 2018 Feb;38(1):98-107. doi: 10.1111/neup.12434. Epub 2017 Oct 
23.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia complex of the Hohara 
focus of the Kii Peninsula: A multiple proteinopathy?

Mimuro M(1), Yoshida M(1), Kuzuhara S(2), Kokubo Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Institute for Medical Science of Aging, Aichi 
Medical University, Nagakute, Japan.
(2)School of Nursing, Suzuka University of Medical Science, Suzuka, Japan.
(3)Kii ALS/PDC Research Center, Mie University, Graduate School of Regional 
Innovation Studies, Tsu, Japan.

The high incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC) has been previously known in the Kii 
Peninsula of Japan and in Guam. Recently, the accumulation of various proteins, 
such as tau, trans-activation response DNA binding protein 43 kDa (TDP-43), and 
alpha-synuclein (αSyn), was reported in the brains of patients with ALS/PDC in 
Guam. To confirm whether similar findings are present in Kii ALS/PDC, we 
neuropathologically examined the brains and spinal cords of 18 patients with 
ALS/PDC (clinical diagnoses: eight ALS and 10 PDC) in Hohara Village, which is 
the eastern focus of Kii ALS. The average age at death was 71.6 years, and 16 
patients (88.9%) had a family history of ALS/PDC. Autopsy specimens were 
immunohistochemically examined with antibodies against four major proteins. 
Neurofibrillary tangles, including ghost tangles, and tau-positive astrocytes 
were distributed widely in all of the brains examined, and TDP-43-positive 
neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions were observed mainly in the limbic system. 
Synuclein pathology was present in 14 patients (77.8%). These patients were 
classified into three pathological subtypes according to the most prominent 
proteinopathy: the tauopathy-dominant type, the TDP-43 proteinopathy-dominant 
type, and the synucleinopathy-dominant type. Five patients with severe tau 
deposition showed clinical features of atypical parkinsonism and dementia with 
or without motor neuron disease. Eight patients were predominated by 
phosphorylated TDP-43 inclusions and clinically showed ALS, and five patients 
were predominated by synuclein pathology and clinically showed signs of PDC. 
Based on the common characteristic tau pathology, three subtypes seemed to be 
pathologically continuous on a spectrum of a single disease. Thus, we conclude 
that ALS/PDC in the Hohara focus of the Kii Peninsula is a single disease 
characterized neuropathologically by a multiple proteinopathy, even though the 
clinical manifestations of the three subtypes differed from each other. It 
remains unclear whether the coexistence of the three proteinopathies was 
incidental or pathogenetically related.

© 2017 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12434
PMID: 29063640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]