---
reference_id: "PMID:26920716"
title: "Prognostic factors in acute promyelocytic leukemia: strategies to define high-risk patients."
authors:
- Testa U
- Lo-Coco F
journal: Ann Hematol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00277-016-2622-1
keywords:
- "Antigens, CD/analysis"
- "Antigens, Neoplasm/analysis"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Arsenic Trioxide
- "Arsenicals/administration & dosage"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Chromosome Aberrations
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation/etiology, mortality"
- "Hemorrhagic Disorders/etiology, mortality"
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/blood, complications, drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Leukocyte Count
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/blood, genetics"
- "Oxides/administration & dosage"
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
- Tandem Repeat Sequences
- Treatment Outcome
- "Tretinoin/administration & dosage"
- Tumor Protein p73
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
- fms-Like Tyrosine Kinase 3/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic factors in acute promyelocytic leukemia: strategies to define high-risk patients.
**Authors:** Testa U, Lo-Coco F
**Journal:** Ann Hematol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00277-016-2622-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00277-016-2622-1)

## Content

1. Ann Hematol. 2016 Apr;95(5):673-80. doi: 10.1007/s00277-016-2622-1. Epub 2016
Feb 26.

Prognostic factors in acute promyelocytic leukemia: strategies to define
high-risk patients.

Testa U(1), Lo-Coco F(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore
di Sanità, Rome, Italy. ugo.testa@iss.it.
(2)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University Tor Vergata, Rome,
Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Neuro-Oncohematology, Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy.

All trans retinoic acid (ATRA) has revolutionized the therapy of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Treatment of this leukemia with ATRA in
combination with chemotherapy has resulted in complete remission rates >90 % and
long-term remission rates above 80 %. Furthermore, the combination of ATRA and
arsenic trioxide (ATO) was shown to be safe and effective in frontline treatment
and, for patients with low and intermediate risk disease, possibly superior to
the standard ATRA and anthracycline-based regimen. However, in spite of this
tremendous progress, APL still remains associated with a high incidence of early
death due to the frequent occurrence of an abrupt bleeding diathesis. This
hemorrhagic syndrome more frequently develops in high-risk APL patients,
currently defined as those exhibiting >10 × 10(9)/L WBC at presentation. In
addition to high WBC count, other molecular and immunophenotypic features have
been associated with high-risk APL. Among them, the expression in APL blasts of
the stem/progenitor cell antigen CD34, the neural adhesion molecule (CD56), and
the T cell antigen CD2 help to identify a subset of patients at higher risk of
relapse and often the expression of these markers is associated with high WBC
count. At the molecular level, the short PML/RARA isoform and FLT3-internal
tandem duplication (ITD) mutations have been associated with increased relapse
risk. These observations indicate that extended immunophenotypic and molecular
characterization of APL at diagnosis including evaluation of CD2, CD56, and CD34
antigens and of FLT3 mutations may help to better design risk-adapted treatment
in this disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-016-2622-1
PMID: 26920716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
