---
reference_id: "PMID:41483695"
title: "Designing of a multi-epitope vaccine targeting enterovirus D68: An integrated immunoinformatic and reverse vaccinology approach."
authors:
- Almohaimeed HM
- Almars AI
- Alkhorayef N
- Basri AM
- Alsulaimani F
- Shahbaz M
- Alshabrmi FM
- Alam S
- Muhammad T
- Shahab M
journal: Comput Biol Med
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2025.111433
keywords:
- "Viral Vaccines/immunology, chemistry"
- "Enterovirus D, Human/immunology"
- Humans
- "Epitopes, T-Lymphocyte/immunology, chemistry"
- Vaccinology
- "Epitopes, B-Lymphocyte/immunology, chemistry"
- Molecular Docking Simulation
- "Enterovirus Infections/prevention & control, immunology"
- Computational Biology
- Molecular Dynamics Simulation
- Vaccine Development
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Designing of a multi-epitope vaccine targeting enterovirus D68: An integrated immunoinformatic and reverse vaccinology approach.
**Authors:** Almohaimeed HM, Almars AI, Alkhorayef N, Basri AM, Alsulaimani F, Shahbaz M, Alshabrmi FM, Alam S, Muhammad T, Shahab M
**Journal:** Comput Biol Med (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.compbiomed.2025.111433](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2025.111433)

## Content

1. Comput Biol Med. 2026 Feb 1;202:111433. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2025.111433.
 Epub 2026 Jan 2.

Designing of a multi-epitope vaccine targeting enterovirus D68: An integrated
immunoinformatic and reverse vaccinology approach.

Almohaimeed HM(1), Almars AI(2), Alkhorayef N(3), Basri AM(4), Alsulaimani F(4),
Shahbaz M(5), Alshabrmi FM(6), Alam S(7), Muhammad T(8), Shahab M(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Science, College of Medicine, Princess Nourah bint
Abdulrahman University, P.O.Box 84428, Riyadh, 11671, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Medial Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Applied Medical Science,
King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, 21589, Saudi Arabia; Editome: Precision Gene
Editing Unit, King Fahad Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, Al-Quway'iyah, Shaqra University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Medial Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Applied Medical Science,
King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Faculty of Chemistry, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 2, 30-387,
Krakow, Poland; School of Exact and Natural Sciences, Jagiellonian University,
Łojasiewicza 11, 30-348, Krakow, Poland.
(6)Department of Medical Laboratories, College of Applied Medical Sciences,
Qassim University, Buraydah, 51452, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Botany, Mirza Ghalib College, Magadh University, Gaya, Bihar,
India. Electronic address: sarfaraziisc@gmail.com.
(8)Molecular Neuropsychiatry and Development (MiND) Lab, Campbell Family Mental
Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON,
Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada.
(9)Key Laboratory of Computer-Aided Drug Design of Dongguan City, The First
Dongguan Affiliated Hospital, School of Pharmacy, Guangdong Medical University,
Dongguan, 523710, China; Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Precision Drug
Design of Guangdong Medical University, Key Laboratory for Research and
Development of Natural Drugs of Guangdong, Guangdong Medical University,
Dongguan, China.

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) is an enterovirus known for causing respiratory
infections, as well as flaccid myelitis, meningitis and encephalitis. Despite
the efforts, no licensed vaccine against EV-D68 is currently available. Vaccine
development efforts are ongoing; however, the process is complex and requires
extensive clinical validation. In contrast, immunoinformatic is a rapidly
expanding area with the potential to significantly influence the therapeutic
interventions and vaccine development for infectious diseases. Herein,
immunoinformatic and reverse vaccinology strategies were utilized to design a
multi-epitope vaccine construct targeting EV-D68 virus. In this connection,
three virulent proteins were selected for analysis based on their immunogenic
characteristics. Further, B-cells and T-cells epitopes were predicted and
connected through suitable linkers and adjuvant. The predicted T-cell epitopes
within the vaccine construct exhibited a significant worldwide population
coverage. Moreover, Robetta was utilized to predict the 3D structure of the
vaccine construct. Subsequently the molecular docking simulation of construct
was employed to study the molecular interactions by using Toll-like receptors as
target proteins and further subjected to MD simulation. The results reveal the
stability of the vaccine-receptor complex throughout the simulation. Finally, in
silico cloning showed potential for the predicted vaccine within the Escherichia
coli expression system. These findings provide valuable insights that may guide
subsequent experimental studies and contribute meaningfully to the early phases
of EV-D68 vaccine research and development. By streamlining candidate selection
and optimizing design parameters, our findings holds promise for accelerating
the transition from computational predictions to effective vaccine formulations.

Copyright © 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2025.111433
PMID: 41483695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
report there are no competing interests to declare.
