---
reference_id: "PMID:27114462"
title: "Recurrent abnormalities can be used for risk group stratification in pediatric AMKL: a retrospective intergroup study."
authors:
- de Rooij JD
- Masetti R
- van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM
- Cayuela JM
- Trka J
- Reinhardt D
- Rasche M
- Sonneveld E
- Alonzo TA
- Fornerod M
- Zimmermann M
- Pigazzi M
- Pieters R
- Meshinchi S
- Zwaan CM
- Locatelli F
journal: Blood
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-01-695551
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Aberrations
- "Chromosomes, Human/genetics"
- Female
- Gene Rearrangement
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Infant
- "Leukemia, Megakaryoblastic, Acute/genetics, mortality"
- Male
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent abnormalities can be used for risk group stratification in pediatric AMKL: a retrospective intergroup study.
**Authors:** de Rooij JD, Masetti R, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Cayuela JM, Trka J, Reinhardt D, Rasche M, Sonneveld E, Alonzo TA, Fornerod M, Zimmermann M, Pigazzi M, Pieters R, Meshinchi S, Zwaan CM, Locatelli F
**Journal:** Blood (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2016-01-695551](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2016-01-695551)

## Content

1. Blood. 2016 Jun 30;127(26):3424-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-01-695551. Epub
2016  Apr 25.

Recurrent abnormalities can be used for risk group stratification in pediatric 
AMKL: a retrospective intergroup study.

de Rooij JD(1), Masetti R(2), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(3), Cayuela JM(4), Trka 
J(5), Reinhardt D(6), Rasche M(6), Sonneveld E(7), Alonzo TA(8), Fornerod M(1), 
Zimmermann M(9), Pigazzi M(10), Pieters R(11), Meshinchi S(12), Zwaan CM(1), 
Locatelli F(13).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center-Sophia Children's 
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;
(2)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy;
(3)Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center-Sophia Children's 
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric 
Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands;
(4)Laboratory of Hematology, University Hospital Saint-Louis, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris and EA3518, University Paris Diderot, Paris, France;
(5)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, 2nd Medical School, Charles University, 
Prague, Czech Republic;
(6)Acute Myeloid Leukemia-Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster Study Group, Pediatric 
Hematology/Oncology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany;
(7)Dutch Childhood Oncology Group, The Hague, The Netherlands;
(8)Children's Oncology Group, Monrovia, CA;
(9)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany;
(10)Onco-Hematology, Dipartimento di Salute della Donna e del Bambino, 
University of Padova, Padova, Italy;
(11)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands;
(12)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA;
(13)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a 
Carattere Scientifico, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy; and 
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Comment in
    Blood. 2016 Jun 30;127(26):3299-300. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-05-715045.

Genetic abnormalities and early treatment response are the main prognostic 
factors in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) 
is a rare subtype of AML. Deep sequencing has identified CBFA2T3/GLIS2 and 
NUP98/KDM5A as recurrent aberrations, occurring in similar frequencies as 
RBM15/MKL1 and KMT2A-rearrangements. We studied whether these cytogenetic 
aberrations can be used for risk group stratification. To assess frequencies and 
outcome parameters of recurrent cytogenetic aberrations in AMKL, samples and 
clinical data of patients treated by the Associazione Italiana Ematologia 
Oncologia Pediatrica, Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster Study Group, Children's Oncology 
Group, Dutch Childhood Oncology Group, and the Saint Louis Hôpital were 
collected, enabling us to screen 153 newly diagnosed pediatric AMKL cases for 
the aforementioned aberrations and to study their clinical characteristics and 
outcome. CBFA2T3/GLIS2 was identified in 16% of the cases; RBM15/MKL1, in 12%; 
NUP98/KDM5A and KMT2A rearrangements, in 9% each; and monosomy 7, in 6%. These 
aberrations were mutually exclusive. RBM15/MKL1-rearranged patients were 
significantly younger. No significant differences in sex and white blood cell 
count were found. NUP98/KDM5A, CBFA2T3/GLIS2, KMT2A-rearranged lesions and 
monosomy 7 (NCK-7) independently predicted a poor outcome, compared with 
RBM15/MKL1-rearranged patients and those with AMKL not carrying these molecular 
lesions. NCK-7-patients (n = 61) showed a 4-year probability of overall survival 
of 35 ± 6% vs 70 ± 5% in the RBM15/MKL1-other groups (n = 92, P < .0001) and 
4-year probability of event-free survival of 33 ± 6% vs 62 ± 5% (P = .0013), the 
4-year cumulative incidence of relapse being 42 ± 7% and 19 ± 4% (P = .003), 
respectively. We conclude that these genetic aberrations may be used for risk 
group stratification of pediatric AMKL and for treatment tailoring.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2016-01-695551
PMCID: PMC5161011
PMID: 27114462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]