---
reference_id: "PMID:27787898"
title: "Role of a heterotrimeric G-protein, Gi2, in the corticogenesis: possible involvement in periventricular nodular heterotopia and intellectual disability."
authors:
- Hamada N
- Negishi Y
- Mizuno M
- Miya F
- Hattori A
- Okamoto N
- Kato M
- Tsunoda T
- Yamasaki M
- Kanemura Y
- Kosaki K
- Tabata H
- Saitoh S
- Nagata KI
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/jnc.13878
keywords:
- Animals
- Avoidance Learning/physiology
- COS Cells
- "Cerebral Cortex/diagnostic imaging, growth & development, metabolism"
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Female
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunit, Gi2/deficiency, physiology"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred ICR"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Periventricular Nodular Heterotopia/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of a heterotrimeric G-protein, Gi2, in the corticogenesis: possible involvement in periventricular nodular heterotopia and intellectual disability.
**Authors:** Hamada N, Negishi Y, Mizuno M, Miya F, Hattori A, Okamoto N, Kato M, Tsunoda T, Yamasaki M, Kanemura Y, Kosaki K, Tabata H, Saitoh S, Nagata KI
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jnc.13878](https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13878)

## Content

1. J Neurochem. 2017 Jan;140(1):82-95. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13878. Epub 2016 Nov 29.

Role of a heterotrimeric G-protein, Gi2, in the corticogenesis: possible
involvement in periventricular nodular heterotopia and intellectual disability.

Hamada N(1)(2), Negishi Y(3), Mizuno M(1), Miya F(4)(5), Hattori A(3), Okamoto
N(6), Kato M(7), Tsunoda T(4)(5), Yamasaki M(8), Kanemura Y(9)(10), Kosaki
K(11), Tabata H(1), Saitoh S(3), Nagata KI(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute for Developmental Research,
Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, Japan.
(2)Research Fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.
(4)Department of Medical Science Mathematics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Laboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute
for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Takatsuki General Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(9)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Clinical Research, Osaka
National Hospital, National Hospital Organization, Osaka, Japan.
(10)Department of Neurosurgery, Institute for Clinical Research, Osaka National
Hospital, National Hospital Organization, Osaka, Japan.
(11)Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.
(12)Department of Neurochemistry, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

We analyzed the role of a heterotrimeric G-protein, Gi2, in the development of
the cerebral cortex. Acute knockdown of the α-subunit (Gαi2) with in utero
electroporation caused delayed radial migration of excitatory neurons during
corticogenesis, perhaps because of impaired morphology. The migration phenotype
was rescued by an RNAi-resistant version of Gαi2. On the other hand, silencing
of Gαi2 did not affect axon elongation, dendritic arbor formation or
neurogenesis at ventricular zone in vivo. When behavior analyses were conducted
with acute Gαi2-knockdown mice, they showed defects in social interaction,
novelty recognition and active avoidance learning as well as increased anxiety.
Subsequently, using whole-exome sequencing analysis, we identified a de novo
heterozygous missense mutation (c.680C>T; p.Ala227Val) in the GNAI2 gene
encoding Gαi2 in an individual with periventricular nodular heterotopia and
intellectual disability. Collectively, the phenotypes in the knockdown
experiments suggest a role of Gαi2 in the brain development, and impairment of
its function might cause defects in neuronal functions which lead to
neurodevelopmental disorders.

© 2016 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.13878
PMID: 27787898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
