---
reference_id: "PMID:37628618"
title: Aicardi Syndrome Is a Genetically Heterogeneous Disorder.
authors:
- Ha TT
- Burgess R
- Newman M
- Moey C
- Mandelstam SA
- Gardner AE
- Ivancevic AM
- Pham D
- Kumar R
- Smith N
- Patel C
- Malone S
- Ryan MM
- Calvert S
- van Eyk CL
- Lardelli M
- Berkovic SF
- Leventer RJ
- Richards LJ
- Scheffer IE
- Gecz J
- Corbett MA
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14081565
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Animals
- Mice
- Aicardi Syndrome/genetics
- Zebrafish/genetics
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Genes, X-Linked/genetics"
- Biological Assay
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aicardi Syndrome Is a Genetically Heterogeneous Disorder.
**Authors:** Ha TT, Burgess R, Newman M, Moey C, Mandelstam SA, Gardner AE, Ivancevic AM, Pham D, Kumar R, Smith N, Patel C, Malone S, Ryan MM, Calvert S, van Eyk CL, Lardelli M, Berkovic SF, Leventer RJ, Richards LJ, Scheffer IE, Gecz J, Corbett MA
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14081565](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14081565)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jul 31;14(8):1565. doi: 10.3390/genes14081565.

Aicardi Syndrome Is a Genetically Heterogeneous Disorder.

Ha TT(1)(2), Burgess R(3), Newman M(4), Moey C(5), Mandelstam SA(6)(7), Gardner 
AE(8), Ivancevic AM(9), Pham D(8), Kumar R(8), Smith N(8)(10), Patel C(11), 
Malone S(12), Ryan MM(6)(13)(14), Calvert S(15), van Eyk CL(8), Lardelli M(4), 
Berkovic SF(3), Leventer RJ(6)(13)(14), Richards LJ(5)(16), Scheffer 
IE(3)(6)(13)(14)(17), Gecz J(1)(8)(18), Corbett MA(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
(2)Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, Centre for Cancer Biology, An 
Alliance between SA Pathology and the University of South Australia, Adelaide, 
SA 5000, Australia.
(3)Epilepsy Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences, 
University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Heidelberg, VIC 3084, Australia.
(4)Alzheimer's Disease Genetics Laboratory, School of Biological Sciences, 
Faculty of Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
(5)The Queensland Brain Institute, The School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia.
(6)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health 
Sciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.
(7)Department of Medical Imaging, The Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC 
3052, Australia.
(8)Adelaide Medical School and Robinson Research Institute, Faculty of Health 
and Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
(9)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, College of Arts 
and Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, SA 
5006, Australia.
(11)Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Herston, QLD 
4029, Australia.
(12)Queensland Children's Hospital, South Brisbane, QLD 4101, Australia.
(13)Department of Neurology, The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC 3052, 
Australia.
(14)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.
(15)Department of Neurosciences, Queensland Children's Hospital, South Brisbane, 
QLD 4101, Australia.
(16)Department of Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Washington University, St 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(17)Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Parkville, VIC 3052, 
Australia.
(18)South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, SA 5000, 
Australia.

Aicardi Syndrome (AIC) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder recognized by the 
classical triad of agenesis of the corpus callosum, chorioretinal lacunae and 
infantile epileptic spasms syndrome. The diagnostic criteria of AIC were revised 
in 2005 to include additional phenotypes that are frequently observed in this 
patient group. AIC has been traditionally considered as X-linked and male lethal 
because it almost exclusively affects females. Despite numerous genetic and 
genomic investigations on AIC, a unifying X-linked cause has not been 
identified. Here, we performed exome and genome sequencing of 10 females with 
AIC or suspected AIC based on current criteria. We identified a unique de novo 
variant, each in different genes: KMT2B, SLF1, SMARCB1, SZT2 and WNT8B, in five 
of these females. Notably, genomic analyses of coding and non-coding single 
nucleotide variants, short tandem repeats and structural variation highlighted a 
distinct lack of X-linked candidate genes. We assessed the likely pathogenicity 
of our candidate autosomal variants using the TOPflash assay for WNT8B and 
morpholino knockdown in zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos for other candidates. We 
show expression of Wnt8b and Slf1 are restricted to clinically relevant cortical 
tissues during mouse development. Our findings suggest that AIC is genetically 
heterogeneous with implicated genes converging on molecular pathways central to 
cortical development.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14081565
PMCID: PMC10454071
PMID: 37628618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.