---
reference_id: "PMID:31735781"
title: MYH7 Gene-Related Mutation p.V878L Identified in a Chinese Family with Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Du Y
- Wang Y
- Han X
- Feng Z
- Ma A
journal: Int Heart J
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1536/ihj.19-146
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MYH7 Gene-Related Mutation p.V878L Identified in a Chinese Family with Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Du Y, Wang Y, Han X, Feng Z, Ma A
**Journal:** Int Heart J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1536/ihj.19-146](https://doi.org/10.1536/ihj.19-146)

## Content

1. Int Heart J. 2019 Nov 30;60(6):1415-1420. doi: 10.1536/ihj.19-146. Epub 2019
Nov  15.

MYH7 Gene-Related Mutation p.V878L Identified in a Chinese Family with 
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.

Du Y(1), Wang Y(1), Han X(1), Feng Z(2), Ma A(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Ninth Hospital of Xi'an.
(3)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, Xi'an Jiaotong University.
(4)Key Laboratory of Environment and Genes Related to Diseases, Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Ministry of Education.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is one of the most common inherited 
cardiovascular diseases and possesses a high risk for sudden cardiac death. 
Although mutations in more than 20 genes have been reported to be associated 
with HCM thus far, the genetic backgrounds of most HCM patients are not fully 
understood. We performed a genetic analysis in a Chinese family that presented 
with HCM using next-generation sequencing (NGS). Clinical data, family 
histories, and blood samples were collected from the proband and family members. 
Five patients showed typical clinical symptoms of HCM. One subject was the 
victim of sudden cardiac death. By NGS, we determined that these subjects with 
HCM symptoms carried a missense heterozygous genetic mutation c.2632C>A 
(p.V878L) in the myosin heavy chain 7 (MYH7) gene with an autosomal dominant 
pattern of inheritance. Individuals without this mutation showed no symptoms or 
cardiac structural abnormalities related to HCM. Bioinformatics evaluation 
predicted this mutant as "damaging" and "disease causing". Additionally, 
sequence alignment showed that this mutant is located in an evolutionarily 
conserved region of MYH7 in multiple species. Our results describe a potentially 
pathogenic mutation associated with HCM, which may extend the spectrum of HCM 
phenotypes related to MYH7 gene mutations.

DOI: 10.1536/ihj.19-146
PMID: 31735781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]