---
reference_id: "PMID:35298417"
title: "Scabies: update on treatment and efforts for prevention and control in highly endemic settings."
authors:
- Widaty S
- Miranda E
- Cornain EF
- Rizky LA
journal: J Infect Dev Ctries
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3855/jidc.15222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scabies: update on treatment and efforts for prevention and control in highly endemic settings.
**Authors:** Widaty S, Miranda E, Cornain EF, Rizky LA
**Journal:** J Infect Dev Ctries (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3855/jidc.15222](https://doi.org/10.3855/jidc.15222)

## Content

1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2022 Feb 28;16(2):244-251. doi: 10.3855/jidc.15222.

Scabies: update on treatment and efforts for prevention and control in highly 
endemic settings.

Widaty S(1), Miranda E(2), Cornain EF(2), Rizky LA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Faculty of Medicine Universitas 
Indonesia, Dr. Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia. 
sandra.widaty@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Faculty of Medicine Universitas 
Indonesia, Dr. Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia.

Scabies is a contagious parasitic skin disease caused by Sarcoptes scabiei 
infestation which can be transmitted through direct or indirect contact. WHO 
classified scabies as a neglected tropical disease. The prevalence of scabies is 
high in certain countries ranging from 32.1% to 74%, especially in crowded 
conditions such as prisons, boarding schools, and orphanages. Indonesia is one 
of the most heavily affected countries worldwide. Scabies might cause great 
impact on patients, which includes decreased concentration and academic 
achievement at school, social stigma, sleep disturbances, and decreased economic 
productivity in community. Management of scabies with anti-scabies needs to be 
carried out appropriately, accompanied with treatment for all contacts. Mass 
treatment with permethrin cream or ivermectin can be given directly to patients. 
Prevention is conducted by providing medical treatment and breaking the chain of 
transmission. Source elimination and disinfection of fomites is very important. 
Participation of non-medical personnel such as teachers, cadres, and parents 
together with the local health workers (primary health care) is highly 
recommended. Using checklists or application can aid non-medical personnel to 
determine suspected cases, thus contributing to scabies elimination. Cooperation 
between patients, patient's family, health workers and other non-medical 
personnel will greatly reduce the prevalence of scabies and ultimately improve 
patient's quality of life. The aim of this review is to provide an update on 
scabies treatment and efforts for prevention and elimination, with focus on the 
situation in Indonesia.

Copyright (c) 2022 Sandra Widaty, Eliza Miranda, Emilina Faradila Cornain, 
Luddwi Achmad Rizky.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.15222
PMID: 35298417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No Conflict of Interest is declared