---
reference_id: "PMID:34361762"
title: The Ultrastructure of Tissue Damage by Amyloid Fibrils.
authors:
- Koike H
- Katsuno M
journal: Molecules
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/molecules26154611
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Ultrastructure of Tissue Damage by Amyloid Fibrils.
**Authors:** Koike H, Katsuno M
**Journal:** Molecules (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/molecules26154611](https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26154611)

## Content

1. Molecules. 2021 Jul 29;26(15):4611. doi: 10.3390/molecules26154611.

The Ultrastructure of Tissue Damage by Amyloid Fibrils.

Koike H(1), Katsuno M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya University, 
Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

Amyloidosis is a group of diseases that includes Alzheimer's disease, prion 
diseases, transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis, and immunoglobulin light chain (AL) 
amyloidosis. The mechanism of organ dysfunction resulting from amyloidosis has 
been a topic of debate. This review focuses on the ultrastructure of tissue 
damage resulting from amyloid deposition and therapeutic insights based on the 
pathophysiology of amyloidosis. Studies of nerve biopsy or cardiac autopsy 
specimens from patients with ATTR and AL amyloidoses show atrophy of cells near 
amyloid fibril aggregates. In addition to the stress or toxicity attributable to 
amyloid fibrils themselves, the toxicity of non-fibrillar states of 
amyloidogenic proteins, particularly oligomers, may also participate in the 
mechanisms of tissue damage. The obscuration of the basement and cytoplasmic 
membranes of cells near amyloid fibrils attributable to an affinity of 
components constituting these membranes to those of amyloid fibrils may also 
play an important role in tissue damage. Possible major therapeutic strategies 
based on pathophysiology of amyloidosis consist of the following: (1) reducing 
or preventing the production of causative proteins; (2) preventing the causative 
proteins from participating in the process of amyloid fibril formation; and/or 
(3) eliminating already-deposited amyloid fibrils. As the development of novel 
disease-modifying therapies such as short interfering RNA, antisense 
oligonucleotide, and monoclonal antibodies is remarkable, early diagnosis and 
appropriate selection of treatment is becoming more and more important for 
patients with amyloidosis.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26154611
PMCID: PMC8347239
PMID: 34361762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.