---
reference_id: "PMID:36300302"
title: A mutation in ATP11A causes autosomal-dominant auditory neuropathy type 2.
authors:
- Chepurwar S
- von Loh SM
- Wigger DC
- Neef J
- Frommolt P
- Beutner D
- Lang-Roth R
- Kubisch C
- Strenzke N
- Volk AE
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac267
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- "Hearing Loss, Central/genetics"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Mutation
- "Hair Cells, Auditory, Inner"
- Chromosomes
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in ATP11A causes autosomal-dominant auditory neuropathy type 2.
**Authors:** Chepurwar S, von Loh SM, Wigger DC, Neef J, Frommolt P, Beutner D, Lang-Roth R, Kubisch C, Strenzke N, Volk AE
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddac267](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddac267)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Mar 20;32(7):1083-1089. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddac267.

A mutation in ATP11A causes autosomal-dominant auditory neuropathy type 2.

Chepurwar S(1), von Loh SM(2), Wigger DC(3), Neef J(1), Frommolt P(2), Beutner 
D(4)(5), Lang-Roth R(5), Kubisch C(2), Strenzke N(1), Volk AE(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Auditory Neuroscience and SFB889, Göttingen University Medical 
Center, Göttingen 37075, Germany.
(2)Institute for Human Genetics, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 
20246, Germany.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm 89081, Germany.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Göttingen 
University Medical Center, Göttingen 37075, Germany.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany.

Auditory synaptopathy/neuropathy (AS/AN) is a distinct type of sensorineural 
hearing loss in which the cochlear sensitivity to sound (i.e. active cochlear 
amplification by outer hair cells) is preserved whereas sound encoding by inner 
hair cells and/or auditory nerve fibers is disrupted owing to genetic or 
environmental factors. Autosomal-dominant auditory neuropathy type 2 (AUNA2) was 
linked either to chromosomal bands 12q24 or 13q34 in a large German family in 
2017. By whole-genome sequencing, we now detected a 5500 bp deletion in ATP11A 
on chromosome 13q34 segregating with the phenotype in this family. ATP11A 
encodes a P-type ATPase that translocates phospholipids from the exoplasmic to 
the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane. The deletion affects both 
isoforms of ATP11A and activates a cryptic splice site leading to the formation 
of an alternative last exon. ATP11A carrying the altered C-terminus loses its 
flippase activity for phosphatidylserine. Atp11a is expressed in fibers and 
synaptic contacts of the auditory nerve and in the cochlear nucleus in mice, and 
conditional Atp11a knockout mice show a progressive reduction of the spiral 
ganglion neuron compound action potential, recapitulating the human phenotype of 
AN. By combining whole-genome sequencing, immunohistochemistry, in vitro 
functional assays and generation of a mouse model, we could thus identify a 
partial deletion of ATP11A as the genetic cause of AUNA2.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddac267
PMID: 36300302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]