---
reference_id: "PMID:38182487"
title: Tumour-based Mutational Profiles Predict Visceral Metastasis Outcome and Early Death in Prostate Cancer Patients.
authors:
- Cussenot O
- Timms KM
- Perrot E
- Blanchet P
- Brureau L
- Solimeno C
- Fromont G
- Comperat E
- Cancel-Tassin G
journal: Eur Urol Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.euo.2023.12.003
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Aged
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, mortality"
- Mutation
- Middle Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Protein/genetics
- beta Catenin/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- Prognosis
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Bone Neoplasms/secondary, genetics, mortality"
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Lymphatic Metastasis/genetics
- Microsatellite Instability
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tumour-based Mutational Profiles Predict Visceral Metastasis Outcome and Early Death in Prostate Cancer Patients.
**Authors:** Cussenot O, Timms KM, Perrot E, Blanchet P, Brureau L, Solimeno C, Fromont G, Comperat E, Cancel-Tassin G
**Journal:** Eur Urol Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.euo.2023.12.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euo.2023.12.003)

## Content

1. Eur Urol Oncol. 2024 Jun;7(3):597-604. doi: 10.1016/j.euo.2023.12.003. Epub
2024  Jan 5.

Tumour-based Mutational Profiles Predict Visceral Metastasis Outcome and Early
Death in Prostate Cancer Patients.

Cussenot O(1), Timms KM(2), Perrot E(3), Blanchet P(3), Brureau L(3), Solimeno
C(2), Fromont G(4), Comperat E(5), Cancel-Tassin G(6).

Author information:
(1)CeRePP, Paris, France; Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Myriad Genetics, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(3)Department of Urology, CHU Pointe-a-Pitre/Abymes, Pointe-à-Pitre, Guadeloupe,
France; Inserm, EHESP, Irset (Institut de recherche en santé, environnement et
travail) - UMR_S 1085, Pointe-à-Pitre, Guadeloupe, France.
(4)CeRePP, Paris, France; Faculté de Médecine, Inserm UMR1069 "Nutrition,
Croissance et Cancer" Université François Rabelais, Tours, France; Departments
of Pathology and Urology, CHRU Bretonneau, Tours, France.
(5)CeRePP, Paris, France; Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.
(6)CeRePP, Paris, France; GRC n°5 Predictive Onco-Urology, Sorbonne Université,
Paris, France. Electronic address: g.cancel@cerepp.org.

BACKGROUND: Visceral metastases are known to occur in advanced prostate cancer,
usually when the tumour is resistant to androgen deprivation and, have worse
outcomes regardless of therapies.
OBJECTIVE: To analyse genomic alterations in tumour samples according to their
lymphatic, bone, and visceral metastatic stages and overall survival.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We selected 200 patients with metastatic
prostate cancer. Genomic profiling of 111 genes and molecular signatures
(homologous recombination deficiency [HRD], microsatellite instability, and
tumour burden mutation) was performed with the MyChoice test (Myriad Genetics,
Inc, Salt Lake City, UT, USA).
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: The association between genomic
profiles and visceral metastatic evolution was evaluated using logistic
regression. Kaplan-Meier and Cox proportional hazard analyses were used for
analyses of early death.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: A total of 173 (87%) genomic profiles were obtained.
Eighty-four (49%) patients died during the follow-up period (median
duration = 76 mo). TP53 was the most frequently mutated gene, followed by FANC
genes, including BRCA2, and those of the Wnt-pathway (APC/CTNNB1). TP53 gene
mutations were more frequent in patients of European (42%) than in those of
African (16%) ancestry. An HRD score of >25 was predictive of FANC gene
mutations. The mutational status of TP53 (p < 0.001) and APC (p = 0.002) genes
were significantly associated with the risk of visceral metastases. The
mutational status of CTNNB1 (p = 0.001), TP53 (p = 0.015), BRCA2 (p = 0.027),
and FANC (p = 0.005) genes were significantly associated with an earlier age at
death. The limitations are the retrospective study design based on a selection
of genes and the low frequency of certain molecular events.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in the TP53 gene and genes (APC/CTNNB1) related to the
Wnt pathway are associated with metastatic visceral dissemination and early
death. These genomic alterations could be considered as markers to identify
prostate cancer patients at a high risk of life-threatening disease who might
benefit from more intensified treatment or new targeted therapies.
PATIENT SUMMARY: In this report, we evaluated the relationships between genomic
profiles (gene mutations and molecular signatures) of tumour samples from
patients with metastatic prostate cancer and early death. We found that
mutations of specific genes, notably TP53 and APC/CTNNB1 related to the Wnt
pathway, are associated with visceral metastatic progression and an earlier age
at death.

Copyright © 2023 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.euo.2023.12.003
PMID: 38182487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
