---
reference_id: "PMID:17934909"
title: "Neurotrophic factor receptor RET: structure, cell biology, and inherited diseases."
authors:
- Runeberg-Roos P
- Saarma M
journal: Ann Med
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1080/07853890701646256
keywords:
- Hirschsprung Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia/genetics
- Mutation
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics, physiology"
- "Receptors, Nerve Growth Factor/physiology"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Transcriptional Activation/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurotrophic factor receptor RET: structure, cell biology, and inherited diseases.
**Authors:** Runeberg-Roos P, Saarma M
**Journal:** Ann Med (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1080/07853890701646256](https://doi.org/10.1080/07853890701646256)

## Content

1. Ann Med. 2007;39(8):572-80. doi: 10.1080/07853890701646256.

Neurotrophic factor receptor RET: structure, cell biology, and inherited
diseases.

Runeberg-Roos P(1), Saarma M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter, University of Helsinki,
Finland.

RET (REarranged during Transfection) is a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase
that is activated by a complex consisting of a soluble glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family ligand (GFL) and a glycosyl
phosphatidylinositol-anchored co-receptor, GDNF family receptors alpha
(GFRalpha). RET signalling is crucial for the development of the enteric nervous
system. RET also regulates the development of sympathetic, parasympathetic,
motor, and sensory neurons, and is necessary for the postnatal maintenance of
dopaminergic neurons. The effect of GFLs on sensory, motor, and dopaminergic
neurons has raised clinical interest towards these ligands. Outside the nervous
system, RET is crucial for development of the kidney and plays a key role in
spermatogenesis. Inactivating mutations in RET cause the Hirschsprung's disease
characterized by megacolon aganglionosis. In contrast, activating mutations give
rise to different types of cancer, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A and type
2B, familial medullary thyroid carcinoma, and papillary thyroid carcinoma. The
multiple disease phenotypes correlate with differences in the molecular and cell
biological functions of different oncogenic RET proteins. In this review we
summarize how the different domains of the RET protein contribute to its normal
function and how mutations in these domains affect the function of the receptor.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890701646256
PMID: 17934909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
