---
reference_id: "PMID:17070582"
title: "Prevalence and associations of enhanced retinal arteriolar light reflex: a new look at an old sign."
authors:
- Kaushik S
- Tan AG
- Mitchell P
- Wang JJ
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2006.06.046
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Arterioles/pathology
- Blood Glucose/analysis
- Blood Pressure/physiology
- Cause of Death
- Cholesterol/blood
- "Cholesterol, LDL/blood"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypertension/diagnosis, etiology, mortality"
- Light
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Photography/methods
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Reflex
- Retinal Artery/pathology
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, mortality"
- Risk Factors
- Triglycerides/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence and associations of enhanced retinal arteriolar light reflex: a new look at an old sign.
**Authors:** Kaushik S, Tan AG, Mitchell P, Wang JJ
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2006.06.046](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2006.06.046)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2007 Jan;114(1):113-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2006.06.046. Epub
 2006 Oct 27.

Prevalence and associations of enhanced retinal arteriolar light reflex: a new 
look at an old sign.

Kaushik S(1), Tan AG, Mitchell P, Wang JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Center for Vision Research, Westmead Millennium 
Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

PURPOSE: To assess the prevalence, associated risk factors and prognosis 
(mortality) of the enhanced retinal arteriolar light reflex sign in an older 
Australian population.
DESIGN: Population-based cross-sectional study.
PARTICIPANTS: Three thousand six hundred fifty-four participants (82.4% 
response) ages >/=49 years from Australia's Blue Mountains region.
METHODS: Retinal photographs of participants were graded for presence and 
severity of the enhanced arteriolar light reflex sign by comparison with 
standard photographs. Associations with systemic factors (subject-specific) and 
ocular variables (eye-specific) were assessed by logistic regression. Mortality 
data were obtained using the Australian National Death Index. Hazard ratios were 
calculated using Cox regression.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Prevalence of enhanced arteriolar light reflex and 
associations with demographic variables (age, gender), blood pressure, blood 
parameters, health risk behaviors, cataract, retinal vessel wall signs, 
retinopathy, and 10-year incident mortality.
RESULTS: The enhanced arteriolar light reflex sign was found in 1053 
participants (31.7%, including 28.8% graded as mild and 2.9% as marked). 
Prevalence decreased with age (36.0%, 37.7%, 28.0%, and 18.8% for age groups < 
60, 60-69, 70-79 and > or = 80 years, respectively, P(trend)<0.0001); odds ratio 
(OR) 0.78; and 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.72 to 0.85 per decade. Persons 
with cataract were less likely to have mildly enhanced light reflex (OR, 0.74; 
CI 0.64-0.87). After multivariate adjustment, mildly enhanced light reflex was 
significantly associated with serum glucose (OR 1.11 per SD increase), total 
cholesterol (OR 1.11), low-density lipoprotein (OR 1.55), triglycerides (OR 
1.11), platelets (OR 0.89), and body mass index (OR 1.12). Markedly enhanced 
light reflex was significantly associated with mean arterial blood pressure (OR 
1.24), heavy alcohol consumption (OR 2.66, > or = 40 grams alcohol per day), and 
serum glucose (OR 1.16). Strong associations were demonstrated between presence 
of mildly enhanced light reflex and either arteriovenous nicking (OR 3.12) or 
retinopathy (OR 1.96). There was no association between mildly or markedly 
enhanced light reflex and either all-cause or vascular mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: In this older population, the enhanced retinal arteriolar light 
reflex sign was a relatively common finding. Although some associations of this 
sign with vascular risk factors were found, only a marked level of enhanced 
light reflex was correlated with elevated blood pressure, but not with poor 
survival.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2006.06.046
PMID: 17070582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]