---
reference_id: "PMID:20301558"
title: FMR1 Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Hunter JE
- Berry-Kravis E
- Hipp H
- Todd PK
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FMR1 Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Hunter JE, Berry-Kravis E, Hipp H, Todd PK

## Content

1. FMR1 Disorders.

Hunter JE(1), Berry-Kravis E(2), Hipp H(3), Todd PK(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
1998 Jun 16 [updated 2024 May 16].

Author information:
(1)Center for Health Research, Kaiser Permanente Northwest, Portland, Oregon
(2)Departments of Pediatrics, Neurological Sciences, and Biochemistry, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois
(3)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: FMR1 disorders include fragile X syndrome (FXS),
fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS), and fragile X-associated
primary ovarian insufficiency (FXPOI). Fragile X syndrome occurs in individuals
with an FMR1 full mutation or other loss-of-function variant and is nearly
always characterized in affected males by developmental delay and intellectual
disability along with a variety of behavioral issues. Autism spectrum disorder
is present in 50%-70% of individuals with FXS. Affected males may have
characteristic craniofacial features (which become more obvious with age) and
medical problems including hypotonia, gastroesophageal reflux, strabismus,
seizures, sleep disorders, joint laxity, pes planus, scoliosis, and recurrent
otitis media. Adults may have mitral valve prolapse or aortic root dilatation.
The physical and behavioral features seen in males with FXS have been reported
in females heterozygous for the FMR1 full mutation, but with lower frequency and
milder involvement. FXTAS occurs in individuals who have an FMR1 premutation and
is characterized by late-onset, progressive cerebellar ataxia and intention
tremor followed by cognitive impairment. Psychiatric disorders are common. Age
of onset is typically between 60 and 65 years and is more common among males who
are hemizygous for the premutation (40%) than among females who are heterozygous
for the premutation (16%-20%). FXPOI, defined as hypergonadotropic hypogonadism
before age 40 years, has been observed in 20% of women who carry a premutation
allele compared to 1% in the general population.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of an FMR1 disorder is established through the
use of specialized molecular genetic testing to detect CGG trinucleotide repeat
expansion in the 5' UTR of FMR1 with abnormal gene methylation for most alleles
with >200 repeats. Typically, a definite diagnosis of FXS requires the presence
of a full-mutation repeat size (>200 CGG repeats) while the diagnosis of FXTAS
or FXPOI is associated with a premutation-sized repeat (55-200 CGG repeats). It
should be noted that typical multigene panels and comprehensive genomic testing
(exome or genome sequencing) are useful only when no CGG repeat expansion is
detected but FXS is still suspected.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Fragile X syndrome: supportive and
symptom-based therapy for children and adults typically consisting of a dual
approach of psychopharmacologic treatment of symptoms as needed in conjunction
with therapeutic services, such as behavioral intervention, speech and language
therapy, occupational therapy, and individualized educational support; routine
treatment of medical problems. FXTAS: symptomatic and supportive and should be
tailored to the individual. FXPOI: Gynecologic or reproductive endocrinologic
evaluation can provide appropriate treatment and counseling for reproductive
considerations and hormone replacement. Agents/circumstances to avoid: FXTAS:
typical and atypical antipsychotics with significant anti-dopaminergic effects
and metoclopramide, which can exacerbate parkinsonism; anticholinergic agents,
which can exacerbate cognitive complaints; excessive alcohol, which can enhance
cerebellar dysfunction and postural instability; agents with known cerebellar
toxicity or side effects. FXPOI: tobacco use as this decreases ovarian reserve
and the age of onset of FXPOI.
GENETIC COUNSELING: FMR1 disorders are inherited in an X-linked manner. All
mothers of individuals with an FMR1 full mutation (expansion >200 CGG
trinucleotide repeats and abnormal methylation) are heterozygous for an FMR1
pathogenic variant. Mothers and their female relatives who are heterozygous for
a premutation are at increased risk for FXTAS, FXPOI, and fragile X-associated
neuropsychiatric disorders (FXAND); those with a full mutation may have findings
of fragile X syndrome. All are at increased risk of having offspring with
fragile X syndrome, FXTAS, FXPOI, or FXAND. Males with premutations are at
increased risk for FXTAS. Males with FXTAS will transmit their FMR1 premutation
expansion to all of their daughters, who will be heterozygous for a premutation
and at increased risk for FXTAS, FXPOI, and FXAND. Males with FXTAS do not
transmit their FMR1 premutation to sons. Prenatal testing for a pregnancy at
increased risk and preimplantation genetic testing are possible once an expanded
(or altered) FMR1 allele has been identified in a family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301558
