---
reference_id: "PMID:20301685"
title: Wilson Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Weiss KH
- Schilsky M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilson Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Weiss KH, Schilsky M

## Content

1. Wilson Disease.

Weiss KH(1), Schilsky M(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Oct 22 [updated 2023 Jan 12].

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Salem Medical Center, Heidelberg, Germany
(2)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Wilson disease is a disorder of copper metabolism 
that, when untreated, can present with hepatic, neurologic, or psychiatric 
disturbances – or a combination of these – in individuals ages three years to 
older than 70 years. Manifestations in untreated individuals vary among and 
within families. Liver disease can include recurrent jaundice, simple acute 
self-limited hepatitis-like illness, autoimmune-type hepatitis, fulminant 
hepatic failure, or chronic liver disease. Neurologic presentations can include 
dysarthria, movement disorders (tremors, involuntary movements, chorea, 
choreoathetosis), dystonia (mask-like facies, rigidity, gait disturbance, 
pseudobulbar involvement), dysautonomia, seizures, sleep disorders, or insomnia. 
Psychiatric disturbances can include depression, bipolar disorder / bipolar 
spectrum disorder, neurotic behaviors, personality changes, or psychosis. Other 
multisystem involvement can include the eye (Kayser-Fleischer rings), hemolytic 
anemia, the kidneys, the endocrine glands, and the heart.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Wilson disease is established in most 
instances by a combination of biochemical findings (low serum ceruloplasmin 
concentration, low serum concentration of total copper, and increased urinary 
copper excretion) and/or detection of biallelic pathogenic (or likely 
pathogenic) variants in ATP7B identified by molecular genetic testing, based on 
the diagnostic scoring system developed at the 8th International Meeting on 
Wilson Disease.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Lifelong medical interventions to 
prevent/treat copper accumulation need to be instituted as soon as possible in 
all individuals with Wilson disease whether they are asymptomatic (i.e., 
individuals with biallelic ATP7B pathogenic variants who have no clinical 
manifestations or tissue damage related to Wilson disease), clinically 
asymptomatic (i.e., individuals with biallelic ATP7B pathogenic variants who 
have no clinical manifestations of Wilson disease, but have Wilson 
disease-related tissue damage), or symptomatic (i.e., individuals with clinical 
manifestations of Wilson disease and Wilson disease-related tissue damage), 
regardless of age and including pregnant women. As Wilson disease treatment 
decisions might be complex, the consultation of disease experts (primarily 
hepatologists and neurologists) or Wilson disease centers of excellence is 
advised. The first-line therapy is copper chelating agents (D-penicillamine and 
trientine). Zinc salts (which interfere with absorption of copper from the 
gastrointestinal tract) cannot be used with a copper chelating agent and are 
most effective after initial decoppering with a chelating agent; however, in 
some individuals zinc salts can be used as an initial treatment. Orthotopic 
liver transplantation is used for individuals who fail to respond to medical 
therapy or present with fulminant acute liver failure. The goals of supportive 
treatment for extrahepatic manifestations of individuals with symptomatic Wilson 
disease are individualized to maximize function and reduce complications. 
Depending on their clinical manifestations, symptomatic individuals may require 
specialists in neurology, occupational therapy, physical therapy, physiatry, 
orthopedics, nutrition, speech-language pathology, social work, and 
psychology/psychiatry. Surveillance: To assess treatment effectiveness and 
adherence to medical interventions that prevent/treat copper accumulation, the 
following are recommended: At least twice annually: assessment of serum copper 
and ceruloplasmin levels, liver biochemistries, international normalized ratio, 
complete blood count, urinalysis, and physical examination including neurologic 
assessment. At least once annually: measurement of 24-hour urinary excretion of 
copper. Monitoring the individual's response to supportive treatment for 
extrahepatic manifestations and the emergence of new manifestations is per the 
recommendations of the treating clinical specialists. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Foods very high in copper (liver, brain, chocolate, mushrooms, shellfish, 
and nuts) should be avoided, especially at the beginning of treatment. In case 
of biochemical abnormalities in liver function tests or transaminases, alcohol 
consumption is strongly discouraged. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is 
appropriate to clarify the genetic status of asymptomatic older and younger 
at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as 
possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of medical interventions 
to prevent/treat copper accumulation. Pregnancy management: Treatment must be 
continued during pregnancy because of the risk for fulminant hepatic failure or 
irreversible neurologic deterioration. Because of possible adverse effects on 
the fetus from chelating agents, the dose should be kept as low as possible.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Wilson disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an ATP7B pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of 
inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Once both ATP7B 
pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier 
and predictive genetic testing for at-risk relatives, prenatal testing for a 
pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing for Wilson 
disease are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301685