---
reference_id: "PMID:3460088"
title: Isolation of animal cell mutants deficient in plasmalogen biosynthesis and peroxisome assembly.
authors:
- Zoeller RA
- Raetz CR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.83.14.5170
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolation of animal cell mutants deficient in plasmalogen biosynthesis and peroxisome assembly.
**Authors:** Zoeller RA, Raetz CR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.83.14.5170](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.83.14.5170)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Jul;83(14):5170-4. doi:
10.1073/pnas.83.14.5170.

Isolation of animal cell mutants deficient in plasmalogen biosynthesis and 
peroxisome assembly.

Zoeller RA, Raetz CR.

A rapid autoradiographic screening procedure has been developed for identifying 
Chinese hamster ovary cell mutants defective in the peroxisomal enzyme 
dihydroxyacetonephosphate (DHAP) acyltransferase. Ten mutants were found among 
60,000 colonies grown from a stock of mutagen-treated cells, and 3 have been 
characterized with respect to their enzymology and phospholipid biosynthesis. 
All three contain 3% (or less) of the parental DHAP acyltransferase activity 
measured at pH 5.5, the optimum for the peroxisomal enzyme. When measured at pH 
7.4, all three contained 70-85% of the wild-type activity, but it was sensitive 
to N-ethylmaleimide. Glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase activities were 
identical in mutant and parent strains. Two other peroxisomal enzymes, 
alkyl-DHAP synthase and particulate catalase, were also reduced by factors of 
5-10 in all three mutants, suggesting that these strains are deficient in some 
aspect of peroxisome assembly, possibly like cells from patients with Zellweger 
syndrome. Short-term and long-term labeling with 32Pi revealed that these 
mutants are grossly deficient in the de novo synthesis and content of 
plasmalogens. In parental cells the plasmalogen form of phosphatidylethanolamine 
constitutes 7.1% of the total phospholipid, but it is reduced to 0.7% in the 
mutants. This decrease is accompanied by a compensatory increase in the diacyl 
form of phosphatidylethanolamine. The results presented here support the view 
that there are two DHAP acyltransferases in animal cells and that the peroxisome 
is essential for the biosynthesis of plasmalogens.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.83.14.5170
PMCID: PMC323912
PMID: 3460088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]