---
reference_id: "PMID:32864841"
title: "Natural history of achondroplasia: A retrospective review of longitudinal clinical data."
authors:
- Okenfuss E
- Moghaddam B
- Avins AL
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61825
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/complications, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain/abnormalities
- Cervical Vertebrae/surgery
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Constriction, Pathologic"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Female
- Foramen Magnum/surgery
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Kyphosis/complications, genetics, surgery"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nervous System Diseases/complications, genetics"
- Orthopedics
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sleep Apnea, Obstructive/complications, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of achondroplasia: A retrospective review of longitudinal clinical data.
**Authors:** Okenfuss E, Moghaddam B, Avins AL
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61825](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61825)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2020 Nov;182(11):2540-2551. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61825. Epub 
2020 Aug 31.

Natural history of achondroplasia: A retrospective review of longitudinal 
clinical data.

Okenfuss E(1), Moghaddam B(1), Avins AL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Kaiser Permanente, Sacramento, California, USA.
(2)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, California, USA.

There are limited data on the longitudinal frequency and severity of the 
symptoms and complications of achondroplasia. We undertook a retrospective 
electronic chart review of 114 patients to develop a more thorough understanding 
of the lifetime impact of achondroplasia. Craniocervical stenosis (involving the 
foramen magnum with or without cervical vertebrae C1 and/or C2) was noted in 
nearly 50% of patients with craniovertebral junction imaging; however, 
corrective decompression surgery was only needed in 6% of patients. No children 
in our cohort died at 4 years of age or under. Kyphosis was present in most 
patients but usually resolved in early childhood. Cervical and lumbar stenosis 
were diagnosed in children and adults while, genu varum, elbow contractures, and 
radial head dislocations were identified during childhood. Central sleep apnea 
and obstructive sleep apnea were present in children, while the diagnosis of 
obstructive sleep apnea was shown to recur in adulthood. Cardiovascular risk 
factors were present in only 7% of patients. A range of mental health disorders 
were identified, with most diagnoses being made before 18 years of age. Our data 
show that achondroplasia has a significant impact on patients' physical health, 
and complications continue to be reported and require intervention throughout 
patients' lifetimes. This highlights the need for continuous support beyond 
pediatric care, by adult care clinicians experienced with managing the long-term 
complications of achondroplasia.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61825
PMID: 32864841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]