---
reference_id: PMID:18394578
title: "Identification of the SPG15 gene, encoding spastizin, as a frequent cause of complicated autosomal-recessive spastic paraplegia, including Kjellin syndrome."
authors:
- Hanein S
- Martin E
- Boukhris A
- Byrne P
- Goizet C
- Hamri A
- Benomar A
- Lossos A
- Denora P
- Fernandez J
- Elleuch N
- Forlani S
- Durr A
- Feki I
- Hutchinson M
- Santorelli FM
- Mhiri C
- Brice A
- Stevanin G
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.004
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- Brain/metabolism
- "Carrier Proteins/analysis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cerebellar Diseases/genetics
- Child
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 14/genetics"
- Dysarthria/genetics
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Endosomes/metabolism
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Male
- Mental Disorders/genetics
- Muscle Weakness/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
- Rats
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/genetics"
- Syndrome
- Zinc Fingers/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of the SPG15 gene, encoding spastizin, as a frequent cause of complicated autosomal-recessive spastic paraplegia, including Kjellin syndrome.
**Authors:** Hanein S, Martin E, Boukhris A, Byrne P, Goizet C, Hamri A, Benomar A, Lossos A, Denora P, Fernandez J, Elleuch N, Forlani S, Durr A, Feki I, Hutchinson M, Santorelli FM, Mhiri C, Brice A, Stevanin G
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.004)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Apr;82(4):992-1002. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.004.

Identification of the SPG15 gene, encoding spastizin, as a frequent cause of 
complicated autosomal-recessive spastic paraplegia, including Kjellin syndrome.

Hanein S(1), Martin E, Boukhris A, Byrne P, Goizet C, Hamri A, Benomar A, Lossos 
A, Denora P, Fernandez J, Elleuch N, Forlani S, Durr A, Feki I, Hutchinson M, 
Santorelli FM, Mhiri C, Brice A, Stevanin G.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Unité 
Mixte de Recherche (UMR) S679, Neurologie et Thérapeutique Expérimentale, Paris, 
F-75013 France.

Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are genetically and phenotypically 
heterogeneous disorders. Both "uncomplicated" and "complicated" forms have been 
described with various modes of inheritance. Sixteen loci for 
autosomal-recessive "complicated" HSP have been mapped. The SPG15 locus was 
first reported to account for a rare form of spastic paraplegia variably 
associated with mental impairment, pigmented maculopathy, dysarthria, cerebellar 
signs, and distal amyotrophy, sometimes designated as Kjellin syndrome. Here, we 
report the refinement of SPG15 to a 2.64 Mb genetic interval on chromosome 
14q23.3-q24.2 and the identification of ZFYVE26, which encodes a zinc-finger 
protein with a FYVE domain that we named spastizin, as the cause of SPG15. Six 
different truncating mutations were found to segregate with the disease in eight 
families with a phenotype that included variable clinical features of Kjellin 
syndrome. ZFYVE26 mRNA was widely distributed in human tissues, as well as in 
rat embryos, suggesting a possible role of this gene during embryonic 
development. In the adult rodent brain, its expression profile closely resembled 
that of SPG11, another gene responsible for complicated HSP. In cultured cells, 
spastizin colocalized partially with markers of endoplasmic reticulum and 
endosomes, suggesting a role in intracellular trafficking.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.004
PMCID: PMC2427184
PMID: 18394578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]