---
reference_id: "PMID:37190157"
title: "The Chromatin Remodeler ATRX: Role and Mechanism in Biology and Cancer."
authors:
- Pang Y
- Chen X
- Ji T
- Cheng M
- Wang R
- Zhang C
- Liu M
- Zhang J
- Zhong C
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15082228
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Chromatin Remodeler ATRX: Role and Mechanism in Biology and Cancer.
**Authors:** Pang Y, Chen X, Ji T, Cheng M, Wang R, Zhang C, Liu M, Zhang J, Zhong C
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15082228](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15082228)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Apr 10;15(8):2228. doi: 10.3390/cancers15082228.

The Chromatin Remodeler ATRX: Role and Mechanism in Biology and Cancer.

Pang Y(1), Chen X(1), Ji T(1), Cheng M(1), Wang R(1), Zhang C(1), Liu M(1), 
Zhang J(1)(2), Zhong C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shanghai East Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Tongji University, 150 Jimo Road, Shanghai 200120, China.
(2)Institute for Advanced Study, Tongji University, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 
200092, China.

The alpha-thalassemia mental retardation X-linked (ATRX) syndrome protein is a 
chromatin remodeling protein that primarily promotes the deposit of H3.3 histone 
variants in the telomere area. ATRX mutations not only cause ATRX syndrome but 
also influence development and promote cancer. The primary molecular 
characteristics of ATRX, including its molecular structures and normal and 
malignant biological roles, are reviewed in this article. We discuss the role of 
ATRX in its interactions with the histone variant H3.3, chromatin remodeling, 
DNA damage response, replication stress, and cancers, particularly gliomas, 
neuroblastomas, and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. ATRX is implicated in 
several important cellular processes and serves a crucial function in regulating 
gene expression and genomic integrity throughout embryogenesis. However, the 
nature of its involvement in the growth and development of cancer remains 
unknown. As mechanistic and molecular investigations on ATRX disclose its 
essential functions in cancer, customized therapies targeting ATRX will become 
accessible.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15082228
PMCID: PMC10136513
PMID: 37190157

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.