---
reference_id: "PMID:16133636"
title: "[Rosacea. Clinical features, pathogenesis and therapy]."
authors:
- Lehmann P
journal: Hautarzt
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s00105-005-1009-3
keywords:
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- Dermatologic Agents/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Practice Patterns, Physicians'"
- "Rosacea/classification, drug therapy, epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Rosacea. Clinical features, pathogenesis and therapy].
**Authors:** Lehmann P
**Journal:** Hautarzt (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00105-005-1009-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00105-005-1009-3)

## Content

1. Hautarzt. 2005 Sep;56(9):871-85; quiz 886-7. doi: 10.1007/s00105-005-1009-3.

[Rosacea. Clinical features, pathogenesis and therapy].

[Article in German]

Lehmann P(1).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Dermatologie, Allergologie und Umweltmedizin, HELIOS-Klinikum 
Wuppertal, Universität Witten-Herdecke, Wuppertal. 
plehmann@wuppertal.helios-kliniken.de

Rosacea is a common facial dermatosis, which may have detrimental effects on the 
patient's psychological and social interactions. It is a disease of the middle 
aged, skin types I and II are more often affected than darker skin types. 
Clinically, pre-rosacea, and rosacea grade I-III may be distinguished. 
Pre-rosacea is characterized by flushing and blushing, grade I to III by 
erythemato-teleangiectasies, papulopustules, and inflammatory nodules. 
Especially severe subtypes include rosacea conglobata and rosacea fulminans. 
Hyperglandular subtypes lead to different forms of phyma, of which Rhinophyma is 
the most frequent. Pathogenetically destruction of the dermal vessels and 
connective tissue seems to be decisive for the development of a chronic 
inflammation, which leads to the phenotype of the various forms of rosacea. Mild 
forms can be treated exclusively by topical medication. Antibiotics 
(erythromycin, clindamycin, tetracyclin), metronidazol, azelaic acid, and the 
retinoid adapalene have been shown to be effective in well controlled randomized 
studies. The best evaluated topical medication is metronidazol. In severe forms 
systemic therapy must be applied. Systemic antibiotics are effective and 
especially isotretinoin has shown a very good response even in low dose 
regimens. Rhinophyma must be treated surgically.

DOI: 10.1007/s00105-005-1009-3
PMID: 16133636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]