---
reference_id: "PMID:23591538"
title: Long-term follow-up of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.
authors:
- Hoang QV
- Gallego-Pinazo R
- Yannuzzi LA
journal: Retina
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/IAE.0b013e318286cc57
keywords:
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Scotoma/pathology
- White Dot Syndromes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term follow-up of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.
**Authors:** Hoang QV, Gallego-Pinazo R, Yannuzzi LA
**Journal:** Retina (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IAE.0b013e318286cc57](https://doi.org/10.1097/IAE.0b013e318286cc57)

## Content

1. Retina. 2013 Jul-Aug;33(7):1325-7. doi: 10.1097/IAE.0b013e318286cc57.

Long-term follow-up of acute zonal occult outer retinopathy.

Hoang QV(1), Gallego-Pinazo R, Yannuzzi LA.

Author information:
(1)Vitreous Retina Macula Consultants of New York, 460 Park Avenue, New York, NY
10022, USA.

BACKGROUND: Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) was described by Gass
in 1992 as an independent posterior uveitis characterized by photopsias and
rapid visual field zonal loss, with 70% of cases stabilizing within 6 months,
although there is a paucity of long-term documentation of AZOOR cases.
METHODS: The authors reported the case of a 55-year-old woman diagnosed with
AZOOR and followed for 13 years.
RESULTS: Best-corrected visual acuity at baseline was 20/60 in her right eye and
20/25 in her left eye, with an annular peripapillary area of irregular retinal
thickening and temporal visual field loss in both eyes. Over her 13-year
follow-up, best-corrected visual acuity dropped to 20/60 in both eyes and visual
field loss because of chorioretinal atrophy progressed significantly. Antiviral
and immunomodulatory drugs did not halt this progression.
CONCLUSION: The prognosis of cases with AZOOR should be cautiously considered.
The authors showed that in the long term, chorioretinal atrophy may lead to
severe visual field loss in patients with AZOOR.

DOI: 10.1097/IAE.0b013e318286cc57
PMID: 23591538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
