---
reference_id: "PMID:20354449"
title: "Mucopolysaccharidosis type II: skeletal-muscle system involvement."
authors:
- Morini SR
- Steiner CE
- Gerson LB
journal: J Pediatr Orthop B
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1097/BPB.0b013e3283317b7a
keywords:
- "Dysostoses/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Female
- Glycosaminoglycans/urine
- Humans
- Iduronate Sulfatase/metabolism
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis II/complications, diagnosis, urine"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- "Muscular Diseases/complications, metabolism, pathology"
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucopolysaccharidosis type II: skeletal-muscle system involvement.
**Authors:** Morini SR, Steiner CE, Gerson LB
**Journal:** J Pediatr Orthop B (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BPB.0b013e3283317b7a](https://doi.org/10.1097/BPB.0b013e3283317b7a)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Orthop B. 2010 Jul;19(4):313-7. doi: 10.1097/BPB.0b013e3283317b7a.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type II: skeletal-muscle system involvement.

Morini SR(1), Steiner CE, Gerson LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, State University
of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. sandramorini@yahoo.com.br

Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS-II) is a rare lysosomal storage disorder
caused by deficiency in the activity of the enzyme iduronate-2-sulphatase. This
enzyme is responsible for the catabolism of two different glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs), dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate. Lysosomal accumulation of these
GAG molecules results in cell, tissue, and organ dysfunction. The
skeletal-muscle system involvement is because of essential accumulated GAGs in
joints and connective tissue. MPS-II has many clinical features and includes two
recognized clinical entities, mild and severe, that represent two ends of a wide
spectrum of clinical severity. The aim of this study is to review the
involvement of the skeletal-muscle system in MPS-II.

DOI: 10.1097/BPB.0b013e3283317b7a
PMID: 20354449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
