---
reference_id: "PMID:11806995"
title: Mechanism of factor VIIa-dependent coagulation in hemophilia blood.
authors:
- Butenas S
- Brummel KE
- Branda RF
- Paradis SG
- Mann KG
journal: Blood
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1182/blood.v99.3.923
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of factor VIIa-dependent coagulation in hemophilia blood.
**Authors:** Butenas S, Brummel KE, Branda RF, Paradis SG, Mann KG
**Journal:** Blood (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.v99.3.923](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.v99.3.923)

## Content

1. Blood. 2002 Feb 1;99(3):923-30. doi: 10.1182/blood.v99.3.923.

Mechanism of factor VIIa-dependent coagulation in hemophilia blood.

Butenas S(1), Brummel KE, Branda RF, Paradis SG, Mann KG.

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, University of Vermont, 89 Beaumont Ave, Burlington, VT 
05405-0068, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2002 Jul 1;100(1):364-5; author reply 365. doi: 
10.1182/blood-2002-03-0736.

The ability of factor VIIa to initiate thrombin generation and clot formation in 
blood from healthy donors, blood from patients with hemophilia A, and in 
anti-factor IX antibody-induced ("acquired") hemophilia B blood was 
investigated. In normal blood, both factor VIIa-tissue factor (TF) complex and 
factor VIIa alone initiated thrombin generation. The efficiency of factor VIIa 
was about 0.0001 that of the factor VIIa-TF complex. In congenital hemophilia A 
blood and "acquired" hemophilia B blood in vitro, addition of 10 to 50 nM factor 
VIIa (pharmacologic concentrations) corrected the clotting time at all TF 
concentrations tested (0-100 pM) but had little effect on thrombin generation. 
Fibrinopeptide release and insoluble clot formation were only marginally 
influenced by addition of factor VIIa. TF alone had a more pronounced effect on 
thrombin generation; an increase in TF from 0 to 100 pM increased the maximum 
thrombin level in "acquired" hemophilia B blood from 120 to 480 nM. Platelet 
activation was considerably enhanced by addition of factor VIIa to both 
hemophilia A blood and "acquired" hemophilia B blood. Thus, pharmacologic 
concentrations of factor VIIa cannot restore normal thrombin generation in 
hemophilia A and hemophilia B blood in vitro. The efficacy of factor VIIa (10-50 
nM) in hemophilia blood is dependent on TF.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v99.3.923
PMID: 11806995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]