---
reference_id: "PMID:36261521"
title: Evolution of immune genes is associated with the Black Death.
authors:
- Klunk J
- Vilgalys TP
- Demeure CE
- Cheng X
- Shiratori M
- Madej J
- Beau R
- Elli D
- Patino MI
- Redfern R
- DeWitte SN
- Gamble JA
- Boldsen JL
- Carmichael A
- Varlik N
- Eaton K
- Grenier JC
- Golding GB
- Devault A
- Rouillard JM
- Yotova V
- Sindeaux R
- Ye CJ
- Bikaran M
- Dumaine A
- Brinkworth JF
- Missiakas D
- Rouleau GA
- Steinrücken M
- Pizarro-Cerdá J
- Poinar HN
- Barreiro LB
journal: Nature
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05349-x
keywords:
- Humans
- "Aminopeptidases/genetics, immunology"
- "DNA, Ancient"
- "Plague/genetics, immunology, microbiology, mortality"
- "Yersinia pestis/immunology, pathogenicity"
- "Selection, Genetic/immunology"
- "Europe/epidemiology, ethnology"
- Immunity/genetics
- Datasets as Topic
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- London/epidemiology
- Denmark/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolution of immune genes is associated with the Black Death.
**Authors:** Klunk J, Vilgalys TP, Demeure CE, Cheng X, Shiratori M, Madej J, Beau R, Elli D, Patino MI, Redfern R, DeWitte SN, Gamble JA, Boldsen JL, Carmichael A, Varlik N, Eaton K, Grenier JC, Golding GB, Devault A, Rouillard JM, Yotova V, Sindeaux R, Ye CJ, Bikaran M, Dumaine A, Brinkworth JF, Missiakas D, Rouleau GA, Steinrücken M, Pizarro-Cerdá J, Poinar HN, Barreiro LB
**Journal:** Nature (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-022-05349-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05349-x)

## Content

1. Nature. 2022 Nov;611(7935):312-319. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05349-x. Epub 2022
 Oct 19.

Evolution of immune genes is associated with the Black Death.

Klunk J(#)(1)(2), Vilgalys TP(#)(3), Demeure CE(4), Cheng X(5), Shiratori M(3),
Madej J(4), Beau R(4), Elli D(6), Patino MI(3), Redfern R(7), DeWitte SN(8),
Gamble JA(9), Boldsen JL(10), Carmichael A(11), Varlik N(12), Eaton K(1),
Grenier JC(13), Golding GB(1), Devault A(2), Rouillard JM(2)(14), Yotova V(15),
Sindeaux R(15), Ye CJ(16)(17), Bikaran M(16)(17), Dumaine A(3), Brinkworth
JF(18)(19), Missiakas D(6), Rouleau GA(20), Steinrücken M(5)(21), Pizarro-Cerdá
J(4), Poinar HN(22)(23)(24), Barreiro LB(25)(26)(27)(28).

Author information:
(1)McMaster Ancient DNA Centre, Departments of Anthropology, Biology and
Biochemistry, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Daicel Arbor Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Section of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Yersinia Research Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Ricketts Laboratory, University of Chicago,
Lemont, IL, USA.
(7)Centre for Human Bioarchaeology, Museum of London, London, UK.
(8)Department of Anthropology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA.
(9)Department of Anthropology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.
(10)Department of Forensic Medicine, Unit of Anthropology (ADBOU), University of
Southern Denmark, Odense S, Denmark.
(11)History Department, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.
(12)Department of History, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA.
(13)Montreal Heart Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Quebec, Canada.
(14)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan - Ann Arbor, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA.
(15)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.
(16)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of California,
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(17)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, CA,
USA.
(18)Department of Anthropology, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
IL, USA.
(19)Carl R Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.
(20)Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital, McGill University, Montréal,
Quebec, Canada.
(21)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(22)McMaster Ancient DNA Centre, Departments of Anthropology, Biology and
Biochemistry, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
poinarh@mcmaster.ca.
(23)Michael G. DeGroote Institute of Infectious Disease Research, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. poinarh@mcmaster.ca.
(24)Humans and the Microbiome Program, Canadian Institute for Advanced Research,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. poinarh@mcmaster.ca.
(25)Section of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. lbarreiro@uchicago.edu.
(26)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
lbarreiro@uchicago.edu.
(27)Committee on Genetics, Genomics, and Systems Biology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. lbarreiro@uchicago.edu.
(28)Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
lbarreiro@uchicago.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nature. 2025 Jan;637(8048):E30. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08522-6.

Comment in
    Nature. 2022 Nov;611(7935):237-238. doi: 10.1038/d41586-022-03160-2.
    Trends Immunol. 2023 Feb;44(2):90-92. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2022.12.001.
    Gastroenterology. 2023 Apr;164(4):696. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2022.12.038.
    Nature. 2025 Feb;638(8051):E19-E22. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08496-5.

Infectious diseases are among the strongest selective pressures driving human
evolution1,2. This includes the single greatest mortality event in recorded
history, the first outbreak of the second pandemic of plague, commonly called
the Black Death, which was caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis3. This
pandemic devastated Afro-Eurasia, killing up to 30-50% of the population4. To
identify loci that may have been under selection during the Black Death, we
characterized genetic variation around immune-related genes from 206 ancient DNA
extracts, stemming from two different European populations before, during and
after the Black Death. Immune loci are strongly enriched for highly
differentiated sites relative to a set of non-immune loci, suggesting positive
selection. We identify 245 variants that are highly differentiated within the
London dataset, four of which were replicated in an independent cohort from
Denmark, and represent the strongest candidates for positive selection. The
selected allele for one of these variants, rs2549794, is associated with the
production of a full-length (versus truncated) ERAP2 transcript, variation in
cytokine response to Y. pestis and increased ability to control intracellular Y.
pestis in macrophages. Finally, we show that protective variants overlap with
alleles that are today associated with increased susceptibility to autoimmune
diseases, providing empirical evidence for the role played by past pandemics in
shaping present-day susceptibility to disease.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-05349-x
PMCID: PMC9580435
PMID: 36261521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.K., A. Devault and J.-M.R. declare financial
interest in Daicel Arbor Biosciences, which provided the myBaits hybridization
capture kits for this work. All other authors declare no competing interests.
