---
reference_id: "PMID:27016849"
title: "[Smoking, smoking cessation and Crohn's disease]."
authors:
- Underner M
- Perriot J
- Cosnes J
- Beau P
- Peiffer G
- Meurice JC
journal: Presse Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2016.02.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Smoking, smoking cessation and Crohn's disease].
**Authors:** Underner M, Perriot J, Cosnes J, Beau P, Peiffer G, Meurice JC
**Journal:** Presse Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lpm.2016.02.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lpm.2016.02.008)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 2016 Apr;45(4 Pt 1):390-402. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2016.02.008. Epub 
2016 Mar 23.

[Smoking, smoking cessation and Crohn's disease].

[Article in French]

Underner M(1), Perriot J(2), Cosnes J(3), Beau P(4), Peiffer G(5), Meurice 
JC(6).

Author information:
(1)CHU La Milétrie, pavillon René-Beauchant, service de pneumologie, unité de 
tabacologie, BP 577, 86021 Poitiers cedex, France. Electronic address: 
m.underner@chu-poitiers.fr.
(2)Dispensaire Émile-Roux, centre de tabacologie, 63100 Clermont-Ferrand, 
France.
(3)Hôpital Saint-Antoine, service d'hépatologie, gastro-entérologie et 
nutrition, 75012 Paris, France.
(4)CHU La Milétrie, service d'hépatologie, gastro-entérologie et nutrition, 
86021 Poitiers, France.
(5)CHR Metz-Thionville, service de pneumologie, 57038 Metz, France.
(6)CHU La Milétrie, pavillon René-Beauchant, service de pneumologie, unité de 
tabacologie, BP 577, 86021 Poitiers cedex, France.

CONTEXT: Smoking whose prevalence is higher in patients with Crohn's disease 
(CD) worsens its evolution. Ulcerative colitis mostly affect non- or ex-smokers; 
smoking may improve the course of the disease.
OBJECTIVES: Systematic literature review of data on the relationship between 
smoking, smoking cessation and Crohn'disease.
DOCUMENTARY SOURCES: Medline, on the period 1980-2015 with the keywords "Crohn's 
disease" or "inflammatory bowel disease" and "smoking" or "smoking cessation"; 
limits "Title/Abstract"; the selected languages were English or French.
STUDY SELECTION: Among 1315 articles, 168 abstracts have given rise to a dual 
reading to select 69 studies (case-control, retrospective, reviews or 
meta-analysis). Data were extracted using a reading gate.
RESULTS: Smoking increases the risk of complications, recurrences and resort of 
surgery, corticosteroids or immunosuppressants. These deleterious effects are 
more common in women. Stopping smoking improves the course of the disease and 
represents an essential component of its management.
LIMITS: Heterogeneity of the studies collected according to the type, population 
characteristics, definition of smoking status and the validation of smoking 
cessation.
CONCLUSION: Smokers suffering from CD must routinely be made aware of the 
disadvantages of smoking, benefits of abstinence and helped to quit smoking.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2016.02.008
PMID: 27016849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]