---
reference_id: "PMID:34710243"
title: "Hairy cell leukemia 2022: Update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and treatment."
authors:
- Troussard X
- Maître E
- Cornet E
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.26390
keywords:
- "Antigens, CD/analysis"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Disease Management
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Immunoconjugates/therapeutic use
- Immunotherapy
- "Leukemia, Hairy Cell/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, therapy"
- Prognosis
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hairy cell leukemia 2022: Update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and treatment.
**Authors:** Troussard X, Maître E, Cornet E
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.26390](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.26390)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 2022 Feb 1;97(2):226-236. doi: 10.1002/ajh.26390. Epub 2021 Nov
8.

Hairy cell leukemia 2022: Update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and
treatment.

Troussard X(1)(2), Maître E(1)(2), Cornet E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Hématologie, CHU Côte de Nacre, Caen Cedex, France.
(2)Université Caen Normandie, Caen Cedex, France.

DISEASE OVERVIEW: Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) and HCL-like disorders, including
HCL variant (HCL-V) and splenic diffuse red pulp lymphoma (SDRPL), are a very
heterogeneous group of mature lymphoid B-cell disorders characterized by the
identification of hairy cells, a specific genetic profile, a different clinical
course, and the need for appropriate treatment.
DIAGNOSIS: Diagnosis of HCL is based on morphological evidence of hairy cells,
an HCL immunologic score of 3 or 4 based on the CD11C, CD103, CD123, and CD25
expression, the trephine biopsy which makes it possible to specify the degree of
tumoral medullary infiltration and the presence of BRAFV600E somatic mutation.
RISK STRATIFICATION: Progression of patients with HCL is based on a large
splenomegaly, leukocytosis, a high number of hairy cells in the peripheral
blood, and the immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region gene mutational
status. VH4-34-positive HCL cases are associated with a poor prognosis.
TREATMENT: Patients should be treated only if HCL is symptomatic. Chemotherapy
with risk adapted therapy purine analogs (PNAs) are indicated in first-line HCL
patients. The use of chemo-immunotherapy combining PNAs and rituximab (R)
represents an increasingly used therapeutic approach. Management of
relapsed/refractory disease is based on the use of BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) plus
rituximab or MEK inhibitors (MEKi), recombinant immunoconjugates targeting CD22
or Bruton Tyrosine Kinase inhibitors (BTKi). However, the optimal sequence of
the different treatments remains to be determined. The Bcl2-inhibitors (Bcl-2i)
can play a major role in the future.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.26390
PMID: 34710243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
