---
reference_id: "PMID:33765420"
title: "Aspirin versus anticoagulation in cervical artery dissection (TREAT-CAD): an open-label, randomised, non-inferiority trial."
authors:
- Engelter ST
- Traenka C
- Gensicke H
- Schaedelin SA
- Luft AR
- Simonetti BG
- Fischer U
- Michel P
- Sirimarco G
- Kägi G
- Vehoff J
- Nedeltchev K
- Kahles T
- Kellert L
- Rosenbaum S
- von Rennenberg R
- Sztajzel R
- Leib SL
- Jung S
- Gralla J
- Bruni N
- Seiffge D
- Feil K
- Polymeris AA
- Steiner L
- Hamann J
- Bonati LH
- Brehm A
- De Marchis GM
- Peters N
- Stippich C
- Nolte CH
- Christensen H
- Wegener S
- Psychogios MN
- Arnold M
- Lyrer P
- TREAT-CAD investigators
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00044-2
keywords:
- Acenocoumarol/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Anticoagulants/therapeutic use
- Aspirin/therapeutic use
- "Carotid Artery, Internal, Dissection/complications, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Denmark
- Female
- Germany
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenprocoumon/therapeutic use
- Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Stroke/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Switzerland
- "Vertebral Artery Dissection/complications, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Warfarin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aspirin versus anticoagulation in cervical artery dissection (TREAT-CAD): an open-label, randomised, non-inferiority trial.
**Authors:** Engelter ST, Traenka C, Gensicke H, Schaedelin SA, Luft AR, Simonetti BG, Fischer U, Michel P, Sirimarco G, Kägi G, Vehoff J, Nedeltchev K, Kahles T, Kellert L, Rosenbaum S, von Rennenberg R, Sztajzel R, Leib SL, Jung S, Gralla J, Bruni N, Seiffge D, Feil K, Polymeris AA, Steiner L, Hamann J, Bonati LH, Brehm A, De Marchis GM, Peters N, Stippich C, Nolte CH, Christensen H, Wegener S, Psychogios MN, Arnold M, Lyrer P, TREAT-CAD investigators
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00044-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00044-2)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2021 May;20(5):341-350. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00044-2.
Epub  2021 Mar 23.

Aspirin versus anticoagulation in cervical artery dissection (TREAT-CAD): an 
open-label, randomised, non-inferiority trial.

Engelter ST(1), Traenka C(2), Gensicke H(2), Schaedelin SA(3), Luft AR(4), 
Simonetti BG(5), Fischer U(6), Michel P(7), Sirimarco G(7), Kägi G(8), Vehoff 
J(8), Nedeltchev K(9), Kahles T(9), Kellert L(10), Rosenbaum S(11), von 
Rennenberg R(12), Sztajzel R(13), Leib SL(14), Jung S(6), Gralla J(15), Bruni 
N(3), Seiffge D(16), Feil K(17), Polymeris AA(18), Steiner L(19), Hamann J(19), 
Bonati LH(18), Brehm A(20), De Marchis GM(16), Peters N(2), Stippich C(21), 
Nolte CH(12), Christensen H(11), Wegener S(19), Psychogios MN(20), Arnold M(6), 
Lyrer P(18); TREAT-CAD investigators.

Collaborators: Kahles T, Nedeltchev K, Altersberger V, Bonati LH, Brehm A, Bruni 
N, De Marchis GM, Engelter ST, Fabbro T, Fisch U, Fladt J, Gensicke H, Hert L, 
Lyrer PA, Maurer M, Peters N, Polymeris A, Psychogios MN, Schaedelin S, Stippich 
C, Thilemann S, Traenka C, Wagner B, Arnold M, Fischer U, Goeggel Simonetti B, 
Gralla J, Heldner M, Jung S, Leib SL, Seiffge DJ, Mueller H, Sveikata L, 
Sztajzel R, Mueller H, Correia P, Eskandari A, Meyer I, Michel P, Nannoni S, 
Remillard S, Sirimarco G, Zachariadis A, Kaegi G, Mueller A, Vehoff J, Hamann J, 
Luft AR, Steiner L, Wegener S, Erdur HJ, Nolte CH, von Rennenberg R, Scheitz JF, 
Feil K, Kellert L, Christensen H, Rosenbaum S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Stroke Centre, University Hospital Basel and 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, 
University Hospital for Geriatric Medicine Felix Platter, University of Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland. Electronic address: stefan.engelter@felixplatter.ch.
(2)Department of Neurology and Stroke Centre, University Hospital Basel and 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, 
University Hospital for Geriatric Medicine Felix Platter, University of Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Clinical Research and Clinical Trial Unit, University Hospital 
Basel and University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Division of Vascular Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, Department of 
Neurology, University Hospital of Zurich and University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland; Cereneo, Centre for Neurology and Rehabilitation, Vitznau, 
Switzerland.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Bern, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland; Department of Neuropaediatrics, Institute of Paediatrics of 
Southern Switzerland, San Giovanni Hospital, Bellinzona, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Bern, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(7)Stroke Centre and Neurology Service, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(8)Department of Neurology and Stroke Centre, Cantonal Hospital St Gallen, St 
Gallen, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Neurology and Stroke Centre, Cantonal Hospital Aarau, Aarau, 
Switzerland.
(10)Department of Neurology, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany; 
Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, University Hospital LMU Munich, 
Munich, Germany.
(11)Department of Neurology, Bispebjerg Hospital and University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(12)Klinik und Hochschulambulanz für Neurologie and Center for Stroke Research 
Berlin, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Freie Universität 
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, 
Germany.
(13)Department of Neurology and Stroke Centre, University Hospital Geneva and 
Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland.
(14)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University Hospital Bern, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(15)Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, University 
Hospital Bern, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(16)Department of Neurology and Stroke Centre, University Hospital Basel and 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; Department of Neurology, University 
Hospital Bern, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(17)Department of Neurology, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany.
(18)Department of Neurology and Stroke Centre, University Hospital Basel and 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(19)Division of Vascular Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, Department of 
Neurology, University Hospital of Zurich and University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(20)Department of Neuroradiology, Clinic of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, 
University Hospital Basel and University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(21)Department of Neuroradiology, University Hospital of Zurich and University 
of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2021 May;20(5):328-329. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00073-9.

BACKGROUND: Cervical artery dissection is a major cause of stroke in young 
people (aged <50 years). Historically, clinicians have preferred using oral 
anticoagulation with vitamin K antagonists for patients with cervical artery 
dissection, although some current guidelines-based on available evidence from 
mostly observational studies-suggest using aspirin. If proven to be non-inferior 
to vitamin K antagonists, aspirin might be preferable, due to its ease of use 
and lower cost. We aimed to test the non-inferiority of aspirin to vitamin K 
antagonists in patients with cervical artery dissection.
METHODS: We did a multicentre, randomised, open-label, non-inferiority trial in 
ten stroke centres across Switzerland, Germany, and Denmark. We randomly 
assigned (1:1) patients aged older than 18 years who had symptomatic, 
MRI-verified, cervical artery dissection within 2 weeks before enrolment, to 
receive either aspirin 300 mg once daily or a vitamin K antagonist 
(phenprocoumon, acenocoumarol, or warfarin; target international normalised 
ratio [INR] 2·0-3·0) for 90 days. Randomisation was computer-generated using an 
interactive web response system, with stratification according to participating 
site. Independent imaging core laboratory adjudicators were masked to treatment 
allocation, but investigators, patients, and clinical event adjudicators were 
aware of treatment allocation. The primary endpoint was a composite of clinical 
outcomes (stroke, major haemorrhage, or death) and MRI outcomes (new ischaemic 
or haemorrhagic brain lesions) in the per-protocol population, assessed at 14 
days (clinical and MRI outcomes) and 90 days (clinical outcomes only) after 
commencing treatment. Non-inferiority of aspirin would be shown if the upper 
limit of the two-sided 95% CI of the absolute risk difference between groups was 
less than 12% (non-inferiority margin). This trial is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02046460.
FINDINGS: Between Sept 11, 2013, and Dec 21, 2018, we enrolled 194 patients; 100 
(52%) were assigned to the aspirin group and 94 (48%) were assigned to the 
vitamin K antagonist group. The per-protocol population included 173 patients; 
91 (53%) in the aspirin group and 82 (47%) in the vitamin K antagonist group. 
The primary endpoint occurred in 21 (23%) of 91 patients in the aspirin group 
and in 12 (15%) of 82 patients in the vitamin K antagonist group (absolute 
difference 8% [95% CI -4 to 21], non-inferiority p=0·55). Thus, non-inferiority 
of aspirin was not shown. Seven patients (8%) in the aspirin group and none in 
the vitamin K antagonist group had ischaemic strokes. One patient (1%) in the 
vitamin K antagonist group and none in the aspirin group had major extracranial 
haemorrhage. There were no deaths. Subclinical MRI outcomes were recorded in 14 
patients (15%) in the aspirin group and in 11 patients (13%) in the vitamin K 
antagonist group. There were 19 adverse events in the aspirin group, and 26 in 
the vitamin K antagonist group.
INTERPRETATION: Our findings did not show that aspirin was non-inferior to 
vitamin K antagonists in the treatment of cervical artery dissection.
FUNDING: Swiss National Science Foundation, Swiss Heart Foundation, Stroke Funds 
Basel, University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, Academic Society Basel.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00044-2
PMID: 33765420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]