---
reference_id: "PMID:22567450"
title: Osteogenesis Imperfecta (Type IV) with Dental Findings in Siblings.
authors:
- Shetty SR
- Dsouza D
- Babu S
- Balan P
journal: Case Rep Dent
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1155/2011/970904
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis Imperfecta (Type IV) with Dental Findings in Siblings.
**Authors:** Shetty SR, Dsouza D, Babu S, Balan P
**Journal:** Case Rep Dent (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2011/970904](https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/970904)

## Content

1. Case Rep Dent. 2011;2011:970904. doi: 10.1155/2011/970904. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Osteogenesis Imperfecta (Type IV) with Dental Findings in Siblings.

Shetty SR(1), Dsouza D, Babu S, Balan P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology, AB Shetty Memorial Institute of 
Dental Sciences, Nitte University, Mangalore 575018, India.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a hereditary disorder characterized by increased 
tendency for bone fractures due to high fragility. The clinical and radiological 
features of OI manifest in different age groups, although the disease is 
congenital in nature. Besides bone fragility, features like laxity of the 
ligaments, blue sclera, growth retardation, and scoliosis are also observed. In 
severe cases, respiratory distress and death have been reported. The most 
important oral finding in OI is the presence of yellowish-brown-coloured brittle 
teeth characteristic of dentinogenesis imperfecta. Genetic factors play a very 
important role in the pathogenesis of OI either as a dominant or recessive 
factor. When a child has OI, there is a 25% chance of the sibling to have the 
same disorder. We report two cases of OI in siblings born to parents with a 
history of consanguineous marriage. The clinical and radiological features of 
the two cases are described in detail.

DOI: 10.1155/2011/970904
PMCID: PMC3335498
PMID: 22567450