---
reference_id: "PMID:20673583"
title: Gestational trophoblastic disease.
authors:
- Seckl MJ
- Sebire NJ
- Berkowitz RS
journal: Lancet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60280-2
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- "Gestational Trophoblastic Disease/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Humans
- Pregnancy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gestational trophoblastic disease.
**Authors:** Seckl MJ, Sebire NJ, Berkowitz RS
**Journal:** Lancet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60280-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60280-2)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2010 Aug 28;376(9742):717-29. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60280-2. Epub
 2010 Jul 29.

Gestational trophoblastic disease.

Seckl MJ(1), Sebire NJ, Berkowitz RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Medicine, Charing Cross Gestational Trophoblastic 
Disease Centre, Charing Cross Hospital Campus of Imperial College London, 
London, UK. m.seckl@imperial.ac.uk

Gestational trophoblastic disease encompasses a range of pregnancy-related 
disorders, consisting of the premalignant disorders of complete and partial 
hydatidiform mole, and the malignant disorders of invasive mole, 
choriocarcinoma, and the rare placental-site trophoblastic tumour. These 
malignant forms are termed gestational trophoblastic tumours or neoplasia. 
Improvements in management and follow-up protocols mean that overall cure rates 
can exceed 98% with fertility retention, whereas most women would have died from 
malignant disease 60 years ago. This success can be explained by the development 
of effective treatments, the use of human chorionic gonadotropin as a biomarker, 
and centralisation of care. We summarise strategies for management of 
gestational trophoblastic disease and address some of the controversies and 
future research directions.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60280-2
PMID: 20673583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]