---
reference_id: "PMID:38190582"
title: "Comprehensive Genomic Analysis of Patients With Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Using Blood-Based Circulating Tumor DNA Assay: Findings From the BFAST Database of a Single Center in Taiwan."
authors:
- Wang HY
- Ho CC
- Lin YT
- Liao WY
- Chen CY
- Shih JY
- Yu CJ
journal: JCO Precis Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1200/PO.23.00314
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/diagnosis, genetics"
- Circulating Tumor DNA/genetics
- Prospective Studies
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Taiwan
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins
- Genomics
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive Genomic Analysis of Patients With Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Using Blood-Based Circulating Tumor DNA Assay: Findings From the BFAST Database of a Single Center in Taiwan.
**Authors:** Wang HY, Ho CC, Lin YT, Liao WY, Chen CY, Shih JY, Yu CJ
**Journal:** JCO Precis Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1200/PO.23.00314](https://doi.org/10.1200/PO.23.00314)

## Content

1. JCO Precis Oncol. 2024 Jan;8:e2300314. doi: 10.1200/PO.23.00314.

Comprehensive Genomic Analysis of Patients With Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Using
Blood-Based Circulating Tumor DNA Assay: Findings From the BFAST Database of a
Single Center in Taiwan.

Wang HY(1)(2), Ho CC(3), Lin YT(2)(4), Liao WY(3), Chen CY(1), Shih JY(3), Yu
CJ(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Yunlin Branch, Douliu City, Yunlin
County, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Zhongzheng District, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Cancer Centre, Da'an
District, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Hsin-Chu Branch, North District, Hsinchu City, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: The Blood First Assay Screening Trial (BFAST) is a prospective study
using next-generation sequencing (NGS) of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in
treatment-naïve advanced/metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We
compared liquid biopsy to tissue testing and analyzed genomic alterations in
Taiwanese patients with NSCLC using the BFAST database.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 269 patients underwent FoundationOne Liquid
Companion Diagnostic (F1LCDx) assay at the National Taiwan University Hospital,
of whom 264 underwent tissue-based genetic testing also. We analyzed the
actionable mutations and the concordance between tissue-based genetic testing,
which was limited to EGFR, ALK, ROS1, and BRAF, in a real-life clinical setting
and blood-based NGS in the clinical trial. Additionally, we analyzed the
co-occurring genomic alterations from the blood-based ctDNA assay.
RESULTS: A total of 76.2% patients showed actionable mutations. Standard tissue
testing did not detect known driver alterations in about 22.7% of the patients
(sensitivity, 70.24%). Liquid NGS detected additional mutations (RET, KRAS, MET,
and ErbB2) in 14% of the patients, which went undetected by the standard-of-care
testing. The complementary use of ctDNA NGS increased the detection rate by 42%.
The F1LCDx assay had a sensitivity of 83.41%. Lower tumor and metastasis stages
predicted nondetected blood-based NGS ctDNA results. Common co-occurring
mutations in the blood-based NGS ctDNA assay were TP53, DNMT3A, TET2, PIK3CA,
CTNNB1, and RB1. Among the patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC, TET2 co-occurring
alterations correlated with shorter progression-free survival of EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor treatment.
CONCLUSION: NGS ctDNA analysis in comprehensive genetic testing improves
actionable mutation identification, vital for treating Asian NSCLC cases with
high actionable mutation rates. Lower stages correlated with undetected
blood-based NGS ctDNA assay results.

DOI: 10.1200/PO.23.00314
PMCID: PMC10793989
PMID: 38190582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or
ascopubs.org/po/author-center. Open Payments is a public database containing
information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed physicians
(Open Payments). Jin-Yuan Shih Honoraria: AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Pfizer, Novartis, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Ono Pharmaceutical, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Roche, Chugai Pharma, Lilly, ACTgenomics, Amgen, CStone Pharmaceuticals, Orient
EuroPharma, Bayer Consulting or Advisory Role: Chugai Pharma, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Roche, AstraZeneca, Lilly, Takeda, CStone
Pharmaceuticals, Janssen Oncology, Novartis, Pfizer, Ono Pharmaceutical, Merck
Sharp & Dohme, Amgen, TTY Biopharm, Orient EuroPharma, MundiPharma Research
Funding: Roche, Genconn Biotech Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Bristol Myers
Squibb, Pfizer, Chugai Pharma, Roche, AstraZeneca No other potential conflicts
of interest were reported.
