---
reference_id: "PMID:37676252"
title: Neural-specific alterations in glycosphingolipid biosynthesis and cell signaling associated with two human ganglioside GM3 synthase deficiency variants.
authors:
- Dookwah M
- Wagner SK
- Ishihara M
- Yu SH
- Ulrichs H
- Kulik MJ
- Zeltner N
- Dalton S
- Strauss KA
- Aoki K
- Steet R
- Tiemeyer M
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad146
keywords:
- Signal Transduction
- "Sialyltransferases/genetics, metabolism, deficiency"
- Gangliosides
- Glycosphingolipids/metabolism
- Humans
- Erlotinib Hydrochloride
- "G(M3) Ganglioside/genetics, metabolism"
- Epilepsy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neural-specific alterations in glycosphingolipid biosynthesis and cell signaling associated with two human ganglioside GM3 synthase deficiency variants.
**Authors:** Dookwah M, Wagner SK, Ishihara M, Yu SH, Ulrichs H, Kulik MJ, Zeltner N, Dalton S, Strauss KA, Aoki K, Steet R, Tiemeyer M
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddad146](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddad146)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 Dec 1;32(24):3323-3341. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad146.

Neural-specific alterations in glycosphingolipid biosynthesis and cell signaling
associated with two human ganglioside GM3 synthase deficiency variants.

Dookwah M(1), Wagner SK(1), Ishihara M(1), Yu SH(2), Ulrichs H(3), Kulik MJ(3),
Zeltner N(3), Dalton S(3), Strauss KA(4), Aoki K(1), Steet R(2), Tiemeyer M(1).

Author information:
(1)Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, 315 Riverbend
Road, Athens, GA 30602, United States.
(2)Greenwood Genetic Center, 106 Gregor Mendel Circle, Greenwood, SC 29646,
United States.
(3)Center for Molecular Medicine, University of Georgia, 325 Riverbend Road,
Athens, GA 30602, United States.
(4)Clinic for Special Children, 535 Bunker Hill Road, Strasburg, PA 17579,
United States.

GM3 Synthase Deficiency (GM3SD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder resulting from
pathogenic variants in the ST3GAL5 gene, which encodes GM3 synthase, a
glycosphingolipid (GSL)-specific sialyltransferase. This enzyme adds a sialic
acid to the terminal galactose of lactosylceramide (LacCer) to produce the
monosialylated ganglioside GM3. In turn, GM3 is extended by other
glycosyltransferases to generate nearly all the complex gangliosides enriched in
neural tissue. Pathogenic mechanisms underlying the neural phenotypes associated
with GM3SD are unknown. To explore how loss of GM3 impacts neural-specific
glycolipid glycosylation and cell signaling, GM3SD patient fibroblasts bearing
one of two different ST3GAL5 variants were reprogrammed to induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) and then differentiated to neural crest cells (NCCs). GM3 and
GM3-derived gangliosides were undetectable in cells carrying either variant,
while LacCer precursor levels were elevated compared to wildtype (WT). NCCs of
both variants synthesized elevated levels of neutral lacto- and globo-series, as
well as minor alternatively sialylated GSLs compared to WT. Ceramide profiles
were also shifted in GM3SD variant cells. Altered GSL profiles in GM3SD cells
were accompanied by dynamic changes in the cell surface proteome, protein
O-GlcNAcylation, and receptor tyrosine kinase abundance. GM3SD cells also
exhibited increased apoptosis and sensitivity to erlotinib-induced inhibition of
epidermal growth factor receptor signaling. Pharmacologic inhibition of
O-GlcNAcase rescued baseline and erlotinib-induced apoptosis. Collectively,
these findings indicate aberrant cell signaling during differentiation of GM3SD
iPSCs and also underscore the challenge of distinguishing between variant effect
and genetic background effect on specific phenotypic consequences.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddad146
PMCID: PMC10695682
PMID: 37676252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.
