---
reference_id: "PMID:36658399"
title: Cytosolic aldose metabolism contributes to progression from cirrhosis to hepatocarcinogenesis.
authors:
- Oaks Z
- Patel A
- Huang N
- Choudhary G
- Winans T
- Faludi T
- Krakko D
- Duarte M
- Lewis J
- Beckford M
- Blair S
- Kelly R
- Landas SK
- Middleton FA
- Asara JM
- Chung SK
- Fernandez DR
- Banki K
- Perl A
journal: Nat Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s42255-022-00711-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/pathology"
- Cytosol/pathology
- NADP
- Liver Neoplasms/pathology
- Carcinogenesis/pathology
- Liver Cirrhosis/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytosolic aldose metabolism contributes to progression from cirrhosis to hepatocarcinogenesis.
**Authors:** Oaks Z, Patel A, Huang N, Choudhary G, Winans T, Faludi T, Krakko D, Duarte M, Lewis J, Beckford M, Blair S, Kelly R, Landas SK, Middleton FA, Asara JM, Chung SK, Fernandez DR, Banki K, Perl A
**Journal:** Nat Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42255-022-00711-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00711-9)

## Content

1. Nat Metab. 2023 Jan;5(1):41-60. doi: 10.1038/s42255-022-00711-9. Epub 2023 Jan
 19.

Cytosolic aldose metabolism contributes to progression from cirrhosis to
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Oaks Z(#)(1)(2), Patel A(#)(1)(2), Huang N(1)(2), Choudhary G(1)(2), Winans
T(1)(2), Faludi T(1), Krakko D(1), Duarte M(1), Lewis J(1), Beckford M(1), Blair
S(1), Kelly R(1), Landas SK(3), Middleton FA(4), Asara JM(5), Chung SK(6),
Fernandez DR(1)(2), Banki K(3), Perl A(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine, State University of New York, Norton College of
Medicine, Syracuse, NY, USA.
(2)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, State University of New
York, Norton College of Medicine, Syracuse, NY, USA.
(3)Departments of Pathology, State University of New York, Norton College of
Medicine, Syracuse, NY, USA.
(4)Departments of Neuroscience, State University of New York, Norton College of
Medicine, Syracuse, NY, USA.
(5)Division of Signal Transduction, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa,
China.
(7)Departments of Medicine, State University of New York, Norton College of
Medicine, Syracuse, NY, USA. perla@upstate.edu.
(8)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, State University of New
York, Norton College of Medicine, Syracuse, NY, USA. perla@upstate.edu.
(9)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, State University of New York,
Norton College of Medicine, Syracuse, NY, USA. perla@upstate.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nat Metab. 2023 Feb;5(2):349. doi: 10.1038/s42255-023-00752-8.

Oxidative stress modulates carcinogenesis in the liver; however, direct evidence
for metabolic control of oxidative stress during pathogenesis, particularly, of
progression from cirrhosis to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), has been lacking.
Deficiency of transaldolase (TAL), a rate-limiting enzyme of the non-oxidative
branch of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), restricts growth and predisposes
to cirrhosis and HCC in mice and humans. Here, we show that mitochondrial
oxidative stress and progression from cirrhosis to HCC and acetaminophen-induced
liver necrosis are critically dependent on NADPH depletion and polyol buildup by
aldose reductase (AR), while this enzyme protects from carbon trapping in the
PPP and growth restriction in TAL deficiency. Both TAL and AR are confined to
the cytosol; however, their inactivation distorts mitochondrial redox
homeostasis in opposite directions. The results suggest that AR acts as a
rheostat of carbon recycling and NADPH output of the PPP with broad implications
for disease progression from cirrhosis to HCC.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s42255-022-00711-9
PMCID: PMC9892301
PMID: 36658399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests Statement The authors
declare having no competing interests.
