---
reference_id: "PMID:21549341"
title: "Kufs disease, the major adult form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, caused by mutations in CLN6."
authors:
- Arsov T
- Smith KR
- Damiano J
- Franceschetti S
- Canafoglia L
- Bromhead CJ
- Andermann E
- Vears DF
- Cossette P
- Rajagopalan S
- McDougall A
- Sofia V
- Farrell M
- Aguglia U
- Zini A
- Meletti S
- Morbin M
- Mullen S
- Andermann F
- Mole SE
- Bahlo M
- Berkovic SF
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.004
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Biopsy
- Dementia/pathology
- Exons
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Genotype
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/etiology, genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kufs disease, the major adult form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, caused by mutations in CLN6.
**Authors:** Arsov T, Smith KR, Damiano J, Franceschetti S, Canafoglia L, Bromhead CJ, Andermann E, Vears DF, Cossette P, Rajagopalan S, McDougall A, Sofia V, Farrell M, Aguglia U, Zini A, Meletti S, Morbin M, Mullen S, Andermann F, Mole SE, Bahlo M, Berkovic SF
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.004)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 May 13;88(5):566-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.004.
Epub  2011 May 5.

Kufs disease, the major adult form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, caused by 
mutations in CLN6.

Arsov T(1), Smith KR, Damiano J, Franceschetti S, Canafoglia L, Bromhead CJ, 
Andermann E, Vears DF, Cossette P, Rajagopalan S, McDougall A, Sofia V, Farrell 
M, Aguglia U, Zini A, Meletti S, Morbin M, Mullen S, Andermann F, Mole SE, Bahlo 
M, Berkovic SF.

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy Research Center, Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, 
Austin Health, Heidelberg, Victoria 3084, Australia.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2011 Dec;80(6):505-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01761.x.

The molecular basis of Kufs disease is unknown, whereas a series of genes 
accounting for most of the childhood-onset forms of neuronal ceroid 
lipofuscinosis (NCL) have been identified. Diagnosis of Kufs disease is 
difficult because the characteristic lipopigment is largely confined to neurons 
and can require a brain biopsy or autopsy for final diagnosis. We mapped four 
families with Kufs disease for whom there was good evidence of 
autosomal-recessive inheritance and found two peaks on chromosome 15. Three of 
the families were affected by Kufs type A disease and presented with progressive 
myoclonus epilepsy, and one was affected by type B (presenting with dementia and 
motor system dysfunction). Sequencing of a candidate gene in one peak shared by 
all four families identified no mutations, but sequencing of CLN6, found in the 
second peak and shared by only the three families affected by Kufs type A 
disease, revealed pathogenic mutations in all three families. We subsequently 
sequenced CLN6 in eight other families, three of which were affected by 
recessive Kufs type A disease. Mutations in both CLN6 alleles were found in the 
three type A cases and in one family affected by unclassified Kufs disease. 
Mutations in CLN6 are the major cause of recessive Kufs type A disease. The 
phenotypic differences between variant late-infantile NCL, previously found to 
be caused by CLN6, and Kufs type A disease are striking; there is a much later 
age at onset and lack of visual involvement in the latter. Sequencing of CLN6 
will provide a simple diagnostic strategy in this disorder, in which definitive 
identification usually requires invasive biopsy.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.004
PMCID: PMC3146726
PMID: 21549341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]