---
reference_id: "PMID:37905988"
title: "Whole-genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of coxsackievirus-A16 strains causing hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) in India."
authors:
- Tikute S
- Sonawane S
- Shete A
- Kumar A
- Yadav S
- Yadav PD
- Lavania M
journal: Microb Genom
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.001130
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/epidemiology"
- Phylogeny
- India/epidemiology
- Enterovirus/genetics
- Nucleotides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of coxsackievirus-A16 strains causing hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) in India.
**Authors:** Tikute S, Sonawane S, Shete A, Kumar A, Yadav S, Yadav PD, Lavania M
**Journal:** Microb Genom (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1099/mgen.0.001130](https://doi.org/10.1099/mgen.0.001130)

## Content

1. Microb Genom. 2023 Oct;9(10):001130. doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.001130.

Whole-genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of coxsackievirus-A16 strains 
causing hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) in India.

Tikute S(1), Sonawane S(1), Shete A(2), Kumar A(2), Yadav S(2), Yadav PD(2), 
Lavania M(1).

Author information:
(1)Enteric Viruses Group; ICMR-National Institute of Virology, Pune, 
Maharashtra, India.
(2)Maximum Containment Laboratory, ICMR-National Institute of Virology Pune, 
Pune, Maharashtra, India.

Hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) is a common childhood infectious disease, 
caused by enteroviruses (EVs), which can present with typical or atypical 
lesions. The illness is self-limiting, but it can also have serious 
complications. Since 1997, HFMD infections have become endemic and have 
increased to epidemic proportions across the Asia Pacific region, including 
India. Coxsackievirus-A16 (CV-A16) outbreaks occurred in India from 2005 
onwards, although the clinical symptoms were noticeably different during this 
period. Understanding the population dynamics of enteroviruses that cause HFMD 
is crucial in the post-polio era because one of the circulating strain may 
replace another as the dominant strain. The aim of this study is to describe the 
genetic features of the CV-A16 strains isolated from hand, foot and mouth 
disease (HFMD) patients in India. Reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) and 
cell-culture-based isolation of CV-A16 was done from the 55 clinical samples. 
The entire genome of the CV-A16 isolate was performed from the seven isolates. 
After the sequences were analysed, a phylogenetic tree was created using 
bioinformatics tools. The total genomic length obtained was 7411 base pairs 
(bp). Nucleotide similarity across various regions, including 5'UTR, P1, P2 and 
3'UTR, ranged from 87.0-97.9 %, 77.0-95.4 %, 80.3-96.9 %, and 77.9-96.2 %, 
respectively. Correspondingly, similarities in the VP1 region's nucleotide and 
amino acid sequences were 91.4-96.4 % and 99.3-99.7 %, respectively. 
Phylogenetic analysis highlighted that CV-A16 strains identified in Pune, 
Maharashtra, were grouped within the same cluster. The analysed CV-A16 isolates 
in this study aligned with subgenotype B1c. These findings have far-reaching 
implications for the surveillance, prevention and management of HFMD and CV-A16. 
Monitoring the dynamics of CV-A16 strains, informed by the genetic 
characteristics identified here, will significantly impact strategies aimed at 
tackling HFMD and its associated public health challenges.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.001130
PMCID: PMC10634451
PMID: 37905988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declare that there are no 
conflicts of interest.