---
reference_id: "PMID:33649241"
title: Up-regulation of miR-34b/c by JNK and FOXO3 protects from liver fibrosis.
authors:
- Piccolo P
- Ferriero R
- Barbato A
- Attanasio S
- Monti M
- Perna C
- Borel F
- Annunziata P
- Carissimo A
- De Cegli R
- Quagliata L
- Terracciano LM
- Housset C
- Teckman JH
- Mueller C
- Brunetti-Pierri N
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2025242118
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Forkhead Box Protein O3/genetics, metabolism"
- "Liver Cirrhosis/genetics, metabolism, prevention & control"
- "MAP Kinase Kinase 4/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "MicroRNAs/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Up-Regulation
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Up-regulation of miR-34b/c by JNK and FOXO3 protects from liver fibrosis.
**Authors:** Piccolo P, Ferriero R, Barbato A, Attanasio S, Monti M, Perna C, Borel F, Annunziata P, Carissimo A, De Cegli R, Quagliata L, Terracciano LM, Housset C, Teckman JH, Mueller C, Brunetti-Pierri N
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2025242118](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2025242118)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Mar 9;118(10):e2025242118. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2025242118.

Up-regulation of miR-34b/c by JNK and FOXO3 protects from liver fibrosis.

Piccolo P(1)(2), Ferriero R(3), Barbato A(3), Attanasio S(3), Monti M(3), Perna
C(3), Borel F(4)(5), Annunziata P(3), Carissimo A(3), De Cegli R(3), Quagliata
L(6), Terracciano LM(6), Housset C(7)(8), Teckman JH(9), Mueller C(4)(5),
Brunetti-Pierri N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, 80078 Naples, Italy;
piccolo@tigem.it brunetti@tigem.it.
(2)Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II University, 80131 Naples,
Italy.
(3)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, 80078 Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655.
(5)Horae Gene Therapy Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655.
(6)Molecular Pathology Division, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of
Basel, University of Basel, 4003 Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, 75012 Paris,
France.
(8)Department of Hepatology, Reference Center for Inflammatory Biliary Diseases
and Autoimmune Hepatitis, Saint-Antoine Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux
de Paris, 75012 Paris, France.
(9)Cardinal Glennon Children's Medical Center, St. Louis University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63104.

α1-Antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency is a common genetic disease presenting with lung
and liver diseases. AAT deficiency results from pathogenic variants in the
SERPINA1 gene encoding AAT and the common mutant Z allele of SERPINA1 encodes
for Z α1-antitrypsin (ATZ), a protein forming hepatotoxic polymers retained in
the endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes. PiZ mice express the human ATZ and are
a valuable model to investigate the human liver disease of AAT deficiency. In
this study, we investigated differential expression of microRNAs (miRNAs)
between PiZ and control mice and found that miR-34b/c was up-regulated and its
levels correlated with intrahepatic ATZ. Furthermore, in PiZ mouse livers, we
found that Forkhead Box O3 (FOXO3) driving microRNA-34b/c (miR-34b/c) expression
was activated and miR-34b/c expression was dependent upon c-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK) phosphorylation on Ser574 Deletion of miR-34b/c in PiZ mice
resulted in early development of liver fibrosis and increased signaling of
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), a target of miR-34b/c. Activation of
FOXO3 and increased miR-34c were confirmed in livers of humans with AAT
deficiency. In addition, JNK-activated FOXO3 and miR-34b/c up-regulation were
detected in several mouse models of liver fibrosis. This study reveals a pathway
involved in liver fibrosis and potentially implicated in both genetic and
acquired causes of hepatic fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2025242118
PMCID: PMC7958360
PMID: 33649241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.
