---
reference_id: "PMID:36662855"
title: The molecular mechanism of sialic acid transport mediated by Sialin.
authors:
- Hu W
- Chi C
- Song K
- Zheng H
journal: Sci Adv
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.ade8346
keywords:
- Humans
- N-Acetylneuraminic Acid
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- Sialic Acid Storage Disease/genetics
- Mutation
- "Symporters/genetics, metabolism"
- Ion Transport
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The molecular mechanism of sialic acid transport mediated by Sialin.
**Authors:** Hu W, Chi C, Song K, Zheng H
**Journal:** Sci Adv (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1126/sciadv.ade8346](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.ade8346)

## Content

1. Sci Adv. 2023 Jan 20;9(3):eade8346. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.ade8346. Epub 2023 Jan
 20.

The molecular mechanism of sialic acid transport mediated by Sialin.

Hu W(1), Chi C(2), Song K(2), Zheng H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.

Malfunction of the sialic acid transporter caused by various genetic mutations 
in the SLC17A5 gene encoding Sialin leads to a spectrum of neurodegenerative 
conditions called free sialic acid storage disorders. Unfortunately, how Sialin 
transports sialic acid/proton (H+) and how pathogenic mutations impair its 
function are poorly defined. Here, we present the structure of human Sialin in 
an inward-facing partially open conformation determined by cryo-electron 
microscopy, representing the first high-resolution structure of any human SLC17 
member. Our analysis reveals two unique features in Sialin: (i) The H+ 
coupling/sensing requires two highly conserved Glu residues (E171 and E175) 
instead of one (E175) as implied in previous studies; and (ii) the normal 
function of Sialin requires the stabilization of a cytosolic helix, which has 
not been noticed in the literature. By mapping known pathogenic mutations, we 
provide mechanistic explanations for corresponding functional defects. We 
propose a structure-based mechanism for sialic acid transport mediated by 
Sialin.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.ade8346
PMCID: PMC9858498
PMID: 36662855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]