---
reference_id: "PMID:38314135"
title: SLC6A14 promotes ulcerative colitis progression by facilitating NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated pyroptosis.
authors:
- Gu Q
- Xia H
- Song YQ
- Duan J
- Chen Y
- Zhang Y
- Chen HP
- Zhang L
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v30.i3.252
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLC6A14 promotes ulcerative colitis progression by facilitating NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated pyroptosis.
**Authors:** Gu Q, Xia H, Song YQ, Duan J, Chen Y, Zhang Y, Chen HP, Zhang L
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v30.i3.252](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v30.i3.252)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2024 Jan 21;30(3):252-267. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v30.i3.252.

SLC6A14 promotes ulcerative colitis progression by facilitating NLRP3 
inflammasome-mediated pyroptosis.

Gu Q(1), Xia H(2), Song YQ(1), Duan J(1), Chen Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Chen HP(1)(2), 
Zhang L(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Elderly Digestive, Sichuan Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, University of Electronic Science and 
Technology, Chengdu 610072, Sichuan Province, China.
(2)Geriatrics Research Institute, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu 
610072, Sichuan Province, China.
(3)Geriatrics Research Institute, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu 
610072, Sichuan Province, China. 1262867096@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an inflammatory condition with frequent 
relapse and recurrence. Evidence suggests the involvement of SLC6A14 in UC 
pathogenesis, but the central regulator remains unknown.
AIM: To explore the role of SLC6A14 in UC-associated pyroptosis.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), 
immunoblotting, and immunohistochemical were used to assess SLC6A14 in human UC 
tissues. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was used to induce inflammation in FHC and 
NCM460 cells and model enteritis, and SLC6A14 levels were assessed. Pyroptosis 
markers were quantified using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, Western 
blotting, and qRT-PCR, and EdU incubation, CCK-8 assays and flow cytometry were 
used to examine proliferation and apoptosis. Mouse models of UC were used for 
verification.
RESULTS: SLC6A14 was increased and correlated with NLRP3 in UC tissues. 
LPS-induced FHC and NCM460 cells showed increased SLC6A14 levels. Reducing 
SLC6A14 increased cell proliferation and suppressed apoptosis. Reducing SLC6A14 
decreased pyroptosis-associated proteins (ASC, IL-1β, IL-18, NLRP3). NLRP3 
overexpression counteracted the effects of sh-SLC6A14 on LPS-induced FHC and 
NCM460 cell pyroptosis. SLC6A14 improved the mucosa in mice with dextran sulfate 
sodium-induced colitis.
CONCLUSION: SLC6A14 promotes UC pyroptosis by regulating NLRP3, suggesting the 
therapeutic potential of modulating the SLC6A14/NLRP3 axis.

©The Author(s) 2024. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v30.i3.252
PMCID: PMC10835529
PMID: 38314135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.