---
reference_id: "PMID:33104273"
title: Respiratory symptoms of exposure to substances in the workplace among Bulgarian dentists.
authors:
- Stoeva I
journal: Community Dent Oral Epidemiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/cdoe.12584
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory symptoms of exposure to substances in the workplace among Bulgarian dentists.
**Authors:** Stoeva I
**Journal:** Community Dent Oral Epidemiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cdoe.12584](https://doi.org/10.1111/cdoe.12584)

## Content

1. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 2021 Apr;49(2):128-135. doi:
10.1111/cdoe.12584.  Epub 2020 Oct 26.

Respiratory symptoms of exposure to substances in the workplace among Bulgarian 
dentists.

Stoeva I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Dental Allergology and Physiotherapy, 
Faculty of Dental Medicine, Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.

OBJECTIVES: Dentists are exposed to a variety of airborne chemicals that can act 
as irritants and sensitizers and may give rise to work-related respiratory 
symptoms. The aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of respiratory 
symptoms of exposure to substances in the workplace and associated risk factors 
in Bulgarian dentists.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was performed among Bulgarian dentists by using 
a self-report questionnaire. A direct acyclic graph (DAG) was elaborated to 
illustrate the direct and indirect causal pathways between exposure to irritants 
and/or allergens from dental environment and work-related respiratory symptoms 
among dentists. Multiple logistic regression analysis was conducted in order to 
investigate the relationship between sex, work experience, daily exposure to 
chemicals from dental environment, history of atopic disorder and work-related 
respiratory symptoms.
RESULTS: A total of 4675 dentists completed the questionnaire (response rate 
48.1%). The prevalence of self-reported work-related respiratory symptoms was 
20.7%. The most common repeated causes of respiratory reactions were 
disinfectants (65.7%) and materials based on acrylic resins (29.7%). Factors 
associated with work-related respiratory symptoms are personal history of asthma 
(odds ratio (OR) 2.50, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.71-3.64), work experience 
>20 years (OR 2.17, 95% CI: 1.74-2.70) and female gender (OR 2.14, 95% CI: 
1.81-2.56).
CONCLUSION: Work-related respiratory symptoms are frequent among dentists and 
indicate a need for efforts to establish effective programmes and techniques of 
reducing or eliminating direct exposure to airborne chemicals in the dental 
environment.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cdoe.12584
PMID: 33104273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]