---
reference_id: "PMID:26414229"
title: Responses to and Outcomes of Treatment of Autoimmune Cerebellar Ataxia in Adults.
authors:
- Jones AL
- Flanagan EP
- Pittock SJ
- Mandrekar JN
- Eggers SD
- Ahlskog JE
- McKeon A
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.2378
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Autoantibodies/blood, cerebrospinal fluid"
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Female
- Glutamate Decarboxylase/immunology
- Humans
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- "Paraneoplastic Cerebellar Degeneration/immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Purkinje Cells/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Responses to and Outcomes of Treatment of Autoimmune Cerebellar Ataxia in Adults.
**Authors:** Jones AL, Flanagan EP, Pittock SJ, Mandrekar JN, Eggers SD, Ahlskog JE, McKeon A
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.2378](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.2378)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2015 Nov;72(11):1304-12. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.2378.

Responses to and Outcomes of Treatment of Autoimmune Cerebellar Ataxia in 
Adults.

Jones AL(1), Flanagan EP(1), Pittock SJ(2), Mandrekar JN(3), Eggers SD(1), 
Ahlskog JE(1), McKeon A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.
(2)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota2Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, College of Medicine, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, College of Medicine, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

IMPORTANCE: Classic Purkinje cell cytoplasmic antibody type 1 (PCA-1, or 
anti-Yo) paraneoplastic cerebellar ataxia has a poor prognosis, yet little has 
been published otherwise regarding treatment responses and outcomes among 
patients with autoimmune cerebellar ataxia.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate treatment responses and outcomes in adults with 
autoimmune cerebellar ataxia.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A cohort study conducted at Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota, included 118 patients who had ataxia, were 18 years or 
older, were seropositive for at least 1 neural autoantibody, had received at 
least 1 immunotherapy or cancer therapy, and had neurologist-reported outcomes 
documented from January 1, 1989, through December 31, 2013. Data were collected 
from May 14, 2013, through August 9, 2014, and analyzed from August 9, 2014, 
through April 27, 2015. Responses to immunotherapy (corticosteroids, intravenous 
immunoglobulin, plasma exchange, and immunosuppressants) and ambulatory outcomes 
were compared between different subgroups. Subgroups were classified as 
paraneoplastic vs nonparaneoplastic disorders; neuronal nuclear and/or 
cytoplasmic (NNC) antibody positivity vs plasma membrane protein (PMP) antibody 
positivity; and glutamic acid decarboxylase 65-kDa isoform (GAD65) antibody 
positivity vs PMP antibody positivity.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Response to therapy and ambulatory ability, with 
univariate logistic regression and Kaplan-Meier analyses.
RESULTS: Inclusion criteria were met by 118 patients. Median age at onset of 
neurologic symptoms was 58 (range, 27-83) years, and 87 patients (73.7%) were 
women. Median duration from symptom onset to last follow-up was 25 (range, 
2-223) months. Sixty-three patients had paraneoplastic and 55 patients had 
nonparaneoplastic ataxic disorders. Eighty-one patients were seropositive for 
NNC antibodies (most commonly PCA-1 [anti-Yo], antineuronal nuclear antibody 
type 1 [anti-Hu], and GAD65 antibody); 22 patients, for neural PMP receptor or 
ion channel antibodies (most commonly targeting P/Q- or N-type voltage-gated 
calcium channels); and 15 patients, for antibodies from both categories. 
Neurologic improvements occurred in 54 patients (with a robust change in 
ambulatory ability in 22) attributable to immunotherapy; univariate regression 
analysis revealed that improvements were significantly more common among 
patients with nonparaneoplastic disorders (P = .03) and those with exclusively 
PMP antibodies (P = .02). Kaplan-Meier analyses revealed that progression to 
wheelchair dependence occurred significantly faster among patients with NNC 
antibody positivity only (P = .02), although those with GAD65 autoimmunity 
progressed to wheelchair dependence at a rate similar to those with PMP 
autoimmunity (P = .92).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Although autoimmune ataxia is usually severe, 
treatment responses can be gratifying, particularly in patients with 
nonparaneoplastic disorders and in those harboring autoantibodies directed 
against GAD65 or neural PMPs.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.2378
PMID: 26414229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]