---
reference_id: "PMID:38457342"
title: Disease-causing Slack potassium channel mutations produce opposite effects on excitability of excitatory and inhibitory neurons.
authors:
- Wu J
- Quraishi IH
- Zhang Y
- Bromwich M
- Kaczmarek LK
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.113904
keywords:
- Humans
- Axons/metabolism
- Epilepsy/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- Potassium Channels/metabolism
- "Potassium Channels, Sodium-Activated"
- Animals
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-causing Slack potassium channel mutations produce opposite effects on excitability of excitatory and inhibitory neurons.
**Authors:** Wu J, Quraishi IH, Zhang Y, Bromwich M, Kaczmarek LK
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2024.113904](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.113904)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2024 Mar 26;43(3):113904. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.113904. Epub
2024  Mar 7.

Disease-causing Slack potassium channel mutations produce opposite effects on
excitability of excitatory and inhibitory neurons.

Wu J(1), Quraishi IH(2), Zhang Y(1), Bromwich M(1), Kaczmarek LK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Yale Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA; Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address: leonard.kaczmarek@yale.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Feb 14:2023.02.14.528229. doi: 10.1101/2023.02.14.528229.

The KCNT1 gene encodes the sodium-activated potassium channel Slack (KCNT1,
KNa1.1), a regulator of neuronal excitability. Gain-of-function mutations in
humans cause cortical network hyperexcitability, seizures, and severe
intellectual disability. Using a mouse model expressing the Slack-R455H
mutation, we find that Na+-dependent K+ (KNa) and voltage-dependent sodium (NaV)
currents are increased in both excitatory and inhibitory cortical neurons. These
increased currents, however, enhance the firing of excitability neurons but
suppress that of inhibitory neurons. We further show that the expression of NaV
channel subunits, particularly that of NaV1.6, is upregulated and that the
length of the axon initial segment and of axonal NaV immunostaining is increased
in both neuron types. Our study on the coordinate regulation of KNa currents and
the expression of NaV channels may provide an avenue for understanding and
treating epilepsies and other neurological disorders.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.113904
PMCID: PMC11013952
PMID: 38457342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
