---
reference_id: "PMID:2998649"
title: Familial male pseudohermaphroditism with gynaecomastia due to 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency. A report of 3 cases.
authors:
- Balducci R
- Toscano V
- Wright F
- Bozzolan F
- Di Piero G
- Maroder M
- Panei P
- Sciarra F
- Boscherini B
journal: Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.1985.tb01102.x
keywords:
- 17-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenases/deficiency
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Disorders of Sex Development/complications, enzymology, genetics"
- Gonadal Steroid Hormones/blood
- "Gynecomastia/complications, enzymology"
- Humans
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial male pseudohermaphroditism with gynaecomastia due to 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency. A report of 3 cases.
**Authors:** Balducci R, Toscano V, Wright F, Bozzolan F, Di Piero G, Maroder M, Panei P, Sciarra F, Boscherini B
**Journal:** Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2265.1985.tb01102.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2265.1985.tb01102.x)

## Content

1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 1985 Oct;23(4):439-44. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.1985.tb01102.x.

Familial male pseudohermaphroditism with gynaecomastia due to 17
beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency. A report of 3 cases.

Balducci R, Toscano V, Wright F, Bozzolan F, Di Piero G, Maroder M, Panei P,
Sciarra F, Boscherini B.

Three sisters with male pseudohermaphroditism due to 17 beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency are described. On the basis of a 46 XY karyotype and
female phenotype all subjects were thought to have the testicular feminization
syndrome. At puberty the two older patients developed signs of virilization and
gynaecomastia. In these patients the plasma androstenedione level was 4-5 times
higher than normal, whilst the plasma testosterone level was low compared to the
normal range and, under basal conditions, their plasma androstenedione to
testosterone ratio was 20-25 times higher than normal. Interestingly, in the
third, prepubertal case, the basal androstenedione to testosterone ratio was
normal but became six times higher than normal after hCG stimulation. These data
support the diagnosis of male pseudohermaphroditism due to 17
beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency and underline the diagnostic value
of the hCG stimulation test prepubertally.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.1985.tb01102.x
PMID: 2998649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
