---
reference_id: PMID:35122356
title: Retrograde upper esophageal sphincter function… and dysfunction.
authors:
- Kahrilas PJ
journal: Neurogastroenterol Motil
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/nmo.14328
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrograde upper esophageal sphincter function… and dysfunction.
**Authors:** Kahrilas PJ
**Journal:** Neurogastroenterol Motil (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nmo.14328](https://doi.org/10.1111/nmo.14328)

## Content

1. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2022 May;34(5):e14328. doi: 10.1111/nmo.14328. Epub 
2022 Feb 4.

Retrograde upper esophageal sphincter function… and dysfunction.

Kahrilas PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Upper esophageal sphincter (UES) function has been extensively studied in the 
context of swallowing and antegrade bolus transit, but relatively little 
attention has been paid to its retrograde function to facilitate belching. 
Indeed, prior to 2019, there were only three case reports in the world 
literature of individuals with a physiologically demonstrated inability to belch 
due to failure of the UES to relax after gas venting from the stomach and 
ensuing low-pressure esophageal distention. In this minireview, that disorder is 
termed retrograde UES dysfunction (R-UESD). The associated symptom complex 
includes some combination of chest pain, gurgling noises in the chest, bloating, 
nausea, hiccups, and flatulence. The obscurity of R-UESD has recently been 
challenged by two large series published in the ENT literature of 
circumstantially demonstrated R-UESD that was resolved by botulinum toxin (BT) 
injection to the cricopharyngeus. The field has now further advanced with the 
publication in this issue of the Journal by Oude Nijhuis et al. of 8 cases of 
R-UESD demonstrated by high-resolution impedance manometry (HRIM) with a 
provocative challenge of carbonated water. These individuals were also treated 
with BT and at 3-month follow-up had both an encouraging symptomatic response 
and HRIM demonstrated resolution of R-UESD.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/nmo.14328
PMCID: PMC9007908
PMID: 35122356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]