---
reference_id: "PMID:40174237"
title: A Phase 3 Trial of Upadacitinib for Giant-Cell Arteritis.
authors:
- Blockmans D
- Penn SK
- Setty AR
- Schmidt WA
- Rubbert-Roth A
- Hauge EM
- Keen HI
- Ishii T
- Khalidi N
- Dejaco C
- Cid MC
- Hellmich B
- Liu M
- Zhao W
- Lagunes I
- Romero AB
- Wung PK
- Merkel PA
- SELECT-GCA Study Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2413449
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Double-Blind Method
- Drug Tapering/methods
- "Drug Therapy, Combination/adverse effects, methods"
- Giant Cell Arteritis/drug therapy
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Janus Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Remission Induction/methods
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Heterocyclic Compounds, 3-Ring"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Phase 3 Trial of Upadacitinib for Giant-Cell Arteritis.
**Authors:** Blockmans D, Penn SK, Setty AR, Schmidt WA, Rubbert-Roth A, Hauge EM, Keen HI, Ishii T, Khalidi N, Dejaco C, Cid MC, Hellmich B, Liu M, Zhao W, Lagunes I, Romero AB, Wung PK, Merkel PA, SELECT-GCA Study Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2413449](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2413449)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2025 May 29;392(20):2013-2024. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2413449. Epub
2025 Apr 2.

A Phase 3 Trial of Upadacitinib for Giant-Cell Arteritis.

Blockmans D(1)(2), Penn SK(3), Setty AR(3), Schmidt WA(4), Rubbert-Roth A(5),
Hauge EM(6)(7), Keen HI(8), Ishii T(9), Khalidi N(10), Dejaco C(11)(12), Cid
MC(13), Hellmich B(14), Liu M(3), Zhao W(3), Lagunes I(3), Romero AB(3), Wung
PK(3), Merkel PA(15); SELECT-GCA Study Group.

Collaborators: Ostor A, Sammel A, Hill C, Tracey G, Keen HI, Ng J, Bird P, Hall
S, Dutiner C, Spellitz P, Betrains A, Blockmans D, Van den Bosch F, Boutsen Y,
Morin F, Fortin I, Khalidi N, Dokoupilova E, Skacelova M, Jankova R, Matousova
Z, Hauge EM, Chrysidis S, Saraux A, Poulet A, Bienvenu B, Agard C, Chu Miow Lin
D, Hachulla E, Pugnet G, Carvajal Alegria G, Sailler L, Mouthon L, Lambert M,
Samson M, Hamidou M, Cacoub P, Devauchelle-Pensec V, Hellmich B, Tony HP, Henes
JC, Schmalzing M, Feuchtenberger M, Wite T, Schmidt WA, Georgountzos A,
Vassilopoulos D, Vounotrypidis P, Kolossvary E, Griger Z, Awisat A, Lidar M,
Salvarani C, Dejaco C, Sandri G, Quartuccio L, De Vita S, Oshikawa H, Dobashi H,
Tamaki H, Wada J, Sada K, Kawahata K, Kishimoto M, Ishii T, Shirai T, Katada Y,
Matsumoto Y, Fujita Y, Magro Checa C, Colin E, Brouwer E, Meek I, Oskam L,
Ramiro M, Bos R, Ching D, Porter D, White D, Gilchrist N, Suppiah R, Kumar S,
Quincey V, Lexberg A, Kaufmann C, Vaz C, Ponte C, Costa J, Khmelinskii N, Pinto
P, Ushakova E, Shumikhina I, Penkov K, Petrova M, Balsa Criado A,
Fernandez-Gutierrez B, Barbazan Alvarez C, de Miguel E, Galindez Agirregoikoa E,
Diaz Gonzalez F, Blanco Garcia F, Espigol-Frigole G, Hernandez Rodriguez I,
Lopez Longo J, Alvaro-Gracia J, Jover J, Nieto González J, Cid MC, Blanco Alonso
R, Hultgard Ekwall AK, Cagnoto G, Gunnarsson I, Lampa J, Rubbert-Roth A, Kyburz
D, Dudler J, Christ L, Villiger P, Mueller R, Daikeler T, Wong E, Tahir H,
Abusalameh M, Cates M, Khurshid M, Winﬁeld R, Kelly S, Sreih A, Antolini C,
Niemer G, Aelion J, Alper J, Churchill M, Amin M, Merkel P, Dore R, Davis W.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Transplantation, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.
(3)AbbVie, North Chicago, IL.
(4)Immanuel Krankenhaus Berlin, Medical Center for Rheumatology Berlin-Buch,
Berlin.
(5)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen, St.
Gallen, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(7)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(8)University of Western Australia Medical School, Fiona Stanley Hospital,
Murdoch, Australia.
(9)Division of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Sendai, Japan.
(10)St. Joseph's Healthcare, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(11)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital of Brunico, Südtiroler Sanitätsbetrieb
- Azienda Sanitaria dell'Alto Adige, Brunico, Italy.
(12)Medical University of Graz, Department of Rheumatology, Graz, Austria.
(13)Department of Autoimmune Diseases, European Reference Network RITA, Hospital
Clinic, University of Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi
i Sunyer, Barcelona.
(14)Medius Kliniken, Teaching Hospital University of Tübingen, Department of
Internal Medicine, Rheumatology, Pneumology, Nephrology and Diabetology,
Kirchheim unter Teck, Germany.
(15)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, and the Division of
Epidemiology, Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

BACKGROUND: Giant-cell arteritis is a systemic vasculitis with limited treatment
options. The efficacy and safety of upadacitinib - a selective Janus kinase
(JAK) inhibitor that blocks the signaling of several cytokines, including
interleukin-6 and interferon-γ - are unknown in patients with giant-cell
arteritis.
METHODS: We randomly assigned patients with new-onset or relapsing giant-cell
arteritis, in a 2:1:1 ratio, to receive upadacitinib at a dose of 15 mg or 7.5
mg orally once daily plus a 26-week glucocorticoid taper or placebo plus a
52-week glucocorticoid taper. The primary end point was sustained remission at
week 52, defined by the absence of signs or symptoms of giant-cell arteritis
from week 12 through week 52 and adherence to the protocol-specified
glucocorticoid taper.
RESULTS: A total of 209 patients received upadacitinib at a dose of 15 mg, 107
received upadacitinib at a dose of 7.5 mg, and 112 received placebo; 70% of the
patients had new-onset giant-cell arteritis. Upadacitinib at a dose of 15 mg
showed superiority over placebo with respect to the primary end point (46.4%
[95% confidence interval {CI}, 39.6 to 53.2] vs. 29.0% [95% CI, 20.6 to 37.5];
P = 0.002). Upadacitinib at a dose of 15 mg was superior to placebo in the
analysis of the hierarchically prespecified and multiplicity-controlled key
secondary end points of sustained complete remission, time to a disease flare,
cumulative glucocorticoid exposure, and patient-reported outcomes. Upadacitinib
at a dose of 7.5 mg was not superior to placebo with respect to the primary end
point (41.1% [95% CI, 31.8 to 50.4]). Safety outcomes during the treatment
period of 52 weeks were similar in the upadacitinib and placebo groups. Although
cardiovascular risk is a potential concern with a JAK inhibitor, no major
adverse cardiovascular events occurred in the upadacitinib groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with giant-cell arteritis, upadacitinib at a dose of 15
mg - but not 7.5 mg - with a 26-week glucocorticoid taper showed efficacy
superior to that of placebo with a 52-week glucocorticoid taper. (Funded by
AbbVie; SELECT-GCA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03725202.).

Copyright © 2025 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2413449
PMID: 40174237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
