---
reference_id: "PMID:21848462"
title: Interleukin-36-receptor antagonist deficiency and generalized pustular psoriasis.
authors:
- Marrakchi S
- Guigue P
- Renshaw BR
- Puel A
- Pei XY
- Fraitag S
- Zribi J
- Bal E
- Cluzeau C
- Chrabieh M
- Towne JE
- Douangpanya J
- Pons C
- Mansour S
- Serre V
- Makni H
- Mahfoudh N
- Fakhfakh F
- Bodemer C
- Feingold J
- Hadj-Rabia S
- Favre M
- Genin E
- Sahbatou M
- Munnich A
- Casanova JL
- Sims JE
- Turki H
- Bachelez H
- Smahi A
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1013068
keywords:
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- "Interleukin-1/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Psoriasis/genetics
- "Receptors, Interleukin/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Signal Transduction
- "Skin Diseases, Vesiculobullous"
- Tunisia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interleukin-36-receptor antagonist deficiency and generalized pustular psoriasis.
**Authors:** Marrakchi S, Guigue P, Renshaw BR, Puel A, Pei XY, Fraitag S, Zribi J, Bal E, Cluzeau C, Chrabieh M, Towne JE, Douangpanya J, Pons C, Mansour S, Serre V, Makni H, Mahfoudh N, Fakhfakh F, Bodemer C, Feingold J, Hadj-Rabia S, Favre M, Genin E, Sahbatou M, Munnich A, Casanova JL, Sims JE, Turki H, Bachelez H, Smahi A
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1013068](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1013068)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2011 Aug 18;365(7):620-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1013068.

Interleukin-36-receptor antagonist deficiency and generalized pustular 
psoriasis.

Marrakchi S(1), Guigue P, Renshaw BR, Puel A, Pei XY, Fraitag S, Zribi J, Bal E, 
Cluzeau C, Chrabieh M, Towne JE, Douangpanya J, Pons C, Mansour S, Serre V, 
Makni H, Mahfoudh N, Fakhfakh F, Bodemer C, Feingold J, Hadj-Rabia S, Favre M, 
Genin E, Sahbatou M, Munnich A, Casanova JL, Sims JE, Turki H, Bachelez H, Smahi 
A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and the Laboratory of Immunology, Hedi Chaker 
Hospital, Sfax University, Sfax, Tunisia.

BACKGROUND: Generalized pustular psoriasis is a life-threatening disease of 
unknown cause. It is characterized by sudden, repeated episodes of high-grade 
fever, generalized rash, and disseminated pustules, with hyperleukocytosis and 
elevated serum levels of C-reactive protein, which may be associated with 
plaque-type psoriasis.
METHODS: We performed homozygosity mapping and direct sequencing in nine 
Tunisian multiplex families with autosomal recessive generalized pustular 
psoriasis. We assessed the effect of mutations on protein expression and 
conformation, stability, and function.
RESULTS: We identified significant linkage to an interval of 1.2 megabases on 
chromosome 2q13-q14.1 and a homozygous missense mutation in IL36RN, encoding an 
interleukin-36-receptor antagonist (interleukin-36Ra), an antiinflammatory 
cytokine. This mutation predicts the substitution of a proline residue for 
leucine at amino acid position 27 (L27P). Homology-based structural modeling of 
human interleukin-36Ra suggests that the proline at position 27 affects both the 
stability of interleukin-36Ra and its interaction with its receptor, 
interleukin-1 receptor-like 2 (interleukin-1 receptor-related protein 2). 
Biochemical analyses showed that the L27P variant was poorly expressed and less 
potent than the nonvariant interleukin-36Ra in inhibiting a cytokine-induced 
response in an interleukin-8 reporter assay, leading to enhanced production of 
inflammatory cytokines (interleukin-8 in particular) by keratinocytes from the 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant interleukin-36Ra structure and function lead to 
unregulated secretion of inflammatory cytokines and generalized pustular 
psoriasis. (Funded by Agence Nationale de la Recherche and Société Française de 
Dermatologie.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1013068
PMID: 21848462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]