---
reference_id: "PMID:38035712"
title: "Characteristics of inflammatory phenotypes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Wen X
- Deng Z
- Peng J
- Yang H
- Wu F
- Dai C
- Zheng Y
- Zhao N
- Wang Z
- Xiao S
- Xu J
- Lu L
- Wu X
- Zhou K
- Dai J
- Li B
- Ran P
- Zhou Y
journal: BMJ Open Respir Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bmjresp-2022-001454
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics of inflammatory phenotypes in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Wen X, Deng Z, Peng J, Yang H, Wu F, Dai C, Zheng Y, Zhao N, Wang Z, Xiao S, Xu J, Lu L, Wu X, Zhou K, Dai J, Li B, Ran P, Zhou Y
**Journal:** BMJ Open Respir Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjresp-2022-001454](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjresp-2022-001454)

## Content

1. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2023 Nov 30;10(1):e001454. doi: 
10.1136/bmjresp-2022-001454.

Characteristics of inflammatory phenotypes in patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: a cross-sectional study.

Wen X(#)(1)(2), Deng Z(#)(1), Peng J(#)(1)(3), Yang H(#)(1), Wu F(1)(3), Dai 
C(1), Zheng Y(1), Zhao N(1), Wang Z(1), Xiao S(1)(4), Xu J(1), Lu L(1), Wu X(1), 
Zhou K(1), Dai J(5), Li B(5), Ran P(6)(3), Zhou Y(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease & National Clinical Research 
Center for Respiratory Disease & National Center for Respiratory Medicine & 
Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Shenzhen Institute of Respiratory Disease & Department of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(3)Guangzhou National Laboratory, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Longgang Central Hospital 
of Shenzhen, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(5)GMU-GIBH Joint School of Life Sciences, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease & National Clinical Research 
Center for Respiratory Disease & National Center for Respiratory Medicine & 
Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China zhouyumin410@126.com 
pxran@gzhmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The relationship between airway inflammation in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) and clinical characteristics remains unclear. This 
study aimed to investigate the airway inflammatory phenotypes in COPD and their 
association with clinical characteristics.
METHODS: 895 patients with COPD were recruited from Guangdong Province, China in 
this study. Each patient underwent questionnaire interviews, spirometry testing, 
CT scans and induced sputum examination. Classification of airway inflammation 
phenotypes was based on sputum inflammatory cell counts. Covariance analysis was 
applied to assess associations with airway inflammation phenotypes.
RESULTS: In this study, we found that neutrophilic phenotype (NP, 58.0%) was the 
most common airway inflammation phenotype in patients with COPD, followed by 
mixed granulocytic phenotype (MGP, 32.6%), eosinophilic phenotype (EP, 5.4%) and 
paucigranulocytic phenotype (PP, 4.0%). Compared with NP patients, those with 
MGP exhibited more frequent chronic respiratory symptoms, and a higher 
proportion of individuals classified under Global Initiative for Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease stages 3 and 4. After adjusting for confounding 
factors, MGP patients had lower lung function, and more severe emphysema and air 
trapping. On the contrary, patients with PP had the best pulmonary function and 
less emphysema and air trapping.
CONCLUSIONS: NP was the most common airway inflammation phenotype in patients 
with COPD. Patients with MGP had more respiratory symptoms, greater loss of lung 
function, and more severe emphysema and gas trapping compared with those with 
NP. Meanwhile, PP may be a phenotype of mild damage to lung structure in 
patients with COPD.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjresp-2022-001454
PMCID: PMC10689359
PMID: 38035712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.