---
reference_id: "PMID:28010143"
title: Chikungunya Virus Infection Manifesting as Intermediate Uveitis.
authors:
- Lin J
- Chen RWS
- Hazan A
- Weiss M
journal: Ocul Immunol Inflamm
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/09273948.2016.1263340
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chikungunya Virus Infection Manifesting as Intermediate Uveitis.
**Authors:** Lin J, Chen RWS, Hazan A, Weiss M
**Journal:** Ocul Immunol Inflamm (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09273948.2016.1263340](https://doi.org/10.1080/09273948.2016.1263340)

## Content

1. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2018;26(5):680-682. doi: 10.1080/09273948.2016.1263340. 
Epub 2016 Dec 23.

Chikungunya Virus Infection Manifesting as Intermediate Uveitis.

Lin J(1), Chen RWS(1), Hazan A(1), Weiss M(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Ophthalmology , Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons , New York , New York , USA.

PURPOSE: To describe a case of intermediate uveitis caused by chikungunya virus 
infection in the Western Hemisphere.
METHODS: Case report of a patient diagnosed with chikungunya infection 
presenting with blurry vision and floaters.
RESULTS: Exam revealed a unilateral intermediate uveitis, with an extensive 
work-up positive for chikungunya virus immunoglobulin M and G titers. The 
patient responded to oral corticosteroids with signs and symptoms resolving over 
the course of 3 months' treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: While anterior uveitis and retinitis are the most common ocular 
manifestations of chikungunya infection, we report here a case of chikungunya 
infection presenting as an intermediate uveitis, responding well to oral 
corticosteroids. This case demonstrates the varied presentation of 
chikungunya-related uveitis and highlights its consideration in the differential 
diagnoses of those who have had preceding systemic viral symptoms and uveitis.

DOI: 10.1080/09273948.2016.1263340
PMID: 28010143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]