---
reference_id: "PMID:25132448"
title: Mutations in NOTCH1 cause Adams-Oliver syndrome.
authors:
- Stittrich AB
- Lehman A
- Bodian DL
- Ashworth J
- Zong Z
- Li H
- Lam P
- Khromykh A
- Iyer RK
- Vockley JG
- Baveja R
- Silva ES
- Dixon J
- Leon EL
- Solomon BD
- Glusman G
- Niederhuber JE
- Roach JC
- Patel MS
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.07.011
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Receptor, Notch1/genetics"
- "Scalp Dermatoses/congenital, genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in NOTCH1 cause Adams-Oliver syndrome.
**Authors:** Stittrich AB, Lehman A, Bodian DL, Ashworth J, Zong Z, Li H, Lam P, Khromykh A, Iyer RK, Vockley JG, Baveja R, Silva ES, Dixon J, Leon EL, Solomon BD, Glusman G, Niederhuber JE, Roach JC, Patel MS
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.07.011)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Sep 4;95(3):275-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.07.011. Epub
 2014 Aug 14.

Mutations in NOTCH1 cause Adams-Oliver syndrome.

Stittrich AB(1), Lehman A(2), Bodian DL(3), Ashworth J(1), Zong Z(2), Li H(1), 
Lam P(2), Khromykh A(3), Iyer RK(3), Vockley JG(3), Baveja R(4), Silva ES(5), 
Dixon J(6), Leon EL(7), Solomon BD(8), Glusman G(1), Niederhuber JE(9), Roach 
JC(1), Patel MS(10).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics and Child and Family Research Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6H 3N1, Canada.
(3)Inova Translational Medicine Institute, Inova Health System, Falls Church, VA 
22042, USA.
(4)Fairfax Neonatal Associates, Inova Health System, Falls Church, VA 22042, 
USA.
(5)Pediatric Gastroenterology Service, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto 
4050-111, Portugal.
(6)Genetic Services, Wellington Hospital, Capital & Coast District Health Board, 
Wellington 6242, New Zealand.
(7)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's National Medical Center, 
Washington, DC 20010, USA.
(8)Inova Translational Medicine Institute, Inova Health System, Falls Church, VA 
22042, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Inova Children's Hospital, Inova Health 
System, Falls Church, VA 22042, USA.
(9)Inova Translational Medicine Institute, Inova Health System, Falls Church, VA 
22042, USA. Electronic address: john.niederhuber@inova.org.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics and Child and Family Research Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6H 3N1, Canada. Electronic 
address: mpatel@cw.bc.ca.

Notch signaling determines and reinforces cell fate in bilaterally symmetric 
multicellular eukaryotes. Despite the involvement of Notch in many key 
developmental systems, human mutations in Notch signaling components have mainly 
been described in disorders with vascular and bone effects. Here, we report five 
heterozygous NOTCH1 variants in unrelated individuals with Adams-Oliver syndrome 
(AOS), a rare disease with major features of aplasia cutis of the scalp and 
terminal transverse limb defects. Using whole-genome sequencing in a cohort of 
11 families lacking mutations in the four genes with known roles in AOS 
pathology (ARHGAP31, RBPJ, DOCK6, and EOGT), we found a heterozygous de novo 85 
kb deletion spanning the NOTCH1 5' region and three coding variants (c.1285T>C 
[p.Cys429Arg], c.4487G>A [p.Cys1496Tyr], and c.5965G>A [p.Asp1989Asn]), two of 
which are de novo, in four unrelated probands. In a fifth family, we identified 
a heterozygous canonical splice-site variant (c.743-1 G>T) in an affected father 
and daughter. These variants were not present in 5,077 in-house control genomes 
or in public databases. In keeping with the prominent developmental role 
described for Notch1 in mouse vasculature, we observed cardiac and multiple 
vascular defects in four of the five families. We propose that the limb and 
scalp defects might also be due to a vasculopathy in NOTCH1-related AOS. Our 
results suggest that mutations in NOTCH1 are the most common cause of AOS and 
add to a growing list of human diseases that have a vascular and/or bony 
component and are caused by alterations in the Notch signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.07.011
PMCID: PMC4157158
PMID: 25132448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]