---
reference_id: "PMID:38261444"
title: "A phase 1 study of triple-targeted therapy with BRAF, MEK, and AKT inhibitors for patients with BRAF-mutated cancers."
authors:
- Algazi AP
- Moon J
- Lao CD
- Chmielowski B
- Kendra KL
- Lewis KD
- Gonzalez R
- Kim K
- Godwin JE
- Curti BD
- Latkovic-Taber M
- Lomeli SH
- Gufford BT
- Scumpia PO
- Lo RS
- Othus M
- Ribas A
journal: Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.35200
keywords:
- Humans
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Female
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Adult
- "Pyridones/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Pyrimidinones/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Imidazoles/administration & dosage, therapeutic use, adverse effects, pharmacokinetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism
- "Oximes/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Mutation
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A phase 1 study of triple-targeted therapy with BRAF, MEK, and AKT inhibitors for patients with BRAF-mutated cancers.
**Authors:** Algazi AP, Moon J, Lao CD, Chmielowski B, Kendra KL, Lewis KD, Gonzalez R, Kim K, Godwin JE, Curti BD, Latkovic-Taber M, Lomeli SH, Gufford BT, Scumpia PO, Lo RS, Othus M, Ribas A
**Journal:** Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.35200](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.35200)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2024 May 15;130(10):1784-1796. doi: 10.1002/cncr.35200. Epub 2024 Jan
23.

A phase 1 study of triple-targeted therapy with BRAF, MEK, and AKT inhibitors
for patients with BRAF-mutated cancers.

Algazi AP(1), Moon J(2)(3), Lao CD(4), Chmielowski B(5), Kendra KL(6), Lewis
KD(7), Gonzalez R(7), Kim K(8), Godwin JE(9), Curti BD(9), Latkovic-Taber M(2),
Lomeli SH(5), Gufford BT(10), Scumpia PO(5), Lo RS(5), Othus M(2), Ribas A(5).

Author information:
(1)University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Southwest Oncology Group Statistical Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California-Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California, USA.
(6)The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(7)University of Colorado Comprehensive Cancer Center, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(8)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco,
California, USA.
(9)Providence Cancer Institute, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(10)Labcorp Drug Development Inc., Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant PI3K/AKT signaling in BRAF-mutant cancers contributes to
resistance to BRAF inhibitors. The authors examined dual MAPK and PI3K pathway
inhibition in patients who had BRAF-mutated solid tumors (ClinicalTrials.gov
identifier NCT01902173).
METHODS: Patients with BRAF V600E/V600K-mutant solid tumors received oral
dabrafenib at 150 mg twice daily with dose escalation of oral uprosertib
starting at 50 mg daily, or, in the triplet cohorts, with dose escalation of
both oral trametinib starting at 1.5 mg daily and oral uprosertib starting at
25 mg daily. Dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) were assessed within the first
56 days of treatment. Radiographic responses were assessed at 8-week intervals.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven patients (22 evaluable) were enrolled in parallel doublet
and triplet cohorts. No DLTs were observed in the doublet cohorts (N = 7). One
patient had a DLT at the maximum administered dose of triplet therapy
(dabrafenib 150 mg twice daily and trametinib 2 mg daily plus uprosertib 75 mg
daily). Three patients in the doublet cohorts had partial responses (including
one who had BRAF inhibitor-resistant melanoma). Two patients in the triplet
cohorts had a partial response, and one patient had an unconfirmed partial
response. Pharmacokinetic data suggested reduced dabrafenib and dabrafenib
metabolite exposure in patients who were also exposed to both trametinib and
uprosertib, but not in whose who were exposed to uprosertib without trametinib.
CONCLUSIONS: Concomitant inhibition of both the MAPK and PI3K-AKT pathways for
the treatment of BRAF-mutated cancers was well tolerated, leading to objective
responses, but higher level drug-drug interactions affected exposure to
dabrafenib and its metabolites.

© 2024 The Authors. Cancer published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of
American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.35200
PMID: 38261444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
