---
reference_id: "PMID:9667624"
title: "Dynamic exercise therapy in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review."
authors:
- Van den Ende CH
- Vliet Vlieland TP
- Munneke M
- Hazes JM
journal: Br J Rheumatol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/37.6.677
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dynamic exercise therapy in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Van den Ende CH, Vliet Vlieland TP, Munneke M, Hazes JM
**Journal:** Br J Rheumatol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/37.6.677](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/37.6.677)

## Content

1. Br J Rheumatol. 1998 Jun;37(6):677-87. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/37.6.677.

Dynamic exercise therapy in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review.

Van den Ende CH(1), Vliet Vlieland TP, Munneke M, Hazes JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, The 
Netherlands.

The aim of this systematic review was to determine the effectiveness of dynamic 
exercise therapy in improving joint mobility, muscle strength, aerobic capacity 
and daily functioning in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In addition, 
possible unwanted effects such as an increase in pain, disease activity and 
radiological progression were studied. A computer-aided search of the MEDLINE, 
Embase and SCISEARCH databases was performed to identify controlled trials on 
the effect of exercise therapy. Randomized trials were selected on the effect of 
dynamic exercise therapy in RA patients with an exercise programme fulfilling 
the following criteria: (a) intensity level such that heart rates exceeded 60% 
of maximal heart rate during at least 20 min; (b) exercise frequency > or = 2 a 
week; and (c) duration of intervention > or = 6 weeks. Two blinded reviewers 
independently selected eligible studies, rated the methodological quality and 
extracted data. Six out of 30 identified controlled trials met the inclusion 
criteria. Four of the six included studies fulfilled > or = 7/10 methodological 
criteria. Because of heterogeneity in outcome measures, data could not be 
pooled. The results suggest that dynamic exercise therapy is effective in 
increasing aerobic capacity and muscle strength. No detrimental effects on 
disease activity and pain were observed. The effects of dynamic exercise therapy 
on functional ability and radiological progression are unclear. It is concluded 
that dynamic exercise therapy has a positive effect on physical capacity. 
Research on the long-term effect of dynamic exercise therapy on radiological 
progression and functional ability is needed.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/37.6.677
PMID: 9667624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]