---
reference_id: "PMID:12419304"
title: Functional studies of human skin disease- and deafness-associated connexin 30 mutations.
authors:
- Common JE
- Becker D
- Di WL
- Leigh IM
- "O'Toole EA"
- Kelsell DP
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02517-2
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Connexin 30
- "Connexins/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA/genetics
- "Deafness/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, metabolism"
- Gap Junctions/metabolism
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Keratinocytes/metabolism
- "Luminescent Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Recombinant Fusion Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Skin Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional studies of human skin disease- and deafness-associated connexin 30 mutations.
**Authors:** Common JE, Becker D, Di WL, Leigh IM, O'Toole EA, Kelsell DP
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02517-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02517-2)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Nov 15;298(5):651-6. doi: 
10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02517-2.

Functional studies of human skin disease- and deafness-associated connexin 30 
mutations.

Common JE(1), Becker D, Di WL, Leigh IM, O'Toole EA, Kelsell DP.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Barts and the London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Queen Mary, University of London, Whitechapel, UK.

Connexin 30 (Cx30) is a component of the gap junction complex. Dominant and 
recessive mutations in the GJB6 gene encoding Cx30 are associated with a variety 
of human inherited diseases primarily affecting the epidermis, hair, nail, 
and/or the inner ear. The underlying mechanism of disease associated with 
different GJB6 mutations such as the disruption of gap junction mediated 
intercellular communication is unknown. Towards understanding these disease 
mechanisms, transfection studies were performed in a keratinocyte cell line and 
in HeLa cells using EGFP tagged wildtype Cx30 and mutant Cx30 constructs 
harbouring dominant disease-associated GJB6 mutations. For all three of the skin 
disease-associated Cx30 mutations investigated, impaired trafficking of the 
protein to the plasma membrane was observed thus preventing the formation of 
functional Cx30 gap junctions. In contrast, the deafness-associated mutation 
T5M-Cx30/EGFP trafficked to the membrane but defective channel activity was 
observed following dye transfer studies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(02)02517-2
PMID: 12419304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]