---
reference_id: "PMID:31996463"
title: Mapping global variation in dengue transmission intensity.
authors:
- Cattarino L
- Rodriguez-Barraquer I
- Imai N
- Cummings DAT
- Ferguson NM
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aax4144
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mapping global variation in dengue transmission intensity.
**Authors:** Cattarino L, Rodriguez-Barraquer I, Imai N, Cummings DAT, Ferguson NM
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.aax4144](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aax4144)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2020 Jan 29;12(528):eaax4144. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aax4144.

Mapping global variation in dengue transmission intensity.

Cattarino L(1), Rodriguez-Barraquer I(2), Imai N(3), Cummings DAT(4), Ferguson 
NM(3).

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, UK. 
l.cattarino@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94110, USA.
(3)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, UK.
(4)Department of Biology and Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of 
Florida, P. O. Box 100009, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Intervention planning for dengue requires reliable estimates of dengue 
transmission intensity. However, current maps of dengue risk provide estimates 
of disease burden or the boundaries of endemicity rather than transmission 
intensity. We therefore developed a global high-resolution map of dengue 
transmission intensity by fitting environmentally driven geospatial models to 
geolocated force of infection estimates derived from cross-sectional serological 
surveys and routine case surveillance data. We assessed the impact of 
interventions on dengue transmission and disease using Wolbachia-infected 
mosquitoes and the Sanofi-Pasteur vaccine as specific examples. We predicted 
high transmission intensity in all continents straddling the tropics, with hot 
spots in South America (Colombia, Venezuela, and Brazil), Africa (western and 
central African countries), and Southeast Asia (Thailand, Indonesia, and the 
Philippines). We estimated that 105 [95% confidence interval (CI), 95 to 114] 
million dengue infections occur each year with 51 (95% CI, 32 to 66) million 
febrile disease cases. Our analysis suggests that transmission-blocking 
interventions such as Wolbachia, even at intermediate efficacy (50% transmission 
reduction), might reduce global annual disease incidence by up to 90%. The 
Sanofi-Pasteur vaccine, targeting only seropositive recipients, might reduce 
global annual disease incidence by 20 to 30%, with the greatest impact in 
high-transmission settings. The transmission intensity map presented here, and 
made available for download, may help further assessment of the impact of dengue 
control interventions and prioritization of global public health efforts.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aax4144
PMID: 31996463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]