---
reference_id: "PMID:38371049"
title: Diagnosis and Treatment of Ankylosing Spondylitis.
authors:
- Agrawal P
- Tote S
- Sapkale B
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.52559
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Treatment of Ankylosing Spondylitis.
**Authors:** Agrawal P, Tote S, Sapkale B
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.52559](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.52559)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jan 19;16(1):e52559. doi: 10.7759/cureus.52559. eCollection 2024 
Jan.

Diagnosis and Treatment of Ankylosing Spondylitis.

Agrawal P(1), Tote S(2), Sapkale B(1).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of Higher 
Education and Research, Wardha, IND.
(2)Anatomy, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of Higher 
Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a chronic inflammatory condition primarily 
affecting the axial bone and sacroiliac joints. Its etiology is complicated and 
involves genetic variables, demographic factors (age of onset, gender, 
ethnicity, family history), and environmental variables. It typically manifests 
in males in their third decade. Galen is credited with first recognizing it, 
according to historical traditions, but it was not until the 19th century that 
specific diagnostic criteria were developed. The human leukocyte antigen B27 
(HLA-B27) variation, around 20% of the genetic risk, is currently the most 
significant gene associated with AS susceptibility. Over 100 genes have been 
connected to AS susceptibility. Clinical signs of AS include stiffness and 
inflammation in the back, eye inflammation, aortitis (inflammation of the 
aorta), and spinal ankylosis that impacts posture and fatigue. The dagger sign 
and sacroiliitis on radiographs, in particular, are crucial for diagnosis. Early 
inflammatory alterations can be found using modern diagnostic tools such as MRI, 
and the HLA-B27 gene can help confirm the diagnosis. Overall, 80-95% of people 
with AS have the HLA-B27 marker. Furthermore, although non-specific, elevated 
inflammatory markers, such as C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate, offer supporting evidence. Over time, treatment paradigms have seen 
significant change. First-line treatments such as non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs are no longer the only options, even though 
disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs and biologics, especially tumor necrosis 
factor blockers, have been developed. Physical therapy, which emphasizes 
consistent exercise, stretches, and posture maintenance, is extremely helpful in 
managing AS. Surgical interventions can be required in extreme situations. The 
significance of the interleukin 23/17 axis in the disease cascade has been 
demonstrated by recent research. Furthermore, a deeper comprehension of the 
genetic landscape, mainly the functions of non-HLA-B27 loci, may open the door 
for more specialized therapies. Early diagnosis and interdisciplinary therapies 
can improve patient outcomes and quality of life as our understanding of AS 
grows.

Copyright © 2024, Agrawal et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.52559
PMCID: PMC10874590
PMID: 38371049

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.