---
reference_id: "PMID:25142508"
title: "A Japanese SCA5 family with a novel three-nucleotide in-frame deletion mutation in the SPTBN2 gene: a clinical and genetic study."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Koh K
- Miwa M
- Yamashiro N
- Shindo K
- Takiyama Y
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2014.74
keywords:
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Base Sequence
- DNA/chemistry
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons
- Female
- Humans
- Japan
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Sequence Deletion
- Spectrin/genetics
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Japanese SCA5 family with a novel three-nucleotide in-frame deletion mutation in the SPTBN2 gene: a clinical and genetic study.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Koh K, Miwa M, Yamashiro N, Shindo K, Takiyama Y
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jhg.2014.74](https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2014.74)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2014 Oct;59(10):569-73. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2014.74. Epub 2014 Aug
21.

A Japanese SCA5 family with a novel three-nucleotide in-frame deletion mutation
in the SPTBN2 gene: a clinical and genetic study.

Wang Y(1), Koh K(1), Miwa M(1), Yamashiro N(1), Shindo K(1), Takiyama Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine and
Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.

To date, four families with spinocerebellar ataxia type 5 (SCA5) with four
distinct mutations in the spectrin, beta, nonerythrocytic 2 gene (SPTBN2) have
been reported worldwide. In the present study, we identified the first Japanese
family with SCA5, and analyzed this family clinically and genetically. The
clinical features of the five patients in this family revealed late-onset
autosomal-dominant pure cerebellar ataxia. We collected DNA samples from the
majority of the family members across two generations, and exome sequencing
combined with Sanger sequencing revealed a novel heterozygous three-nucleotide
in-frame deletion mutation (c.2608_2610delGAG) in exon 14 of the SPTBN2 gene.
This mutation cosegregated with the disease in the family and resulted in a
glutamic acid deletion (p.E870del) in the sixth spectrin repeat, which is highly
conserved in the SPTBN2 gene. This is the first three-nucleotide in-frame
deletion mutation in this region of the beta-3 spectrin protein highly likely to
be pathogenic based on exome and bioinformatic data.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2014.74
PMID: 25142508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
