---
reference_id: PMID:30615115
title: Homozygous hydroxymethylbilane synthase knock-in mice provide pathogenic insights into the severe neurological impairments present in human homozygous dominant acute intermittent porphyria.
authors:
- Yasuda M
- Gan L
- Chen B
- Yu C
- Zhang J
- Gama-Sosa MA
- Pollak DD
- Berger S
- Phillips JD
- Edelmann W
- Desnick RJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz003
keywords:
- "Aminolevulinic Acid/blood, urine"
- Animals
- "Central Nervous System/metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Hydroxymethylbilane Synthase/genetics, metabolism"
- Liver/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Myelin Sheath/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nervous System Diseases/blood, genetics, pathology, urine"
- Phenobarbital/pharmacology
- "Porphobilinogen/blood, urine"
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/blood, genetics, pathology, urine"
- "Psychomotor Disorders/blood, genetics, pathology, urine"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous hydroxymethylbilane synthase knock-in mice provide pathogenic insights into the severe neurological impairments present in human homozygous dominant acute intermittent porphyria.
**Authors:** Yasuda M, Gan L, Chen B, Yu C, Zhang J, Gama-Sosa MA, Pollak DD, Berger S, Phillips JD, Edelmann W, Desnick RJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddz003](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddz003)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 Jun 1;28(11):1755-1767. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz003.

Homozygous hydroxymethylbilane synthase knock-in mice provide pathogenic
insights into the severe neurological impairments present in human homozygous
dominant acute intermittent porphyria.

Yasuda M(1), Gan L(1), Chen B(1), Yu C(1), Zhang J(1), Gama-Sosa MA(2)(3),
Pollak DD(4), Berger S(4), Phillips JD(5), Edelmann W(6), Desnick RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, USA.
(3)General Medical Research Service, James J. Peters Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA.
(4)Center for Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.
(5)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(6)Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is an inborn error of heme biosynthesis due
to the deficiency of hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMBS) activity. Human AIP
heterozygotes have episodic acute neurovisceral attacks that typically start
after puberty, whereas patients with homozygous dominant AIP (HD-AIP) have
early-onset chronic neurological impairment, including ataxia and psychomotor
retardation. To investigate the dramatically different manifestations, knock-in
mice with human HD-AIP missense mutations c.500G>A (p.Arg167Glu) or
c.518_519GC>AG (p.Arg173Glu), designated R167Q or R173Q mice, respectively, were
generated and compared with the previously established T1/T2 mice with ~30%
residual HMBS activity and the heterozygous AIP phenotype. Homozygous R173Q mice
were embryonic lethal, while R167Q homozygous mice (R167Q+/+) had ~5% of normal
HMBS activity, constitutively elevated plasma and urinary 5-aminolevulinic acid
(ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG), profound early-onset ataxia, delayed motor
development and markedly impaired rotarod performance. Central nervous system
(CNS) histology was grossly intact, but CNS myelination was delayed and overall
myelin volume was decreased. Heme concentrations in liver and brain were similar
to those of T1/T2 mice. Notably, ALA and PBG concentrations in the cerebral
spinal fluid and CNS regions were markedly elevated in R167Q+/+ mice compared
with T1/T2 mice. When the T1/T2 mice were administered phenobarbital, ALA and
PBG markedly accumulated in their liver and plasma, but not in the CNS,
indicating that ALA and PBG do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier. Taken
together, these studies suggest that the severe HD-AIP neurological phenotype
results from decreased myelination and the accumulation of locally produced
neurotoxic porphyrin precursors within the CNS.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz003
PMCID: PMC6522063
PMID: 30615115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
