---
reference_id: "PMID:32147592"
title: Persistent Low Level of Hepatitis B Virus Promotes Fibrosis Progression During Therapy.
authors:
- Sun Y
- Wu X
- Zhou J
- Meng T
- Wang B
- Chen S
- Liu H
- Wang T
- Zhao X
- Wu S
- Kong Y
- Ou X
- Wee A
- Theise ND
- Qiu C
- Zhang W
- Lu F
- Jia J
- You H
journal: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2020.03.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Persistent Low Level of Hepatitis B Virus Promotes Fibrosis Progression During Therapy.
**Authors:** Sun Y, Wu X, Zhou J, Meng T, Wang B, Chen S, Liu H, Wang T, Zhao X, Wu S, Kong Y, Ou X, Wee A, Theise ND, Qiu C, Zhang W, Lu F, Jia J, You H
**Journal:** Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cgh.2020.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2020.03.001)

## Content

1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020 Oct;18(11):2582-2591.e6. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2020.03.001. Epub 2020 Mar 6.

Persistent Low Level of Hepatitis B Virus Promotes Fibrosis Progression During 
Therapy.

Sun Y(1), Wu X(1), Zhou J(1), Meng T(1), Wang B(1), Chen S(1), Liu H(2), Wang 
T(3), Zhao X(1), Wu S(1), Kong Y(1), Ou X(1), Wee A(4), Theise ND(5), Qiu C(6), 
Zhang W(6), Lu F(7), Jia J(8), You H(9).

Author information:
(1)Liver Research Center, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine on Liver Cirrhosis, 
National Clinical Research Center of Digestive Diseases, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Beijing You-an Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, National University Hospital, Yong Loo Lin School of 
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Department of 
Microbiology and Infectious Disease Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.
(8)Liver Research Center, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine on Liver Cirrhosis, 
National Clinical Research Center of Digestive Diseases, Beijing, China. 
Electronic address: jia_jd@ccmu.edu.cn.
(9)Liver Research Center, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine on Liver Cirrhosis, 
National Clinical Research Center of Digestive Diseases, Beijing, China. 
Electronic address: youhong30@sina.com.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Progression of liver fibrosis still occurs in some patients 
with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection despite antiviral therapy. We 
aimed to identify risk factors for fibrosis progression in patients who received 
antiviral therapy.
METHODS: We conducted a longitudinal study of patients with chronic HBV 
infection and liver biopsies collected before and after 78 weeks of anti-HBV 
therapy. Fibrosis progression was defined as Ishak stage increase ≥ 1 or as 
predominantly progressive classified by P-I-R system (Beijing Classification). 
Levels of HBV DNA and HBV RNA in blood samples were measured by real-time 
quantitative PCR. HBV RNA in liver tissue was detected by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: A total of 239 patients with chronic HBV infection with paired liver 
biopsies were included. Among the 163 patients with significant fibrosis at 
baseline (Ishak ≥ stage 3), fibrosis progressed in 22 patients (13%), was 
indeterminate in 24 patients (15%), and regressed in 117 patients (72%). 
Univariate and multivariate analyses revealed that independent risk factors for 
fibrosis progression were higher rate of detected HBV DNA at week 78 (odds 
ratio, 4.84; 95% CI, 1.30-17.98; P = .019) and alcohol intake (odds ratio, 
23.84; 95% CI, 2.68-212.50; P = .004). HBV DNA was detected in blood samples 
from a significantly higher proportion of patients with fibrosis progression 
(50%) at week 78 than patients with fibrosis regression (19%) or indeterminate 
fibrosis (26%) (P = .015), despite low viremia (20-200 IU/mL) in all groups. The 
decrease of serum HBV RNA from baseline in the fibrosis regression group was 
larger than that in the fibrosis progression group.
CONCLUSIONS: In a longitudinal study of patients with chronic HBV infection, we 
associated liver fibrosis progression at week 78 of treatment with higher rates 
of detected HBV DNA. We propose that a low level of residual HBV may still 
promote fibrosis progression, and that patients' levels of HBV DNA should be 
carefully monitored.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2020.03.001
PMID: 32147592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]