---
reference_id: "PMID:41483505"
title: The role of phototherapy in pediatric dermatology.
authors:
- Benavides E
- Hartmann D
- Retamal C
- Valenzuela F
journal: An Bras Dermatol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.abd.2025.501252
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Skin Diseases/therapy, radiotherapy"
- Phototherapy/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- Ultraviolet Therapy/methods
- Dermatology/methods
- Vitiligo/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of phototherapy in pediatric dermatology.
**Authors:** Benavides E, Hartmann D, Retamal C, Valenzuela F
**Journal:** An Bras Dermatol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.abd.2025.501252](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abd.2025.501252)

## Content

1. An Bras Dermatol. 2026 Jan-Feb;101(1):501252. doi: 10.1016/j.abd.2025.501252.
Epub 2025 Dec 26.

The role of phototherapy in pediatric dermatology.

Benavides E(1), Hartmann D(2), Retamal C(2), Valenzuela F(3).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Universitario del Valle "Evaristo García", Universidad del Valle,
Cali, Colombia.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile; Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de
los Andes, Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: fernidando@u.uchile.cl.

BACKGROUND: Phototherapy is one of the widely used therapeutic options in
dermatology, and it has proven effective for many dermatological conditions. It
includes various modalities such as heliotherapy, broad-band UVB, narrow-band
UVB, excimer laser, UVA1, UVA with Psoralens (PUVA), among others. The
mechanisms behind phototherapy's efficacy include proapoptotic,
immunomodulatory, propigmenting, antifibrotic, and antipruritic effects. In this
context, the effectiveness of this modality has been demonstrated in pediatric
patients with various conditions; however, no consensus has yet been established
regarding its use in this population.
METHODS: A comprehensive literature review was conducted to identify the most
recent studies and advancements in the use of phototherapy in the pediatric
population.
RESULTS: Phototherapy is a safe and effective therapeutic modality that can be
used in multiple conditions, such as psoriasis, vitiligo, atopic dermatitis,
mycosis fungoides, pityriasis lichenoides, and actinic prurigo, among others.
The therapeutic outcomes depend on the condition being treated, the type of
phototherapy used, and the appropriate selection of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The phototherapy with NB-UVB is the most commonly use and preferred
modality due to its efficacy and lower risk associated. Careful monitoring is
recommended to assess long-term safety and optimize pediatric treatment
protocols.

Copyright © 2025 Sociedade Brasileira de Dermatologia. Published by Elsevier
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abd.2025.501252
PMCID: PMC12924013
PMID: 41483505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
