---
reference_id: "PMID:22631035"
title: The role of ineffective erythropoiesis in non-transfusion-dependent thalassemia.
authors:
- Rivella S
journal: Blood Rev
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/S0268-960X(12)70005-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of ineffective erythropoiesis in non-transfusion-dependent thalassemia.
**Authors:** Rivella S
**Journal:** Blood Rev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0268-960X(12)70005-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0268-960X(12)70005-X)

## Content

1. Blood Rev. 2012 Apr;26 Suppl 1(0 1):S12-5. doi: 10.1016/S0268-960X(12)70005-X.

The role of ineffective erythropoiesis in non-transfusion-dependent thalassemia.

Rivella S(1).

Author information:
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY, USA. 
str2010@med.cornell.edu

Ineffective erythropoiesis is the hallmark of beta-thalassemia that triggers a 
cascade of compensatory mechanisms resulting in clinical sequelae such as 
erythroid marrow expansion, extramedullary hematopoiesis, splenomegaly, and 
increased gastrointestinal iron absorption. Recent studies have begun to shed 
light on the complex molecular mechanisms underlying ineffective erythropoiesis 
and the associated compensatory pathways; this new understanding may lead to the 
development of novel therapies. Increased or excessive activation of the 
Jak2/STAT5 pathway promotes unnecessary disproportionate proliferation of 
erythroid progenitors, while other factors suppress serum hepcidin levels 
leading to dysregulation of iron metabolism. Preclinical studies suggest that 
Jak inhibitors, hepcidin agonists, and exogenous transferrin may help to restore 
normal erythropoiesis and iron metabolism and reduce splenomegaly; however, 
further research is needed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0268-960X(12)70005-X
PMCID: PMC3697110
PMID: 22631035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement Dr. Rivella is a 
consultant for Novartis. In addition, he is a co-inventor for the patents 
US8058061 B2 C12N 20111115 and US7541179 B2 C12N 20090602. The consulting work 
and intellectual property of Dr. Rivella did not affect in any way the design, 
conduct, or reporting of this manuscript.