---
reference_id: "PMID:25124931"
title: "Phenotypic overlap between familial exudative vitreoretinopathy and microcephaly, lymphedema, and chorioretinal dysplasia caused by KIF11 mutations."
authors:
- Robitaille JM
- Gillett RM
- LeBlanc MA
- Gaston D
- Nightingale M
- Mackley MP
- Parkash S
- Hathaway J
- Thomas A
- Ells A
- Traboulsi EI
- Héon E
- Roy M
- Shalev S
- Fernandez CV
- MacGillivray C
- Wallace K
- Fahiminiya S
- Majewski J
- McMaster CR
- Bedard K
journal: JAMA Ophthalmol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.2814
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electrophysiology
- Exons/genetics
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary"
- Facies
- Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathies
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Humans
- Kinesins/genetics
- "Lymphedema/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- "Microcephaly/diagnosis, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Retinal Dysplasia/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic overlap between familial exudative vitreoretinopathy and microcephaly, lymphedema, and chorioretinal dysplasia caused by KIF11 mutations.
**Authors:** Robitaille JM, Gillett RM, LeBlanc MA, Gaston D, Nightingale M, Mackley MP, Parkash S, Hathaway J, Thomas A, Ells A, Traboulsi EI, Héon E, Roy M, Shalev S, Fernandez CV, MacGillivray C, Wallace K, Fahiminiya S, Majewski J, McMaster CR, Bedard K
**Journal:** JAMA Ophthalmol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.2814](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.2814)

## Content

1. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2014 Dec;132(12):1393-9. doi:
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.2814.

Phenotypic overlap between familial exudative vitreoretinopathy and 
microcephaly, lymphedema, and chorioretinal dysplasia caused by KIF11 mutations.

Robitaille JM(1), Gillett RM(2), LeBlanc MA(2), Gaston D(2), Nightingale M(2), 
Mackley MP(2), Parkash S(3), Hathaway J(4), Thomas A(5), Ells A(6), Traboulsi 
EI(7), Héon E(8), Roy M(9), Shalev S(10), Fernandez CV(11), MacGillivray C(12), 
Wallace K(13), Fahiminiya S(14), Majewski J(14), McMaster CR(15), Bedard K(2).

Author information:
(1)IWK Health Centre Eye Care Team, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada2Department of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada3Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Maritime Medical Genetics Service, Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(4)Providence Health Care Heart Centre, St. Paul's Hospital, Vancouver Coastal 
Health, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Maritime Medical Genetics Service, IWK Health Centre, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Surgery, University of Calgary, Alberta Children's Hospital 
Research Institute, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(7)Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Réseau de santé Vitalité Health Network, Hôpital regional Chaleur Regional 
Hospital, Bathurst, New Brunswick, Canada.
(10)Genetic Institute, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Rappaport School of Medicine, 
Technion, Haifa, Israel.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Oncology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, 
Nova Scotia, Canada.
(12)Department of Ophthalmology, Capital Health, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(13)IWK Health Centre Eye Care Team, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada2Department of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
(14)Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada15Genome Quebec Innovation Center, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(15)Department of Pharmacology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.

IMPORTANCE: Retinal detachment with avascularity of the peripheral retina, 
typically associated with familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR), can 
result from mutations in KIF11, a gene recently identified to cause 
microcephaly, lymphedema, and chorioretinal dysplasia (MLCRD) as well as 
chorioretinal dysplasia, microcephaly, and mental retardation (CDMMR). 
Ophthalmologists should be aware of the range of presentations for mutations in 
KIF11 because the phenotypic distinction between FEVR and MLCRD/CDMMR portends 
management implications in patients with these conditions.
OBJECTIVE: To identify gene mutations in patients who present with a FEVR 
phenotype and explore the spectrum of ocular and systemic abnormalities caused 
by KIF11 mutations in a cohort of patients with FEVR or microcephaly in 
conjunction with chorioretinopathy or FEVR.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Clinical data and DNA were collected from 
each participant between 1998 and 2013 from the clinical practices of 
ophthalmologists and clinical geneticists internationally. Twenty-eight FEVR 
probands with diagnoses made by the referring physician and without a known FEVR 
gene mutation, and 3 with microcephaly and chorioretinopathy, were included. At 
least 1 patient in each pedigree manifested 1 or more of the following: macular 
dragging, partial retinal detachment, falciform folds, or total retinal 
detachment.
EXPOSURES: Whole-exome sequencing was conducted on affected members in multiplex 
pedigrees, and Sanger sequencing of the 22 exons of the KIF11 gene was performed 
on singletons. Clinical data and history were collected and reviewed.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Identification of mutations in KIF11.
RESULTS: Four novel heterozygous KIF11 mutations and 1 previously published 
mutation were identified in probands with FEVR: p.A218Gfs*15, p.E470X, p.R221G, 
c.790-1G>T, and the previously described heterozygous p.R47X. Documentation of 
peripheral avascular areas on intravenous fluorescein angiography was possible 
in 2 probands with fibrovascular proliferation demonstrating phenotypic overlap 
with FEVR.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Mutations in KIF11 cause a broader spectrum of ocular 
disease than previously reported, including retinal detachment. The KIF11 gene 
likely plays a role in retinal vascular development and mutations in this gene 
can lead to clinical overlap with FEVR. Cases of FEVR should be carefully 
inspected for the presence of microcephaly as a marker for KIF11-related disease 
to enhance the accuracy of the prognosis and genetic counseling.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2014.2814
PMID: 25124931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]