---
reference_id: "PMID:19056323"
title: Immunotherapy for autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
authors:
- Iodice V
- Kimpinski K
- Vernino S
- Sandroni P
- Low PA
journal: Auton Neurosci
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2008.11.001
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Autoantigens/immunology
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/drug therapy, immunology, therapy"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Ganglia, Autonomic/chemistry, immunology"
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Immunotherapy
- Plasma Exchange
- "Primary Dysautonomias/drug therapy, immunology, therapy"
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/immunology"
- Rituximab
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunotherapy for autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
**Authors:** Iodice V, Kimpinski K, Vernino S, Sandroni P, Low PA
**Journal:** Auton Neurosci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autneu.2008.11.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2008.11.001)

## Content

1. Auton Neurosci. 2009 Mar 12;146(1-2):22-5. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2008.11.001. 
Epub 2008 Dec 4.

Immunotherapy for autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.

Iodice V(1), Kimpinski K, Vernino S, Sandroni P, Low PA.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Department of Neurology, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To provide an update on recent advances in the treatment of 
autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG). AAG is an immune-mediated disorder 
characterized by prominent and selective involvement of autonomic nerve fibers 
or ganglia. Treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or plasma exchange 
(PE) has been reported to be effective in single case reports and recent case 
series. This review summarizes current treatment options including IVIG, PE, and 
immunosuppressants agents, alone or in combination.
RESULTS: Controlled clinical trials of immunotherapy are not available and 
experience with immunotherapy is confined to single case reports. Some patients 
with AAG seem to respond to IVIg or PE as initial therapy but often require 
subsequent immunosuppressive treatment to sustain or advance the improvement. 
Preliminary studies suggest that the most severely affected patients may need a 
protracted and combined treatment program to achieve clinical improvement.
SUMMARY: Several recent studies suggest that IVIg, PE, and immunosuppressant 
agents are effective treatment for AAG. Current available treatments used as 
monotherapy or in combination may be efficacious and the specific regimen may 
depend on the severity of autonomic failure. There is preliminary evidence that 
novel immunosuppressant agents such as Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and Rituximab 
may be effective in certain patients who are unresponsive to IVIG or PE.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autneu.2008.11.001
PMID: 19056323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]