---
reference_id: "PMID:28625830"
title: Bioengineering strategies for inducing tolerance in autoimmune diabetes.
authors:
- Baekkeskov S
- Hubbell JA
- Phelps EA
journal: Adv Drug Deliv Rev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2017.06.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bioengineering strategies for inducing tolerance in autoimmune diabetes.
**Authors:** Baekkeskov S, Hubbell JA, Phelps EA
**Journal:** Adv Drug Deliv Rev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.addr.2017.06.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2017.06.007)

## Content

1. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2017 May 15;114:256-265. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2017.06.007. 
Epub 2017 Jun 15.

Bioengineering strategies for inducing tolerance in autoimmune diabetes.

Baekkeskov S(1), Hubbell JA(2), Phelps EA(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne, Building SV 3826, Station 19, CH-1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland; Departments of Medicine and Microbiology/Immunology, Diabetes 
Center, 513 Parnassus Ave, 20159, Box 0534, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
(2)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne, Building SV 3826, Station 19, CH-1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland; Institute for Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, 5640 S 
Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60615, USA.
(3)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne, Building SV 3826, Station 19, CH-1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland; J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, 
University of Florida, 1275 Center Drive, P.O. Box 116131, Gainesville, FL 
32611, USA. Electronic address: ephelps@bme.ufl.edu.

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease marked by the destruction of 
insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreatic islets. Strategies to delay onset 
or prevent the autoimmune recognition of beta cell antigens or T cell-mediated 
killing of beta cells have mainly focused on systemic immunomodulation and 
antigen-specific immunotherapy. To bridge the fields of type 1 diabetes 
immunology and biomaterials engineering, this article will review recent trends 
in the etiology of type 1 diabetes immunopathology and will focus on the 
contributions of emerging bioengineered strategies in the fight against beta 
cell autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2017.06.007
PMID: 28625830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]