---
reference_id: "PMID:8611653"
title: "Evidence for McKusick's hypothesis of deficient collagen cross-linking in patients with homocystinuria."
authors:
- Lubec B
- Fang-Kircher S
- Lubec T
- Blom HJ
- Boers GH
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1016/0925-4439(95)00119-0
keywords:
- Adult
- Biomarkers
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Collagen/blood, chemistry, metabolism"
- Collagen Type I
- "Cystathionine beta-Synthase/deficiency, genetics"
- Female
- Homocysteine/blood
- "Homocystinuria/classification, complications, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (NADPH2)
- Middle Aged
- "Models, Biological"
- "Osteoporosis/etiology, metabolism"
- "Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-NH Group Donors/deficiency, genetics"
- Peptide Fragments/blood
- Peptides/blood
- "Procollagen/blood, metabolism"
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Solubility
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence for McKusick's hypothesis of deficient collagen cross-linking in patients with homocystinuria.
**Authors:** Lubec B, Fang-Kircher S, Lubec T, Blom HJ, Boers GH
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0925-4439(95)00119-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/0925-4439(95)00119-0)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Apr 12;1315(3):159-62. doi:
10.1016/0925-4439(95)00119-0.

Evidence for McKusick's hypothesis of deficient collagen cross-linking in
patients with homocystinuria.

Lubec B(1), Fang-Kircher S, Lubec T, Blom HJ, Boers GH.

Author information:
(1)University of Vienna, Department of Paediatrics, Austria.

Osteoporosis occurs commonly in homocystinuria. The underlying pathobiochemical
mechanism remains unclear; disturbed cross-linking of collagen has been
suggested but this hypothesis has not been fully tested, nor have studies on
collagen synthesis been performed. We therefore used recently available
noninvasive tests for collagen synthesis and cross-linking to examine 10
patients with homocystinuria. Synthesis of collagen type I and type III was not
different from age-matched healthy controls as reflected by comparable plasma
levels of carboxyterminal propeptide of type I procollagen (PICP) and of plasma
levels of N-terminal propeptide of procollagen type III (PIIINP). Collagen type
I cross-links expressed by serum carboxyterminal telopeptide of collagen type I
(ICTP) were 1.14 +/- 0.24 micrograms/l in the patient group versus 3.29 +/- 0.32
micrograms/l in the control group. This significant reduction of cross-links in
the group with homocystinuria did not correlate with serum homocysteine or
homocysteic acid concentrations. Our data clearly indicate that the disturbed
cross-linking hypothesis still holds and that the bone manifestations of
homocystinuria are not due to deficient collagen synthesis.

DOI: 10.1016/0925-4439(95)00119-0
PMID: 8611653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
