---
reference_id: "PMID:12473277"
title: Systemic vasculitides.
authors:
- González-Gay MA
- García-Porrúa C
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1053/berh.2002.0260
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- "Arteritis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sex Distribution
- "Vasculitis/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic vasculitides.
**Authors:** González-Gay MA, García-Porrúa C
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1053/berh.2002.0260](https://doi.org/10.1053/berh.2002.0260)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2002 Dec;16(5):833-45. doi:
10.1053/berh.2002.0260.

Systemic vasculitides.

González-Gay MA(1), García-Porrúa C.

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Division, Hospital Xeral-Calde, Dr Ochoa s/n, 27004, Lugo,
Spain. miguelaggay@hotmail.com

The vasculitides are a heterogeneous group of diseases that are characterized by
blood vessel inflammation and necrosis. They have a wide spectrum of
manifestations due to the involvement of arteries and other vessels of various
sizes and locations. Classification criteria are useful in improving our
understanding of the epidemiology of these conditions but they are not
diagnostic criteria. In recent years a progressive increase in incidence has
been reported. Both giant cell arteritis and Wegener's granulomatosis are more
common in the Northern hemisphere. Environmental factors have been implicated in
the pathogenesis of these syndromes. Recent studies in patients with large and
small-sized vasculitides support a genetic influence in disease susceptibility.
They have confirmed the association of giant cell arteritis and Henoch-Schönlein
purpura with HLA-DRB1 alleles. Moreover, the polymorphisms of other genes, such
as interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, seem to be implicated in disease severity
in patients with cutaneous vasculitis.

DOI: 10.1053/berh.2002.0260
PMID: 12473277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
