---
reference_id: "PMID:3717210"
title: "Achondrogenesis II-hypochondrogenesis: variability versus heterogeneity."
authors:
- Borochowitz Z
- Ornoy A
- Lachman R
- Rimoin DL
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320240208
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Achondrogenesis II-hypochondrogenesis: variability versus heterogeneity.
**Authors:** Borochowitz Z, Ornoy A, Lachman R, Rimoin DL
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320240208](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320240208)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1986 Jun;24(2):273-88. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320240208.

Achondrogenesis II-hypochondrogenesis: variability versus heterogeneity.

Borochowitz Z, Ornoy A, Lachman R, Rimoin DL.

Recently hypochondrogenesis was described as a form of neonatally lethal 
dwarfism said to resemble spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita 
radiographically and achondrogenesis II morphologically. Because of the 
difficulty in distinguishing radiographically between mild achondrogenesis II 
and severe hypochondrogenesis, we performed a clinical, radiographic, and 
morphologic study of 24 cases originally classified as either achondrogenesis II 
or hypochondrogenesis, in an attempt to distinguish between heterogeneity and 
clinical variability. Review of the radiographic findings in these cases show a 
fairly continuous spectrum of bony defects, rather than two distinct 
radiographic syndromes. Chondro-osseous histology and ultrastructure was similar 
in all cases regardless of severity and was characterized by hypervascularity 
and hypercellularity of the cartilage with multiple small, round dilated 
cysternae of rough endoplasmic reticulum. These findings suggest that 
hypochondrogenesis and achondrogenesis type II represent a spectrum with marked 
phenotypic variability.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320240208
PMID: 3717210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]