---
reference_id: "PMID:17437277"
title: Missense and silent mutations in COL2A1 result in Stickler syndrome but via different molecular mechanisms.
authors:
- Richards AJ
- Laidlaw M
- Meredith SP
- Shankar P
- Poulson AV
- Scott JD
- Snead MP
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/humu.9497
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Missense and silent mutations in COL2A1 result in Stickler syndrome but via different molecular mechanisms.
**Authors:** Richards AJ, Laidlaw M, Meredith SP, Shankar P, Poulson AV, Scott JD, Snead MP
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.9497](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.9497)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2007 Jun;28(6):639. doi: 10.1002/humu.9497.

Missense and silent mutations in COL2A1 result in Stickler syndrome but via 
different molecular mechanisms.

Richards AJ(1), Laidlaw M, Meredith SP, Shankar P, Poulson AV, Scott JD, Snead 
MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Stickler syndrome due to mutations in COL2A1 is usually the result of premature 
termination codons and nonsense mediated decay resulting in haploinsufficiency 
of type II collagen. Here we present two missense mutations and one apparently 
silent mutation that each result in Stickler syndrome, but via different 
molecular mechanisms. One alters the translation initiating ATG codon. The 
second mutation is a unique glycine substitution in the minor collagen helix of 
the procollagen. To our knowledge a glycine substitution has not previously been 
reported in this region of fibrillar procollagens. The third mutation appears to 
be a silent change altering a GGC codon to GGT both for glycine, but use of a 
splicing reporter assay demonstrates that it results in missplicing and a shift 
in the reading frame.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.9497
PMID: 17437277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]