---
reference_id: "PMID:39028335"
title: "The missing link: ARID1B non-truncating variants causing Coffin-Siris syndrome due to protein aggregation."
authors:
- Bosch E
- Güse E
- Kirchner P
- Winterpacht A
- Walther M
- Alders M
- Kerkhof J
- Ekici AB
- Sticht H
- Sadikovic B
- Reis A
- Vasileiou G
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-024-02688-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Micrognathism/genetics
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Neck/abnormalities
- Face/abnormalities
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Mutation
- Male
- Protein Aggregates
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The missing link: ARID1B non-truncating variants causing Coffin-Siris syndrome due to protein aggregation.
**Authors:** Bosch E, Güse E, Kirchner P, Winterpacht A, Walther M, Alders M, Kerkhof J, Ekici AB, Sticht H, Sadikovic B, Reis A, Vasileiou G
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-024-02688-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-024-02688-9)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2024 Aug;143(8):965-978. doi: 10.1007/s00439-024-02688-9. Epub 2024
 Jul 19.

The missing link: ARID1B non-truncating variants causing Coffin-Siris syndrome 
due to protein aggregation.

Bosch E(1), Güse E(1), Kirchner P(1), Winterpacht A(1), Walther M(1), Alders 
M(2), Kerkhof J(3), Ekici AB(1), Sticht H(4), Sadikovic B(3)(5), Reis A(1)(6), 
Vasileiou G(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Amsterdam University Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Department of 
Human Genetics, Amsterdam Reproduction and Development Research Institute, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre, London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, 
Canada.
(4)Division of Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054, Erlangen, Germany.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London, 
ON, Canada.
(6)Centre for Rare Diseases Erlangen (ZSEER), Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Erlangen, Germany.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054, Erlangen, Germany. 
Georgia.vasileiou@uk-erlangen.de.
(8)Centre for Rare Diseases Erlangen (ZSEER), Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Erlangen, Germany. Georgia.vasileiou@uk-erlangen.de.

ARID1B is the most frequently mutated gene in Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS). To 
date, the vast majority of causative variants reported in ARID1B are truncating, 
leading to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. In the absence of experimental data, 
only few ARID1B amino acid substitutions have been classified as pathogenic, 
mainly based on clinical data and their de novo occurrence, while most others 
are currently interpreted as variants of unknown significance. The present study 
substantiates the pathogenesis of ARID1B non-truncating/NMD-escaping variants 
located in the SMARCA4-interacting EHD2 and DNA-binding ARID domains. 
Overexpression assays in cell lines revealed that the majority of EHD2 variants 
lead to protein misfolding and formation of cytoplasmic aggresomes surrounded by 
vimentin cage-like structures and co-localizing with the microtubule 
organisation center. ARID domain variants exhibited not only aggresomes, but 
also nuclear aggregates, demonstrating robust pathological effects. Protein 
levels were not compromised, as shown by quantitative western blot analysis. In 
silico structural analysis predicted the exposure of amylogenic segments in both 
domains due to the nearby variants, likely causing this aggregation. Genome-wide 
transcriptome and methylation analysis in affected individuals revealed 
expression and methylome patterns consistent with those of the pathogenic 
haploinsufficiency ARID1B alterations in CSS cases. These results further 
support pathogenicity and indicate two approaches for disambiguation of such 
variants in everyday practice. The few affected individuals harbouring EHD2 
non-truncating variants described to date exhibit mild CSS clinical traits. In 
summary, this study paves the way for the re-evaluation of previously unclear 
ARID1B non-truncating variants and opens a new era in CSS genetic diagnosis.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-024-02688-9
PMCID: PMC11303441
PMID: 39028335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Bekim Sadikovic is a shareholder in EpiSign Inc, 
a company involved in commercialization of EpiSign technology. The remaining 
authors declare no competing interests.