---
reference_id: "PMID:25765123"
title: Dominant frontotemporal dementia mutations in 140 cases of primary progressive aphasia and speech apraxia.
authors:
- Flanagan EP
- Baker MC
- Perkerson RB
- Duffy JR
- Strand EA
- Whitwell JL
- Machulda MM
- Rademakers R
- Josephs KA
journal: Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1159/000375299
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dominant frontotemporal dementia mutations in 140 cases of primary progressive aphasia and speech apraxia.
**Authors:** Flanagan EP, Baker MC, Perkerson RB, Duffy JR, Strand EA, Whitwell JL, Machulda MM, Rademakers R, Josephs KA
**Journal:** Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000375299](https://doi.org/10.1159/000375299)

## Content

1. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2015;39(5-6):281-6. doi: 10.1159/000375299. Epub 
2015 Feb 28.

Dominant frontotemporal dementia mutations in 140 cases of primary progressive 
aphasia and speech apraxia.

Flanagan EP(1), Baker MC, Perkerson RB, Duffy JR, Strand EA, Whitwell JL, 
Machulda MM, Rademakers R, Josephs KA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Behavioral Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn., USA.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in three genes [chromosome 9 open-reading-frame 72 
(C9ORF72); microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) and progranulin (GRN)] 
account for the vast majority of familial, and a proportion of sporadic, 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD) cases. Progressive apraxia of speech (PAOS) is a 
type of FTD characterized by speech production deficits without a known cause.
METHODS: We therefore assessed for genetic mutations in C9ORF72, MAPT and GRN in 
40 prospectively recruited PAOS patients. For comparison, we also assessed these 
mutations in 100 patients with primary progressive aphasia (PPA), including 
logopenic PPA (n = 54), nonfluent/agrammatic PPA (n = 17), semantic PPA (n = 
16), and unclassifiable PPA (n = 13).
RESULTS: The mean age at onset of PAOS patients was 66.7 years (± 9.3); 50% were 
women. Ten patients (25%) had ≥1 first-degree relative with a neurodegenerative 
disease. No mutations were found in any PAOS patient. In comparison, 36% of the 
PPA patients had a family history and 5 (5%) had a genetic mutation detected: 
MAPT (n = 0), GRN (n = 3) and C9ORF72 (n = 2).
CONCLUSIONS: Although limited by an overrepresentation of logopenic PPA, which 
frequently predicts Alzheimer's disease pathology, this study suggests that 
mutations in the three genes most commonly associated with FTD are not 
associated with PAOS and are not commonly associated with PPA.

DOI: 10.1159/000375299
PMCID: PMC4879710
PMID: 25765123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]