---
reference_id: "PMID:32931859"
title: Spectrum of cardiac involvement in patients with dengue fever.
authors:
- Shah C
- Vijayaraghavan G
- Kartha CC
journal: Int J Cardiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2020.09.034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spectrum of cardiac involvement in patients with dengue fever.
**Authors:** Shah C, Vijayaraghavan G, Kartha CC
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcard.2020.09.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2020.09.034)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol. 2021 Feb 1;324:180-185. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2020.09.034. Epub
 2020 Sep 13.

Spectrum of cardiac involvement in patients with dengue fever.

Shah C(1), Vijayaraghavan G(2), Kartha CC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Society for Continuing Medical Education & 
Research, Kerala Institute of Medical Sciences, Trivandrum 695029, Kerala, 
India.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Society for Continuing Medical Education & 
Research, Kerala Institute of Medical Sciences, Trivandrum 695029, Kerala, 
India. Electronic address: drvijayaraghavan@kimsglobal.com.

BACKGROUND: Dengue fever (DF) is an infectious disease of viral origin common in 
the tropics. Studies on a large number of patients with dengue infection to 
assess associated cardiac involvement are rare.
METHODS: We analyzed the incidence and spectrum of cardiac abnormalities in 320 
patients with dengue fever admitted to our hospital located in an endemic area 
for dengue infection. All patients were evaluated following the WHO guidelines. 
Those confirmed to have dengue infection by serology had detailed clinical 
evaluation, 12‑lead electrocardiography (ECG), assay for cardiac markers 
(troponin T, CK-MB, NT Pro BNP) and 2-D echocardiography.
RESULTS: Among the 320 patients selected for the study 112 (35%) had changes of 
cardiac involvement as detected by investigations. Changes in ECG were seen in 
all of them. Sinus bradycardia in spite of fever was the most common abnormality 
(n = 63;19.7%). Forty-two (13.1%) patients had left ventricular ejection 
fraction less than 40%. Forty-eight patients (15%) had increased serum levels of 
troponin-T. Serum levels of CK-MB were elevated in 34 (10.6%) and serum levels 
of NT-pro BNP was increased in 19 (5.9%). Fourteen patients died and all of them 
had abnormalities in electrocardiogram, echocardiogram and serum markers.
CONCLUSION: Our study reveals that cardiac involvement in patients with dengue 
infection is not uncommon. We found that ECHO or ECG abnormalities or elevated 
serum levels of markers of cardiac injury are predictors of risk for adverse 
outcome. Absence of these abnormalities has a 100% negative predictive value.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2020.09.034
PMID: 32931859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Nil