---
reference_id: "PMID:36039321"
title: "Review of Escherichia coli O157:H7 Prevalence, Pathogenicity, Heavy Metal and Antimicrobial Resistance, African Perspective."
authors:
- Gambushe SM
- Zishiri OT
- El Zowalaty ME
journal: Infect Drug Resist
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2147/IDR.S365269
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of Escherichia coli O157:H7 Prevalence, Pathogenicity, Heavy Metal and Antimicrobial Resistance, African Perspective.
**Authors:** Gambushe SM, Zishiri OT, El Zowalaty ME
**Journal:** Infect Drug Resist (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2147/IDR.S365269](https://doi.org/10.2147/IDR.S365269)

## Content

1. Infect Drug Resist. 2022 Aug 23;15:4645-4673. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S365269. 
eCollection 2022.

Review of Escherichia coli O157:H7 Prevalence, Pathogenicity, Heavy Metal and 
Antimicrobial Resistance, African Perspective.

Gambushe SM(1), Zishiri OT(1), El Zowalaty ME(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture, Engineering and Sciences, 
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, 4000, South Africa.
(2)Zoonosis Science Center, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, SE 75 123, Sweden.

Escherichia coli O157:H7 is an important food-borne and water-borne pathogen 
that causes hemorrhagic colitis and the hemolytic-uremic syndrome in humans and 
may cause serious morbidity and large outbreaks worldwide. People with bloody 
diarrhea have an increased risk of developing serious complications such as 
acute renal failure and neurological damage. The hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) 
is a serious condition, and up to 50% of HUS patients can develop long-term 
renal dysfunction or blood pressure-related complications. Children aged two to 
six years have an increased risk of developing HUS. Clinical enteropathogenic 
Escherichia coli (EPEC) infections show fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. The EPEC 
reservoir is unknown but is suggested to be an asymptomatic or symptomatic child 
or an asymptomatic adult carrier. Spreading is often through the fecal-oral 
route. The prevalence of EPEC in infants is low, and EPEC is highly contagious 
in children. EPEC disease in children tends to be clinically more severe than 
other diarrheal infections. Some children experience persistent diarrhea that 
lasts for more than 14 days. Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) strains are 
a compelling cause of the problem of diarrheal disease. ETEC strains are a 
global concern as the bacteria are the leading cause of acute watery diarrhea in 
children and the leading cause of traveler's diarrhea. It is contagious to 
children and can cause chronic diarrhea that can affect the development and 
well-being of children. Infections with diarrheagenic E. coli are more common in 
African countries. Antimicrobial agents should be avoided in the acute phase of 
the disease since studies showed that antimicrobial agents may increase the risk 
of HUS in children. The South African National Veterinary Surveillance and 
Monitoring Programme for Resistance to Antimicrobial Drugs has reported 
increased antimicrobial resistance in E. coli. Pathogenic bacterial strains have 
developed resistance to a variety of antimicrobial agents due to antimicrobial 
misuse. The induced heavy metal tolerance may also enhance antimicrobial 
resistance. The prevalence of antimicrobial resistance depends on the type of 
the antimicrobial agent, bacterial strain, dose, time, and mode of 
administration. Developing countries are severely affected by increased 
resistance to antimicrobial agents due to poverty, lack of proper hygiene, and 
clean water, which can lead to bacterial infections with limited treatment 
options due to resistance.

© 2022 Gambushe et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S365269
PMCID: PMC9420067
PMID: 36039321

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.