---
reference_id: "PMID:20301566"
title: Hereditary Neuropathy with Liability to Pressure Palsies.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Chrestian N
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Neuropathy with Liability to Pressure Palsies.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Chrestian N

## Content

1. Hereditary Neuropathy with Liability to Pressure Palsies.

Chrestian N(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
1998 Sep 28 [updated 2020 Aug 27].

Author information:
(1)CHU Laval–CHU de Québec;, Centre de Recherche du CHU, Québec City, Québec,
Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure
palsies (HNPP) is characterized by recurrent acute sensory and motor neuropathy
in a single or multiple nerves. The most common initial manifestation is the
acute onset of a non-painful focal sensory and motor neuropathy in a single
nerve (mononeuropathy). The first attack usually occurs in the second or third
decade but earlier onset is possible. Neuropathic pain is increasingly
recognized as a common manifestation. Recovery from acute neuropathy is usually
complete; when recovery is not complete, the resulting disability is mild. Some
affected individuals also demonstrate a mild-to-moderate peripheral neuropathy.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of HNPP is established in a proband with
suggestive clinical and electrophysiologic findings and either the 1.5-Mb
recurrent deletion or a novel deletion involving PMP22 (in 80%), or a PMP22
sequence variant (in 20%) identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is symptomatic and involves
occupational therapy and physical therapy as needed to address issues with fine
motor and gross motor skills, including activities of daily living. Bracing,
such as with a wrist splint or ankle-foot orthosis, may be useful transiently or
in some instances permanently. Special shoes, including those with good ankle
support, may be needed. Neuropathic pain can be treated with analgesic
medications. Protective pads at elbows or knees may prevent pressure and trauma
to local nerves. Surveillance: Routine screening neurologic examination focused
on muscle atrophy, strength, sensory loss, and neuropathic pain; physical and
occupational therapy assessments of gross motor and fine motor skills and
activities of daily living; foot examinations for pressure sores or poorly
fitting footwear. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Prolonged sitting with legs
crossed; prolonged leaning on elbows; occupations requiring repetitive movements
of the wrist; rapid weight loss; vincristine. Evaluation of relatives at risk:
Asymptomatic relatives at risk may wish to clarify their genetic status by
undergoing molecular genetic testing for the PMP22 pathogenic variant identified
in an affected family member in order to be advised about agents and
circumstances to avoid.
GENETIC COUNSELING: HNPP is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
Approximately 20% of individuals with HNPP have the disorder as the result of a
de novo PMP22 pathogenic variant. Each child of an affected individual is at a
50% risk of inheriting the PMP22 pathogenic variant. Once the PMP22 pathogenic
variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal testing for a
pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301566
