---
reference_id: "PMID:19834559"
title: Targeted induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress induces cartilage pathology.
authors:
- Rajpar MH
- McDermott B
- Kung L
- Eardley R
- Knowles L
- Heeran M
- Thornton DJ
- Wilson R
- Bateman JF
- Poulsom R
- Arvan P
- Kadler KE
- Briggs MD
- Boot-Handford RP
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000691
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Cartilage/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Differentiation
- "Chondrocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Collagen Type X/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Mice
- "Stress, Physiological"
- Unfolded Protein Response
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress induces cartilage pathology.
**Authors:** Rajpar MH, McDermott B, Kung L, Eardley R, Knowles L, Heeran M, Thornton DJ, Wilson R, Bateman JF, Poulsom R, Arvan P, Kadler KE, Briggs MD, Boot-Handford RP
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1000691](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000691)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2009 Oct;5(10):e1000691. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000691. Epub 
2009 Oct 16.

Targeted induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress induces cartilage pathology.

Rajpar MH(1), McDermott B, Kung L, Eardley R, Knowles L, Heeran M, Thornton DJ, 
Wilson R, Bateman JF, Poulsom R, Arvan P, Kadler KE, Briggs MD, Boot-Handford 
RP.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Life Sciences, The 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Pathologies caused by mutations in extracellular matrix proteins are generally 
considered to result from the synthesis of extracellular matrices that are 
defective. Mutations in type X collagen cause metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type 
Schmid (MCDS), a disorder characterised by dwarfism and an expanded growth plate 
hypertrophic zone. We generated a knock-in mouse model of an MCDS-causing 
mutation (COL10A1 p.Asn617Lys) to investigate pathogenic mechanisms linking 
genotype and phenotype. Mice expressing the collagen X mutation had shortened 
limbs and an expanded hypertrophic zone. Chondrocytes in the hypertrophic zone 
exhibited endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and a robust unfolded protein 
response (UPR) due to intracellular retention of mutant protein. Hypertrophic 
chondrocyte differentiation and osteoclast recruitment were significantly 
reduced indicating that the hypertrophic zone was expanded due to a decreased 
rate of VEGF-mediated vascular invasion of the growth plate. To test directly 
the role of ER stress and UPR in generating the MCDS phenotype, we produced 
transgenic mouse lines that used the collagen X promoter to drive expression of 
an ER stress-inducing protein (the cog mutant of thyroglobulin) in hypertrophic 
chondrocytes. The hypertrophic chondrocytes in this mouse exhibited ER stress 
with a characteristic UPR response. In addition, the hypertrophic zone was 
expanded, gene expression patterns were disrupted, osteoclast recruitment to the 
vascular invasion front was reduced, and long bone growth decreased. Our data 
demonstrate that triggering ER stress per se in hypertrophic chondrocytes is 
sufficient to induce the essential features of the cartilage pathology 
associated with MCDS and confirm that ER stress is a central pathogenic factor 
in the disease mechanism. These findings support the contention that ER stress 
may play a direct role in the pathogenesis of many connective tissue disorders 
associated with the expression of mutant extracellular matrix proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000691
PMCID: PMC2757901
PMID: 19834559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.