---
reference_id: "PMID:39017655"
title: "Enterovirus-A71 preferentially infects and replicates in human motor neurons, inducing neurodegeneration by ferroptosis."
authors:
- Chooi WH
- Winanto
- Zeng Y
- Lee CY
- Lim ZQ
- Gautam P
- Chu JJH
- Loh YH
- Alonso S
- Ng SY
journal: Emerg Microbes Infect
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/22221751.2024.2382235
keywords:
- Ferroptosis/drug effects
- Humans
- "Enterovirus A, Human/physiology, genetics, drug effects"
- "Motor Neurons/virology, metabolism"
- "Enterovirus Infections/virology, metabolism"
- Virus Replication
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Deferoxamine/pharmacology
- Viral Load
- Iron/metabolism
- "Ferritins/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enterovirus-A71 preferentially infects and replicates in human motor neurons, inducing neurodegeneration by ferroptosis.
**Authors:** Chooi WH, Winanto, Zeng Y, Lee CY, Lim ZQ, Gautam P, Chu JJH, Loh YH, Alonso S, Ng SY
**Journal:** Emerg Microbes Infect (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/22221751.2024.2382235](https://doi.org/10.1080/22221751.2024.2382235)

## Content

1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2024 Dec;13(1):2382235. doi: 
10.1080/22221751.2024.2382235. Epub 2024 Jul 25.

Enterovirus-A71 preferentially infects and replicates in human motor neurons, 
inducing neurodegeneration by ferroptosis.

Chooi WH(1), Winanto(1)(2), Zeng Y(1), Lee CY(1), Lim ZQ(3)(4), Gautam P(1), Chu 
JJH(1)(3), Loh YH(1), Alonso S(3)(4), Ng SY(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Republic of Singapore.
(2)National University of Singapore, Faculty of Science (Department of 
Biological Science), Singapore.
(3)Infectious Diseases Translational Research Programme (IDTRP); Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Immunology Programme, Life Science Institute, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore.
(6)National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore.

Enterovirus A71 (EV-A71) causes Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease and has been 
clinically associated with neurological complications. However, there is a lack 
of relevant models to elucidate the neuropathology of EV-A71 and its mechanism, 
as the current models mainly utilize animal models or immortalized cell lines. 
In this study, we established a human motor neuron model for EV-A71 infection. 
Single cell transcriptomics of a mixed neuronal population reveal higher viral 
RNA load in motor neurons, suggesting higher infectivity and replication of 
EV-A71 in motor neurons. The elevated RNA load in motor neurons correlates with 
the downregulation of ferritin-encoding genes. Subsequent analysis confirms that 
neurons infected with EV-A71 undergo ferroptosis, as evidenced by increased 
levels of labile Fe2+ and peroxidated lipids. Notably, the Fe2+ chelator 
Deferoxamine improves mitochondrial function and promotes survival of motor 
neurons by 40% after EV-A71 infection. These findings deepen understanding of 
the molecular pathogenesis of EV-A71 infection, providing insights which suggest 
that improving mitochondrial respiration and inhibition of ferroptosis can 
mitigate the impact of EV-A71 infection in the central nervous system.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2024.2382235
PMCID: PMC11285248
PMID: 39017655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).