---
reference_id: "PMID:31002071"
title: Serologic Prevalence of Ebola Virus in Equatorial Africa.
authors:
- Steffen I
- Lu K
- Yamamoto LK
- Hoff NA
- Mulembakani P
- Wemakoy EO
- Muyembe-Tamfum JJ
- Ndembi N
- Brennan CA
- Hackett J Jr
- Stramer SL
- Switzer WM
- Saragosti S
- Mbensa GO
- Laperche S
- Rimoin AW
- Simmons G
journal: Emerg Infect Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3201/eid2505.180115
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serologic Prevalence of Ebola Virus in Equatorial Africa.
**Authors:** Steffen I, Lu K, Yamamoto LK, Hoff NA, Mulembakani P, Wemakoy EO, Muyembe-Tamfum JJ, Ndembi N, Brennan CA, Hackett J Jr, Stramer SL, Switzer WM, Saragosti S, Mbensa GO, Laperche S, Rimoin AW, Simmons G
**Journal:** Emerg Infect Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3201/eid2505.180115](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2505.180115)

## Content

1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2019 May;25(5):911-918. doi: 10.3201/eid2505.180115.

Serologic Prevalence of Ebola Virus in Equatorial Africa.

Steffen I, Lu K, Yamamoto LK, Hoff NA, Mulembakani P, Wemakoy EO, Muyembe-Tamfum 
JJ, Ndembi N, Brennan CA, Hackett J Jr, Stramer SL, Switzer WM, Saragosti S, 
Mbensa GO, Laperche S, Rimoin AW, Simmons G.

We conducted a serologic survey of 2,430 serum samples collected during 
1997-2012 for various studies to determine the prevalence of the hemorrhagic 
fever virus Ebola virus (EBOV) in equatorial Africa. We screened serum samples 
for neutralizing antibodies by using a pseudotype microneutralization assay and 
a newly developed luciferase immunoprecipitation system assay. Specimens 
seroreactive for EBOV were confirmed by using an ELISA. Our results suggest a 
serologic prevalence of 2%-3.5% in the Republic of the Congo and the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, which have reported outbreaks of infection with EBOV. In 
addition we detected a seroprevalence of 1.3% in southern Cameroon, which 
indicated a low risk for exposure in this region.

DOI: 10.3201/eid2505.180115
PMCID: PMC6478206
PMID: 31002071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]