---
reference_id: "PMID:36532829"
title: "Peripheral facial nerve palsy in children: clinical manifestations, treatment and prognosis."
authors:
- Bilge S
- Mert GG
- Hergüner MÖ
- İncecik F
- Sürmelioğlu Ö
- Bilen S
- Yılmaz L
journal: Egypt J Neurol Psychiatr Neurosurg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s41983-022-00596-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripheral facial nerve palsy in children: clinical manifestations, treatment and prognosis.
**Authors:** Bilge S, Mert GG, Hergüner MÖ, İncecik F, Sürmelioğlu Ö, Bilen S, Yılmaz L
**Journal:** Egypt J Neurol Psychiatr Neurosurg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s41983-022-00596-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s41983-022-00596-1)

## Content

1. Egypt J Neurol Psychiatr Neurosurg. 2022;58(1):152. doi: 
10.1186/s41983-022-00596-1. Epub 2022 Dec 9.

Peripheral facial nerve palsy in children: clinical manifestations, treatment 
and prognosis.

Bilge S(1), Mert GG(1), Hergüner MÖ(1), İncecik F(1), Sürmelioğlu Ö(2), Bilen 
S(3), Yılmaz L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Çukurova University, 
Adana, Turkey.
(2)Department of Ear, Nose &Throat, Faculty of Medicine, Çukurova University, 
Adana, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Emergency, Faculty of Medicine, Çukurova University, 
Adana, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Sudden onset of unilateral weakness of the upper and lower muscles 
of one side of the face is defined as peripheral facial nerve palsy. Peripheral 
facial nerve palsy is often idiopathic and sometimes it could be due to 
infectious, traumatic, neoplastic, and immune causes. This study aimed to report 
the clinical manifestation, evaluation, and prognosis in children with 
peripheral facial nerve palsy.
METHODS: 57 children under 18 years of age diagnosed with peripheral facial 
nerve palsy at Çukurova University, Balcalı Hospital, between January 2018 and 
September 2021, were included in the study.
RESULTS: The mean age of the children at the time of diagnosis was 9.6 ± 7, 
4 years. Thirty-two (56.1%) of the patients were female and 25 (43.9%) were 
male. A total of 57 patients were diagnosed with peripheral facial nerve palsy 
and categorized into many groups by etiology: idiopathic Bell's palsy in 27 
(47.5%), infectious in 11 (19.2%), traumatic in 6 (10.5%), and others (due to 
congenital, immune, neoplastic, Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome, drug toxicity, 
and iatrogenic causes) in 13 (22.8%). Forty-six of the children achieved full 
recovery under oral steroids within 1-7 months. Four patients with acute 
leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, Mobius syndrome and trauma did not recover 
and two patients (schwannoma, trauma) showed partial improvement. Five patients 
could not come to follow-up control.
CONCLUSION: Peripheral facial nerve palsy is a rare condition in children with 
different causes. It could be idiopathic, congenital, or due to infectious, 
traumatic, neoplastic, and immune reasons. So, when a child presents with facial 
palsy, a complete clinical history and a detailed clinical examination are 
recommended. Giving attention to the red flag is very important. Peripheral 
facial nerve palsy in children is considered to have a good prognosis.

© The Author(s) 2022.

DOI: 10.1186/s41983-022-00596-1
PMCID: PMC9734354
PMID: 36532829

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.