---
reference_id: "PMID:30739515"
title: Fluoropyrimidine-induced intestinal mucosal injury is associated with the severity of chemotherapy-related diarrhea.
authors:
- Ota K
- Takeuchi T
- Kojima Y
- Harada S
- Ozaki H
- Sugawara N
- Hirata Y
- Yamaguchi T
- Terazawa T
- Kakimoto K
- Kii T
- Goto M
- Higuchi K
journal: Scand J Gastroenterol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/00365521.2019.1575466
keywords:
- "Administration, Intravenous"
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adult
- "Antineoplastic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Capsule Endoscopy
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Diarrhea/chemically induced, physiopathology"
- Enteritis/chemically induced
- Female
- "Fluorouracil/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Humans
- "Intestinal Mucosa/drug effects, pathology"
- "Intestine, Small/drug effects, pathology"
- Japan
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Risk Factors
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fluoropyrimidine-induced intestinal mucosal injury is associated with the severity of chemotherapy-related diarrhea.
**Authors:** Ota K, Takeuchi T, Kojima Y, Harada S, Ozaki H, Sugawara N, Hirata Y, Yamaguchi T, Terazawa T, Kakimoto K, Kii T, Goto M, Higuchi K
**Journal:** Scand J Gastroenterol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00365521.2019.1575466](https://doi.org/10.1080/00365521.2019.1575466)

## Content

1. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2019 Feb;54(2):227-232. doi:
10.1080/00365521.2019.1575466. Epub 2019 Feb 10.

Fluoropyrimidine-induced intestinal mucosal injury is associated with the
severity of chemotherapy-related diarrhea.

Ota K(1), Takeuchi T(1), Kojima Y(1), Harada S(1), Ozaki H(1), Sugawara N(1),
Hirata Y(1), Yamaguchi T(2), Terazawa T(2), Kakimoto K(1), Kii T(2), Goto M(2),
Higuchi K(1).

Author information:
(1)a Second Department of Internal Medicine , Osaka Medical College , Takatsuki
, Osaka , Japan.
(2)b Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Osaka Medical College Hospital , Takatsuki ,
Osaka , Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Although the fluoropyrimidines are effective
chemotherapeutic agents for malignant gastrointestinal tumors, they sometimes
cause enteritis with diarrhea. Severe treatment-related diarrhea may result in
chemotherapy discontinuation. We investigated the relationship between diarrhea
severity and fluoropyrimidine-induced small intestinal mucosal injury.
METHODS: We performed small bowel capsule endoscopy in patients undergoing
chemotherapy including fluoropyrimidine for a malignant tumor between May 2017
and June 2018 and analyzed the relationship between the endoscopic findings and
diarrhea severity. We also performed a cross-sectional analysis of patient
factors and routes of chemotherapy to identify risk factors of
fluoropyrimidine-induced small intestinal injury.
RESULTS: Small bowel capsule endoscopy was successfully completed in 16 eligible
patients. The diarrhea grade (per the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse
Events, version 4.0) was significantly correlated with the percentage of
patients with a small intestinal mucosal break (grade 0, 16.7%; grade 1, 57.1%;
grade 2, 100%; p = .016, Cochran-Armitage trend test). Compared to patients
receiving intravenous therapy, those receiving an orally administered
fluoropyrimidine had a significantly greater number of small intestinal mucosal
breaks (median number of breaks [range]; intravenous 5-fluorouracil, 0 [0-13];
oral fluoropyrimidine, 6.5 [1-20]; p = .0162, Mann-Whitney U test).
CONCLUSIONS: Many patients with diarrhea caused by chemotherapy including
fluoropyrimidine had small intestinal mucosal breaks. Additionally, small
intestinal mucosal breaks were more severe in patients receiving a regimen of
oral treatment than in those receiving a regimen of intravenous therapy. These
outcomes have important implications for investigations of new strategies for
preventing anti-cancer drug-induced diarrhea.

DOI: 10.1080/00365521.2019.1575466
PMID: 30739515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
