---
reference_id: "PMID:41009669"
title: Vaccination Against Extracellular Vimentin Plus Doxorubicin for Canine Hemangiosarcoma.
authors:
- Engbersen DJM
- van Bergen L
- Bos EN
- Hansen Q
- Roos A
- Huijbers EJM
- Faulhaber EA
- Hogendoorn PCW
- Thamm DH
- Griffioen AW
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijms26189096
keywords:
- Animals
- Dogs
- "Doxorubicin/therapeutic use, administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- "Hemangiosarcoma/veterinary, drug therapy, therapy, immunology"
- "Dog Diseases/therapy, immunology, drug therapy"
- Vimentin/immunology
- "Cancer Vaccines/immunology, therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Female
- Male
- Vaccination
- "Antibiotics, Antineoplastic/therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vaccination Against Extracellular Vimentin Plus Doxorubicin for Canine Hemangiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Engbersen DJM, van Bergen L, Bos EN, Hansen Q, Roos A, Huijbers EJM, Faulhaber EA, Hogendoorn PCW, Thamm DH, Griffioen AW
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms26189096](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26189096)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 Sep 18;26(18):9096. doi: 10.3390/ijms26189096.

Vaccination Against Extracellular Vimentin Plus Doxorubicin for Canine
Hemangiosarcoma.

Engbersen DJM(1)(2), van Bergen L(3), Bos EN(1), Hansen Q(1), Roos A(4),
Huijbers EJM(1)(5), Faulhaber EA(6), Hogendoorn PCW(2), Thamm DH(6), Griffioen
AW(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)CimCure BV, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZG Leiden,
The Netherlands.
(3)IVC Animal Hospital Barendrecht, 2992 LC Barendrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)IVC Animal Hospital Nieuwegein, 3433 NP Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(5)Angiogenesis Laboratory, Department of Medical Oncology, Amsterdam University
Medical Center, Cancer Center Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Flint Animal Cancer Center, Department of Clinical Sciences, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.

Angiosarcomas are highly aggressive soft tissue tumors with poor prognosis in
both humans and dogs. In dogs, visceral hemangiosarcoma offers a relevant
spontaneous model for evaluating novel therapies. Surgery alone yields a median
survival of 1-3 months, and treatment with doxorubicin (DOX), alone or in
combination (e.g., with propranolol), modestly extends median survival time to
5-7 months, with a 1-year survival of around 10%. We developed a conjugate
vaccine technology, called immune Boost (iBoost), and hypothesized that
combining DOX with an iBoost vaccine targeting extracellular vimentin (eVim)
could improve survival without added toxicity. Twenty-three dogs with visceral
hemangiosarcoma received six cycles of DOX every two weeks post-splenectomy,
alongside four doses every other week of eVim iBoost immunotherapy, followed by
maintenance vaccinations every two months. Outcomes were compared to historical
controls treated with DOX alone. Compared to the control group the median
overall survival time increased from 136 to 235 days (NS), restricted mean
survival time at one year increased with 81 days (p = 0.02) and 1-year survival
rate was 44% versus 14% (p = 0.0344). The combination was well-tolerated, with
no systemic vaccine-related toxicity. Adding dog eVim vaccine to DOX appears to
improve survival without added toxicity in dogs with hemangiosarcoma. These
results support further clinical development, including evaluation in human
angiosarcoma.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms26189096
PMCID: PMC12471246
PMID: 41009669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E.J.H. and A.W.G. are inventors on two Amsterdam
UMC patents. CimCure BV has a worldwide exclusive license on the patent WO
2018/026283 Al (EP 16182827.2). D.J.M.E., E.J.H., E.N.B., Q.H. and A.W.G. have
(part-time) appointments at CimCure BV under a collaboration agreement with
Amsterdam UMC. D.J.M.E., E.J.H. and A.W.G. have shares in CimCure BV. All other
authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.
