---
reference_id: "PMID:34696507"
title: Clonal Expansion of Infected CD4+ T Cells in People Living with HIV.
authors:
- Coffin JM
- Hughes SH
journal: Viruses
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/v13102078
keywords:
- Anti-Retroviral Agents/therapeutic use
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/metabolism, virology"
- "DNA, Viral/genetics"
- "HIV Infections/genetics, virology"
- HIV-1/pathogenicity
- Humans
- Proviruses/genetics
- Viral Load/genetics
- Viremia/virology
- "Virus Latency/drug effects, genetics, physiology"
- "Virus Replication/drug effects, genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clonal Expansion of Infected CD4+ T Cells in People Living with HIV.
**Authors:** Coffin JM, Hughes SH
**Journal:** Viruses (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v13102078](https://doi.org/10.3390/v13102078)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2021 Oct 15;13(10):2078. doi: 10.3390/v13102078.

Clonal Expansion of Infected CD4+ T Cells in People Living with HIV.

Coffin JM(1), Hughes SH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University, Boston, 
MA 02111, USA.
(2)HIV Dynamics and Replication Program, National Cancer Institute in Frederick, 
Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

HIV infection is not curable with current antiretroviral therapy (ART) because a 
small fraction of CD4+ T cells infected prior to ART initiation persists. 
Understanding the nature of this latent reservoir and how it is created is 
essential to development of potentially curative strategies. The discovery that 
a large fraction of the persistently infected cells in individuals on 
suppressive ART are members of large clones greatly changed our view of the 
reservoir and how it arises. Rather than being the products of infection of 
resting cells, as was once thought, HIV persistence is largely or entirely a 
consequence of infection of cells that are either expanding or are destined to 
expand, primarily due to antigen-driven activation. Although most of the clones 
carry defective proviruses, some carry intact infectious proviruses; these 
clones comprise the majority of the reservoir. A large majority of both the 
defective and the intact infectious proviruses in clones of infected cells are 
transcriptionally silent; however, a small fraction expresses a few copies of 
unspliced HIV RNA. A much smaller fraction is responsible for production of low 
levels of infectious virus, which can rekindle infection when ART is stopped. 
Further understanding of the reservoir will be needed to clarify the 
mechanism(s) by which provirus expression is controlled in the clones of cells 
that constitute the reservoir.

DOI: 10.3390/v13102078
PMCID: PMC8537114
PMID: 34696507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.