---
reference_id: "PMID:15694417"
title: Osteoporosis with increased osteoclastogenesis in hematopoietic cell-specific STAT3-deficient mice.
authors:
- Zhang Z
- Welte T
- Troiano N
- Maher SE
- Fu XY
- Bothwell AL
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.01.019
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Remodeling
- "Bone Resorption/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Proliferation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/deficiency
- Hematopoietic Stem Cells
- Membrane Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Mice
- Osteoclasts/pathology
- "Osteoporosis/complications, metabolism, pathology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-fos/metabolism
- RANK Ligand
- Receptor Activator of Nuclear Factor-kappa B
- STAT3 Transcription Factor
- Trans-Activators/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoporosis with increased osteoclastogenesis in hematopoietic cell-specific STAT3-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Zhang Z, Welte T, Troiano N, Maher SE, Fu XY, Bothwell AL
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.01.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.01.019)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Mar 18;328(3):800-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.01.019.

Osteoporosis with increased osteoclastogenesis in hematopoietic cell-specific 
STAT3-deficient mice.

Zhang Z(1), Welte T, Troiano N, Maher SE, Fu XY, Bothwell AL.

Author information:
(1)Sections of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA.

Hematopoietic cell-specific disruption of the STAT3 gene induces 
hyperproliferation of cells of the myeloid lineage. Osteoclasts (OC), the 
bone-resorbing cells, are generated from the same precursors as 
monocyte/macrophages. STAT3 mutant mice exhibit decreased bone density, bone 
volume, and increased numbers of TRAP-positive OC. In vitro generation of OC 
showed significantly greater numbers of OC in mutant mice. The increased numbers 
of Mac1+ cells and c-kit+ cells were detected by FACS analysis, suggesting an 
increased number of OC precursors. Treatment of splenocytes with CSF-1 and RANKL 
significantly increased the Mac-1+RANK+ cells, with much higher levels observed 
in cells from mutant mice compared with littermate controls. Besides enhanced 
number of Mac1+ OC precursors, we also identified an OC-generating Mac1- c-kit+ 
population in mutant mice which was absent in littermate controls. The Mac1- 
c-kit- cells did not generate OC. Finally, we determined that protein expression 
and mRNA level of c-fos, a transcription factor which is essential for OC 
differentiation, were enhanced in OC precursors of mutant mice, which may 
contribute to the osteopenic phenotype.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.01.019
PMID: 15694417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]