---
reference_id: "PMID:35508594"
title: "Dose-Exposure-Response Analysis of the Nonsteroidal Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonist Finerenone on UACR and eGFR: An Analysis from FIDELIO-DKD."
authors:
- Goulooze SC
- Heerspink HJL
- van Noort M
- Snelder N
- Brinker M
- Lippert J
- Eissing T
journal: Clin Pharmacokinet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s40262-022-01124-3
keywords:
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/complications, drug therapy"
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Naphthyridines
- Renal Insufficiency/complications
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/drug therapy"
- Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2 Inhibitors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dose-Exposure-Response Analysis of the Nonsteroidal Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonist Finerenone on UACR and eGFR: An Analysis from FIDELIO-DKD.
**Authors:** Goulooze SC, Heerspink HJL, van Noort M, Snelder N, Brinker M, Lippert J, Eissing T
**Journal:** Clin Pharmacokinet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40262-022-01124-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40262-022-01124-3)

## Content

1. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2022 Jul;61(7):1013-1025. doi: 10.1007/s40262-022-01124-3.
 Epub 2022 May 5.

Dose-Exposure-Response Analysis of the Nonsteroidal Mineralocorticoid Receptor 
Antagonist Finerenone on UACR and eGFR: An Analysis from FIDELIO-DKD.

Goulooze SC(1), Heerspink HJL(2), van Noort M(1), Snelder N(1), Brinker M(3), 
Lippert J(4), Eissing T(5).

Author information:
(1)Leiden Experts on Advanced Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics (LAP&P), 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Bayer AG, Pharmaceuticals R&D, Clinical Development, Leverkusen, Germany.
(4)Bayer AG, Pharmaceuticals R&D, Pharmacometrics, Building B106, Room 205, 
51368, Leverkusen, Germany.
(5)Bayer AG, Pharmaceuticals R&D, Pharmacometrics, Building B106, Room 205, 
51368, Leverkusen, Germany. thomas.eissing@bayer.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Finerenone reduces the risk of kidney failure in 
patients with chronic kidney disease and type 2 diabetes. Changes in the urine 
albumin-to-creatinine ratio (UACR) and estimated glomerular filtration rate 
(eGFR) are surrogates for kidney failure. We performed dose-exposure-response 
analyses to determine the effects of finerenone on these surrogates in the 
presence and absence of sodium glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2is) 
using individual patient data from the FIDELIO-DKD study.
METHODS: Non-linear mixed-effects population pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic 
models were used to quantify disease progression in terms of UACR and eGFR 
during standard of care and pharmacodynamic effects of finerenone in the 
presence and absence of SGLT2i use.
RESULTS: The population pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic models adequately 
described effects of finerenone exposure in reducing UACR and slowing eGFR 
decline over time. The reduction in UACR achieved with finerenone during the 
first year predicted its subsequent effect in slowing progressive eGFR decline. 
SGLT2i use did not modify the effects of finerenone. The population 
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic model demonstrated with 97.5% confidence that 
finerenone was at least 94.1% as efficacious in reducing UACR in patients using 
an SGLT2i compared with patients not using an SGLT2i based on the 95% confidence 
interval of the SGLT2i-finerenone interaction from 94.1 to 122%. The 95% 
confidence interval of the SGLT2i-finerenone interaction for the UACR-mediated 
effect on chronic eGFR decline was 9.5-144%.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a model that accurately describes the finerenone 
dose-exposure-response relationship for UACR and eGFR. The model demonstrated 
that the early UACR effect of finerenone predicted its long-term effect on eGFR 
decline. These effects were independent of concomitant SGLT2i use.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40262-022-01124-3
PMCID: PMC9287422
PMID: 35508594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SCG, MvN and NS are employed by LAP&P, a CRO 
working for Bayer. HJLH is co-chairing the executive committee of the ongoing 
finerenone FIND-CKD trial and advising Bayer including payments. He also had and 
has various roles in several SGLT2i trials. MB, JL and TE are Bayer employees 
and potential shareholders of Bayer AG.