---
reference_id: "PMID:26492519"
title: The association between the HLA-G 14-bp insertion/deletion polymorphism and type 1 diabetes.
authors:
- Silva HP
- Ururahy MA
- Souza KS
- Loureiro MB
- Oliveira YM
- Oliveira GH
- Luchessi AD
- Carvalho KT
- Freitas JC
- Donadi EA
- Hirata RD
- Almeida MG
- Arrais RF
- Hirata MH
- Rezende AA
journal: Genes Immun
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/gene.2015.45
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The association between the HLA-G 14-bp insertion/deletion polymorphism and type 1 diabetes.
**Authors:** Silva HP, Ururahy MA, Souza KS, Loureiro MB, Oliveira YM, Oliveira GH, Luchessi AD, Carvalho KT, Freitas JC, Donadi EA, Hirata RD, Almeida MG, Arrais RF, Hirata MH, Rezende AA
**Journal:** Genes Immun (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gene.2015.45](https://doi.org/10.1038/gene.2015.45)

## Content

1. Genes Immun. 2016 Jan-Feb;17(1):13-8. doi: 10.1038/gene.2015.45. Epub 2015 Oct
 22.

The association between the HLA-G 14-bp insertion/deletion polymorphism and type 
1 diabetes.

Silva HP(1), Ururahy MA(1), Souza KS(1), Loureiro MB(1), Oliveira YM(1), 
Oliveira GH(1), Luchessi AD(1), Carvalho KT(1), Freitas JC(1), Donadi EA(2), 
Hirata RD(3), Almeida MG(1), Arrais RF(4), Hirata MH(3), Rezende AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analysis, School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Natal, Brazil.
(2)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analyses, University of Sao Paulo, 
Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine 
of Ribeirao Preto, University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.
(4)Pediatrics Endocrinology Unit, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, 
Natal, Brazil.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a multifactorial disease that has a strong genetic 
component. The HLA-G is a nonclassical HLA class I locus that is associated with 
immunomodulatory functions, including downregulation of innate and adaptive 
immune responses and induction of immune tolerance. However, there is currently 
limited information about the involvement of HLA-G in T1D susceptibility. This 
case-control study aims to investigate the T1D susceptibility association of 
alleles and genotypes of a widely investigated 14-bp insertion/deletion 
polymorphism in the HLA-G and to provide further evidence of the frequency 
distribution of class II HLA-DR-DQ-risk genotypes in T1D children and 
adolescents in the Brazilian population. The deletion allele and the homozygous 
deletion genotype are associated with susceptibility to T1D and the insertion 
allele and the heterozygous deletion/insertion genotype are associated with 
protection from T1D. We also confirm that genetic susceptibility to T1D is 
associated with the DRB1*03:01-DQA1*05:01-DQB1*02:01 and 
DRB1*04-DQA1*03:01-DQB1*03:02 haplotypes in Brazilian northeast region. The 
DR3-DQ2/DR4-DQ8 genotype conferred the highest detected risk for T1D. Our 
results identify a novel association of the 14-bp deletion allele and the 
homozygous deletion genotype with T1D development and provide additional 
evidence of the importance of HLA class II heterozygous DR3-DQ2/DR4-DQ8 genotype 
in T1D susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1038/gene.2015.45
PMID: 26492519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]