---
reference_id: "PMID:38793083"
title: Non-Invasive Retinal Vessel Analysis as a Predictor for Cardiovascular Disease.
authors:
- Iorga RE
- Costin D
- Munteanu-Dănulescu RS
- Rezuș E
- Moraru AD
journal: J Pers Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jpm14050501
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-Invasive Retinal Vessel Analysis as a Predictor for Cardiovascular Disease.
**Authors:** Iorga RE, Costin D, Munteanu-Dănulescu RS, Rezuș E, Moraru AD
**Journal:** J Pers Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jpm14050501](https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm14050501)

## Content

1. J Pers Med. 2024 May 9;14(5):501. doi: 10.3390/jpm14050501.

Non-Invasive Retinal Vessel Analysis as a Predictor for Cardiovascular Disease.

Iorga RE(1), Costin D(2), Munteanu-Dănulescu RS(3), Rezuș E(4), Moraru AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery II, Discipline of Ophthalmology, "Grigore T. Popa" 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Strada Universitatii No. 16, 700115 Iași, 
Romania.
(2)Doctoral School, "Grigore T. Popa" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
700115 Iași, Romania.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, "L. Pasteur" Clinical Hospital, 28630 Le 
Coudray, France.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine II, Discipline of Reumathology, "Grigore T. 
Popa" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 700115 Iași, Romania.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the most frequent cause of death worldwide. The 
alterations in the microcirculation may predict the cardiovascular mortality. 
The retinal vasculature can be used as a model to study vascular alterations 
associated with cardiovascular disease. In order to quantify microvascular 
changes in a non-invasive way, fundus images can be taken and analysed. The 
central retinal arteriolar (CRAE), the venular (CRVE) diameter and the 
arteriolar-to-venular diameter ratio (AVR) can be used as biomarkers to predict 
the cardiovascular mortality. A narrower CRAE, wider CRVE and a lower AVR have 
been associated with increased cardiovascular events. Dynamic retinal vessel 
analysis (DRVA) allows the quantification of retinal changes using digital image 
sequences in response to visual stimulation with flicker light. This article is 
not just a review of the current literature, it also aims to discuss the 
methodological benefits and to identify research gaps. It highlights the 
potential use of microvascular biomarkers for screening and treatment monitoring 
of cardiovascular disease. Artificial intelligence (AI), such as Quantitative 
Analysis of Retinal vessel Topology and size (QUARTZ), and SIVA-deep learning 
system (SIVA-DLS), seems efficient in extracting information from fundus 
photographs and has the advantage of increasing diagnosis accuracy and improving 
patient care by complementing the role of physicians. Retinal vascular imaging 
using AI may help identify the cardiovascular risk, and is an important tool in 
primary cardiovascular disease prevention. Further research should explore the 
potential clinical application of retinal microvascular biomarkers, in order to 
assess systemic vascular health status, and to predict cardiovascular events.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm14050501
PMCID: PMC11122007
PMID: 38793083

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.