---
reference_id: "PMID:20301472"
title: COL1A1- and COL1A2-Related Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Rodriguez Celin M
- Steiner RD
- Basel D
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COL1A1- and COL1A2-Related Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Rodriguez Celin M, Steiner RD, Basel D

## Content

1. COL1A1- and COL1A2-Related Osteogenesis Imperfecta.

Rodriguez Celin M(1), Steiner RD(2)(3)(4), Basel D(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2005 Jan 28 [updated 2025 May 29].

Author information:
(1)Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
(2)Professor (Clinical), Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin 
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin
(3)Medical Director, Newborn Screening, Wisconsin Department of Health 
Services / Wisconsin State Lab of Hygiene, Madison, Wisconsin
(4)Editor-in-Chief, Genetics in Medicine

INCLUDED TYPES: Classic non-deforming OI with blue sclerae (OI type I). 
Perinatally lethal OI (OI type II). Progressively deforming OI (OI type III). 
Common variable OI with normal sclerae (OI type IV).
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: COL1A1- and COL1A2-related osteogenesis imperfecta 
(COL1A1/COL1A2-OI) is characterized by fractures (often with minimal or absent 
trauma), variable dentinogenesis imperfecta (DI), and hearing loss (typically in 
adult years). The severity of COL1A1/COL1A2-OI ranges from perinatal lethality; 
individuals with severe skeletal deformities, mobility impairments, and very 
short stature; to individuals with a slight predisposition to fractures and 
normal dentition, stature, and life span. Fractures can occur in any bone but 
are most common in the extremities. DI is characterized by gray or brown teeth 
that may appear translucent and wear down or break easily. COL1A1/COL1A2-OI is 
classified into four types based on clinical presentation and radiographic 
findings. This classification system, although imperfect, can be helpful in 
providing information about prognosis and management for a given individual. The 
four more common OI types are now referred to as follows: classic non-deforming 
OI with blue sclerae (previously OI type I), perinatally lethal OI (previously 
OI type II), progressively deforming OI (previously OI type III), common 
variable OI with normal sclerae (previously OI type IV).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of COL1A1/COL1A2-OI is established in a proband 
with clinical and radiographic manifestations of OI by identification of a 
heterozygous in COL1A1 or COL1A2 by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Ideally, management is by a 
multidisciplinary team including specialists in the medical management of OI. 
Educate parents/caregivers of safe handling techniques. Alternate position to 
minimize deformity. Initiate upright sitting only once the infant has adequate 
head and trunk control. Physical and occupational therapy to increase bone 
stability, improve mobility, prevent contractures and head and spine deformity, 
and improve muscle strength; physical activity guided by therapists. Mobility 
aids including orthotics to stabilize lax joints. Pain management combines 
pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic strategies. Fractures are treated with as 
short a period of immobility as is practical, small and lightweight casts, and 
physical therapy as soon as casts are removed; intramedullary rodding when 
indicated to provide anatomic positioning of limbs; bracing of limbs depending 
on OI severity. Anesthesia requires special attention including proper 
positioning, intraoperative management, and postoperative analgesia. Progressive 
scoliosis in severe OI may not respond well to conservative or surgical 
management. Bisphosphonates continue to be used most extensively in those with 
vertebral fractures, frequent long bone fractures, or more severe OI. Surgical 
treatment for symptomatic basilar impression should be done in an experienced 
center. Dental care to maintain both primary and permanent dentition, a 
functional bite or occlusion, optimal gingival health, and overall appearance. 
Conductive hearing loss may be improved with middle ear surgery; standard 
treatments for later-onset sensorineural hearing loss. Protective glasses to 
prevent eye injury; ocular surgery should be approached with caution. Nutrition 
education to support maintaining healthy weight for height. Standard treatments 
for other gastrointestinal issues and cardiovascular and pulmonary issues. 
Standard pediatric and adult vaccinations to prevent respiratory disease. Mental 
health support through psychiatry, psychology, and social work can improve 
quality of life. Surveillance: Orthopedic evaluation every three months until 
age one year, every six months from ages one to three years, and then annually 
or with any new fractures or other musculoskeletal concerns. Assess growth at 
each visit throughout childhood and adolescence. Physical and rehabilitation 
medicine and physical and occupational therapy evaluation in infancy for those 
with motor delays and as needed in older individuals. Assessment of pain at each 
visit. Evaluation by bone disease specialist including vitamin D level; 
frequency will depend on age and OI severity. DXA scans beginning at age five 
years with follow-up scan based on severity of OI, initial results, and 
pharmacologic treatment status. CT and/or MRI with views across the base of the 
skull to evaluate for basilar impression in those with platybasia, 
moderate-to-severe OI, or concerning signs or symptoms. Cervical spine flexion 
and extension radiographs in children able to cooperate with the examination or 
before participating in sporting activities in more mildly affected individuals. 
Dental examination every six months beginning in early childhood or infancy for 
those with (or at risk for) DI. Annual dental exams in those without DI. Hearing 
evaluation every three years from age five years until hearing loss is 
identified, then as indicated based on the nature and degree of hearing loss and 
associated interventions. Eye exam every two to three years in adults or more 
frequently as needed. Nutrition and feeding evaluation annually or as needed. 
Assess for gastrointestinal issues each visit. Assess for symptoms of 
cardiovascular disease as needed. Assess for pulmonary issues at each visit; 
consider pulmonary evaluation in those with lung disease; pulmonary function 
tests every one to two years in adults; sleep study in those with symptoms of 
sleep apnea. Mental health evaluation and follow-up genetic counseling as 
needed. Assess family and social work needs at each visit. Agents/circumstances 
to be avoided: In young children, avoid sudden acceleration/deceleration 
movements; avoid throwing a child in the air. To minimize point pressure, avoid 
lifting an infant by the ankle when diapering. Contact sports and other physical 
activities with significant risks of falls or high-impact collision should be 
avoided. Avoid smoking and secondhand smoke to decrease risk of pulmonary 
disease; avoid excessive alcohol and caffeine consumption. Consider avoiding or 
limiting any substance or medication that may affect bone health (e.g., 
steroids). Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the 
genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of 
an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would 
benefit from spine examination and ophthalmic, dental, and audiology 
evaluations. Pregnancy management: Women with OI and significant skeletal 
deformities and short stature should be followed closely during pregnancy at a 
high-risk prenatal care center.
GENETIC COUNSELING: COL1A1-OI and COL1A2-OI are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. Many individuals diagnosed with the milder forms of 
COL1A1/COL1A2-OI have the disorder as the result of a pathogenic variant 
inherited from an affected parent. The proportion of affected individuals who 
represent simplex cases varies by the severity of disease: ~60% of probands with 
mild OI represent simplex cases; virtually 100% of probands with progressively 
deforming or perinatally lethal OI represent simplex cases. A proband who 
appears to be the only affected family member may have COL1A1/COL1A2-OI as the 
result of a pathogenic variant that occurred de novo in the proband or as a 
postzygotic de novo event in a parent with gonadal (or somatic and gonadal) 
mosaicism. The overall rate of mosaicism is up to 16% in the parents of children 
with COL1A1/COL1A2-OI. Each child of an individual with COL1A1/COL1A2-OI has a 
50% chance of inheriting the causative variant. Once the OI-causing variant has 
been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible. Ultrasound examination performed in a center with 
experience in diagnosing OI can be valuable in the prenatal diagnosis of the 
lethal form and most severe forms prior to 20 weeks' gestation; milder forms may 
be detected later in pregnancy if fractures or deformities are present.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301472