---
reference_id: "PMID:28297032"
title: Ultra-Wide-Field Fundus Autofluorescence and Spectral-Domain Optical Coherence Tomography Findings in Syphilitic Outer Retinitis.
authors:
- Saleh MG
- Campbell JP
- Yang P
- Lin P
journal: Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging Retina
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3928/23258160-20170301-03
keywords:
- Electroretinography
- "Eye Infections, Bacterial/diagnosis, microbiology"
- Fluorescein Angiography/methods
- Follow-Up Studies
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, microbiology"
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/pathology
- Retrospective Studies
- "Syphilis/diagnosis, microbiology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Visual Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ultra-Wide-Field Fundus Autofluorescence and Spectral-Domain Optical Coherence Tomography Findings in Syphilitic Outer Retinitis.
**Authors:** Saleh MG, Campbell JP, Yang P, Lin P
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging Retina (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3928/23258160-20170301-03](https://doi.org/10.3928/23258160-20170301-03)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging Retina. 2017 Mar 1;48(3):208-215. doi:
10.3928/23258160-20170301-03.

Ultra-Wide-Field Fundus Autofluorescence and Spectral-Domain Optical Coherence
Tomography Findings in Syphilitic Outer Retinitis.

Saleh MG, Campbell JP, Yang P, Lin P.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: To determine the ultra-wide-field fundus
autofluorescence (UWFFAF) and optical coherence tomography (OCT) features of
syphilitic outer retinopathy (SOR).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Retrospective chart review.
RESULTS: Three patients with SOR were investigated. Treatment with parenteral
penicillin led to improvement of outer retinopathy, visual acuity, and symptoms.
UWFFAF showed speckled hyperautofluorescence, hypoautofluorescence, and normal
autofluorescence, similar to what has been described as a trizonal pattern in
acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) in the chronic case of SOR, but
with hyperautofluorescent areas in the two acute cases. OCT showed disruption of
the photoreceptor outer segment ellipsoid zone and external limiting membrane,
which improved after penicillin treatment, and corresponded to normalization of
the hyperautofluorescent areas on UWFFAF. There was irregularity and nodular
thickening of retinal pigment epithelium on OCT in areas of mottled
hyperautofluorescence.
CONCLUSION: SOR can present similarly to AZOOR on UWFFAF and should be highly
suspected in cases presenting like AZOOR. [Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging
Retina. 2017;48:208-215. ].

Copyright 2017, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/23258160-20170301-03
PMCID: PMC7083197
PMID: 28297032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
