---
reference_id: "PMID:38338783"
title: "Mitochondrial Dysfunction, Oxidative Stress, and Inter-Organ Miscommunications in T2D Progression."
authors:
- Veluthakal R
- Esparza D
- Hoolachan JM
- Balakrishnan R
- Ahn M
- Oh E
- Jayasena CS
- Thurmond DC
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25031504
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial Dysfunction, Oxidative Stress, and Inter-Organ Miscommunications in T2D Progression.
**Authors:** Veluthakal R, Esparza D, Hoolachan JM, Balakrishnan R, Ahn M, Oh E, Jayasena CS, Thurmond DC
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25031504](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25031504)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jan 25;25(3):1504. doi: 10.3390/ijms25031504.

Mitochondrial Dysfunction, Oxidative Stress, and Inter-Organ Miscommunications 
in T2D Progression.

Veluthakal R(1), Esparza D(1), Hoolachan JM(1), Balakrishnan R(1), Ahn M(1), Oh 
E(1), Jayasena CS(1), Thurmond DC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology, Arthur Riggs Diabetes & 
Metabolism Research Institute, City of Hope Beckman Research Institute, 1500 E. 
Duarte Rd, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a heterogenous disease, and conventionally, peripheral 
insulin resistance (IR) was thought to precede islet β-cell dysfunction, 
promoting progression from prediabetes to T2D. New evidence suggests that 
T2D-lean individuals experience early β-cell dysfunction without significant IR. 
Regardless of the primary event (i.e., IR vs. β-cell dysfunction) that 
contributes to dysglycemia, significant early-onset oxidative damage and 
mitochondrial dysfunction in multiple metabolic tissues may be a driver of T2D 
onset and progression. Oxidative stress, defined as the generation of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS), is mediated by hyperglycemia alone or in combination with 
lipids. Physiological oxidative stress promotes inter-tissue communication, 
while pathological oxidative stress promotes inter-tissue mis-communication, and 
new evidence suggests that this is mediated via extracellular vesicles (EVs), 
including mitochondria containing EVs. Under metabolic-related stress 
conditions, EV-mediated cross-talk between β-cells and skeletal muscle likely 
trigger mitochondrial anomalies leading to prediabetes and T2D. This article 
reviews the underlying molecular mechanisms in ROS-related pathogenesis of 
prediabetes, including mitophagy and mitochondrial dynamics due to oxidative 
stress. Further, this review will describe the potential of various therapeutic 
avenues for attenuating oxidative damage, reversing prediabetes and preventing 
progression to T2D.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25031504
PMCID: PMC10855860
PMID: 38338783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.