---
reference_id: "PMID:7890422"
title: Characterization of a two-gene locus from Bartonella bacilliformis associated with the ability to invade human erythrocytes.
authors:
- Mitchell SJ
- Minnick MF
journal: Infect Immun
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1128/iai.63.4.1552-1562.1995
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Bartonella/genetics
- Base Sequence
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "DNA, Bacterial/genetics"
- Erythrocytes/microbiology
- "Genes, Bacterial"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Nucleic Acid Hybridization
- Restriction Mapping
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Transformation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of a two-gene locus from Bartonella bacilliformis associated with the ability to invade human erythrocytes.
**Authors:** Mitchell SJ, Minnick MF
**Journal:** Infect Immun (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1128/iai.63.4.1552-1562.1995](https://doi.org/10.1128/iai.63.4.1552-1562.1995)

## Content

1. Infect Immun. 1995 Apr;63(4):1552-62. doi: 10.1128/iai.63.4.1552-1562.1995.

Characterization of a two-gene locus from Bartonella bacilliformis associated
with the ability to invade human erythrocytes.

Mitchell SJ(1), Minnick MF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula 59812-1002.

Bartonella bacilliformis, the agent of human Oroya fever, invades erythrocytes
and causes a severe hemolytic anemia. The ability of two minimally invasive
strains of Escherichia coli (DH5 alpha and HB101) to invade human erythrocytes
was enhanced 6- to 39-fold by transformation with pIAL1, a plasmid containing a
1,469-bp BamHI fragment from the B. bacilliformis chromosome. Invasiveness was
confirmed by gentamicin protection and transmission electron microscopy. DNA
hybridization analysis confirmed the presence of the locus in B. bacilliformis
KC583 and KC584 and its absence in E. coli chromosomal DNA. Sequencing of the
DNA insert of pIAL1 revealed tandem open reading frames of 510 and 558 bp,
designated ialA and ialB, respectively. Invasion assays with E. coli containing
only an ialA or ialB recombinant suggest that both genes are necessary for
invasiveness. The ialA gene is predicted to code for a polypeptide of 170 amino
acids (20.1 kDa), and ialB is predicted to code for a polypeptide of 186 amino
acids (19.9 kDa). In vitro transcription and translation of pIAL1 produced
insert-specific protein bands with masses of approximately 21 and 20 kDa when
analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Expression of ialA and ialB in E. coli maxicells produced proteins with masses
of approximately 21 kDa (IalA) and 18 kDa (IalB). Maxicell and computer analyses
suggest that IalB contains an N-terminal secretory signal sequence which is
posttranslationally cleaved. Searches of various DNA and protein databases
revealed that IalA contains an N-terminal region of 35 amino acids with a high
degree of homology to an NTPase consensus domain. There is 63.6% sequence
conservation between the IalB protein and the invasion-associated protein Ail of
Yersinia enterocolitica.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.63.4.1552-1562.1995
PMCID: PMC173188
PMID: 7890422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
