---
reference_id: "PMID:38976822"
title: Evolution of Movement Disorders in Patients With CLN2-Batten Disease Treated With Enzyme Replacement Therapy.
authors:
- Spaull R
- Soo AK
- Batzios S
- Footitt E
- Whiteley R
- Mink JW
- Carr L
- Gissen P
- Kurian MA
journal: Neurology
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209615
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/drug therapy, genetics, complications"
- Male
- Female
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- Child
- "Movement Disorders/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Disease Progression
- Cohort Studies
- "Myoclonus/drug therapy, genetics"
- Treatment Outcome
- Dipeptidyl-Peptidases and Tripeptidyl-Peptidases
- Recombinant Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolution of Movement Disorders in Patients With CLN2-Batten Disease Treated With Enzyme Replacement Therapy.
**Authors:** Spaull R, Soo AK, Batzios S, Footitt E, Whiteley R, Mink JW, Carr L, Gissen P, Kurian MA
**Journal:** Neurology (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000209615](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000209615)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2024 Aug 13;103(3):e209615. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209615. Epub
 2024 Jul 8.

Evolution of Movement Disorders in Patients With CLN2-Batten Disease Treated
With Enzyme Replacement Therapy.

Spaull R(1), Soo AK(1), Batzios S(1), Footitt E(1), Whiteley R(1), Mink JW(1),
Carr L(1), Gissen P(1), Kurian MA(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Molecular Neurosciences (R.S., A.K.S., M.A.K.), Developmental
Neurosciences, Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease in Children, UCL
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom;
Department of Neurology (R.S., A.K.S., L.C., M.A.K.), Great Ormond Street
Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Department of Paediatric Metabolic Diseases
(S.B., E.F., R.W., P.G.), Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London,
United Kingdom; Department of Neurology (J.W.M.), University of Rochester, NY;
and Genetics and Genomic Medicine (P.G.), UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of
Child Health, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209729.
    Neurology. 103:e209729.

OBJECTIVES: Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2-disease) is an inherited
childhood-onset neurodegenerative condition, with classical early features of
speech delay, epilepsy, myoclonus, ataxia, and motor regression. This study
aimed to better characterize the spectrum of movement disorders in CLN2-disease
in a cohort of children receiving enzyme replacement therapy (ERT).
METHODS: A cohort of 18 children attending a single center for treatment with
cerliponase alfa ERT was systematically assessed using a standardized structured
history and a double-scored, video-recorded examination using the Unified Batten
Disease Rating Scale (UBDRS) and Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale.
RESULTS: Noncanonical movement disorders are common: while ataxia (89%) and
myoclonus (83%) were near-universal, spasticity and dystonia were experienced by
over half (61% each), with children having a median of 4 distinct movement
disorder phenotypes. This progression was stereotyped with initial
ataxia/myoclonus, then hyperkinesia/spasticity, and later hypokinesia. ERT slows
progression of movement disorders, as measured by the UBDRS physical subscale,
with 1.45 points-per-month progression before diagnosis and 0.44
points-per-month while on treatment (p = 0.019).
DISCUSSION: Movement disorders are a core feature of CLN2-disease and follow a
typical pattern of progression which is slowed by ERT. Identifying and treating
movement disorders should become standard, especially given increased patient
survival.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209615
PMCID: PMC11314953
PMID: 38976822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R. Spaull has received funding from the Great
Ormond Street Hospital Children's Charity and LifeArc. R. Whiteley has received
speaker honoraria from BioMarin. J.W. Mink has received research funding from
NIH grants P50HD103536 and R01NS060022, and from Neurogene, Amicus, and
Theranexus. L. Carr has received speaker honoraria from BioMarin. P. Gissen was
an investigator in cerliponase alfa clinical studies for BioMarin, has received
consulting fees and grants from BioMarin, has received funding from an NIHR
Senior Investigator award (reference NIHR202370), and is a cofounder
of/consultant for Bloomsbury Genetic Therapies. M.A. Kurian is a cofounder
of/consultant for Bloomsbury Genetic Therapies, has received honoraria from PTC,
and has received funding from the MRC (MR/S036784/1), the Great Ormond Street
Hospital Children's Charity, and LifeArc. All other authors report no relevant
disclosures. Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.
