---
reference_id: "PMID:31041800"
title: "Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation in Cancer: An Update."
authors:
- Levi M
journal: Semin Thromb Hemost
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1687890
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation in Cancer: An Update.
**Authors:** Levi M
**Journal:** Semin Thromb Hemost (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0039-1687890](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0039-1687890)

## Content

1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2019 Jun;45(4):342-347. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1687890. Epub
 2019 Apr 30.

Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation in Cancer: An Update.

Levi M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University College London Hospitals, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Biomedical Research Centre, University College London Hospitals, London, 
United Kingdom.

Cancer often leads to the activation of coagulation, manifesting as disseminated 
intravascular coagulation (DIC) in its most extreme form. DIC is characterized 
by systemic intravascular coagulation activation (leading to deposition of 
intravascular platelets and fibrin) and simultaneous consumption of coagulation 
proteins and thrombocytes (which may cause bleeding complications). The clinical 
course of DIC in patients with malignancies is typically less intense compared 
with DIC complicating alternative clinical settings, including systemic 
inflammatory responses following infection or traumatic injury. A more slowly 
proceeding, less fulminant, and widespread hemostatic derangement can remain 
asymptomatic. Eventually, the ongoing consumption may result in low levels of 
platelets and coagulation factors, and bleeding complications (frequently 
localized at the site of the tumor or distant metastases) may be the first 
clinical manifestation of DIC. An alternative clinical scenario is dominated by 
thrombotic complications, ranging from clinically manifest vascular thrombosis 
to microvascular platelet plugs. The main principle of DIC management is 
adequate treatment of the precipitating disorder; however, there are clinical 
presentations that may require additional supportive strategies specifically 
aimed at the amelioration of the coagulopathy.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1687890
PMID: 31041800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author has no conflicts of interest 
concerning the contents to report.