---
reference_id: "PMID:29191347"
title: "Granulomatous diseases: Kids are not just little people."
authors:
- Lakdawala N
- Ferenczi K
- Grant-Kels JM
journal: Clin Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2017.08.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Granulomatous diseases: Kids are not just little people.
**Authors:** Lakdawala N, Ferenczi K, Grant-Kels JM
**Journal:** Clin Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clindermatol.2017.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2017.08.006)

## Content

1. Clin Dermatol. 2017 Nov-Dec;35(6):555-565. doi: 
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2017.08.006. Epub 2017 Aug 4.

Granulomatous diseases: Kids are not just little people.

Lakdawala N(1), Ferenczi K(2), Grant-Kels JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwuakee, WI. 
Electronic address: nikita.lakdawala@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Connecticut Health Center, 
Farmington, CT.

Granulomatous diseases represent a heterogeneous group of conditions 
characterized by histiocytic inflammation that affect patients of any age. These 
diseases differ widely in their pathogenesis and include infectious and 
noninfectious conditions. This review focuses on noninfectious granulomatous 
conditions, with particular emphasis on age-related differences in the onset, 
epidemiology, clinical manifestations, prognosis, and age-specific management of 
specific granulomatous disorders. Knowledge of age-specific aspects of 
granulomatous conditions in adults and children improves both the extent of the 
diagnostic workup and the management of these patients.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2017.08.006
PMID: 29191347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]