---
reference_id: "PMID:30638864"
title: The blood transcriptome of childhood malaria.
authors:
- Boldt ABW
- van Tong H
- Grobusch MP
- Kalmbach Y
- Dzeing Ella A
- Kombila M
- Meyer CG
- Kun JFJ
- Kremsner PG
- Velavan TP
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.12.055
keywords:
- Asymptomatic Diseases
- Biomarkers
- Cell-Free Nucleic Acids/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Computational Biology/methods
- Erythrocyte Count
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Infant
- "Malaria, Cerebral/blood, parasitology"
- "Malaria, Falciparum/blood, diagnosis, parasitology"
- Male
- Plasmodium falciparum
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Reproducibility of Results
- Severity of Illness Index
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The blood transcriptome of childhood malaria.
**Authors:** Boldt ABW, van Tong H, Grobusch MP, Kalmbach Y, Dzeing Ella A, Kombila M, Meyer CG, Kun JFJ, Kremsner PG, Velavan TP
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.12.055](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.12.055)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2019 Feb;40:614-625. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.12.055. Epub 2019
 Jan 10.

The blood transcriptome of childhood malaria.

Boldt ABW(1), van Tong H(2), Grobusch MP(3), Kalmbach Y(4), Dzeing Ella A(5),
Kombila M(5), Meyer CG(6), Kun JFJ(4), Kremsner PG(7), Velavan TP(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany;
Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Department of Genetics, Universidade
Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil. Electronic address:
angelicaboldt@gmail.com.
(2)Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany;
Institute of Biomedicine and Pharmacy, Vietnam Military Medical University,
Hanoi, Viet Nam.
(3)Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany;
Center of Medical Research Lambaréné, Lambaréné, Gabon; Center of Travel
Medicine and Tropical Medicine, Department of Infectious Diseases, Division of
Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers, the Netherlands.
(4)Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Department of Parasitology, Tropical Medicine and Mycology, University of
Libreville, Libreville, Gabon.
(6)Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany;
Vietnamese-German Center for Medical Research, Hanoi, Viet Nam; Duy Tan
University, Da Nang, Viet Nam.
(7)Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany;
Center of Medical Research Lambaréné, Lambaréné, Gabon.
(8)Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany;
Vietnamese-German Center for Medical Research, Hanoi, Viet Nam; Duy Tan
University, Da Nang, Viet Nam. Electronic address:
velavan@medizin.uni-tuebingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Transcriptomic research of blood cell lineages supports the
understanding of distinct features of the immunopathology in human malaria.
METHODS: We used microarray hybridization, validated by real-time RT-PCR to
analyze whole blood gene expression in healthy Gabonese children and children
with various conditions of Plasmodium falciparum infection, including i)
asymptomatic infection, ii) uncomplicated malaria, iii) malaria associated with
severe anemia and iv) cerebral malaria.
FINDINGS: Our data indicate that the expression profile of 22 genes
significantly differed among the investigated groups. Immunoglobulin production,
complement regulation and IFN beta signaling, in particular IRF7 and ISRE
binding signatures in the corresponding genes, were most conspicuous.
Down-regulation in cerebral malaria seems to rely on AhRF, GABP and HIF1 hypoxia
transcription factors. ARG1, BPI, CD163, IFI27, HP and TNFAIP6 transcript levels
correlated positively with lactatemia, and negatively with hemoglobin
concentrations.
INTERPRETATION: Differences in gene expression profile reflect distinct
immunopathological mechanisms of P. falciparum infection. They emerge as
potential prognostic markers for early therapeutic measures and need to be
validated further. FUND: This work was supported by a grant of the NGFN
(Nationales Genomforschungsnetz 01GS0114) and by a CNPq (Conselho Nacional de
Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico, Brazil) PhD scholarship for A. B. W.
Boldt. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis,
decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.12.055
PMCID: PMC6412103
PMID: 30638864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
