---
reference_id: "PMID:16001794"
title: "[The genetic disorders responsible for sudden cardiac death]."
authors:
- Harada T
- Nagai R
journal: Nihon Rinsho
year: '2005'
keywords:
- Adult
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/etiology, genetics"
- Child
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Heart Diseases/genetics
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [The genetic disorders responsible for sudden cardiac death].
**Authors:** Harada T, Nagai R
**Journal:** Nihon Rinsho (2005)

## Content

1. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Jul;63(7):1273-83.

[The genetic disorders responsible for sudden cardiac death].

[Article in Japanese]

Harada T(1), Nagai R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo.

Sudden cardiac death is defined as an unpredictable death within 24 hours. It is
estimated to occur with a frequency of more than 50,000 per year in Japan. The
inherited arrhythmogenic diseases associated with the transmembranous ionic
channels, anchoring proteins or intracellular calcium regulating proteins are
thought to be responsible for sudden cardiac death in infants, children, and
young adults who have structurally normal hearts. Recent genetic analyses have
identified congenital diseases such as the long-QT syndrome (LQTS), the Jervell
and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS), the Brugada syndrome (BrS), the short-QT
syndrome (SQTS), the arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy type 2
(ARVC2), and the catecholamine-induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
(CPVT) /familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (FPVT). Loss of function in
the slow component of the delayed rectifier potassium current (I(Ks)) channels
(KCNQ1, KCNE1), the rapid component of the potassium current (I(Kr)) channels
(KCNH2, KCNE2) and the inward rectifier potassium current (I(Kl), Kir2.1)
channel (KCNJ2) is linked to the LQTSs (type 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7 (Andersen
syndrome)) and the JLNSs (type 1 and 2). Changes of function in the
alpha-subunit of cardiac sodium channels (SCN5A) is also linked to the LQTS type
3 and the BrS. A mutation in the ankyrin-B, anchoring proteins, has been
identified as cause of the LQTS type 4. The SQTS is caused by gain of function
in the KCNH2. Further, the missense mutations in the gene encoding ryanodine
receptor 2 (RyR2) or calsequestrin 2 (CASQ2) that regulate intra-cardiac calcium
handling is possibly implicated in the ARVC2 and the CPVT/FPVT. Herein, we
present a review of the literature regarding the genetic mechanisms of the
inherited arrhythmogenic diseases.

PMID: 16001794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
