---
reference_id: "PMID:38923548"
title: "Amyloid Neuropathy: From Pathophysiology to Treatment in Light-Chain Amyloidosis and Hereditary Transthyretin Amyloidosis."
authors:
- Chompoopong P
- Mauermann ML
- Siddiqi H
- Peltier A
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ana.26965
keywords:
- Humans
- "Amyloid Neuropathies, Familial/therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Amyloid Neuropathies/therapy, genetics"
- "Immunoglobulin Light-chain Amyloidosis/therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Amyloidosis/therapy, genetics"
- Prealbumin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyloid Neuropathy: From Pathophysiology to Treatment in Light-Chain Amyloidosis and Hereditary Transthyretin Amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Chompoopong P, Mauermann ML, Siddiqi H, Peltier A
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.26965](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.26965)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2024 Sep;96(3):423-440. doi: 10.1002/ana.26965. Epub 2024 Jun 24.

Amyloid Neuropathy: From Pathophysiology to Treatment in Light-Chain Amyloidosis 
and Hereditary Transthyretin Amyloidosis.

Chompoopong P(1), Mauermann ML(2), Siddiqi H(3), Peltier A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 
USA.

Amyloid neuropathy is caused by deposition of insoluble β-pleated amyloid sheets 
in the peripheral nervous system. It is most common in: (1) light-chain 
amyloidosis, a clonal non-proliferative plasma cell disorder in which fragments 
of immunoglobulin, light or heavy chain, deposit in tissues, and (2) hereditary 
transthyretin (ATTRv) amyloidosis, a disorder caused by autosomal dominant 
mutations in the TTR gene resulting in mutated protein that has a higher 
tendency to misfold. Amyloid fibrils deposit in the endoneurium of peripheral 
nerves, often extensive in the dorsal root ganglia and sympathetic ganglia, 
leading to atrophy of Schwann cells in proximity to amyloid fibrils and 
blood-nerve barrier disruption. Clinically, amyloid neuropathy is manifested as 
a length-dependent sensory predominant neuropathy associated with generalized 
autonomic failure. Small unmyelinated nerves are involved early and prominently 
in early-onset Val30Met ATTRv, whereas other ATTRv and light-chain amyloidosis 
often present with large- and small-fiber involvement. Nerve conduction studies, 
quantitative sudomotor axon testing, and intraepidermal nerve fiber density are 
useful tools to evaluate denervation. Amyloid deposition can be demonstrated by 
tissue biopsy of the affected organ or surrogate site, as well as bone-avid 
radiotracer cardiac imaging. Treatment of light-chain amyloidosis has been 
revolutionized by monoclonal antibodies and stem cell transplantation with 
improved 5-year survival up to 77%. Novel gene therapy and transthyretin 
stabilizers have revolutionized treatment of ATTRv, improving the course of 
neuropathy (less change in the modified Neuropathy Impairment Score + 7 from 
baseline) and quality of life. With great progress in amyloidosis therapies, 
early diagnosis and presymptomatic testing for ATTRv family members has become 
paramount. ANN NEUROL 2024;96:423-440.

© 2024 The Author(s). Annals of Neurology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.26965
PMID: 38923548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]