---
reference_id: "PMID:35366214"
title: "Time to remission of proteinuria and incidence of relapse in patients with steroid-sensitive minimal change disease and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis: the Japan Nephrotic Syndrome Cohort Study."
authors:
- Yamamoto R
- Imai E
- Maruyama S
- Yokoyama H
- Sugiyama H
- Takeda A
- Tsukamoto T
- Uchida S
- Tsuruya K
- Shoji T
- Hayashi H
- Akai Y
- Fukunaga M
- Konta T
- Nishio S
- Goto S
- Tamai H
- Nagai K
- Katafuchi R
- Masutani K
- Wada T
- Nishino T
- Shirasaki A
- Sobajima H
- Nitta K
- Yamagata K
- Kazama JJ
- Hiromura K
- Yasuda H
- Mizutani M
- Akahori T
- Naruse T
- Hiramatsu T
- Morozumi K
- Mimura T
- Saka Y
- Ishimura E
- Hasegawa H
- Ichikawa D
- Shigematsu T
- Sato H
- Narita I
- Isaka Y
- Japan Nephrotic Syndrome Cohort Study investigators
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-022-01279-z
keywords:
- Adult
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Incidence
- Japan/epidemiology
- Male
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Prospective Studies
- "Proteinuria/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Recurrence
- Steroids/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Time to remission of proteinuria and incidence of relapse in patients with steroid-sensitive minimal change disease and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis: the Japan Nephrotic Syndrome Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Yamamoto R, Imai E, Maruyama S, Yokoyama H, Sugiyama H, Takeda A, Tsukamoto T, Uchida S, Tsuruya K, Shoji T, Hayashi H, Akai Y, Fukunaga M, Konta T, Nishio S, Goto S, Tamai H, Nagai K, Katafuchi R, Masutani K, Wada T, Nishino T, Shirasaki A, Sobajima H, Nitta K, Yamagata K, Kazama JJ, Hiromura K, Yasuda H, Mizutani M, Akahori T, Naruse T, Hiramatsu T, Morozumi K, Mimura T, Saka Y, Ishimura E, Hasegawa H, Ichikawa D, Shigematsu T, Sato H, Narita I, Isaka Y, Japan Nephrotic Syndrome Cohort Study investigators
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-022-01279-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-022-01279-z)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2022 May;35(4):1135-1144. doi: 10.1007/s40620-022-01279-z. Epub
2022  Apr 2.

Time to remission of proteinuria and incidence of relapse in patients with 
steroid-sensitive minimal change disease and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis: 
the Japan Nephrotic Syndrome Cohort Study.

Yamamoto R(1)(2), Imai E(3), Maruyama S(4), Yokoyama H(5), Sugiyama H(6), Takeda 
A(7), Tsukamoto T(8), Uchida S(9), Tsuruya K(10), Shoji T(11), Hayashi H(12), 
Akai Y(13), Fukunaga M(14), Konta T(15), Nishio S(16), Goto S(17), Tamai H(18), 
Nagai K(19), Katafuchi R(20), Masutani K(21), Wada T(22), Nishino T(23), 
Shirasaki A(24), Sobajima H(25), Nitta K(26), Yamagata K(27), Kazama JJ(28), 
Hiromura K(29), Yasuda H(30), Mizutani M(31), Akahori T(32), Naruse T(33), 
Hiramatsu T(34), Morozumi K(35), Mimura T(36), Saka Y(37), Ishimura E(38), 
Hasegawa H(39), Ichikawa D(40), Shigematsu T(41), Sato H(42), Narita I(43), 
Isaka Y(44); Japan Nephrotic Syndrome Cohort Study investigators.

Collaborators: Nishio S, Ishikawa Y, Nakazawa D, Nakagaki T, Sato T, Sato M, 
Sanada S, Sato H, Miyazaki M, Nakamichi T, Yamamoto T, Narumi K, Yamada G, Konta 
T, Ichikawa K, Kazama JJ, Watanabe T, Asahi K, Kusano Y, Watanabe K, Yamagata K, 
Usui J, Kaneko S, Kawamura T, Hiromura K, Maeshima A, Kaneko Y, Ikeuchi H, 
Sakairi T, Nakasatomi M, Hasegawa H, Iwashita T, Shimizu T, Kanozawa K, Ogawa T, 
Takayanagi K, Mitarai T, Okada H, Inoue T, Suzuki H, Tomori K, Nitta K, Moriyama 
T, Ino A, Sato M, Uchida S, Nakajima H, Homma H, Nagura N, Tamura Y, Shibata S, 
Fujigaki Y, Suzuki Y, Takeda Y, Osawa I, Hidaka T, Ichikawa D, Shibagaki Y, 
Shirai S, Sakurada T, Suzuki T, Hisamichi M, Narita I, Imai N, Ito Y, Goto S, 
Kaneko Y, Kaseda R, Yokoyama H, Fujimoto K, Hayashi N, Wada T, Shimizu M, 
Furuichi K, Sakai N, Iwata Y, Toyama T, Kitajima S, Kitagawa K, Sobajima H, 
Ohashi N, Oshitani S, Kawashima K, Mimura T, Yasuda H, Hishida A, Fujigaki Y, 
Tanaka S, Mori N, Akahori T, Fujita Y, Maruyama S, Tsuboi N, Kosugi T, Ishimoto 
T, Katsuno T, Kato N, Sato W, Takeda A, Morozumi K, Ohtsuka Y, Shinjo H, Tanaka 
A, Hayashi H, Yuzawa Y, Hasegawa M, Inaguma D, Koide S, Takahashi K, Hiramatsu 
T, Furuta S, Ishikawa H, Tamai H, Morinaga T, Shirasaki A, Kimura T, Kato M, 
Ichida S, Endo N, Naruse T, Watanabe Y, Saka Y, Suzuki S, Yamazaki M, Morita R, 
Morozumi K, Morozumi K, Yasuda K, Kondo C, Morohiro T, Sato R, Shirasawa Y, 
Fujita Y, Shimizu H, Tomino T, Mizutani M, Saka Y, Nagaya H, Yamaguchi M, 
Tsukamoto T, Muso E, Suzuki H, Endo T, Kakita H, Fukunaga M, Shoji T, Hayashi T, 
Ishimura E, Tsuda A, Nakatani S, Kobayashi I, Ichii M, Ochi A, Ohno Y, Isaka Y, 
Imai E, Nagasawa Y, Iwatani H, Yamamoto R, Namba T, Md SG, Nishi S, Akai Y, 
Samejima KI, Matsui M, Tagawa M, Tanabe K, Tsushima H, Shigematsu T, Ohya M, 
Negi S, Mima T, Ito T, Sugiyama H, Tanaka K, Yamanari T, Kitagawa M, Onishi A, 
Mise K, Kashihara N, Sasaki T, Fujimoto S, Nagasu H, Nagai K, Doi T, Sofue T, 
Kiyomoto H, Moriwaki K, Hara T, Nishijima Y, Kushida Y, Minamino T, Terada Y, 
Horino T, Taniguchi Y, Inoue K, Shimamura Y, Matsumoto T, Tsuruya K, Yoshida H, 
Haruyama N, Yamada S, Tsuchimoto A, Matsukuma Y, Masutani K, Abe Y, Hamauchi A, 
Yasuno T, Ito K, Fukami K, Yano J, Yoshida C, Kurokawa Y, Nakamura N, Katafuchi 
R, Nagae H, Matsueda S, Abe K, Nishino T, Uramatsu T, Obata Y, Fujimoto S, Sato 
Y, Kikuchi M, Nishizono R, Iwakiri T, Komatsu H.

Author information:
(1)Health and Counseling Center, Osaka University, 1-17 Machikaneyama-cho, 
Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-0043, Japan. yamamoto.ryohei.ras@osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
2-2-D11 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. 
yamamoto.ryohei.ras@osaka-u.ac.jp.
(3)Nakayamadera Imai Clinic, 2-8-18 Nakayamadera, Takarazuka, Hyogo, 665-0861, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65 
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi, 466-8550, Japan.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Kanazawa Medical University School of Medicine, 1-1 
Daigaku, Uchinada, Kahoku, Ishikawa, 920-0293, Japan.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Rheumatology, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Okayama 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
2-5-1 Shikatacho, Kita-ku, Okayama, Okayama, 700-8558, Japan.
(7)Kidney Disease Center, Japanese Red Cross Nagoya Daini Hospital, 2-9 
Myokencho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi, 466-8650, Japan.
(8)Department of Nephrology and Dialysis, Kitano Hospital, Tazuke Kofukai 
Medical Research Institute, 2-4-20 Ogimachi, Kita-ku, Osaka, Osaka, 530-8480, 
Japan.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, 2-11-1 
Kaga, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, 173-8606, Japan.
(10)Department of Nephrology, Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara, 
Nara, 634-8521, Japan.
(11)Department of Kidney Disease and Hypertension, Osaka General Medical Center, 
3-1-56 Bandaihigashi, Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka, Osaka, 558-8558, Japan.
(12)Department of Nephrology, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, 1-98 
Dengakugakubo, Kutsukakecho, Toyoake, Aichi, 470-1192, Japan.
(13)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nara Medical University, 840 
Shijocho, Kashihara, Nara, 634-8522, Japan.
(14)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Toyonaka Municipal 
Hospital, 4-14-1 Shibaharacho, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8565, Japan.
(15)Department of Cardiology, Pulmonology, and Nephrology, Yamagata University 
School of Medicine, 2-2 Iida-Nishi, Yamagata-shi, Yamagata, Yamagata, 990-9585, 
Japan.
(16)Division of Rheumatology, Endocrinology and Nephrology, Hokkaido University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido, 
060-8638, Japan.
(17)Division of Nephrology and Kidney Center, Kobe University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunokicho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan.
(18)Department of Nephrology, Anjo Kosei Hospital, 28 Higashihirokute, Anjocho, 
Anjo, Aichi, 446-8602, Japan.
(19)Department of Nephrology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Tokushima 
University Graduate School, 3-18-15, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima, 770-8503, Japan.
(20)Kidney Unit, National Hospital Organization Fukuokahigashi Medical Center, 
1-1-1 Chidori, Koga, Fukuoka, 811-3195, Japan.
(21)Division of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, 7-45-1 Nanakuma, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka, 
Fukuoka, 814-0180, Japan.
(22)Department of Nephrology and Laboratory Medicine, Kanazawa University, 13-1 
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 920-8641, Japan.
(23)Department of Nephrology, Nagasaki University Hospital, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, 
Nagasaki, Nagasaki, 852-8501, Japan.
(24)Department of Nephrology, Ichinomiya Municipal Hospital, 2-2-22 Bunkyo, 
Ichinomiya, Aichi, 491-8558, Japan.
(25)Department of Diabetology and Nephrology, Ogaki Municipal Hospital, 4-86 
Minaminokawacho, Ogaki, Gifu, 503-8502, Japan.
(26)Department of Nephrology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, 
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8666, Japan.
(27)Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 
Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan.
(28)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Fukushima Medical University 
School of Medicine, 1 Hikariga-oka, Fukushima-City, Fukushima, 960-1295, Japan.
(29)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Gunma University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 3-39-22 Showa, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan.
(30)Internal Medicine 1, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 
Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan.
(31)Department of Nephrology, Handa City Hospital, 2-29 Toyocho, Handa, Aichi, 
475-8599, Japan.
(32)Department of Nephrology, Chutoen General Medical Center, 1-1 Shobugaike, 
Kakegawa, Shizuoka, 436-8555, Japan.
(33)Department of Nephrology, Kasugai Municipal Hospital, 1-1-1 Takakicho, 
Kasugai, Aichi, 486-8510, Japan.
(34)Department of Nephrology, Konan Kosei Hospital, 137 Omatsubara, Takayacho, 
Konan, Aichi, 483-8704, Japan.
(35)Department of Nephrology, Masuko Memorial Hospital, 35-28 Takebashicho, 
Nakamura-ku, Nagoya, Aichi, 453-8566, Japan.
(36)Department of Nephrology, Gifu Prefectural Tajimi Hospital, 5-161 
Maebatacho, Tajimi, Gifu, 507-8522, Japan.
(37)Department of Nephrology, Yokkaichi Municipal Hospital, 2-2-37 Shibata, 
Yokkaichi, Mie, 510-8567, Japan.
(38)Department of Nephrology, Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine, 
1-4-3 Asahimachi, Abeno-ku, Osaka, 545-8585, Japan.
(39)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Saitama Medical Center, Saitama 
Medical University, 1981 Kamoda, Kawagoe, Saitama, 350-850, Japan.
(40)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, 
St. Marianna University School of Medicine, 2-16-1 Sugao, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, 
Kanagawa, 216-000, Japan.
(41)Department of Nephrology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, 
Wakayama-City, Wakayama, 641-8509, Japan.
(42)Department of Nephrology, Endocrinology, and Vascular Medicine, Tohoku 
University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, 
980-8574, Japan.
(43)Division of Clinical Nephrology and Rheumatology, Kidney Research Center, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 757 
Ichibancho, Asahimachi-dori, Chuo Ward, Niigata, Niigata, 951-8510, Japan.
(44)Department of Nephrology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
2-2-D11 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Minimal change disease (MCD) is characterized by a nephrotic 
syndrome usually steroid-sensitive and a high incidence of relapse of 
proteinuria. Previous cohort studies have reported conflicting results regarding 
the association between the time to remission and incidence of relapse.
METHODS: This multicenter prospective cohort study included 102 adult patients 
with steroid-sensitive MCD or focal segmental glomerulosclerosis from a 5-year 
cohort study of primary nephrotic syndrome, the Japan Nephrotic Syndrome Cohort 
Study, who achieved remission of proteinuria within 2 months of 
immunosuppressive therapy (IST). The association between the time to remission 
of proteinuria after immunosuppressive therapy and incidence of relapse was 
assessed using Cox proportional hazards models adjusted for clinically relevant 
factors.
RESULTS: Remission was observed at 3-7, 8-14, 15-21, 22-28, and 30-56 days after 
initiation of immunosuppressive therapy in 17 (16.7%), 37 (36.3%), 21 (20.6%), 
13 (12.7%), and 14 (13.7%) patients, respectively. During a median observation 
period of 2.3 years after the end of the 2nd month after 
initiation of immunosuppressive therapy, 46 (45.1%) patients relapsed. The time 
to remission was associated with the incidence of relapse in an inverse U-shaped 
pattern (multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios [95% confidence intervals] of the 
time to remission of 3-7, 8-14, 15-21, 22-28, 30-56 days: 1.00 [reference], 1.76 
[0.56, 5.51], 6.06 [1.85, 19.80], 5.46 [1.44, 20.64], and 2.19 [0.52, 9.30], 
respectively).
CONCLUSION: The time to remission was identified as a significant predictor of 
relapse in steroid-sensitive patients.

© 2022. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Italian Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-022-01279-z
PMID: 35366214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]