---
reference_id: "PMID:34839379"
title: MRI of focal cortical dysplasia.
authors:
- Urbach H
- Kellner E
- Kremers N
- Blümcke I
- Demerath T
journal: Neuroradiology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00234-021-02865-x
keywords:
- Epilepsy
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Malformations of Cortical Development/diagnostic imaging
- "Malformations of Cortical Development, Group I"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MRI of focal cortical dysplasia.
**Authors:** Urbach H, Kellner E, Kremers N, Blümcke I, Demerath T
**Journal:** Neuroradiology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00234-021-02865-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00234-021-02865-x)

## Content

1. Neuroradiology. 2022 Mar;64(3):443-452. doi: 10.1007/s00234-021-02865-x. Epub 
2021 Nov 27.

MRI of focal cortical dysplasia.

Urbach H(1), Kellner E(2), Kremers N(3), Blümcke I(4), Demerath T(3).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Neuroradiology, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Breisacher 
Str. 64, 79106, Freiburg, Germany. horst.urbach@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Dept. of Medical Physics, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(3)Dept. of Neuroradiology, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Breisacher 
Str. 64, 79106, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Dept. of Neuropathology, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) are histopathologically categorized in ILAE type 
I to III. Mild malformations of cortical development (mMCD) including those with 
oligodendroglial hyperplasia (MOGHE) are to be integrated into this 
classification yet. Only FCD type II have distinctive MRI and molecular genetics 
alterations so far. Subtle FCD including FCD type II located in the depth of a 
sulcus are often overlooked requiring the use of dedicated sequences (MP2RAGE, 
FLAWS, EDGE) and/or voxel (VBM)- or surface-based (SBM) postprocessing. The 
added value of 7 Tesla MRI has to be proven yet.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00234-021-02865-x
PMCID: PMC8850246
PMID: 34839379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.