---
reference_id: PMID:32376409
title: Liver Phenotypes of European Adults Heterozygous or Homozygous for Pi∗Z Variant of AAT (Pi∗MZ vs Pi∗ZZ genotype) and Noncarriers.
authors:
- Schneider CV
- Hamesch K
- Gross A
- Mandorfer M
- Moeller LS
- Pereira V
- Pons M
- Kuca P
- Reichert MC
- Benini F
- Burbaum B
- Voss J
- Gutberlet M
- Woditsch V
- Lindhauer C
- Fromme M
- Kümpers J
- Bewersdorf L
- Schaefer B
- Eslam M
- Bals R
- Janciauskiene S
- Carvão J
- Neureiter D
- Zhou B
- Wöran K
- Bantel H
- Geier A
- Dirrichs T
- Stickel F
- Teumer A
- Verbeek J
- Nevens F
- Govaere O
- Krawczyk M
- Roskams T
- Haybaeck J
- Lurje G
- Chorostowska-Wynimko J
- Genesca J
- Reiberger T
- Lammert F
- Krag A
- George J
- Anstee QM
- Trauner M
- Datz C
- Gaisa NT
- Denk H
- Trautwein C
- Aigner E
- Strnad P
- European Alpha-1 Liver Study Group
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.04.058
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Counseling
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Elasticity Imaging Techniques
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Liver/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Liver Cirrhosis/blood, diagnosis, genetics, prevention & control"
- Liver Function Tests
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Prospective Studies
- United Kingdom
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/blood, complications, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver Phenotypes of European Adults Heterozygous or Homozygous for Pi∗Z Variant of AAT (Pi∗MZ vs Pi∗ZZ genotype) and Noncarriers.
**Authors:** Schneider CV, Hamesch K, Gross A, Mandorfer M, Moeller LS, Pereira V, Pons M, Kuca P, Reichert MC, Benini F, Burbaum B, Voss J, Gutberlet M, Woditsch V, Lindhauer C, Fromme M, Kümpers J, Bewersdorf L, Schaefer B, Eslam M, Bals R, Janciauskiene S, Carvão J, Neureiter D, Zhou B, Wöran K, Bantel H, Geier A, Dirrichs T, Stickel F, Teumer A, Verbeek J, Nevens F, Govaere O, Krawczyk M, Roskams T, Haybaeck J, Lurje G, Chorostowska-Wynimko J, Genesca J, Reiberger T, Lammert F, Krag A, George J, Anstee QM, Trauner M, Datz C, Gaisa NT, Denk H, Trautwein C, Aigner E, Strnad P, European Alpha-1 Liver Study Group
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2020.04.058](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2020.04.058)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2020 Aug;159(2):534-548.e11. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2020.04.058. Epub 2020 May 4.

Liver Phenotypes of European Adults Heterozygous or Homozygous for Pi∗Z Variant 
of AAT (Pi∗MZ vs Pi∗ZZ genotype) and Noncarriers.

Schneider CV(1), Hamesch K(2), Gross A(1), Mandorfer M(3), Moeller LS(4), 
Pereira V(5), Pons M(6), Kuca P(7), Reichert MC(8), Benini F(9), Burbaum B(1), 
Voss J(1), Gutberlet M(1), Woditsch V(1), Lindhauer C(1), Fromme M(1), Kümpers 
J(1), Bewersdorf L(1), Schaefer B(10), Eslam M(11), Bals R(12), Janciauskiene 
S(13), Carvão J(5), Neureiter D(14), Zhou B(1), Wöran K(15), Bantel H(16), Geier 
A(17), Dirrichs T(18), Stickel F(19), Teumer A(20), Verbeek J(21), Nevens F(21), 
Govaere O(22), Krawczyk M(23), Roskams T(24), Haybaeck J(25), Lurje G(26), 
Chorostowska-Wynimko J(7), Genesca J(6), Reiberger T(3), Lammert F(8), Krag 
A(4), George J(11), Anstee QM(22), Trauner M(3), Datz C(27), Gaisa NT(28), Denk 
H(29), Trautwein C(2), Aigner E(30), Strnad P(31); European Alpha-1 Liver Study 
Group.

Author information:
(1)Medical Clinic III, Gastroenterology, Metabolic diseases and Intensive Care, 
University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Medical Clinic III, Gastroenterology, Metabolic diseases and Intensive Care, 
University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany; Coordinating Center for 
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-related liver disease of the European Reference 
Network (ERN) "Rare Liver" and the European Association for the Study of the 
Liver (EASL) registry group "Alpha-1 Liver," University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, 
Germany.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine 
III, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Rare Liver Disease (RALID) 
Center of the European Reference Network (ERN) RARE-LIVER, Medical University 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Centro Hospitalar do Funchal, Madeira, 
Portugal.
(6)Liver Unit, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron Research 
Institute (VHIR), Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas 
(CIBERehd), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid.
(7)Department of Genetics and Clinical Immunology, National Institute of 
Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases, Warsaw, Poland.
(8)Department of Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Saarland 
University, Homburg, Germany.
(9)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Medicine, Spedali Civili and University, 
Brescia, Italy.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria.
(11)Storr Liver Centre, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, Westmead 
Hospital and University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine V, Saarland University Medical Center, 
Homburg, Germany.
(13)Clinic for Pneumology, Medical University Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(14)Institute of Pathology, Paracelsus Medical University/Salzburger 
Landeskliniken (SALK), Salzburg, Austria.
(15)Department of Pathology, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(16)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(17)Department of Hepatology, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(18)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, RWTH Aachen 
University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(19)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital of 
Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(20)Institute for Community Medicine, University Medicine Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany; DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), partner 
site Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(21)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, University Hospitals KU Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(22)Translational & Clinical Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Newcastle NIHR Biomedical 
Research Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, UK.
(23)Department of Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Saarland 
University, Homburg, Germany; Department of Medicine II Saarland University 
Medical Center Saarland University Homburg Germany Laboratory of Metabolic Liver 
Diseases, Centre for Preclinical Research, Department of General, Transplant and 
Liver Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(24)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(25)Department of Pathology, Neuropathology, and Molecular Pathology, Medical 
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria; Diagnostic & Research Center for 
Molecular Biomedicine, Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, 
Austria.
(26)Department of Surgery and Transplantation, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, 
Aachen, Germany; Department of Surgery, Campus Charité Mitte I Campus Virchow 
Klinikum Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(27)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Oberndorf, Teaching Hospital of 
the Paracelsus Private University of Salzburg, Oberndorf, Austria.
(28)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(29)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(30)First Department of Medicine, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, 
Austria.
(31)Medical Clinic III, Gastroenterology, Metabolic diseases and Intensive Care, 
University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany; Coordinating Center for 
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-related liver disease of the European Reference 
Network (ERN) "Rare Liver" and the European Association for the Study of the 
Liver (EASL) registry group "Alpha-1 Liver," University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, 
Germany. Electronic address: pstrnad@ukaachen.de.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2020 Aug;159(2):433-434. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2020.06.035.
    Gastroenterology. 2021 Apr;160(5):1874-1875. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2020.10.061.
    Gastroenterology. 2021 Apr;160(5):1875-1877. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2021.01.002.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Homozygosity for the Pi∗Z variant of the gene that encodes 
the alpha-1 antitrypsin peptide (AAT), called the Pi∗ZZ genotype, causes a liver 
and lung disease called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. Heterozygosity (the 
Pi∗MZ genotype) is a risk factor for cirrhosis in individuals with liver 
disease. Up to 4% of Europeans have the Pi∗MZ genotype; we compared features of 
adults with and without Pi∗MZ genotype among persons without preexisting liver 
disease.
METHODS: We analyzed data from the European Alpha-1 Liver Cohort, from 419 
adults with the Pi∗MZ genotype, 309 adults with the Pi∗ZZ genotype, and 284 
individuals without the variant (noncarriers). All underwent a comprehensive 
evaluation; liver stiffness measurements (LSMs) were made by transient 
elastography. Liver biopsies were analyzed to define histologic and biochemical 
features associated with the Pi∗Z variant. Levels of serum transaminases were 
retrieved from 444,642 participants, available in the United Kingdom biobank.
RESULTS: In the UK biobank database, levels of serum transaminases were 
increased in subjects with the Pi∗MZ genotype compared with noncarriers. In the 
Alpha-1 Liver Cohort, adults with Pi∗MZ had lower levels of gamma-glutamyl 
transferase in serum and lower LSMs than adults with the Pi∗ZZ variant, but 
these were higher than in noncarriers. Ten percent of subjects with the Pi∗MZ 
genotype vs 4% of noncarriers had LSMs of 7.1 kPa or more (adjusted odds ratio, 
4.8; 95% confidence interval, 2.0-11.8). Obesity and diabetes were the most 
important factors associated with LSMs ≥7.1 kPa in subjects with the Pi∗MZ 
genotype. AAT inclusions were detected in liver biopsies of 63% of subjects with 
the Pi∗MZ genotype, vs 97% of subjects with the Pi∗ZZ genotype, and increased 
with liver fibrosis stages. Subjects with the Pi∗MZ genotype did not have 
increased hepatic levels of AAT, whereas levels of insoluble AAT varied among 
individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Adults with the Pi∗MZ genotype have lower levels of serum 
transaminases, fewer AAT inclusions in liver, and lower liver stiffness than 
adults with the Pi∗ZZ genotype, but higher than adults without the Pi∗Z variant. 
These findings should help determine risk of subjects with the Pi∗MZ genotype 
and aid in counseling.

Copyright © 2020 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.04.058
PMID: 32376409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]