---
reference_id: "PMID:20586738"
title: "Clinical assessment and management of spasticity: a review."
authors:
- Rekand T
journal: Acta Neurol Scand Suppl
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2010.01378.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical assessment and management of spasticity: a review.
**Authors:** Rekand T
**Journal:** Acta Neurol Scand Suppl (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0404.2010.01378.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0404.2010.01378.x)

## Content

1. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl. 2010;(190):62-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0404.2010.01378.x.

Clinical assessment and management of spasticity: a review.

Rekand T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. 
trek@helse-bergen.no

Spasticity is a sign of upper motor neurone lesion, which can be located in the 
cerebrum or the spinal cord, and be caused by stroke, multiple sclerosis, spinal 
cord injury, brain injury, cerebral paresis, or other neurological conditions. 
Management is dependent on clinical assessment. Positive and negative effects of 
spasticity should be considered. Ashworth score and the modified Ashworth score 
are the most used scales for assessment of spasticity. These and other 
spasticity scales are based on assessment of resistance during passive movement. 
The main goal of management is functional improvement. A novel 100-point score 
to assess disability, function related to spasticity (Rekand disability and 
spasticity score) is proposed. Management of spasticity should be multimodal and 
should always include physiotherapy or exercise. Oral medications such as 
baclofen and tizanidine have limited efficacy and considerable side effects, but 
are easiest to use. Botulinum toxin combined with physiotherapy and/or 
orthopaedic surgery is effective treatment of localized spasticity. Treatment 
with intrathecal baclofen via programmable implanted pump is effective in 
generalized spasticity, particularly in the lower extremities. Neurosurgical and 
orthopaedic procedures may be considered in intractable cases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2010.01378.x
PMID: 20586738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]