---
reference_id: "PMID:29756580"
title: "Subtypes of Antiphospholipid Antibodies in Neurologic Disorders: An Observational Study."
authors:
- Sahebari M
- Rastin M
- Boostani R
- Forughipour M
- Hashemzadeh K
- Sadeghi SH
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2174/1573397114666180514125412
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Subtypes of Antiphospholipid Antibodies in Neurologic Disorders: An Observational Study.
**Authors:** Sahebari M, Rastin M, Boostani R, Forughipour M, Hashemzadeh K, Sadeghi SH
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573397114666180514125412](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573397114666180514125412)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rev. 2019;15(1):59-66. doi: 10.2174/1573397114666180514125412.

Subtypes of Antiphospholipid Antibodies in Neurologic Disorders: An 
Observational Study.

Sahebari M(1), Rastin M(2), Boostani R(3), Forughipour M(3), Hashemzadeh K(1), 
Sadeghi SH(4).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatic Diseases Research Center, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Immunology Research Center, Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Department of Neurology, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)School of Medicine, Mashhad, Iran.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Concomitant neurologic manifestations and positive 
antiphospholipid antibodies (APAs) have been investigated in different manners. 
The present study aimed to investigate the association between neurologic 
manifestations and APAs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted on 
100 consecutive patients with selected neurological manifestations and at least 
one positive APAs within the age range of 20-50 years, referred to the Rheumatic 
Diseases Research Center from the Northeast Central Neurology Department of Iran 
during August 2012 to March 2014.
RESULTS: According to the results, 89% of the participants were persistently 
positive for APAs, including lupus anticoagulant, IgG anticardiolipin (aCL), IgM 
aCL, IgG β-2 glycoprotein 1 (β2- GP1), and IgM β2-GP1, observed in 16%, 41%, 
42%, 17%, and 15% of the patients, respectively. Furthermore, 10% of the 
patients had concomitant lupus manifestations, and 37% of them showed anti-DNA. 
The IgG and IgM aCL were the most prevalent antibodies. Cerebral vascular 
accident (33%), retinal artery/vein occlusion (21%), and seizure (20%) were the 
most frequent presentations among the patients. In addition, the patients with 
multiple sclerosis (composing 3% of the subjects) were 100% positive for IgG and 
IgM aCL, as well as lupus anticoagulant. In addition, IgM anti-β2- GP1 was 100% 
positive in optic neuritis patients (composing 5% of the subjects) and was 
significantly associated with this neurologic disorder. IgM anti-β2-GP1 was also 
prevalent in the cases with Guillain-Barré syndrome. The most prevalent 
persistently positive antibody in the patients with cerebrovascular accident was 
IgM aCL.
CONCLUSION: The findings of this study revealed some associations between the 
subtypes of APAs and incidence of neurologic disorders. However, the exact 
correlation between those symptoms and APAs needs further investigations.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1573397114666180514125412
PMID: 29756580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]