---
reference_id: "PMID:25110406"
title: Relationship between pouch microbiota and pouchitis following restorative proctocolectomy for ulcerative colitis.
authors:
- Angriman I
- Scarpa M
- Castagliuolo I
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i29.9665
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between pouch microbiota and pouchitis following restorative proctocolectomy for ulcerative colitis.
**Authors:** Angriman I, Scarpa M, Castagliuolo I
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v20.i29.9665](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i29.9665)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Aug 7;20(29):9665-74. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i29.9665.

Relationship between pouch microbiota and pouchitis following restorative 
proctocolectomy for ulcerative colitis.

Angriman I(1), Scarpa M(1), Castagliuolo I(1).

Author information:
(1)Imerio Angriman, Department of Surgery, Gastroenterology and Oncology, 
University of Padova, 35128 Padova, Italy.

Restorative proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) has become 
the surgical treatment of choice for many patients with medically refractory 
ulcerative colitis (UC) and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). UC patients 
with IPAA (UC-IPAA) are, nevertheless, susceptible to inflammatory and 
noninflammatory sequelae such as pouchitis, which is only rarely noted in FAP 
patients with IPAA. Pouchitis is the most frequent long-term complication of 
UC-IPAA patients, with a cumulative prevalence of up to 50%. Although the 
aetiology of pouchitis remains unclear, accumulating evidence suggests that a 
dysbiosis of the pouch microbiota and an abnormal mucosal immune response are 
implicated in its pathogenesis. Studies using culture and molecular techniques 
have detected a dysbiosis of the pouch microbiota in patients with pouchitis. 
Risk factors, genetic associations, and serological markers suggest that 
interactions between the host immune response and the pouch microbiota underlie 
the aetiology of this idiopathic inflammatory condition. This systematic review 
focuses on the dysbiosis of the microbiota that inhabit the pouch in UC and FAP 
patients and its interaction with the mucosal immune system. A meta-analysis was 
not attempted due to the highly heterogeneous microbiota composition and the 
different detection methods used by the various studies. Although no specific 
bacterial species, genus, or family has as yet been identified as pathogenic, 
there is evidence that a dysbiosis characterized by decreased gut microbiota 
diversity in UC-IPAA patients may, in genetically predisposed subjects, lead to 
aberrant mucosal immune regulation triggering an inflammatory process.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i29.9665
PMCID: PMC4123357
PMID: 25110406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]