---
reference_id: "PMID:17999358"
title: Deletions at the SOX10 gene locus cause Waardenburg syndrome types 2 and 4.
authors:
- Bondurand N
- Dastot-Le Moal F
- Stanchina L
- Collot N
- Baral V
- Marlin S
- Attie-Bitach T
- Giurgea I
- Skopinski L
- Reardon W
- Toutain A
- Sarda P
- Echaieb A
- Lackmy-Port-Lis M
- Touraine R
- Amiel J
- Goossens M
- Pingault V
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/522090
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Gene Deletion
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Heterozygote
- High Mobility Group Proteins/genetics
- Hirschsprung Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- SOXE Transcription Factors
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/classification, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletions at the SOX10 gene locus cause Waardenburg syndrome types 2 and 4.
**Authors:** Bondurand N, Dastot-Le Moal F, Stanchina L, Collot N, Baral V, Marlin S, Attie-Bitach T, Giurgea I, Skopinski L, Reardon W, Toutain A, Sarda P, Echaieb A, Lackmy-Port-Lis M, Touraine R, Amiel J, Goossens M, Pingault V
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/522090](https://doi.org/10.1086/522090)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Dec;81(6):1169-85. doi: 10.1086/522090. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Deletions at the SOX10 gene locus cause Waardenburg syndrome types 2 and 4.

Bondurand N(1), Dastot-Le Moal F, Stanchina L, Collot N, Baral V, Marlin S,
Attie-Bitach T, Giurgea I, Skopinski L, Reardon W, Toutain A, Sarda P, Echaieb
A, Lackmy-Port-Lis M, Touraine R, Amiel J, Goossens M, Pingault V.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U841, Institut Mondor de Recherche Biomedicale, Département de
Génétique, Université Paris 12, Paris, France.
nadege.bondurand@creteil.inserm.fr

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is an auditory-pigmentary disorder that exhibits
varying combinations of sensorineural hearing loss and abnormal pigmentation of
the hair and skin. Depending on additional symptoms, WS is classified into four
subtypes, WS1-WS4. Absence of additional features characterizes WS2. The
association of facial dysmorphic features defines WS1 and WS3, whereas the
association with Hirschsprung disease (aganglionic megacolon) characterizes WS4,
also called "Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease." Mutations within the genes MITF
and SNAI2 have been identified in WS2, whereas mutations of EDN3, EDNRB, and
SOX10 have been observed in patients with WS4. However, not all cases are
explained at the molecular level, which raises the possibility that other genes
are involved or that some mutations within the known genes are not detected by
commonly used genotyping methods. We used a combination of semiquantitative
fluorescent multiplex polymerase chain reaction and fluorescent in situ
hybridization to search for SOX10 heterozygous deletions. We describe the first
characterization of SOX10 deletions in patients presenting with WS4. We also
found SOX10 deletions in WS2 cases, making SOX10 a new gene of WS2.
Interestingly, neurological phenotypes reminiscent of that observed in WS4 (PCWH
syndrome [peripheral demyelinating neuropathy, central dysmyelinating
leukodystrophy, WS, and Hirschsprung disease]) were observed in some
WS2-affected patients with SOX10 deletions. This study further characterizes the
molecular complexity and the close relationship that links the different
subtypes of WS.

DOI: 10.1086/522090
PMCID: PMC2276340
PMID: 17999358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
