---
reference_id: "PMID:12837870"
title: Prospective diagnosis of 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in the Hmong population by newborn screening using tandem mass spectrometry.
authors:
- Matern D
- He M
- Berry SA
- Rinaldo P
- Whitley CB
- Madsen PP
- van Calcar SC
- Lussky RC
- Andresen BS
- Wolff JA
- Vockley J
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1542/peds.112.1.74
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prospective diagnosis of 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in the Hmong population by newborn screening using tandem mass spectrometry.
**Authors:** Matern D, He M, Berry SA, Rinaldo P, Whitley CB, Madsen PP, van Calcar SC, Lussky RC, Andresen BS, Wolff JA, Vockley J
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.112.1.74](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.112.1.74)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2003 Jul;112(1 Pt 1):74-8. doi: 10.1542/peds.112.1.74.

Prospective diagnosis of 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in the 
Hmong population by newborn screening using tandem mass spectrometry.

Matern D(1), He M, Berry SA, Rinaldo P, Whitley CB, Madsen PP, van Calcar SC, 
Lussky RC, Andresen BS, Wolff JA, Vockley J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathology, Mayo Clinic & Foundation, 
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. matern@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVE: 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, also known as 
short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SBCAD) deficiency, is a recently 
described autosomal recessive disorder of L-isoleucine metabolism. Only 4 
affected individuals in 2 families have been described. One patient developed 
athetoid cerebral palsy, and another had severe motor developmental delay with 
muscle atrophy. A sibling of the first patient is asymptomatic after prenatal 
diagnosis and early treatment. Family investigations in the second family 
revealed that the patient's mother was also affected but asymptomatic.
METHODS: We report 8 additional patients identified by prospective newborn 
screening using tandem mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Molecular genetic analysis performed for 3 of these patients revealed 
that all are homozygous for an 1165A>G mutation that causes skipping of exon 10 
of the SBCAD gene. Although there was no obvious consanguinity, all patients 
belong to the Hmong, an ancient ethnic group that originated in China and 
constitutes only 0.8% and 0.6% of the Minnesota and Wisconsin population, 
respectively. Dietary treatment was initiated in the neonatal period. Except for 
1 patient who developed mild muscle hypotonia, all patients remain asymptomatic 
at ages ranging from 3 to 14 months of age.
CONCLUSIONS: These cases suggest that SBCAD deficiency is another inborn error 
of metabolism detectable by newborn screening using tandem mass spectrometry. 
The continued efficacy of long-term dietary therapy instituted 
presymptomatically remains to be established.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.112.1.74
PMID: 12837870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]