---
reference_id: "PMID:32810505"
title: "Influence of coarse particulate matter on chickenpox in Jiading District, Shanghai, 2009-2018: A distributed lag non-linear time series analysis."
authors:
- Yu H
- Wang Y
- Peng Q
- Shao Y
- Duan C
- Zhu Y
- Dong S
- Li C
- Shi Y
- Zhang N
- Zheng Y
- Chen Y
- Jiang Q
- Zhong P
- Zhou Y
journal: Environ Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.110039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Influence of coarse particulate matter on chickenpox in Jiading District, Shanghai, 2009-2018: A distributed lag non-linear time series analysis.
**Authors:** Yu H, Wang Y, Peng Q, Shao Y, Duan C, Zhu Y, Dong S, Li C, Shi Y, Zhang N, Zheng Y, Chen Y, Jiang Q, Zhong P, Zhou Y
**Journal:** Environ Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envres.2020.110039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110039)

## Content

1. Environ Res. 2020 Nov;190:110039. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.110039. Epub 2020
 Aug 15.

Influence of coarse particulate matter on chickenpox in Jiading District, 
Shanghai, 2009-2018: A distributed lag non-linear time series analysis.

Yu H(1), Wang Y(2), Peng Q(1), Shao Y(1), Duan C(1), Zhu Y(1), Dong S(2), Li 
C(2), Shi Y(2), Zhang N(2), Zheng Y(2), Chen Y(3), Jiang Q(2), Zhong P(4), Zhou 
Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Jiading District Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shanghai, 201800, 
China.
(2)Fudan University School of Public Health, Building 8, 130 Dong'an Road, Xuhui 
District, Shanghai, 200032, China; Key Laboratory of Public Health Safety, Fudan 
University, Ministry of Education, Building 8, 130 Dong an Road, Xuhui District, 
Shanghai, 200032, China; Fudan University Center for Tropical Disease Research, 
Building 8, 130 Dong'an Road, Xuhui District, Shanghai, 200032, China.
(3)School of Epidemiology and Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
(4)Jiading District Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shanghai, 201800, 
China. Electronic address: zhongpeisong@jiading.gov.cn.
(5)Fudan University School of Public Health, Building 8, 130 Dong'an Road, Xuhui 
District, Shanghai, 200032, China; Key Laboratory of Public Health Safety, Fudan 
University, Ministry of Education, Building 8, 130 Dong an Road, Xuhui District, 
Shanghai, 200032, China; Fudan University Center for Tropical Disease Research, 
Building 8, 130 Dong'an Road, Xuhui District, Shanghai, 200032, China. 
Electronic address: ybzhou@fudan.edu.cn.

Although the link between ambient air pollution and some infectious diseases has 
been studied, few studies have explored so far, the relationship between 
chickenpox and particulate matter. Daily chickenpox counts in Jiading District, 
Shanghai, were collected from 2009 to 2018. Time series analysis was conducted 
to describe the trends of the daily number of chickenpox cases and the 
concentration of particulate matter 10 μm or less (PM10). The distributed lag 
non-linear model (DLNM) was developed to assess the lag and non-linear 
relationship between the number of chickenpox cases and PM10 concentration 
adjusting for meteorological factors and other pollutants. Spatiotemporal 
scanning was used to detect the clustering of chickenpox cases. There was a 
concomitant relationship between the number of chickenpox cases and PM10 
concentration, especially in the period of high PM10 concentration. DLNM results 
showed a nonlinear relationship between the number of chickenpox cases and PM10 
concentration with the maximum effect of PM10 being lagged for 13-14 days, which 
was consistent with the average incubation period of chickenpox. PM10 was 
significantly associated with the daily number of chickenpox cases when above 
300 μg/m3. The risk of chickenpox increased with increasing PM10 concentration 
and the association was strongest at the lag of 14 day (RR = 1.13, 95% CI: 
1.04-1.23) for PM10 concentration of 500 μg/m3 versus 50 μg/m3. The study 
provides evidence that high PM10 concentration increases the risk of chickenpox 
spreading.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.110039
PMID: 32810505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]