---
reference_id: "PMID:27472649"
title: "Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: Evaluation of systemic chemotherapy with comprehensive treatment through the RENAPE Database: Multi-Institutional Retrospective Study."
authors:
- Kepenekian V
- Elias D
- Passot G
- Mery E
- Goere D
- Delroeux D
- Quenet F
- Ferron G
- Pezet D
- Guilloit JM
- Meeus P
- Pocard M
- Bereder JM
- Abboud K
- Arvieux C
- Brigand C
- Marchal F
- Classe JM
- Lorimier G
- De Chaisemartin C
- Guyon F
- Mariani P
- Ortega-Deballon P
- Isaac S
- Maurice C
- Gilly FN
- Glehen O
- French Network for Rare Peritoneal Malignancies (RENAPE)
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2016.06.002
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Cytoreduction Surgical Procedures/methods
- Female
- Humans
- "Hyperthermia, Induced"
- "Injections, Intraperitoneal"
- "Lung Neoplasms/mortality, therapy"
- Male
- "Mesothelioma/mortality, therapy"
- "Mesothelioma, Malignant"
- Middle Aged
- "Peritoneal Neoplasms/mortality, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Analysis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: Evaluation of systemic chemotherapy with comprehensive treatment through the RENAPE Database: Multi-Institutional Retrospective Study.
**Authors:** Kepenekian V, Elias D, Passot G, Mery E, Goere D, Delroeux D, Quenet F, Ferron G, Pezet D, Guilloit JM, Meeus P, Pocard M, Bereder JM, Abboud K, Arvieux C, Brigand C, Marchal F, Classe JM, Lorimier G, De Chaisemartin C, Guyon F, Mariani P, Ortega-Deballon P, Isaac S, Maurice C, Gilly FN, Glehen O, French Network for Rare Peritoneal Malignancies (RENAPE)
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2016.06.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2016.06.002)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2016 Sep;65:69-79. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2016.06.002. Epub 2016
Jul  26.

Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: Evaluation of systemic chemotherapy
with comprehensive treatment through the RENAPE Database: Multi-Institutional
Retrospective Study.

Kepenekian V(1), Elias D(2), Passot G(1), Mery E(3), Goere D(2), Delroeux D(4),
Quenet F(5), Ferron G(6), Pezet D(7), Guilloit JM(8), Meeus P(9), Pocard M(10),
Bereder JM(11), Abboud K(12), Arvieux C(13), Brigand C(14), Marchal F(15),
Classe JM(16), Lorimier G(17), De Chaisemartin C(18), Guyon F(19), Mariani
P(20), Ortega-Deballon P(21), Isaac S(22), Maurice C(23), Gilly FN(1), Glehen
O(24); French Network for Rare Peritoneal Malignancies (RENAPE).

Collaborators: Averous G(25), Bereder JM(11), Bibeau F(26), Bouzard D(27),
Chevallier A(28), Croce S(29), Dartigues P(30), Durand-Fontanier S(31), Gouthi
L(32), Heyd B(4), Kaci R(33), Kianmanesh R(34), Laverrière MH(35), Leblanc
E(36), Lelong B(18), Leroux A(37), Loi V(38), Mariette C(16), Meeus P(9), Msika
S(28), Pezet D(7), Peyrat P(9), Pirro N(39), Paineau J(16), Poizat F(40),
Porcheron J(12), Quenet F(5), Rat P(21), Regimbeau JM(41), Thibaudeau E(16),
Tuech JJ(42), Valmary-Degano S(43), Verriele V(44), Zerbib P(45), Zinzindohoue
F(46).

Author information:
(1)Department of Digestive Surgery, Lyon-Sud University Hospital, EMR 3738, Lyon
1 University, Lyon, France.
(2)Department of Surgical Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Cancer Campus, Grand Paris,
France.
(3)Department of Pathology, IUCT, Toulouse, France.
(4)Department of Digestive Surgery, Jean Minjoz University Hospital, Besançon,
France.
(5)Department of Surgical Oncology, Val d'Aurelle Montpellier Cancer Institute,
Montpellier, France.
(6)Department of Surgical Oncology, Claudius Regaud Institute - IUCT, Toulouse,
France.
(7)Department of Digestive Surgery, Estaing University Hospital,
Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(8)Department of Surgical Oncology, Francois Baclesse Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Caen, France.
(9)Department of Surgery, Léon Bérard Comprehensive Cancer Center, Lyon, France.
(10)Surgical Oncologic & Digestive Unit, Lariboisière University Hospital,
INSERM, U 965, Paris, France.
(11)Department of General Surgery and Gastrointestinal Oncology, Archet 2
University Hospital, Nice, France.
(12)Department of Digestive Surgery, University Hospital of Saint Etienne, Saint
Etienne, France.
(13)Department of Digestive Surgery, Michallon University Hospital, Grenoble,
France.
(14)Department of General Surgery, Hautepierre University Hospital, Strasbourg,
France.
(15)Department of Surgical Oncology, Lorraine Institute of Oncology,
Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France.
(16)Department of Surgical Oncology, René Gauducheau Integrated Center of
Oncology, Nantes, France.
(17)Department of Surgical Oncology, Paul Papin Integrated Center of Oncology,
Angers, France.
(18)Department of Surgical Oncology, Paoli-Calmettes Institute, Marseille,
France.
(19)Department of Surgical Oncology, Bergonie Institute, Bordeaux, France.
(20)Department of Surgical Oncology, Curie Institute, Paris, France.
(21)Department of Digestive Surgical Oncology, University Hospital of Dijon,
Dijon, France.
(22)Department of Pathology, Lyon-Sud University Hospital, Lyon, France.
(23)Clinical Research Unit, Pôle IMER (Information Médicale Evaluation et
Recherche), Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(24)Department of Digestive Surgery, Lyon-Sud University Hospital, EMR 3738,
Lyon 1 University, Lyon, France. Electronic address: olivier.glehen@chu-lyon.fr.
(25)Department of Pathology, Hautepierre University Hospital, Strasbourg,
France.
(26)Department of Pathology, Val d'Aurelle Montpellier Cancer Institute,
Montpellier, France.
(27)Department of Surgery, Louis Mourier University Hospital, Colombes, France.
(28)Department of Pathology, Archet 2 University Hospital, Nice, France.
(29)Department of Pathology, Bergonie Institute, Bordeaux, France.
(30)Department of Pathology, Gustave Roussy Institute, Villejuif, France.
(31)Department of Visceral Surgery and Transplantation, Dupuytren University
Hospital, Limoges, France.
(32)Department of Digestive Surgery, Purpan University Hospital, Toulouse,
France.
(33)Department of Pathology, Lariboisière University Hospital, Paris, France.
(34)Department of Digestive Surgery, Robert Debré University Hospital, Reims,
France.
(35)Department of Pathology, Michallon University Hospital, Grenoble, France.
(36)Department of Gynaecological Surgery, Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France.
(37)Department of Pathology, Lorraine Institute of Oncology,
Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France.
(38)Department of Digestive Surgery, Tenon University Hospital, Paris, France.
(39)Department of Digestive Surgery, Timône University Hospital, Marseille,
France.
(40)Department of Pathology, Paoli-Calmettes Institute, Marseille, France.
(41)Department of Digestive Surgery, University Hospital of Amiens, Amiens,
France.
(42)Department of Digestive Surgery, Charles Nicolle University Hospital, Rouen,
France.
(43)Department of Pathology, Jean Minjoz University Hospital, Besançon, France.
(44)Department of Pathology, Paul Papin Integrated Center of Oncology, Angers,
France.
(45)Department of Digestive and Oncological Surgery, Claude-Huriez University
Hospital, Lille, France.
(46)Department of Digestive and General Surgery, G. Pompidou European Hospital,
Paris, France.

PURPOSE: Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma (DMPM) is a severe disease
with mainly locoregional evolution. Cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic
intraperitoneal chemotherapy (CRS-HIPEC) is the reported treatment with the
longest survival. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of
perioperative systemic chemotherapy strategies on survival and postoperative
outcomes in patients with DMPM treated with curative intent with CRS-HIPEC,
using a multi-institutional database: the French RENAPE network.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From 1991 to 2014, 126 DMPM patients underwent CRS-HIPEC
at 20 tertiary centres. The population was divided into four groups according to
perioperative treatment: only neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NA), only adjuvant
chemotherapy (ADJ), perioperative chemotherapy (PO) and no chemotherapy before
or after CRS-HIPEC (NoC).
RESULTS: All groups (NA: n = 42; ADJ: n = 16; PO: n = 16; NoC: n = 48) were
comparable regarding clinicopathological data and main DMPM prognostic factors.
After a median follow-up of 61 months, the 5-year overall survival (OS) was 40%,
67%, 62% and 56% in NA, ADJ, PO and NoC groups, respectively (P = 0.049). Major
complications occurred for 41%, 45%, 35% and 41% of patients from NA, ADJ, PO
and NoC groups, respectively (P = 0.299). In multivariate analysis, NA was
independently associated with worse OS (hazard ratio, 2.30; 95% confidence
interval, 1.07-4.94; P = 0.033).
CONCLUSION: This retrospective study suggests that adjuvant chemotherapy may
delay recurrence and improve survival and that NA may impact negatively the
survival for patients with DMPM who underwent CRS-HIPEC with curative intent.
Upfront CRS and HIPEC should be considered when achievable, waiting for stronger
level of scientific evidence.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2016.06.002
PMID: 27472649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
