---
reference_id: "PMID:23846232"
title: "Systemic lupus erythematosus in the multiethnic Malaysian population: disease expression and ethnic differences revisited."
authors:
- Jasmin R
- Sockalingam S
- Cheah TE
- Goh KJ
journal: Lupus
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1177/0961203313496299
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic lupus erythematosus in the multiethnic Malaysian population: disease expression and ethnic differences revisited.
**Authors:** Jasmin R, Sockalingam S, Cheah TE, Goh KJ
**Journal:** Lupus (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0961203313496299](https://doi.org/10.1177/0961203313496299)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2013 Aug;22(9):967-71. doi: 10.1177/0961203313496299. Epub 2013 Jul 11.

Systemic lupus erythematosus in the multiethnic Malaysian population: disease 
expression and ethnic differences revisited.

Jasmin R(1), Sockalingam S, Cheah TE, Goh KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
jazzmeen@hotmail.com

Erratum in
    Lupus. 2013 Oct;22(11):1200.

OBJECTIVES: Ethnic differences in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have been 
previously described in the multiethnic Malaysian population. However, there 
have since been many demographic and socioeconomic changes in the country. The 
aim of this study is to re-examine the clinical and immunological profiles of 
Malaysian SLE patients of different ethnic backgrounds.
METHODS: Consecutive follow-up patients at the University Malaya Medical Centre 
(UMMC) from July 2010 until March 2011 were included in the study.
RESULTS: The most common clinical manifestations were malar rash (61.3%), 
arthritis (52.3%), haematological disease (51.6%), oral ulcers (51%) and renal 
disease (40.6%). Ethnic Indians had fewer malar and discoid rashes but were at 
higher risk of arthritis, serositis, renal and neuropsychiatric disease compared 
to Malays and Chinese Malaysians. Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) was less 
common in Chinese. A longer duration of SLE correlated with a lower SLEDAI 
score.
CONCLUSION: Overall, the spectrum disease expression was similar to the earlier 
Malaysian study but the frequency of the more severe disease manifestations, 
viz. renal, haematological, neuropsychiatric involvements and serositis, were 
lower. This study further emphasises differences primarily between ethnic 
Indians and the other races in Malaysia.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203313496299
PMID: 23846232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]