---
reference_id: "PMID:36375008"
title: TNF Receptor-Associated Periodic Fever Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Deuitch N
- Cudrici C
- Ombrello A
- Aksentijevich I
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TNF Receptor-Associated Periodic Fever Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Deuitch N, Cudrici C, Ombrello A, Aksentijevich I

## Content

1. TNF Receptor-Associated Periodic Fever Syndrome.

Deuitch N(1), Cudrici C(2), Ombrello A(1), Aksentijevich I(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2022 Nov 10.

Author information:
(1)Inflammatory Disease Section, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Translational Vascular Medicine Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: TNF receptor-associated periodic fever syndrome 
(TRAPS) is characterized by episodes of inflammation typically occurring every 
four to six weeks and lasting between five and 25 days. Flares may be prompted 
by stress, infection, trauma, hormonal changes, and vaccination. Symptoms may 
include fever, abdominal pain, arthralgia, myalgia, migratory rash, and eye 
inflammation, with variable severity. Symptoms often begin in early childhood 
(median age 4.3 years), though symptom onset can occur later in life. During a 
flare, acute-phase reactants such as C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR), and serum amyloid A are typically elevated. Generally, 
acute-phase reactants stabilize between flares but may remain somewhat elevated 
even in the absence of clinical symptoms. AA amyloidosis, the most severe 
sequela of TRAPS, can largely be avoided with adequate treatment. Proteinuria 
and kidney failure occur in 80%-90% of affected individuals with amyloidosis, 
while intestinal, thyroid, myocardium, liver, and spleen deposits are less 
common.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of TRAPS is established in a proband with at 
least one suggestive clinical feature and a heterozygous pathogenic (or likely 
pathogenic) variant in TNFRSF1A identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Interleukin-1 (IL-1) inhibitors 
(anakinra or canakinumab) are considered first-line therapies. Another treatment 
option is the use of TNF inhibitors (most commonly etanercept), which may be 
considered in refractory situations. The use of corticosteroids may be useful as 
needed during an acute attack but is not sufficient for long-term management or 
for preventing amyloidosis. Standard treatment (including low-vision services) 
by an ophthalmic subspecialist may be considered in those who experience retinal 
infarcts and/or optic nerve damage. Prevention of secondary manifestations: IL-1 
inhibitors and the TNF inhibitor etanercept control the severity of disease 
flares and are effective in preventing AA amyloidosis. Surveillance: Complete 
physical examination with blood pressure and other vital signs, full skin 
examination, assessment for the presence of lymphadenopathy and 
hepatosplenomegaly, and musculoskeletal evaluation should be performed yearly, 
or more frequently if clinically indicated. The following are also recommended 
on an annual basis (or more frequently if indicated): measurement of CRP, ESR, 
serum level of AA amyloid, fibrinogen, haptoglobin, and complete blood count 
with differential, liver and renal function tests, urinalysis, quantitative 
immunoglobulins, QuantiFERON® to screen for tuberculosis (for those on biologic 
treatment), ophthalmologic evaluation, and assessment of the Autoinflammatory 
Diseases Activity Index (AIDAI). Imaging of the abdomen to assess for 
splenomegaly/hepatomegaly may also be considered if there are findings of serum 
AA amyloid or suspected spleen or liver enlargement on physical exam. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: For affected individuals managed with continuous 
biologic agents, consideration should be given to whether live-attenuated versus 
non-live vaccines should be administered. Data on the effect of live-attenuated 
vaccines is limited, and risks/benefits should be considered. It should be noted 
that affected individuals may have severe, paradoxical reactions that have been 
associated with anti-TNF monoclonal antibodies. Pregnancy management: To date, 
no pattern of birth anomalies with either the anti-IL-1 or TNF inhibitor 
medication classes has been reported. The use of corticosteroids during human 
pregnancy has been associated with an increased risk of cleft lip with or 
without cleft palate in exposed fetuses.
GENETIC COUNSELING: TRAPS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most 
individuals diagnosed with TRAPS have an affected parent. Each child of an 
individual with TRAPS has a 50% chance of inheriting the TNFRSF1A pathogenic 
variant. Once the TNFRSF1A pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 36375008