---
reference_id: "PMID:35066574"
title: "Neurofibromin and suppression of tumorigenesis: beyond the GAP."
authors:
- Mo J
- Moye SL
- McKay RM
- Le LQ
journal: Oncogene
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41388-021-02156-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neurofibromin 1/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "Carcinogenesis/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurofibromin and suppression of tumorigenesis: beyond the GAP.
**Authors:** Mo J, Moye SL, McKay RM, Le LQ
**Journal:** Oncogene (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41388-021-02156-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41388-021-02156-y)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2022 Feb;41(9):1235-1251. doi: 10.1038/s41388-021-02156-y. Epub 2022
 Jan 23.

Neurofibromin and suppression of tumorigenesis: beyond the GAP.

Mo J(1), Moye SL(1), McKay RM(1), Le LQ(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, Dallas, TX, 75390-9069, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, Dallas, TX, 75390-9069, USA. lu.le@utsouthwestern.edu.
(3)Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX, 75390-9069, USA. lu.le@utsouthwestern.edu.
(4)UTSW Comprehensive Neurofibromatosis Clinic, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX, 75390-9069, USA. lu.le@utsouthwestern.edu.
(5)Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX, 75390-9069, USA. 
lu.le@utsouthwestern.edu.
(6)O'Donnell Brain Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, Dallas, TX, 75390-9069, USA. lu.le@utsouthwestern.edu.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant genetic disease and one 
of the most common inherited tumor predisposition syndromes, affecting 1 in 3000 
individuals worldwide. The NF1 gene encodes neurofibromin, a large protein with 
RAS GTP-ase activating (RAS-GAP) activity, and loss of NF1 results in increased 
RAS signaling. Neurofibromin contains many other domains, and there is 
considerable evidence that these domains play a role in some manifestations of 
NF1. Investigating the role of these domains as well as the various signaling 
pathways that neurofibromin regulates and interacts with will provide a better 
understanding of how neurofibromin acts to suppress tumor development and 
potentially open new therapeutic avenues. In this review, we discuss what is 
known about the structure of neurofibromin, its interactions with other proteins 
and signaling pathways, its role in development and differentiation, and its 
function as a tumor suppressor. Finally, we discuss the latest research on 
potential therapeutics for neurofibromin-deficient neoplasms.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-021-02156-y
PMCID: PMC9063229
PMID: 35066574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.