---
reference_id: "PMID:41780801"
title: "Cutaneous Epithelioid/Pleomorphic Rhabdomyosarcoma, Melanoma in Disguise? An Immunohistochemical, Molecular, and Epigenetic Study of 13 Patients."
authors:
- Ulici V
- Ameline B
- John I
- Dermawan JK
- Karunamurthy A
- Dehner CA
- Fernandez AP
- Azzato E
- Hattery T
- Kilpatrick SE
- Isaacson AL
- Ko JS
- Fritchie KJ
- Baumhoer D
- Billings SD
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.modpat.2026.100983
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous Epithelioid/Pleomorphic Rhabdomyosarcoma, Melanoma in Disguise? An Immunohistochemical, Molecular, and Epigenetic Study of 13 Patients.
**Authors:** Ulici V, Ameline B, John I, Dermawan JK, Karunamurthy A, Dehner CA, Fernandez AP, Azzato E, Hattery T, Kilpatrick SE, Isaacson AL, Ko JS, Fritchie KJ, Baumhoer D, Billings SD
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.modpat.2026.100983](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.modpat.2026.100983)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2026 Mar 3;39(5):100983. doi: 10.1016/j.modpat.2026.100983. Online
 ahead of print.

Cutaneous Epithelioid/Pleomorphic Rhabdomyosarcoma, Melanoma in Disguise? An
Immunohistochemical, Molecular, and Epigenetic Study of 13 Patients.

Ulici V(1), Ameline B(2), John I(3), Dermawan JK(1), Karunamurthy A(3), Dehner
CA(4), Fernandez AP(1), Azzato E(1), Hattery T(1), Kilpatrick SE(1), Isaacson
AL(1), Ko JS(1), Fritchie KJ(1), Baumhoer D(5), Billings SD(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)Bone Tumor Reference Center at the Institute for Medical Genetics and
Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Pennsylvania.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania; Basel Research Centre for Child Health, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. Electronic
address: billins@ccf.org.

Rhabdomyosarcomatous transdifferentiation is a rare but well-documented
phenomenon in melanoma, and, in these cases, recognition of a conventional
component by either morphology or immunophenotype is essential for the correct
diagnosis. However, tumors that are entirely transdifferentiated can be
impossible to distinguish from primary rhabdomyosarcoma. We analyzed a cohort of
cases diagnosed as cutaneous epithelioid/pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma using
genetic/epigenetic techniques and compared them with melanoma. Cases diagnosed
as cutaneous epithelioid/pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma were retrieved, and
clinicopathologic features were documented. NRAS p.Q61R and BRAF p.V600E
immunohistochemistry, targeted DNA next-generation sequencing, and DNA
methylation profiling were performed. A total of 13 cases of cutaneous
epithelioid/pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcomas were identified in 10 males and 3
females (62-90 years; median, 83 years). Cases included tumors arising in the
head and neck (n = 9), upper extremity (n = 2), lower extremity (n = 1), and
back (n = 1). Using immunohistochemistry, 1 tumor (of 13) was positive for NRAS
Q61R; all were negative for BRAF V600E expression (0/13). Targeted DNA
next-generation sequencing revealed 1 case each to harbor HRAS c.34G>A p.G12S
and BRAF c.1363G>A p.G455R mutations, respectively. Tumor mutation burden was
interpretable in 5 cases and ranged from 3 to 80 Mut/Mb (median 38 Mut/Mb); 4 of
5 cases had tumor mutation burden > 10 Mut/Mb. A DNA UV light mutational
signature was present in all cases with evaluable data (6/6). DNA methylation
profiling showed 7 (of 9) cases to cluster with desmoplastic melanoma, whereas 1
case formed a partial match for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, and the
final case matched with TFCP2-rearranged rhabdomyosarcoma. At the last
follow-up, 4 patients died from the disease, 2 died from unknown causes, 2 were
alive without disease, and 1 was alive with disease. The majority of cutaneous
epithelioid/pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma show clinical, genetic, and epigenetic
profiles similar to melanoma, suggesting that a major subset represents
transdifferentiated melanoma.

Copyright © 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.modpat.2026.100983
PMID: 41780801
