---
reference_id: "PMID:35291541"
title: "X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy in a 20-Year-Old Male With an ABCD1 Gene Mutation: First Case From Pakistan."
authors:
- Ghori M
- Molani RA
- Ibrahim PMN
- Hanif MI
- Jamal Raza J
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.21837
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy in a 20-Year-Old Male With an ABCD1 Gene Mutation: First Case From Pakistan.
**Authors:** Ghori M, Molani RA, Ibrahim PMN, Hanif MI, Jamal Raza J
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.21837](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.21837)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Feb 2;14(2):e21837. doi: 10.7759/cureus.21837. eCollection 2022 
Feb.

X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy in a 20-Year-Old Male With an ABCD1 Gene Mutation: 
First Case From Pakistan.

Ghori M(1), Molani RA(1), Ibrahim PMN(2), Hanif MI(2), Jamal Raza J(2).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Jinnah Sindh Medical University, Karachi, PAK.
(2)Pediatrics and Endocrinology, National Institute of Child Health, Karachi, 
PAK.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a rare neurodegenerative disease 
characterized by genetic mutation of the ABCD1 gene. This gene encodes for 
transmembrane adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP). Defective ALDP protein 
results in the accumulation of a very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) within 
certain tissues and plasma. X-ALD can initially present as Addison's disease 
(primary adrenal insufficiency) as the accumulation of VLCFA most importantly 
occurs in the adrenal gland. Our 20-year-old male patient, a known case of 
Addison's disease, presented with vision loss, neurologic symptoms, and 
psychiatric issues. Neurologic symptoms included poor concentration and memory, 
while psychiatric problems included primarily depressive disorder and mild 
psychotic behavior. His Addison's disease was secondary to X-ALD. Still, he was 
diagnosed late due to a lack of awareness of X-ALD and a lack of resources for 
genetic testing in Pakistan. Therefore, the purpose of this case report is to 
spread knowledge and understanding of X-ALD, so that it can be ruled out as the 
potential cause of adrenal insufficiency in young patients, particularly males 
diagnosed with Addison's disease. Moreover, if the patient presents with 
Addison's disease and psychiatric issues, they should be tested to rule out 
X-ALD.

Copyright © 2022, Ghori et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.21837
PMCID: PMC8896247
PMID: 35291541

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.