---
reference_id: "PMID:2261887"
title: Disintegration of the motor unit in post-polio syndrome. Part I. Electrophysiological findings in patients after poliomyelitis.
authors:
- Ryniewicz B
- Rowińska-Marcińska K
- Emeryk B
- Hausmanowa-Petrusewicz I
journal: Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol
year: '1990'
keywords:
- Action Potentials/physiology
- Adult
- "Electrodes, Implanted"
- Electromyography/instrumentation
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Motor Neurons/physiology, ultrastructure"
- Muscle Contraction/physiology
- Nerve Fibers/physiology
- Neural Conduction/physiology
- "Poliomyelitis/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Postpoliomyelitis Syndrome/pathology, physiopathology"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disintegration of the motor unit in post-polio syndrome. Part I. Electrophysiological findings in patients after poliomyelitis.
**Authors:** Ryniewicz B, Rowińska-Marcińska K, Emeryk B, Hausmanowa-Petrusewicz I
**Journal:** Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol (1990)

## Content

1. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1990 Nov;30(7):423-7.

Disintegration of the motor unit in post-polio syndrome. Part I. 
Electrophysiological findings in patients after poliomyelitis.

Ryniewicz B(1), Rowińska-Marcińska K, Emeryk B, Hausmanowa-Petrusewicz I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical School, Centre for Experimental and Clinical 
Medicine, Warsaw, Poland.

CN EMG and SF EMG were performed in 12 patients many years after acute 
poliomyelitis, without symptoms of post-polio syndrome. In 19 muscles with 
clinical symptoms and in 11 clinically normal muscles chronic neurogenic changes 
of a similar degree were observed. Fibre density was increased in both groups of 
muscles. In muscles with clinical symptoms complexes of single fibres with 
increased jitter and blocking were more frequent than in muscles without 
clinical manifestations. It seems that the reinnervation after acute polio is a 
continuing process and thus complete stabilization and integration of the motor 
unit cannot be achieved.

PMID: 2261887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]