---
reference_id: "PMID:40889886"
title: Immunosuppressive contribution of tumour-infiltrating B cells in human intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and their role in chemoimmunotherapy outcome.
authors:
- Milardi G
- Franceschini B
- Camisaschi C
- Puccio S
- Costa G
- Soldani C
- Uva P
- Cangelosi D
- Carriero R
- Lambroia L
- Cammarota A
- Lodetti-Zangrandi G
- Malenica I
- Erreni M
- Montali I
- Lottini T
- Raggi C
- Kunderfranco P
- Polidoro MA
- Aghemo A
- Balsano R
- Pressiani T
- Piscuoglio S
- Di Tommaso L
- Torzilli G
- Rimassa L
- Lugli E
- Cassani B
- Lleo A
journal: Gut
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2025-334861
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunosuppressive contribution of tumour-infiltrating B cells in human intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and their role in chemoimmunotherapy outcome.
**Authors:** Milardi G, Franceschini B, Camisaschi C, Puccio S, Costa G, Soldani C, Uva P, Cangelosi D, Carriero R, Lambroia L, Cammarota A, Lodetti-Zangrandi G, Malenica I, Erreni M, Montali I, Lottini T, Raggi C, Kunderfranco P, Polidoro MA, Aghemo A, Balsano R, Pressiani T, Piscuoglio S, Di Tommaso L, Torzilli G, Rimassa L, Lugli E, Cassani B, Lleo A
**Journal:** Gut (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gutjnl-2025-334861](https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2025-334861)

## Content

1. Gut. 2025 Nov 30:gutjnl-2025-334861. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2025-334861. Online 
ahead of print.

Immunosuppressive contribution of tumour-infiltrating B cells in human 
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and their role in chemoimmunotherapy outcome.

Milardi G(1), Franceschini B(1), Camisaschi C(2), Puccio S(3)(4), Costa G(5)(6), 
Soldani C(1), Uva P(7), Cangelosi D(7), Carriero R(8), Lambroia L(8), Cammarota 
A(1)(6), Lodetti-Zangrandi G(1), Malenica I(4), Erreni M(6)(9), Montali I(2), 
Lottini T(10), Raggi C(10), Kunderfranco P(8), Polidoro MA(1), Aghemo A(6)(11), 
Balsano R(6)(12), Pressiani T(12), Piscuoglio S(6)(13), Di Tommaso L(6)(13), 
Torzilli G(5)(6), Rimassa L(6)(12), Lugli E(4), Cassani B(#)(14)(15), Lleo 
A(#)(16)(11).

Author information:
(1)Hepatobiliary Immunopathology Lab, Department of Gastroenterology, IRCCS 
Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano (MI), Italy.
(2)Flow Cytometry Core, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano (MI), Italy.
(3)Institute of Genetic and Biomedical Research, UoS Milan, National Research 
Council, Rozzano, (MI), Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Translational Immunology, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, 
Rozzano (MI), Italy.
(5)Division of Hepatobiliary and General Surgery, Department of Surgery, IRCCS 
Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano (MI), Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele (MI), 
Italy.
(7)Clinical Bioinformatics Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(8)Bioinformatics Unit, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano (MI), Italy.
(9)Unit of Multiscale and Nanostructural Imaging, IRCCS Humanitas Research 
Hospital, Rozzano (MI), Italy.
(10)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Università degli Studi di 
Firenze, Florence, Italy.
(11)Division of Internal Medicine and Hepatology, Department of 
Gastroenterology, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano (MI), Italy.
(12)Medical Oncology and Hematology Unit, Humanitas Cancer Center, IRCCS 
Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano (MI), Italy.
(13)Pathology Unit, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano (MI), Italy.
(14)Department of Medical Biotechnologies and Translational Medicine, Università 
degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(15)Immunity and Immunodeficiency Lab, IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, 
Rozzano (MI), Italy.
(16)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele 
(MI), Italy ana.lleo@humanitas.it.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA) is a highly aggressive 
biliary tract cancer with a poor prognosis and a complex tumour microenvironment 
(TME) that remains poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the phenotypic and molecular 
characteristics of B lymphocytes, their interactions with the TME and their 
prognostic implications.
DESIGN: B-cell compartments in the tumour, peritumour, and peripheral blood of 
iCCA patients were analysed using multimodal single-cell technologies. The 
B-cell interactome with the iCCA TME was explored in silico, and ex vivo assays 
assessed the impact of interactions with cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) 
and tumour cells on B-cell biology. B-cell modulation during chemoimmunotherapy 
in advanced iCCA was also evaluated.
RESULTS: B cells were enriched in adjacent tumour-free tissues and formed mature 
tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS), correlating with better prognosis. 
Conversely, tumour-infiltrating B cells were scarce, immature and displayed 
reduced effector function with increased immunosuppressive features. Coculture 
with tumour cells or CAFs impaired B-cell differentiation and function, 
including downregulation of BAFFR in peripheral B cells. IL-6 and TGF-β emerged 
as major drivers of B-cell dysfunction; dual blockade restored B-cell activation 
and differentiation. Elevated frequencies of circulating BAFFR+ B cells and 
hyperexpanded clonotypes were linked to improved chemoimmunotherapy response.
CONCLUSIONS: iCCA is characterised by a profoundly immunosuppressive TME that 
impairs B-cell function through soluble factors and cellular interactions. Our 
findings identify B cells as biomarkers and therapeutic targets, supporting 
strategies to restore B-cell function and promote mature TLS to enhance 
immunotherapy responsiveness in iCCA.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2025-334861
PMID: 40889886

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AL has received consulting 
fees from Advanz Pharma, GSK, Ipsen, Gilead, Dr Falk, AlfaSigma and Takeda, 
speaker fees from Gilead, AbbVie, MSD, Advanz Pharma, AlfaSigma, GSK, 
AstraZeneca, Ipsen and Incyte. She has received travel support from Ipsen and 
Falk Foundation and grant support (to Humanitas Research Hospital) from Mirum, 
GSK, Ipsen, Dr Falk, Gilead. LR has received consulting fees from AbbVie, 
AstraZeneca, Basilea, Bayer, BMS, Eisai, Elevar Therapeutics, Exelixis, Genenta, 
Hengrui, Incyte, Ipsen, IQVIA, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, MSD, Nerviano Medical 
Sciences, Roche, Servier, Taiho Oncology, Zymeworks; speaker fees from 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, BMS, Guerbet, Incyte, Ipsen, Roche, Servier; travel expenses 
from AstraZeneca; research funding to Humanitas Research Hospital from AbbVie, 
Agios, AstraZeneca, BeiGene, Eisai, Exelixis, Fibrogen, Incyte, Ipsen, Jazz 
Pharmaceuticals, Lilly, MSD, Nerviano Medical Sciences, Roche, Servier, Taiho 
Oncology, TransThera Sciences, Zymeworks. TP received/reports consulting fees 
from Bayer, Ipsen and AstraZeneca; institutional research funding from Roche, 
Bayer, AstraZeneca; support for congress attendance from Roche. EL is listed as 
the inventor on a patent on TSCM cells and received royalties related to that 
patent, received research funding from Bristol Myers Squibb on a topic unrelated 
to this paper and reports consulting fees from BD Biosciences, BioLegend, Swarm 
Oncology, Pfizer, Menarini and AstraZeneca. All the other authors have nothing 
to declare.