---
reference_id: "PMID:24759929"
title: EHD3-dependent endosome pathway regulates cardiac membrane excitability and physiology.
authors:
- Curran J
- Makara MA
- Little SC
- Musa H
- Liu B
- Wu X
- Polina I
- Alecusan JS
- Wright P
- Li J
- Billman GE
- Boyden PA
- Gyorke S
- Band H
- Hund TJ
- Mohler PJ
journal: Circ Res
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304149
keywords:
- Animals
- Ankyrins/metabolism
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/physiology"
- Carrier Proteins/physiology
- Endosomes/physiology
- Heart/physiology
- Heart Rate
- Mice
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/physiology"
- Stroke Volume
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EHD3-dependent endosome pathway regulates cardiac membrane excitability and physiology.
**Authors:** Curran J, Makara MA, Little SC, Musa H, Liu B, Wu X, Polina I, Alecusan JS, Wright P, Li J, Billman GE, Boyden PA, Gyorke S, Band H, Hund TJ, Mohler PJ
**Journal:** Circ Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304149](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304149)

## Content

1. Circ Res. 2014 Jun 20;115(1):68-78. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304149. Epub
2014 Apr 23.

EHD3-dependent endosome pathway regulates cardiac membrane excitability and
physiology.

Curran J(1), Makara MA(2), Little SC(2), Musa H(2), Liu B(2), Wu X(2), Polina
I(2), Alecusan JS(2), Wright P(2), Li J(2), Billman GE(2), Boyden PA(2), Gyorke
S(2), Band H(2), Hund TJ(2), Mohler PJ(2).

Author information:
(1)From The Dorothy M. Davis Heart & Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State
University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus (J.C., M.A.M., S.C.L., H.M., B.L.,
X.W., I.P., J.S.A., P.W., J.L., G.E.B., S.G., T.J.H., P.J.M.); Departments of
Internal Medicine (P.J.M.) and Physiology and Cell Biology (J.C., M.A.M.,
S.C.L., H.M., B.L., P.W., G.E.B., S.G., P.J.M.), The Ohio State University,
Columbus; Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Ohio State University
College of Engineering, Columbus (T.J.H.); Department of Pharmacology and Center
for Molecular Therapeutics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
(P.A.B.); and The Eppley Institute and UNMC-Eppley Cancer Center, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha (H.B.). peter.mohler@osumc.edu
jerry.curran@osumc.edu.
(2)From The Dorothy M. Davis Heart & Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State
University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus (J.C., M.A.M., S.C.L., H.M., B.L.,
X.W., I.P., J.S.A., P.W., J.L., G.E.B., S.G., T.J.H., P.J.M.); Departments of
Internal Medicine (P.J.M.) and Physiology and Cell Biology (J.C., M.A.M.,
S.C.L., H.M., B.L., P.W., G.E.B., S.G., P.J.M.), The Ohio State University,
Columbus; Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Ohio State University
College of Engineering, Columbus (T.J.H.); Department of Pharmacology and Center
for Molecular Therapeutics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
(P.A.B.); and The Eppley Institute and UNMC-Eppley Cancer Center, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha (H.B.).

RATIONALE: Cardiac function is dependent on the coordinate activities of
membrane ion channels, transporters, pumps, and hormone receptors to tune the
membrane electrochemical gradient dynamically in response to acute and chronic
stress. Although our knowledge of membrane proteins has rapidly advanced during
the past decade, our understanding of the subcellular pathways governing the
trafficking and localization of integral membrane proteins is limited and
essentially unstudied in vivo. In the heart, to our knowledge, there are no in
vivo mechanistic studies that directly link endosome-based machinery with
cardiac physiology.
OBJECTIVE: To define the in vivo roles of endosome-based cellular machinery for
cardiac membrane protein trafficking, myocyte excitability, and cardiac
physiology.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We identify the endosome-based Eps15 homology domain 3
(EHD3) pathway as essential for cardiac physiology. EHD3-deficient hearts
display structural and functional defects including bradycardia and rate
variability, conduction block, and blunted response to adrenergic stimulation.
Mechanistically, EHD3 is critical for membrane protein trafficking, because
EHD3-deficient myocytes display reduced expression/localization of Na/Ca
exchanger and L-type Ca channel type 1.2 with a parallel reduction in Na/Ca
exchanger-mediated membrane current and Cav1.2-mediated membrane current.
Functionally, EHD3-deficient myocytes show increased sarcoplasmic reticulum
[Ca], increased spark frequency, and reduced expression/localization of
ankyrin-B, a binding partner for EHD3 and Na/Ca exchanger. Finally, we show that
in vivo EHD3-deficient defects are attributable to cardiac-specific roles of
EHD3 because mice with cardiac-selective EHD3 deficiency demonstrate both
structural and electric phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide new insight into the critical role of
endosome-based pathways in membrane protein targeting and cardiac physiology.
EHD3 is a critical component of protein trafficking in heart and is essential
for the proper membrane targeting of select cellular proteins that maintain
excitability.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304149
PMCID: PMC4065849
PMID: 24759929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
