---
reference_id: "PMID:32662900"
title: IRX3 and IRX5 Inhibit Adipogenic Differentiation of Hypertrophic Chondrocytes and Promote Osteogenesis.
authors:
- Tan Z
- Kong M
- Wen S
- Tsang KY
- Niu B
- Hartmann C
- Chan D
- Hui CC
- Cheah KSE
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4132
keywords:
- Adipogenesis/genetics
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Chondrocytes
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- Osteoblasts
- Osteogenesis
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IRX3 and IRX5 Inhibit Adipogenic Differentiation of Hypertrophic Chondrocytes and Promote Osteogenesis.
**Authors:** Tan Z, Kong M, Wen S, Tsang KY, Niu B, Hartmann C, Chan D, Hui CC, Cheah KSE
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4132](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4132)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2020 Dec;35(12):2444-2457. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4132. Epub 2020
 Aug 17.

IRX3 and IRX5 Inhibit Adipogenic Differentiation of Hypertrophic Chondrocytes
and Promote Osteogenesis.

Tan Z(1), Kong M(1), Wen S(1), Tsang KY(1), Niu B(1), Hartmann C(2), Chan D(1),
Hui CC(3), Cheah KSE(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong, HKSAR, China.
(2)Institute of Musculoskeletal Medicine, Department of Bone and Skeletal
Research, Faculty of Medicine, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Program in Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children
and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Maintaining the correct proportions of different cell types in the bone marrow
is critical for bone function. Hypertrophic chondrocytes (HCs) and osteoblasts
are a lineage continuum with a minor contribution to adipocytes, but the
regulatory network is unclear. Mutations in transcription factors, IRX3 and
IRX5, result in skeletal patterning defects in humans and mice. We found
coexpression of Irx3 and Irx5 in late-stage HCs and osteoblasts in cortical and
trabecular bone. Irx3 and Irx5 null mutants display severe bone deficiency in
newborn and adult stages. Quantitative analyses of bone with different
combinations of functional alleles of Irx3 and Irx5 suggest these two factors
function in a dosage-dependent manner. In Irx3 and Irx5 nulls, the amount of
bone marrow adipocytes was increased. In Irx5 nulls, lineage tracing revealed
that removal of Irx3 specifically in HCs exacerbated reduction of HC-derived
osteoblasts and increased the frequency of HC-derived marrow adipocytes.
β-catenin loss of function and gain of function specifically in HCs affects the
expression of Irx3 and Irx5, suggesting IRX3 and IRX5 function downstream of WNT
signaling. Our study shows that IRX3 and IRX5 regulate fate decisions in the
transition of HCs to osteoblasts and to marrow adipocytes, implicating their
potential roles in human skeletal homeostasis and disorders.

© 2020 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4132
PMID: 32662900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
