---
reference_id: "PMID:8129412"
title: The Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome.
authors:
- Goeteyn M
- Geerts ML
- Kint A
- De Weert J
journal: Arch Dermatol
year: '1994'
keywords:
- Adult
- Atrophy
- Basal Cell Carcinoma/ultrastructure
- Child
- Epidermal Cyst/ultrastructure
- Female
- Hair/ultrastructure
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/congenital, pathology"
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Skin Neoplasms/ultrastructure
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome.
**Authors:** Goeteyn M, Geerts ML, Kint A, De Weert J
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol (1994)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol. 1994 Mar;130(3):337-42.

The Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome.

Goeteyn M(1), Geerts ML, Kint A, De Weert J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: The Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome is characterized by follicular
atrophoderma, congenital hypotrichosis, and basal cell neoformations that
include basal cell carcinomas and basal cell nevi.
OBSERVATIONS: We describe a large family in which 20 persons across four
generations present with typical features of the Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome.
However, the clinical picture in this family differs with regard to gender and
age. Male subjects have a uniformly severe disease, whereas female subjects
exhibit a range of severity of the syndrome. The most striking difference
between male and female subjects is provided by hypotrichosis. In male subjects,
hypotrichosis is diffuse and affects all scalp hairs. On the other hand, female
subjects do not have hypotrichosis, but normal hairs are intermingled with
abnormal hairs. In infancy and childhood, multiple milia are present, whereas in
adults only a few milia are observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The family pedigree seems to be consistent with an X-linked
inheritance, since male-to-male transmission does not occur. Moreover, further
evidence of an X-linked dominant mode of inheritance could be derived from the
observation of gender differences that can be attributed to the lyonization
phenomenon in female subjects. From a clinical and morphologic point of view,
the Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome seems to be a disorder of the hair follicle.

PMID: 8129412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
