---
reference_id: "PMID:38542006"
title: "Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia: Clinical Characteristics, Diagnostic Evaluation and Therapeutic Strategies."
authors:
- Aggarwal A
- Stolear A
- Alam MM
- Vardhan S
- Dulgher M
- Jang SJ
- Zarich SW
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13061781
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia: Clinical Characteristics, Diagnostic Evaluation and Therapeutic Strategies.
**Authors:** Aggarwal A, Stolear A, Alam MM, Vardhan S, Dulgher M, Jang SJ, Zarich SW
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13061781](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13061781)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Mar 20;13(6):1781. doi: 10.3390/jcm13061781.

Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia: Clinical Characteristics,
Diagnostic Evaluation and Therapeutic Strategies.

Aggarwal A(1), Stolear A(2), Alam MM(1), Vardhan S(1), Dulgher M(3), Jang SJ(4),
Zarich SW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale New Haven Health, Bridgeport Hospital,
Bridgeport, CT 06605, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale New Haven
Health, Bridgeport Hospital, Bridgeport, CT 06605, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Nuvance Health, Norwalk Hospital, Norwalk,
CT 06856, USA.
(4)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06519, USA.

Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is a severe
hereditary arrhythmia syndrome predominantly affecting children and young
adults. It manifests through bidirectional or polymorphic ventricular
arrhythmia, often culminating in syncope triggered by physical exertion or
emotional stress which can lead to sudden cardiac death. Most cases stem from
mutations in the gene responsible for encoding the cardiac ryanodine receptor
(RyR2), or in the Calsequestrin 2 gene (CASQ2), disrupting the handling of
calcium ions within the cardiac myocyte sarcoplasmic reticulum. Diagnosing CPVT
typically involves unmasking the arrhythmia through exercise stress testing.
This diagnosis emerges in the absence of structural heart disease by cardiac
imaging and with a normal baseline electrocardiogram. Traditional first-line
treatment primarily involves β-blocker therapy, significantly reducing
CPVT-associated mortality. Adjunctive therapies such as moderate exercise
training, flecainide, left cardiac sympathetic denervation and implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators have been utilized with reasonable success. However,
the spectrum of options for managing CPVT has expanded over time, demonstrating
decreased rates of arrhythmic events. Furthermore, ongoing research into
potential new therapies including gene therapies has the potential to further
enhance treatment paradigms. This review aims to succinctly encapsulate the
contemporary understanding of the clinical characteristics, diagnostic approach,
established therapeutic interventions and the promising future directions in
managing CPVT.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13061781
PMCID: PMC10971616
PMID: 38542006

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
