---
reference_id: "PMID:29310764"
title: "Reducing Environmental Allergic Triggers: Policy Issues."
authors:
- Abramson SL
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2017.10.027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reducing Environmental Allergic Triggers: Policy Issues.
**Authors:** Abramson SL
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2017.10.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2017.10.027)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2018 Jan-Feb;6(1):32-35. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2017.10.027.

Reducing Environmental Allergic Triggers: Policy Issues.

Abramson SL(1).

Author information:
(1)Shannon Clinic/Shannon Medical Center, San Angelo, Texas. Electronic address: 
stuartabramson@shannonhealth.org.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2018 Jan - Feb;6(1):36-37. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2017.10.022.

The implementation of policies to reduce environmental allergic triggers can be 
an important adjunct to optimal patient care for allergic rhinitis and allergic 
asthma. Policies at the local level in schools and other public as well as 
private buildings can make an impact on disease morbidity. Occupational 
exposures for allergens have not yet been met with the same rigorous policy 
standards applied for exposures to toxicants by Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration. Further benefit may be obtained through policies by local, 
county, state, and national governments, and possibly through international 
cooperative agreements. The reduction of allergenic exposures can and should be 
affected by policies with strong scientific, evidence-based derivation. However, 
a judicious application of the precautionary principle may be needed in 
circumstances where the health effect of inaction could lead to more serious 
threats to vulnerable populations with allergic disease. This commentary covers 
the scientific basis, current implementation, knowledge gaps, and pro/con views 
on policy issues in reducing environmental allergic triggers.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2017.10.027
PMID: 29310764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]