---
reference_id: "PMID:39536751"
title: PD-1 blockade plus cisplatin-based chemotherapy in patients with small cell/neuroendocrine bladder and prostate cancers.
authors:
- Gu Y
- Ly A
- Rodriguez S
- Zhang H
- Kim J
- Mao Z
- Sachdeva A
- Zomorodian N
- Pellegrini M
- Li G
- Liu S
- Drakaki A
- Rettig MB
- Chin AI
journal: Cell Rep Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101824
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Cisplatin/therapeutic use
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Female
- "Carcinoma, Small Cell/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine/drug therapy, pathology, mortality"
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PD-1 blockade plus cisplatin-based chemotherapy in patients with small cell/neuroendocrine bladder and prostate cancers.
**Authors:** Gu Y, Ly A, Rodriguez S, Zhang H, Kim J, Mao Z, Sachdeva A, Zomorodian N, Pellegrini M, Li G, Liu S, Drakaki A, Rettig MB, Chin AI
**Journal:** Cell Rep Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101824](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101824)

## Content

1. Cell Rep Med. 2024 Nov 19;5(11):101824. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101824. Epub 
2024 Nov 12.

PD-1 blockade plus cisplatin-based chemotherapy in patients with small 
cell/neuroendocrine bladder and prostate cancers.

Gu Y(1), Ly A(2), Rodriguez S(2), Zhang H(2), Kim J(3), Mao Z(4), Sachdeva A(2), 
Zomorodian N(2), Pellegrini M(5), Li G(6), Liu S(7), Drakaki A(8), Rettig MB(9), 
Chin AI(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Urology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Fielding School of Public Health, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA; Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and 
Stem Cell Research, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, Fielding School of Public Health, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, David Geffen 
School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department of 
Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(9)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department of 
Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; The VA Greater Los 
Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Urology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA; Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and 
Stem Cell Research, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
Electronic address: arnoldchin@mednet.ucla.edu.

Small cell neuroendocrine cancers share biologic similarities across tissue 
types, including transient response to platinum-based chemotherapy with rapid 
progression of disease. We report a phase 1b study of pembrolizumab in 
combination with platinum-based chemotherapy in 15 patients with stage III-IV 
small cell bladder (cohort 1) or small cell/neuroendocrine prostate cancers 
(cohort 2). Overall response rate (ORR) is 43% with two-year overall survival 
(OS) rate of 86% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.63, 1.00) for cohort 1 and 57% 
(95% CI: 0.30, 1.00) for cohort 2. Treatment is tolerated well with grade 3 or 
higher adverse events occurring in 40% of patients with no deaths or treatment 
cessation secondary to toxicity. Single-cell and T cell receptor sequencing of 
serial peripheral blood samples reveals clonal expansion of diverse T cell 
repertoire correlating with progression-free survival. Our results demonstrate 
promising efficacy and safety of this treatment combination and support future 
investigation of this biomarker. This study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov 
(NCT03582475).

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101824
PMCID: PMC11604497
PMID: 39536751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.