---
reference_id: "PMID:19558906"
title: "[Clinical significance of unilateral tonsillar enlargement]."
authors:
- Tobias Gómez S
- Palomar Asenjo V
- Borràs Perera M
- Pérez Hernández I
- Ruiz Giner A
- Palomar García V
journal: Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Clinical significance of unilateral tonsillar enlargement].
**Authors:** Tobias Gómez S, Palomar Asenjo V, Borràs Perera M, Pérez Hernández I, Ruiz Giner A, Palomar García V
**Journal:** Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp (2009)

## Content

1. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 2009 May-Jun;60(3):194-8.

[Clinical significance of unilateral tonsillar enlargement].

[Article in Spanish]

Tobias Gómez S(1), Palomar Asenjo V, Borràs Perera M, Pérez Hernández I, Ruiz 
Giner A, Palomar García V.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, 
Lleida, España. stobiago@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Asymptomatic unilateral tonsillar enlargement is usually treated 
with systematic tonsillectomy under suspicion of malignancy. Due to the fact 
that most of the cases are benign pathologies, we set out to study the clinical 
signs that would help us in the diagnosis in order to avoid unnecessary 
tonsillectomies.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We reviewed 267 tonsillectomies performed from 1996 to 
2006 and 30 of these were indicated because of asymmetry. We evaluated risk 
factors for malignancy: cervical lymphatic node enlargement, sex, age, tonsillar 
enlargement noticed by the patient, suspicious appearance, systemic symptoms, 
history of malignancy and immunocompromise.
RESULTS: Histopathologic study revealed 80 % to be benign and 20 % malignant. 
The risk factors with the strongest association were enlargement of cervical 
lymphatic nodes and suspicious appearance of the tonsil.
CONCLUSIONS: Strict control of a unilateral tonsillar enlargement is possible, 
but it is mandatory to perform a tonsillectomy when the appearance of the tonsil 
raises suspicions or there are enlarged lymphatic nodes.

PMID: 19558906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]