---
reference_id: "PMID:2447461"
title: Laser catheter ablation of simulated ventricular tachycardia.
authors:
- Vincent GM
- Fox J
- Benedick BA
- Hunter J
- Dixon JA
journal: Lasers Surg Med
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1002/lsm.1900070508
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laser catheter ablation of simulated ventricular tachycardia.
**Authors:** Vincent GM, Fox J, Benedick BA, Hunter J, Dixon JA
**Journal:** Lasers Surg Med (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lsm.1900070508](https://doi.org/10.1002/lsm.1900070508)

## Content

1. Lasers Surg Med. 1987;7(5):421-5. doi: 10.1002/lsm.1900070508.

Laser catheter ablation of simulated ventricular tachycardia.

Vincent GM(1), Fox J, Benedick BA, Hunter J, Dixon JA.

Author information:
(1)Nora Eccles Harrison Cardiovascular Research, University of Utah School of 
Medicine, Salt Lake City.

Catheter-directed laser injury of the left ventricular endocardium for ablation 
of ventricular tachycardia was studied in a canine model of simulated 
ventricular tachycardia. Bipolar plunge electrodes were placed at thoracotomy 
into the left ventricular endocardium in nine anesthetized dogs. Ventricular 
tachycardia was simulated by pacing at 200 beats per minute. After four days of 
recovery, catheter-directed neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser injury was 
produced at the site of earliest recorded electrical activation during pacing 
tachycardia as detected by endocardial catheter mapping. Immediately after laser 
injury and again five days after injury, pacing tachycardia was attempted. 
Failure to pace after laser injury was defined as successful arrhythmia 
ablation. In 3/9 (33%) experiments, the laser-injured tissue surrounded the 
tachycardia source (pacing wires), and pacing-simulated ventricular tachycardia 
was prevented. When the laser injury did not involve the tachycardia source, 6/9 
animals, due to limitations of the mapping system, pacing was not prevented. One 
animal developed sustained ventricular tachycardia during laser injury, with 
conversion to sinus rhythm by lidocaine. One animal, without recognized 
ventricular arrhythmia, died five days after laser injury. No unusual findings 
were noted at autopsy. These preliminary data suggest that catheter-directed 
laser-induced injury can ablate arrhythmia sources. Further studies are 
indicated in a more physiologic model, and the safety and risks of the procedure 
need further evaluation.

DOI: 10.1002/lsm.1900070508
PMID: 2447461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]