---
reference_id: "PMID:17130534"
title: Genes influencing innate and acquired immunity in type 1 diabetes and latent autoimmune diabetes in adults.
authors:
- Sanjeevi CB
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1196/annals.1375.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genes influencing innate and acquired immunity in type 1 diabetes and latent autoimmune diabetes in adults.
**Authors:** Sanjeevi CB
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1196/annals.1375.010](https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1375.010)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Oct;1079:67-80. doi: 10.1196/annals.1375.010.

Genes influencing innate and acquired immunity in type 1 diabetes and latent 
autoimmune diabetes in adults.

Sanjeevi CB(1).

Author information:
(1)Karolinska Institute, Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Hospital 
Campus, CMM L5:01, S-17176 Stockholm, Sweden. Sanjeevi.Carani@ki.se

DQ8 and DQ2 are associated with susceptibility to and DQ6 with protection from 
type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM). A set of polymorphic genes, called MHC class I 
chain-related genes (MIC-A) in HLA class I region interact with NK cells. In 
Italians, MICA allele 5 increases T1DM risk by 6.1. Together with HLA-DQ8 and 
DQ2 the risk increases severalfold. HLA class I genes, also identified as 
susceptibility genes for T1DM, interact with polymorphic killer 
immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) on NK cells. HLA-DQ8 and DQ2 and MICA-5 in 
Swedish and other populations also show positive association with disease. 
Studies on KIR in Latvian patients with T1DM also suggest a role for KIR in the 
etiology of T1DM. The results from MICA and KIR studies suggest that 
polymorphism of these genes of the innate immune system identify possible 
defects in the first line of antiviral defense in the etiology of T1DM. 
Screening for these genes could be important in the prediction strategies for 
T1DM.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1375.010
PMID: 17130534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]