---
reference_id: "PMID:30067075"
title: "Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: Longitudinal Study of Lung Disease by Ultrastructure Defect and Genotype."
authors:
- Davis SD
- Rosenfeld M
- Lee HS
- Ferkol TW
- Sagel SD
- Dell SD
- Milla C
- Pittman JE
- Shapiro AJ
- Sullivan KM
- Nykamp KR
- Krischer JP
- Zariwala MA
- Knowles MR
- Leigh MW
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201803-0548OC
keywords:
- Child
- "Cilia/genetics, ultrastructure"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Kartagener Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Lung/physiopathology
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- Prospective Studies
- Respiratory Function Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: Longitudinal Study of Lung Disease by Ultrastructure Defect and Genotype.
**Authors:** Davis SD, Rosenfeld M, Lee HS, Ferkol TW, Sagel SD, Dell SD, Milla C, Pittman JE, Shapiro AJ, Sullivan KM, Nykamp KR, Krischer JP, Zariwala MA, Knowles MR, Leigh MW
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.201803-0548OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201803-0548OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Jan 15;199(2):190-198. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201803-0548OC.

Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: Longitudinal Study of Lung Disease by Ultrastructure 
Defect and Genotype.

Davis SD(1), Rosenfeld M(2), Lee HS(3), Ferkol TW(4), Sagel SD(5), Dell SD(6), 
Milla C(7), Pittman JE(4), Shapiro AJ(8), Sullivan KM(9), Nykamp KR(10), 
Krischer JP(3), Zariwala MA(11), Knowles MR(9), Leigh MW(12).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Pediatrics, Riley Children's Hospital, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(2)2 Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington.
(3)3 Department of Pediatrics, Health Informatics Institute, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, Florida.
(4)4 Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri.
(5)5 Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Colorado, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado.
(6)6 Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)7 Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California.
(8)8 Department of Pediatrics, McGill University Health Centre Research 
Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(9)9 Department of Medicine.
(10)10 Invitae, San Francisco, California.
(11)11 Department of Pathology/Lab Medicine, and.
(12)12 Department of Pediatrics, Marsico Lung Institute, University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; and.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Jan 15;199(2):136-138. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201807-1390ED.

RATIONALE: In primary ciliary dyskinesia, factors leading to disease 
heterogeneity are poorly understood.
OBJECTIVES: To describe early lung disease progression in primary ciliary 
dyskinesia and identify associations between ultrastructural defects and 
genotypes with clinical phenotype.
METHODS: This was a prospective, longitudinal (5 yr), multicenter, observational 
study. Inclusion criteria were less than 19 years at enrollment and greater than 
or equal to two annual study visits. Linear mixed effects models including 
random slope and random intercept were used to evaluate longitudinal 
associations between the ciliary defect group (or genotype group) and clinical 
features (percent predicted FEV1 and weight and height z-scores).
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: A total of 137 participants completed 732 visits. 
The group with absent inner dynein arm, central apparatus defects, and 
microtubular disorganization (IDA/CA/MTD) (n = 41) were significantly younger at 
diagnosis and in mixed effects models had significantly lower percent predicted 
FEV1 and weight and height z-scores than the isolated outer dynein arm defect 
(n = 55) group. Participants with CCDC39 or CCDC40 mutations (n = 34) had lower 
percent predicted FEV1 and weight and height z-scores than those with DNAH5 
mutations (n = 36). For the entire cohort, percent predicted FEV1 decline was 
heterogeneous with a mean (SE) decline of 0.57 (0.25) percent predicted/yr. Rate 
of decline was different from zero only in the IDA/MTD/CA group (mean [SE], 
-1.11 [0.48] percent predicted/yr; P = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Participants with IDA/MTD/CA defects, which included individuals 
with CCDC39 or CCDC40 mutations, had worse lung function and growth indices 
compared with those with outer dynein arm defects and DNAH5 mutations, 
respectively. The only group with a significant lung function decline over time 
were participants with IDA/MTD/CA defects.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201803-0548OC
PMCID: PMC6353004
PMID: 30067075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]