---
reference_id: "PMID:36969243"
title: Gut and airway microbiota dysbiosis and their role in COVID-19 and long-COVID.
authors:
- Ancona G
- Alagna L
- Alteri C
- Palomba E
- Tonizzo A
- Pastena A
- Muscatello A
- Gori A
- Bandera A
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1080043
keywords:
- Humans
- COVID-19
- SARS-CoV-2
- Post-Acute COVID-19 Syndrome
- Dysbiosis
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gut and airway microbiota dysbiosis and their role in COVID-19 and long-COVID.
**Authors:** Ancona G, Alagna L, Alteri C, Palomba E, Tonizzo A, Pastena A, Muscatello A, Gori A, Bandera A
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1080043](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1080043)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Mar 8;14:1080043. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1080043.
eCollection 2023.

Gut and airway microbiota dysbiosis and their role in COVID-19 and long-COVID.

Ancona G(1), Alagna L(1), Alteri C(2)(3), Palomba E(1)(4), Tonizzo A(1)(4),
Pastena A(1)(4), Muscatello A(1), Gori A(1)(4), Bandera A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Unit, Foundation IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.
(3)Multimodal Research Area, Bambino Gesù Children Hospital (IRCCS), Rome,
Italy.
(4)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Centre for
Multidisciplinary Research in Health Science (MACH), University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.

The gut microbiota plays a crucial role in human health and disease. Gut
dysbiosis is known to be associated with increased susceptibility to respiratory
diseases and modifications in the immune response and homeostasis of the lungs
(the so-called gut-lung axis). Furthermore, recent studies have highlighted the
possible role of dysbiosis in neurological disturbances, introducing the notion
of the "gut-brain axis." During the last 2 years, several studies have described
the presence of gut dysbiosis during coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and its
relationship with disease severity, SARS-CoV-2 gastrointestinal replication, and
immune inflammation. Moreover, the possible persistence of gut dysbiosis after
disease resolution may be linked to long-COVID syndrome and particularly to its
neurological manifestations. We reviewed recent evidence on the association
between dysbiosis and COVID-19, investigating the possible epidemiologic
confounding factors like age, location, sex, sample size, the severity of
disease, comorbidities, therapy, and vaccination status on gut and airway
microbial dysbiosis in selected studies on both COVID-19 and long-COVID.
Moreover, we analyzed the confounding factors strictly related to microbiota,
specifically diet investigation and previous use of antibiotics/probiotics, and
the methodology used to study the microbiota (α- and β-diversity parameters and
relative abundance tools). Of note, only a few studies focused on longitudinal
analyses, especially for long-term observation in long-COVID. Lastly, there is a
lack of knowledge regarding the role of microbiota transplantation and other
therapeutic approaches and their possible impact on disease progression and
severity. Preliminary data seem to suggest that gut and airway dysbiosis might
play a role in COVID-19 and in long-COVID neurological symptoms. Indeed, the
development and interpretation of these data could have important implications
for future preventive and therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2023 Ancona, Alagna, Alteri, Palomba, Tonizzo, Pastena, Muscatello,
Gori and Bandera.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1080043
PMCID: PMC10030519
PMID: 36969243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
