---
reference_id: "PMID:38787506"
title: "Interplay of metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease and papillary thyroid carcinoma: insights from a Chinese cohort."
authors:
- Xiao R
- Wang Q
- Ni C
- Pan W
- Wu W
- Cai Y
- Xie K
- You J
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s40618-024-02391-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/pathology, epidemiology, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/epidemiology, pathology, metabolism"
- China/epidemiology
- Adult
- Risk Factors
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/epidemiology, metabolism, complications, pathology"
- Cohort Studies
- Lymphatic Metastasis
- "Fatty Liver/epidemiology, pathology, complications, etiology, metabolism"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Mutation
- "Metabolic Diseases/epidemiology, etiology"
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interplay of metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease and papillary thyroid carcinoma: insights from a Chinese cohort.
**Authors:** Xiao R, Wang Q, Ni C, Pan W, Wu W, Cai Y, Xie K, You J
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40618-024-02391-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40618-024-02391-6)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2024 Dec;47(12):2943-2952. doi:
10.1007/s40618-024-02391-6.  Epub 2024 May 24.

Interplay of metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease and papillary
thyroid carcinoma: insights from a Chinese cohort.

Xiao R(#)(1), Wang Q(#)(1), Ni C(2), Pan W(3), Wu W(4), Cai Y(1), Xie K(#)(5),
You J(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thyroid Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(3)Department of Radiotherapy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Research Center, The Affiliated
Hospital of Jiaxing University, Jiaxing, China. ballbe@163.com.
(6)Department of Thyroid Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China. youjie@wmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Thyroid cancer is one of a set of extrahepatic cancers that closely
linked to metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD). However,
the connection between MAFLD and the characteristics of papillary thyroid cancer
(PTC) remains unexplored.
METHODS: Between Jan 2020 and Oct 2022, surgical cases of PTC patients were
examined at the first Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University.
Clinical data extracted from the electronic medical system underwent a rigorous
comparison between two groups, classified based on MAFLD criteria, using
logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: In this study of 4,410 PTC patients, 18.3% had MAFLD. MAFLD emerged as
a distinct risk factor for lymph node metastasis (OR = 1.230, 95% CI
1.018-1.487) in this cohort, especially in females (OR = 1.321, 95% CI
1.026-1.702) and those with BMI ≥ 23 kg/m2 (OR = 1.232, 95% CI 1.004-1.511). The
presence of MAFLD was found to significantly elevate the risk of BRAF V600E
mutation in both subgroups characterized by FIB-4 score ≥ 1.3 (OR = 1.968, 95%
CI 1.107-3.496) and BMI < 23 kg/m2 (OR = 2.584, 95% CI 1.012-6.601). Moreover,
among the subset of individuals without non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD), it was noted that MAFLD considerably increased the likelihood of tumor
multifocality (OR = 1.697, 95% CI 1.111-2.592). Nevertheless, MAFLD did not
exhibit any correlation with increased tumor size, extra-thyroidal extension
(ETE), or later TNM stage in PTC.
CONCLUSION: In this cross-sectional study, we discovered a significant
association between MAFLD and increased occurrences of lymph node metastasis.
Furthermore, MAFLD was linked to a higher chance of BRAF V600E mutation and the
presence of multiple tumors in certain subgroups.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Italian Society of
Endocrinology (SIE).

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-024-02391-6
PMID: 38787506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
