---
reference_id: "PMID:36828173"
title: "Cystic fibrosis and primary ciliary dyskinesia: Similarities and differences."
authors:
- Pereira R
- Barbosa T
- Cardoso AL
- Sá R
- Sousa M
journal: Respir Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107169
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystic fibrosis and primary ciliary dyskinesia: Similarities and differences.
**Authors:** Pereira R, Barbosa T, Cardoso AL, Sá R, Sousa M
**Journal:** Respir Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107169](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107169)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2023 Apr;209:107169. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107169. Epub 2023
Feb  22.

Cystic fibrosis and primary ciliary dyskinesia: Similarities and differences.

Pereira R(1), Barbosa T(2), Cardoso AL(3), Sá R(4), Sousa M(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Department of Microscopy, ICBAS-School of 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; 
UMIB-Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedicine, ICBAS-UP/ 
ITR-Laboratory for Integrative and Translational Research in Population Health, 
UP, Porto, Portugal. Electronic address: rrpereira@icbas.up.pt.
(2)UMIB-Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedicine, ICBAS-UP/ 
ITR-Laboratory for Integrative and Translational Research in Population Health, 
UP, Porto, Portugal; Department of Pediatrics, Maternal Child Centre of the 
North (CMIN), University Hospital Centre of Porto (CHUP), Largo da Maternidade, 
4050-371, Porto, Portugal. Electronic address: telmab@gmail.com.
(3)UMIB-Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedicine, ICBAS-UP/ 
ITR-Laboratory for Integrative and Translational Research in Population Health, 
UP, Porto, Portugal; Department of Pediatrics, Maternal Child Centre of the 
North (CMIN), University Hospital Centre of Porto (CHUP), Largo da Maternidade, 
4050-371, Porto, Portugal. Electronic address: ana.ld.cardoso@gmail.com.
(4)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Department of Microscopy, ICBAS-School of 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; 
UMIB-Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedicine, ICBAS-UP/ 
ITR-Laboratory for Integrative and Translational Research in Population Health, 
UP, Porto, Portugal. Electronic address: rmsa@icbas.up.pt.
(5)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Department of Microscopy, ICBAS-School of 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; 
UMIB-Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedicine, ICBAS-UP/ 
ITR-Laboratory for Integrative and Translational Research in Population Health, 
UP, Porto, Portugal. Electronic address: msousa@icbas.up.pt.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) and Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) are both rare chronic 
diseases, inherited disorders associated with multiple complications, namely 
respiratory complications, due to impaired mucociliary clearance that affect 
severely patients' lives. Although both are classified as rare diseases, PCD has 
a much lower prevalence than CF, particularly among Caucasians. As a result, CF 
is well studied, better recognized by clinicians, and with some therapeutic 
approaches already available. Whereas PCD is still largely unknown, and thus the 
approach is based on consensus guidelines, expert opinion, and extrapolation 
from the larger evidence base available for patients with CF. Both diseases have 
some clinical similarities but are very different, necessitating different 
treatment by specialists who are familiar with the complexities of each 
disease.This review aims to provide an overview of the knowledge about the two 
diseases with a focus on the similarities and differences between both in terms 
of disease mechanisms, common clinical manifestations, genetics and the most 
relevant therapeutic options. We hoped to raise clinical awareness about PCD, 
what it is, how it differs from CF, and how much information is still lacking. 
Furthermore, this review emphasises the fact that both diseases require ongoing 
research to find better treatments and, in particular for PCD, to fill the 
medical and scientific gaps.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107169
PMID: 36828173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.