---
reference_id: "PMID:34790403"
title: Molecular characterization of squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal.
authors:
- Armstrong SA
- Malley R
- Wang H
- Lenz HJ
- Arguello D
- El-Deiry WS
- Xiu J
- Gatalica Z
- Hwang JJ
- Philip PA
- Shields AF
- Marshall JL
- Salem ME
- Weinberg BA
journal: J Gastrointest Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.21037/jgo-20-610
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular characterization of squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal.
**Authors:** Armstrong SA, Malley R, Wang H, Lenz HJ, Arguello D, El-Deiry WS, Xiu J, Gatalica Z, Hwang JJ, Philip PA, Shields AF, Marshall JL, Salem ME, Weinberg BA
**Journal:** J Gastrointest Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.21037/jgo-20-610](https://doi.org/10.21037/jgo-20-610)

## Content

1. J Gastrointest Oncol. 2021 Oct;12(5):2423-2437. doi: 10.21037/jgo-20-610.

Molecular characterization of squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal.

Armstrong SA(1), Malley R(1), Wang H(1), Lenz HJ(2), Arguello D(3), El-Deiry 
WS(4), Xiu J(3), Gatalica Z(3), Hwang JJ(5), Philip PA(6), Shields AF(6), 
Marshall JL(1), Salem ME(#)(5), Weinberg BA(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Ruesch Center for the Cure of Gastrointestinal Cancers, Lombardi 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC, USA.
(2)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(4)Warren Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI, USA.
(5)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Levine Cancer Institute, Atrium Health, 
Charlotte, NC, USA.
(6)Department of Oncology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Karmanos 
Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal (SCCA) is an uncommon 
malignancy with limited therapeutic options. Nivolumab and pembrolizumab show 
promising results in patients with SCCA. Human papillomavirus (HPV)-negative 
tumors are frequently TP53-mutated (TP53-MT) and often resistant to therapy.
METHODS: We present a large molecularly-profiled cohort of SCCA, exploring the 
underlying biology of SCCA, differences between TP53-wild type (TP53-WT) and 
TP53-MT tumors, and differences between local and metastatic tumors. SCCA 
specimens (n=311) underwent multiplatform testing with immunohistochemistry 
(IHC), in situ hybridization (ISH) and next-generation sequencing (NGS). Tumor 
mutational burden (TMB) was calculated using only somatic nonsynonymous missense 
mutations. Chi-square testing was used for comparative analyses.
RESULTS: The most frequently mutated genes included PIK3CA (28.1%), KMT2D 
(19.5%), FBXW7 (12%), TP53 (12%) and PTEN (10.8%). The expression of PD-1 was 
seen in 68.8% and PD-L1 in 40.5% of tumors. High TMB was present in 6.7% of 
specimens. HER2 IHC was positive in 0.9%, amplification by chromogenic in situ 
hybridization (CISH) was seen 1.3%, and mutations in ERBB2 were present in 1.8% 
of tumors. The latter mutation has not been previously described in SCCA. When 
compared with TP53-WT tumors, TP53-MT tumors had higher rates of CDKN2A, EWSR1, 
JAK1, FGFR1 and BRAF mutations. PD-1 and PD-L1 expression were similar, and high 
TMB did not correlate with PD-1 (P=0.50) or PD-L1 (P=0.52) expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular profiling differences between TP53-MT and TP53-WT SCCA 
indicate different carcinogenic pathways which may influence response to 
therapy. Low frequency mutations in several druggable genes may provide 
therapeutic opportunities for patients with SCCA.

2021 Journal of Gastrointestinal Oncology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jgo-20-610
PMCID: PMC8576238
PMID: 34790403

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/jgo-20-610). DA, JX, ZG are employed by Caris Life 
Sciences. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.