---
reference_id: "PMID:37056678"
title: "K(ATP) channel mutations in congenital hyperinsulinism: Progress and challenges towards mechanism-based therapies."
authors:
- ElSheikh A
- Shyng SL
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1161117
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Sulfonylurea Receptors/genetics
- Adenosine Triphosphate/metabolism
- "Congenital Hyperinsulinism/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Insulin Secretion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# K(ATP) channel mutations in congenital hyperinsulinism: Progress and challenges towards mechanism-based therapies.
**Authors:** ElSheikh A, Shyng SL
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1161117](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1161117)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Mar 28;14:1161117. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1161117. eCollection 2023.

K(ATP) channel mutations in congenital hyperinsulinism: Progress and challenges 
towards mechanism-based therapies.

ElSheikh A(1)(2), Shyng SL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Physiology and Biochemistry, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR, United States.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt.

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is the most common cause of persistent 
hypoglycemia in infancy/childhood and is a serious condition associated with 
severe recurrent attacks of hypoglycemia due to dysregulated insulin secretion. 
Timely diagnosis and effective treatment are crucial to prevent severe 
hypoglycemia that may lead to life-long neurological complications. In 
pancreatic β-cells, adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive K+ (KATP) channels 
are a central regulator of insulin secretion vital for glucose homeostasis. 
Genetic defects that lead to loss of expression or function of KATP channels are 
the most common cause of HI (KATP-HI). Much progress has been made in our 
understanding of the molecular genetics and pathophysiology of KATP-HI in the 
past decades; however, treatment remains challenging, in particular for patients 
with diffuse disease who do not respond to the KATP channel activator diazoxide. 
In this review, we discuss current approaches and limitations on the diagnosis 
and treatment of KATP-HI, and offer perspectives on alternative therapeutic 
strategies.

Copyright © 2023 ElSheikh and Shyng.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1161117
PMCID: PMC10086357
PMID: 37056678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.