---
reference_id: "PMID:32223133"
title: Interplay of Ubiquitin-Like Modifiers Following Arsenic Trioxide Treatment.
authors:
- Rinfret Robert C
- McManus FP
- Lamoliatte F
- Thibault P
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00807
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Arsenic Trioxide
- Arsenicals/pharmacology
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Oxides/pharmacology
- Ubiquitin
- Ubiquitin-Specific Proteases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interplay of Ubiquitin-Like Modifiers Following Arsenic Trioxide Treatment.
**Authors:** Rinfret Robert C, McManus FP, Lamoliatte F, Thibault P
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00807](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00807)

## Content

1. J Proteome Res. 2020 May 1;19(5):1999-2010. doi:
10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00807.  Epub 2020 Apr 8.

Interplay of Ubiquitin-Like Modifiers Following Arsenic Trioxide Treatment.

Rinfret Robert C(1)(2), McManus FP(1), Lamoliatte F(1)(3), Thibault P(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Montreal, Québec H3T 1J4,
Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Montréal, Montreal, Québec H3T 1J4,
Canada.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Montréal, P.O. Box 6128, Station
Centre-Ville, Montreal, Québec H3T 1J4, Canada.

Arsenic trioxide (ATO) is a therapeutic agent used to treat acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL), a disease caused by a chromosomal translocation of the retinoic
acid receptor α (RARα) gene that can occur reciprocally with the promyelocytic
leukemia (PML) gene. The mechanisms through which ATO exerts its effects on
cells are not fully characterized though they involve the SUMOylation, the
ubiquitylation, and the degradation of the PML/RARα oncoprotein through the PML
moiety. To better understand the mechanisms that underlie the cytotoxicity
induced with increasing ATO levels, we profiled the changes in protein
SUMOylation, phosphorylation, and ubiquitylation on HEK293 cells following
exposure to low (1 μM) or elevated (10 μM) ATO for 4 h. Our analyses revealed
that a low dose of ATO resulted in the differential modification of selected
substrates including the SUMOylation (K380, K394, K490, and K497) and
ubiquitylation (K337, K401) of PML. These experiments also highlighted a number
of unexpected SUMOylated substrates involved in DNA damage response (e.g., PCNA,
YY1, and poly[ADP-ribose] polymerase 1 (PARP1)) and messenger RNA (mRNA)
splicing (e.g., ACIN1, USP39, and SART1) that were regulated at higher ATO
concentrations. Interestingly, additional enzymatic assays revealed that
SUMOylation of PARP1 impeded its proteolytic cleavage by caspase-3, suggesting
that SUMOylation could have a protective role in delaying cell apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00807
PMID: 32223133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
