---
reference_id: "PMID:33243541"
title: "The role of respiratory droplet physicochemistry in limiting and promoting the airborne transmission of human coronaviruses: A critical review."
authors:
- Niazi S
- Groth R
- Spann K
- Johnson GR
journal: Environ Pollut
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115767
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of respiratory droplet physicochemistry in limiting and promoting the airborne transmission of human coronaviruses: A critical review.
**Authors:** Niazi S, Groth R, Spann K, Johnson GR
**Journal:** Environ Pollut (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115767](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115767)

## Content

1. Environ Pollut. 2021 May 1;276:115767. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115767. Epub
 2020 Nov 6.

The role of respiratory droplet physicochemistry in limiting and promoting the 
airborne transmission of human coronaviruses: A critical review.

Niazi S(1), Groth R(1), Spann K(2), Johnson GR(3).

Author information:
(1)Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Science and Engineering Faculty, 
School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)Queensland University of Technology, Faculty of Health, School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Brisbane, Australia.
(3)Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Science and Engineering Faculty, 
School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, Brisbane, Australia. Electronic 
address: g.johnson@qut.edu.au.

Whether virulent human pathogenic coronaviruses (SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2) 
are effectively transmitted by aerosols remains contentious. Transmission modes 
of the novel coronavirus have become a hot topic of research with the importance 
of airborne transmission controversial due to the many factors that can 
influence virus transmission. Airborne transmission is an accepted potential 
route for the spread of some viral infections (measles, chickenpox); however, 
aerosol features and infectious inoculum vary from one respiratory virus to 
another. Infectious virus-laden aerosols can be produced by natural human 
respiratory activities, and their features are vital determinants for virus 
carriage and transmission. Physicochemical characteristics of infectious 
respiratory aerosols can influence the efficiency of virus transmission by 
droplets. This critical review identifies studies reporting instances of 
infected patients producing airborne human pathogenic coronaviruses, and 
evidence for the role of physical/chemical characteristics of human-generated 
droplets in altering embedded viruses' viability. We also review studies 
evaluating these viruses in the air, field studies and available evidence about 
seasonality patterns. Ultimately the literature suggests that a proportion of 
virulent human coronaviruses can plausibly be transmitted via the air, even 
though this might vary in different conditions. Evidence exists for 
respirable-sized airborne droplet nuclei containing viral RNA, although this 
does not necessarily imply that the virus is transmittable, capable of 
replicating in a recipient host, or that inoculum is sufficient to initiate 
infection. However, evidence suggests that coronaviruses can survive in 
simulated droplet nuclei for a significant time (>24 h). Nevertheless, 
laboratory nebulized virus-laden aerosols might not accurately model the 
complexity of human carrier aerosols in studying airborne viral transport. In 
summary, there is disagreement on whether wild coronaviruses can be transmitted 
via an airborne path and display seasonal patterns. Further studies are 
therefore required to provide supporting evidence for the role of airborne 
transmission and assumed mechanisms underlying seasonality.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115767
PMCID: PMC7645283
PMID: 33243541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.