---
reference_id: "PMID:19595511"
title: Intestinal membrane permeability and hypersensitivity in the irritable bowel syndrome.
authors:
- Zhou Q
- Zhang B
- Verne GN
journal: Pain
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2009.06.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intestinal membrane permeability and hypersensitivity in the irritable bowel syndrome.
**Authors:** Zhou Q, Zhang B, Verne GN
**Journal:** Pain (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pain.2009.06.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2009.06.017)

## Content

1. Pain. 2009 Nov;146(1-2):41-6. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2009.06.017.

Intestinal membrane permeability and hypersensitivity in the irritable bowel 
syndrome.

Zhou Q(1), Zhang B, Verne GN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common gastrointestinal disorder in which 
the underlying pathophysiology is poorly understood; however, increased 
intestinal permeability in diarrhea-predominant IBS patients has been reported. 
Here we demonstrate that diarrhea-predominant IBS (D-IBS) patients display 
increased intestinal permeability. We have also found that increased intestinal 
membrane permeability is associated with visceral and thermal hypersensitivity 
in this subset of D-IBS patients. We evaluated 54 D-IBS patients and 22 controls 
for intestinal membrane permeability using the lactulose/mannitol method. All 
subjects ingested 5g of lactulose and 2g of mannitol in 100ml of water after 
which their urine was collected. We also evaluated the mean mechanical visual 
analogue scale (M-VAS) pain rating to nociceptive thermal and visceral 
stimulation in all subjects. All study participants also completed the FBDSI 
scale. Approximately 39% of diarrhea-predominant IBS patients had increased 
intestinal membrane permeability as measured by the lactulose/mannitol ratio. 
These IBS patients also demonstrated higher M-VAS pain intensity reading scale. 
Interestingly, the IBS patients with hypersensitivity and increased intestinal 
permeability had a higher FBDSI score (100.8 + or - 5.4) than IBS patients with 
normal membrane permeability and sensitivity (51.6 + or - 12.7) and controls 
(6.1 + or - 5.6) (p<0.001). A subset of D-IBS patients had increased intestinal 
membrane permeability that was associated with an increased FBDSI score and 
increased hypersensitivity to visceral and thermal nociceptive pain stimuli. 
Thus, increased intestinal membrane permeability in D-IBS patients may lead to 
more severe IBS symptoms and hypersensitivity to somatic and visceral stimuli.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pain.2009.06.017
PMCID: PMC2763174
PMID: 19595511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]