---
reference_id: "PMID:9054777"
title: Outcome in bulimia nervosa.
authors:
- Keel PK
- Mitchell JE
journal: Am J Psychiatry
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1176/ajp.154.3.313
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- "Anorexia Nervosa/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- "Bulimia/diagnosis, epidemiology, mortality"
- Cause of Death
- Comorbidity
- "Depressive Disorder/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
- Prognosis
- Recurrence
- Severity of Illness Index
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcome in bulimia nervosa.
**Authors:** Keel PK, Mitchell JE
**Journal:** Am J Psychiatry (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1176/ajp.154.3.313](https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.154.3.313)

## Content

1. Am J Psychiatry. 1997 Mar;154(3):313-21. doi: 10.1176/ajp.154.3.313.

Outcome in bulimia nervosa.

Keel PK(1), Mitchell JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Psychiatry. 1997 Dec;154(12):1791; author reply 1791-2.
    Am J Psychiatry. 1997 Dec;154(12):1791; author reply 1791-2.

OBJECTIVE: The authors sought to synthesize existing data on outcome for
individuals diagnosed with bulimia nervosa in order to better understand
long-term outcome and prognostic factors.
METHOD: They reviewed 88 studies that conducted follow-up assessments with
bulimic subjects at least 6 months after presentation. Findings are summarized
for the areas of mortality, recovery, relapse, crossover, and prognostic
variables.
RESULTS: The crude mortality rate due to all causes of death for subjects with
bulimia nervosa in these studies was 0.3% (seven deaths among 2,194 subjects);
however, ascertainment rates and follow-up periods were small and likely to
produce underestimation. Five to 10 years following presentation, approximately
50% of women initially diagnosed with bulimia nervosa had fully recovered from
their disorder, while nearly 20% continued to meet full criteria for bulimia
nervosa. Approximately 30% of women experienced relapse into bulimic symptoms,
and risk of relapse appeared to decline 4 years after presentation. Few
prognostic factors have been consistently identified, but personality traits,
such as impulsivity, may contribute to poorer outcome. In addition,
participation in a treatment outcome study was associated with improved outcome
for follow-up periods less than 5 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment interventions may speed eventual recovery but do not
appear to alter outcome more than 5 years following presentation. Long-term
outcome for women diagnosed with bulimia nervosa remains unclear. However, this
disorder may be chronic for at least a subset of women.

DOI: 10.1176/ajp.154.3.313
PMID: 9054777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
