---
reference_id: "PMID:27664778"
title: "Detection of parvovirus B19 DNA in blood: Viruses or DNA remnants?"
authors:
- Molenaar-de Backer MW
- Russcher A
- Kroes AC
- Koppelman MH
- Lanfermeijer M
- Zaaijer HL
journal: J Clin Virol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2016.09.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of parvovirus B19 DNA in blood: Viruses or DNA remnants?
**Authors:** Molenaar-de Backer MW, Russcher A, Kroes AC, Koppelman MH, Lanfermeijer M, Zaaijer HL
**Journal:** J Clin Virol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcv.2016.09.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2016.09.004)

## Content

1. J Clin Virol. 2016 Nov;84:19-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2016.09.004. Epub 2016 Sep
 13.

Detection of parvovirus B19 DNA in blood: Viruses or DNA remnants?

Molenaar-de Backer MW(1), Russcher A(2), Kroes AC(2), Koppelman MH(3), 
Lanfermeijer M(3), Zaaijer HL(3).

Author information:
(1)Sanquin Blood Supply Foundation, Department of Blood-borne Infections, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: m.molenaar@sanquin.nl.
(2)Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Sanquin Blood Supply Foundation, Department of Blood-borne Infections, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Clin Virol. 2017 Oct;95:10-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2017.07.017.

BACKGROUND: Parvovirus B19 (B19V) DNA can be detected in blood over a long 
period after acute infection. Several reports associate the presence of B19V DNA 
with disease, irrespective of timing of the initial B19V infection.
OBJECTIVES: This study aims to analyze the properties of B19V DNA in blood, 
differentiating between bare, non-infectious strands of DNA and B19V DNA in 
viable virions.
STUDY DESIGN: Ten blood donors with asymptomatic acute B19V infection were 
followed and sampled up to 22 months after infection. The samples were treated 
with and without an endonuclease and tested for B19V DNA, to distinguish between 
DNA in virions and naked DNA.
RESULTS: In the acute phase of infection, high levels of B19V DNA were detected, 
concurrent with B19V IgM antibodies. B19V DNA apparently was encapsidated, as 
indicated by resistance to endonuclease degradation. Subsequently, B19V DNA 
remained detectable for more than one year in all donors at low levels (<105 
IU/mL). Approximately 150days after infection B19V DNA became degradable by an 
endonuclease, indicating that this concerned naked DNA. In some donors a second 
endonuclease-resistant peak occurred.
DISCUSSION: Detection of B19V DNA in blood by PCR does not necessarily imply 
that B19V replication takes place and that infectious B19V virions are present. 
We propose that remnant B19V DNA strands can be released from tissues without 
active replication. This finding urges to reconsider an assumed role of B19V 
infection mainly based on B19V DNA detection in blood, a much debated subject in 
clinical syndromes such as myocarditis and arthritis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2016.09.004
PMID: 27664778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]