---
reference_id: "PMID:34988410"
title: Cell cycle defects underlie childhood-onset cardiomyopathy associated with Noonan syndrome.
authors:
- Meier AB
- Raj Murthi S
- Rawat H
- Toepfer CN
- Santamaria G
- Schmid M
- Mastantuono E
- Schwarzmayr T
- Berutti R
- Cleuziou J
- Ewert P
- Görlach A
- Klingel K
- Laugwitz KL
- Seidman CE
- Seidman JG
- Moretti A
- Wolf CM
journal: iScience
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103596
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell cycle defects underlie childhood-onset cardiomyopathy associated with Noonan syndrome.
**Authors:** Meier AB, Raj Murthi S, Rawat H, Toepfer CN, Santamaria G, Schmid M, Mastantuono E, Schwarzmayr T, Berutti R, Cleuziou J, Ewert P, Görlach A, Klingel K, Laugwitz KL, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, Moretti A, Wolf CM
**Journal:** iScience (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.isci.2021.103596](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.103596)

## Content

1. iScience. 2021 Dec 9;25(1):103596. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103596.
eCollection  2022 Jan 21.

Cell cycle defects underlie childhood-onset cardiomyopathy associated with
Noonan syndrome.

Meier AB(1)(2), Raj Murthi S(3), Rawat H(1)(2), Toepfer CN(4)(5)(6), Santamaria
G(1)(2), Schmid M(5), Mastantuono E(7)(2), Schwarzmayr T(7)(2), Berutti R(8)(9),
Cleuziou J(10)(11), Ewert P(3)(2), Görlach A(3)(2), Klingel K(12), Laugwitz
KL(1)(2), Seidman CE(4), Seidman JG(4), Moretti A(1)(2), Wolf CM(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Medicine, Cardiology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical
University of Munich, School of Medicine and Health, Munich 81675, Germany.
(2)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Munich Heart
Alliance, Munich Germany.
(3)Department of Congenital Heart Defects and Pediatric Cardiology, German Heart
Center Munich, Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine and Health,
Munich 80636, Germany.
(4)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(6)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, German Research Center
for Environmental Health, Neuherberg 85764, Germany.
(8)Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University
of Munich, School of Medicine and Health, Munich 81675, Germany.
(9)Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, German Research Center
for Environmental Health, Neuherberg 85764, Germany.
(10)Department of Congenital and Pediatric Heart Surgery, German Heart Center
Munich, Technical University of Munich, Munich 80636, Germany.
(11)INSURE (Institute for Translational Cardiac Surgery), Department of
Cardiovascular Surgery, German Heart Center Munich, Technical University of
Munich, Munich 80636, Germany.
(12)Institute for Pathology and Neuropathology, Department of Cardiopathology,
University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen 72076, Germany.

Childhood-onset myocardial hypertrophy and cardiomyopathic changes are
associated with significant morbidity and mortality in early life, particularly
in patients with Noonan syndrome, a multisystemic genetic disorder caused by
autosomal dominant mutations in genes of the Ras-MAPK pathway. Although the
cardiomyopathy associated with Noonan syndrome (NS-CM) shares certain cardiac
features with the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by mutations in sarcomeric
proteins (HCM), such as pathological myocardial remodeling, ventricular
dysfunction, and increased risk for malignant arrhythmias, the clinical course
of NS-CM significantly differs from HCM. This suggests a distinct
pathophysiology that remains to be elucidated. Here, through analysis of
sarcomeric myosin conformational states, histopathology, and gene expression in
left ventricular myocardial tissue from NS-CM, HCM, and normal hearts
complemented with disease modeling in cardiomyocytes differentiated from
patient-derived PTPN11 N308S/+ induced pluripotent stem cells, we demonstrate
distinct disease phenotypes between NS-CM and HCM and uncover cell cycle defects
as a potential driver of NS-CM.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103596
PMCID: PMC8704485
PMID: 34988410

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Wolf is a consultant for Day One
Therapeutics. All other authors declare no competing interests.
