---
reference_id: "PMID:40575034"
title: Single-cell transcriptomic landscape indicates the potential role of immunotherapy in metastatic pancreatic angiosarcoma.
authors:
- Yang Y
- Chen L
- Liu M
- Lin X
- Peng S
- Xie Y
- Zeng Z
- Chen M
- Zhang N
journal: Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/gastro/goaf046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell transcriptomic landscape indicates the potential role of immunotherapy in metastatic pancreatic angiosarcoma.
**Authors:** Yang Y, Chen L, Liu M, Lin X, Peng S, Xie Y, Zeng Z, Chen M, Zhang N
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/gastro/goaf046](https://doi.org/10.1093/gastro/goaf046)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf). 2025 Jun 16;13:goaf046. doi: 10.1093/gastro/goaf046.
eCollection 2025.

Single-cell transcriptomic landscape indicates the potential role of
immunotherapy in metastatic pancreatic angiosarcoma.

Yang Y(1), Chen L(1), Liu M(1), Lin X(1), Peng S(1)(2), Xie Y(2), Zeng Z(1),
Chen M(1), Zhang N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Institute of Precision Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic angiosarcoma is a rare and highly aggressive tumor
originating from lymphatic or vascular endothelial cells, with poor prognosis
and few effective treatments. In this study, we aimed to characterize the tumor
ecosystem of metastatic pancreatic angiosarcoma, along with its potential
treatment strategies.
METHODS: Single-cell RNA-sequencing and bioinformatics analysis were performed
on samples obtained from one patient, including at total of 16,841 cells from
pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis and adjacent normal liver tissue.
RESULTS: Pancreatic angiosarcoma cells exhibited marked upregulation of nuclear
factor kappa-B (NF-κB), hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), and myelocytomatosis
oncogene (MYC) proto-oncogene signaling pathways, while presenting limited
upregulation of actionable therapeutic targets except for cyclin-dependent
kinase 4 (CDK4) and epidermal growth factor receptor. Several immune checkpoint
genes, including cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA4),
lymphocyte-activation gene 3 (LAG3), programmed cell death protein 1 (PDCD1),
and cluster of differentiation 86 (CD86), were upregulated in tumor-infiltrating
T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, and myeloid cells. Furthermore,
intercellular interaction profiling demonstrated enhanced activity of the
programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) and CD86 signaling pathways within the tumor
microenvironment. The gene-set scores of T/NK-cell exhaustion, regulatory T
cell, and macrophage angiogenesis were significantly higher in tumor tissues
compared with adjacent normal tissues. However, the phagocytosis scores of
macrophages within the tumor-infiltrating region were significantly lower than
those in the adjacent normal tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings outlined an immunosuppressive and angiogenic tumor
ecosystem in pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis, suggesting that
pancreatic angiosarcoma may be insensitive to most targeted therapies.
Conversely, immunotherapies targeting LAG3, PD-L1, and CD86 (e.g. isatuximab,
Opdualag, and abatacept) and anti-angiogenic agents may be therapeutically
effective and worthy of subsequent exploration.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press and Sixth Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University.

DOI: 10.1093/gastro/goaf046
PMCID: PMC12199912
PMID: 40575034

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.
