---
reference_id: "PMID:11313741"
title: "Human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase (alpha-NAGA) deficiency: no association with neuroaxonal dystrophy?"
authors:
- Bakker HD
- de Sonnaville ML
- Vreken P
- Abeling NG
- Groener JE
- Keulemans JL
- van Diggelen OP
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200598
keywords:
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Fibroblasts/enzymology, pathology"
- Genotype
- "Hexosaminidases/deficiency, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Neuroaxonal Dystrophies/enzymology, genetics"
- Oligosaccharides/analysis
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Skin/enzymology
- alpha-N-Acetylgalactosaminidase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase (alpha-NAGA) deficiency: no association with neuroaxonal dystrophy?
**Authors:** Bakker HD, de Sonnaville ML, Vreken P, Abeling NG, Groener JE, Keulemans JL, van Diggelen OP
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200598](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200598)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2001 Feb;9(2):91-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200598.

Human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase (alpha-NAGA) deficiency: no association 
with neuroaxonal dystrophy?

Bakker HD(1), de Sonnaville ML, Vreken P, Abeling NG, Groener JE, Keulemans JL, 
van Diggelen OP.

Author information:
(1)Emma Children's Hospital and Laboratory of Genetic Metabolic Diseases, 
Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Two new individuals with alpha-NAGA deficiency are presented. The index patient, 
3 years old, has congenital cataract, slight motor retardation and secondary 
demyelinisation. Screening of his sibs revealed an alpha-NAGA deficiency in his 
7-year-old healthy brother who had no clinical or neurological symptoms. Both 
sibs are homozygous for the E325K mutation, the same genotype that was found in 
the most severe form of alpha-NAGA deficiency presenting as infantile 
neuroaxonal dystrophy. Thus, at the age of 7 years the same genotype of 
alpha-NAGA may present as a 'non-disease' (present healthy case) and can be 
associated with the vegetative state (the first two patients described with 
alpha-NAGA deficiency). The clinical heterogeneity among the 11 known 
individuals with alpha-NAGA deficiency is extreme, with a 'non-disease' (two 
cases) and infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (two cases) at the opposite sides of 
the clinical spectrum. The broad spectrum is completed by a very heterogeneous 
group of patients with various degrees of epilepsy/behavioural 
difficulties/psychomotor retardation (four patients) and a mild phenotype in 
adults without overt neurological manifestations who have angiokeratoma and 
clear vacuolisation in various cell types (three cases). These observations are 
difficult to reconcile with a straightforward genotype-phenotype correlation and 
suggest that factors or genes other than alpha-NAGA contribute to the clinical 
heterogeneity of the 11 patients with alpha-NAGA deficiency.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200598
PMID: 11313741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]