---
reference_id: "PMID:15832489"
title: "Pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents: treatment implications."
authors:
- Gungor N
- Arslanian S
journal: Treat Endocrinol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.2165/00024677-200201060-00002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents: treatment implications.
**Authors:** Gungor N, Arslanian S
**Journal:** Treat Endocrinol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00024677-200201060-00002](https://doi.org/10.2165/00024677-200201060-00002)

## Content

1. Treat Endocrinol. 2002;1(6):359-71. doi: 10.2165/00024677-200201060-00002.

Pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents: 
treatment implications.

Gungor N(1), Arslanian S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes Mellitus, 
Children's Hospital, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, 
USA.

Erratum in
    Treat Endocrinol. 2003;2(2):143.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus was considered an exclusive disease of adulthood until 
the late 1970s, when reports of an increased prevalence in the pediatric age 
group emerged in the literature. The concerning upswing in the rate of diagnosis 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents has continued, parallel 
to the increasing rates of obesity. The disease is not specific to the U.S.; it 
has proven to be a global problem. The current information on type 2 diabetes 
mellitus in children and adolescents is mostly extrapolated from studies in 
adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus, due to the paucity of studies conducted in 
youth. Obesity, family history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, minority ethnicity 
and race, polycystic ovary syndrome, maternal diabetes mellitus or impaired 
glucose tolerance during gestation, and acanthosis nigricans are the major risk 
factors and markers of youth-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus. The 
pathophysiology, which involves both an insulin secretion defect and resistance 
to insulin, needs further clarification in pediatric studies. Current management 
approaches involve lifestyle modification (nutritional and exercise) along with 
pharmacologic agents, such as insulin and oral antihyperglycemic medications, as 
indicated. A recent study on the use of metformin in childhood-onset type 2 
diabetes mellitus demonstrated the drug to be effective and to have a good 
safety profile in this population. However, the outcomes of ongoing studies and 
future studies focusing on type 2 diabetes mellitus in the pediatric age group 
will be crucial in terms of fine-tuning management plans and setting up 
appropriate prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.2165/00024677-200201060-00002
PMID: 15832489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]