---
reference_id: "PMID:17669242"
title: "[Determination of serum argininosuccinate lyase in diagnosing liver diseases]."
authors:
- Feng JF
- Chen TM
- Tu ZG
journal: Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi
year: '2007'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Argininosuccinate Lyase/blood
- Automation
- Female
- Humans
- "Liver Diseases/blood, diagnosis"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- ROC Curve
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Serum/chemistry
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Determination of serum argininosuccinate lyase in diagnosing liver diseases].
**Authors:** Feng JF, Chen TM, Tu ZG
**Journal:** Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi (2007)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;15(7):521-4.

[Determination of serum argininosuccinate lyase in diagnosing liver diseases].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng JF(1), Chen TM, Tu ZG.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Clinical Laboratory Diagnosis of Education Ministry, School
of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the value of the determination of the levels of serum
argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) in diagnosing various liver diseases.
METHODS: Two hundred and ninety-one patients with various liver diseases, 257
patients with non-liver disease, and 32 healthy controls were recruited for this
study and their serum ASL, ALT, AST, GGT, LDH, ALP, and total bilirubin (TBil)
levels were determined. Liver biopsies were performed on 31 patients with
hepatopathy.
RESULTS: Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis showed that the
sensitivity and specificity of ASL in assessing liver diseases were 100% and
91.1% (at cut-off values of 8 U/L), those of ALT were 97.6% and 24.7% and those
of AST were 83.8% and 28.3% (both at cut-off values = 40.0 U/L), respectively.
The levels of ASL in various liver disease patients were: in liver cancer -
acute hepatitis - liver cirrhosis - chronic hepatitis. A positive correlation (r
= 0.417) was observed between serum ASL levels (86.9+/-26.5) and scores of
histopathological inflammation grading (9.83+/-3.36).
CONCLUSION: ASL is of higher sensitivity and specificity than those of ALT and
AST for diagnosing liver diseases. ASL may be used as a useful marker in
estimating hepatopathy.

PMID: 17669242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
