---
reference_id: "PMID:20493458"
title: "Cranioectodermal Dysplasia, Sensenbrenner syndrome, is a ciliopathy caused by mutations in the IFT122 gene."
authors:
- Walczak-Sztulpa J
- Eggenschwiler J
- Osborn D
- Brown DA
- Emma F
- Klingenberg C
- Hennekam RC
- Torre G
- Garshasbi M
- Tzschach A
- Szczepanska M
- Krawczynski M
- Zachwieja J
- Zwolinska D
- Beales PL
- Ropers HH
- Latos-Bielenska A
- Kuss AW
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cranioectodermal Dysplasia, Sensenbrenner syndrome, is a ciliopathy caused by mutations in the IFT122 gene.
**Authors:** Walczak-Sztulpa J, Eggenschwiler J, Osborn D, Brown DA, Emma F, Klingenberg C, Hennekam RC, Torre G, Garshasbi M, Tzschach A, Szczepanska M, Krawczynski M, Zachwieja J, Zwolinska D, Beales PL, Ropers HH, Latos-Bielenska A, Kuss AW
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.012)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Jun 11;86(6):949-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.012.
Epub  2010 May 20.

Cranioectodermal Dysplasia, Sensenbrenner syndrome, is a ciliopathy caused by 
mutations in the IFT122 gene.

Walczak-Sztulpa J(1), Eggenschwiler J, Osborn D, Brown DA, Emma F, Klingenberg 
C, Hennekam RC, Torre G, Garshasbi M, Tzschach A, Szczepanska M, Krawczynski M, 
Zachwieja J, Zwolinska D, Beales PL, Ropers HH, Latos-Bielenska A, Kuss AW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular 
Genetics, Berlin 14195, Germany. jsztulpa@umed.poznan.pl

Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED) is a disorder characterized by craniofacial, 
skeletal, and ectodermal abnormalities. Most cases reported to date are 
sporadic, but a few familial cases support an autosomal-recessive inheritance 
pattern. Aiming at the elucidation of the genetic basis of CED, we collected 13 
patients with CED symptoms from 12 independent families. In one family with 
consanguineous parents two siblings were affected, permitting linkage analysis 
and homozygosity mapping. This revealed a single region of homozygosity with a 
significant LOD score (3.57) on chromosome 3q21-3q24. By sequencing candidate 
genes from this interval we found a homozygous missense mutation in the IFT122 
(WDR10) gene that cosegregated with the disease. Examination of IFT122 in our 
patient cohort revealed one additional homozygous missense change in the patient 
from a second consanguineous family. In addition, we found compound 
heterozygosity for a donor splice-site change and a missense change in one 
sporadic patient. All mutations were absent in 340 control chromosomes. Because 
IFT122 plays an important role in the assembly and maintenance of eukaryotic 
cilia, we investigated patient fibroblasts and found significantly reduced 
frequency and length of primary cilia as compared to controls. Furthermore, we 
transiently knocked down ift122 in zebrafish embryos and observed the typical 
phenotype found in other models of ciliopathies. Because not all of our patients 
harbored mutations in IFT122, CED seems to be genetically heterogeneous. Still, 
by identifying CED as a ciliary disorder, our study suggests that the causative 
mutations in the unresolved cases most likely affect primary cilia function too.

Copyright 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.012
PMCID: PMC3032067
PMID: 20493458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]