---
reference_id: "PMID:26595735"
title: Immune Dysfunction in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
authors:
- Bhat TA
- Panzica L
- Kalathil SG
- Thanavala Y
journal: Ann Am Thorac Soc
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201503-126AW
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune Dysfunction in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
**Authors:** Bhat TA, Panzica L, Kalathil SG, Thanavala Y
**Journal:** Ann Am Thorac Soc (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1513/AnnalsATS.201503-126AW](https://doi.org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.201503-126AW)

## Content

1. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2015 Nov;12 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):S169-75. doi: 
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201503-126AW.

Immune Dysfunction in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Bhat TA(1), Panzica L(1), Kalathil SG(1), Thanavala Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a complex chronic disease. 
Chronic inflammation is the hallmark of COPD, involving the interplay of a wide 
variety of cells in the lung microenvironment. Cigarette smoke (CS) induces 
chronic lung inflammation and is considered a key etiological factor in the 
development and pathogenesis of COPD. Structural and inflammatory cells in the 
lung respond to CS exposure by releasing proinflammatory mediators that recruit 
additional inflammatory immune cells, which collectively contribute to the 
establishment of a chronic inflammatory microenvironment. Chronic inflammation 
contributes to lung damage, compromises innate and adaptive immune responses, 
and facilitates the recurrent episodes of respiratory infection that punctuate 
and further contribute to the pathological manifestations of the stable disease. 
A number of studies support the conclusion that immune dysfunction leads to 
exacerbations and disease severity in COPD. Our group has clearly demonstrated 
that CS exacerbates lung inflammation and compromises immunity to respiratory 
pathogens in a mouse model of COPD. We have also investigated the phenotype of 
immune cells in patients with COPD compared with healthy control subjects and 
found extensive immune dysfunction due to the presence and functional activity 
of T regulatory cells, CD4(+)PD-1(+) exhausted effector T cells and 
myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Manipulation of these immunosuppressive 
networks in COPD could provide a rational strategy to restore functional immune 
responses, reduce exacerbations, and improve lung function. In this review, we 
discuss the role of immune dysfunction in COPD that may contribute to recurrent 
respiratory infections and disease severity.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201503-126AW
PMCID: PMC4722840
PMID: 26595735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]