---
reference_id: "PMID:26485283"
title: A mutation in the nucleoporin-107 gene causes XX gonadal dysgenesis.
authors:
- Weinberg-Shukron A
- Renbaum P
- Kalifa R
- Zeligson S
- Ben-Neriah Z
- Dreifuss A
- Abu-Rayyan A
- Maatuk N
- Fardian N
- Rekler D
- Kanaan M
- Samson AO
- Levy-Lahad E
- Gerlitz O
- Zangen D
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1172/JCI83553
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- "Animals, Genetically Modified"
- "Aquaporins/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Consanguinity
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Drosophila Proteins/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Drosophila melanogaster/genetics
- Female
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis, 46,XX/genetics"
- Humans
- "Infertility, Female/genetics"
- Male
- Mice
- "Models, Molecular"
- Morphogenesis
- Multiprotein Complexes
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nuclear Pore Complex Proteins/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Oogenesis/genetics
- Ovary/pathology
- Ovum/pathology
- Pedigree
- Protein Conformation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in the nucleoporin-107 gene causes XX gonadal dysgenesis.
**Authors:** Weinberg-Shukron A, Renbaum P, Kalifa R, Zeligson S, Ben-Neriah Z, Dreifuss A, Abu-Rayyan A, Maatuk N, Fardian N, Rekler D, Kanaan M, Samson AO, Levy-Lahad E, Gerlitz O, Zangen D
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI83553](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI83553)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2015 Nov 2;125(11):4295-304. doi: 10.1172/JCI83553. Epub 2015
Oct  20.

A mutation in the nucleoporin-107 gene causes XX gonadal dysgenesis.

Weinberg-Shukron A, Renbaum P, Kalifa R, Zeligson S, Ben-Neriah Z, Dreifuss A,
Abu-Rayyan A, Maatuk N, Fardian N, Rekler D, Kanaan M, Samson AO, Levy-Lahad E,
Gerlitz O, Zangen D.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2015 Nov 2;125(11):4005-7. doi: 10.1172/JCI84692.

Ovarian development and maintenance are poorly understood; however, diseases
that affect these processes can offer insights into the underlying mechanisms.
XX female gonadal dysgenesis (XX-GD) is a rare, genetically heterogeneous
disorder that is characterized by underdeveloped, dysfunctional ovaries, with
subsequent lack of spontaneous pubertal development, primary amenorrhea, uterine
hypoplasia, and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Here, we report an extended
consanguineous family of Palestinian origin, in which 4 females exhibited XX-GD.
Using homozygosity mapping and whole-exome sequencing, we identified a recessive
missense mutation in nucleoporin-107 (NUP107, c.1339G>A, p.D447N). This mutation
segregated with the XX-GD phenotype and was not present in available databases
or in 150 healthy ethnically matched controls. NUP107 is a component of the
nuclear pore complex, and the NUP107-associated protein SEH1 is required for
oogenesis in Drosophila. In Drosophila, Nup107 knockdown in somatic gonadal
cells resulted in female sterility, whereas males were fully fertile. Transgenic
rescue of Drosophila females bearing the Nup107D364N mutation, which corresponds
to the human NUP107 (p.D447N), resulted in almost complete sterility, with a
marked reduction in progeny, morphologically aberrant eggshells, and
disintegrating egg chambers, indicating defective oogenesis. These results
indicate a pivotal role for NUP107 in ovarian development and suggest that
nucleoporin defects may play a role in milder and more common conditions such as
premature ovarian failure.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI83553
PMCID: PMC4639971
PMID: 26485283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
