---
reference_id: "PMID:37830578"
title: "Exploration of SUMO2/3 Expression Levels and Autophagy Process in Fragile X-Associated Tremor/Ataxia Syndrome: Addressing Study Limitations and Insights for Future Research."
authors:
- Alvarez-Mora MI
- Garrabou G
- Molina-Porcel L
- Grillo-Risco R
- Garcia-Garcia F
- Barcos T
- Cantó-Santos J
- Rodriguez-Revenga L
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12192364
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Tremor/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Ubiquitin/metabolism
- Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1/genetics
- Fragile X Syndrome/pathology
- Ataxia/pathology
- Autophagy
- Small Ubiquitin-Related Modifier Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploration of SUMO2/3 Expression Levels and Autophagy Process in Fragile X-Associated Tremor/Ataxia Syndrome: Addressing Study Limitations and Insights for Future Research.
**Authors:** Alvarez-Mora MI, Garrabou G, Molina-Porcel L, Grillo-Risco R, Garcia-Garcia F, Barcos T, Cantó-Santos J, Rodriguez-Revenga L
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12192364](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12192364)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Sep 26;12(19):2364. doi: 10.3390/cells12192364.

Exploration of SUMO2/3 Expression Levels and Autophagy Process in Fragile 
X-Associated Tremor/Ataxia Syndrome: Addressing Study Limitations and Insights 
for Future Research.

Alvarez-Mora MI(1)(2)(3), Garrabou G(2)(4), Molina-Porcel L(3)(5)(6), 
Grillo-Risco R(7), Garcia-Garcia F(7), Barcos T(1), Cantó-Santos J(2)(4), 
Rodriguez-Revenga L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, 
08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)CIBER of Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 08036 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Fundacio de Recerca Clínic Barcelona-Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques 
August Pi i Sunyer (FRCB-IDIBAPS), 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Inherited Metabolic Diseases and Muscle Disorders' Research Laboratory 
(U722), Cellex-IDIBAPS, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of 
Barcelona, Internal Medicine Department--Hospital Clínic Clinic of Barcelona, 
08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Alzheimer's Disease and Other Cognitive Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, 
Hospital Clinic, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Neurological Tissue Bank of the Biobanc-Hospital Clinic-FCRB-IDIBAPS, 08036 
Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Unit, Principe Felipe Research Center 
(CIPF), 46012 Valencia, Spain.

Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a late-onset 
neurodegenerative disorder that appears in adult FMR1 premutation carriers. The 
neuropathological hallmark of FXTAS is an intranuclear inclusion in neurons and 
astrocytes. Nearly 200 different proteins have been identified in FXTAS 
inclusions, being the small ubiquitin-related modifier 2 (SUMO2), ubiquitin and 
p62 the most highly abundant. These proteins are components of the protein 
degradation machinery. This study aimed to characterize SUMO2/3 expression 
levels and autophagy process in human postmortem brain samples and skin 
fibroblast cultures from FXTAS patients. Results revealed that FXTAS postmortem 
brain samples are positive for SUMO2/3 conjugates and supported the idea that 
SUMO2/3 accumulation is involved in inclusion formation. Insights from 
RNA-sequencing data indicated that SUMOylation processes are significantly 
upregulated in FXTAS samples. In addition, the analysis of the autophagy flux 
showed the accumulation of p62 protein levels and autophagosomes in skin 
fibroblasts from FXTAS patients. Similarly, gene set analysis evidenced a 
significant downregulation in gene ontology terms related to autophagy in FXTAS 
samples. Overall, this study provides new evidence supporting the role of 
SUMOylation and autophagic processes in the pathogenic mechanisms underlying 
FXTAS.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12192364
PMCID: PMC10571773
PMID: 37830578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The other authors declare no conflict of 
interest related to this work.