---
reference_id: "PMID:11347740"
title: Concordance for type 1 diabetes in identical twins is affected by insulin genotype.
authors:
- Metcalfe KA
- Hitman GA
- Rowe RE
- Hawa M
- Huang X
- Stewart T
- Leslie RD
journal: Diabetes Care
year: '2001'
doi: 10.2337/diacare.24.5.838
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concordance for type 1 diabetes in identical twins is affected by insulin genotype.
**Authors:** Metcalfe KA, Hitman GA, Rowe RE, Hawa M, Huang X, Stewart T, Leslie RD
**Journal:** Diabetes Care (2001)
**DOI:** [10.2337/diacare.24.5.838](https://doi.org/10.2337/diacare.24.5.838)

## Content

1. Diabetes Care. 2001 May;24(5):838-42. doi: 10.2337/diacare.24.5.838.

Concordance for type 1 diabetes in identical twins is affected by insulin 
genotype.

Metcalfe KA(1), Hitman GA, Rowe RE, Hawa M, Huang X, Stewart T, Leslie RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, St Bartholomew's and the Royal 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary and Westfield College, 
University of London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Monozygotic twins are usually discordant (only one twin affected) for 
type 1 diabetes. Discordance for disease between such twins implies a role for 
nongenetically determined factors but could also be influenced by a decreased 
load of diabetes susceptibility genes. The aim of this study was to determine 
whether two susceptibility genes were less prevalent in discordant twins 
compared with concordant twins.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied 77 monozygotic twin pairs (INS), 40 
concordant and 37 discordant, for type 1 diabetes at polymorphism of the insulin 
gene region on chromosome 11 p and HLA-DQBI.
RESULTS: The disease-associated INS genotype (Hph I) was identified in 87.5% of 
the concordant twins but only in 59.5% (P = 0.005) of the discordant twins. 
Neither DQB1*0201 nor DQB1*0302 was seen in 2 of 40 (5%) concordant twins 
compared with 8 of 37 (22%) discordant twins (P = 0.04). No statistical 
differences were seen between concordant and discordant twins at individual 
alleles of DQB1. Combining insulin and DQ data, 5% of concordant twins compared 
with 32.4% of discordant twins had neither DQB1*0201/DQB1*0302 nor the high-risk 
Hph I INS "++" genotype (P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the possession of the high-risk Hph I insulin 
genotype increases the likelihood of identical twins being concordant for type 1 
diabetes and that the "load" of both major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and 
non-MHC susceptibility genes has an impact on the disease penetrance of type 1 
diabetes.

DOI: 10.2337/diacare.24.5.838
PMID: 11347740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]