---
reference_id: "PMID:8465574"
title: "[Polyarthritis in the elderly]."
authors:
- Caroit M
journal: Z Gerontol
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Polyarthritis in the elderly].
**Authors:** Caroit M
**Journal:** Z Gerontol (1993)

## Content

1. Z Gerontol. 1993 Jan-Feb;26(1):13-6.

[Polyarthritis in the elderly].

[Article in German]

Caroit M(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Rhumatologie honoraire de l'Hôpital Notre Dame de Bon Secours, 
Paris, France.

Ten to thirty-three per cent of all cases of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) develop 
after sixty years of age. Late-onset RA patients are more likely to be male, to 
have faster onset of symptoms, to experience shoulder and hip disease initially, 
and to have higher erythrocyte sedimentation rates; they are less likely to 
develop rheumatoid nodules, extraarticular manifestations, positive serologic 
tests, or unfavorable outcomes. There are roughly three patterns of late-onset 
RA: a classical form which resembles typical adult-onset RA; a limited, fairly 
mild form in which Gougerot-Sjögren syndrome often coexists; and a form in which 
the shoulders and hips are involved first. The latter form, whose early stage 
closely resembles polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR), accounts for approximately 25% 
of cases, is very specific of elderly patients, and is difficult to 
differentiate from PMR. RS3PE (Remitting Seronegative Symmetrical Synovitis with 
Pitting Edema) is a different entity from RA.

PMID: 8465574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]