---
reference_id: "PMID:38424108"
title: Deregulated protein homeostasis constrains fetal hematopoietic stem cell pool expansion in Fanconi anemia.
authors:
- Kovuru N
- Mochizuki-Kashio M
- Menna T
- Jeffrey G
- Hong Y
- Me Yoon Y
- Zhang Z
- Kurre P
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-46159-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deregulated protein homeostasis constrains fetal hematopoietic stem cell pool expansion in Fanconi anemia.
**Authors:** Kovuru N, Mochizuki-Kashio M, Menna T, Jeffrey G, Hong Y, Me Yoon Y, Zhang Z, Kurre P
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-46159-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-46159-1)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Feb 29;15(1):1852. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-46159-1.

Deregulated protein homeostasis constrains fetal hematopoietic stem cell pool 
expansion in Fanconi anemia.

Kovuru N(#)(1), Mochizuki-Kashio M(#)(2), Menna T(1), Jeffrey G(1), Hong Y(3), 
Me Yoon Y(4), Zhang Z(5), Kurre P(6).

Author information:
(1)Comprehensive Bone Marrow Failure Center, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia; Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Microscopic and Developmental Anatomy, Tokyo Women's Medical 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)La Trobe University, Department of Biochemistry and Chemistry, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(4)Committee on Immunology, Graduate Program in Biosciences, University of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Comprehensive Bone Marrow Failure Center, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia; Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. kurrep@chop.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Demand-adjusted and cell type specific rates of protein synthesis represent an 
important safeguard for fate and function of long-term hematopoietic stem cells. 
Here, we identify increased protein synthesis rates in the fetal hematopoietic 
stem cell pool at the onset of hematopoietic failure in Fanconi Anemia, a 
prototypical DNA repair disorder that manifests with bone marrow failure. 
Mechanistically, the accumulation of misfolded proteins in Fancd2-/- fetal liver 
hematopoietic stem cells converges on endoplasmic reticulum stress, which in 
turn constrains midgestational expansion. Restoration of protein folding by the 
chemical chaperone tauroursodeoxycholic acid, a hydrophilic bile salt, prevents 
accumulation of unfolded proteins and rescues Fancd2-/- fetal liver long-term 
hematopoietic stem cell numbers. We find that proteostasis deregulation itself 
is driven by excess sterile inflammatory activity in hematopoietic and stromal 
cells within the fetal liver, and dampened Type I interferon signaling similarly 
restores fetal Fancd2-/- long-term hematopoietic stem cells to wild 
type-equivalent numbers. Our study reveals the origin and pathophysiological 
trigger that gives rise to Fanconi anemia hematopoietic stem cell pool deficits. 
More broadly, we show that fetal protein homeostasis serves as a physiological 
rheostat for hematopoietic stem cell fate and function.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-46159-1
PMCID: PMC10904799
PMID: 38424108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.