---
reference_id: "PMID:33644030"
title: "Mutant p53 Gain-of-Function: Role in Cancer Development, Progression, and Therapeutic Approaches."
authors:
- Alvarado-Ortiz E
- de la Cruz-López KG
- Becerril-Rico J
- Sarabia-Sánchez MA
- Ortiz-Sánchez E
- García-Carrancá A
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.607670
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant p53 Gain-of-Function: Role in Cancer Development, Progression, and Therapeutic Approaches.
**Authors:** Alvarado-Ortiz E, de la Cruz-López KG, Becerril-Rico J, Sarabia-Sánchez MA, Ortiz-Sánchez E, García-Carrancá A
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2020.607670](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2020.607670)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Feb 11;8:607670. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.607670. 
eCollection 2020.

Mutant p53 Gain-of-Function: Role in Cancer Development, Progression, and 
Therapeutic Approaches.

Alvarado-Ortiz E(1)(2), de la Cruz-López KG(2)(3), Becerril-Rico J(2), 
Sarabia-Sánchez MA(4), Ortiz-Sánchez E(2), García-Carrancá A(5).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Posgrado en Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Subdirección de Investigación Básica, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, 
Secretaría de Salud, Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Doctorado en Ciencias Biomédicas, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Programa de Posgrado en Ciencias Bioquímicas, Departamento de Bioquímica, 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, 
Mexico.
(5)Laboratorio de Virus and Cáncer, Unidad de Investigación Biomédica en Cáncer, 
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 
and Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, Secretaría de Salud, Mexico City, 
Mexico.

Frequent p53 mutations (mutp53) not only abolish tumor suppressor capacities but 
confer various gain-of-function (GOF) activities that impacts molecules and 
pathways now regarded as central for tumor development and progression. Although 
the complete impact of GOF is still far from being fully understood, the effects 
on proliferation, migration, metabolic reprogramming, and immune evasion, among 
others, certainly constitute major driving forces for human tumors harboring 
them. In this review we discuss major molecular mechanisms driven by mutp53 GOF. 
We present novel mechanistic insights on their effects over key functional 
molecules and processes involved in cancer. We analyze new mechanistic insights 
impacting processes such as immune system evasion, metabolic reprogramming, and 
stemness. In particular, the increased lipogenic activity through the mevalonate 
pathway (MVA) and the alteration of metabolic homeostasis due to interactions 
between mutp53 and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and Sterol regulatory 
element-binding protein 1 (SREBP1) that impact anabolic pathways and favor 
metabolic reprograming. We address, in detail, the impact of mutp53 over 
metabolic reprogramming and the Warburg effect observed in cancer cells as a 
consequence, not only of loss-of-function of p53, but rather as an effect of GOF 
that is crucial for the imbalance between glycolysis and oxidative 
phosphorylation. Additionally, transcriptional activation of new targets, 
resulting from interaction of mutp53 with NF-kB, HIF-1α, or SREBP1, are 
presented and discussed. Finally, we discuss perspectives for targeting 
molecules and pathways involved in chemo-resistance of tumor cells resulting 
from mutp53 GOF. We discuss and stress the fact that the status of p53 currently 
constitutes one of the most relevant criteria to understand the role of 
autophagy as a survival mechanism in cancer, and propose new therapeutic 
approaches that could promote the reduction of GOF effects exercised by mutp53 
in cancer.

Copyright © 2021 Alvarado-Ortiz, de la Cruz-López, Becerril-Rico, 
Sarabia-Sánchez, Ortiz-Sánchez and García-Carrancá.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2020.607670
PMCID: PMC7905058
PMID: 33644030

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.