---
reference_id: "PMID:33052516"
title: Variable Abnormalities in T and B Cell Subsets in Ataxia Telangiectasia.
authors:
- Moeini Shad T
- Yousefi B
- Amirifar P
- Delavari S
- Rae W
- Kokhaei P
- Abolhassani H
- Aghamohammadi A
- Yazdani R
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-020-00881-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/diagnosis, etiology"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/genetics
- "B-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology, metabolism"
- Biomarkers
- Child
- Comorbidity
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Immunologic Memory
- Immunophenotyping
- Lymphocyte Activation
- Lymphocyte Count
- Male
- Phenotype
- Severity of Illness Index
- "T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable Abnormalities in T and B Cell Subsets in Ataxia Telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Moeini Shad T, Yousefi B, Amirifar P, Delavari S, Rae W, Kokhaei P, Abolhassani H, Aghamohammadi A, Yazdani R
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-020-00881-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-020-00881-9)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2021 Jan;41(1):76-88. doi: 10.1007/s10875-020-00881-9. Epub
2020  Oct 14.

Variable Abnormalities in T and B Cell Subsets in Ataxia Telangiectasia.

Moeini Shad T(1)(2), Yousefi B(1), Amirifar P(2)(3), Delavari S(2), Rae W(4)(5),
Kokhaei P(6)(7), Abolhassani H(2)(8)(9), Aghamohammadi A(10), Yazdani R(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Semnan,
Iran.
(2)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, Jeffrey
Cheah Biomedical Centre, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine,
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Cancer Research Center, Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Semnan, Iran.
(7)Department of Oncology-Pathology, BioClinicum, Karolinska University Hospital
Solna and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Research Center for Primary Immunodeficiencies, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(9)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institute at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(10)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. aghamohammadi@tums.ac.ir.
(11)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. reza_yazdani86@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a rare genetic condition, caused by
biallelic deleterious variants in the ATM gene, and has variable immunological
abnormalities. This study aimed to examine immunologic parameters reflecting
cell development, activation, proliferation, and class switch recombination
(CSR) and determine their relationship to the clinical phenotype in AT patients.
METHODS: In this study, 40 patients with a confirmed diagnosis of AT from the
Iranian immunodeficiency registry center and 28 age-sex matched healthy controls
were enrolled. We compared peripheral B and T cell subsets and T cell
proliferation response to CD3/CD28 stimulation in AT patients with and without
CSR defects using flow cytometry.
RESULTS: A significant decrease in naïve, transitional, switched memory, and IgM
only memory B cells, along with a sharp increase in the marginal zone-like and
CD21low B cells was observed in the patients. We also found CD4+ and CD8+ naïve,
central memory, and terminally differentiated effector memory CD4+ (TEMRA) T
cells were decreased. CD4+ and CD8+ effector memory, CD8+ TEMRA, and CD4+
regulatory T cells were significantly elevated in our patients. CD4+ T cell
proliferation was markedly impaired compared to the healthy controls. Moreover,
immunological investigations of 15 AT patients with CSR defect revealed a
significant reduction in the marginal zone, switched memory, and more intense
defects in IgM only memory B cells, CD4+ naïve and central memory T cells.
CONCLUSION: The present study revealed that patients with AT have a broad
spectrum of cellular and humoral deficiencies. Therefore, a detailed evaluation
of T and B cell subsets increases understanding of the disease in patients and
the risk of infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-020-00881-9
PMID: 33052516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
