---
reference_id: "PMID:37455305"
title: Development of High-Resolution Melting Curve Analysis for rapid detection of SEC23B gene mutation causing Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia type II in Indian population.
authors:
- Saptarshi AN
- Dongerdiye RK
- More TA
- Kedar PS
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-023-01493-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Anemia, Dyserythropoietic, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Vesicular Transport Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of High-Resolution Melting Curve Analysis for rapid detection of SEC23B gene mutation causing Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia type II in Indian population.
**Authors:** Saptarshi AN, Dongerdiye RK, More TA, Kedar PS
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-023-01493-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-023-01493-w)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2023 Jul 16;49(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s13052-023-01493-w.

Development of High-Resolution Melting Curve Analysis for rapid detection of 
SEC23B gene mutation causing Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia type II in 
Indian population.

Saptarshi AN(1), Dongerdiye RK(1), More TA(1), Kedar PS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematogenetics, ICMR- National Institute of Immunohaematology, 
13th Floor, New Multi Storeyed Building, KEM Hospital Campus, Parel, Mumbai, 
400012, India.
(2)Department of Haematogenetics, ICMR- National Institute of Immunohaematology, 
13th Floor, New Multi Storeyed Building, KEM Hospital Campus, Parel, Mumbai, 
400012, India. kedarps2002@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) are a very rare and 
heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by ineffective erythropoiesis. 
CDA II is caused by mutations in the SEC23B gene. The most common mutation 
reported in India is c.1385 A > G, p.Y462C. There is no simple and 
cost-effective confirmatory diagnostic test available for CDA, and therefore, 
many patients remain undiagnosed. High-resolution melting curve (HRM) analysis 
is a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based technique applied to identify genetic 
differences and scan nucleic acid sequences. HRM can be used to rapidly screen 
the common mutation causing CDA II in the Indian population. Thus, we studied 
the use of High-Resolution Melting Curve Analysis to detect common mutation 
causing CDA II in the Indian population.
METHOD: 11 patients having SEC23B (Y462C) mutation causing CDA II are considered 
for this study. HRM was used to check the presence of Y462C mutation. To verify 
the accuracy of the HRM analysis, we compared HRM results with the results of 
Sanger sequencing. This helped us to confirm the diagnosis.
RESULTS: We have described the clinical, hematological, and genetic data of 
eleven patients suffering from CDAII. According to HRM and Sanger sequencing, a 
homozygous SEC23B (Y462C) mutation was present in all patients, whereas a 
heterozygous Y462C mutation was present in their parents.
CONCLUSION: Our data showed that High-Resolution Melting (HRM) analysis could be 
used to rapidly screen common SEC23B mutation that causes CDA II in the Indian 
population.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-023-01493-w
PMCID: PMC10350259
PMID: 37455305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests.