---
reference_id: "PMID:21708223"
title: Hydroxysteroid (17β) dehydrogenase X in human health and disease.
authors:
- Yang SY
- He XY
- Miller D
journal: Mol Cell Endocrinol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.06.011
keywords:
- "3-Hydroxyacyl CoA Dehydrogenases/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Alzheimer Disease/enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- Animals
- "Brain/anatomy & histology, enzymology"
- Catalytic Domain
- "Down Syndrome/enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Structure
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Conformation
- "Protein Subunits/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Steroids/chemistry, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hydroxysteroid (17β) dehydrogenase X in human health and disease.
**Authors:** Yang SY, He XY, Miller D
**Journal:** Mol Cell Endocrinol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mce.2011.06.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2011.06.011)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Aug 22;343(1-2):1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.06.011.
 Epub 2011 Jun 25.

Hydroxysteroid (17β) dehydrogenase X in human health and disease.

Yang SY(1), He XY, Miller D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, NYS Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY 10314, USA. 
songyu.yang@csi.cuny.edu

Hydroxysteroid (17β) dehydrogenase 10 (HSD10), the HSD17B10 gene product, is a 
mitochondrial NAD(+)-dependent dehydrogenase. There are two outstanding features 
of this vital enzyme: (a) the versatility of its catalytic endowment is 
attributed to the flexibility of its active site to accommodate diverse 
substrates such as steroids, fatty acids, bile acid, and xenobiotics; (b) its 
capacity to bind other proteins and peptides. For example, it tightly binds with 
three identical subunits to compose a homotetramer. The homotetramer then binds 
with two other proteins, namely, RNA (guanine-9-)methyl-transferase domain 
containing-1 and KIAA0391, to form mitochondrial RNase P. Furthermore, various 
HSD10 functions are inhibited when the enzyme is bound by amyloid-β peptide or 
estrogen receptor alpha. Missense mutations of HSD10 may cause neurodegeneration 
related to HSD10 deficiency, whereas a silent mutation of HSD10 results in 
mental retardation, choreoathetosis and abnormal behavior (MRXS10). The clinical 
condition of some HSD10 patients mimics mitochondrial disorders. Since normal 
HSD10 function is essential for brain cognitive activity, elevated levels of 
HSD10 found in brains of Alzheimer disease (AD) patients and mouse AD model 
might counterbalance the inhibition of HSD10 by amyloid-β peptide. The 
investigation of HSD10 may lead to a better understanding of AD pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.06.011
PMID: 21708223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]