---
reference_id: "PMID:39273698"
title: "Establishing Treatment Effectiveness in Fabry Disease: Observation-Based Recommendations for Improvement."
authors:
- Veldman BCF
- Schoenmakers DH
- van Dussen L
- Datema MR
- Langeveld M
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25179752
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishing Treatment Effectiveness in Fabry Disease: Observation-Based Recommendations for Improvement.
**Authors:** Veldman BCF, Schoenmakers DH, van Dussen L, Datema MR, Langeveld M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25179752](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25179752)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Sep 9;25(17):9752. doi: 10.3390/ijms25179752.

Establishing Treatment Effectiveness in Fabry Disease: Observation-Based 
Recommendations for Improvement.

Veldman BCF(1), Schoenmakers DH(2)(3), van Dussen L(1), Datema MR(1), Langeveld 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Amsterdam Gastroenterology 
Endocrinology Metabolism, Amsterdam UMC Location University of Amsterdam, 1105 
AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Platform "Medicine for Society", 
Amsterdam UMC Location University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Child Neurology, Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Emma's 
Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC Location Vrije Universiteit, 1081 HV 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Fabry disease (FD, OMIM #301500) is caused by pathogenic GLA gene (OMIM #300644) 
variants, resulting in a deficiency of the α-galactosidase A enzyme with 
accumulation of its substrate globotriaosylceramide and its derivatives. The 
phenotype of FD is highly variable, with distinctive disease features and course 
in classical male patients but more diverse and often nonspecific features in 
non-classical and female patients. FD-specific therapies have been available for 
approximately two decades, yet establishing robust evidence for long-term 
effectiveness remains challenging. This review aims to identify the factors 
contributing to this lack of robust evidence for the treatment of FD with enzyme 
replacement therapy (ERT) (agalsidase-alfa and -beta and pegunigalsidase alfa) 
and chaperone therapy (migalastat). Major factors that have been identified are 
study population heterogeneity (concerning sex, age, phenotype, disease stage) 
and differences in study design (control groups, outcomes assessed), as well as 
the short duration of studies. To address these challenges, we advocate for 
patient matching to improve control group compatibility in future FD therapy 
studies. We recommend international collaboration and harmonization, facilitated 
by an independent FD registry. We propose a stepwise approach for evaluating the 
effectiveness of novel treatments, including recommendations for surrogate 
outcomes and required study duration.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25179752
PMCID: PMC11396259
PMID: 39273698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.C.F.V. is involved in a premarketing study 
with Sanofi-Genzyme. Financial arrangements were made through AMC Research BV. 
No fees, travel support, or grants were obtained from the Pharmaceutical 
Industry. M. Langeveld is involved in premarketing studies with Sanofi-Genzyme 
and Protalix/Chiesi. Financial arrangements were made through AMC Research BV. 
No fees, travel support, or grants were obtained from the Pharmaceutical 
Industry. D.H.S., L.v.D., and M.R.D. declare that they have no conflicts of 
interest.