---
reference_id: "PMID:15252192"
title: "Soluble or insoluble prussian blue for radiocesium and thallium poisoning?"
authors:
- Thompson DF
- Callen ED
journal: Ann Pharmacother
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1345/aph.1E024
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antidotes/chemistry, therapeutic use"
- Cesium Radioisotopes/poisoning
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- "Ferrocyanides/chemistry, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Solubility
- Thallium/poisoning
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Soluble or insoluble prussian blue for radiocesium and thallium poisoning?
**Authors:** Thompson DF, Callen ED
**Journal:** Ann Pharmacother (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1345/aph.1E024](https://doi.org/10.1345/aph.1E024)

## Content

1. Ann Pharmacother. 2004 Sep;38(9):1509-14. doi: 10.1345/aph.1E024. Epub 2004
Jul  13.

Soluble or insoluble prussian blue for radiocesium and thallium poisoning?

Thompson DF(1), Callen ED.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy, Southwestern Oklahoma 
State University, Weatherford, OK 73102-1080, USA. dennis.thompson@swosu.edu

OBJECTIVE: To review the available English-language literature concerning the 
efficacy of soluble and insoluble Prussian blue used as a therapeutic agent in 
radiocesium and thallium poisoning.
DATA SOURCES: A thorough search of MEDLINE, Toxline, and EMBASE databases 
(1960s-August 2003) was performed. Search terms included Prussian blue, 
thallium, and radiocesium poisoning. Bibliographies of relevant papers were 
reviewed for additional citations. study selection AND DATA EXTRACTION: Reports 
and studies of human trials and cases, along with animal and relevant in vitro 
data, were sought. Data were categorized as insoluble and soluble Prussian blue 
and by thallium and radiocesium poisoning.
DATA SYNTHESIS: The majority of evidence describing the efficacy of Prussian 
blue for radiocesium poisoning is based on the use of the insoluble form. In 
contrast, the majority of data supporting the efficacy of Prussian blue in 
thallium poisoning involves the use of the soluble form.
CONCLUSIONS: Insoluble Prussian blue has recently been approved in the US for 
treatment of both thallium and radiocesium poisoning. While there is sufficient 
evidence that the insoluble form of Prussian blue is effective in radiocesium 
poisoning, there is a paucity of analogous data supporting its use in thallium 
poisoning. Whether the physicochemical differences between soluble and insoluble 
Prussian blue have any effect on outcomes in human poisoning is not known.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1E024
PMID: 15252192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]