---
reference_id: "PMID:28919799"
title: "Maple syrup urine disease: mechanisms and management."
authors:
- Blackburn PR
- Gass JM
- Vairo FPE
- Farnham KM
- Atwal HK
- Macklin S
- Klee EW
- Atwal PS
journal: Appl Clin Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2147/TACG.S125962
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maple syrup urine disease: mechanisms and management.
**Authors:** Blackburn PR, Gass JM, Vairo FPE, Farnham KM, Atwal HK, Macklin S, Klee EW, Atwal PS
**Journal:** Appl Clin Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2147/TACG.S125962](https://doi.org/10.2147/TACG.S125962)

## Content

1. Appl Clin Genet. 2017 Sep 6;10:57-66. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S125962. eCollection 
2017.

Maple syrup urine disease: mechanisms and management.

Blackburn PR(#)(1)(2), Gass JM(#)(1), Vairo FPE(#)(1)(3), Farnham KM(4), Atwal 
HK(5), Macklin S(4), Klee EW(1)(3)(4)(6), Atwal PS(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Individualized Medicine.
(2)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(4)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is an inborn error of metabolism caused by 
defects in the branched-chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex, which results in 
elevations of the branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) in plasma, α-ketoacids in 
urine, and production of the pathognomonic disease marker, alloisoleucine. The 
disorder varies in severity and the clinical spectrum is quite broad with five 
recognized clinical variants that have no known association with genotype. The 
classic presentation occurs in the neonatal period with developmental delay, 
failure to thrive, feeding difficulties, and maple syrup odor in the cerumen and 
urine, and can lead to irreversible neurological complications, including 
stereotypical movements, metabolic decompensation, and death if left untreated. 
Treatment consists of dietary restriction of BCAAs and close metabolic 
monitoring. Clinical outcomes are generally good in patients where treatment is 
initiated early. Newborn screening for MSUD is now commonplace in the United 
States and is included on the Recommended Uniform Screening Panel (RUSP). We 
review this disorder including its presentation, screening and clinical 
diagnosis, treatment, and other relevant aspects pertaining to the care of 
patients.

DOI: 10.2147/TACG.S125962
PMCID: PMC5593394
PMID: 28919799

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.