---
reference_id: "PMID:37344292"
title: "[Scleritis and episcleritis]."
authors:
- Perray L
- Ungerer L
- Chazal T
- Monnet D
- Brézin A
- Terrier B
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2023.05.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Scleritis and episcleritis].
**Authors:** Perray L, Ungerer L, Chazal T, Monnet D, Brézin A, Terrier B
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2023.05.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2023.05.013)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2023 Dec;44(12):646-655. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2023.05.013. 
Epub 2023 Jun 19.

[Scleritis and episcleritis].

[Article in French]

Perray L(1), Ungerer L(2), Chazal T(3), Monnet D(4), Brézin A(4), Terrier B(5).

Author information:
(1)Service de médecine interne, hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, 27, rue du 
Faubourg-Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France. Electronic address: 
laura.perray@aphp.fr.
(2)Service de chirurgie plastique et reconstructrice, hôpital Saint-Louis, 
AP-HP, Paris, France.
(3)Service de médecine interne, hôpital fondation Adolphe-de-Rothschild, Paris, 
France.
(4)Service d'ophtalmologie, hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(5)Service de médecine interne, hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, 27, rue du 
Faubourg-Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

Scleritis and episcleritis are rare ocular inflammatory diseases but deserve to 
be known by internists because of their frequent association with systemic 
autoimmune diseases. It is important to distinguish them between because their 
prognosis, therapeutic management and potential complications are very 
different. Episcleritis represents a superficial ocular inflammation with 
usually benign visual prognosis, no complication with local treatment, and is 
associated with a systemic autoimmune disease in rare cases. In contrast, 
scleritis is a potentially serious ophthalmological condition that can threaten 
the visual prognosis in the absence of appropriate systemic treatment. It is 
associated with an underlying disease in 40-50% of cases, in particular a 
systemic autoimmune disease (25-35% of cases) or an infectious cause (5-10% of 
cases). Rheumatoid arthritis and systemic vasculitides, particularly 
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitides, are the main 
autoimmune causes of scleritis and episcleritis. Scleritis can reveal the 
underlying autoimmune disease and requires systematic etiological 
investigations. Aggressive, complicated, refractory forms or those associated 
with a systemic autoimmune disease require glucocorticoids or even 
immunosuppressants, and close collaboration between ophthalmologists and 
internists is required. The development of biologic agents offers new effective 
therapeutic tools in the management of these difficult cases.

Copyright © 2023 Société Nationale Française de Médecine Interne (SNFMI). 
Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2023.05.013
PMID: 37344292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]