---
reference_id: "PMID:7874170"
title: Jackson-Weiss and Crouzon syndromes are allelic with mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2.
authors:
- Jabs EW
- Li X
- Scott AF
- Meyers G
- Chen W
- Eccles M
- Mao JI
- Charnas LR
- Jackson CE
- Jaye M
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1038/ng1194-275
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Jackson-Weiss and Crouzon syndromes are allelic with mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2.
**Authors:** Jabs EW, Li X, Scott AF, Meyers G, Chen W, Eccles M, Mao JI, Charnas LR, Jackson CE, Jaye M
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1194-275](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1194-275)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1994 Nov;8(3):275-9. doi: 10.1038/ng1194-275.

Jackson-Weiss and Crouzon syndromes are allelic with mutations in fibroblast 
growth factor receptor 2.

Jabs EW(1), Li X, Scott AF, Meyers G, Chen W, Eccles M, Mao JI, Charnas LR, 
Jackson CE, Jaye M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland 21287-3914.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1995 Apr;9(4):451.

Jackson-Weiss syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by 
craniosynostosis, foot anomalies and great phenotypic variability. Recently 
mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) have been found in 
patients with another craniosynostotic syndrome, Crouzon syndrome. FGFR2 is a 
member of the tyrosine kinase receptor superfamily, having a high affinity for 
peptides that signal the transduction pathways for mitogenesis, cellular 
differentiation and embryogenesis. We now report an FGFR2 mutation in the 
conserved region of the immunoglobulin IIIc domain in the Jackson-Weiss syndrome 
family in which the syndrome was originally described. In addition, in four of 
12 Crouzon syndrome cases, we identified two new mutations and found two 
previously described mutations in the same region.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1194-275
PMID: 7874170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]