---
reference_id: "PMID:38480682"
title: Biallelic NAA60 variants with impaired n-terminal acetylation capacity cause autosomal recessive primary familial brain calcifications.
authors:
- Chelban V
- Aksnes H
- Maroofian R
- LaMonica LC
- Seabra L
- Siggervåg A
- Devic P
- Shamseldin HE
- Vandrovcova J
- Murphy D
- Richard AC
- Quenez O
- Bonnevalle A
- Zanetti MN
- Kaiyrzhanov R
- Salpietro V
- Efthymiou S
- Schottlaender LV
- Morsy H
- Scardamaglia A
- Tariq A
- Pagnamenta AT
- Pennavaria A
- Krogstad LS
- Bekkelund ÅK
- Caiella A
- Glomnes N
- Brønstad KM
- Tury S
- Moreno De Luca A
- Boland-Auge A
- Olaso R
- Deleuze JF
- Anheim M
- Cretin B
- Vona B
- Alajlan F
- Abdulwahab F
- Battini JL
- İpek R
- Bauer P
- Zifarelli G
- Gungor S
- Kurul SH
- Lochmuller H
- "Da'as SI"
- Fakhro KA
- Gómez-Pascual A
- Botía JA
- Wood NW
- Horvath R
- Ernst AM
- Rothman JE
- McEntagart M
- Crow YJ
- Alkuraya FS
- Nicolas G
- SYNaPS Study Group
- Arnesen T
- Houlden H
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-46354-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Acetylation
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- Brain Diseases/genetics
- Inheritance Patterns
- Mutation
- Phosphates/metabolism
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type III/metabolism"
- N-Terminal Acetyltransferase F
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic NAA60 variants with impaired n-terminal acetylation capacity cause autosomal recessive primary familial brain calcifications.
**Authors:** Chelban V, Aksnes H, Maroofian R, LaMonica LC, Seabra L, Siggervåg A, Devic P, Shamseldin HE, Vandrovcova J, Murphy D, Richard AC, Quenez O, Bonnevalle A, Zanetti MN, Kaiyrzhanov R, Salpietro V, Efthymiou S, Schottlaender LV, Morsy H, Scardamaglia A, Tariq A, Pagnamenta AT, Pennavaria A, Krogstad LS, Bekkelund ÅK, Caiella A, Glomnes N, Brønstad KM, Tury S, Moreno De Luca A, Boland-Auge A, Olaso R, Deleuze JF, Anheim M, Cretin B, Vona B, Alajlan F, Abdulwahab F, Battini JL, İpek R, Bauer P, Zifarelli G, Gungor S, Kurul SH, Lochmuller H, Da'as SI, Fakhro KA, Gómez-Pascual A, Botía JA, Wood NW, Horvath R, Ernst AM, Rothman JE, McEntagart M, Crow YJ, Alkuraya FS, Nicolas G, SYNaPS Study Group, Arnesen T, Houlden H
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-46354-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-46354-0)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Mar 13;15(1):2269. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-46354-0.

Biallelic NAA60 variants with impaired n-terminal acetylation capacity cause 
autosomal recessive primary familial brain calcifications.

Chelban V(#)(1)(2), Aksnes H(#)(3), Maroofian R(4), LaMonica LC(5), Seabra L(6), 
Siggervåg A(7), Devic P(8), Shamseldin HE(9), Vandrovcova J(4), Murphy D(10), 
Richard AC(11), Quenez O(11), Bonnevalle A(11), Zanetti MN(12), Kaiyrzhanov 
R(4)(13), Salpietro V(4), Efthymiou S(4), Schottlaender LV(4)(14)(15), Morsy 
H(4)(16), Scardamaglia A(4), Tariq A(4), Pagnamenta AT(17), Pennavaria A(7), 
Krogstad LS(7), Bekkelund ÅK(7), Caiella A(7), Glomnes N(7)(18), Brønstad KM(7), 
Tury S(19), Moreno De Luca A(20)(21), Boland-Auge A(22), Olaso R(22), Deleuze 
JF(22), Anheim M(23)(24)(25), Cretin B(23)(24)(25), Vona B(26)(27), Alajlan 
F(28), Abdulwahab F(9), Battini JL(19), İpek R(29), Bauer P(30), Zifarelli 
G(30), Gungor S(31), Kurul SH(32), Lochmuller H(33)(34)(35), Da'as SI(36)(37), 
Fakhro KA(36)(37)(38), Gómez-Pascual A(39), Botía JA(39), Wood NW(10)(40), 
Horvath R(41), Ernst AM(5)(42), Rothman JE(5)(12), McEntagart M(43), Crow 
YJ(6)(44), Alkuraya FS(9)(45), Nicolas G(11); SYNaPS Study Group; Arnesen 
T(46)(47), Houlden H(48)(49).

Collaborators: Houlden H, Alkuraya FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, London, WC1N 3BG, UK. v.chelban@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Neurobiology and Medical Genetics Laboratory, "Nicolae Testemitanu" State 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 165, Stefan cel Mare si Sfant Boulevard, 
MD, 2004, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. v.chelban@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. 
henriette.aksnes@uib.no.
(4)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(6)Université Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Neurogenetics and 
Neuroinflammation, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(8)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Groupement Hospitalier Sud, Service d'Explorations 
Fonctionnelles Neurologiques, Lyon, France.
(9)Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomic Medicine, King 
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(10)Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences, UCL Queen Square 
Institute of Neurology, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(11)Univ Rouen Normandie, Inserm U1245, CHU Rouen, Department of Genetics and 
CNRMAJ, F-76000, Rouen, France.
(12)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, UCL Queen Square Institute 
of Neurology, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(13)South Kazakhstan Medical Academy Shymkent, Shymkent, 160019, Kazakhstan.
(14)Instituto de Investigaciones en Medicina Traslacional (IIMT), 
CONICET-Universidad Austral, Av. Juan Domingo Perón 1500, B1629AHJ, Pilar, 
Argentina.
(15)Instituto de medicina genómica (IMeG), Hospital Universitario Austral, 
Universidad Austral, Av. Juan Domingo Perón 1500, B1629AHJ, Pilar, Argentina.
(16)Department of Human Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Alexandria 
University, Alexandria, Egypt.
(17)Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(18)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 5020, Bergen, Norway.
(19)Institut de Recherche en Infectiologie de Montpellier, Université de 
Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France.
(20)Department of Radiology, Autism & Developmental Medicine Institute, 
Geisinger, Lewisburg, PA, USA.
(21)Department of Radiology, Neuroradiology Section, Kingston Health Sciences 
Centre, Queen's University Faculty of Health Sciences, Kingston, Ontario, 
Canada.
(22)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, Centre National de Recherche en Génomique 
Humaine (CNRGH), 91057, Evry, France.
(23)Neurology Department, Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, France.
(24)Strasbourg Federation of Translational Medicine (FMTS), Strasbourg 
University, Strasbourg, France.
(25)INSERM-U964; CNRS-UMR7104, University of Strasbourg, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, 
France.
(26)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, 37073, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(27)Institute for Auditory Neuroscience and InnerEarLab, University Medical 
Center Göttingen, 37075, Göttingen, Germany.
(28)Department of Neuroscience Center, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and 
Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(29)Paediatric Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Dicle University, Diyarbakır, 
Turkey.
(30)Centogene GmbH, Am Strande 7, 18055, Rostock, Germany.
(31)Inonu University, Faculty of Medicine, Turgut Ozal Research Center, 
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Malatya, Turkey.
(32)Dokuz Eylul University, School of Medicine, Department of Paediatric 
Neurology, Izmir, Turkey.
(33)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute and Division of 
Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Canada.
(34)Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
(35)Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Medical 
Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(36)Department of Human Genetics, Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar.
(37)College of Health and Life Sciences, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, 
Qatar.
(38)Weill Cornell Medical College, Doha, Qatar.
(39)Department of Information and Communications Engineering, University of 
Murcia, Campus Espinardo, 30100, Murcia, Spain.
(40)Neurogenetics Laboratory, The National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(41)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.
(42)School of Biological Sciences, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, 
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(43)Medical Genetics Department, St George's University Hospitals, London, SWI7 
0RE, UK.
(44)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(45)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(46)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. 
thomas.arnesen@uib.no.
(47)Department of Surgery, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. 
thomas.arnesen@uib.no.
(48)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, London, WC1N 3BG, UK. h.houlden@ucl.ac.uk.
(49)Neurogenetics Laboratory, The National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, WC1N 3BG, UK. h.houlden@ucl.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Primary familial brain calcification (PFBC) is characterized by calcium 
deposition in the brain, causing progressive movement disorders, psychiatric 
symptoms, and cognitive decline. PFBC is a heterogeneous disorder currently 
linked to variants in six different genes, but most patients remain genetically 
undiagnosed. Here, we identify biallelic NAA60 variants in ten individuals from 
seven families with autosomal recessive PFBC. The NAA60 variants lead to 
loss-of-function with lack of protein N-terminal (Nt)-acetylation activity. We 
show that the phosphate importer SLC20A2 is a substrate of NAA60 in vitro. In 
cells, loss of NAA60 caused reduced surface levels of SLC20A2 and a reduction in 
extracellular phosphate uptake. This study establishes NAA60 as a causal gene 
for PFBC, provides a possible biochemical explanation of its disease-causing 
mechanisms and underscores NAA60-mediated Nt-acetylation of transmembrane 
proteins as a fundamental process for healthy neurobiological functioning.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-46354-0
PMCID: PMC10937998
PMID: 38480682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.D. is an orator and scientific board member 
for Gilead and an orator for Novartis. All other authors declare no competing 
interests.