---
reference_id: "PMID:35076018"
title: Personalized computational heart models with T1-mapped fibrotic remodeling predict sudden death risk in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- "O'Hara RP"
- Binka E
- Prakosa A
- Zimmerman SL
- Cartoski MJ
- Abraham MR
- Lu DY
- Boyle PM
- Trayanova NA
journal: Elife
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.73325
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Personalized computational heart models with T1-mapped fibrotic remodeling predict sudden death risk in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** O'Hara RP, Binka E, Prakosa A, Zimmerman SL, Cartoski MJ, Abraham MR, Lu DY, Boyle PM, Trayanova NA
**Journal:** Elife (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.73325](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.73325)

## Content

1. Elife. 2022 Jan 25;11:e73325. doi: 10.7554/eLife.73325.

Personalized computational heart models with T1-mapped fibrotic remodeling 
predict sudden death risk in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

O'Hara RP(1), Binka E(2), Prakosa A(1), Zimmerman SL(3), Cartoski MJ(4), Abraham 
MR(5), Lu DY(5), Boyle PM(6), Trayanova NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
United States.
(2)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, United States.
(3)Department of Radiology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, United 
States.
(4)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for 
Children, Wilmington, United States.
(5)Division of Cardiology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, United States.
(6)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, United 
States.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is associated with risk of sudden cardiac 
death (SCD) due to ventricular arrhythmias (VAs) arising from the proliferation 
of fibrosis in the heart. Current clinical risk stratification criteria 
inadequately identify at-risk patients in need of primary prevention of VA. 
Here, we use mechanistic computational modeling of the heart to analyze how 
HCM-specific remodeling promotes arrhythmogenesis and to develop a personalized 
strategy to forecast risk of VAs in these patients. We combine contrast-enhanced 
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging and T1 mapping data to construct digital 
replicas of HCM patient hearts that represent the patient-specific distribution 
of focal and diffuse fibrosis and evaluate the substrate propensity to VA. Our 
analysis indicates that the presence of diffuse fibrosis, which is rarely 
assessed in these patients, increases arrhythmogenic propensity. In forecasting 
future VA events in HCM patients, the imaging-based computational heart approach 
achieved 84.6%, 76.9%, and 80.1% sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy, 
respectively, and significantly outperformed current clinical risk predictors. 
This novel VA risk assessment may have the potential to prevent SCD and help 
deploy primary prevention appropriately in HCM patients.

© 2022, O'Hara et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.73325
PMCID: PMC8789259
PMID: 35076018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RO, EB, AP, SZ, MC, MA, DL, PB, NT No competing 
interests declared