---
reference_id: "PMID:32976333"
title: Periphlebitis of the Superior Ophthalmic Vein.
authors:
- Lee JJ
- Cohen LM
- Lo CC
- Rootman DB
journal: Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000001818
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Periphlebitis of the Superior Ophthalmic Vein.
**Authors:** Lee JJ, Cohen LM, Lo CC, Rootman DB
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IOP.0000000000001818](https://doi.org/10.1097/IOP.0000000000001818)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2021 May-Jun 01;37(3S):S144-S148. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0000000000001818.

Periphlebitis of the Superior Ophthalmic Vein.

Lee JJ(1), Cohen LM(2), Lo CC(2), Rootman DB(2).

Author information:
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California.
(2)Division of Orbital and Ophthalmic Plastic Surgery, Doheny and Stein Eye 
Institutes, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, 
U.S.A.

Isolated orbital periphlebitis in the context of nonspecific orbital 
inflammation is rare. This case series describes 3 patients with periphlebitis 
of the superior ophthalmic vein, 2 of which were confirmed with pathology. All 3 
cases had a history of Graves hyperthyroidism. Superior ophthalmic vein 
periphlebitis is a rare form of orbital inflammation presenting with proptosis 
and motility restriction yet few inflammatory signs. It may be associated with 
autoimmune hyperthyroidism and represent a rare feature of thyroid eye disease, 
or perhaps could be an overlap syndrome between thyroid eye disease and 
nonspecific orbital inflammation. Treatment response is variable and may require 
a prolonged course of steroids or other immunosuppressive medications.

Copyright © 2021 The American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive 
Surgery, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000001818
PMID: 32976333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Proprietary Interest Statement: All authors 
report no conflicts of interest, financial, or otherwise. The authors alone are 
responsible for the content and writing of the paper.