---
reference_id: "PMID:27590927"
title: CRISPR-Cas9 induced mutations along de novo purine synthesis in HeLa cells result in accumulation of individual enzyme substrates and affect purinosome formation.
authors:
- Baresova V
- Krijt M
- Skopova V
- Souckova O
- Kmoch S
- Zikanova M
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.08.004
keywords:
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- "Chromatography, Liquid"
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- "Multienzyme Complexes/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Purines/biosynthesis, metabolism"
- Substrate Specificity
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CRISPR-Cas9 induced mutations along de novo purine synthesis in HeLa cells result in accumulation of individual enzyme substrates and affect purinosome formation.
**Authors:** Baresova V, Krijt M, Skopova V, Souckova O, Kmoch S, Zikanova M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.08.004)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2016 Nov;119(3):270-277. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.08.004.
Epub  2016 Aug 24.

CRISPR-Cas9 induced mutations along de novo purine synthesis in HeLa cells
result in accumulation of individual enzyme substrates and affect purinosome
formation.

Baresova V(1), Krijt M(1), Skopova V(1), Souckova O(1), Kmoch S(1), Zikanova
M(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, General University Hospital in Prague, Ke Karlovu
2, 128 08 Praha 2, Czech Republic.
(2)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, General University Hospital in Prague, Ke Karlovu
2, 128 08 Praha 2, Czech Republic. Electronic address: mzika@lf1.cuni.cz.

Purines are essential molecules for nucleic acid synthesis and are the most
common carriers of chemical energy in all living organisms. The cellular pool of
purines is maintained by the balance between their de novo synthesis (DNPS),
recycling and degradation. DNPS includes ten reactions catalysed by six enzymes.
To date, two genetically determined disorders of DNPS enzymes have been
described, and the existence of other defects manifested by neurological
symptoms and the accumulation of DNPS intermediates in bodily fluids is highly
presumable. In the current study, we prepared specific recombinant DNPS enzymes
and used them for the biochemical preparation of their commercially unavailable
substrates. These compounds were used as standards for the development and
validation of quantitative liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS). To simulate manifestations of known and putative defects of DNPS we
prepared CRISPR-Cas9 genome-edited HeLa cells deficient for the individual steps
of DNPS (CR-cells), assessed the substrates accumulation in cell lysates and
growth media and tested how the mutations affect assembly of the purinosome, the
multi-enzyme complex of DNPS enzymes. In all model cell lines with the exception
of one, an accumulation of the substrate(s) for the knocked out enzyme was
identified. The ability to form the purinosome was reduced. We conclude that
LC-MS/MS analysis of the dephosphorylated substrates of DNPS enzymes in bodily
fluids is applicable in the selective screening of the known and putative DNPS
disorders. This approach should be considered in affected individuals with
neurological and neuromuscular manifestations of unknown aetiology. Prepared in
vitro human model systems can serve in various studies that aim to provide a
better characterization and understanding of physiology and pathology of DNPS,
to study the role of each DNPS protein in the purinosome formation and represent
an interesting way for the screening of potential therapeutic agents.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.08.004
PMID: 27590927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
