---
reference_id: PMID:34232383
title: Human deafness-associated variants alter the dynamics of key molecules in hair cell stereocilia F-actin cores.
authors:
- Miyoshi T
- Belyantseva IA
- Kitajiri SI
- Miyajima H
- Nishio SY
- Usami SI
- Kim BJ
- Choi BY
- Omori K
- Shroff H
- Friedman TB
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-021-02304-0
keywords:
- Actins/genetics
- Animals
- "Deafness/genetics, metabolism"
- Formins
- Hair/metabolism
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/metabolism"
- Humans
- "Mechanotransduction, Cellular/genetics"
- Mice
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- Stereocilia/metabolism
- "Zebrafish/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human deafness-associated variants alter the dynamics of key molecules in hair cell stereocilia F-actin cores.
**Authors:** Miyoshi T, Belyantseva IA, Kitajiri SI, Miyajima H, Nishio SY, Usami SI, Kim BJ, Choi BY, Omori K, Shroff H, Friedman TB
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-021-02304-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-021-02304-0)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2022 Apr;141(3-4):363-382. doi: 10.1007/s00439-021-02304-0. Epub
2021  Jul 7.

Human deafness-associated variants alter the dynamics of key molecules in hair 
cell stereocilia F-actin cores.

Miyoshi T(1)(2), Belyantseva IA(3), Kitajiri SI(4), Miyajima H(5)(6), Nishio 
SY(4), Usami SI(4), Kim BJ(7)(8), Choi BY(9), Omori K(10), Shroff H(11), 
Friedman TB(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Porter Neuroscience 
Research Center, Room 1F-143A, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. 
takushi.miyoshi@nih.gov.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan. takushi.miyoshi@nih.gov.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Porter Neuroscience 
Research Center, Room 1F-143A, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(4)Department of Hearing Implant Sciences, Shinshu University School of 
Medicine, 390-8621, Matsumoto, Japan.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Matsumoto, 390-8621, Japan.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, Aizawa Hospital, Matsumoto, 390-8510, Japan.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Chungnam National 
University College of Medicine, Chungnam National University Sejong Hospital, 
Sejong, 30099, South Korea.
(8)Brain Research Institute, Chungnam National University College of Medicine, 
Daejeon, 35015, South Korea.
(9)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Seoul National University Bundang 
Hospital, Seongnam, 13620, South Korea.
(10)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan.
(11)Laboratory of High Resolution Optical Imaging, National Institute of 
Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, 20892, USA.

Stereocilia protrude up to 100 µm from the apical surface of vertebrate inner 
ear hair cells and are packed with cross-linked filamentous actin (F-actin). 
They function as mechanical switches to convert sound vibration into 
electrochemical neuronal signals transmitted to the brain. Several genes encode 
molecular components of stereocilia including actin monomers, actin regulatory 
and bundling proteins, motor proteins and the proteins of the 
mechanotransduction complex. A stereocilium F-actin core is a dynamic system, 
which is continuously being remodeled while maintaining an outwardly stable 
architecture under the regulation of F-actin barbed-end cappers, severing 
proteins and crosslinkers. The F-actin cores of stereocilia also provide a 
pathway for motor proteins to transport cargos including components of tip-link 
densities, scaffolding proteins and actin regulatory proteins. Deficiencies and 
mutations of stereocilia components that disturb this "dynamic equilibrium" in 
stereocilia can induce morphological changes and disrupt mechanotransduction 
causing sensorineural hearing loss, best studied in mouse and zebrafish models. 
Currently, at least 23 genes, associated with human syndromic and nonsyndromic 
hearing loss, encode proteins involved in the development and maintenance of 
stereocilia F-actin cores. However, it is challenging to predict how variants 
associated with sensorineural hearing loss segregating in families affect 
protein function. Here, we review the functions of several molecular components 
of stereocilia F-actin cores and provide new data from our experimental approach 
to directly evaluate the pathogenicity and functional impact of reported and 
novel variants of DIAPH1 in autosomal-dominant DFNA1 hearing loss using 
single-molecule fluorescence microscopy.

© 2021. This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the 
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-021-02304-0
PMCID: PMC11351816
PMID: 34232383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Conflict of interests The authors 
declare no conflict of interest associated with this manuscript.