---
reference_id: "PMID:34135889"
title: Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Infection of Neuronal and Non-Neuronal Cells Elicits Specific Innate Immune Responses and Immune Evasion Mechanisms.
authors:
- Verzosa AL
- McGeever LA
- Bhark SJ
- Delgado T
- Salazar N
- Sanchez EL
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.644664
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Infection of Neuronal and Non-Neuronal Cells Elicits Specific Innate Immune Responses and Immune Evasion Mechanisms.
**Authors:** Verzosa AL, McGeever LA, Bhark SJ, Delgado T, Salazar N, Sanchez EL
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.644664](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.644664)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 May 31;12:644664. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.644664. 
eCollection 2021.

Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Infection of Neuronal and Non-Neuronal Cells Elicits 
Specific Innate Immune Responses and Immune Evasion Mechanisms.

Verzosa AL(1), McGeever LA(1), Bhark SJ(2), Delgado T(2), Salazar N(1), Sanchez 
EL(1).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, College of Science and Engineering, San Francisco State 
University, San Francisco, CA, United States.
(2)Biology Department, Seattle Pacific University, Seattle, WA, United States.

Alphaherpesviruses (α-HV) are a large family of double-stranded DNA viruses 
which cause many human and animal diseases. There are three human α-HVs: Herpes 
Simplex Viruses (HSV-1 and HSV-2) and Varicella Zoster Virus (VZV). All α-HV 
have evolved multiple strategies to suppress or exploit host cell innate immune 
signaling pathways to aid in their infections. All α-HVs initially infect 
epithelial cells (primary site of infection), and later spread to infect 
innervating sensory neurons. As with all herpesviruses, α-HVs have both a lytic 
(productive) and latent (dormant) stage of infection. During the lytic stage, 
the virus rapidly replicates in epithelial cells before it is cleared by the 
immune system. In contrast, latent infection in host neurons is a life-long 
infection. Upon infection of mucosal epithelial cells, herpesviruses immediately 
employ a variety of cellular mechanisms to evade host detection during active 
replication. Next, infectious viral progeny bud from infected cells and fuse to 
neuronal axonal terminals. Here, the nucleocapsid is transported via sensory 
neuron axons to the ganglion cell body, where latency is established until viral 
reactivation. This review will primarily focus on how HSV-1 induces various 
innate immune responses, including host cell recognition of viral constituents 
by pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs), induction of IFN-mediated immune 
responses involving toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling pathways, and cyclic 
GMP-AMP synthase stimulator of interferon genes (cGAS-STING). This review 
focuses on these pathways along with other mechanisms including autophagy and 
the complement system. We will summarize and discuss recent evidence which has 
revealed how HSV-1 is able to manipulate and evade host antiviral innate immune 
responses both in neuronal (sensory neurons of the trigeminal ganglia) and 
non-neuronal (epithelial) cells. Understanding the innate immune response 
mechanisms triggered by HSV-1 infection, and the mechanisms of innate immune 
evasion, will impact the development of future therapeutic treatments.

Copyright © 2021 Verzosa, McGeever, Bhark, Delgado, Salazar and Sanchez.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.644664
PMCID: PMC8201405
PMID: 34135889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.