---
reference_id: "PMID:36632466"
title: Molecular Mechanisms of Mitochondrial Quality Control in Ischemic Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Chang X
- Liu R
- Li R
- Peng Y
- Zhu P
- Zhou H
journal: Int J Biol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7150/ijbs.76223
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Mechanisms of Mitochondrial Quality Control in Ischemic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Chang X, Liu R, Li R, Peng Y, Zhu P, Zhou H
**Journal:** Int J Biol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7150/ijbs.76223](https://doi.org/10.7150/ijbs.76223)

## Content

1. Int J Biol Sci. 2023 Jan 1;19(2):426-448. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.76223. eCollection
 2023.

Molecular Mechanisms of Mitochondrial Quality Control in Ischemic 
Cardiomyopathy.

Chang X(1), Liu R(1), Li R(2), Peng Y(3), Zhu P(4), Zhou H(5).

Author information:
(1)Guang'anmen Hospital of China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, The First Medical Centre, Medical 
School of Chinese People's Liberation Army, Beijing, China.
(3)Montverde Future Academy Shanghai, 88 Jianhao Road, Pudong New District, 
Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The Second Medical 
Center & National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Diseases, Chinese PLA 
General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(5)Senior Department of Cardiology, The Sixth Medical Centre of People's 
Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing, China.

Ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM) is a special type of coronary heart disease or an 
advanced stage of the disease, which is related to the pathological mechanism of 
primary dilated cardiomyopathy. Ischemic cardiomyopathy mainly occurs in the 
long-term myocardial ischemia, resulting in diffuse myocardial fibrosis. This in 
turn affects the cardiac ejection function, resulting in a significant impact on 
myocardial systolic and diastolic function, resulting in a decrease in the 
cardiac ejection fraction. The pathogenesis of ICM is closely related to 
coronary heart disease. Mainly due to coronary atherosclerosis caused by 
coronary stenosis or vascular occlusion, causing vascular inflammatory lesions 
and thrombosis. As the disease progresses, it leads to long-term myocardial 
ischemia and eventually ICM. The pathological mechanism is mainly related to the 
mechanisms of inflammation, myocardial hypertrophy, fibrosis and vascular 
remodeling. Mitochondria are organelles with a double-membrane structure, so the 
composition of the mitochondrial outer compartment is basically similar to that 
of the cytoplasm. When ischemia-reperfusion induces a large influx of calcium 
into the cell, the concentration of calcium ions in the mitochondrial outer 
compartment also increases. The subsequent opening of the membrane permeability 
transition pore in the inner mitochondrial membrane and the resulting calcium 
overload induces the homeostasis of cardiomyocytes and activates the 
mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis. Mitochondrial Quality Control (MQC), as an 
important mechanism for regulating mitochondrial function in cardiomyocytes, 
affects the morphological structure/function and lifespan of mitochondria. In 
this review, we discuss the role of MQC (including mitophagy, mitochondrial 
dynamics, and mitochondrial biosynthesis) in the pathogenesis of ICM and provide 
important evidence for targeting MQC for ICM.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.76223
PMCID: PMC9830521
PMID: 36632466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.