---
reference_id: "PMID:26330906"
title: Treatment timing and multidisciplinary approach in Apert syndrome.
authors:
- Fadda MT
- Ierardo G
- Ladniak B
- Di Giorgio G
- Caporlingua A
- Raponi I
- Silvestri A
- "Group of Apert syndrome, Policlinico Umberto I, “Sapienza” University of Rome, Italy"
journal: Ann Stomatol (Roma)
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment timing and multidisciplinary approach in Apert syndrome.
**Authors:** Fadda MT, Ierardo G, Ladniak B, Di Giorgio G, Caporlingua A, Raponi I, Silvestri A, Group of Apert syndrome, Policlinico Umberto I, “Sapienza” University of Rome, Italy
**Journal:** Ann Stomatol (Roma) (2015)

## Content

1. Ann Stomatol (Roma). 2015 Jul 28;6(2):58-63. eCollection 2015 Apr-Jun.

Treatment timing and multidisciplinary approach in Apert syndrome.

Fadda MT(1), Ierardo G(2), Ladniak B(2), Di Giorgio G(2), Caporlingua A(1), 
Raponi I(1), Silvestri A(3); Group of Apert syndrome, Policlinico Umberto I, 
“Sapienza” University of Rome, Italy.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Sciences, Maxillofacial Surgery Unit, 
Policlinico Umberto I, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Sciences, Pediatric Unit, "Sapienza" 
University of Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Sciences, Orthognathodontic Unit, 
"Sapienza" University of Rome, Italy.

Apert syndrome is a rare congenital disorder characterized by craniosynostosis, 
midface hypoplasia and symmetric syndactyly of hands and feet. Abnormalities 
associated with Apert syndrome include premature fusion of coronal sutures 
system (coronal sutures and less frequently lambdoid suture) resulting in 
brachiturricephalic dismorphism and impaired skull base growth. After this brief 
explanation it is clear that these anatomical abnormalities may have a negative 
impact on the ability to perform essential functions. Due to the complexity of 
the syndrome a multidisciplinary (respiratory, cerebral, maxillo-mandibular, 
dental, ophthalmic and orthopaedic) approach is necessary in treating the 
psychological, aesthetic and functional issues. The aim of this paper is to 
analyse the different functional issues and surgical methods trying to enhance 
results through a treatment plan which includes different specialities involved 
in Apert syndrome treatment. Reduced intellectual capacity is associated to the 
high number of general anaesthesia the small patients are subject to. Therefore 
the diagnostic and therapeutic treatment plan in these patients has established 
integrated and tailored surgical procedures based on the patients' age in order 
to reduce the number of general anaesthesia, thus simplifying therapy for both 
Apert patients and their family members.

PMCID: PMC4525098
PMID: 26330906