---
reference_id: "PMID:36187726"
title: Overview of the Clinical Approach to Individuals With Cerebellar Ataxia and Neuropathy.
authors:
- Roberts LJ
- McVeigh M
- Seiderer L
- Harding IH
- Corben LA
- Delatycki M
- Szmulewicz DJ
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overview of the Clinical Approach to Individuals With Cerebellar Ataxia and Neuropathy.
**Authors:** Roberts LJ, McVeigh M, Seiderer L, Harding IH, Corben LA, Delatycki M, Szmulewicz DJ
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200021](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200021)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2022 Sep 28;8(5):e200021. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200021. 
eCollection 2022 Oct.

Overview of the Clinical Approach to Individuals With Cerebellar Ataxia and 
Neuropathy.

Roberts LJ(1), McVeigh M(1), Seiderer L(1), Harding IH(1), Corben LA(1), 
Delatycki M(1), Szmulewicz DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurophysiology Department (L.J.R.,L.S.), Department of Neurology & 
Neurological Research, St Vincent's Hospital; Department of Medicine (L.J.R., 
L.S.), the University of Melbourne; Ballance Disorders and Ataxia Service 
(L.J.R., M.M., D.J.S.), Eye and Ear Hospital; Department of Neuroscience 
(I.H.H., L.A.C.), Central Clinical School, Monash University; Monash Biomedical 
Imaging (I.H.H., L.A.C.), Monash University; Bruce Lefroy Centre (L.A.C.), 
Murdoch Children's Research Institute; 7Department of Paediatrics, Melbourne 
University; Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health, Monash University; 
Victorian Clinical Genetics Services (M.D.), Murdoch Children's Reseach 
Institute; and The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health (D.J.S.), 
the University of Melbourne, Australia.

Increasingly, cerebellar syndromes are recognized as affecting multiple systems. 
Extracerebellar features include peripheral neuropathies affecting 
proprioception; cranial neuropathies such as auditory and vestibular; and 
neuronopathies, for example, dorsal root and vestibular. The presence of such 
features, which in and of themselves may cause ataxia, likely contribute to key 
disabilities such as gait instability and falls. Based on the evolving available 
literature and experience, we outline a clinical approach to the diagnosis of 
adult-onset ataxia where a combination of cerebellar and peripheral or cranial 
nerve pathology exists. Objective diagnostic modalities including 
electrophysiology, oculomotor, and vestibular function testing are invaluable in 
accurately defining an individual's phenotype. Advances in MRI techniques have 
led to an increased recognition of disease-specific patterns of cerebellar 
pathology, including those conditions where neuronopathies may be involved. 
Depending on availability, a stepwise approach to genetic testing is suggested. 
This is guided by factors such as pattern of inheritance and age at disease 
onset, and genetic testing may range from specific genetic panels through to 
whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing. Management is best performed with the 
involvement of a multidisciplinary team, aiming at minimization of complications 
such as falls and aspiration pneumonia and maximizing functional status.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200021
PMCID: PMC9520343
PMID: 36187726