---
reference_id: "PMID:34413153"
title: Theratyping cystic fibrosis in vitro in ALI culture and organoid models generated from patient-derived nasal epithelial conditionally reprogrammed stem cells.
authors:
- Sette G
- Lo Cicero S
- Blaconà G
- Pierandrei S
- Bruno SM
- Salvati V
- Castelli G
- Falchi M
- Fabrizzi B
- Cimino G
- De Maria R
- Biffoni M
- Eramo A
- Lucarelli M
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1183/13993003.00908-2021
keywords:
- Aminophenols/pharmacology
- Benzodioxoles
- "Cystic Fibrosis/drug therapy, genetics"
- Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator/genetics
- Epithelial Cells
- Humans
- Mutation
- Organoids
- Stem Cells
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Theratyping cystic fibrosis in vitro in ALI culture and organoid models generated from patient-derived nasal epithelial conditionally reprogrammed stem cells.
**Authors:** Sette G, Lo Cicero S, Blaconà G, Pierandrei S, Bruno SM, Salvati V, Castelli G, Falchi M, Fabrizzi B, Cimino G, De Maria R, Biffoni M, Eramo A, Lucarelli M
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1183/13993003.00908-2021](https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00908-2021)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2021 Dec 2;58(6):2100908. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00908-2021.
Print  2021 Dec.

Theratyping cystic fibrosis in vitro in ALI culture and organoid models 
generated from patient-derived nasal epithelial conditionally reprogrammed stem 
cells.

Sette G(1)(2), Lo Cicero S(1)(2), Blaconà G(3), Pierandrei S(3), Bruno SM(3), 
Salvati V(1), Castelli G(1), Falchi M(4), Fabrizzi B(5), Cimino G(6), De Maria 
R(7)(8), Biffoni M(1), Eramo A(9)(10), Lucarelli M(3)(11)(10).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Co-first authors.
(3)Dept of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)National AIDS Center, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(5)Cystic Fibrosis Care Center, Mother-Child Dept, United Hospitals, Ancona, 
Italy.
(6)Cystic Fibrosis Reference Center of Lazio Region, AOU Policlinico Umberto I, 
Rome, Italy.
(7)U.O.C. Medical Oncology, Dipartimento di Medicina e Chirurgia Traslazionale, 
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(8)Fondazione Policlinico Universitario 'A. Gemelli' - IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(9)Dept of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, 
Italy adriana.eramo@iss.it.
(10)Co-last authors.
(11)Pasteur Institute, Cenci Bolognetti Foundation, Sapienza University of Rome, 
Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2021 Dec 2;58(6):2102735. doi: 10.1183/13993003.02735-2021.

QUESTION: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is due to pathogenic variants in the cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Recent improvements 
have enabled pharmacological therapy aiming at restoring mutated CFTR expression 
and function. CFTR "modulators" have revolutionised the CF therapeutic 
landscape, particularly the last approved, Trikafta. This drug combination is 
indicated by the United States Food and Drug Administration and very recently by 
the European Medicines Agency for genotypes carrying at least one copy of CFTR 
with the F508del pathogenic variant. However, several genotypes are not yet 
eligible for Trikafta treatment.
MATERIALS/PATIENTS AND METHODS: We exploited an innovative cellular approach 
allowing highly efficient in vitro expansion of airway epithelial stem cells 
(AESCs) through conditional reprogramming from nasal brushing of CF patients. 
This approach, coupled to the development of AESC-derived personalised disease 
models, as organoids and air-liquid interface (ALI) cultures, revealed highly 
suitable for CFTR pharmacological testing.
RESULTS AND ANSWER TO THE QUESTION: We fully validated the experimental models 
and implemented the CFTR functional assays and biochemical CFTR protein 
characterisation, which allowed the evaluation of the efficacy of clinically 
available modulators in restoring CFTR maturation and function of each 
patient-derived "avatar" (theratyping). F508del homozygous genotypes, used as 
controls, confirmed the higher clinical activity of Trikafta in comparison with 
older modulators. In addition, Trikafta showed its efficacy on three rare 
genotypes previously not eligible for treatment with modulators, opening the way 
to clinical translation. Finally, encouraging results for innovative drug 
combinations were obtained.

Copyright ©The authors 2021. For reproduction rights and permissions contact 
permissions@ersnet.org.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00908-2021
PMCID: PMC8675295
PMID: 34413153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: G. Sette has nothing to 
disclose. Conflict of interest: S. Lo Cicero has nothing to disclose. Conflict 
of interest: G. Blaconà has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: S. 
Pierandrei has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: S.M. Bruno has nothing 
to disclose. Conflict of interest: V. Salvati has nothing to disclose. Conflict 
of interest: G. Castelli has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: M. 
Falchi has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: B. Fabrizzi has nothing to 
disclose. Conflict of interest: G. Cimino has nothing to disclose. Conflict of 
interest: R. De Maria has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: M. Biffoni 
has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: A. Eramo has nothing to disclose. 
Conflict of interest: M. Lucarelli has nothing to disclose.