---
reference_id: "PMID:4032175"
title: Anorectal manometry for the exclusion of Hirschsprung's disease in neonates.
authors:
- Loening-Baucke V
- Pringle KC
- Ekwo EE
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1097/00005176-198508000-00018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anorectal manometry for the exclusion of Hirschsprung's disease in neonates.
**Authors:** Loening-Baucke V, Pringle KC, Ekwo EE
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00005176-198508000-00018](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005176-198508000-00018)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1985 Aug;4(4):596-603. doi: 
10.1097/00005176-198508000-00018.

Anorectal manometry for the exclusion of Hirschsprung's disease in neonates.

Loening-Baucke V, Pringle KC, Ekwo EE.

We studied the usefulness of anorectal manometry in excluding Hirschsprung's 
disease in 25 neonates with signs and symptoms of intestinal obstruction. An 
intraluminal pressure transducer or perfused side-opening catheters were used to 
evaluate anal tone, anal rhythmicity, and internal sphincter relaxation during 
rectal distention. Hirschsprung's disease was diagnosed by rectal biopsy in 16% 
of the neonates. Studies using anorectal manometry gave one false positive and 
one false negative diagnosis of Hirschsprung's disease, which resulted in 75% 
sensitivity, 95% specificity, and a kappa coefficient of 0.7. We found that 
anorectal manometry, a rapid and atraumatic test, is a reliable screening test 
for exclusion of neonatal Hirschsprung's disease. By using the combination of 
manometry and contrast enema, it is possible to eliminate the need for a 
confirmatory rectal biopsy in many neonates suspected of having Hirschsprung's 
disease.

DOI: 10.1097/00005176-198508000-00018
PMID: 4032175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]