---
reference_id: "PMID:26583190"
title: Baraitser-Winter Cerebrofrontofacial Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Verloes A
- Drunat S
- Pilz D
- Di Donato N
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Baraitser-Winter Cerebrofrontofacial Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Verloes A, Drunat S, Pilz D, Di Donato N

## Content

1. Baraitser-Winter Cerebrofrontofacial Syndrome.

Verloes A(1), Drunat S(2), Pilz D(3), Di Donato N(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2015 Nov 19 [updated 2022 Mar 24].

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Cité;, Department of Genetics, APHP-Hôpital Robert Debré, 
Paris, France
(2)Department of Genetics, APHP-Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France
(3)Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United 
Kingdom
(4)Institut für Klinische Genetik, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, 
Dresden, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial (BWCFF) syndrome 
is a multiple congenital anomaly syndrome characterized by typical craniofacial 
features and intellectual disability. Many (but not all) affected individuals 
have pachygyria that is predominantly frontal, wasting of the shoulder girdle 
muscles, and sensory impairment due to iris or retinal coloboma and/or 
sensorineural deafness. Intellectual disability, which is common but variable, 
is related to the severity of the brain malformations. Seizures, congenital 
heart defects, renal malformations, and gastrointestinal dysfunction are also 
common.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of BWCFF syndrome is established in a proband 
with suggestive findings and a heterozygous missense pathogenic variant in 
either ACTB or ACTG1 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Standard treatment for medical concerns 
in conjunction with the associated specialist; management of developmental delay 
and intellectual disability is tailored to the individual. Surveillance: Routine 
follow up recommended for neurodevelopmental assessment in all; follow up as 
needed for those with seizures (neurologic evaluation), coloboma or 
microphthalmia (ophthalmologic evaluation), hearing loss (audiologic 
evaluation), cardiac defects, renal tract anomalies, and gastrointestinal 
dysfunction.
GENETIC COUNSELING: BWCFF syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder. Most 
individuals with BWCFF syndrome reported to date have the disorder as the result 
of a de novo ACTB or ACTG1 pathogenic variant. If a parent of the proband has 
the pathogenic variant identified in the proband, the risk to the sibs of 
inheriting the pathogenic variant is 50%. Once the ACTB or ACTG1 pathogenic 
variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and 
preimplantation genetic testing for BWCFF syndrome are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 26583190