---
reference_id: "PMID:38587015"
title: Upper Esophageal Sphincter and Esophageal Motility Pathology on Manometry in Retrograde Cricopharyngeal Dysfunction.
authors:
- Yousef A
- Krause A
- Yadlapati R
- Sharma P
- Weissbrod PA
journal: Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ohn.735
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Upper Esophageal Sphincter and Esophageal Motility Pathology on Manometry in Retrograde Cricopharyngeal Dysfunction.
**Authors:** Yousef A, Krause A, Yadlapati R, Sharma P, Weissbrod PA
**Journal:** Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ohn.735](https://doi.org/10.1002/ohn.735)

## Content

1. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2024 Aug;171(2):478-485. doi: 10.1002/ohn.735.
Epub  2024 Apr 8.

Upper Esophageal Sphincter and Esophageal Motility Pathology on Manometry in 
Retrograde Cricopharyngeal Dysfunction.

Yousef A(1), Krause A(2), Yadlapati R(2), Sharma P(2), Weissbrod PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: There exists a paucity of data regarding the mechanism and manometric 
findings in retrograde cricopharyngeal dysfunction (RCPD). In this study, we 
aimed to compare esophageal physiologic findings between patients with RCPD 
compared to an asymptomatic cohort.
STUDY DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Tertiary Care Center.
METHODS: Esophageal high-resolution impedance manometry was completed 
preoperatively in patients diagnosed with RCPD. Manometric data were compared 
between the RCPD and asymptomatic cohorts. A 2:1 age-sex-matched asymptomatic 
cohort was used as the control group. Treatment response was assessed among the 
RCPD cohort.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients are included: 13 RCPD [mean age: 31.1 (SD: 12.6) 
years, female sex: 11 (85%)] and 26 asymptomatic [mean age: 32.1 (SD: 1.5) 
years, female sex: 22 (85%)]. The RCPD cohort, compared to the asymptomatic 
cohort, exhibited significantly greater upper esophageal sphincter (UES) length 
[4.5 (SD: 0.7) vs 3.7 (0.9) cm, P = .01] and higher UES basal pressures [91.9 
(35.0) vs 49.7 (25.5) mm Hg, P = .002]. Patients with RCPD demonstrated higher 
rates of ineffective swallows [70.0% (31.6%) vs 15.4% (21.6%), P < .001] and 
incomplete bolus clearance [81% (22.0%) vs 21.8% (30.0%), P < .001]. All 
patients who underwent cricopharyngeal botulinum injections experienced initial 
improvement of symptoms with 3 patients requiring repeat intervention.
CONCLUSION: RCPD is associated with a longer UES, elevated UES basal pressures, 
and an increased incidence of ineffective esophageal motility. This study is the 
first to compare preoperative manometry results among patients with RCPD to 
those of an asymptomatic cohort, providing insights into the mechanism of RCPD.

© 2024 American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery Foundation.

DOI: 10.1002/ohn.735
PMCID: PMC11580733
PMID: 38587015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None of the authors of this 
manuscript have any conflicts of interest or disclosures to report.