---
reference_id: "PMID:34890998"
title: Atlas of circulating immune cells in Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Xie Z
- Huang Y
- Li X
- Lun Y
- Li X
- He Y
- Wu S
- Wang S
- Sun J
- Zhang J
journal: Int Immunopharmacol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108396
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atlas of circulating immune cells in Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Xie Z, Huang Y, Li X, Lun Y, Li X, He Y, Wu S, Wang S, Sun J, Zhang J
**Journal:** Int Immunopharmacol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108396](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108396)

## Content

1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2022 Jan;102:108396. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108396. 
Epub 2021 Dec 7.

Atlas of circulating immune cells in Kawasaki disease.

Xie Z(1), Huang Y(1), Li X(1), Lun Y(1), Li X(1), He Y(1), Wu S(1), Wang S(1), 
Sun J(1), Zhang J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular and Thyroid Surgery, The First Hospital, China Medical 
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(2)Department of Vascular and Thyroid Surgery, The First Hospital, China Medical 
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China. Electronic address: jianzhang@cmu.edu.cn.

Increasing evidence shows that the pathogenesis of Kawasaki disease (KD) is 
caused by abnormal and unbalanced innate and adaptive immune responses. However, 
the changes in and functions of adaptive immune cells in the peripheral blood of 
subjects with KD remain controversial. In this study, three different methods, 
CIBERSORT, Immune Cell Abundance Identifier (ImmuCellAI), and immune cell 
markers, were used to evaluate the proportions and abundances of immune cells in 
eight KD datasets (GSE9863, GSE9864, GSE18606, GSE63881, GSE68004, GSE73461, 
GSE73463, and GSE64486; a total of 1,251 samples). Compared with those in normal 
controls and convalescent KD samples, the proportions and abundances of innate 
immune cells such as neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages in acute KD 
peripheral blood samples were significantly increased, while those of adaptive 
immune cells such as B and T cells were significantly decreased. The change 
tendencies of these immune cells were similar to those observed in other febrile 
illnesses but were more significant. However, in the coronary artery tissues of 
patients with convalescent KD, adaptive immune cells, especially B cells and 
CD8+ T cell subsets, were significantly increased. This result suggests that 
adaptive immune cells can be selectively recruited from peripheral blood into 
the coronary arteries. In addition, we found that elevated neutrophils in 
peripheral blood could be used as a biomarker to assist in the differential 
diagnosis of KD, but we did not find immune cells that could accurately predict 
intravenousimmunoglobulin (IVIG) responses in multiple datasets.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108396
PMID: 34890998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]