---
reference_id: "PMID:12172547"
title: Acquired mutations in GATA1 in the megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome.
authors:
- Wechsler J
- Greene M
- McDevitt MA
- Anastasi J
- Karp JE
- Le Beau MM
- Crispino JD
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/ng955
keywords:
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- "Child, Preschool"
- Core Binding Factor Alpha 2 Subunit
- DNA/metabolism
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Down Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- Erythroid-Specific DNA-Binding Factors
- Female
- GATA1 Transcription Factor
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Infant
- "Leukemia, Megakaryoblastic, Acute/etiology, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/metabolism
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Protein Binding
- Protein Biosynthesis
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired mutations in GATA1 in the megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome.
**Authors:** Wechsler J, Greene M, McDevitt MA, Anastasi J, Karp JE, Le Beau MM, Crispino JD
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng955](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng955)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2002 Sep;32(1):148-52. doi: 10.1038/ng955. Epub 2002 Aug 12.

Acquired mutations in GATA1 in the megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome.

Wechsler J(1), Greene M, McDevitt MA, Anastasi J, Karp JE, Le Beau MM, Crispino 
JD.

Author information:
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois 60637, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2002 Sep;32(1):83-4. doi: 10.1038/ng960.
    Pediatr Res. 2002 Dec;52(6):831. doi: 10.1203/00006450-200212000-00003.

Children with Down syndrome have a 10-20-fold elevated risk of developing 
leukemia, particularly acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). While a subset of 
pediatric AMKLs is associated with the 1;22 translocation and expression of a 
mutant fusion protein, the genetic alterations that promote Down 
syndrome-related AMKL (DS-AMKL) have remained elusive. Here we show that 
leukemic cells from every individual with DS-AMKL that we examined contain 
mutations in GATA1, encoding the essential hematopoietic transcription factor 
GATA1 (GATA binding protein 1 or globin transcription factor 1). Each mutation 
results in the introduction of a premature stop codon in the gene sequence that 
encodes the amino-terminal activation domain. These mutations prevent synthesis 
of full-length GATA1, but not synthesis of a shorter variant that is initiated 
downstream. We show that the shorter GATA1 protein, which lacks the N-terminal 
activation domain, binds DNA and interacts with its essential cofactor Friend of 
GATA1 (FOG1; encoded by ZFPM1) to the same extent as does full-length GATA1, but 
has a reduced transactivation potential. Although some reports suggest that the 
activation domain is dispensable in cell-culture models of hematopoiesis, one 
study has shown that it is required for normal development in vivo. Together, 
these findings indicate that loss of wildtype GATA1 constitutes one step in the 
pathogenesis of AMKL in Down syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/ng955
PMID: 12172547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]