---
reference_id: "PMID:39370509"
title: "The effect of MIND diet on sleep status, anxiety, depression, and cardiometabolic indices in obese diabetic women with insomnia: study protocol for a randomized controlled clinical trial {1}."
authors:
- Golmohammadi M
- Attari VE
- Salimi Y
- Nachvak SM
- Samadi M
journal: Trials
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13063-024-08486-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The effect of MIND diet on sleep status, anxiety, depression, and cardiometabolic indices in obese diabetic women with insomnia: study protocol for a randomized controlled clinical trial {1}.
**Authors:** Golmohammadi M, Attari VE, Salimi Y, Nachvak SM, Samadi M
**Journal:** Trials (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13063-024-08486-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13063-024-08486-y)

## Content

1. Trials. 2024 Oct 7;25(1):660. doi: 10.1186/s13063-024-08486-y.

The effect of MIND diet on sleep status, anxiety, depression, and 
cardiometabolic indices in obese diabetic women with insomnia: study protocol 
for a randomized controlled clinical trial {1}.

Golmohammadi M(1), Attari VE(2), Salimi Y(3), Nachvak SM(4), Samadi M(5).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Department of Nutritional Sciences, School of 
Nutrition Sciences and Food Technology, Kermanshah University of Medical 
Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, School of Nutrition and Food 
Sciences, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Social Development & Health Promotion Research Center, Health Institute, 
Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(4)Department of Nutritional Sciences, School of Nutritional Sciences and Food 
Technology, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran. 
smnachvak@hotmail.com.
(5)Department of Nutritional Sciences, School of Nutritional Sciences and Food 
Technology, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran. 
mehnoosh_samadi@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: The Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay 
(MIND) diet is a plant-based and anti-inflammatory diet that has the ability to 
protect and manage cardiovascular and nervous system diseases. Regarding that 
insomnia and cardiovascular problems are x`common in type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(T2DM), the present study will assess the effectiveness of the MIND dietary 
pattern on sleep quality, cardiometabolic indicators, and other psychological 
indicators.
METHODS: Forty-four overweight/obese T2DM women with insomnia, aged 30-65 years, 
will voluntarily participate in this randomized controlled trial and will be 
randomized to receive either a MIND low-calorie diet (MLCD) or a low-calorie 
diet (LCD) over a 3-month period. Before and after the study, sleep quality, 
some biochemical and cardiometabolic indices, cortisol, brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), and 
oxidative stress indicators will be assessed.
DISCUSSION: The use of dietary interventions in the management of T2DM 
complications is practical and safe. This research seeks to investigate the 
capacity of the MIND diet in the management of insomnia and cardiovascular 
problems of DM. It is expected that the results of this research will provide 
new perspectives on using an ideal dietary regimen to treat these health 
conditions.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: IRCT20181111041611N8. Registered on August 7, 2023. 
https://www.irct.ir/trial/71772.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-024-08486-y
PMCID: PMC11457347
PMID: 39370509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.