---
reference_id: "PMID:21413271"
title: Filarial Nematodes.
authors:
- Baron S
- Cross JH
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Filarial Nematodes.
**Authors:** Baron S, Cross JH

## Content

1. Filarial Nematodes.

Cross JH.

In: Baron S(1), editor. Medical Microbiology. 4th edition. Galveston (TX): 
University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston; 1996. Chapter 92.

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas

The filariae are thread-like parasitic nematodes (roundworms) that are 
transmitted by arthropod vectors. The adult worms inhabit specific tissues where 
they mate and produce microfilariae, the characteristic tiny, thread-like 
larvae. The microfilariae infect vector arthropods, in which they mature to 
infective larvae. Filarial diseases are a major health problem in many tropical 
and subtropical areas. The disease produced by a filarial worm depends on the 
tissue locations preferred by adults and microfilariae. The adults of the 
lymphatic filariae inhabit lymph vessels, where blockage and host reaction can 
result in lymphatic inflammation and dysfunction, and eventually in lymphedema 
and fibrosis. Repeated, prolonged infection with these worms can lead to 
elephantiasis, a buildup of excess tissue in the affected area. Other filariae 
mature in the skin and subcutaneous tissues, where they induce nodule formation 
and dermatitis; migrating filariae of these species can cause ocular damage. 
Table 92-1 summarizes the filarial infections of humans.

Copyright © 1996, The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston.

PMID: 21413271