---
reference_id: "PMID:32087739"
title: Taste and smell function in Wolfram syndrome.
authors:
- Alfaro R
- Doty T
- Narayanan A
- Lugar H
- Hershey T
- Pepino MY
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-1335-7
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Biomarkers
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Smell
- Taste
- Wolfram Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Taste and smell function in Wolfram syndrome.
**Authors:** Alfaro R, Doty T, Narayanan A, Lugar H, Hershey T, Pepino MY
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-020-1335-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-020-1335-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Feb 22;15(1):57. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-1335-7.

Taste and smell function in Wolfram syndrome.

Alfaro R(1), Doty T(2), Narayanan A(2), Lugar H(2), Hershey T(2)(3), Pepino
MY(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois at
Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Washington University, St.
Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, School of Medicine, Washington University, St.
Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois at
Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA. ypepino@illinois.edu.
(5)Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign,
Urbana, IL, USA. ypepino@illinois.edu.

BACKGROUND: Wolfram syndrome is a rare genetic disease characterized by
insulin-dependent diabetes, optic nerve atrophy, sensorineural hearing loss and
neurodegeneration. Although olfactory dysfunction, a classical clinical marker
of neurodegenerative processes, has been reported in Wolfram syndrome, its use
as a clinical marker in Wolfram is limited due to data scarcity. In addition, it
is unknown whether Wolfram syndrome affects the sense of taste.
METHODS: Smell and taste perception were assessed in participants with Wolfram
syndrome (n = 40) who were 15.1 ± 6.0 years of age (range: 5.1-28.7 years) and
two sex- and age-matched control groups: one group with type 1 diabetes mellitus
(T1D; n = 25) and a healthy control group (HC; n = 29). Smell sensitivity was
assessed by measuring n-butanol detection thresholds and smell identification by
using the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT). Taste
function was assessed using NIH Toolbox, which includes the assessment of
sucrose (sweet) taste preference, and perceived intensity of sucrose, sodium
chloride (salty), and quinine hydrochloride (bitter) both in the tip of the
tongue (regional test) and the whole mouth.
RESULTS: Smell sensitivity was not significantly different among groups;
however, smell identification was impaired in Wolfram syndrome, as reflected by
significantly lower UPSIT scores in Wolfram syndrome compared to HC and T1D
(P < 0.001). Compared to participants in the control groups, participants with
Wolfram syndrome had a blunted perception of sweetness and saltiness when taste
stimuli were applied regionally (P < 0.05), but differences in perceived
intensity were no longer significant among groups when taste stimuli were tasted
with the whole mouth. Groups preferred similar sucrose concentrations.
CONCLUSION: Wolfram syndrome was associated with olfactory dysfunction. However,
the olfactory dysfunction was qualitative (related to smell identification) and
not secondary to olfactory insensitivity or diabetes, suggesting is arising from
dysfunction in central olfactory brain regions. In contrast to olfaction, and
despite decreased perception of taste intensity in the anterior tongue, the
sense of taste was overall well-conserved in individuals with Wolfram syndrome.
Future longitudinal studies of taste and smell perception in Wolfram syndrome
will be important to determine the use of the chemical senses as clinical
markers of disease progression.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-1335-7
PMCID: PMC7036249
PMID: 32087739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
