---
reference_id: "PMID:9836373"
title: Role of pro-inflammatory cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Brennan FM
- Maini RN
- Feldmann M
journal: Springer Semin Immunopathol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1007/BF00832003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of pro-inflammatory cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Brennan FM, Maini RN, Feldmann M
**Journal:** Springer Semin Immunopathol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00832003](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00832003)

## Content

1. Springer Semin Immunopathol. 1998;20(1-2):133-47. doi: 10.1007/BF00832003.

Role of pro-inflammatory cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis.

Brennan FM(1), Maini RN, Feldmann M.

Author information:
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Hammersmith, London, UK.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is well known to be a chronic autoimmune/inflammatory 
disease which leads to progressive joint damage and destruction. Less well known 
is the fact that in severe cases of RA, with extra-articular manifestations and 
multiple joint involvement, there is also a significant reduction in life 
expectancy [28]. Hence the need for new therapeutic agents. With the cloning of 
cDNAs encoding cytokines in the early to mid 1980s, it became possible to use 
new assays to evaluate cytokine expression in the local site of autoimmunity, 
the rheumatoid synovium. There were two goals. First would understanding 
cytokine expression help us understand the pathogenesis of RA? Secondly, would 
it be possible to learn enough about the cytokine network to establish possible 
therapeutic targets? While a complete understanding of either of these questions 
remains elusive, here we review the state of knowledge in early 1998, which 
shows that much progress has been made and that these goals have been partly 
reached. The clinical benefits of this knowledge are documented elsewhere in 
this compilation, as is the role of chemokines, anti-inflammatory cytokines and 
the cytokines involved in neovascularisation.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00832003
PMID: 9836373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]