---
reference_id: "PMID:21545448"
title: Clinical correlates of olfactory hallucinations in schizophrenia.
authors:
- Langdon R
- McGuire J
- Stevenson R
- Catts SV
journal: Br J Clin Psychol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1348/014466510X500837
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical correlates of olfactory hallucinations in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Langdon R, McGuire J, Stevenson R, Catts SV
**Journal:** Br J Clin Psychol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1348/014466510X500837](https://doi.org/10.1348/014466510X500837)

## Content

1. Br J Clin Psychol. 2011 Jun;50(2):145-63. doi: 10.1348/014466510X500837. Epub 
2011 Feb 23.

Clinical correlates of olfactory hallucinations in schizophrenia.

Langdon R(1), McGuire J, Stevenson R, Catts SV.

Author information:
(1)Macquarie Centre for Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia.

OBJECTIVES. Olfactory hallucinations (OHs) are underrepresented in conventional 
clinical instruments, infrequently researched, and poorly understood. To advance 
understanding of OHs, we examined their past-month prevalence and co-occurring 
symptoms in two datasets. DESIGN. One dataset comprised categorical codes and 
was examined using homogeneity analysis and logistic regression; the other 
dataset comprised numeric ratings and was examined using principal components 
analyses and linear regression. METHOD. The two datasets included: (1) 962 cases 
with Present State Examination - 9th Edition (PSE-9), codes (recoded 
present/absent) from the World Health Organization 10 Country (WHO-10) Study and 
(2) 265 cases with ratings on Scales for Assessing Positive/Negative Symptoms of 
Schizophrenia (SAPS/SANS). Two PSE-9 items (external- and self-smells) were 
recoded into a single OH item to examine consistency with the SAPS/SANS dataset, 
which contained a single OH item. RESULTS. Prevalence of OHs and hallucinations 
in other modalities differed according to the WHO-10 international centre. 
Across centres, OHs were present in 13% of the WHO-10 dataset, similar to the 
17% prevalence rate in the SAPS/SANS dataset. Referential/control delusions and 
other hallucinations (particularly, somatic/tactile/gustatory hallucinations) 
were significant independent correlates of OHs in both datasets. OHs also 
co-occurred with social anxiety and depression in the WHO-10 dataset, with 
self-smells being particularly associated with self-depreciation. 
CONCLUSIONS. Sociocultural factors may modulate the self-reporting and/or 
detection of OHs and hallucinations in other modalities. Referential/control 
delusions promote the generation and/or maintenance of OHs independent of 
factors shared with other hallucinations. OHs and hallucinations of taste, 
touch, and bodily sensation frequently co-occur. Self-smells warrant sensitive 
probing.

©2010 The British Psychological Society.

DOI: 10.1348/014466510X500837
PMID: 21545448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]