---
reference_id: "PMID:21376230"
title: "Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation."
authors:
- Hanahan D
- Weinberg RA
journal: Cell
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013
keywords:
- Animals
- Genomic Instability
- Humans
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- "Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Signal Transduction
- Stromal Cells/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation.
**Authors:** Hanahan D, Weinberg RA
**Journal:** Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013)

## Content

1. Cell. 2011 Mar 4;144(5):646-74. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013.

Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation.

Hanahan D(1), Weinberg RA.

Author information:
(1)The Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life 
Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne CH-1015, Switzerland. dh@epfl.ch

The hallmarks of cancer comprise six biological capabilities acquired during the 
multistep development of human tumors. The hallmarks constitute an organizing 
principle for rationalizing the complexities of neoplastic disease. They include 
sustaining proliferative signaling, evading growth suppressors, resisting cell 
death, enabling replicative immortality, inducing angiogenesis, and activating 
invasion and metastasis. Underlying these hallmarks are genome instability, 
which generates the genetic diversity that expedites their acquisition, and 
inflammation, which fosters multiple hallmark functions. Conceptual progress in 
the last decade has added two emerging hallmarks of potential generality to this 
list-reprogramming of energy metabolism and evading immune destruction. In 
addition to cancer cells, tumors exhibit another dimension of complexity: they 
contain a repertoire of recruited, ostensibly normal cells that contribute to 
the acquisition of hallmark traits by creating the "tumor microenvironment." 
Recognition of the widespread applicability of these concepts will increasingly 
affect the development of new means to treat human cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013
PMID: 21376230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]