---
reference_id: "PMID:1387926"
title: Mechanism of the anti-emetic activity of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists.
authors:
- Tyers MB
- Freeman AJ
journal: Oncology
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1159/000227054
keywords:
- Antiemetics
- Brain Stem/physiopathology
- Digestive System/physiopathology
- Humans
- Imidazoles/pharmacology
- Ondansetron
- Serotonin/physiology
- Serotonin Antagonists
- Vomiting/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of the anti-emetic activity of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists.
**Authors:** Tyers MB, Freeman AJ
**Journal:** Oncology (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000227054](https://doi.org/10.1159/000227054)

## Content

1. Oncology. 1992;49(4):263-8. doi: 10.1159/000227054.

Mechanism of the anti-emetic activity of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists.

Tyers MB(1), Freeman AJ.

Author information:
(1)Glaxo Group Research Limited, Ware, UK.

Ondansetron, a potent and highly selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, prevents
emesis following chemotherapy by antagonising the action of 5-hydroxytryptamine
(5-HT) at 5-HT3 receptors on vagal afferent neurons that innervate the
gastrointestinal tract and 5-HT3 receptors in the central vomiting system.
Evidence suggests that chemotherapy induces the release of 5-HT from
enterochromaffin cells in the small intestine. This stimulates vagal afferent
nerves via 5-HT3 receptors. Information is then relayed, via the vagus nerve, to
the central vomiting system. 5-HT3 receptors are also found in the hind-brain
vomiting system including the area postrema (the site of the chemoreceptor
trigger zone for emesis). Therefore, following chemotherapy, 5-HT activates
5-HT3 receptors at 2 sites to induce emesis. Clinical data showing that a single
dose of ondansetron prevents acute emesis suggest that it is important to block
the initiation of the emetic reflex. This may prevent the recruitment of central
mechanisms involving 5-HT3 receptors.

DOI: 10.1159/000227054
PMID: 1387926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
