---
reference_id: "PMID:26239400"
title: "Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: A review and update."
authors:
- Battaglia A
- Carey JC
- South ST
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31449
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: A review and update.
**Authors:** Battaglia A, Carey JC, South ST
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31449](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31449)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2015 Sep;169(3):216-23. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31449. Epub 2015 Aug 4.

Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: A review and update.

Battaglia A, Carey JC, South ST.

Since 4p- was first described in 1961, significant progress has been made in our 
understanding of this classic deletion disorder. We have been able to establish 
a more complete picture of the WHS phenotype associated with distal 4p monosomy, 
and we are working to delineate the phenotypic effects when each gene on distal 
4p is hemizygous. Our aim is to provide genotype-specific anticipatory guidance 
and recommendations to families of individuals with a diagnosis of WHS. In 
addition, establishing the molecular underpinnings of the disorder will 
potentially suggest targets for molecular treatments. Thus, the next step is to 
determine the precise effects of specific gene deletions. As we look forward to 
deepening our understanding of distal 4p deletion, our focus will continue to be 
on the establishment of robust genotype-phenotype correlations and the 
penetrance of these phenotypes. We will continue to follow our WHS cohort 
closely as they age to determine the presence or absence of some of these 
comorbidities, including hepatic neoplasms, hematopoietic dysfunction, and 
recurrence of seizures. We will also continue to refine the critical regions for 
other phenotypes as we enroll additional (hopefully informative) participants 
into the research study and as the mechanisms of the genes in these regions are 
elucidated. New animal models will also be developed to further our 
understanding of the effects of hemizygosity as well as to serve as models for 
treatment development.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31449
PMID: 26239400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]