---
reference_id: "PMID:37958463"
title: "Excellent Outcomes in Children, Adolescents, and Young Adults with Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treated by Either Reduced- or Standard-Dose Bleomycin."
authors:
- Park M
- Suh JK
- Lee JA
- Park HJ
- Park EY
- Yoo CW
- Lim MC
- Park SY
- Park BK
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15215290
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Excellent Outcomes in Children, Adolescents, and Young Adults with Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors Treated by Either Reduced- or Standard-Dose Bleomycin.
**Authors:** Park M, Suh JK, Lee JA, Park HJ, Park EY, Yoo CW, Lim MC, Park SY, Park BK
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15215290](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15215290)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Nov 4;15(21):5290. doi: 10.3390/cancers15215290.

Excellent Outcomes in Children, Adolescents, and Young Adults with Ovarian Germ 
Cell Tumors Treated by Either Reduced- or Standard-Dose Bleomycin.

Park M(1), Suh JK(1), Lee JA(1), Park HJ(1), Park EY(2), Yoo CW(3), Lim MC(4), 
Park SY(4), Park BK(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric Cancer, National Cancer 
Center, Goyang 10408, Republic of Korea.
(2)Biostatistics Collaboration Team, Research Core Center, National Cancer 
Center, Goyang 10408, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Center for Gynecologic Cancer, National Cancer 
Center, Goyang 10408, Republic of Korea.
(4)Gynecologic Cancer Branch, Center for Gynecologic Cancer, National Cancer 
Center, Goyang 10408, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul Metropolitan Seonam Hospital, Seoul 08049, 
Republic of Korea.

To investigate the outcomes of children, adolescents, and young adults (AYAs) 
with malignant ovarian germ cell tumors (MOGCTs), we analyzed the data of 61 
patients aged ≤39 years diagnosed with MOGCT between 2006 and 2022. Among 59 
patients who received chemotherapy after initial diagnosis, 57 received BEP 
(standard dose of bleomycin with 30 units per week, n = 13) or bEP (reduced dose 
of bleomycin with 15 units/m2 on day 1, n = 44). The 5-year overall survival 
(OS) and event-free survival (EFS) rates were 98.3% and 84.9%, respectively. 
Reduced bleomycin dose did not adversely affect survival. Normalization of tumor 
markers within 3 months after surgery was significantly associated with better 
EFS (p < 0.01). Of the 59 surviving patients, 8 experienced surgery-related 
menopause, while 49 demonstrated menstrual recovery. After completion of 
chemotherapy, there was no significant difference in pulmonary function 
regarding bleomycin dose, and no overt nephrotoxicity. Approximately 60% and 25% 
of survivors experienced peripheral neuropathy at the end of chemotherapy and 
after 1 year, respectively (p < 0.01). Children and AYAs with MOGCT have 
favorable survival rates with minimal long-term toxicity, which are not 
influenced by a reduced bleomycin dose. Rapid normalization of tumor markers is 
associated with improved outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15215290
PMCID: PMC10647703
PMID: 37958463

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.