---
reference_id: "PMID:35969258"
title: "Acro-osteolysis: imaging, differential diagnosis, and disposition review."
authors:
- Bailey CT
- Zelaya R
- Kayder OO
- Cecava ND
journal: Skeletal Radiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00256-022-04145-y
keywords:
- Humans
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Acro-Osteolysis/diagnostic imaging
- Finger Phalanges/diagnostic imaging
- Hand/diagnostic imaging
- Radiography
- Osteolysis/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acro-osteolysis: imaging, differential diagnosis, and disposition review.
**Authors:** Bailey CT, Zelaya R, Kayder OO, Cecava ND
**Journal:** Skeletal Radiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00256-022-04145-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00256-022-04145-y)

## Content

1. Skeletal Radiol. 2023 Jan;52(1):9-22. doi: 10.1007/s00256-022-04145-y. Epub
2022  Aug 15.

Acro-osteolysis: imaging, differential diagnosis, and disposition review.

Bailey CT(1), Zelaya R(2), Kayder OO(3), Cecava ND(4).

Author information:
(1)Wright-Patterson Medical Center, 4881 Sugar Maple Drive, Wright-Patterson 
AFB, OH, 45433, USA. Christopher.thomas.bailey12@gmail.com.
(2)Brooke Army Medical Center, 3551 Roger Brooke Drive, Fort Sam Houston, TX, 
78234, USA.
(3)Detroit Medical Center, 4201 St. Antoine, Detroit Receiving Hospital 3L-8, 
Detroit, MI, 48201, USA.
(4)Wilford Hall Ambulatory Surgical Center, 1100 Wilford Hall Loop, JBSA 
Lackland, TX, 78236, USA.

Acro-osteolysis is the osseous destruction of the hand or foot distal phalanges. 
The categories of the disease include terminal tuft, midshaft, or mixed types. 
Recognition of acro-osteolysis is straightforward on radiographs, but providing 
an accurate differential diagnosis and appropriately recommending advanced 
imaging or invasive tissue diagnosis can be more elusive. A radiologist's 
ability to provide advanced assessment can greatly aid clinicians in expedient 
diagnosis and management of the array of diseases presenting with 
acro-osteolysis.

© 2022. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s00256-022-04145-y
PMID: 35969258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]