---
reference_id: "PMID:18538831"
title: Vasculitis of the temporal arteries in the young.
authors:
- Nesher G
- Oren S
- Lijovetzky G
- Nesher R
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2008.03.001
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Female
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Male
- "Temporal Arteries/pathology, physiopathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vasculitis of the temporal arteries in the young.
**Authors:** Nesher G, Oren S, Lijovetzky G, Nesher R
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2008.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2008.03.001)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Oct;39(2):96-107. doi:
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2008.03.001. Epub 2008 Jun 9.

Vasculitis of the temporal arteries in the young.

Nesher G(1), Oren S, Lijovetzky G, Nesher R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Rheumatology Service, Shaare-Zedek Medical
Center, Jerusalem, Israel. nesher@inter.net.il

OBJECTIVE: Temporal artery vasculitis (TAV) in patients younger than 50 years is
extremely rare. A case of TAV in an 18-year-old man is described here, followed
by a literature review regarding cases of all types of vasculitic involvement of
the temporal arteries in the young.
METHODS: Review of the English literature on vasculitis involving the temporal
arteries in young patients, based on a PubMed search.
RESULTS: Less than 40 cases of vasculitic involvement of temporal arteries in
the young have been described. TAV in the young may be divided into 3 groups:
juvenile temporal arteritis, a localized eosinophilic arteritis confined to the
temporal arteries, seems unique to this age group. Fifteen patients with
juvenile temporal arteritis were described. Other vasculitides, such as
polyarteritis nodosa, Churg-Strauss syndrome, and thrombangiitis obliterans may
involve the temporal arteries in young patients. The literature search revealed
12 such cases. The least common group is arteritis in young patients,
histologically resembling elderly type temporal arteritis, featuring 5 cases. In
addition, other conditions such as Kimura disease and angiolymphoid hyperplasia
with eosinophilia may resemble temporal arteritis in the young.
CONCLUSIONS: TAV in the young is rare and differs from the classical temporal
arteritis of older adults. There is an apparent overlap among several vasculitic
conditions involving the temporal arteries in the young, and histological
distinction may be difficult at times. The final diagnosis of the different
conditions causing TAV in the young is based on a combination of clinical
findings, relevant laboratory data, imaging studies, and histological findings.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2008.03.001
PMID: 18538831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]