---
reference_id: "PMID:32783349"
title: "Global prevalence of obesity, overweight and underweight in children, adolescents and adults with autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Li YJ
- Xie XN
- Lei X
- Li YM
- Lei X
journal: Obes Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/obr.13123
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology
- Autism Spectrum Disorder/epidemiology
- Child
- Global Health
- Humans
- Obesity/epidemiology
- Overweight/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Thinness/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global prevalence of obesity, overweight and underweight in children, adolescents and adults with autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Li YJ, Xie XN, Lei X, Li YM, Lei X
**Journal:** Obes Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/obr.13123](https://doi.org/10.1111/obr.13123)

## Content

1. Obes Rev. 2020 Dec;21(12):e13123. doi: 10.1111/obr.13123. Epub 2020 Aug 11.

Global prevalence of obesity, overweight and underweight in children,
adolescents and adults with autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Li YJ(1), Xie XN(2), Lei X(3), Li YM(4), Lei X(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, China.
(2)Shuda College, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China.
(3)School of Psychology, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland,
Australia.
(4)Clinical Nursing Teaching and Research Section, The Second Xiangya Hospital
of Central South University, Changsha, China.
(5)Office of the President, Central South University, Changsha, China.

Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may have unhealthy bodyweight. This meta-analysis
was performed to understand the weight status in individuals with ASD or ADHD.
PubMed, Embase, Cochrane and ISI Web of Science databases were searched from
inception until June 2020 to identify relevant studies. Prevalence estimates and
their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of obesity, overweight and underweight were
separately pooled using random-effects models. A total of 95 studies were
included in the meta-analysis. The pooled estimates of the prevalence of
obesity, overweight and underweight were 21.8%, 19.8% and 6.4% in individuals
with ASD and 14.7%, 20.9% and 4.0% in individuals with ADHD. In subgroup
analyses, an increasing trend in the prevalence of unhealthy weight was observed
from children aged 2 to 5 years to adults with ASD (obesity: from 16.7% to
31.3%, overweight: from 16.2% to 27.2%, underweight from 5.3% to 8.6%) and from
children aged 6 to 12 years to adults with ADHD (obesity: from 13.5% to 19.3%,
overweight: from 18.8% to 31.2%). The worrisome epidemic of obesity and
overweight in individuals with ASD, ADHD highlighted the need for weight
management.

© 2020 World Obesity Federation.

DOI: 10.1111/obr.13123
PMID: 32783349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
