---
reference_id: "PMID:28947309"
title: "Wilson's Disease and Cardiac Myopathy."
authors:
- Grandis DJ
- Nah G
- Whitman IR
- Vittinghoff E
- Dewland TA
- Olgin JE
- Marcus GM
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.08.025
keywords:
- California/epidemiology
- Cardiomyopathies/complications
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Heart Failure/epidemiology, etiology"
- Hepatolenticular Degeneration/complications
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- Male
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Survival Rate/trends
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wilson's Disease and Cardiac Myopathy.
**Authors:** Grandis DJ, Nah G, Whitman IR, Vittinghoff E, Dewland TA, Olgin JE, Marcus GM
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.08.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.08.025)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 2017 Dec 1;120(11):2056-2060. doi:
10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.08.025.  Epub 2017 Aug 30.

Wilson's Disease and Cardiac Myopathy.

Grandis DJ(1), Nah G(1), Whitman IR(1), Vittinghoff E(2), Dewland TA(3), Olgin
JE(1), Marcus GM(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(3)Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, Oregon.
(4)Division of Cardiology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California. Electronic address: marcusg@medicine.ucsf.edu.

Wilson's disease is a well-characterized disorder known to cause liver and brain
disease due to abnormal copper deposition. Data regarding copper infiltration of
the heart is conflicting, and the risk of heart disease has not been well
described. We aimed to determine whether Wilson's disease is associated with
cardiac myopathy, clinically evident in the atria as atrial fibrillation (AF)
and in the ventricles as heart failure (HF). We longitudinally assessed 14.3
million patients in the California Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project
database from 2005 through 2009 for diagnoses of Wilson's disease, AF, HF, and
covariates using International Classification of Diseases-9th Edition codes.
Cirrhosis and appendicitis diagnoses were assessed for positive and negative
validation, respectively. We identified 463 patients with Wilson's disease. As
expected in validation analyses, patients with Wilson's disease had a threefold
greater risk of cirrhosis (hazard ratio [HR] 2.85, 95% confidence interval [CI]
2.81 to 2.90, p <0.0001) and no increased risk of appendicitis (HR 0.24, 95% CI
0.04 to 1.71, p = 0.16). Patients with Wilson's disease exhibited a 29% higher
risk of AF after adjusting for age, gender, race, income, hypertension,
diabetes, renal disease, hyperlipidemia, obesity, coronary disease, and
obstructive sleep apnea (HR 1.29, 95% CI 1.15 to 1.45, p <0.0001). After
adjusting for the same covariates, patients with Wilson's disease had a 55%
higher risk of incident HF (HR 1.55, 95% CI 1.41 to 1.71, p <0.0001). Patients
with Wilson's disease have an increased risk of AF and HF, supporting the need
for careful surveillance for heart disease. These findings also suggest that the
role of copper metabolism in heart disease should be more broadly investigated.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.08.025
PMID: 28947309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
