---
reference_id: "PMID:32034314"
title: Mutant GTF2I induces cell transformation and metabolic alterations in thymic epithelial cells.
authors:
- Kim IK
- Rao G
- Zhao X
- Fan R
- Avantaggiati ML
- Wang Y
- Zhang YW
- Giaccone G
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41418-020-0502-7
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Carcinogenesis/genetics, pathology"
- Cell Line
- Cell Survival
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/genetics, pathology"
- Cyclooxygenase 2/metabolism
- DNA Damage/genetics
- "Epithelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition/genetics
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- Glucose/deficiency
- Glycolysis
- Humans
- Lipids/biosynthesis
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- Thymus Gland/pathology
- "Transcription Factors, TFII/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant GTF2I induces cell transformation and metabolic alterations in thymic epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Kim IK, Rao G, Zhao X, Fan R, Avantaggiati ML, Wang Y, Zhang YW, Giaccone G
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41418-020-0502-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41418-020-0502-7)

## Content

1. Cell Death Differ. 2020 Jul;27(7):2263-2279. doi: 10.1038/s41418-020-0502-7.
Epub 2020 Feb 7.

Mutant GTF2I induces cell transformation and metabolic alterations in thymic
epithelial cells.

Kim IK(1), Rao G(2), Zhao X(2), Fan R(2), Avantaggiati ML(2), Wang Y(2)(3),
Zhang YW(2), Giaccone G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, 20057, USA. ingyu.kim80@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, 20057, USA.
(3)Basic and Mechanistic Research Branch, Division of Extramural Research,
National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCAIH), NIH,
Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(4)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, 20057, USA. gg496@georgetown.edu.

The pathogenesis of thymic epithelial tumors (TETs) is poorly understood.
Recently we reported the frequent occurrence of a missense mutation in the GTF2I
gene in TETs and hypothesized that GTF2I mutation might contribute to thymic
tumorigenesis. Expression of mutant TFII-I altered the transcriptome of normal
thymic epithelial cells and upregulated several oncogenic genes. Gtf2i L424H
knockin cells exhibited cell transformation, aneuploidy, and increase tumor
growth and survival under glucose deprivation or DNA damage. Gtf2i mutation also
increased the expression of several glycolytic enzymes, cyclooxygenase-2, and
caused modifications of lipid metabolism. Elevated cyclooxygenase-2 expression
by Gtf2i mutation was required for survival under metabolic stress and cellular
transformation of thymic epithelial cells. Our findings identify GTF2I mutation
as a new oncogenic driver that is responsible for transformation of thymic
epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1038/s41418-020-0502-7
PMCID: PMC7308410
PMID: 32034314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
