---
reference_id: "PMID:40399177"
title: "Immune checkpoint inhibitor-related eosinophilic fasciitis: 3 case reports with literature review."
authors:
- Biteau M
- Sibaud V
- Maria A
- Dion J
- Uro-Coste E
- Siegfried A
- Pastissier A
- Cougoul P
- Delavigne K
- Comont T
- Rivet V
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2025.05.004
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Eosinophilia/chemically induced, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Fasciitis/chemically induced, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Melanoma/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune checkpoint inhibitor-related eosinophilic fasciitis: 3 case reports with literature review.
**Authors:** Biteau M, Sibaud V, Maria A, Dion J, Uro-Coste E, Siegfried A, Pastissier A, Cougoul P, Delavigne K, Comont T, Rivet V
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.revmed.2025.05.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revmed.2025.05.004)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2025 Jul;46(7):377-385. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2025.05.004.
Epub  2025 May 20.

Immune checkpoint inhibitor-related eosinophilic fasciitis: 3 case reports with 
literature review.

Biteau M(1), Sibaud V(2), Maria A(3), Dion J(4), Uro-Coste E(5), Siegfried A(5), 
Pastissier A(1), Cougoul P(1), Delavigne K(1), Comont T(1), Rivet V(6).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine and Immunopathology Department, The Cancer University of 
Toulouse Oncopole, Toulouse University Hospital, 1, avenue Joliot-Curie, 31100 
Toulouse, France.
(2)Oncoderrmatology Department - Medical Oncology, The Cancer University of 
Toulouse Oncopole, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, France.
(3)Internal Medicine and Immuno-Oncology Department (MEDI(2)O), Hospital Saint 
Eloi, Montpellier University Hospital, Montpellier, France.
(4)Internal Medicine and Immunopathology Department, The Cancer University of 
Toulouse Oncopole, Toulouse University Hospital, 1, avenue Joliot-Curie, 31100 
Toulouse, France; Internal Medicine and Immuno-Oncology Department (MEDI(2)O), 
Hospital Saint Eloi, Montpellier University Hospital, Montpellier, France.
(5)Pathology Department, The Cancer University of Toulouse Oncopole, Toulouse 
University Hospital, Toulouse, France.
(6)Internal Medicine and Immunopathology Department, The Cancer University of 
Toulouse Oncopole, Toulouse University Hospital, 1, avenue Joliot-Curie, 31100 
Toulouse, France. Electronic address: Valerian.rivet@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) are associated with a large 
spectrum of immune-related Adverse Events (irAEs). ICIs can exceptionally induce 
eosinophilic fasciitis (EF). Data of ICI-related EF (ICI-EF) are scarce without 
clear guidelines on both diagnosis and treatment.
METHODS: We conducted a literature review of all cases of patients over 18 years 
old with EF diagnosis following ICI treatment between 2016 and November 2023 and 
meeting Pinal-Fernandez's criteria. New cases from two departments (French 
Region of Occitania) were added to complete the cohort.
RESULTS: We selected 30 cases: 27 from literature review and 3 new cases 
diagnosed in Occitania. There was male predominance, with a sex ratio (M/F) of 
1.3 with a median age of 57 years. The most common tumor was melanoma (50%). The 
time to onset was 10 months. Twenty-two patients (73%) had hypereosinophilia 
(mean 3300/mm3). A large majority (25/30, 83%) received at least one course of 
steroids therapy while immunosuppressive treatment was needed for 18 patients 
(72%). Rechallenge was proposed in 2 patients without recurrence of EF.
DISCUSSION: Clinical and biological characteristics appeared roughly similar 
between ICI-EF and idiopathic-EF. Management is currently based on clinical 
practice of idiopathic-EF with corticosteroids often used in first line of 
treatment. However, a second line (methotrexate of mycophenolate mofetil) was 
required in majority of patients as observed in idiopathic-EF.
CONCLUSION: There is a significant reporting signal of EF following ICIs. A 
proactive management is required in all cases. A specific algorithm for 
treatment is finally proposed.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2025.05.004
PMID: 40399177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]