---
reference_id: "PMID:11371345"
title: Solution structure of the methyl-CpG binding domain of human MBD1 in complex with methylated DNA.
authors:
- Ohki I
- Shimotake N
- Fujita N
- Jee J
- Ikegami T
- Nakao M
- Shirakawa M
journal: Cell
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00324-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Solution structure of the methyl-CpG binding domain of human MBD1 in complex with methylated DNA.
**Authors:** Ohki I, Shimotake N, Fujita N, Jee J, Ikegami T, Nakao M, Shirakawa M
**Journal:** Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00324-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00324-5)

## Content

1. Cell. 2001 May 18;105(4):487-97. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00324-5.

Solution structure of the methyl-CpG binding domain of human MBD1 in complex 
with methylated DNA.

Ohki I(1), Shimotake N, Fujita N, Jee J, Ikegami T, Nakao M, Shirakawa M.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and 
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, 630-0101, Nara, Japan.

Erratum in
    Cell 2001 Jun 15;105(6):815.

In vertebrates, the biological consequences of DNA methylation are often 
mediated by protein factors containing conserved methyl-CpG binding domains 
(MBDs). Mutations in the MBD protein MeCP2 cause the neurodevelopmental disease 
Rett syndrome. We report here the solution structure of the MBD of the human 
methylation-dependent transcriptional regulator MBD1 bound to methylated DNA. 
DNA binding causes a loop in MBD1 to fold into a major and novel DNA binding 
interface. Recognition of the methyl groups and CG sequence at the methylation 
site is due to five highly conserved residues that form a hydrophobic patch. The 
structure indicates how MBD may access nucleosomal DNA without encountering 
steric interference from core histones, and provides a basis to interpret 
mutations linked to Rett syndrome in MeCP2.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00324-5
PMID: 11371345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]