---
reference_id: "PMID:35887499"
title: "Mycetoma: Development of Diagnosis and Treatment."
authors:
- Hao X
- Cognetti M
- Burch-Smith R
- Mejia EO
- Mirkin G
journal: J Fungi (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jof8070743
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycetoma: Development of Diagnosis and Treatment.
**Authors:** Hao X, Cognetti M, Burch-Smith R, Mejia EO, Mirkin G
**Journal:** J Fungi (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jof8070743](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof8070743)

## Content

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2022 Jul 19;8(7):743. doi: 10.3390/jof8070743.

Mycetoma: Development of Diagnosis and Treatment.

Hao X(1)(2), Cognetti M(2), Burch-Smith R(2), Mejia EO(2), Mirkin G(1).

Author information:
(1)Foot and Ankle Specialists of the Mid-Atlantic, LLC, Rockville, MD 20850, 
USA.
(2)P4Diagnostix, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA.

Mycetoma describes a heterogeneous group of cutaneous and subcutaneous 
infections caused by either fungi (eumycetomas) or bacteria (actinomycetomas). 
It is characterized by a triad of clinical symptoms: painless subcutaneous 
tumor-like swelling, multiple sinuses and fistulas, and discharged grains in 
pus. This predominantly affects the feet in more than 70% of patients. It is 
endemic in the "mycetoma belt" regions, including Africa, South America, and 
South Asia. Autochthonous mycetoma is rare in the United States of America 
(USA). We recently reported a Latin American immigrant with eumycetoma in the 
State of Maryland, USA. With millions of immigrants from endemic regions, the 
true number of mycetomas in the USA is most likely higher than currently 
recognized. With the aim to raise the awareness of clinicians about mycetoma, 
especially dermatologists and podiatrists, we update the development of the 
epidemiology, etiology, clinical presentations, pathogenesis, diagnosis, 
differential diagnosis, and treatment of mycetoma.

DOI: 10.3390/jof8070743
PMCID: PMC9323607
PMID: 35887499

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.