---
reference_id: "PMID:38534443"
title: New Genetic Variants of RUNX2 in Mexican Families Cause Cleidocranial Dysplasia.
authors:
- Toral López J
- Gómez Martinez S
- Rivera Vega MDR
- Hernández-Zamora E
- Cuevas Covarrubias S
- Ibarra Castrejón BA
- González Huerta LM
journal: Biology (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biology13030173
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Genetic Variants of RUNX2 in Mexican Families Cause Cleidocranial Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Toral López J, Gómez Martinez S, Rivera Vega MDR, Hernández-Zamora E, Cuevas Covarrubias S, Ibarra Castrejón BA, González Huerta LM
**Journal:** Biology (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biology13030173](https://doi.org/10.3390/biology13030173)

## Content

1. Biology (Basel). 2024 Mar 8;13(3):173. doi: 10.3390/biology13030173.

New Genetic Variants of RUNX2 in Mexican Families Cause Cleidocranial Dysplasia.

Toral López J(1), Gómez Martinez S(2), Rivera Vega MDR(2), Hernández-Zamora 
E(3), Cuevas Covarrubias S(2), Ibarra Castrejón BA(2), González Huerta LM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Centro Médico Ecatepec ISSEMYM, Ecatepec 
55000, México State, Mexico.
(2)Servicio de Genética, Hospital General de México "Eduardo Liceaga" (HGM), 
México City 06720, Mexico.
(3)Medicina Genómica, Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación "Luis Guillermo 
Ibarra Ibarra", México City 14389, Mexico.

Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia 
characterized by persistent open skull sutures with bulging calvaria, 
hypoplasia, or aplasia of clavicles permitting abnormal opposition of the 
shoulders; wide public symphysis; short middle phalanx of the fifth fingers; and 
vertebral, craniofacial, and dental anomalies. It is a rare disease, with a 
prevalence of 1-9/1,000,000, high penetrance, and variable expression. The gene 
responsible for CCD is the Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) gene. We 
characterize the clinical, genetic, and bioinformatic results of four CCD cases: 
two cases within Mexican families with six affected members, nine asymptomatic 
individuals, and two sporadic cases with CCD, with one hundred healthy controls. 
Genomic DNA analyses of the RUNX2 gene were performed for Sanger sequencing. 
Bioinformatics tools were used to predict the function, stability, and 
structural changes of the mutated RUNX2 proteins. Three novel heterozygous 
mutations (c.651_652delTA; c.538_539delinsCA; c.662T>A) and a previously 
reported mutation (c.674G>A) were detected. In silico analysis showed that all 
mutations had functional, stability-related, and structural alterations in the 
RUNX2 protein. Our results show novel mutations that enrich the pool of RUNX2 
gene mutations with CCD. Moreover, the proband 1 presented clinical data not 
previously reported that could represent an expanded phenotype of severe 
expression.

DOI: 10.3390/biology13030173
PMCID: PMC10968410
PMID: 38534443

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.