---
reference_id: "PMID:36982552"
title: "Molecular Pathology, Oxidative Stress, and Biomarkers in Obstructive Sleep Apnea."
authors:
- Meliante PG
- Zoccali F
- Cascone F
- Di Stefano V
- Greco A
- de Vincentiis M
- Petrella C
- Fiore M
- Minni A
- Barbato C
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24065478
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Pathology, Oxidative Stress, and Biomarkers in Obstructive Sleep Apnea.
**Authors:** Meliante PG, Zoccali F, Cascone F, Di Stefano V, Greco A, de Vincentiis M, Petrella C, Fiore M, Minni A, Barbato C
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24065478](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24065478)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 13;24(6):5478. doi: 10.3390/ijms24065478.

Molecular Pathology, Oxidative Stress, and Biomarkers in Obstructive Sleep 
Apnea.

Meliante PG(1), Zoccali F(1), Cascone F(1), Di Stefano V(1), Greco A(1), de 
Vincentiis M(1), Petrella C(2), Fiore M(2), Minni A(1)(3), Barbato C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sense Organs DOS, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del 
Policlinico 155, 00161 Roma, Italy.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology (IBBC), National Research Council 
(CNR), Department of Sense Organs DOS, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del 
Policlinico 155, 00161 Roma, Italy.
(3)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Ospedale San Camillo de 
Lellis, ASL Rieti-Sapienza University, Viale Kennedy, 02100 Rieti, Italy.

Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is characterized by intermittent hypoxia 
(IH) during sleep due to recurrent upper airway obstruction. The derived 
oxidative stress (OS) leads to complications that do not only concern the 
sleep-wake rhythm but also systemic dysfunctions. The aim of this narrative 
literature review is to investigate molecular alterations, diagnostic markers, 
and potential medical therapies for OSAS. We analyzed the literature and 
synthesized the evidence collected. IH increases oxygen free radicals (ROS) and 
reduces antioxidant capacities. OS and metabolic alterations lead OSAS patients 
to undergo endothelial dysfunction, osteoporosis, systemic inflammation, 
increased cardiovascular risk, pulmonary remodeling, and neurological 
alterations. We treated molecular alterations known to date as useful for 
understanding the pathogenetic mechanisms and for their potential application as 
diagnostic markers. The most promising pharmacological therapies are those based 
on N-acetylcysteine (NAC), Vitamin C, Leptin, Dronabinol, or Atomoxetine + 
Oxybutynin, but all require further experimentation. CPAP remains the approved 
therapy capable of reversing most of the known molecular alterations; future 
drugs may be useful in treating the remaining dysfunctions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24065478
PMCID: PMC10058074
PMID: 36982552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.