---
reference_id: "PMID:25035356"
title: "Lyme disease in Haryana, India."
authors:
- Jairath V
- Sehrawat M
- Jindal N
- Jain VK
- Aggarwal P
journal: Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4103/0378-6323.136894
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lyme disease in Haryana, India.
**Authors:** Jairath V, Sehrawat M, Jindal N, Jain VK, Aggarwal P
**Journal:** Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0378-6323.136894](https://doi.org/10.4103/0378-6323.136894)

## Content

1. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2014 Jul-Aug;80(4):320-3. doi: 
10.4103/0378-6323.136894.

Lyme disease in Haryana, India.

Jairath V(1), Sehrawat M, Jindal N, Jain VK, Aggarwal P.

Author information:
(1)Pandit Bhagwat Dayal Sharma Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Rohtak, Haryana, India.

Lyme disease is a multiorgan animal-borne disease caused by the spirochete 
Borrelia burgdorferi. This case series highlights its presence in Haryana, a 
nonendemic zone. The first case was a 27-year-old housewife who presented with 
an annular erythematous patch with a central papule following an insect bite on 
the left upper arm. The second case was a 32-year-old farmer who gave a history 
of insect bite on the right arm followed by the development of an erythematous 
patch with a central blister. The third case, a 17-year-old boy presented with a 
history of tick bite over right thigh and a typical bull's eye lesion with 
central ulceration. These cases were managed with oral doxycycline 100 mg twice 
daily for 14 days. The fourth case was a 7-year-old boy with typical erythema 
migrans on the right check and neck while the fifth case, a 30-year-old 
housewife, presented with an erythematous patch with a central papule on the 
right buttock. These patients were treated with oral amoxycillin 25 mg/kg, 
thrice daily for 14 days. All patients showed IgM antibodies to B. burgdorferi. 
Treatment led to clearance of lesions in all the patients. Lyme borreliosis was 
diagnosed in these patients based on the history of established exposure to tick 
bites, presence of classic signs and symptoms, serology and the response to 
treatment.

DOI: 10.4103/0378-6323.136894
PMID: 25035356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]