---
reference_id: "PMID:34799298"
title: Modeling pulmonary cystic fibrosis in a human lung airway-on-a-chip.
authors:
- Plebani R
- Potla R
- Soong M
- Bai H
- Izadifar Z
- Jiang A
- Travis RN
- Belgur C
- Dinis A
- Cartwright MJ
- Prantil-Baun R
- Jolly P
- Gilpin SE
- Romano M
- Ingber DE
journal: J Cyst Fibros
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2021.10.004
keywords:
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cystic Fibrosis
- Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator/genetics
- Endothelial Cells
- Humans
- Lab-On-A-Chip Devices
- Lung
- Pseudomonas aeruginosa/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling pulmonary cystic fibrosis in a human lung airway-on-a-chip.
**Authors:** Plebani R, Potla R, Soong M, Bai H, Izadifar Z, Jiang A, Travis RN, Belgur C, Dinis A, Cartwright MJ, Prantil-Baun R, Jolly P, Gilpin SE, Romano M, Ingber DE
**Journal:** J Cyst Fibros (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcf.2021.10.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcf.2021.10.004)

## Content

1. J Cyst Fibros. 2022 Jul;21(4):606-615. doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2021.10.004. Epub
2021  Nov 17.

Modeling pulmonary cystic fibrosis in a human lung airway-on-a-chip.

Plebani R(1), Potla R(2), Soong M(3), Bai H(3), Izadifar Z(3), Jiang A(3), 
Travis RN(3), Belgur C(3), Dinis A(3), Cartwright MJ(3), Prantil-Baun R(3), 
Jolly P(3), Gilpin SE(3), Romano M(4), Ingber DE(5).

Author information:
(1)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, 
Boston, MA, United States; Center on Advanced Studies and Technology (CAST), 
Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, "G. d'Annunzio" 
University of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
(2)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, 
Boston, MA, United States; Vascular Biology Program and Department of Surgery, 
Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(3)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, 
Boston, MA, United States.
(4)Center on Advanced Studies and Technology (CAST), Department of Medical, Oral 
and Biotechnological Sciences, "G. d'Annunzio" University of Chieti-Pescara, 
Chieti, Italy.
(5)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, 
Boston, MA, United States; Vascular Biology Program and Department of Surgery, 
Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United 
States; Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, 
Cambridge, MA, United States. Electronic address: don.ingber@wyss.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease caused by mutations in the 
gene encoding the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), 
which results in impaired airway mucociliary clearance, inflammation, infection, 
and respiratory insufficiency. The development of new therapeutics for CF are 
limited by the lack of reliable preclinical models that recapitulate the 
structural, immunological, and bioelectrical features of human CF lungs.
METHODS: We leveraged organ-on-a-chip technology to develop a microfluidic 
device lined by primary human CF bronchial epithelial cells grown under an 
air-liquid interface and interfaced with pulmonary microvascular endothelial 
cells (CF Airway Chip) exposed to fluid flow. The responses of CF and healthy 
Airway Chips were analyzed in the presence or absence of polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes (PMNs) and the bacterial pathogen, Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
RESULTS: The CF Airway Chip faithfully recapitulated many features of the human 
CF airways, including enhanced mucus accumulation, increased cilia density, and 
a higher ciliary beating frequency compared to chips lined by healthy bronchial 
epithelial cells. The CF chips also secreted higher levels of IL-8, which was 
accompanied by enhanced PMN adhesion to the endothelium and transmigration into 
the airway compartment. In addition, CF Airway Chips provided a more favorable 
environment for Pseudomonas aeruginosa growth, which resulted in enhanced 
secretion of inflammatory cytokines and recruitment of PMNs to the airway.
CONCLUSIONS: The human CF Airway Chip may provide a valuable preclinical tool 
for pathophysiology studies as well as for drug testing and personalized 
medicine.

Copyright © 2021 European Cystic Fibrosis Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcf.2021.10.004
PMID: 34799298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest D.E.I. is a 
founder, board member, scientific advisory board chair, and equity holder in 
Emulate, Inc.