---
reference_id: "PMID:32255174"
title: "Juberg-Hayward syndrome is a cohesinopathy, caused by mutation in ESCO2."
authors:
- Kantaputra PN
- Dejkhamron P
- Intachai W
- Ngamphiw C
- Kawasaki K
- Ohazama A
- Krisanaprakornkit S
- Olsen B
- Tongsima S
- Ketudat Cairns JR
journal: Eur J Orthod
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/ejo/cjaa023
keywords:
- Acetyltransferases/genetics
- Animals
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/genetics"
- Cleft Lip/genetics
- "Cleft Palate/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- Orofaciodigital Syndromes/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juberg-Hayward syndrome is a cohesinopathy, caused by mutation in ESCO2.
**Authors:** Kantaputra PN, Dejkhamron P, Intachai W, Ngamphiw C, Kawasaki K, Ohazama A, Krisanaprakornkit S, Olsen B, Tongsima S, Ketudat Cairns JR
**Journal:** Eur J Orthod (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ejo/cjaa023](https://doi.org/10.1093/ejo/cjaa023)

## Content

1. Eur J Orthod. 2021 Jan 29;43(1):45-50. doi: 10.1093/ejo/cjaa023.

Juberg-Hayward syndrome is a cohesinopathy, caused by mutation in ESCO2.

Kantaputra PN(1)(2), Dejkhamron P(3), Intachai W(1), Ngamphiw C(4), Kawasaki 
K(5), Ohazama A(5), Krisanaprakornkit S(6)(7), Olsen B(8), Tongsima S(4), 
Ketudat Cairns JR(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric 
Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(2)Dentaland Clinic, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang 
Mai, Thailand.
(4)National Biobank of Thailand, National Center for Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology, National Science and Technology Development Agency, Pathum Thani, 
Thailand.
(5)Division of Oral Anatomy, Department of Oral Biological Science, Niigata 
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.
(6)Center of Excellence in Oral Biology, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 
Thailand.
(7)Department of Oral Biology and Diagnostic Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, 
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(8)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(9)School of Chemistry, Institute of Science, and Center for Biomolecular 
Structure, Function and Application, Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon 
Ratchasima, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Juberg-Hayward syndrome (JHS; MIM 216100) is a rare autosomal 
recessive malformation syndrome, characterized by cleft lip/palate, 
microcephaly, ptosis, short stature, hypoplasia or aplasia of thumbs, and 
dislocation of radial head and fusion of humerus and radius leading to elbow 
restriction.
OBJECTIVE: To report for the first time the molecular aetiology of JHS.
PATIENT AND METHODS: Clinical and radiographic examination, whole exome 
sequencing, Sanger sequencing, mutant protein model construction, and in situ 
hybridization of Esco2 expression in mouse embryos were performed.
RESULTS: Clinical findings of the patient consisted of repaired cleft 
lip/palate, microcephaly, ptosis, short stature, delayed bone age, hypoplastic 
fingers and thumbs, clinodactyly of the fifth fingers, and humeroradial 
synostosis leading to elbow restriction. Intelligence is normal. Whole exome 
sequencing of the whole family showed a novel homozygous base substitution 
c.1654C>T in ESCO2 of the proband. The sister was homozygous for the wildtype 
variant. Parents were heterozygous for the mutation. The mutation is predicted 
to cause premature stop codon p.Arg552Ter. Mutations in ESCO2, a gene involved 
in cohesin complex formation, are known to cause Roberts/SC phocomelia syndrome. 
Roberts/SC phocomelia syndrome and JHS share similar clinical findings, 
including autosomal recessive inheritance, short stature, cleft lip/palate, 
severe upper limb anomalies, and hypoplastic digits. Esco2 expression during the 
early development of lip, palate, eyelid, digits, upper limb, and lower limb and 
truncated protein model are consistent with the defect.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed that Roberts/SC phocomelia syndrome and JHS are 
allelic and distinct entities. This is the first report demonstrating that 
mutation in ESCO2 causes JHS, a cohesinopathy.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Orthodontic Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ejo/cjaa023
PMID: 32255174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]