---
reference_id: "PMID:20301483"
title: SLC26A2-Related Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Unger S
- Superti-Furga A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SLC26A2-Related Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Unger S, Superti-Furga A

## Content

1. SLC26A2-Related Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia.

Unger S(1), Superti-Furga A(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Aug 29 [updated 2023 Jan 19].

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor of Genetics, University of Lausanne;, Lausanne University 
Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland
(2)Professor of Pediatrics and Genetics, University of Lausanne;, Lausanne 
University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SLC26A2-related multiple epiphyseal dysplasia 
(SLC26A2-MED) is characterized by joint pain (usually in the hips or knees); 
malformations of hands, feet, and knees; and scoliosis. Approximately 50% of 
affected individuals have an abnormal finding at birth, including clubfoot, 
clinodactyly, or (rarely) cystic ear swelling. Onset of articular pain is 
variable but usually occurs in late childhood. Stature is usually within the 
normal range prior to puberty; in adulthood, stature is only slightly diminished 
and ranges from 150 to 180 cm. Functional disability is mild.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Diagnosis of SLC26A2-MED is based on detection of biallelic 
variants in SLC26A2 by molecular genetic testing in an individual with 
compatible clinical and radiographic findings.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Physiotherapy for muscular 
strengthening and maintaining mobility; cautious use of analgesic medications 
such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; orthopedic surgery (joint 
replacement) as indicated; career counseling. Prevention of secondary 
complications: Intensive physiotherapy may help in delaying joint contractures 
and maintaining mobility. Surveillance: Radiographs as indicated. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Sports involving joint overload.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SLC26A2-MED is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. 
If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an SLC26A2 pathogenic variant, 
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the SLC26A2 pathogenic variants have 
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301483