---
reference_id: "PMID:23509317"
title: New syndrome of paraganglioma and somatostatinoma associated with polycythemia.
authors:
- Pacak K
- Jochmanova I
- Prodanov T
- Yang C
- Merino MJ
- Fojo T
- Prchal JT
- Tischler AS
- Lechan RM
- Zhuang Z
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.47.1912
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Middle Aged
- "Paraganglioma/metabolism, pathology"
- "Polycythemia/metabolism, pathology"
- "Somatostatinoma/metabolism, pathology"
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New syndrome of paraganglioma and somatostatinoma associated with polycythemia.
**Authors:** Pacak K, Jochmanova I, Prodanov T, Yang C, Merino MJ, Fojo T, Prchal JT, Tischler AS, Lechan RM, Zhuang Z
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2012.47.1912](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2012.47.1912)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2013 May 1;31(13):1690-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.47.1912. Epub
2013  Mar 18.

New syndrome of paraganglioma and somatostatinoma associated with polycythemia.

Pacak K(1), Jochmanova I, Prodanov T, Yang C, Merino MJ, Fojo T, Prchal JT,
Tischler AS, Lechan RM, Zhuang Z.

Author information:
(1)Section on Medical Neuroendocrinology, Program in Reproductive and Adult
Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-1109, USA.
karel@mail.nih.gov

PURPOSE: The occurrence of ≥ two distinct types of tumors, one of them
paraganglioma (PGL), is unusual in an individual patient, except in hereditary
cancer syndromes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Four unrelated patients were investigated, with thorough
clinical evaluation. Plasma and tissue catecholamines and metanephrines were
measured by high-performance liquid chromatography. Anatomic and functional
imaging were performed for tumor visualization. Germline and tumor tissue DNA
were analyzed for hypoxia-inducible factor 2 alpha (HIF2A) mutations. The prolyl
hydroxylation and stability of the mutant HIF2α protein, transcriptional
activity of mutant HIF2A, and expression of hypoxia-related genes were also
investigated. Immunohistochemical staining for HIF1/2α was performed on
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissue.
RESULTS: Patients were found to have polycythemia, multiple PGLs, and duodenal
somatostatinomas by imaging or biochemistry with somatic gain-of-function HIF2A
mutations. Each patient carried an identical unique mutation in both types of
tumors but not in germline DNA. The HIF2A mutations in these patients were
clustered adjacent to an oxygen-sensing proline residue, affecting HIF2α
interaction with the prolyl hydroxylase domain 2-containing protein, decreasing
the hydroxylation of HIF2α, and reducing HIF2α affinity for the von
Hippel-Lindau protein and its degradation. An increase in the half-life of HIF2α
was associated with upregulation of the hypoxia-related genes EPO, VEGFA, GLUT1,
and END1 in tumors.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate the existence of a new syndrome with multiple
PGLs and somatostatinomas associated with polycythemia. This new syndrome
results from somatic gain-of-function HIF2A mutations, which cause an
upregulation of hypoxia-related genes, including EPO and genes important in
cancer biology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.47.1912
PMCID: PMC3807138
PMID: 23509317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' disclosures of potential conflicts of
interest and author contributions are found at the end of this article.
