---
reference_id: "PMID:35142873"
title: "The prevalence and clinical presentation of Hirschsprung's disease in preterm infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Chen Y
- Yuan X
- Li Y
- Wu S
- Miao X
- Gong J
- Huang Y
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-021-05054-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prevalence and clinical presentation of Hirschsprung's disease in preterm infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Chen Y, Yuan X, Li Y, Wu S, Miao X, Gong J, Huang Y
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-021-05054-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-021-05054-2)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2022 Apr;38(4):523-532. doi: 10.1007/s00383-021-05054-2.
Epub  2022 Feb 10.

The prevalence and clinical presentation of Hirschsprung's disease in preterm 
infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Chen Y(#)(1), Yuan X(#)(2)(3), Li Y(4), Wu S(4), Miao X(4), Gong J(4), Huang 
Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nosocomial Infection, Yiwu Maternity and Children Hospital, 
Jinhua, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Jiaxing Maternity and Children Hospital, 
Jiaxing, 314000, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China. yuanxiaojian2021@126.com.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Yiwu Maternity and Children Hospital, 
Jinhua, People's Republic of China. yuanxiaojian2021@126.com.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Yiwu Maternity and Children Hospital, 
Jinhua, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Hirschsprung's disease (HD) is a rare occurrence in premature infants, 
and the exact prevalence varying across studies. Thus, we conducted this study 
to determine the prevalence of and clinical presentation of HD in preterm 
infants.
METHODS: The PubMed, EmBase, and Cochrane library databases were searched for 
eligible studies throughout May 2021. The pooled incidence with 95% confidence 
interval (CI) was calculated using the random-effects model.
RESULTS: Thirty studies involved 4,557 children with HD were included. The 
pooled proportion of HD patients who were preterm infants was 7% (95% CI 5-8%; 
P < 0.001); the sensitivity analysis indicated that the pooled prevalence of 
preterm infants with HD ranged from 5.0% to 5.6%. Moreover, the pooled incidence 
of abdominal distention in HD patients was 83% (P < 0.001), that of vomiting was 
61% (P < 0.001), that of bilious vomiting was 54% (P < 0.001), that of delayed 
meconium passage was 48% (P < 0.001), that of constipation was 44% (P < 0.001), 
and that of enterocolitis was 13% (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This study reported the prevalence of HD patients who were preterm 
infants, and the most common presentations were abdominal distention, vomiting, 
bilious vomiting, delayed meconium passage, constipation, and enterocolitis.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-021-05054-2
PMID: 35142873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]