---
reference_id: "PMID:3328890"
title: The epidemiology of Legionella pneumophila infections.
authors:
- Doebbeling BN
- Wenzel RP
journal: Semin Respir Infect
year: '1987'
keywords:
- Disease Outbreaks
- Humans
- "Legionnaires' Disease/epidemiology, prevention & control, transmission"
- Population Surveillance
- Risk Factors
- Spain
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The epidemiology of Legionella pneumophila infections.
**Authors:** Doebbeling BN, Wenzel RP
**Journal:** Semin Respir Infect (1987)

## Content

1. Semin Respir Infect. 1987 Dec;2(4):206-21.

The epidemiology of Legionella pneumophila infections.

Doebbeling BN(1), Wenzel RP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City.

The study of outbreaks of Legionella pneumophila has been essential in 
understanding the organism, the disease, and its pathogenesis. Early epidemics 
defined the clinical spectrum: Pontiac fever is an acute, self-limited, febrile 
illness with an attack rate of 95% to 100% and an incubation period of 36 hours. 
In contrast, legionnaires' disease is a life-threatening bronchopneumonia with 
an attack rate of 2% to 7% and an incubation period of two to ten days. Three 
times as many males as females are affected with legionnaires' disease, and age, 
cigarette smoking, and chronic medical disease (particularly immunosuppression) 
appear to be separate risk factors. Furthermore, L pneumophila is responsible 
for approximately 1% to 3% of community-acquired pneumonias, 13% of those 
acquired in the hospital and as many as 26% of atypical pneumonias. Diverse 
environmental reservoirs have been identified, including cooling systems, 
potable or domestic water systems, respiratory therapy devices, industrial 
coolants, and whirlpool spas. Hot water temperature, stagnant water, sediment, 
and the presence of other microorganisms are important factors in the 
amplification of the Legionellaceae. Although airborne transmission has been 
widely suggested, aspiration may be an important mode in certain patients. 
Regional and national surveillance may identify common sources and allow the 
introduction of early control measures. The latter have included primarily pulse 
and continuous hyperchlorination and super-heating hot water systems to 50 to 60 
degrees C. Experimental data suggest that ozone and UV light may be useful in 
the future. Additionally, cooling towers and evaporative condensers have been 
decontaminated and maintained with a variety of biocides. The prevention of 
outbreaks requires thoughtful planning, redesign, and good engineering 
practices.

PMID: 3328890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]