---
reference_id: "PMID:20871834"
title: Lipid mediators in acne.
authors:
- Ottaviani M
- Camera E
- Picardo M
journal: Mediators Inflamm
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1155/2010/858176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lipid mediators in acne.
**Authors:** Ottaviani M, Camera E, Picardo M
**Journal:** Mediators Inflamm (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2010/858176](https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/858176)

## Content

1. Mediators Inflamm. 2010;2010:858176. doi: 10.1155/2010/858176. Epub 2010 Aug
25.

Lipid mediators in acne.

Ottaviani M(1), Camera E, Picardo M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cutaneous Physiopathology, San Gallicano Dermatological 
Institute IRCCS, 00144 Rome, Italy.

Multiple factors are involved in acne pathogenesis, and sebum secretion is one 
of the main ones. The role sebum plays in acne development has not been 
completely elucidated yet; however, increasing amounts of data seem to confirm 
the presence of alterations in sebum from acne patients. Altered ratio between 
saturated and unsaturated fatty acids has been indicated as an important feature 
to be considered in addition to the altered amount of specific fatty acids such 
as linoleic acid. Furthermore, particular attention has been focused on squalene 
peroxide that seems to be able to induce an inflammatory response beyond 
cytotoxicity and comedones formation. Moreover, recent data suggest that lipid 
mediators are able to interfere with sebocytes differentiation and sebogenesis 
through the activation of pathways related to peroxisome proliferators-activated 
receptors. Understanding the factors and mechanisms that regulate sebum 
production is needed in order to identify novel therapeutic strategies for acne 
treatment.

DOI: 10.1155/2010/858176
PMCID: PMC2943135
PMID: 20871834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]