---
reference_id: "PMID:31761837"
title: "[Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy]."
authors:
- Nakane S
journal: Rinsho Shinkeigaku
year: '2019'
doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-001354
keywords:
- Animals
- Autoantibodies
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Ganglia, Autonomic/immunology"
- Humans
- Immunotherapy/methods
- "Receptors, Cholinergic/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy].
**Authors:** Nakane S
**Journal:** Rinsho Shinkeigaku (2019)
**DOI:** [10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-001354](https://doi.org/10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-001354)

## Content

1. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2019 Dec 25;59(12):783-790. doi: 
10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-001354. Epub 2019 Nov 23.

[Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakane S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neurology and Therapeutics, Kumamoto University 
Hospital.

Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy (AAG) is an acquired immune-mediated 
disorder of widespread autonomic failure. Approximately half of the patients 
with AAG have the autoantibodies against the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor (AChR) in autonomic ganglia. These ganglionic AChR antibodies have the 
potential to mediate the synaptic transmission in sympathetic, parasympathetic, 
and enteric ganglia. Therefore, seropositive AAG patients exhibit various 
autonomic symptoms. Extra-autonomic manifestations (coexistence with brain 
involvement, sensory disturbance, endocrine disorders, autoimmune diseases and 
tumors) are present in many patients with AAG. The nicotinic AChRs comprise a 
family of abundantly expressed ligand-gated cation channels found throughout the 
central and peripheral nervous systems. Moreover, limited manifestations of 
autoimmune dysautonomia including autoimmune gastrointestinal dysmotility are 
newly recognized clinical entity. Although combined immunomodulatory therapy is 
beneficial for almost all patients with AAG, several case reports of some AAG 
patients with small benefit exist. This review focuses on the recent progress in 
the clinical approaches of AAG and its related disorders involving the role of 
autoantibodies and clinical practice.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.cn-001354
PMID: 31761837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]