---
reference_id: "PMID:32202634"
title: The role of AGK in thrombocytopoiesis and possible therapeutic strategies.
authors:
- Jiang H
- Yu Z
- Ding N
- Yang M
- Zhang L
- Fan X
- Zhou Y
- Zou Q
- Hou J
- Zheng J
- Zhang L
- Xu Y
- Liu J
journal: Blood
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2019003851
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of AGK in thrombocytopoiesis and possible therapeutic strategies.
**Authors:** Jiang H, Yu Z, Ding N, Yang M, Zhang L, Fan X, Zhou Y, Zou Q, Hou J, Zheng J, Zhang L, Xu Y, Liu J
**Journal:** Blood (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2019003851](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2019003851)

## Content

1. Blood. 2020 Jul 2;136(1):119-129. doi: 10.1182/blood.2019003851.

The role of AGK in thrombocytopoiesis and possible therapeutic strategies.

Jiang H(1), Yu Z(2), Ding N(1), Yang M(1), Zhang L(1), Fan X(1), Zhou Y(3), Zou 
Q(4), Hou J(5), Zheng J(2), Zhang L(3), Xu Y(1), Liu J(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, and.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and 
Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes 
and Related Genes, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, National Clinical Research 
Center for Blood Diseases, Institute of Hematology & Blood Diseases Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 
Laboratory of Blood Disease Gene Therapy, Tianjin, China.
(4)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology, 
Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of 
Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Hematology, Renji Hospital affiliated with Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(6)Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Soochow University, Suzhou, 
China; and.
(7)Innovative Research Team of High-level Local Universities in Shanghai, 
Shanghai, China.

Abnormal megakaryocyte development and platelet production lead to 
thrombocytopenia or thrombocythemia and increase the risk of hemorrhage or 
thrombosis. Acylglycerol kinase (AGK) is a mitochondrial membrane kinase that 
catalyzes the formation of phosphatidic acid and lysophosphatidic acid. Mutation 
of AGK has been described as the major cause of Sengers syndrome, and the 
patients with Sengers syndrome have been reported to exhibit thrombocytopenia. 
In this study, we found that megakaryocyte/platelet-specific AGK-deficient mice 
developed thrombocytopenia and splenomegaly, mainly caused by inefficient bone 
marrow thrombocytopoiesis and excessive extramedullary hematopoiesis, but not by 
apoptosis of circulating platelets. It has been reported that the G126E mutation 
arrests the kinase activity of AGK. The AGK G126E mutation did not affect 
peripheral platelet counts or megakaryocyte differentiation, suggesting that the 
involvement of AGK in megakaryocyte development and platelet biogenesis was not 
dependent on its kinase activity. The Mpl/Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)/signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) pathway is the major 
signaling pathway regulating megakaryocyte development. Our study confirmed that 
AGK can bind to JAK2 in megakaryocytes/platelets. More interestingly, we found 
that the JAK2 V617F mutation dramatically enhanced the binding of AGK to JAK2 
and greatly facilitated JAK2/Stat3 signaling in megakaryocytes/platelets in 
response to thrombopoietin. We also found that the JAK2 JAK homology 2 domain 
peptide YGVCF617CGDENI enhanced the binding of AGK to JAK2 and that 
cell-permeable peptides containing YGVCF617CGDENI sequences accelerated 
proplatelet formation. Therefore, our study reveals critical roles of AGK in 
megakaryocyte differentiation and platelet biogenesis and suggests that 
targeting the interaction between AGK and JAK2 may be a novel strategy for the 
treatment of thrombocytopenia or thrombocythemia.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2019003851
PMID: 32202634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]