---
reference_id: "PMID:28043173"
title: Glucocorticoid-targeted therapies for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Strehl C
- van der Goes MC
- Bijlsma JW
- Jacobs JW
- Buttgereit F
journal: Expert Opin Investig Drugs
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/13543784.2017.1276562
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucocorticoid-targeted therapies for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Strehl C, van der Goes MC, Bijlsma JW, Jacobs JW, Buttgereit F
**Journal:** Expert Opin Investig Drugs (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13543784.2017.1276562](https://doi.org/10.1080/13543784.2017.1276562)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2017 Feb;26(2):187-195. doi: 
10.1080/13543784.2017.1276562. Epub 2017 Jan 3.

Glucocorticoid-targeted therapies for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.

Strehl C(1)(2), van der Goes MC(3), Bijlsma JW(3), Jacobs JW(3), Buttgereit 
F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology , Charité - University 
Medicine Berlin , Berlin , Germany.
(2)b German Rheumatism Research Centre (DRFZ) , Berlin , Germany.
(3)c Department of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology , University Medical 
Center Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands.

The beneficial effects of glucocorticoids are highly regarded in the treatment 
of inflammatory diseases. In rheumatoid arthritis, these drugs are widely used 
because they effectively reduce signs and symptoms of the disease, and exert 
disease-modifying effects. However, both patients and physicians frequently 
associate glucocorticoids with a variety of adverse effects which hamper 
adherence. Due to this ambivalent nature of these drugs, several new 
glucocorticoids or glucocorticoid receptor ligands are being developed, aiming 
at improving their benefit-risk balance. Areas covered: Focussing on rheumatoid 
arthritis, we discuss current approaches to achieve this goal, including an 
optimized application of conventional glucocorticoids and the development of 
novel formulations aiming at minimizing adverse effects while keeping or even 
enhancing the anti-inflammatory efficacy. Expert opinion: Glucocorticoids - be 
it conventional or modified/delayed-release formulations - have so far been 
convincing in clinical practice, and their widespread use will therefore 
continue. They are not likely to be replaced by novel drugs in the near future 
although some investigational preparations are promising, and results obtained 
from currently ongoing clinical trials in humans are eagerly awaited. As a 
result of these developmental activities, a further improvement of the 
benefits-risk balance of glucocorticoids or glucocorticoid receptor ligands is 
expected.

DOI: 10.1080/13543784.2017.1276562
PMID: 28043173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]