---
reference_id: "PMID:22937199"
title: "Cholera epidemiology in Nigeria: an overview."
authors:
- Adagbada AO
- Adesida SA
- Nwaokorie FO
- Niemogha MT
- Coker AO
journal: Pan Afr Med J
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholera epidemiology in Nigeria: an overview.
**Authors:** Adagbada AO, Adesida SA, Nwaokorie FO, Niemogha MT, Coker AO
**Journal:** Pan Afr Med J (2012)

## Content

1. Pan Afr Med J. 2012;12:59. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

Cholera epidemiology in Nigeria: an overview.

Adagbada AO(1), Adesida SA, Nwaokorie FO, Niemogha MT, Coker AO.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology and Biotechnology Division, Nigerian Institute of Medical 
Research, Yaba, Lagos, Nigeria.

Cholera is an acute diarrhoeal infection caused by ingestion of food or water 
contaminated with the bacterium, Vibrio cholera. Choleragenic V. cholera O1 and 
O139 are the only causative agents of the disease. The two most distinguishing 
epidemiologic features of the disease are its tendency to appear in explosive 
outbreaks and its predisposition to causing pandemics that may progressively 
affect many countries and spread into continents. Despite efforts to control 
cholera, the disease continues to occur as a major public health problem in many 
developing countries. Numerous studies over more than a century have made 
advances in the understanding of the disease and ways of treating patients, but 
the mechanism of emergence of new epidemic strains, and the ecosystem supporting 
regular epidemics, remain challenging to epidemiologists. In Nigeria, since the 
first appearance of epidemic cholera in 1972, intermittent outbreaks have been 
occurring. The later part of 2010 was marked with severe outbreak which started 
from the northern part of Nigeria, spreading to the other parts and involving 
approximately 3,000 cases and 781 deaths. Sporadic cases have also been 
reported. Although epidemiologic surveillance constitutes an important component 
of the public health response, publicly available surveillance data from Nigeria 
have been relatively limited to date. Based on existing relevant scientific 
literature on features of cholera, this paper presents a synopsis of cholera 
epidemiology emphasising the situation in Nigeria.

PMCID: PMC3428179
PMID: 22937199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]