---
reference_id: "PMID:29100093"
title: "De Novo Mutations in SLC25A24 Cause a Craniosynostosis Syndrome with Hypertrichosis, Progeroid Appearance, and Mitochondrial Dysfunction."
authors:
- Ehmke N
- Graul-Neumann L
- Smorag L
- Koenig R
- Segebrecht L
- Magoulas P
- Scaglia F
- Kilic E
- Hennig AF
- Adolphs N
- Saha N
- Fauler B
- Kalscheuer VM
- Hennig F
- Altmüller J
- Netzer C
- Thiele H
- Nürnberg P
- Yigit G
- Jäger M
- Hecht J
- Krüger U
- Mielke T
- Krawitz PM
- Horn D
- Schuelke M
- Mundlos S
- Bacino CA
- Bonnen PE
- Wollnik B
- Fischer-Zirnsak B
- Kornak U
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.016
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adenosine Triphosphate/genetics
- Adolescent
- Antiporters/genetics
- Calcium-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Craniosynostoses/genetics
- Cutis Laxa/genetics
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- "Ductus Arteriosus, Patent/genetics"
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Fetal Growth Retardation/genetics
- Fibroblasts/pathology
- Growth Disorders
- Humans
- Hydrogen Peroxide/pharmacology
- Hypertrichosis/genetics
- Infant
- "Membrane Potential, Mitochondrial/drug effects, genetics"
- "Mitochondria/drug effects, genetics"
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Oxidative Stress/genetics
- Progeria/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De Novo Mutations in SLC25A24 Cause a Craniosynostosis Syndrome with Hypertrichosis, Progeroid Appearance, and Mitochondrial Dysfunction.
**Authors:** Ehmke N, Graul-Neumann L, Smorag L, Koenig R, Segebrecht L, Magoulas P, Scaglia F, Kilic E, Hennig AF, Adolphs N, Saha N, Fauler B, Kalscheuer VM, Hennig F, Altmüller J, Netzer C, Thiele H, Nürnberg P, Yigit G, Jäger M, Hecht J, Krüger U, Mielke T, Krawitz PM, Horn D, Schuelke M, Mundlos S, Bacino CA, Bonnen PE, Wollnik B, Fischer-Zirnsak B, Kornak U
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.016)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Nov 2;101(5):833-843. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.016.

De Novo Mutations in SLC25A24 Cause a Craniosynostosis Syndrome with
Hypertrichosis, Progeroid Appearance, and Mitochondrial Dysfunction.

Ehmke N(1), Graul-Neumann L(2), Smorag L(3), Koenig R(4), Segebrecht L(2),
Magoulas P(5), Scaglia F(5), Kilic E(6), Hennig AF(7), Adolphs N(8), Saha N(9),
Fauler B(10), Kalscheuer VM(11), Hennig F(11), Altmüller J(12), Netzer C(13),
Thiele H(14), Nürnberg P(15), Yigit G(3), Jäger M(16), Hecht J(17), Krüger
U(16), Mielke T(10), Krawitz PM(18), Horn D(2), Schuelke M(19), Mundlos S(18),
Bacino CA(5), Bonnen PE(20), Wollnik B(3), Fischer-Zirnsak B(18), Kornak U(21).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany; Berlin Institute of Health, 10117 Berlin,
Germany; Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Development and Disease
Group, 14195 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: nadja.ehmke@charite.de.
(2)Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsmedizin Göttingen, 37073 Göttingen,
Germany.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.
(5)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(6)Pediatric Genetics, Pediatric Hematology Oncology Research &Training
Hospital, 06110 Ankara, Turkey.
(7)Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany; Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative
Therapies, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.
(8)Department of Craniomaxillofacial Surgery, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.
(9)Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany; Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Development and Disease Group, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Berlin-Brandenburg School
for Regenerative Therapies, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin,
Germany; Max Planck International Research Network on Aging, 18057 Rostock,
Germany.
(10)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Microscopy and Cryo-electron
Microscopy Group, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(11)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Development and Disease Group,
14195 Berlin, Germany.
(12)Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany;
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne,
Germany.
(13)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Cologne, 50931 Cologne,
Germany.
(14)Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.
(15)Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany;
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne,
Germany; Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in
Aging-Associated Diseases, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany.
(16)Genomics Core Facility, Campus Virchow Klinikum, Berlin Institute of Health,
13353 Berlin, Germany.
(17)Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute for Science and
Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain; Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
08002 Barcelona, Spain.
(18)Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany; Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Development and Disease Group, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Berlin-Brandenburg Center
for Regenerative Therapies, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin,
Germany.
(19)Department of Neuropediatrics and NeuroCure Clinical Research Center,
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(20)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(21)Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany; Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Development and Disease Group, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Berlin-Brandenburg Center
for Regenerative Therapies, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin,
Germany. Electronic address: uwe.kornak@charite.de.

Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome (GCMS) is a dysmorphic syndrome characterized by
coronal craniosynostosis and severe midface hypoplasia, body and facial
hypertrichosis, microphthalmia, short stature, and short distal phalanges.
Variable lipoatrophy and cutis laxa are the basis for a progeroid appearance.
Using exome and genome sequencing, we identified the recurrent de novo mutations
c.650G>A (p.Arg217His) and c.649C>T (p.Arg217Cys) in SLC25A24 in five unrelated
girls diagnosed with GCMS. Two of the girls had pronounced neonatal progeroid
features and were initially diagnosed with Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch syndrome.
SLC25A24 encodes a mitochondrial inner membrane ATP-Mg/Pi carrier. In
fibroblasts from affected individuals, the mutated SLC25A24 showed normal
stability. In contrast to control cells, the probands' cells showed
mitochondrial swelling, which was exacerbated upon treatment with hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2). The same effect was observed after overexpression of the mutant
cDNA. Under normal culture conditions, the mitochondrial membrane potential of
the probands' fibroblasts was intact, whereas ATP content in the mitochondrial
matrix was lower than that in control cells. However, upon H2O2 exposure, the
membrane potential was significantly elevated in cells harboring the mutated
SLC25A24. No reduction of mitochondrial DNA copy number was observed. These
findings demonstrate that mitochondrial dysfunction with increased sensitivity
to oxidative stress is due to the SLC25A24 mutations. Our results suggest that
the SLC25A24 mutations induce a gain of pathological function and link
mitochondrial ATP-Mg/Pi transport to the development of skeletal and connective
tissue.

Copyright © 2017 American Society of Human Genetics. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.09.016
PMCID: PMC5673623
PMID: 29100093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
