---
reference_id: "PMID:35425822"
title: "Left Bundle Branch Area Pacing in a Giant Atrium With Atrial Standstill: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Zheng J
- Yang Q
- Zheng J
- Chen Q
- Jin Q
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.836964
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Left Bundle Branch Area Pacing in a Giant Atrium With Atrial Standstill: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Zheng J, Yang Q, Zheng J, Chen Q, Jin Q
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2022.836964](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2022.836964)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Mar 29;9:836964. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.836964. 
eCollection 2022.

Left Bundle Branch Area Pacing in a Giant Atrium With Atrial Standstill: A Case 
Report and Literature Review.

Zheng J(1), Yang Q(1), Zheng J(1), Chen Q(1), Jin Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Quzhou Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Quzhou People's Hospital, Quzhou, China.

Atrial standstill (AS) is a rare condition defined by the lack of atrial 
electrical and mechanical activities. It is usually clinically manifested as 
symptomatic bradycardia, which requires permanent pacemaker (PPM) implantation. 
Traditional right ventricular apical pacing causes electrical and mechanical 
dyssynchrony resulting in left ventricular dysfunction, heart failure, and 
arrhythmias. As a novel physiological pacing strategy, left bundle branch area 
pacing (LBBaP) has demonstrated effectiveness and safety in recent years, but 
its application in exceptional conditions is rarely reported. We report the case 
of a 47-year-old female, who was diagnosed with AS complicated with a giant 
atrium, and successfully received a single-chamber PPM with LBBaP.

Copyright © 2022 Zheng, Yang, Zheng, Chen and Jin.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.836964
PMCID: PMC9001966
PMID: 35425822

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.