---
reference_id: "PMID:38427309"
title: "Examining the association between serum galactose-deficient IgA1 and primary IgA nephropathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Vaz de Castro PAS
- Amaral AA
- Almeida MG
- Selvaskandan H
- Barratt J
- Simões E Silva AC
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-023-01874-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Examining the association between serum galactose-deficient IgA1 and primary IgA nephropathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Vaz de Castro PAS, Amaral AA, Almeida MG, Selvaskandan H, Barratt J, Simões E Silva AC
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-023-01874-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-023-01874-8)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2024 Nov;37(8):2099-2112. doi: 10.1007/s40620-023-01874-8. Epub
2024  Mar 1.

Examining the association between serum galactose-deficient IgA1 and primary IgA 
nephropathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Vaz de Castro PAS(1), Amaral AA(1), Almeida MG(1), Selvaskandan H(2), Barratt 
J(3)(4), Simões E Silva AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Medical Investigation, Unit of Pediatric 
Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo 
Horizonte, Brazil.
(2)The Mayer IgA Nephropathy Laboratories, University of Leicester, Leicester, 
UK.
(3)The Mayer IgA Nephropathy Laboratories, University of Leicester, Leicester, 
UK. jb81@leicester.ac.uk.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, University 
Road, Leicester, LE1 7RH, UK. jb81@leicester.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: IgA nephropathy (IgAN) is a common primary glomerular disease. The 
O-glycosylation status of IgA1 plays a crucial role in disease pathophysiology. 
The level of poorly-O-galactosylated IgA1, or galactose-deficient IgA1 
(Gd-IgA1), has also been identified as a potential biomarker in IgAN. We sought 
to examine the value of serum Gd-IgA1 as a biomarker in IgAN, by investigating 
its association with clinical, laboratory, and histopathological features of 
IgAN.
METHODS: The review followed Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews 
and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) recommendations and was registered in PROSPERO 
(CRD42021287423). The literature search was conducted in PubMed, Web of Science, 
Cochrane, and Scopus, and the selected articles were evaluated for eligibility 
based on predefined criteria. The methodological quality of the studies was 
assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Statistical analysis was performed to 
calculate effect sizes and assess heterogeneity among the studies.
RESULTS: This review analyzed 29 out of 1,986 studies, conducted between 2005 
and 2022, with participants from multiple countries. Gd-IgA1 levels were not 
associated with age and gender, while associations with hypertension, hematuria, 
and proteinuria were inconsistent. In the meta-analyses, a correlation between 
serum Gd-IgA1 and estimated glomerular filtration rate was identified, however, 
the relationships between Gd-IgA1 levels and chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 
and progression to kidney failure were inconsistent.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum Gd-IgA1 levels were not associated with validated prognostic 
risk factors, but were negatively correlated with kidney function. Further 
research in larger studies using standardized assays are needed to establish the 
value of Gd-IgA1 as a prognostic risk factor in IgAN.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-023-01874-8
PMCID: PMC11649794
PMID: 38427309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: All authors 
certify that they have no affiliations with or involvement in any organization 
or entity with any financial interest or non-financial interest in the subject 
matter or materials discussed in this manuscript. Ethical approval: Ethical 
approval is not applicable. This is a systematic review article. Human and 
animal rights: This article does not contain any studies with human participants 
or animals performed by any of the authors. Informed consent: For this type of 
study, formal consent is not required.