---
reference_id: "PMID:28364778"
title: "Clinical and molecular findings in a Moroccan family with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome: a case report."
authors:
- Adadi N
- Lahrouchi N
- Bouhouch R
- Fellat I
- Amri R
- Alders M
- Sefiani A
- Bezzina C
- Ratbi I
journal: J Med Case Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13256-017-1243-1
keywords:
- Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electrocardiography
- Genetic Counseling
- Humans
- "Jervell-Lange Nielsen Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- KCNQ1 Potassium Channel/genetics
- Male
- Morocco
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Syncope/etiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular findings in a Moroccan family with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome: a case report.
**Authors:** Adadi N, Lahrouchi N, Bouhouch R, Fellat I, Amri R, Alders M, Sefiani A, Bezzina C, Ratbi I
**Journal:** J Med Case Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13256-017-1243-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13256-017-1243-1)

## Content

1. J Med Case Rep. 2017 Apr 2;11(1):88. doi: 10.1186/s13256-017-1243-1.

Clinical and molecular findings in a Moroccan family with Jervell and
Lange-Nielsen syndrome: a case report.

Adadi N(1)(2), Lahrouchi N(3), Bouhouch R(4), Fellat I(4), Amri R(5), Alders
M(6), Sefiani A(7)(8), Bezzina C(3), Ratbi I(8).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Génomique Humaine, Faculté de Médecine et Pharmacie, Mohammed V
University, Rabat, Morocco. najlae.adadi@yahoo.fr.
(2)Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National d'Hygiène, Rabat,
Morocco. najlae.adadi@yahoo.fr.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Electrophysiologie et Stimulation Cardiaque, Clinique Belvédère, Rabat,
Morocco.
(5)Service de Cardiologie B, CHU Ibn Sina, Rabat, Morocco.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(7)Centre de Génomique Humaine, Faculté de Médecine et Pharmacie, Mohammed V
University, Rabat, Morocco.
(8)Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National d'Hygiène, Rabat,
Morocco.

BACKGROUND: Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (Online Mendelian Inheritance in
Man 220400) is a rare autosomal recessive cardioauditory ion channel disorder
that affects 1/200,000 to 1/1,000,000 children. It is characterized by
congenital profound bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, a long QT interval,
ventricular tachyarrhythmias, and episodes of torsade de pointes on an
electrocardiogram. Cardiac symptoms arise mostly in early childhood and consist
of syncopal episodes during periods of stress, exercise, or fright and are
associated with a high risk of sudden cardiac death. Jervell and Lange-Nielsen
syndrome is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in KCNQ1 on
11p15.5 or KCNE1 on 1q22.1-q22.2.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the case of a 10-year-old Moroccan boy with
congenital hearing loss and severely prolonged QT interval who presented with
multiple episodes of syncope. His parents are first-degree cousins. We performed
Sanger sequencing and identified a homozygous variant in KCNQ1 (c.1343dupC,
p.Glu449Argfs*14).
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of the genetic substrate in this patient
confirmed the clinical diagnosis of Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome and
allowed us to provide him with appropriate management and genetic counseling to
his family. In addition, this finding contributes to our understanding of
genetic disease in the Moroccan population.

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-017-1243-1
PMCID: PMC5376485
PMID: 28364778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
