---
reference_id: "PMID:7801427"
title: Cardiovascular lesions in bovine Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Potter KA
- Besser TE
journal: Vet Pathol
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1177/030098589403100501
keywords:
- "Aortic Dissection/etiology, pathology, veterinary"
- Animals
- "Aortic Aneurysm/etiology, pathology, veterinary"
- "Aortic Rupture/etiology, pathology, veterinary"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/etiology, pathology, veterinary"
- Cattle
- Cattle Diseases/pathology
- Elastic Tissue/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Marfan Syndrome/complications, pathology, veterinary"
- "Microscopy, Electron/veterinary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular lesions in bovine Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Potter KA, Besser TE
**Journal:** Vet Pathol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1177/030098589403100501](https://doi.org/10.1177/030098589403100501)

## Content

1. Vet Pathol. 1994 Sep;31(5):501-9. doi: 10.1177/030098589403100501.

Cardiovascular lesions in bovine Marfan syndrome.

Potter KA(1), Besser TE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman.

Bovine Marfan syndrome is a genetic disease with many of the clinical and
pathologic manifestations of human Marfan syndrome. Major manifestations include
ectopia lentis and aortic dilatation, aneurysm, and rupture. Affected cattle
have a defect in fibrillin metabolism similar to that in human patients. Ten
cattle were followed and their disease progression and lesions documented. Ages
ranged from a term fetus (No. 9) to a 4-year-old cow (No. 4); three animals were
male (Nos. 1-3) and seven were female (Nos. 4-10). Of eight animals (80%) that
died or were euthanatized (Nos. 1-3, 5-9), six (75%) had severe cardiovascular
lesions identified at necropsy. Gross cardiovascular lesions of bovine Marfan
syndrome included cardiac tamponade secondary to aortic rupture (animal Nos. 3,
6, 8), dissecting aneurysms of the aorta and pulmonary artery (animal No. 5),
and intrauterine cardiac tamponade secondary to rupture of the pulmonary artery
(animal No. 9). Microscopically, Verhoeff Van Gieson-stained sections of aorta
contained severe fragmentation of the elastic laminae in the aortic media, but
the cystic medial necrosis seen in human Marfan aortae was not identified, even
in the chronic aortic dissection. Ultrastructurally, affected aortic tissue was
characterized by thin, dark elastic fibers with abundant, tangled microfibrils
on the periphery. Swirls of collagen fibers and bundles of hypertrophic smooth
muscle cells replaced damaged elastic laminae. Gross and microscopic
cardiovascular lesions in bovine Marfan syndrome are similar to those in human
Marfan syndrome. Bovine Marfan syndrome is a valuable model for investigation of
molecular pathogenesis and treatment of human Marfan syndrome.

DOI: 10.1177/030098589403100501
PMID: 7801427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
