---
reference_id: "PMID:20137773"
title: Loss-of-function ENPP1 mutations cause both generalized arterial calcification of infancy and autosomal-recessive hypophosphatemic rickets.
authors:
- Lorenz-Depiereux B
- Schnabel D
- Tiosano D
- Häusler G
- Strom TM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Calcinosis/complications, enzymology, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/complications, enzymology, genetics"
- Family
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/chemistry, genetics"
- "Pyrophosphatases/chemistry, genetics"
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type IIa/genetics"
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type IIc/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss-of-function ENPP1 mutations cause both generalized arterial calcification of infancy and autosomal-recessive hypophosphatemic rickets.
**Authors:** Lorenz-Depiereux B, Schnabel D, Tiosano D, Häusler G, Strom TM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.006)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Feb 12;86(2):267-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.006.
Epub  2010 Feb 4.

Loss-of-function ENPP1 mutations cause both generalized arterial calcification
of infancy and autosomal-recessive hypophosphatemic rickets.

Lorenz-Depiereux B(1), Schnabel D, Tiosano D, Häusler G, Strom TM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.

The analysis of rare genetic disorders affecting phosphate homeostasis led to
the identification of several proteins that are essential for the renal
regulation of phosphate homeostasis; for example, fibroblast growth factor 23
(FGF23), which inhibits renal phosphate reabsorption and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
synthesis. Here, we report presumable loss-of-function mutations in the ENPP1
gene (ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase) in members of four
families affected with hypophosphatemic rickets. We provide evidence for the
conclusion that ENPP1 is the fourth gene-in addition to PHEX, FGF23, and
DMP1-that, if mutated, causes hypophosphatemic rickets resulting from elevated
FGF23 levels. Surprisingly, ENPP1 loss-of-function mutations have previously
been described in generalized arterial calcification of infancy, suggesting an
as yet elusive mechanism that balances arterial calcification with bone
mineralization.

Copyright (c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.006
PMCID: PMC2820166
PMID: 20137773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
