---
reference_id: "PMID:36165286"
title: "Brain Atrophy Is Substantially Accelerated in Neurological Wilson's Disease: A Longitudinal Study."
authors:
- Smolinski L
- Ziemssen T
- Akgun K
- Antos A
- Skowrońska M
- Kurkowska-Jastrzębska I
- Członkowska A
- Litwin T
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mds.29229
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Longitudinal Studies
- Copper
- Nervous System Diseases/pathology
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Atrophy/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain Atrophy Is Substantially Accelerated in Neurological Wilson's Disease: A Longitudinal Study.
**Authors:** Smolinski L, Ziemssen T, Akgun K, Antos A, Skowrońska M, Kurkowska-Jastrzębska I, Członkowska A, Litwin T
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.29229](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.29229)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2022 Dec;37(12):2446-2451. doi: 10.1002/mds.29229. Epub 2022 Sep
27.

Brain Atrophy Is Substantially Accelerated in Neurological Wilson's Disease: A
Longitudinal Study.

Smolinski L(1), Ziemssen T(2), Akgun K(2), Antos A(1), Skowrońska M(1),
Kurkowska-Jastrzębska I(1), Członkowska A(1), Litwin T(1).

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology,
Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Center of Clinical Neuroscience, Department of Neurology, University Clinic
Carl Gustav Carus & Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Although brain atrophy is common in neurological Wilson's disease,
longitudinal studies are lacking.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to measure longitudinal brain atrophy
rate and to relate it to the change in neurological impairment in Wilson's
disease.
METHODS: We included patients with brain imaging done at diagnosis and at least
12 months later. The atrophy rate was measured as percentage change in
ventricular volume, whereas the change in neurological impairment was scored on
the Unified Wilson's Disease Rating Scale.
RESULTS: Of 57 patients, 36 had neurological presentation, 17 had hepatic
presentation, and 4 were presymptomatic. The annualized atrophy rate was
significantly greater in patients with the neurological presentation than in
other patients (P = 0.001). In the neurological presentation, the atrophy rate
correlated with the change in impairment (rho = 0.39, P = 0.018) and was
significantly greater in those with worsening after diagnosis than in those
without worsening (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Brain atrophy rate appears as a promising marker of
neurodegeneration in Wilson's disease. © 2022 International Parkinson and
Movement Disorder Society.

© 2022 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.29229
PMID: 36165286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
