---
reference_id: "PMID:10773652"
title: Acute bilateral arm paresis.
authors:
- Stapf C
- Mohr JP
- Straschill M
- Mast H
- Marx P
journal: Cerebrovasc Dis
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1159/000016063
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Aged
- "Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Arm
- Electrophysiology
- Female
- Functional Laterality
- Humans
- "Infarction/diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neural Conduction
- "Paralysis/etiology, physiopathology"
- Spinal Cord/blood supply
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute bilateral arm paresis.
**Authors:** Stapf C, Mohr JP, Straschill M, Mast H, Marx P
**Journal:** Cerebrovasc Dis (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000016063](https://doi.org/10.1159/000016063)

## Content

1. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2000 May-Jun;10(3):239-43. doi: 10.1159/000016063.

Acute bilateral arm paresis.

Stapf C(1), Mohr JP, Straschill M, Mast H, Marx P.

Author information:
(1)Stroke Unit/Neurologische Klinik, Universitätsklinikum Benjamin Franklin,
Freie Universität Berlin, Germany. cs585@columbia.edu

OBJECTIVE: To study pure motor bilateral arm paresis of acute onset. This
syndrome is as yet a barely described clinical feature attributed to ischemia in
the territory of the anterior spinal artery (ASA).
CASES: We present 2 patients with acute onset of pure motor deficit in both
upper extremities.
RESULTS: Magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical spinal cord revealed
infarcts in the territory of the ASA. In 1 case, electrophysiology further
suggested discrete gray matter involvement.
CONCLUSION: In patients with acute weakness of both arms without further
neurological deficits, an incomplete ASA syndrome should be considered with the
anterior horns predominantly being affected. Magnetic resonance imaging and
electrophysiology are valuable tools to further confirm both location and
extension of the spinal lesion.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000016063
PMID: 10773652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
