---
reference_id: "PMID:38619323"
title: CHD4 and SMYD1 repress common transcriptional programs in the developing heart.
authors:
- Shi W
- Wasson LK
- Dorr KM
- Robbe ZL
- Wilczewski CM
- Hepperla AJ
- Davis IJ
- Seidman CE
- Seidman JG
- Conlon FL
journal: Development
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1242/dev.202505
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Chromatin/metabolism
- DNA Helicases
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Glycolysis/genetics
- Heart/embryology
- "Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/metabolism, genetics"
- "Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex/metabolism, genetics"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Muscle Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Proteomics
- Transcription Factors
- "Transcription, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHD4 and SMYD1 repress common transcriptional programs in the developing heart.
**Authors:** Shi W, Wasson LK, Dorr KM, Robbe ZL, Wilczewski CM, Hepperla AJ, Davis IJ, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, Conlon FL
**Journal:** Development (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.202505](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.202505)

## Content

1. Development. 2024 Apr 15;151(8):dev202505. doi: 10.1242/dev.202505. Epub 2024 
May 3.

CHD4 and SMYD1 repress common transcriptional programs in the developing heart.

Shi W(1), Wasson LK(2)(3), Dorr KM(1), Robbe ZL(1), Wilczewski CM(1), Hepperla 
AJ(4), Davis IJ(4), Seidman CE(2)(3)(5), Seidman JG(2), Conlon FL(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Genetics, McAllister Heart Institute, UNC-Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 
20815, USA.
(4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(5)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.

Regulation of chromatin states is essential for proper temporal and spatial gene 
expression. Chromatin states are modulated by remodeling complexes composed of 
components that have enzymatic activities. CHD4 is the catalytic core of the 
nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex, which represses gene 
transcription. However, it remains to be determined how CHD4, a ubiquitous 
enzyme that remodels chromatin structure, functions in cardiomyocytes to 
maintain heart development. In particular, whether other proteins besides the 
NuRD components interact with CHD4 in the heart is controversial. Using 
quantitative proteomics, we identified that CHD4 interacts with SMYD1, a 
striated muscle-restricted histone methyltransferase that is essential for 
cardiomyocyte differentiation and cardiac morphogenesis. Comprehensive 
transcriptomic and chromatin accessibility studies of Smyd1 and Chd4 null 
embryonic mouse hearts revealed that SMYD1 and CHD4 repress a group of common 
genes and pathways involved in glycolysis, response to hypoxia, and 
angiogenesis. Our study reveals a mechanism by which CHD4 functions during heart 
development, and a previously uncharacterized mechanism regarding how SMYD1 
represses cardiac transcription in the developing heart.

© 2024. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.202505
PMCID: PMC11112163
PMID: 38619323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.