---
reference_id: "PMID:16987892"
title: "Usher syndrome: molecular links of pathogenesis, proteins and pathways."
authors:
- Kremer H
- van Wijk E
- Märker T
- Wolfrum U
- Roepman R
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl205
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/chemistry, genetics"
- Animals
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- "Ear, Inner/metabolism"
- "Hair Cells, Auditory/metabolism"
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Mice
- Multiprotein Complexes
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/metabolism"
- "Protein Isoforms/chemistry, genetics"
- Retina/metabolism
- Synapses/metabolism
- "Usher Syndromes/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Usher syndrome: molecular links of pathogenesis, proteins and pathways.
**Authors:** Kremer H, van Wijk E, Märker T, Wolfrum U, Roepman R
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddl205](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddl205)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Oct 15;15 Spec No 2:R262-70. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl205.

Usher syndrome: molecular links of pathogenesis, proteins and pathways.

Kremer H(1), van Wijk E, Märker T, Wolfrum U, Roepman R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. h.kremer@antrg.umcn.nl

Usher syndrome is the most common form of deaf-blindness. The syndrome is both 
clinically and genetically heterogeneous, and to date, eight causative genes 
have been identified. The proteins encoded by these genes are part of a dynamic 
protein complex that is present in hair cells of the inner ear and in 
photoreceptor cells of the retina. The localization of the Usher proteins and 
the phenotype in animal models indicate that the Usher protein complex is 
essential in the morphogenesis of the stereocilia bundle in hair cells and in 
the calycal processes of photoreceptor cells. In addition, the Usher proteins 
are important in the synaptic processes of both cell types. The association of 
other proteins with the complex indicates functional links to a number of basic 
cell-biological processes. Prominently present is the connection to the dynamics 
of the actin cytoskeleton, involved in cellular morphology, cell polarity and 
cell-cell interactions. The Usher protein complex can also be linked to the 
cadherins/catenins in the adherens junction-associated protein complexes, 
suggesting a role in cell polarity and tissue organization. A third link can be 
established to the integrin transmembrane signaling network. The Usher 
interactome, as outlined in this review, participates in pathways common in 
inner ear and retina that are disrupted in the Usher syndrome.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddl205
PMID: 16987892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]