---
reference_id: "PMID:9425233"
title: Mice with an aspartylglucosaminuria mutation similar to humans replicate the pathophysiology in patients.
authors:
- Jalanko A
- Tenhunen K
- McKinney CE
- LaMarca ME
- Rapola J
- Autti T
- Joensuu R
- Manninen T
- Sipilä I
- Ikonen S
- Riekkinen P Jr
- Ginns EI
- Peltonen L
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.2.265
keywords:
- "Acetylglucosamine/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- Animals
- Aspartylglucosaminuria
- Aspartylglucosylaminase/genetics
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Gene Targeting
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Liver/pathology
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/enzymology, genetics"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Maze Learning
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout/genetics"
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mice with an aspartylglucosaminuria mutation similar to humans replicate the pathophysiology in patients.
**Authors:** Jalanko A, Tenhunen K, McKinney CE, LaMarca ME, Rapola J, Autti T, Joensuu R, Manninen T, Sipilä I, Ikonen S, Riekkinen P Jr, Ginns EI, Peltonen L
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/7.2.265](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/7.2.265)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Feb;7(2):265-72. doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.2.265.

Mice with an aspartylglucosaminuria mutation similar to humans replicate the
pathophysiology in patients.

Jalanko A(1), Tenhunen K, McKinney CE, LaMarca ME, Rapola J, Autti T, Joensuu R,
Manninen T, Sipilä I, Ikonen S, Riekkinen P Jr, Ginns EI, Peltonen L.

Author information:
(1)National Public Health Institute, Department of Human Molecular Genetics,
Mannerheimintie 166, 00300 Helsinki, Finland.

Aspartyglucosaminuria (AGU) is a lysosomal storage disease with autosomal
recessive inheritance that is caused by deficient activity of
aspartylglucosaminidase (AGA), a lysosomal enzyme belonging to the newly
described enzyme family of N-terminal hydrolases. An AGU mouse model was
generated by targeted disruption of the AGA gene designed to mimic closely one
human disease mutation. These homozygous mutant mice have no detectable AGA
activity and excrete aspartylglucosamine in their urine. Analogously to the
human disease, the affected homozygous animals showed storage in lysosomes in
all analyzed tissues, including the brain, liver, kidney and skin, and lysosomal
storage was already detected in fetuses at 19 days gestation. Electron
microscopic studies of brain tissue samples demonstrated lysosomal storage
vacuoles in the neurons and glia of the neocortical and cortical regions.
Magnetic resonance images (MRI) facilitating monitoring of the brains of living
animals indicated cerebral atrophy and hypointensity of the deep gray matter
structures of brain-findings similar to those observed in human patients. AGU
mice are fertile, and up to 11 months of age their movement and behavior do not
differ from their age-matched littermates. However, in the Morris water maze
test, a slow worsening of performance could be seen with age. The phenotype
mimics well AGU in humans, the patients characteristically showing only slowly
progressive mental retardation and relatively mild skeletal abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/7.2.265
PMID: 9425233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
