---
reference_id: "PMID:6651315"
title: Sézary syndrome. A clinicopathologic study of 39 cases.
authors:
- Buechner SA
- Winkelmann RK
journal: Arch Dermatol
year: '1983'
doi: 10.1001/archderm.119.12.979
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Biopsy
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mycosis Fungoides/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Sezary Syndrome/diagnosis, pathology"
- Skin/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sézary syndrome. A clinicopathologic study of 39 cases.
**Authors:** Buechner SA, Winkelmann RK
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archderm.119.12.979](https://doi.org/10.1001/archderm.119.12.979)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol. 1983 Dec;119(12):979-86. doi: 10.1001/archderm.119.12.979.

Sézary syndrome. A clinicopathologic study of 39 cases.

Buechner SA, Winkelmann RK.

The histopathologic and clinicopathologic characteristics of 121 skin biopsy
specimens from 39 patients with Sézary syndrome were reviewed. The most
frequently noted histologic type was a lymphomatoid subepidermal band
infiltrate, composed predominantly of atypical lymphoid cells with cerebriform
nuclei, found in 53 (44%) of the skin biopsy specimens. A lymphocytic band
infiltrate, characterized by a predominance of small lymphocytes and a variable
admixture of atypical lymphoid cells, was found in 47 (39%) of the specimens.
Only 18 (15%) of the lymphomatoid band specimens from ten patients demonstrated
epidermal involvement suggesting mycosis fungoides. Twenty-one (17%) of the
biopsy specimens were interpreted as showing changes consistent with those of
chronic dermatitis. Despite multiple skin biopsy specimens, there was a weak
association noted between the histologic patterns and the clinical stage of
disease or the prognosis.

DOI: 10.1001/archderm.119.12.979
PMID: 6651315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
