---
reference_id: "PMID:23820898"
title: Uterine-specific loss of Tsc2 leads to myometrial tumors in both the uterus and lungs.
authors:
- Prizant H
- Sen A
- Light A
- Cho SN
- DeMayo FJ
- Lydon JP
- Hammes SR
journal: Mol Endocrinol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1059
keywords:
- Animals
- Aromatase/metabolism
- Aromatase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Female
- Leiomyoma/pathology
- "Lung Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology, secondary"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Models, Biological"
- "Myometrium/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- Organ Specificity
- Ovariectomy
- Sexual Maturation/drug effects
- Sirolimus/pharmacology
- Tuberous Sclerosis/metabolism
- "Uterine Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- "Uterus/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uterine-specific loss of Tsc2 leads to myometrial tumors in both the uterus and lungs.
**Authors:** Prizant H, Sen A, Light A, Cho SN, DeMayo FJ, Lydon JP, Hammes SR
**Journal:** Mol Endocrinol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1210/me.2013-1059](https://doi.org/10.1210/me.2013-1059)

## Content

1. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Sep;27(9):1403-14. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1059. Epub 2013
Jul  2.

Uterine-specific loss of Tsc2 leads to myometrial tumors in both the uterus and 
lungs.

Prizant H(1), Sen A, Light A, Cho SN, DeMayo FJ, Lydon JP, Hammes SR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University 
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a rare disease characterized by proliferation 
of abnormal smooth-muscle cells in the lungs, leading to functional loss and 
sometimes lung transplantation. Although the origin of LAM cells is unknown, 
several features of LAM provide clues. First, LAM cells contain inactivating 
mutations in genes encoding Tsc1 or Tsc2, proteins that limit mTORC1 activity. 
Second, LAM tumors recur after lung transplantation, suggesting a metastatic 
pathogenesis. Third, LAM is found almost exclusively in women. Finally, LAM 
shares features with uterine leiomyomas, benign tumors of myometrial cells. From 
these observations, we proposed that LAM cells might originate from uterine 
leiomyomas containing Tsc mutations. To test our hypothesis, and to develop 
mouse models for leiomyoma and LAM, we targeted Tsc2 deletion primarily in 
uterine cells. In fact, nearly 100% of uteri from uterine-specific Tsc2 knockout 
mice developed myometrial proliferation and uterine leiomyomas by 12 and 24 
weeks, respectively. Myometrial proliferation and mTORC1/S6 activity were 
abrogated by the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin or by elimination of sex steroid 
production through ovariectomy or aromatase inhibition. In ovariectomized Tsc2 
null mice, mTORC1/S6 activity and myometrial growth were restored by estrogen 
but not progesterone. Thus, even without Tsc2, estrogen appears to be required 
for myometrial mTORC1/S6 signaling and proliferation. Finally, we found Tsc2 
null myometrial tumors in lungs of older Tsc2 uterine-specific knockout females, 
suggesting that lung LAM-like myometrial lesions may indeed originate from the 
uterus. This mouse model may improve our understanding of LAM and leiomyomas and 
might lead to novel therapeutic strategies for both diseases.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2013-1059
PMCID: PMC3753421
PMID: 23820898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]