---
reference_id: "PMID:38672697"
title: "Unraveling the Complexities of Oxidative Stress and Inflammation Biomarkers in Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Lavalle S
- Masiello E
- Iannella G
- Magliulo G
- Pace A
- Lechien JR
- Calvo-Henriquez C
- Cocuzza S
- Parisi FM
- Favier V
- Bahgat AY
- Cammaroto G
- La Via L
- Gagliano C
- Caranti A
- Vicini C
- Maniaci A
journal: Life (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/life14040425
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unraveling the Complexities of Oxidative Stress and Inflammation Biomarkers in Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Lavalle S, Masiello E, Iannella G, Magliulo G, Pace A, Lechien JR, Calvo-Henriquez C, Cocuzza S, Parisi FM, Favier V, Bahgat AY, Cammaroto G, La Via L, Gagliano C, Caranti A, Vicini C, Maniaci A
**Journal:** Life (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/life14040425](https://doi.org/10.3390/life14040425)

## Content

1. Life (Basel). 2024 Mar 22;14(4):425. doi: 10.3390/life14040425.

Unraveling the Complexities of Oxidative Stress and Inflammation Biomarkers in 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review.

Lavalle S(1), Masiello E(2), Iannella G(3), Magliulo G(3), Pace A(3), Lechien 
JR(4), Calvo-Henriquez C(5), Cocuzza S(6), Parisi FM(6), Favier V(7), Bahgat 
AY(8), Cammaroto G(9), La Via L(10), Gagliano C(1), Caranti A(11), Vicini C(11), 
Maniaci A(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Enna Kore, 94100 Enna, Italy.
(2)Clinical and Experimental Radiology Unit, Experimental Imaging Center, IRCCS 
San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina 60, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of 'Organi di Senso', University "Sapienza", Viale 
dell'Università, 33, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Human Anatomy and Experimental Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, 
UMONS Research Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, University of Mons, 
7022 Mons, Belgium.
(5)Service of Otolaryngology, Hospital Complex of Santiago de Compostela, 15705 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(6)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Advanced Technologies "GF 
Ingrassia", ENT Section, University of Catania, Via S. Sofia, 78, 95125 Catania, 
Italy.
(7)Service d'ORL et de Chirurgie Cervico-Faciale, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire 
de Montpellier, 80 Avenue Augustin Fliche, 34000 Montpellier, France.
(8)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Alexandria University, Alexandria 21577, 
Egypt.
(9)Department of Head-Neck Surgery, Otolaryngology, Head-Neck and Oral Surgery 
Unit, Morgagni Pierantoni Hospital, Via Carlo Forlanini, 34, 47121 Forlì, Italy.
(10)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, University Hospital 
Policlinico-San Marco, 95125 Catania, Italy.
(11)ENT and Audiology Department, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS), affecting approximately 1 
billion adults globally, is characterized by recurrent airway obstruction during 
sleep, leading to oxygen desaturation, elevated carbon dioxide levels, and 
disrupted sleep architecture. OSAS significantly impacts quality of life and is 
associated with increased morbidity and mortality, particularly in the 
cardiovascular and cognitive domains. The cyclic pattern of intermittent hypoxia 
in OSAS triggers oxidative stress, contributing to cellular damage. This review 
explores the intricate relationship between OSAS and oxidative stress, shedding 
light on molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic interventions.
METHODS: A comprehensive review spanning from 2000 to 2023 was conducted using 
the PubMed, Cochrane, and EMBASE databases. Inclusion criteria encompassed 
English articles focusing on adults or animals and reporting values for 
oxidative stress and inflammation biomarkers.
RESULTS: The review delineates the imbalance between pro-inflammatory and 
anti-inflammatory factors in OSAS, leading to heightened oxidative stress. 
Reactive oxygen species biomarkers, nitric oxide, inflammatory cytokines, 
endothelial dysfunction, and antioxidant defense mechanisms are explored in the 
context of OSAS. OSAS-related complications include cardiovascular disorders, 
neurological impairments, metabolic dysfunction, and a potential link to cancer. 
This review emphasizes the potential of antioxidant therapy as a complementary 
treatment strategy.
CONCLUSIONS: Understanding the molecular intricacies of oxidative stress in OSAS 
is crucial for developing targeted therapeutic interventions. The comprehensive 
analysis of biomarkers provides insights into the complex interplay between OSAS 
and systemic complications, offering avenues for future research and therapeutic 
advancements in this multifaceted sleep disorder.

DOI: 10.3390/life14040425
PMCID: PMC11050908
PMID: 38672697

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.