---
reference_id: "PMID:27141727"
title: DROPLET SIZE DISTRIBUTION MEASUREMENTS OF ISO NOZZLES BY SHADOWGRAPHY METHOD.
authors:
- De Cock N
- Massinon M
- Salah SO
- Mercatoris BC
- Lebeau F
journal: Commun Agric Appl Biol Sci
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DROPLET SIZE DISTRIBUTION MEASUREMENTS OF ISO NOZZLES BY SHADOWGRAPHY METHOD.
**Authors:** De Cock N, Massinon M, Salah SO, Mercatoris BC, Lebeau F
**Journal:** Commun Agric Appl Biol Sci (2015)

## Content

1. Commun Agric Appl Biol Sci. 2015;80(3):295-301.

DROPLET SIZE DISTRIBUTION MEASUREMENTS OF ISO NOZZLES BY SHADOWGRAPHY METHOD.

De Cock N, Massinon M, Salah SO, Mercatoris BC, Lebeau F.

The droplet size distribution of agricultural sprays is a key parameter during 
the plant protection product applications. Therefore, measurement of the drop 
size distribution is an important concern for spray users as well as nozzle 
manufacturers. The present work assessed the capability of a shadowgraphy 
technique to distinguish correctly the 6 spray class boundaries defined in the 
ISO draft standard (ISO 25358). The measurement set-up is composed by a high 
speed camera synchronized with a LED backlighting. The tested spray is 
positioned between the camera and the light. The droplets appear on the images 
as shadows on a brighter background. For each acquisition, two frames are 
recorded within a small time laps (38 μI. The droplet diameter and velocity are 
retrieved by using advanced image analysis algorithm on each pair of frames. 
Then, the drop size distribution is obtained by gathering the data retrieved 
from all the images. The global results showed that the 6 drop size 
distributions were correctly separated highlighting the ability of the method to 
measure small as well as large droplets using the same set-up configuration. The 
spatial analysis showed that the spray scanning should be extended in the minor 
axis direction in order to catch the whole spray.

PMID: 27141727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]