---
reference_id: "PMID:39127734"
title: The receptor VLDLR binds Eastern Equine Encephalitis virus through multiple distinct modes.
authors:
- Cao D
- Ma B
- Cao Z
- Xu X
- Zhang X
- Xiang Y
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-51293-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Binding Sites
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- "Encephalitis Virus, Eastern Equine/genetics, metabolism"
- HEK293 Cells
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Protein Binding
- "Receptors, LDL/metabolism, genetics"
- "Receptors, Virus/metabolism"
- Virus Attachment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The receptor VLDLR binds Eastern Equine Encephalitis virus through multiple distinct modes.
**Authors:** Cao D, Ma B, Cao Z, Xu X, Zhang X, Xiang Y
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-51293-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51293-x)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Aug 10;15(1):6866. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-51293-x.

The receptor VLDLR binds Eastern Equine Encephalitis virus through multiple 
distinct modes.

Cao D(#)(1), Ma B(#)(2)(3)(4), Cao Z(#)(1)(5), Xu X(2)(3)(4), Zhang X(6)(7), 
Xiang Y(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Key Laboratory of 
Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of 
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, 100101, P.R. China.
(2)Beijing Frontier Research Center for Biological Structure, Center for 
Infectious Disease Research, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing, 100084, P.R. China.
(3)SXMU-Tsinghua Collaborative Innovation Center for Frontier Medicine, Taiyuan, 
030001, P.R. China.
(4)Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, Beijing, 100084, P.R. China.
(5)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, P.R. China.
(6)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Key Laboratory of 
Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of 
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, 100101, P.R. China. 
xzzhang@ibp.ac.cn.
(7)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, P.R. China. 
xzzhang@ibp.ac.cn.
(8)Beijing Frontier Research Center for Biological Structure, Center for 
Infectious Disease Research, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing, 100084, P.R. China. yxiang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.
(9)SXMU-Tsinghua Collaborative Innovation Center for Frontier Medicine, Taiyuan, 
030001, P.R. China. yxiang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.
(10)Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, Beijing, 100084, P.R. China. 
yxiang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Eastern Equine Encephalitis virus (EEEV) is an alphavirus that can cause severe 
diseases in infected humans. The very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) 
was recently identified as a receptor of EEEV. Herein, we performed 
cryo-electron microscopy structural and biochemistry studies on the specific 
interactions between EEEV and VLDLR. Our results show that VLDLR binds EEEV at 
three different sites A, B and C through its membrane-distal LDLR class A (LA) 
repeats. Site A is located in the cleft in between the E1-E2 heterodimers. Site 
B is located near the connecting β ribbon of E2 and is in proximity to site A, 
while site C is on the domain B of E2. The binding of VLDLR LAs to EEEV is in 
complex modes, including the LA1-2 and LA3-5 mediated two major modes. 
Disruption of the LA1-2 mediated binding significantly affect the cell 
attachment of EEEV. However, the mutation W132G of VLDLR impairs the binding of 
LA3, drives the switch of the binding modes, and significantly enhances the 
attachment of EEEV to the cell. The W132G variant of VLDLR could be identified 
in human genome and SNP sequences, implying that people with similar mutations 
in VLDLR may be highly susceptible to EEEV infection.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-51293-x
PMCID: PMC11316819
PMID: 39127734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.