---
reference_id: "PMID:36070074"
title: "Inebilizumab: A Review in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder."
authors:
- Nie T
- Blair HA
journal: CNS Drugs
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s40263-022-00949-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inebilizumab: A Review in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder.
**Authors:** Nie T, Blair HA
**Journal:** CNS Drugs (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40263-022-00949-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-022-00949-7)

## Content

1. CNS Drugs. 2022 Oct;36(10):1133-1141. doi: 10.1007/s40263-022-00949-7. Epub
2022  Sep 7.

Inebilizumab: A Review in Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder.

Nie T(1), Blair HA(2).

Author information:
(1)Springer Nature, Mairangi Bay, Private Bag 65901, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand. demail@springer.com.
(2)Springer Nature, Mairangi Bay, Private Bag 65901, Auckland, 0754, New 
Zealand.

Erratum in
    CNS Drugs. 2022 Nov;36(11):1239. doi: 10.1007/s40263-022-00957-7.

Inebilizumab (Uplizna®) is a recently approved monoclonal antibody for use in 
adults with neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) who are 
anti-aquaporin-4 (AQP4) antibody seropositive. Inebilizumab targets the B cell 
antigen CD19 and effectively depletes circulating B cells, thus suppressing 
inflammatory NMOSD attacks that are potentially disabling or life-threatening. 
It is approved as an intravenous infusion in several countries. In the pivotal 
phase 2/3 N-MOmentum trial, inebilizumab reduced the risk of NMOSD attacks 
compared with placebo, including in AQP4-antibody seropositive patients. 
Inebilizumab also significantly reduced the risk of disability score worsening, 
the number of NMOSD-related hospitalisations and MRI lesion count, but had no 
significant effect on low-contrast binocular vision. The treatment effect on 
relapse risk and disability scores was sustained in inebilizumab-treated 
patients for ≥ 4 years during the open-label extension. Inebilizumab was 
generally well tolerated, with the most common adverse events being urinary 
tract infection and arthralgia. Thus, inebilizumab is an effective treatment 
option for adults with AQP4-antibody seropositive NMOSD.

Plain Language Summary: Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) is a 
chronic condition denoted by relapsing autoimmune attacks affecting the central 
nervous system, which may lead to accruing disability or death. It is frequently 
associated with anti-aquaporin-4 (AQP4) autoantibodies. In recent years, three 
new monoclonal antibody therapies have gained regulatory approval for the 
treatment of NMOSD. Inebilizumab (Uplizna®), a monoclonal antibody that targets 
B cells, is approved for use in AQP4-antibody seropositive adults as an 
intravenous infusion. Inebilizumab was effective at preventing NMOSD relapse 
compared with placebo in a pivotal phase 2/3 trial. It also prevented worsening 
of disability scores, and decreased the number of NMOSD-related hospitalisations 
and MRI lesions, but did not significantly improve low-contrast binocular 
vision. The clinical benefit of inebilizumab was maintained long-term (≥ 4 years 
in the open-label extension). Inebilizumab was generally well tolerated, with 
most adverse events being mild to moderate in severity. The most common adverse 
events were urinary tract infection and joint pain. Inebilizumab provides an 
effective option for preventing NMOSD attacks in adults who are AQP4-antibody 
seropositive.

© 2022. Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s40263-022-00949-7
PMCID: PMC9550749
PMID: 36070074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Tina Nie and Hannah Blair are salaried employees 
of Adis International Ltd/Springer Nature, and declare no relevant conflicts of 
interest. All authors contributed to the review and are responsible for the 
article content.