---
reference_id: "PMID:22795537"
title: De novo mutations in MLL cause Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome.
authors:
- Jones WD
- Dafou D
- McEntagart M
- Woollard WJ
- Elmslie FV
- Holder-Espinasse M
- Irving M
- Saggar AK
- Smithson S
- Trembath RC
- Deshpande C
- Simpson MA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De novo mutations in MLL cause Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome.
**Authors:** Jones WD, Dafou D, McEntagart M, Woollard WJ, Elmslie FV, Holder-Espinasse M, Irving M, Saggar AK, Smithson S, Trembath RC, Deshpande C, Simpson MA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.008)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Aug 10;91(2):358-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.008.
Epub  2012 Jul 12.

De novo mutations in MLL cause Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome.

Jones WD(1), Dafou D, McEntagart M, Woollard WJ, Elmslie FV, Holder-Espinasse M, 
Irving M, Saggar AK, Smithson S, Trembath RC, Deshpande C, Simpson MA.

Author information:
(1)South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George's Hospital, University 
of London, London SW17 0RE, UK.

Excessive growth of terminal hair around the elbows (hypertrichosis cubiti) has 
been reported both in isolation and in association with a variable spectrum of 
associated phenotypic features. We identified a cohort of six individuals with 
hypertrichosis cubiti associated with short stature, intellectual disability, 
and a distinctive facial appearance, consistent with a diagnosis of 
Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome (WSS). Utilizing a whole-exome sequencing approach, 
we identified de novo mutations in MLL in five of the six individuals. MLL 
encodes a histone methyltransferase that regulates chromatin-mediated 
transcription through the catalysis of methylation of histone H3K4. Each of the 
five mutations is predicted to result in premature termination of the protein 
product. Furthermore, we demonstrate that transcripts arising from the mutant 
alleles are subject to nonsense-mediated decay. These findings define the 
genetic basis of WSS, provide additional evidence for the role of 
haploinsufficency of histone-modification enzymes in multiple-congenital-anomaly 
syndromes, and further illustrate the importance of the regulation of histone 
modification in development.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.008
PMCID: PMC3415539
PMID: 22795537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]