---
reference_id: PMID:31159914
title: Invasive Fungal Infection.
authors:
- von Lilienfeld-Toal M
- Wagener J
- Einsele H
- Cornely OA
- Kurzai O
journal: Dtsch Arztebl Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2019.0271
keywords:
- Antifungal Agents/therapeutic use
- Aspergillus
- Candida
- Humans
- Incidence
- Invasive Fungal Infections/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Invasive Fungal Infection.
**Authors:** von Lilienfeld-Toal M, Wagener J, Einsele H, Cornely OA, Kurzai O
**Journal:** Dtsch Arztebl Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3238/arztebl.2019.0271](https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2019.0271)

## Content

1. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2019 Apr 19;116(16):271-278. doi:
10.3238/arztebl.2019.0271.

Invasive Fungal Infection.

von Lilienfeld-Toal M(1), Wagener J, Einsele H, Cornely OA, Kurzai O.

Author information:
(1)National Reference Center for Invasive Fungal Infections, Leibniz Institute 
for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute (HKI), 
Jena; Clinic of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital Jena; Institute for 
Hygiene and Microbiology, University of Würzburg, Chair of Medical Microbiology 
and Mycology, Würzburg; Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital 
of Würzburg; InfectControl 2020, Jena/Würzburg; Cologne Excellence Cluster on 
Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Department I of 
Internal Medicine, at the University Hospital of Cologne, European Excellence 
Center for Medical Mycology (ECMM), DGerman Center for Infection Research(DZIF) 
Partner Site Bonn Köln, Cologne University.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of invasive fungal infection is approximately 6 cases 
per 100 000 persons per year. It is estimated that only half of such infections 
are detected during the patient's lifetime, making this one of the more common 
overlooked causes of death in intensive-care patients. The low detection rate is 
due in part to the complexity of the diagnostic work-up, in which the clinical, 
radiological, and microbiological findings must be considered. Fungi with 
resistance to antimycotic drugs have been found to be on the rise around the 
world.
METHODS: This review is based on pertinent publications retrieved from a 
selective search in PubMed, with special attention to guidelines on the 
diagnosis and treatment of invasive fungal infections caused by Candida spp., 
Aspergillus spp., Mucorales, and Fusarium spp.
RESULTS: The clinical risk factors for invasive fungal infection include, among 
others, congenital immune deficiency, protracted (>10 days) marked 
granulocytopenia (<0.5 x 109/L), allogeneic stem-cell transplantation, and 
treatment with immunosuppressive drugs or corticosteroids. High-risk groups 
include patients in intensive care and those with structural pulmonary disease 
and/or compli- cated influenza. The first line of treatment, supported by the 
findings of randomized clinical trials, consists of echinocandins for in- 
fections with Candida spp. (candidemia response rates: 75.6% for anidulafungin 
vs. 60.2% for fluconazole) and azole antimycotic drugs for infections with 
Aspergillus spp. (response rates: 52.8% for voriconazole vs. 31.6% for 
conventional amphotericin B). The recommended first-line treatment also depends 
on the local epidemiology. This challenge should be met by interdisciplinary 
collaboration. Therapeutic decision-making should also take account of the often 
severe undesired effects of antimycotic drugs (including impairment of hepatic 
and/or renal function) and the numerous interactions that some of them have with 
other drugs.
CONCLUSION: Invasive fungal infections are often overlooked in routine hospital 
care. They should be incorporated into antimicro- bial stewardship programs as 
an essential component. There is also a pressing need for the development of new 
classes of antimycotic drug.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2019.0271
PMCID: PMC6549129
PMID: 31159914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]