---
reference_id: "PMID:27306639"
title: Systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Kaul A
- Gordon C
- Crow MK
- Touma Z
- Urowitz MB
- van Vollenhoven R
- Ruiz-Irastorza G
- Hughes G
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.39
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Arthralgia/etiology
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Comorbidity
- Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions/complications
- Endogenous Retroviruses/pathogenicity
- Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/complications
- Fatigue/etiology
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Quality of Life/psychology
- Risk Factors
- Smoking/adverse effects
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Kaul A, Gordon C, Crow MK, Touma Z, Urowitz MB, van Vollenhoven R, Ruiz-Irastorza G, Hughes G
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2016.39](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2016.39)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 Jun 16;2:16039. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.39.

Systemic lupus erythematosus.

Kaul A(1), Gordon C(2), Crow MK(3), Touma Z(4), Urowitz MB(4), van Vollenhoven
R(5), Ruiz-Irastorza G(6), Hughes G(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, St. George's, University of London, Cranmer
Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK.
(2)Rheumatology Research Group, Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, College of
Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(3)Mary Kirkland Center for Lupus Research, Hospital for Special Surgery, New
York, New York, USA.
(4)University of Toronto Lupus Clinic, Toronto Western Hospital, Centre for
Prognosis Studies in the Rheumatic Diseases, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Unit for Clinical Therapy Research, Inflammatory Diseases (ClinTRID),
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Autoimmune Diseases Research Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, BioCruces
Health Research Institute, Hospital Universitario Cruces, University of the
Basque Country, Bizkaia, Spain.
(7)The London Lupus Centre, London Bridge Hospital, London, UK.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease that can affect many
organs, including the skin, joints, the central nervous system and the kidneys.
Women of childbearing age and certain racial groups are typically predisposed to
developing the condition. Rare, inherited, single-gene complement deficiencies
are strongly associated with SLE, but the disease is inherited in a polygenic
manner in most patients. Genetic interactions with environmental factors,
particularly UV light exposure, Epstein-Barr virus infection and hormonal
factors, might initiate the disease, resulting in immune dysregulation at the
level of cytokines, T cells, B cells and macrophages. Diagnosis is primarily
clinical and remains challenging because of the heterogeneity of SLE.
Classification criteria have aided clinical trials, but, despite this, only one
drug (that is, belimumab) has been approved for use in SLE in the past 60 years.
The 10-year mortality has improved and toxic adverse effects of older
medications such as cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids have been partially
offset by newer drugs such as mycophenolate mofetil and glucocorticoid-sparing
regimes. However, further improvements have been hampered by the adverse effects
of renal and neuropsychiatric involvement and late diagnosis. Adding to this
burden is the increased risk of premature cardiovascular disease in SLE together
with the risk of infection made worse by immunosuppressive therapy. Challenges
remain with treatment-resistant disease and symptoms such as fatigue. Newer
therapies may bring hope of better outcomes, and the refinement to stem cell and
genetic techniques might offer a cure in the future.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2016.39
PMID: 27306639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
