---
reference_id: "PMID:38042508"
title: Proteomic analysis of X-linked dystonia parkinsonism disease striatal neurons reveals altered RNA metabolism and splicing.
authors:
- Tshilenge KT
- Bons J
- Aguirre CG
- Geronimo-Olvera C
- Shah S
- Rose J
- Gerencser AA
- Mak SK
- Ehrlich ME
- Bragg DC
- Schilling B
- Ellerby LM
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2023.106367
keywords:
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked"
- Transcription Factor TFIID/genetics
- Neurons/metabolism
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/metabolism
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Dystonic Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- "Dystonia/genetics, metabolism"
- Proteomics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteomic analysis of X-linked dystonia parkinsonism disease striatal neurons reveals altered RNA metabolism and splicing.
**Authors:** Tshilenge KT, Bons J, Aguirre CG, Geronimo-Olvera C, Shah S, Rose J, Gerencser AA, Mak SK, Ehrlich ME, Bragg DC, Schilling B, Ellerby LM
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2023.106367](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2023.106367)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2024 Jan;190:106367. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2023.106367. Epub 2023 
Nov 30.

Proteomic analysis of X-linked dystonia parkinsonism disease striatal neurons 
reveals altered RNA metabolism and splicing.

Tshilenge KT(1), Bons J(1), Aguirre CG(2), Geronimo-Olvera C(1), Shah S(1), Rose 
J(1), Gerencser AA(1), Mak SK(1), Ehrlich ME(3), Bragg DC(4), Schilling B(5), 
Ellerby LM(6).

Author information:
(1)The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, California 94945, USA.
(2)The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, California 94945, USA; 
University of Southern California, Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, 3715 
McClintock Ave, Los Angeles, CA 90893, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Neurology, The Collaborative Center for 
X-linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, 
USA.
(5)The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, California 94945, USA; 
University of Southern California, Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, 3715 
McClintock Ave, Los Angeles, CA 90893, USA. Electronic address: 
bschilling@buckinstitute.org.
(6)The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, California 94945, USA; 
University of Southern California, Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, 3715 
McClintock Ave, Los Angeles, CA 90893, USA. Electronic address: 
lellerby@buckinstitute.org.

X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (XDP) is a rare neurodegenerative disease endemic 
to the Philippines. The genetic cause for XDP is an insertion of a SINE-VNTR-Alu 
(SVA)-type retrotransposon within intron 32 of TATA-binding protein associated 
factor 1 (TAF1) that causes an alteration of TAF1 splicing, partial intron 
retention, and decreased transcription. Although TAF1 is expressed in all 
organs, medium spiny neurons (MSNs) within the striatum are one of the cell 
types most affected in XDP. To define how mutations in the TAF1 gene lead to MSN 
vulnerability, we carried out a proteomic analysis of human XDP patient-derived 
neural stem cells (NSCs) and MSNs derived from induced pluripotent stem cells. 
NSCs and MSNs were grown in parallel and subjected to quantitative proteomic 
analysis in data-independent acquisition mode on the Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid 
mass spectrometer. Subsequent functional enrichment analysis demonstrated that 
neurodegenerative disease-related pathways, such as Huntington's disease, 
spinocerebellar ataxia, cellular senescence, mitochondrial function and RNA 
binding metabolism, were highly represented. We used weighted coexpression 
network analysis (WGCNA) of the NSC and MSN proteomic data set to uncover 
disease-driving network modules. Three of the modules significantly correlated 
with XDP genotype when compared to the non-affected control and were enriched 
for DNA helicase and nuclear chromatin assembly, mitochondrial disassembly, RNA 
location and mRNA processing. Consistent with aberrant mRNA processing, we found 
splicing and intron retention of TAF1 intron 32 in XDP MSN. We also identified 
TAF1 as one of the top enriched transcription factors, along with YY1, ATF2, 
USF1 and MYC. Notably, YY1 has been implicated in genetic forms of dystonia. 
Overall, our proteomic data set constitutes a valuable resource to understand 
mechanisms relevant to TAF1 dysregulation and to identify new therapeutic 
targets for XDP.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2023.106367
PMCID: PMC11103251
PMID: 38042508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
have no competing interests.