---
reference_id: "PMID:7654792"
title: Epidemiology of early-onset schizophrenia.
authors:
- Häfner H
- Nowotny B
journal: Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1007/BF02190734
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of early-onset schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Häfner H, Nowotny B
**Journal:** Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02190734](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02190734)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1995;245(2):80-92. doi: 10.1007/BF02190734.

Epidemiology of early-onset schizophrenia.

Häfner H, Nowotny B.

A total of 232 (84%) first episodes of schizophrenia from our epidemiologically 
defined ABC sample (Age, Beginning and Course) were retrospectively assessed 
with regard to the onset and early course of the disorder. In a follow-up study 
a representative subgroup (n = 133) was prospectively examined in five cross 
sections over 3 years from first admission on. Population-based incidence rates 
for 5-year age groups comprising a range of < 10 - < 60 years were calculated on 
the basis of two definitions of onset: first sign of disorder and first 
psychotic symptom. In 40% of adult patients who had been admitted with a first 
schizophrenic episode after age 20 years the prodromal phase, in 11% the 
psychotic prephase, began before that age. This demonstrates that schizophrenia 
often begins in an age period in which the social and cognitive development and 
brain maturation are still unfinished. Early-onset schizophrenias (< or = 20 
years) were compared with a medium-onset group (21 - < 35 years) and a 
late-onset group (35 - < 60 years) with regard to age and type of onset, early 
symptom-related course, social development and social course. The number of 
schizophrenia-specific positive and negative syndromes in early-onset 
schizophrenia is comparable to that of higher age groups. However, neurotic 
syndromes, emotional disorders and conduct disorders are most frequent in 
younger patients, especially in young men. Paranoid syndromes seem to prevail in 
late-onset schizophrenia, whereas less differentiated positive syndromes, such 
as delusional mood, are more frequent in the youngest age group. An earlier 
onset of schizophrenia has more severe social consequences than onset in adults, 
because it interrupts the cognitive and social development at an earlier stage. 
The worse social course of schizophrenia in men compared with women cannot be 
related to a more severe symptomatology, but to the earlier age at onset and the 
impairment or stagnation of social ascent at an earlier stage of social and 
cognitive development. Social disability in the sense of an adaptation to the 
expectations of the social environment, as well as symptomatology during the 
further course of schizophrenia, show no major differences between the genders 
nor between the age groups.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02190734
PMID: 7654792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]