---
reference_id: "PMID:30213483"
title: Abnormal steroidogenesis and aromatase activity in preeclampsia.
authors:
- Berkane N
- Liere P
- Lefevre G
- Alfaidy N
- Nahed RA
- Vincent J
- Oudinet JP
- Pianos A
- Cambourg A
- Rozenberg P
- Galichon P
- Rousseau A
- Simon T
- Schumacher M
- Chabbert-Buffet N
- Hertig A
journal: Placenta
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2018.07.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal steroidogenesis and aromatase activity in preeclampsia.
**Authors:** Berkane N, Liere P, Lefevre G, Alfaidy N, Nahed RA, Vincent J, Oudinet JP, Pianos A, Cambourg A, Rozenberg P, Galichon P, Rousseau A, Simon T, Schumacher M, Chabbert-Buffet N, Hertig A
**Journal:** Placenta (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.placenta.2018.07.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.placenta.2018.07.004)

## Content

1. Placenta. 2018 Sep;69:40-49. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2018.07.004. Epub 2018
Jul  7.

Abnormal steroidogenesis and aromatase activity in preeclampsia.

Berkane N(1), Liere P(2), Lefevre G(3), Alfaidy N(4), Nahed RA(4), Vincent J(5), 
Oudinet JP(2), Pianos A(2), Cambourg A(2), Rozenberg P(6), Galichon P(7), 
Rousseau A(8), Simon T(8), Schumacher M(2), Chabbert-Buffet N(9), Hertig A(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics and Reproductive Medicine, Assistance 
Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP), Sorbonne University, Paris, France; 
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of Geneva Hospitals (HUG), 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)U1195 INSERM and University Paris-Sud, Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Hormonology, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux 
de Paris (APHP), Sorbonne University, Paris, France.
(4)U1036 INSERM, Biosciences and Biotechnology Institute, Grenoble, France.
(5)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of Geneva Hospitals 
(HUG), Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Poissy-Saint Germain Hospital, 
Poissy, France.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP), 
Sorbonne University, Tenon Hospital, Paris, France.
(8)Department of Clinical Research Center-Est (URCEST), St. Antoine Hospital, 
Paris, France.
(9)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics and Reproductive Medicine, Assistance 
Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP), Sorbonne University, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Nephrology, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP), 
Sorbonne University, Tenon Hospital, Paris, France. Electronic address: 
alexandre.hertig@aphp.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Estrogens and progesterone play critical roles in angiogenesis and 
vasodilation. Moreover, placental aromatase deficiency is detected in women with 
preeclampsia (PE) at delivery. We hypothesized that abnormal steroidogenesis 
occurs much earlier than typical PE diagnosis. Thus, we investigated whether the 
circulating steroid profile was already disturbed at 24-29 weeks of gestation in 
women with subsequent PE, and compared the profile with that of women with 
"placental" small gestational age (SGA) without PE.
METHODS: We selected nulliparous women (n = 90) from the MOMA trial, including 
women with PE (n = 25), SGA (n = 25), and controls (NP; n = 40), for plasma 
steroid profiling by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry and to measure 
placental growth factor and soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1. Placental 
aromatase expression was evaluated in a new set of women.
RESULTS: Compared with that of controls, the women with PE had a significantly 
lower estrone/androstenedione ratio, and exhibited a decreasing trend for 
estradiol and estrone levels. Lower estriol levels were observed in the SGA 
group compared to the NP group. Compared with that of controls, the women with 
PE and SGA had significantly higher levels of 20α-dihydroprogesterone (20α-DHP) 
and 20α-DHP/progesterone ratios. Pregnenolone sulfate levels were lower in the 
PE group than in the NP and SGA groups. Decreased expression of aromatase was 
observed in the PE group compared to the control group.
DISCUSSION: Preeclampsia appears to be characterized by specific steroidogenesis 
dysregulation long before PE diagnosis, highlighting potential new biomarkers of 
PE.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.placenta.2018.07.004
PMID: 30213483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]