---
reference_id: "PMID:10781099"
title: "A decamer duplication in the 3' region of the BRI gene originates an amyloid peptide that is associated with dementia in a Danish kindred."
authors:
- Vidal R
- Revesz T
- Rostagno A
- Kim E
- Holton JL
- Bek T
- Bojsen-Møller M
- Braendgaard H
- Plant G
- Ghiso J
- Frangione B
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.080076097
keywords:
- "3' Untranslated Regions/genetics"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Amyloid/analysis, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- "Dementia/genetics, pathology"
- Denmark
- Female
- Gene Duplication
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Glycoproteins
- Membrane Proteins
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Temporal Lobe/blood supply, pathology"
- White People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A decamer duplication in the 3' region of the BRI gene originates an amyloid peptide that is associated with dementia in a Danish kindred.
**Authors:** Vidal R, Revesz T, Rostagno A, Kim E, Holton JL, Bek T, Bojsen-Møller M, Braendgaard H, Plant G, Ghiso J, Frangione B
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.080076097](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.080076097)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Apr 25;97(9):4920-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.080076097.

A decamer duplication in the 3' region of the BRI gene originates an amyloid 
peptide that is associated with dementia in a Danish kindred.

Vidal R(1), Revesz T, Rostagno A, Kim E, Holton JL, Bek T, Bojsen-Møller M, 
Braendgaard H, Plant G, Ghiso J, Frangione B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York 
10016, USA. vidalr01@popmail.med.nyu.edu

Familial Danish dementia (FDD), also known as heredopathia 
ophthalmo-oto-encephalica, is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by 
cataracts, deafness, progressive ataxia, and dementia. Neuropathological 
findings include severe widespread cerebral amyloid angiopathy, hippocampal 
plaques, and neurofibrillary tangles, similar to Alzheimer's disease. N-terminal 
sequence analysis of isolated leptomeningeal amyloid fibrils revealed homology 
to ABri, the peptide originated by a point mutation at the stop codon of gene 
BRI in familial British dementia. Molecular genetic analysis of the BRI gene in 
the Danish kindred showed a different defect, namely the presence of a 10-nt 
duplication (795-796insTTTAATTTGT) between codons 265 and 266, one codon before 
the normal stop codon 267. The decamer duplication mutation produces a 
frame-shift in the BRI sequence generating a larger-than-normal precursor 
protein, of which the amyloid subunit (designated ADan) comprises the last 34 
C-terminal amino acids. This de novo-created amyloidogenic peptide, associated 
with a genetic defect in the Danish kindred, stresses the importance of amyloid 
formation as a causative factor in neurodegeneration and dementia.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.080076097
PMCID: PMC18333
PMID: 10781099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]