---
reference_id: "PMID:39515456"
title: "PRPH2-ASSOCIATED RETINAL DISEASES: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF PHENOTYPIC FINDINGS."
authors:
- AlAshwal SM
- Yassin SH
- Kalaw FGP
- Borooah S
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2024.10.025
keywords:
- Humans
- Phenotype
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/pathology
- "Peripherins/genetics, metabolism"
- Fluorescein Angiography
- "Retinal Diseases/genetics, diagnosis"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PRPH2-ASSOCIATED RETINAL DISEASES: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF PHENOTYPIC FINDINGS.
**Authors:** AlAshwal SM, Yassin SH, Kalaw FGP, Borooah S
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajo.2024.10.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajo.2024.10.025)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2025 Mar;271:7-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2024.10.025. Epub 2024
Nov 6.

PRPH2-ASSOCIATED RETINAL DISEASES: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF PHENOTYPIC FINDINGS.

AlAshwal SM(1), Yassin SH(1), Kalaw FGP(1), Borooah S(2).

Author information:
(1)Shiley Eye Institute, University of California, La Jolla, California, USA.
(2)Shiley Eye Institute, University of California, La Jolla, California, USA.
Electronic address: sborooah@health.ucsd.edu.

PURPOSE: PRPH2-associated retinal diseases (PARD) result from pathogenic PRPH2
variants, primarily affecting photoreceptor outer segments and retinal pigment
epithelium. The focus of this article is to review and discuss the phenotyping
of PARD subtypes.
DESIGN: A systematic review.
METHODS: The review followed PRISMA 2020 guidelines with searches on PubMed,
Medline, Web of Science, Google Scholar, and Cochrane Library. Eligible studies
were those which discussed molecularly confirmed PARD or described associated
diseases such as butterfly pattern dystrophy.
INCLUSION: cross-sectional, cohort, case-control studies, book chapters.
EXCLUSION: non-English, conference papers, non-peer-reviewed, or non-full text
articles.
RESULTS: PARD is responsible for 25% of pattern dystrophy and up to 5% of
inherited retinal dystrophies. There is clear evidence of phenotypic variability
between individuals carrying the same pathogenic variant. Fundus
autofluorescence, fluorescein angiography, optical coherence tomography, while
in research adaptive optics reveal detailed phenotypic characteristics, notably
in retinal pigment epithelium changes and photoreceptor disruption. The
phenotypic of PARD variability presents diagnostic challenges, with phenotypic
features often overlapping with other retinal diseases including age-related
macular degeneration, Stargardt disease, and retinitis pigmentosa.
CONCLUSIONS: This review emphasizes revising diagnostic criteria by
incorporating more recent imaging techniques and confirming diagnosis with the
use of genetic testing. Understanding phenotypic diversity and intrafamilial
variability in PARD is crucial for developing new treatments and for patient
prognosis and future research should focus on larger cohorts studying
genotype-phenotype correlations.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2024.10.025
PMID: 39515456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
