---
reference_id: "PMID:22104079"
title: Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma--an update on treatment.
authors:
- Mirarabshahii P
- Pillai K
- Chua TC
- Pourgholami MH
- Morris DL
journal: Cancer Treat Rev
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2011.10.006
keywords:
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Humans
- "Mesothelioma/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
- "Peritoneal Neoplasms/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma--an update on treatment.
**Authors:** Mirarabshahii P, Pillai K, Chua TC, Pourgholami MH, Morris DL
**Journal:** Cancer Treat Rev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ctrv.2011.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctrv.2011.10.006)

## Content

1. Cancer Treat Rev. 2012 Oct;38(6):605-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2011.10.006. Epub
 2011 Nov 21.

Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma--an update on treatment.

Mirarabshahii P(1), Pillai K, Chua TC, Pourgholami MH, Morris DL.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, St. George Hospital,
Sydney, Australia.

Mesotheliomas are aggressive and lethal neoplasms arising from mesothelial cells
lining the pleura, peritoneum, tunica vaginalis testis and pericardium.
Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma accounts for about 30% of all mesotheliomas.
Asbestos is the main known cause of the disease. Presenting symptoms in these
patients include: ascites, abdominal pain, asthenia, weight loss, anorexia,
abdominal mass, fever, diarrhea and vomiting. Electron microscopy,
immunohistochemistry, computed tomography scan, echotomography, magnetic
resonance imaging, positron emission tomography and laparoscopy are used in
diagnosis and follow-up. Chemotherapy alone is considered as a palliative
treatment for these patients who are not eligible for radical surgery. The most
promising non-surgical approach today in the management of peritoneal
mesothelioma is the use of the combination chemotherapy regime of an antifolate
(pemetrexed and raltitrexed) and a platinum based (cisplatin) agent with a
median survival of about 12-14 months. Due to peritoneal confinement of
malignant mesothelioma and low occurrence of metastasis, a locoregional approach
consisting of cytoreductive surgery and perioperative intraperitoneal
chemotherapy has been introduced as a curative treatment option over the last
decade with an overall 5-year survival rate of 29-63%. In this locoregional
approach, surgery can separate the adhesions and remove the bulky tumor, leaving
microscopic residual tumors much more susceptible to the killing effect of
chemotherapeutic drugs. Here in St. George hospital, cytoreductive surgery and
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (using cisplatin and doxorubicin)
resulted in significant survival advantage. This article describes how the
prognosis of the disease has changed over the last decade.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2011.10.006
PMID: 22104079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
