---
reference_id: "PMID:28290622"
title: "Melanoma and melanocytic nevi in pediatric patients: a single institution experience."
authors:
- Sgubbi P
- Savoia F
- Dika E
- Neri I
- Fanti PA
- Patrizi A
journal: G Ital Dermatol Venereol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.23736/S0392-0488.17.05521-3
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Melanoma/epidemiology, surgery"
- "Nevus, Epithelioid and Spindle Cell/epidemiology, surgery"
- "Nevus, Pigmented/epidemiology, surgery"
- "Referral and Consultation/statistics & numerical data"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Melanoma and melanocytic nevi in pediatric patients: a single institution experience.
**Authors:** Sgubbi P, Savoia F, Dika E, Neri I, Fanti PA, Patrizi A
**Journal:** G Ital Dermatol Venereol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S0392-0488.17.05521-3](https://doi.org/10.23736/S0392-0488.17.05521-3)

## Content

1. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2019 Feb;154(1):14-17. doi: 
10.23736/S0392-0488.17.05521-3. Epub 2017 Mar 14.

Melanoma and melanocytic nevi in pediatric patients: a single institution 
experience.

Sgubbi P(1), Savoia F(2), Dika E(1), Neri I(1), Fanti PA(1), Patrizi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Dermatology, Department of Specialist, Diagnostic and Experimental 
Medicine, Sant'Orsola-Malpighi Policlinic, University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.
(2)Unit of Dermatology, AUSL della Romagna, Umberto I Hospital of Lugo, Ravenna, 
Italy - francescosavoia76@virgilio.it.

BACKGROUND: Melanoma is an infrequent neoplasm in children and adolescents. The 
number of consultancies for melanocytic nevi control in the pediatric population 
is increased by the major anxiety of parents and pediatricians.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review was performed in order to evaluate the 
incidence rate of melanoma, Spitz nevi, congenital and acquired melanocytic nevi 
in patients aged 14 years or less and referred to our institution from April 
2010 to September 2015.
RESULTS: A total of 32,755 dermatologic pediatric consultancies were performed 
in the considered 66 months period, including 4260 patients referred for mole 
control (13%). During the same period, a total of 5193 excisions of melanocytic 
lesions were performed (adults and pediatric patients), 259 of which were 
performed in 250 patients aged 14 years or less (4.98%). Only 1 in situ melanoma 
of the nail matrix was detected in a 12-year-old female patient (0.38% of 
surgical excisions). The number needed to excise (NNE) in our pediatric 
population, calculated by comparing the total number of excised lesions and the 
number of melanomas found, was 259.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data leads to 3 major observations: 1) the rarity of melanoma 
in patients with 14 years of age or less is confirmed; 2) the number of 
excisions performed in this pediatric population is extremely high; 3) neither 
the cases of melanoma and atypical Spitz neoplasm (ASN) nor the majority of 
Spitz nevi were referred to us for a generic mole control. Mole controls in the 
pediatric population should be properly addressed, incrementing the attention on 
specific suspicious cutaneous lesions.

DOI: 10.23736/S0392-0488.17.05521-3
PMID: 28290622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]