---
reference_id: "PMID:16961127"
title: "Skull base abnormalities in osteogenesis imperfecta: a cephalometric evaluation of 54 patients and 108 control volunteers."
authors:
- Kovero O
- Pynnönen S
- Kuurila-Svahn K
- Kaitila I
- Waltimo-Sirén J
journal: J Neurosurg
year: '2006'
doi: 10.3171/jns.2006.105.3.361
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Cephalometry/methods
- Female
- Foramen Magnum
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/pathology
- Platybasia/pathology
- Skull Base/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skull base abnormalities in osteogenesis imperfecta: a cephalometric evaluation of 54 patients and 108 control volunteers.
**Authors:** Kovero O, Pynnönen S, Kuurila-Svahn K, Kaitila I, Waltimo-Sirén J
**Journal:** J Neurosurg (2006)
**DOI:** [10.3171/jns.2006.105.3.361](https://doi.org/10.3171/jns.2006.105.3.361)

## Content

1. J Neurosurg. 2006 Sep;105(3):361-70. doi: 10.3171/jns.2006.105.3.361.

Skull base abnormalities in osteogenesis imperfecta: a cephalometric evaluation 
of 54 patients and 108 control volunteers.

Kovero O(1), Pynnönen S, Kuurila-Svahn K, Kaitila I, Waltimo-Sirén J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Radiology, Institute of Dentistry, University of Helsinki, 
Finland.

Comment in
    J Neurosurg. 2006 Sep;105(3):359; discussion 359-60. doi: 
10.3171/jns.2006.105.3.359.

OBJECT: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), which usually results from mutations in 
type I collagen genes, causes bone fragility and deformities. The head is often 
abnormally shaped, and changes in skull base anatomy in the form of basilar 
impression and basilar invagination have been reported. The authors analyzed the 
skull base anatomy on standardized lateral cephalograms from 54 patients with OI 
(Types I, III, and IV) and 108 control volunteers. They were surprised to find 
that the previously used diagnostic measures for basilar abnormality in patients 
with OI were exceeded in 6.5 to 7.4% of the controls, and hence needed to be 
reevaluated.
METHODS: The authors calculated the distance from the odontoid process to four 
reference lines, including a novel one, in the controls. The normal mean 
distances were exceeded by more than two standard deviations (SDs) in 28.3 to 
35.2%, and by more than three SDs in 13.2 to 16.6% of the patients with OI. The 
latter figures reliably reflect the prevalence of basilar impression. As a sign 
of basilar invagination the odontoid process protruded into the foramen magnum 
or reached the foramen magnum level in 22.2% of the patients with OI, whereas 
none of the controls showed this feature. Platybasia (an anterior cranial base 
angle > 146 degrees) was present in 11.1% of the patients but in none of the 
controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Platybasia, basilar impression, and basilar invagination were often 
coexpressed, but each was also present as an isolated abnormality. These three 
abnormalities and wormian bones were predominantly found in OI Types III and IV 
as well as in patients exhibiting dentinal abnormality.

DOI: 10.3171/jns.2006.105.3.361
PMID: 16961127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]