---
reference_id: "PMID:38231397"
title: "Anxiety and depression symptoms among patients with long COVID: a retrospective cohort study."
authors:
- Sauer MC
- Barlow PB
- Comellas AP
- Garg A
journal: Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00406-023-01740-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anxiety and depression symptoms among patients with long COVID: a retrospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Sauer MC, Barlow PB, Comellas AP, Garg A
**Journal:** Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00406-023-01740-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-023-01740-5)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2024 Dec;274(8):1879-1886. doi: 
10.1007/s00406-023-01740-5. Epub 2024 Jan 17.

Anxiety and depression symptoms among patients with long COVID: a retrospective 
cohort study.

Sauer MC(1), Barlow PB(2)(3), Comellas AP(3)(4), Garg A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Division of General 
Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Drive, Iowa City, IA, 52242, 
USA. mcsr@uiowa.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Division of General 
Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Drive, Iowa City, IA, 52242, 
USA.
(3)Institute for Clinical and Translational Science, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, USA.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

Patients suffering from post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC) have a higher 
prevalence of anxiety and depression than the general population. The long-term 
trajectory of these sequelae is still unfolding. To assess the burden of anxiety 
and depression among patients presenting to the University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics (UIHC) post-COVID-19 clinic, we analyzed how patient factors influenced 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7) and Patient Health Questionnaire-9 
(PHQ-9) scores. In this retrospective cohort study, the GAD-7 and PHQ-9 
questionnaire scores of patients presenting to the UIHC post-COVID clinic 
between March 2021-February 2022 (N = 455) were compared to the scores of a 
sample of patients presenting to the general internal medicine (GIM) clinic 
during the same period (N = 94). Our analysis showed that patients with an 
absent history of depression on their electronic medical record (EMR) problem 
list scored significantly higher on the GAD-7 (mean difference -1.62, 95% CI 
-3.12 to -0.12, p = 0.034) and PHQ-9 (mean difference -4.45, 95% CI -5.53 to 
-3.37, p < 0.001) questionnaires compared to their similar counterparts in the 
GIM clinic. On the other hand, patients with an absent history of anxiety on 
their EMR problem list scored significantly higher on the GAD-7 (mean difference 
-2.90, 95% CI -4.0 to -1.80, p < 0.001) but not on the PHQ-9 questionnaire 
(p = 0.196). Overall, patients with PASC may have experienced a heavier burden 
of newly manifest anxiety and depression symptoms compared to patients seen in 
the GIM clinic. This suggests that the mental health impacts of PASC may be more 
pronounced in patients with no prior history of anxiety or depression.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany.

DOI: 10.1007/s00406-023-01740-5
PMID: 38231397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: On behalf of 
all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of 
interest.