---
reference_id: "PMID:31023660"
title: GJA1 Variants Cause Spastic Paraplegia Associated with Cerebral Hypomyelination.
authors:
- Saint-Val L
- Courtin T
- Charles P
- Verny C
- Catala M
- Schiffmann R
- Boespflug-Tanguy O
- Mochel F
journal: AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A6036
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain/pathology
- Connexin 43/genetics
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Eye Abnormalities/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neuroimaging
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/genetics, pathology"
- "Syndactyly/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Tooth Abnormalities/complications, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GJA1 Variants Cause Spastic Paraplegia Associated with Cerebral Hypomyelination.
**Authors:** Saint-Val L, Courtin T, Charles P, Verny C, Catala M, Schiffmann R, Boespflug-Tanguy O, Mochel F
**Journal:** AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3174/ajnr.A6036](https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A6036)

## Content

1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2019 May;40(5):788-791. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A6036. Epub 
2019 Apr 25.

GJA1 Variants Cause Spastic Paraplegia Associated with Cerebral Hypomyelination.

Saint-Val L(1), Courtin T(1), Charles P(1), Verny C(2), Catala M(3)(4), 
Schiffmann R(5), Boespflug-Tanguy O(6), Mochel F(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Genetics (L.S.-V., T.C., P.C., F.M.).
(2)Department of Neurology and Reference Center for Neurogenetic Diseases 
(C.V.), Angers University Hospital, Angers, France.
(3)Department of Neurology (M.C.), Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, La 
Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Université (M.C.), Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 
7622, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale ERL 1156, 
Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine, Paris, France.
(5)Baylor Scott & White Research Institute (R.S.), Dallas, Texas.
(6)Department of Neuropediatrics and Reference Center for Leukodystrophy and 
Leukoencephalopathy (O.B.-T.), Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 
Robert-Debré University Hospital, Paris, France.
(7)From the Department of Genetics (L.S.-V., T.C., P.C., F.M.) 
fanny.mochel@upmc.fr.
(8)Reference Center for Adult Neurometabolic Diseases (F.M.).
(9)Groupe de Recherche Clinique No. 13, Neurométabolisme (F.M.), Sorbonne 
Université, Paris, France.
(10)Sorbonne Université (F.M.), Université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie-Paris 6, UMR S 
1127 and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U 1127, and 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 7225, and Brain and Spine 
Institute, F-75013, Paris, France.

Oculodentodigital dysplasia is an autosomal dominant disorder due to GJA1 
variants characterized by dysmorphic features. Neurologic symptoms have been 
described in some patients but without a clear neuroimaging pattern. To 
understand the pathophysiology underlying neurologic deficits in 
oculodentodigital dysplasia, we studied 8 consecutive patients presenting with 
hereditary spastic paraplegia due to GJA1 variants. Clinical disease severity 
was highly variable. Cerebral MR imaging revealed variable white matter 
abnormalities, consistent with a hypomyelination pattern, and bilateral 
hypointense signal of the basal ganglia on T2-weighted images and/or magnetic 
susceptibility sequences, as seen in neurodegeneration with brain iron 
accumulation diseases. Patients with the more prominent basal ganglia 
abnormalities were the most disabled ones. This study suggests that GJA1-related 
hereditary spastic paraplegia is a complex neurodegenerative disease affecting 
both the myelin and the basal ganglia. GJA1 variants should be considered in 
patients with hereditary spastic paraplegia presenting with brain 
hypomyelination, especially if associated with neurodegeneration and a brain 
iron accumulation pattern.

© 2019 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A6036
PMCID: PMC7053899
PMID: 31023660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]