---
reference_id: "PMID:37035740"
title: Early postnatal administration of an AAV9 gene therapy is safe and efficacious in CLN3 disease.
authors:
- Johnson TB
- Brudvig JJ
- Likhite S
- Pratt MA
- White KA
- Cain JT
- Booth CD
- Timm DJ
- Davis SS
- Meyerink B
- Pineda R
- Dennys-Rivers C
- Kaspar BK
- Meyer K
- Weimer JM
journal: Front Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1118649
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early postnatal administration of an AAV9 gene therapy is safe and efficacious in CLN3 disease.
**Authors:** Johnson TB, Brudvig JJ, Likhite S, Pratt MA, White KA, Cain JT, Booth CD, Timm DJ, Davis SS, Meyerink B, Pineda R, Dennys-Rivers C, Kaspar BK, Meyer K, Weimer JM
**Journal:** Front Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2023.1118649](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2023.1118649)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Mar 24;14:1118649. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1118649.
eCollection 2023.

Early postnatal administration of an AAV9 gene therapy is safe and efficacious
in CLN3 disease.

Johnson TB(1)(2), Brudvig JJ(1)(2), Likhite S(3), Pratt MA(1), White KA(1), Cain
JT(1)(2), Booth CD(1), Timm DJ(1), Davis SS(1), Meyerink B(1), Pineda R(3),
Dennys-Rivers C(3), Kaspar BK(3), Meyer K(3), Weimer JM(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics and Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, SD, United
States.
(2)Amicus Therapeutics, Cranbury, NJ, United States.
(3)The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH,
United States.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Sanford School of Medicine, University of South
Dakota, Vermillion, SD, United States.

CLN3 disease, caused by biallelic mutations in the CLN3 gene, is a rare
pediatric neurodegenerative disease that has no cure or disease modifying
treatment. The development of effective treatments has been hindered by a lack
of etiological knowledge, but gene replacement has emerged as a promising
therapeutic platform for such disorders. Here, we utilize a mouse model of CLN3
disease to test the safety and efficacy of a cerebrospinal fluid-delivered AAV9
gene therapy with a study design optimized for translatability. In this model,
postnatal day one administration of the gene therapy virus resulted in robust
expression of human CLN3 throughout the CNS over the 24-month duration of the
study. A range of histopathological and behavioral parameters were assayed, with
the therapy consistently and persistently rescuing a number of hallmarks of
disease while being safe and well-tolerated. Together, the results show great
promise for translation of the therapy into the clinic, prompting the launch of
a first-in-human clinical trial (NCT03770572).

Copyright © 2023 Johnson, Brudvig, Likhite, Pratt, White, Cain, Booth, Timm,
Davis, Meyerink, Pineda, Dennys-Rivers, Kaspar, Meyer and Weimer.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1118649
PMCID: PMC10080320
PMID: 37035740

Conflict of interest statement: TJ, JB, and JW were employed by the Company
Amicus Therapeutics. The authors declare that this study received funding from
Amicus Therapeutics. The funder had involvement in the study design and data
analysis via TJ, JB, and JW’s scientific input. The remaining authors declare
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
