---
reference_id: "PMID:36151328"
title: Genetics of human telomere biology disorders.
authors:
- Revy P
- Kannengiesser C
- Bertuch AA
journal: Nat Rev Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41576-022-00527-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Telomere/genetics, metabolism"
- Aging/genetics
- Telomere Homeostasis
- Genomic Instability
- Biology
- Telomerase/genetics
- Growth Disorders
- Hypercalcemia
- Metabolic Diseases
- Nephrocalcinosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of human telomere biology disorders.
**Authors:** Revy P, Kannengiesser C, Bertuch AA
**Journal:** Nat Rev Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41576-022-00527-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-022-00527-z)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Genet. 2023 Feb;24(2):86-108. doi: 10.1038/s41576-022-00527-z. Epub
2022  Sep 23.

Genetics of human telomere biology disorders.

Revy P(1)(2), Kannengiesser C(3)(4), Bertuch AA(5).

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR 1163, Laboratory of Genome Dynamics in the Immune System, Equipe 
Labellisée Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Paris, France. 
patrick.revy@inserm.fr.
(2)Université Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. 
patrick.revy@inserm.fr.
(3)APHP Service de Génétique, Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France.
(4)Inserm U1152, Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(5)Departments of Paediatrics and Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Telomeres are specialized nucleoprotein structures at the ends of linear 
chromosomes that prevent the activation of DNA damage response and repair 
pathways. Numerous factors localize at telomeres to regulate their length, 
structure and function, to avert replicative senescence or genome instability 
and cell death. In humans, Mendelian defects in several of these factors can 
result in abnormally short or dysfunctional telomeres, causing a group of rare 
heterogeneous premature-ageing diseases, termed telomeropathies, short-telomere 
syndromes or telomere biology disorders (TBDs). Here, we review the TBD-causing 
genes identified so far and describe their main functions associated with 
telomere biology. We present molecular aspects of TBDs, including genetic 
anticipation, phenocopy, incomplete penetrance and somatic genetic rescue, which 
underlie the complexity of these diseases. We also discuss the implications of 
phenotypic and genetic features of TBDs on fundamental aspects related to human 
telomere biology, ageing and cancer, as well as on diagnostic, therapeutic and 
clinical approaches.

© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41576-022-00527-z
PMID: 36151328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]