---
reference_id: "PMID:32838589"
title: "Factors affecting vitiligo response to treatment: do MiRNA 196a2C/T gene polymorphism and serum tyrosinase levels have any role?"
authors:
- Monib KME
- Sabry HH
- Hussein MS
- El-Fallah AA
- Salem RM
journal: J Dermatolog Treat
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/09546634.2020.1810202
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors affecting vitiligo response to treatment: do MiRNA 196a2C/T gene polymorphism and serum tyrosinase levels have any role?
**Authors:** Monib KME, Sabry HH, Hussein MS, El-Fallah AA, Salem RM
**Journal:** J Dermatolog Treat (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09546634.2020.1810202](https://doi.org/10.1080/09546634.2020.1810202)

## Content

1. J Dermatolog Treat. 2022 May;33(3):1351-1355. doi: 
10.1080/09546634.2020.1810202. Epub 2020 Aug 24.

Factors affecting vitiligo response to treatment: do MiRNA 196a2C/T gene 
polymorphism and serum tyrosinase levels have any role?

Monib KME(1), Sabry HH(1), Hussein MS(1), El-Fallah AA(2), Salem RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Andrology, Faculty of Medicine, Benha 
University, Benha, Egypt.
(2)Department of Clinical and Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Benha 
University, Benha, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Factors contributing to the pathogenesis of vitiligo and factors 
affecting its response to treatment are still a major area of debate.
AIM OF THE WORK: The study aimed to assess the serum levels of tyrosinase and 
Micro-RNAs (miRNAs) gene polymorphism in a sample of Egyptian vitiligo patients, 
and to determine factors affecting the response of vitiligo to treatment.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: This prospective case-control interventional study 
included 212 non-segmental vitiligo patients and 96 control subjects. Before 
treatment, vitiligo was evaluated using Vitiligo Area Severity Index. Detection 
of miRNA 196a-2 polymorphism was done using PCR-REELP and serum tyrosinase was 
measured using ELISA. After treatment, patients were reevaluated clinically and 
serum tyrosinase levels were re-measured.
RESULTS: The tyrosinase levels were significantly elevated in patients. The TT 
genotype was the most prevalent one in the patients. The percentage of 
improvement showed a significant positive correlation with patients' ages and 
age of the disease onset and a negative correlation with disease duration, 
baseline VASI scores and serum tyrosinase levels.
CONCLUSION: MiRNA 196a-2 C/T (11614913) gene polymorphism and the elevated serum 
tyrosinase levels might be related to the pathogenesis of vitiligo and may 
affect its therapeutic response.

DOI: 10.1080/09546634.2020.1810202
PMID: 32838589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]