---
reference_id: "PMID:34495535"
title: Epigenetic Regulation of Glycosylation.
authors:
- Indellicato R
- Trinchera M
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-70115-4_8
keywords:
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Glycosylation
- Histone Code
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetic Regulation of Glycosylation.
**Authors:** Indellicato R, Trinchera M
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-70115-4_8](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-70115-4_8)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2021;1325:173-186. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-70115-4_8.

Epigenetic Regulation of Glycosylation.

Indellicato R(1), Trinchera M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
rossella.indellicato@unimi.it.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery (DMC), University of Insubria, Varese,
Italy.

Expression of glycosylation-related genes (or glycogenes) is strictly regulated
by transcription factors and epigenetic processes, both in normal and in
pathological conditions. In fact, glycosylation is an essential mechanism
through which proteins and lipids are modified to perform a variety of
biological events, to adapt to environment, and to interact with
microorganisms.Many glycogenes with a role in normal development are
epigenetically regulated. Essential studies were performed in the brain, where
expression of glycogenes like MGAT5B, B4GALNT1, and ST8Sia1 are under the
control of histone modifications, and in the immune system, where expression of
FUT7 is regulated by both DNA methylation and histone modifications. At present,
epigenetic regulation of glycosylation is still poorly described under
physiological conditions, since the majority of the studies were focused on
cancer. In fact, virtually all types of cancers display aberrant glycosylation,
because of both genetic and epigenetic modifications on glycogenes. This is also
true for many other diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease, diabetes,
systemic lupus erythematosus, IgA nephropathy, multiple sclerosis, and
cardiovascular diseases.A deeper knowledge in epigenetic regulation of
glycogenes is essential, since research in this field could be helpful in
finding novel and personalized therapeutics.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-70115-4_8
PMID: 34495535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
