---
reference_id: "PMID:41064055"
title: "CRTAP-Related Osteogenesis Imperfecta: Clinical Variability and a Potential Founder Variant in CRTAP."
authors:
- Travessa AM
- Romeu JC
- Mirco T
- Vaz-de-Macedo C
- Palma MJ
- Modamio-Høybjør S
- Barreiros C
- Magalhães A
- Barão RC
- Heath KE
- Sousa AB
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1159/000547923
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CRTAP-Related Osteogenesis Imperfecta: Clinical Variability and a Potential Founder Variant in CRTAP.
**Authors:** Travessa AM, Romeu JC, Mirco T, Vaz-de-Macedo C, Palma MJ, Modamio-Høybjør S, Barreiros C, Magalhães A, Barão RC, Heath KE, Sousa AB
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000547923](https://doi.org/10.1159/000547923)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2025 Aug 20. doi: 10.1159/000547923. Online ahead of print.

CRTAP-Related Osteogenesis Imperfecta: Clinical Variability and a Potential 
Founder Variant in CRTAP.

Travessa AM(1)(2)(3), Romeu JC(4), Mirco T(5), Vaz-de-Macedo C(6), Palma MJ(6), 
Modamio-Høybjør S(7)(8)(9), Barreiros C(10)(11)(12), Magalhães A(11)(12), Barão 
RC(13), Heath KE(7)(8)(9), Sousa AB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and ERN-BOND, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro 
Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Medical Genetics Consultation, Hospital Professor Doutor Fernando Fonseca, 
Amadora, Portugal.
(4)Department of Rheumathology and Metabolic Bone Disorders and ERN-BOND, 
Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, 
Portugal.
(5)Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation and ERN-BOND, Hospital de 
Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal.
(6)Department of Obstetrics, Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal.
(7)Skeletal Dysplasia Multidisciplinary Unit (UMDE) and ERN-BOND, Hospital 
Universitario la Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario 
la Paz, IdiPAZ, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(9)CIBERER (Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras), 
ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Associação Portuguesa de Osteogénese Imperfeita (APOI), Lisbon, Portugal.
(11)Cardiology Department and ERN-BOND, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro 
Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal.
(12)Cardiovascular Centre of the University of Lisbon (CCUL@RISE), Faculdade de 
Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar 
Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: CRTAP-related osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a form of OI that 
ranges from moderate (type IV) to extremely severe (type II) and is caused by 
biallelic variants in the CRTAP gene. To date, only about 30 cases have been 
reported in the literature.
METHODS: We describe two adults and one fetus with molecularly confirmed 
CRTAP-related OI.
RESULTS: The phenotype varied extensively in terms of severity and clinical 
features, ranging from moderate (type IV) to severe (type III) and including 
cases with prenatal fractures as well as one case with a low number of fractures 
and no prenatal fractures. Interestingly, 1 patient presented with high myopia 
and bilateral retinal detachment, which have not been previously reported in OI 
type VII. Regarding molecular results, we identified three CRTAP variants that 
have not been previously reported in the literature. One of the variants was 
found in both a woman and an unrelated fetus of Cape Verdean descent, suggesting 
that the carrier frequency of this variant in the Cape Verde population may be 
relatively high.
CONCLUSION: We expand the clinical spectrum of patients with CRTAP variants and 
highlight the clinical variability of this extremely rare type of OI, which may 
present with either prenatal or postnatal onset. Our findings also underscore 
the importance of investigating the role of CRTAP in extra-skeletal tissues and 
assessing potential founder effects in underrepresented populations.

© 2025 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000547923
PMCID: PMC12503711
PMID: 41064055

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.