---
reference_id: "PMID:25889843"
title: BAP1 mutation is a frequent somatic event in peritoneal malignant mesothelioma.
authors:
- Alakus H
- Yost SE
- Woo B
- French R
- Lin GY
- Jepsen K
- Frazer KA
- Lowy AM
- Harismendy O
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0485-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BAP1 mutation is a frequent somatic event in peritoneal malignant mesothelioma.
**Authors:** Alakus H, Yost SE, Woo B, French R, Lin GY, Jepsen K, Frazer KA, Lowy AM, Harismendy O
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-015-0485-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-015-0485-1)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2015 Apr 16;13:122. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0485-1.

BAP1 mutation is a frequent somatic event in peritoneal malignant mesothelioma.

Alakus H(1)(2)(3), Yost SE(4), Woo B(5), French R(6), Lin GY(7), Jepsen K(8), 
Frazer KA(9)(10)(11), Lowy AM(12)(13), Harismendy O(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Cancer Surgery, University of Cologne, 
Köln, Germany. hakan.alakus@uk-koeln.de.
(2)Moores UCSD Cancer Center, 3855 Health Science Drive, Maildrop 0820, 92093, 
La Jolla, USA. hakan.alakus@uk-koeln.de.
(3)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. hakan.alakus@uk-koeln.de.
(4)Division of Genome Information Sciences, Department of Pediatrics and Rady 
Children's Hospital, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. 
yostshawn@gmail.com.
(5)Moores UCSD Cancer Center, 3855 Health Science Drive, Maildrop 0820, 92093, 
La Jolla, USA. b2woo@ucsd.edu.
(6)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. rfrench@ucsd.edu.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA. g4lin@ucsd.edu.
(8)Institute for Genomic Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA. kjepsen@ucsd.edu.
(9)Division of Genome Information Sciences, Department of Pediatrics and Rady 
Children's Hospital, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. 
kafrazer@ucsd.edu.
(10)Moores UCSD Cancer Center, 3855 Health Science Drive, Maildrop 0820, 92093, 
La Jolla, USA. kafrazer@ucsd.edu.
(11)Institute for Genomic Medicine, University of California San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA. kafrazer@ucsd.edu.
(12)Moores UCSD Cancer Center, 3855 Health Science Drive, Maildrop 0820, 92093, 
La Jolla, USA. alowy@ucsd.edu.
(13)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. alowy@ucsd.edu.
(14)Moores UCSD Cancer Center, 3855 Health Science Drive, Maildrop 0820, 92093, 
La Jolla, USA. oharismendy@ucsd.edu.
(15)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Department of Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. oharismendy@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Malignant mesothelioma (MM) arises from mesothelial cells that line 
the pleural, peritoneal and pericardial surfaces. The majority of MMs are 
pleural and have been associated with asbestos exposure. Previously, pleural MMs 
have been genetically characterized by the loss of BAP1 (40-60%) as well as loss 
of NF2 (75%) and CDKN2A (60%). The rare peritoneal form of MM occurs in ~10% 
cases. With only ~300 cases diagnosed in the US per year, its link to asbestos 
exposure is not clear and its mutational landscape unknown.
METHODS: We analyzed the somatic mutational landscape of 12 peritoneal MM of 
epitheloid subtype using copy number analysis (N = 9), whole exome sequencing 
(N = 7) and targeted sequencing (N = 12).
RESULTS: Peritoneal MM display few copy number alterations, with most samples 
having less than 10 Mbp total changes, mostly through deletions and no high copy 
number amplification. Chromosome band 3p21 encoding BAP1 is the most recurrently 
deleted region (5/9), while, in contrast to pleural MM, NF2 and CDKN2A are not 
affected. We further identified 87 non-silent mutations across 7 sequenced 
tumors, with a median of 8 mutated genes per tumor, resulting in a very low 
mutation rate (median 1.3 10(-6)). BAP1 was the only recurrently mutated gene 
(N = 3/7). In one additional case, loss of the entire chromosome 3 leaves a 
non-functional copy of BAP1 carrying a rare nonsense germline variant, thus 
suggesting a potential genetic predisposition in this patient. Finally, with 
targeted sequencing of BAP1 in 3 additional cases, we conclude that BAP1 is 
frequently altered through copy number losses (N = 3/12), mutations (N = 3/12) 
or both (N = 2/12) sometimes at a sub-clonal level.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest a major role for BAP1 in peritoneal MM 
susceptibility and oncogenesis and indicate important molecular differences to 
pleural MM as well as potential strategies for therapy and prevention.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-015-0485-1
PMCID: PMC4422481
PMID: 25889843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]