---
reference_id: "PMID:24626166"
title: A model system for studying the transcriptomic and physiological changes associated with mammalian host-adaptation by Leptospira interrogans serovar Copenhageni.
authors:
- Caimano MJ
- Sivasankaran SK
- Allard A
- Hurley D
- Hokamp K
- Grassmann AA
- Hinton JC
- Nally JE
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004004
keywords:
- Animals
- "Genes, Bacterial/genetics"
- Host-Pathogen Interactions/physiology
- Immunoblotting
- "Leptospira interrogans/pathogenicity, physiology"
- Leptospirosis/genetics
- "Models, Biological"
- Rats
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A model system for studying the transcriptomic and physiological changes associated with mammalian host-adaptation by Leptospira interrogans serovar Copenhageni.
**Authors:** Caimano MJ, Sivasankaran SK, Allard A, Hurley D, Hokamp K, Grassmann AA, Hinton JC, Nally JE
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1004004](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1004004)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Mar 13;10(3):e1004004. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004004.
eCollection 2014 Mar.

A model system for studying the transcriptomic and physiological changes
associated with mammalian host-adaptation by Leptospira interrogans serovar
Copenhageni.

Caimano MJ(1), Sivasankaran SK(2), Allard A(3), Hurley D(4), Hokamp K(5),
Grassmann AA(6), Hinton JC(7), Nally JE(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
Connecticut, United States of America; Department of Pediatrics, University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Genetics and Microbiology, Moyne
Institute of Preventative Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
Connecticut, United States of America.
(4)School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin,
Ireland.
(5)Department of Genetics, School of Genetics and Microbiology, Smurfit
Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
Connecticut, United States of America; Unidade de Biotecnologia, Centro de
Desenvolvimento Tecnológico, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, Pelotas, Rio
Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(7)Department of Microbiology, School of Genetics and Microbiology, Moyne
Institute of Preventative Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland;
Department of Functional and Comparative Genomics, Institute of Integrative
Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(8)School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin,
Ireland; Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.

Leptospirosis, an emerging zoonotic disease with worldwide distribution, is
caused by spirochetes belonging to the genus Leptospira. More than 500,000 cases
of severe leptospirosis are reported annually, with >10% of these being fatal.
Leptospires can survive for weeks in suitably moist conditions before
encountering a new host. Reservoir hosts, typically rodents, exhibit little to
no signs of disease but shed large numbers of organisms in their urine.
Transmission occurs when mucosal surfaces or abraded skin come into contact with
infected urine or urine-contaminated water or soil. In humans, leptospires can
cause a variety of clinical manifestations, ranging from asymptomatic or mild
fever to severe icteric (Weil's) disease and pulmonary haemorrhage. Currently,
little is known about how Leptospira persist within a reservoir host. Prior in
vitro studies have suggested that leptospires alter their transcriptomic and
proteomic profiles in response to environmental signals encountered during
mammalian infection. However, no study has examined gene expression by
leptospires within a mammalian host-adapted state. To obtain a more faithful
representation of how leptospires respond to host-derived signals, we used
RNA-Seq to compare the transcriptome of L. interrogans cultivated within
dialysis membrane chambers (DMCs) implanted into the peritoneal cavities of rats
with that of organisms grown in vitro. In addition to determining the relative
expression levels of "core" housekeeping genes under both growth conditions, we
identified 166 genes that are differentially-expressed by L. interrogans in
vivo. Our analyses highlight physiological aspects of host adaptation by
leptospires relating to heme uptake and utilization. We also identified 11 novel
non-coding transcripts that are candidate small regulatory RNAs. The DMC model
provides a facile system for studying the transcriptional and antigenic changes
associated with mammalian host-adaptation, selection of targets for mutagenesis,
and the identification of previously unrecognized virulence determinants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004004
PMCID: PMC3953431
PMID: 24626166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
