---
reference_id: "PMID:39294497"
title: Gene discovery and biological insights into anxiety disorders from a large-scale multi-ancestry genome-wide association study.
authors:
- Friligkou E
- Løkhammer S
- Cabrera-Mendoza B
- Shen J
- He J
- Deiana G
- Zanoaga MD
- Asgel Z
- Pilcher A
- Di Lascio L
- Makharashvili A
- Koller D
- Tylee DS
- Pathak GA
- Polimanti R
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41588-024-01908-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene discovery and biological insights into anxiety disorders from a large-scale multi-ancestry genome-wide association study.
**Authors:** Friligkou E, Løkhammer S, Cabrera-Mendoza B, Shen J, He J, Deiana G, Zanoaga MD, Asgel Z, Pilcher A, Di Lascio L, Makharashvili A, Koller D, Tylee DS, Pathak GA, Polimanti R
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41588-024-01908-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-024-01908-2)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2024 Oct;56(10):2036-2045. doi: 10.1038/s41588-024-01908-2. Epub
2024  Sep 18.

Gene discovery and biological insights into anxiety disorders from a large-scale 
multi-ancestry genome-wide association study.

Friligkou E(1)(2), Løkhammer S(1)(3)(4), Cabrera-Mendoza B(1)(2), Shen J(1)(5), 
He J(1)(2), Deiana G(1)(6), Zanoaga MD(1)(7), Asgel Z(1)(8), Pilcher A(1), Di 
Lascio L(1)(9), Makharashvili A(1)(2), Koller D(1)(10), Tylee DS(1), Pathak 
GA(1)(2), Polimanti R(11)(12)(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Cooperative Studies Program Clinical Epidemiology Research Center (CSP-CERC), 
VA Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Dr. Einar Martens Research Group for Biological Psychiatry, Center for 
Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, 
China.
(6)Center for Neuroscience, Pharmacology Unit, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Camerino, Camerino, Italy.
(7)Department of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(8)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, NYU Langone Health, New York 
Metropolitan Area, New York, NY, USA.
(9)IRCCS Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Rozzano, Milan, Italy; Humanitas 
University, Pieve Emanuele, Milan, Italy.
(10)Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of Biology, 
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
renato.polimanti@yale.edu.
(12)Cooperative Studies Program Clinical Epidemiology Research Center 
(CSP-CERC), VA Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, CT, USA. 
renato.polimanti@yale.edu.
(13)Wu Tsai Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 
renato.polimanti@yale.edu.
(14)Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public Health, 
New Haven, CT, USA. renato.polimanti@yale.edu.
(15)Department of Biomedical Informatics and Data Science, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. renato.polimanti@yale.edu.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 Feb 15:2024.02.14.24302836. doi: 10.1101/2024.02.14.24302836.

We leveraged information from more than 1.2 million participants, including 
97,383 cases, to investigate the genetics of anxiety disorders across five 
continental groups. Through ancestry-specific and cross-ancestry genome-wide 
association studies, we identified 51 anxiety-associated loci, 39 of which were 
novel. In addition, polygenic risk scores derived from individuals of European 
descent were associated with anxiety in African, admixed American and East Asian 
groups. The heritability of anxiety was enriched for genes expressed in the 
limbic system, cerebral cortex, cerebellum, metencephalon, entorhinal cortex and 
brain stem. Transcriptome-wide and proteome-wide analyses highlighted 115 genes 
associated with anxiety through brain-specific and cross-tissue regulation. 
Anxiety also showed global and local genetic correlations with depression, 
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and widespread pleiotropy with several 
physical health domains. Overall, this study expands our knowledge regarding the 
genetic risk and pathogenesis of anxiety disorders, highlighting the importance 
of investigating diverse populations and integrating multi-omics information.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41588-024-01908-2
PMCID: PMC12139100
PMID: 39294497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS Dr. Polimanti is paid for 
their editorial work on the journal Complex Psychiatry and reports a research 
grant from Alkermes outside the scope of the present study. The other authors 
declare no competing interests.