---
reference_id: "PMID:17560419"
title: Extra-intestinal manifestations of Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Ephgrave K
journal: Surg Clin North Am
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.suc.2007.03.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extra-intestinal manifestations of Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Ephgrave K
**Journal:** Surg Clin North Am (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.suc.2007.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.suc.2007.03.003)

## Content

1. Surg Clin North Am. 2007 Jun;87(3):673-80. doi: 10.1016/j.suc.2007.03.003.

Extra-intestinal manifestations of Crohn's disease.

Ephgrave K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, 200 Hawkins 
Drive, Iowa City IA, 52242, USA. kimberly-ephgrave@uiowa.edu

Extra-intestinal manifestations occur in at least 25% of Crohn's disease 
patients. Some extra-intestinal manifestations, such as erythema nodusum and 
peripheral arthropathy, will wax and wane in keeping with bowel inflammation. 
The more severe cutaneous ulcerations, uveitis, and axial arthropathy may 
precede bowel disease or persist after it subsides. Screening may be appropriate 
for eye disease and for osteoporosis to prevent complications. Medical 
management for extra-intestinal manifestations is similar to treatment for the 
bowel symptoms of Crohn's disease, with corticosteroids the mainstay. Pain and 
depression are associated with inflammatory bowel disease, and their control 
benefits patients. Recent small studies with anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) 
agents are promising for most extra-intestinal manifestations of Crohn's 
disease, and may permit more steroid-sparing disease control in the future.

DOI: 10.1016/j.suc.2007.03.003
PMID: 17560419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]