---
reference_id: "PMID:35347921"
title: Advances in targeted therapy for anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.
authors:
- Qian C
- Jiang L
- Xu S
- Wang J
- Tan Z
- Xin Y
- Ge M
journal: Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3724/zdxbyxb-2021-0249
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mammals
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Thyroid Carcinoma, Anaplastic/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in targeted therapy for anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.
**Authors:** Qian C, Jiang L, Xu S, Wang J, Tan Z, Xin Y, Ge M
**Journal:** Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3724/zdxbyxb-2021-0249](https://doi.org/10.3724/zdxbyxb-2021-0249)

## Content

1. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2021 Dec 25;50(6):685-693. doi: 
10.3724/zdxbyxb-2021-0249.

Advances in targeted therapy for anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.

[Article in English]

Qian C(1)(2), Jiang L(2)(3), Xu S(2)(4), Wang J(2)(3), Tan Z(2)(3), Xin Y(2)(3), 
Ge M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)1. Graduate School, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu 233030, Anhui Province, 
China.
(2)2. Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Center of Otolaryngology, Head and 
Neck Surgery, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, Affiliated People's 
Hospital of Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou 310014, China.
(3)3. Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Endocrine Gland Diseases, Hangzhou 
310014, China.
(4)4. The Second Clinical Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou 310053, China.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is a highly malignant and aggressive thyroid 
malignancy with rapid onset and poor prognosis. There is no effective treatment 
for ATC yet. Molecular targeted therapy provides a new idea for ATC treatment. 
Tyrosine kinase inhibitor lenvatinib has potential in treating ATC patients with 
favorable efficacy in clinical trials. The effectiveness of the v-raf murine 
sarcoma viral oncogene homologue B1 () gene inhibitor dabrafenib in combination 
with trametinib for the treatment of positive ATC patients has been demonstrated 
in clinical trials. The has proposed dabrafenib in combination with trametinib 
as the preferred modality for the treatment of patients with positive ATC. The 
immune checkpoint inhibitor pembrolizumab can be applied to treat thyroid cancer 
with high tumor mutational load and may be considered as the preferred modality 
for the treatment of ATC patients with high programmed death ligand-1 
expression. The mammalian target of rapamycin pathway inhibitors, peroxisome 
proliferators-activated receptor γ agonists, endothelial growth factor 
receptors-targeting monoclonal antibody cetuximab and novel vascular blocker 
fosbretabulin are still in the clinical research stage, which are expected to 
provide new directions for the development of novel targeted drugs. This article 
reviews the current research progress on targeted drugs for the treatment of 
ATC.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is a highly malignant and aggressive thyroid 
malignancy with rapid onset and poor prognosis. There is no effective treatment 
for ATC yet. Molecular targeted therapy provides a new idea for ATC treatment. 
Tyrosine kinase inhibitor lenvatinib has potential in treating ATC patients with 
favorable efficacy in clinical trials. The effectiveness of the v-raf murine 
sarcoma viral oncogene homologue B1 ( BRAF) gene inhibitor dabrafenib in 
combination with trametinib for the treatment of BRAF V600E positive ATC 
patients has been demonstrated in clinical trials. The NCCN clinical practice 
guidelines in oncology has proposed dabrafenib in combination with trametinib as 
the preferred modality for the treatment of patients with BRAF V600E positive 
ATC. The immune checkpoint inhibitor pembrolizumab can be applied to treat 
thyroid cancer with high tumor mutational load and may be considered as the 
preferred modality for the treatment of ATC patients with high programmed death 
ligand-1 expression. The mammalian target of rapamycin pathway inhibitors, 
peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor γ agonists, endothelial growth 
factor receptors-targeting monoclonal antibody cetuximab and novel vascular 
blocker fosbretabulin are still in the clinical research stage, which are 
expected to provide new directions for the development of novel targeted drugs. 
This article reviews the current research progress on targeted drugs for the 
treatment of ATC.

DOI: 10.3724/zdxbyxb-2021-0249
PMCID: PMC8931613
PMID: 35347921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: 所有作者均声明不存在利益冲突