---
reference_id: "PMID:24507849"
title: Pulmonary rehabilitation.
authors:
- Troosters T
- Demeyer H
- Hornikx M
- Camillo CA
- Janssens W
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2013.10.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary rehabilitation.
**Authors:** Troosters T, Demeyer H, Hornikx M, Camillo CA, Janssens W
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccm.2013.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccm.2013.10.006)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2014 Mar;35(1):241-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2013.10.006. Epub
2013  Dec 12.

Pulmonary rehabilitation.

Troosters T(1), Demeyer H(2), Hornikx M(2), Camillo CA(2), Janssens W(2).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Rehabilitation and Respiratory Division, University Hospital 
Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Faculty of 
Kinesiology and Rehabilitation Sciences, Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Tervuursevest 101, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. 
Electronic address: thierry.troosters@med.kuleuven.be.
(2)Respiratory Rehabilitation and Respiratory Division, University Hospital 
Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Faculty of 
Kinesiology and Rehabilitation Sciences, Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Tervuursevest 101, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Pulmonary rehabilitation is a therapy that offers benefits to patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease that are complementary to those obtained 
by pharmacotherapy. The main objective of pulmonary rehabilitation is to restore 
muscle function and exercise tolerance, reverse other nonrespiratory 
consequences of the disease, and help patients to self-manage chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease and its exacerbations and symptoms. To do so, a 
multidisciplinary program tailored to the patient in terms of program content, 
exercise prescription, and setting must be offered. Several settings and 
programs have shown to spin off in significant immediate results. The challenge 
lies in maintaining the benefits outside the program.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccm.2013.10.006
PMID: 24507849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]