---
reference_id: "PMID:12089631"
title: "Splenic artery aneurysms: two decades experience at Mayo clinic."
authors:
- Abbas MA
- Stone WM
- Fowl RJ
- Gloviczki P
- Oldenburg WA
- Pairolero PC
- Hallett JW
- Bower TC
- Panneton JM
- Cherry KJ
journal: Ann Vasc Surg
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/s10016-001-0207-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Aneurysm/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- "Aneurysm, Ruptured/surgery"
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Splenic Artery/surgery
- Vascular Surgical Procedures/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Splenic artery aneurysms: two decades experience at Mayo clinic.
**Authors:** Abbas MA, Stone WM, Fowl RJ, Gloviczki P, Oldenburg WA, Pairolero PC, Hallett JW, Bower TC, Panneton JM, Cherry KJ
**Journal:** Ann Vasc Surg (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10016-001-0207-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10016-001-0207-4)

## Content

1. Ann Vasc Surg. 2002 Jul;16(4):442-9. doi: 10.1007/s10016-001-0207-4. Epub 2002
 Jul 1.

Splenic artery aneurysms: two decades experience at Mayo clinic.

Abbas MA(1), Stone WM, Fowl RJ, Gloviczki P, Oldenburg WA, Pairolero PC, Hallett 
JW, Bower TC, Panneton JM, Cherry KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Vascular Surgery, Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, 
Scottsdale, AZ 85259, USA.

Although rare, splenic artery aneurysms (SAAs) have a definite risk of rupture. 
The optimal management of these aneurysms remains elusive. A retrospective chart 
review of all patients treated at our institutions with the diagnosis of SAA 
from January 1980 until December 1998 was undertaken. Follow-up was obtained via 
chart review and by direct phone contact of the patient or relative. No specific 
protocol was followed for management. From analysis of the patient data we 
concluded that although SAAs may rupture, not all intact aneurysms need 
intervention. Calcification does not appear to protect against rupture, although 
beta-blockade may be protective. Growth rates of SAA are slow and growth is 
infrequent. Selective management of SAAs is safe. Open ligation or transcatheter 
embolization should be considered for symptomatic aneurysms, for aneurysms > or 
= 2 cm in size, or for any SAA in women of childbearing years.

DOI: 10.1007/s10016-001-0207-4
PMID: 12089631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]