---
reference_id: "PMID:23472839"
title: "Binge eating in adults: prevalence and association with obesity, poor self-rated health status and body dissatisfaction."
authors:
- de França GV
- Gigante DP
- Olinto MT
journal: Public Health Nutr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1017/S1368980013000591
keywords:
- Adult
- Body Mass Index
- Body Weight
- Brazil/epidemiology
- Bulimia/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Health Status
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nutritional Status
- Obesity/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Self Report
- Socioeconomic Factors
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Binge eating in adults: prevalence and association with obesity, poor self-rated health status and body dissatisfaction.
**Authors:** de França GV, Gigante DP, Olinto MT
**Journal:** Public Health Nutr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S1368980013000591](https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980013000591)

## Content

1. Public Health Nutr. 2014 Apr;17(4):932-8. doi: 10.1017/S1368980013000591. Epub
 2013 Mar 11.

Binge eating in adults: prevalence and association with obesity, poor self-rated 
health status and body dissatisfaction.

de França GV(1), Gigante DP(1), Olinto MT(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Postgraduate Program in Epidemiology, Federal University of Pelotas, Rua 
Marechal Deodoro, 1160 - 3° Piso, Bairro Centro - Pelotas, RS, Cep: 96020-220 - 
Caixa Postal 464, Brazil.
(2)2 Postgraduate Program in Public Health, University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos, 
São Leopoldo, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the prevalence of episodes of binge eating and to assess 
potential associations with nutritional status, satisfaction with current body 
weight, self-rated health status and self-rated body weight.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional population-based study. Binge eating was assessed 
using adapted questions from the Brazilian Portuguese version of the 
Questionnaire on Eating and Weight Patterns and was defined as binging one or 
more times over the last 3 months before the interview.
SETTING: City of Pelotas, southern Brazil.
SUBJECTS: Individuals (n 2097) aged 20-59 years.
RESULTS: The prevalence of binge eating and recurrent binge eating was 7.9% and 
2.7%, respectively. In the adjusted analysis, obesity, fair/poor self-rated 
health status and body dissatisfaction remained strongly associated with binge 
eating.
CONCLUSIONS: The study showed a high prevalence of binge eating among adults in 
Pelotas, being higher among younger women, the obese and those who desired to 
weigh less. The current results are informative, but longitudinal studies would 
be needed to demonstrate the causal relationship between these events.

DOI: 10.1017/S1368980013000591
PMCID: PMC10282444
PMID: 23472839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]