---
reference_id: "PMID:39049934"
title: "From prenatal diagnosis to surgical treatment: two case reports of congenital granular cell epulis."
authors:
- Han Y
- Qiu W
- Zhang Y
- Hua M
- Liu S
- Dong Z
journal: Pathol Oncol Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/pore.2024.1611834
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Pregnancy
- "Granular Cell Tumor/surgery, pathology, congenital"
- Prenatal Diagnosis/methods
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Gingival Neoplasms/surgery, pathology, congenital"
- Adult
- Male
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From prenatal diagnosis to surgical treatment: two case reports of congenital granular cell epulis.
**Authors:** Han Y, Qiu W, Zhang Y, Hua M, Liu S, Dong Z
**Journal:** Pathol Oncol Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/pore.2024.1611834](https://doi.org/10.3389/pore.2024.1611834)

## Content

1. Pathol Oncol Res. 2024 Jul 10;30:1611834. doi: 10.3389/pore.2024.1611834. 
eCollection 2024.

From prenatal diagnosis to surgical treatment: two case reports of congenital 
granular cell epulis.

Han Y(1), Qiu W(2), Zhang Y(3), Hua M(1), Liu S(1), Dong Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Qi Lu Hospital of Shandong 
University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences (SDAMS), Jinan, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Qi Lu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 
Shandong, China.

Herein, we detail a multidisciplinary approach and sequential treatment for two 
infants with congenital granular cell epulis (CGCE). Ultrasonic examinations at 
34 weeks of gestation revealed prominent oral masses in both fetuses. To devise 
a carefully considered treatment strategy, a comprehensive multidisciplinary 
consultation including oral and maxillofacial surgeons, pediatricians, 
obstetricians, and anesthesiologists was convened. Following cesarean sections, 
the lesions were successfully removed, measuring approximately 30 × 15 mm and 30 
× 20 mm in size, respectively. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that vimentin 
was positive, S-100 protein was negative, and NSE protein and CD68 protein were 
negative. These findings underscore the importance of prenatal diagnosis of 
congenital granular cell epulis for the effective management of these rare 
benign conditions.

Copyright © 2024 Han, Qiu, Zhang, Hua, Liu and Dong.

DOI: 10.3389/pore.2024.1611834
PMCID: PMC11266033
PMID: 39049934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.