---
reference_id: "PMID:15838240"
title: Understanding the genetic contribution to rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- van der Helm-van Mil AH
- Wesoly JZ
- Huizinga TW
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/01.bor.0000160780.13012.be
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding the genetic contribution to rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** van der Helm-van Mil AH, Wesoly JZ, Huizinga TW
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.bor.0000160780.13012.be](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.bor.0000160780.13012.be)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2005 May;17(3):299-304. doi: 
10.1097/01.bor.0000160780.13012.be.

Understanding the genetic contribution to rheumatoid arthritis.

van der Helm-van Mil AH(1), Wesoly JZ, Huizinga TW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The identification of the genetic variants that mediate the 
risk for susceptibility and severity of rheumatoid arthritis will allow the 
development of new drug targets and also increase the ability to predict disease 
course. Technical and methodologic progress has fueled the advances in this 
field.
RECENT FINDINGS: The second risk factor for rheumatoid arthritis, the PTPN22 
polymorphism, has been identified. This genetic variant regulates the threshold 
of T cell activation. Intriguingly, this variant is a risk factor for diabetes 
as well. Moreover, it has been shown that multiple genetic variants in one 
pathway (both in a transcription factor, RUNX-1, as in the transcription factor 
binding site of RUNX1 in the SLC22A4 gene) can each confer very small risks but 
by gene-gene interactions can confer a ninefold risk for rheumatoid arthritis. 
These genetic risk factors have been found to confer risk for multiple 
autoimmune diseases. Phenotype-genotype interactions were described by the 
enhanced prevalence of a rheumatoid arthritis-specific autoantibody (anti-cyclic 
citrullinated peptide antibodies) in rheumatoid arthritis patients that harbor 
the rheumatoid arthritis-associated human leukocyte antigen class II genes, the 
shared epitope alleles. An environmental factor, smoking was demonstrated to 
confer risk for rheumatoid arthritis, especially in patients positive for both 
shared epitope and rheumatoid arthritis-specific anti-cyclic citrullinated 
peptide antibodies.
SUMMARY: Two new pathways, T cell receptor signaling and a 
hematopoietic-specific signal transduction pathway, have been discovered that 
allow future pharmacologic interventions. The description of the new genetic 
risk factors and the interaction with environmental triggers as well as 
phenotypic features are gradually expanding the ability to predict disease 
susceptibility and course.

DOI: 10.1097/01.bor.0000160780.13012.be
PMID: 15838240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]