---
reference_id: "PMID:40234111"
title: "Familial chylomicronemia syndrome: An expert clinical review from the National Lipid Association."
authors:
- Javed F
- Hegele RA
- Garg A
- Patni N
- Gaudet D
- Williams L
- Khan M
- Li Q
- Ahmad Z
journal: J Clin Lipidol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2025.03.013
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hyperlipoproteinemia Type I/genetics, diagnosis, therapy, epidemiology"
- "Lipoprotein Lipase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial chylomicronemia syndrome: An expert clinical review from the National Lipid Association.
**Authors:** Javed F, Hegele RA, Garg A, Patni N, Gaudet D, Williams L, Khan M, Li Q, Ahmad Z
**Journal:** J Clin Lipidol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacl.2025.03.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacl.2025.03.013)

## Content

1. J Clin Lipidol. 2025 May-Jun;19(3):382-403. doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2025.03.013. 
Epub 2025 Mar 22.

Familial chylomicronemia syndrome: An expert clinical review from the National 
Lipid Association.

Javed F(1), Hegele RA(2), Garg A(3), Patni N(4), Gaudet D(5), Williams L(6), 
Khan M(7), Li Q(7), Ahmad Z(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada (Dr Javed).
(2)Department of Medicine and Robarts Research Institute, Schulich School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada (Dr Hegele).
(3)Section of Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, Division of Endocrinology, 
Department of Internal Medicine and the Center for Human Nutrition, UT 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA (Dr Garg).
(4)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, UT 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA (Dr Patni).
(5)ECOGENE-21 Department of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Chicoutimi, QC, 
Canada (Dr Gaudet).
(6)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Baylor Scott & White McLane Children's 
Medical Center, Temple, TX, USA (Ms Williams).
(7)FCS Foundation, San Diego, CA, USA (Mr Khan and Mr Li).
(8)Section of Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, Division of Endocrinology, 
Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA 
(Dr Ahmad). Electronic address: Zahid.ahmad@utsouthwestern.edu.

Familial chylomicronemia syndrome (FCS) is a rare Mendelian autosomal recessive 
disorder (MIM 238600) characterized by extreme and sustained 
hypertriglyceridemia due to profound reduction of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) 
activity. This expert opinion statement synthesizes current knowledge on the 
definition, pathophysiology, genetics, prevalence, diagnosis, and management of 
FCS. FCS typically manifests at a young age with persistent severe 
hypertriglyceridemia-defined as ≥10 mmol/L (≥885 mg/dL), or ≥1000 mg/dL (≥11.2 
mmol/L) depending on region and whether Systeme International (SI) units are 
utilized-in the absence of secondary factors, resistance to conventional 
lipid-lowering therapies, and a high lifetime risk of acute pancreatitis. It is 
caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in the LPL gene encoding LPL, or 1 of 4 
other related genes that encode proteins that interact with LPL. Affected 
individuals require a strict, lifelong very low-fat diet with <15% of energy 
from fat. Emerging therapies inhibiting apolipoprotein C-III show promise in 
reducing serum triglycerides and pancreatitis risk in patients with FCS. A 
multidisciplinary approach, encompassing dietary management, pharmacotherapy, 
and patient education, is pivotal in mitigating the significant morbidity 
associated with FCS.

Copyright © 2025 National Lipid Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacl.2025.03.013
PMID: 40234111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest F.J., M.K., 
Q.L. reports no conflicts of interest. A.G. consults for Chiesi, Regeneron, and 
Zvelt Pharmaceuticals, and has received grant support from Chiesi, Regeneron, 
Quintiles, Akcea Pharmaceuticals, and Intercept Pharmaceuticals. AG has NIH 
funding related to treatment options for FCS R33-HL66373 (Garg) NHLBI. N.P. has 
consulted for Chiesi, and has NIH funding related to treatment options for FCS 
R33-HL66373 (Garg) NHLBI. D.G. has received funding and/or consulting fees from 
Alnylam, Amgen, Chiesi (Amryt), Applied therapeutics, Arrowhead, Astra Zeneca, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, CRISPR Therapeutics, Eli Lilly, Esperion, Flagship 
Pioneering, Ionis, Kowa, National Research Council Canada, New Amsterdam Pharma, 
Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Regeneron, Sanofi, Ultragenyx, Uniqure, and 
Verve therapeutics. L.W. has no conflicts of interest to declare. R.A.H. reports 
grants or contracts from Ionis, Arrowhead, Novartis, Amryt; consulting fees from 
Arrowhead, Amgen, Acasti Pharma, Aegerion Pharmaceuticals, Akcea 
Therapeutics/Ionis Pharmaceuticals, HLS Therapeutics, Novartis, Pfizer, 
Regeneron, Sanofi, and Ultragenyx; honoraria from Amgen, Sanofi, HLS 
Therapeutics, and Ionis; and participation on a data safety monitoring board or 
advisory board for Novartis. Z.A. reports institutional grants or contracts from 
the US Department of Defense, the NIH, and Ionis. Chair of metreleptin 
adjudication committee for Amyrt Pharmaceuticals.