---
reference_id: "PMID:19720631"
title: High prevalence of primary ciliary dyskinesia in a British Asian population.
authors:
- "O'Callaghan C"
- Chetcuti P
- Moya E
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1136/adc.2009.158493
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Asian People/ethnology, statistics & numerical data"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- Cough/etiology
- England/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Kartagener Syndrome/complications, ethnology, genetics"
- Male
- Prevalence
- Respiration Disorders/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High prevalence of primary ciliary dyskinesia in a British Asian population.
**Authors:** O'Callaghan C, Chetcuti P, Moya E
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1136/adc.2009.158493](https://doi.org/10.1136/adc.2009.158493)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2010 Jan;95(1):51-2. doi: 10.1136/adc.2009.158493. Epub 2009
Aug  30.

High prevalence of primary ciliary dyskinesia in a British Asian population.

O'Callaghan C(1), Chetcuti P, Moya E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Health, Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, 
University of Leicester, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester LE2 7LX, UK. 
ajb64@le.ac.uk

Determining the prevalence of primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) in different 
populations has proved difficult, with estimates varying between one in 4000 to 
one in 40,000. The aim of this study was to determine the incidence of PCD in a 
well-defined highly consanguineous Asian population in the UK. Over a 15-year 
period all patients suspected of having PCD in the Asian population of Bradford, 
UK, were tested by measurement of ciliary beat pattern, frequency and electron 
microscopy. The prevalence of PCD in the population studied was one in 2265. 52% 
of the patients' parents were first cousins. All patients had a history of 
chronic cough and nasal symptoms from the first year of life. 73% had a history 
of neonatal respiratory distress. Clinical suspicion of PCD should be high in 
populations in which it is possible that high levels of consanguinity may result 
in an increase in those with PCD. In these communities the combination of 
chronic cough and nasal symptoms should prompt early diagnostic testing.

DOI: 10.1136/adc.2009.158493
PMID: 19720631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]