---
reference_id: "PMID:21447126"
title: Pathogenesis of Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Takahashi K
- Oharaseki T
- Yokouchi Y
journal: Clin Exp Immunol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04361.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Takahashi K, Oharaseki T, Yokouchi Y
**Journal:** Clin Exp Immunol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04361.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04361.x)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2011 May;164 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):20-2. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04361.x.

Pathogenesis of Kawasaki disease.

Takahashi K(1), Oharaseki T, Yokouchi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Toho University Ohashi Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan. 
keitak@oha.toho-u.ac.jp

Kawasaki disease (KD) most frequently affects infants and young children under 5 
years of age. This disease is considered a kind of systemic vasculitis syndrome, 
and primarily invades the medium-sized muscular arteries, including coronary 
arteries. Diagnosis of KD is based on characteristic clinical signs and 
symptoms, which are classified as principal clinical findings and other clinical 
and laboratory findings. Even though the aetiology of KD is unknown, 
epidemiological data suggest that some kinds of infectious agents are involved 
in the onset of KD. In addition, the data indicate that host genetics underlie 
the disease's pathogenesis. Histologically, coronary arteritis begins 6-8 days 
after the onset of KD, and leads immediately to inflammation of all layers of 
the artery. The inflammation spreads completely around the artery; as a result, 
structural components of the artery undergo intense damage; the artery then 
begins to dilate. Inflammatory cell infiltration continues until about the 25th 
day of the disease, after which the inflammatory cells gradually decrease in 
number. KD arteritis is characterized by granulomatous inflammation that 
consists of severe accumulation of monocytes/macrophages. Aberrant activation of 
monocytes/macrophages is thought to be involved in the formation of vascular 
lesions. The lesions in all the arteries are relatively synchronous as they 
evolve from acute to chronic injury. There is no fibrinoid necrosis nor any 
mixture of acute inflammatory lesions and scarring lesions, which are 
characteristics in polyarteritis nodosa in KD.

© 2011 The Authors;Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2011 British Society 
for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04361.x
PMCID: PMC3095860
PMID: 21447126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]