---
reference_id: "PMID:39914145"
title: UBE3A controls axon initial segment in the cortical pyramidal neurons.
authors:
- Liu X
- Jiang Z
- Otani Y
- Zhu X
- Yu Y
- Tarif AMM
- Ferdousy RN
- Kishino T
- Fujitani M
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2025.151429
content_type: abstract_only
---

# UBE3A controls axon initial segment in the cortical pyramidal neurons.
**Authors:** Liu X, Jiang Z, Otani Y, Zhu X, Yu Y, Tarif AMM, Ferdousy RN, Kishino T, Fujitani M
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2025.151429](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2025.151429)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2025 Mar 5;751:151429. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2025.151429. Epub 2025 Feb 1.

UBE3A controls axon initial segment in the cortical pyramidal neurons.

Liu X(1), Jiang Z(2), Otani Y(1), Zhu X(1), Yu Y(1), Tarif AMM(1), Ferdousy 
RN(1), Kishino T(3), Fujitani M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane 
University, Izumo, 693-8501, Japan.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane 
University, Izumo, 693-8501, Japan; Ningxia Key Laboratory of Craniocerebral 
Diseases, Ningxia Medical University, 1160 Shengli Street, Yinchuan, 750004, 
Ningxia, China.
(3)Division of Functional Genomics, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 
Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane 
University, Izumo, 693-8501, Japan. Electronic address: 
fujitani@med.shimane-u.ac.jp.

The axon initial segment (AIS) is a critical regulator of neuronal excitability 
and the initiation site of action potentials. Alterations in the structural 
features of AIS, such as length and position, have been shown to influence 
neuronal function, a phenomenon known as activity-dependent AIS plasticity. In 
addition to their physiological functions, abnormalities in the AIS have been 
implicated in various neurological disorders. UBE3A is an E3 ubiquitin ligase 
crucial for protein degradation in neurons. In mature neurons, only the maternal 
allele of the UBE3A gene is active, and the paternal allele is silenced. 
However, the role of UBE3A in controlling AIS in the cortical pyramidal neurons 
has not yet been fully elucidated. In this study, we compared wild-type mice 
with three different Ube3a-deficient mice and observed specific elongation of 
the AIS in the prelimbic cortex of the medial prefrontal cortex but not in the 
somatosensory cortex or motor cortex, as previously reported. Interestingly, we 
also showed that UBE3A controls AIS length in a cell-autonomous manner using 
cultured cortical neurons derived from Ube3a-floxed (Ube3aflox/flox) mice. This 
study indicates that UBE3A controls AIS length through a cell-autonomous 
mechanism in vitro. However, non-cell-autonomous mechanisms, including feedback 
from inhibitory neurons or connections with the hippocampus, may also influence 
adult AIS length in vivo, thereby helping to maintain the excitability 
homeostasis of cortical pyramidal neurons in a region-specific manner.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2025.151429
PMID: 39914145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.