---
reference_id: "PMID:33368193"
title: "Smith-Magenis syndrome: Clinical and behavioral characteristics in a large retrospective cohort."
authors:
- Rive Le Gouard N
- Jacquinet A
- Ruaud L
- Deleersnyder H
- Ageorges F
- Gallard J
- Lacombe D
- Odent S
- Mikaty M
- Manouvrier-Hanu S
- Ghoumid J
- Geneviève D
- Lehman N
- Philip N
- Edery P
- Héron D
- Rastel C
- Chancenotte S
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Faivre L
- Perrin L
- Verloes A
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13906
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Child
- Child Behavior Disorders/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/ultrastructure"
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- "Education, Special"
- Family Relations
- Growth Disorders/genetics
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Overweight/genetics
- Parents
- "Patient Acceptance of Health Care/statistics & numerical data"
- Phenotype
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Sleep Wake Disorders/genetics
- "Smith-Magenis Syndrome/diagnosis, embryology, epidemiology, psychology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smith-Magenis syndrome: Clinical and behavioral characteristics in a large retrospective cohort.
**Authors:** Rive Le Gouard N, Jacquinet A, Ruaud L, Deleersnyder H, Ageorges F, Gallard J, Lacombe D, Odent S, Mikaty M, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Ghoumid J, Geneviève D, Lehman N, Philip N, Edery P, Héron D, Rastel C, Chancenotte S, Thauvin-Robinet C, Faivre L, Perrin L, Verloes A
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13906](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13906)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2021 Apr;99(4):519-528. doi: 10.1111/cge.13906. Epub 2021 Jan 5.

Smith-Magenis syndrome: Clinical and behavioral characteristics in a large 
retrospective cohort.

Rive Le Gouard N(1), Jacquinet A(1)(2), Ruaud L(1), Deleersnyder H(1), Ageorges 
F(1), Gallard J(1), Lacombe D(3), Odent S(4), Mikaty M(4), Manouvrier-Hanu S(5), 
Ghoumid J(5), Geneviève D(6), Lehman N(6), Philip N(7), Edery P(8), Héron D(9), 
Rastel C(9), Chancenotte S(10), Thauvin-Robinet C(10), Faivre L(10), Perrin 
L(1), Verloes A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, APHP Nord-Université de Paris Robert Debré University 
Hospital and INSERM U1141 NeuroDiderot, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Genetics, Sart Tilman University Hospital, Liège, Belgium.
(3)Department of Genetics, Bordeaux, Pellegrin University Hospital, Bordeaux, 
France.
(4)Department of Genetics, Rennes University Hospital, Rennes, France.
(5)Department of Genetics, Lille Jeanne de Flandre, University Hospital, Lille, 
France.
(6)Department of Genetics, Arnaud de Villeneuve University Hospital, 
Montpellier, France.
(7)Department of Genetics, la Timone University Hospital, Marseille, France.
(8)Department of Genetics, Femme-Mère-Enfant University Hospital, Lyon, France.
(9)Department of Genetics, APHP Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, 
France.
(10)Department of Genetics, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France.

Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS), characterized by dysmorphic features, 
neurodevelopmental disorder, and sleep disturbance, is due to an interstitial 
deletion of chromosome 17p11.2 (90%) or to point mutations in the RAI1 gene. In 
this retrospective cohort, we studied the clinical, cognitive, and behavioral 
profile of 47 European patients with SMS caused by a 17p11.2 deletion. We update 
the clinical and neurobehavioral profile of SMS. Intrauterine growth was normal 
in most patients. Prenatal anomalies were reported in 15%. 60% of our patients 
older than 10 years were overweight. Prevalence of heart defects (6.5% tetralogy 
of Fallot, 6.5% pulmonary stenosis), ophthalmological problems (89%), scoliosis 
(43%), or deafness (32%) were consistent with previous reports. Epilepsy was 
uncommon (2%). We identified a high prevalence of obstipation (45%). All 
patients had learning difficulties and developmental delay, but ID range was 
wide and 10% of patients had IQ in the normal range. Behavioral problems 
included temper tantrums and other difficult behaviors (84%) and night-time 
awakenings (86%). Optimal care of SMS children is multidisciplinary and requires 
important parental involvement. In our series, half of patients were able to 
follow adapted schooling, but 70% of parents had to adapt their working time, 
illustrating the medical, social, educative, and familial impact of having a 
child with SMS.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13906
PMID: 33368193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]