---
reference_id: "PMID:9844057"
title: "Argininosuccinate lyase: a new autoantigen in liver disease."
authors:
- Pelli N
- Fensom AH
- Slade C
- Boa F
- Mieli-Vergani G
- Vergani D
journal: Clin Exp Immunol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.1998.00754.x
keywords:
- Argininosuccinate Lyase/immunology
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- "Autoantigens/classification, immunology"
- "Blotting, Western"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Hepatitis, Autoimmune/immunology"
- Humans
- Immunodiffusion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Argininosuccinate lyase: a new autoantigen in liver disease.
**Authors:** Pelli N, Fensom AH, Slade C, Boa F, Mieli-Vergani G, Vergani D
**Journal:** Clin Exp Immunol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2249.1998.00754.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2249.1998.00754.x)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1998 Dec;114(3):455-61. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2249.1998.00754.x.

Argininosuccinate lyase: a new autoantigen in liver disease.

Pelli N(1), Fensom AH, Slade C, Boa F, Mieli-Vergani G, Vergani D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hepatology, University College London Medical School, Chenies
Mews, London, UK

Anti-liver cytosol 1 autoantibody (LC1) characterizes a severe form of
autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), staining the cytoplasm of periportal hepatocytes and
targeting an unidentified 60-kD liver cytosolic antigen. To identify its target,
we used high-titre anti-LCI+ sera from two patients with AIH to screen 18
cytoplasm enzymes with periportal location by double immunodiffusion (DDI). Both
sera gave a broad precipitin line against human liver cytosol, suggesting that
they may recognize two distinct antigens, a possibility confirmed by the
appearance of two precipitin lines when DDI conditions were optimized (0.8%
agarose and 3% polyethylene glycol (PEG)). Experiments by DDI and Western blot
(WB) identified a liver cytosolic autoantigen of 50 kD, different from LC1,
giving a line of identity with argininosuccinate lyase (ASL). Reactivity to ASL
was then investigated by DDI and WB in 57 patients with AIH, 17 with primary
biliary cirrhosis (PBC), 15 with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, 13
with alphal-antitrypsin deficiency, 17 with Wilson's disease, 18 with
extrahepatic autoimmune disorders, and in 48 healthy controls. Anti-ASL was
found in 16% of AIH and 23% of PBC patients by DDI and in 14% of AIH, 23% of PBC
and 20% of HBV patients by WB. No argininosuccinate was present in the urine of
four anti-ASL+ patients tested, excluding an inhibition of enzymatic activity by
anti-ASL. The addition of anti-ASL+ serum to human fibroblast cultures induced a
significant increase in ASL activity. ASL is a new autoantigen in liver disease
and its clinical relevance warrants further investigation.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.1998.00754.x
PMCID: PMC1905125
PMID: 9844057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
