---
reference_id: "PMID:42237847"
title: "A c.89G>C p.(Gly30Ala) Variant in the DHCR7 Gene as a Cause of a Mild Phenotype in the Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome."
authors:
- Martinková J
- Vyhnálková E
- Schwarz M
- Balaščaková M
- Biddle V
- Borská R
- Fajkusová L
- Ryba L
- Křepelová A
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A c.89G>C p.(Gly30Ala) Variant in the DHCR7 Gene as a Cause of a Mild Phenotype in the Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome.
**Authors:** Martinková J, Vyhnálková E, Schwarz M, Balaščaková M, Biddle V, Borská R, Fajkusová L, Ryba L, Křepelová A
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.70222](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.70222)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2026 Jun;14(6):e70222. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.70222.

A c.89G>C p.(Gly30Ala) Variant in the DHCR7 Gene as a Cause of a Mild Phenotype 
in the Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome.

Martinková J(1), Vyhnálková E(1), Schwarz M(1)(2), Balaščaková M(1), Biddle 
V(1), Borská R(3), Fajkusová L(3), Ryba L(1), Křepelová A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Second Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)PRENET-Laboratoře lékařské Genetiky s.r.o., Pardubice, Czech Republic.
(3)Centre of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Department of Hematology, Oncology 
and Internal Medicine, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a common autosomal recessive 
disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the DHCR7 gene, resulting in a 
deficiency of the enzyme 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase. Two forms of SLOS are 
recognized based on the severity of associated symptoms. Type I is characterized 
by a milder phenotype, whereas type II is more severe and frequently results in 
fetal loss or early neonatal death. We observed two unrelated patients: a 
5-year-old boy and a 3.5-year-old girl, with elevated 7-DHC levels, a milder 
phenotype, and an identical genotype.
METHODS: Variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: A rare heterozygous likely pathogenic variant, c.89G>C p.(Gly30Ala), 
and a pathogenic variant, c.964-1G>C, in the trans position in the DHCR7 gene 
were identified in both patients.
CONCLUSION: The two unique patients presented here suggest that the c.89G>C 
p.(Gly30Ala) variant is associated with a mild SLOS phenotype, which may be 
overlooked and unrecognized in clinical practice. Information about this rare 
DHCR7 variant is important for diagnostic awareness of SLOS, especially within 
the Central European population. We present clinical data and a literature 
review of the DHCR7 variants associated with the mild SLOS phenotype.

© 2026 The Author(s). Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.70222
PMID: 42237847