---
reference_id: "PMID:19118152"
title: "Nephronophthisis: disease mechanisms of a ciliopathy."
authors:
- Hildebrandt F
- Attanasio M
- Otto E
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008050456
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephronophthisis: disease mechanisms of a ciliopathy.
**Authors:** Hildebrandt F, Attanasio M, Otto E
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2008050456](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2008050456)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Jan;20(1):23-35. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008050456. Epub 2008
 Dec 31.

Nephronophthisis: disease mechanisms of a ciliopathy.

Hildebrandt F(1), Attanasio M, Otto E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of 
Michigan Health System, 8220C MSRB III, 1150 West Medical Center Drive, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109-5646, USA. fhilde@umich.edu

Nephronophthisis (NPHP), a recessive cystic kidney disease, is the most frequent 
genetic cause of end-stage kidney disease in children and young adults. 
Positional cloning of nine genes (NPHP1 through 9) and functional 
characterization of their encoded proteins (nephrocystins) have contributed to a 
unifying theory that defines cystic kidney diseases as "ciliopathies." The 
theory is based on the finding that all proteins mutated in cystic kidney 
diseases of humans or animal models are expressed in primary cilia or 
centrosomes of renal epithelial cells. Primary cilia are sensory organelles that 
connect mechanosensory, visual, and other stimuli to mechanisms of epithelial 
cell polarity and cell-cycle control. Mutations in NPHP genes cause defects in 
signaling mechanisms that involve the noncanonical Wnt signaling pathway and the 
sonic hedgehog signaling pathway, resulting in defects of planar cell polarity 
and tissue maintenance. The ciliary theory explains the multiple organ 
involvement in NPHP, which includes retinal degeneration, cerebellar hypoplasia, 
liver fibrosis, situs inversus, and mental retardation. Positional cloning of 
dozens of unknown genes that cause NPHP will elucidate further signaling 
mechanisms involved. Nephrocystins are highly conserved in evolution, thereby 
allowing the use of animal models to develop future therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2008050456
PMCID: PMC2807379
PMID: 19118152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]