---
reference_id: "PMID:34511614"
title: Two Types of Polyp Shape Observed in the Stomach of Patients with Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.
authors:
- Iwamuro M
- Toyokawa T
- Matsueda K
- Hori S
- Yoshioka M
- Moritou Y
- Tanaka T
- Mizuno M
- Okada H
journal: Acta Med Okayama
year: '2021'
doi: 10.18926/AMO/62399
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two Types of Polyp Shape Observed in the Stomach of Patients with Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome.
**Authors:** Iwamuro M, Toyokawa T, Matsueda K, Hori S, Yoshioka M, Moritou Y, Tanaka T, Mizuno M, Okada H
**Journal:** Acta Med Okayama (2021)
**DOI:** [10.18926/AMO/62399](https://doi.org/10.18926/AMO/62399)

## Content

1. Acta Med Okayama. 2021 Aug;75(4):471-477. doi: 10.18926/AMO/62399.

Two Types of Polyp Shape Observed in the Stomach of Patients with Peutz-Jeghers 
Syndrome.

Iwamuro M(1), Toyokawa T(2), Matsueda K(3), Hori S(4), Yoshioka M(5), Moritou 
Y(6), Tanaka T(7), Mizuno M(3), Okada H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Fukuyama Medical Center.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kurashiki Central Hospital.
(4)Department of Endoscopy, Shikoku Cancer Center.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Okayama Saiseikai General Hospital.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Hiroshima City Hiroshima Citizens Hospital.
(7)Department of Pathology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences.

The characteristics of gastric polyps in patients with Peutz-Jeghers (PJ) 
syndrome (PJS) have not been fully investigated. The objective of this study was 
to reveal the endoscopic and pathologic findings of gastric polyps in patients 
with PJS. We reviewed 11 patients with PJS treated at 6 institutions, and 
summarized the endo-scopic and pathologic features of their gastric polyps. The 
polyps were mainly classified into 2 types: (i) soli-tary or sporadic polyps > 5 
mm, reddish in color with a sessile or semi-pedunculated morphology (n = 9); and 
(ii) multiple sessile polyps ≤ 5 mm with the same color tone as the peripheral 
mucosa (n = 9). Patients who underwent endoscopic mucosal resection for polyps > 
5 mm were diagnosed with PJ polyps (n = 2), whereas those who underwent biopsy 
were diagnosed with hyperplastic polyps. Polyps ≤ 5 mm were pathologically 
diagnosed as fundic gland polyps or hyperplastic polyps. This study revealed 
that patients with PJS present with 2 types of polyps in the stomach. Endoscopic 
mucosal resection of polyps > 5 mm seems necessary for the pathologic diagnosis 
of PJ polyps.

DOI: 10.18926/AMO/62399
PMID: 34511614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.