---
reference_id: "PMID:28546782"
title: Neoadjuvant Ifosfamide and Epirubicin in the Treatment of Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors.
authors:
- Hirbe AC
- Cosper PF
- Dahiya S
- Van Tine BA
journal: Sarcoma
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1155/2017/3761292
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neoadjuvant Ifosfamide and Epirubicin in the Treatment of Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors.
**Authors:** Hirbe AC, Cosper PF, Dahiya S, Van Tine BA
**Journal:** Sarcoma (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2017/3761292](https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/3761292)

## Content

1. Sarcoma. 2017;2017:3761292. doi: 10.1155/2017/3761292. Epub 2017 May 4.

Neoadjuvant Ifosfamide and Epirubicin in the Treatment of Malignant Peripheral
Nerve Sheath Tumors.

Hirbe AC(1)(2), Cosper PF(2)(3), Dahiya S(4), Van Tine BA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Siteman Cancer Center, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Campus Box 8118, 660 South Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Background and Objectives. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are
aggressive soft tissue sarcomas with poor overall survival. Response to
chemotherapy has been debated for these tumors. Methods. We performed a
retrospective analysis of the patients at our institution with a biopsy-proven
diagnosis of MPNST that underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy prior to surgery.
Results. We retrospectively identified five patients who received neoadjuvant
chemotherapy with epirubicin and ifosfamide that demonstrated a 30% reduction in
tumor growth and a 60% response rate by RECIST criteria. Additionally, a
metabolic response was observed in all three patients who received serial PET
scans during neoadjuvant treatment. The clinical benefit rate, which includes
stable disease, was 100%. Conclusions. Our data suggest that MPNSTs do respond
to epirubicin and ifosfamide based chemotherapy and prospective studies are
warranted to further define the clinical benefit.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/3761292
PMCID: PMC5435903
PMID: 28546782
