---
reference_id: "PMID:23001804"
title: Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.
authors:
- Wang T
- Lazar CA
- Fishbein MC
- Lynch JP 3rd
journal: Semin Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1325160
keywords:
- Animals
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- "Autoimmune Diseases/immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Bronchoalveolar Lavage
- Cough/etiology
- Dyspnea/etiology
- "Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/administration & dosage, immunology"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis/immunology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Pulmonary Gas Exchange
- Pulmonary Surfactants/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.
**Authors:** Wang T, Lazar CA, Fishbein MC, Lynch JP 3rd
**Journal:** Semin Respir Crit Care Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0032-1325160](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0032-1325160)

## Content

1. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2012 Oct;33(5):498-508. doi:
10.1055/s-0032-1325160.  Epub 2012 Sep 21.

Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.

Wang T(1), Lazar CA, Fishbein MC, Lynch JP 3rd.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care Medicine, Clinical Immunology, and
Allergy, Department of Internal Medicine, The David Geffen School of Medicine at
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a rare disorder characterized by the
accumulation of surfactant lipids and protein in the alveolar spaces, with
resultant impairment in gas exchange. The clinical course can be variable,
ranging from spontaneous resolution to respiratory failure and death. PAP in all
forms is caused by excessive accumulation of surfactant within the alveolar
spaces. Autoimmune PAP accounts for the vast majority of cases in humans and is
caused by autoantibodies to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF), which results in impaired catabolism and clearance of surfactant
lipids and proteins. Inherited or congenital forms of PAP are exceptionally rare
and caused by mutations of genes encoding for surfactant proteins. Secondary
forms of PAP are associated with diverse clinical disorders and are caused by
reduced alveolar macrophage numbers or function with resultant reduced pulmonary
clearance of surfactant. PAP is characterized by progressive exertional dyspnea
and nonproductive cough with hypoxemia. Bilateral infiltrates are typically
present on chest radiograph, and high-resolution computed tomography reveals
diffuse ground-glass opacities and airspace consolidation with interlobular
septal thickening in a characteristic "crazy paving" pattern. Although surgical
lung biopsy will provide a definitive diagnosis, a combination of typical
clinical and imaging features with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive material
on bronchoalveolar lavage and transbronchial biopsies is usually sufficient. The
standard of care for treatment of PAP remains whole lung lavage, but treatment
is not required in all patients. Autoimmune PAP has also been successfully
treated with GM-CSF, both inhaled and systemic, but the optimal dose, duration,
and route of administration of GM-CSF have not been elucidated.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1325160
PMID: 23001804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
