---
reference_id: PMID:39385469
title: Togaram1 is expressed in the neural tube and its absence causes neural tube closure defects.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Kraemer N
- Schneider J
- Ninnemann O
- Weng K
- Hildebrand M
- Reid J
- Li N
- Hu H
- Mani S
- Kaindl AM
journal: HGG Adv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100363
keywords:
- "Neural Tube/metabolism, embryology"
- Humans
- "Neural Tube Defects/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Mice
- "Cilia/metabolism, pathology"
- Signal Transduction
- "Mice, Knockout"
- HEK293 Cells
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Spinal Dysraphism/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Neural Stem Cells/metabolism
- Retina/abnormalities
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Cerebellum/abnormalities
- Eye Abnormalities
- "Kidney Diseases, Cystic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Togaram1 is expressed in the neural tube and its absence causes neural tube closure defects.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Kraemer N, Schneider J, Ninnemann O, Weng K, Hildebrand M, Reid J, Li N, Hu H, Mani S, Kaindl AM
**Journal:** HGG Adv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100363](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100363)

## Content

1. HGG Adv. 2025 Jan 9;6(1):100363. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100363. Epub 2024
Oct  9.

Togaram1 is expressed in the neural tube and its absence causes neural tube 
closure defects.

Wang Y(1), Kraemer N(1), Schneider J(2), Ninnemann O(3), Weng K(4), Hildebrand 
M(5), Reid J(6), Li N(4), Hu H(7), Mani S(1), Kaindl AM(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, Charite - Universitatsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Department of Pediatric Neurology, Charité - 
Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Charité - Universitatsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany; Center for Chronically Sick Children, Charité - 
Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, Charite - Universitatsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Laboratory of Medical Systems Biology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical 
Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine, The University of 
Melbourne, Austin Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; Neuroscience Group, Murdoch 
Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(6)Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine, The University of 
Melbourne, Austin Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(7)Laboratory of Medical Systems Biology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical 
Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: 
huh@cougarlab.org.
(8)Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, Charite - Universitatsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Department of Pediatric Neurology, Charité - 
Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Center for Chronically Sick 
Children, Charité - Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; German Epilepsy 
Center for Children and Adolescents, Charité - Universitatsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: angela.kaindl@charite.de.

Neural tube closure defect pathomechanisms in human embryonic development are 
poorly understood. Here we identified spina bifida patients expressing novel 
variants of the TOGARAM gene family. TOGARAM1 has been associated with the 
ciliopathy Joubert syndrome, but its connection to spina bifida and role in 
neural development is unknown. We show that Togaram1 is expressed in the neural 
tube and Togaram1 knockout mice have abnormal cilia, reduced sonic hedgehog 
(Shh) signaling, abnormal neural tube patterning, and display neural tube 
closure defects. Neural stem cells from Togaram1 knockout embryos showed reduced 
cilia and defects in Shh signaling. Overexpression in IMCD3 and HEK293 cells of 
TOGARAM1 carrying the variant found in the spina bifida patient resulted in 
cilia defect along with reduced pericentriolar material one (PCM1), a critical 
constituent of centriolar satellites involved in transporting proteins toward 
the centrosome and primary cilia. Our results demonstrate the role of TOGARAM1 
in regulating Shh signaling during early neural development that is critical for 
neural tube closure and elucidates potential mechanisms whereby the 
ciliopathy-associated gene TOGARAM1 gives rise to spina bifida aperta in humans.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100363
PMCID: PMC11541697
PMID: 39385469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.