---
reference_id: "PMID:31388190"
title: "The CHD4-related syndrome: a comprehensive investigation of the clinical spectrum, genotype-phenotype correlations, and molecular basis."
authors:
- Weiss K
- Lazar HP
- Kurolap A
- Martinez AF
- Paperna T
- Cohen L
- Smeland MF
- Whalen S
- Heide S
- Keren B
- Terhal P
- Irving M
- Takaku M
- Roberts JD
- Petrovich RM
- Schrier Vergano SA
- Kenney A
- Hove H
- DeChene E
- Quinonez SC
- Colin E
- Ziegler A
- Rumple M
- Jain M
- Monteil D
- Roeder ER
- Nugent K
- van Haeringen A
- Gambello M
- Santani A
- Medne L
- Krock B
- Skraban CM
- Zackai EH
- Dubbs HA
- Smol T
- Ghoumid J
- Parker MJ
- Wright M
- Turnpenny P
- Clayton-Smith J
- Metcalfe K
- Kurumizaka H
- Gelb BD
- Baris Feldman H
- Campeau PM
- Muenke M
- Wade PA
- Lachlan K
journal: Genet Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0612-0
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly/genetics
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Hearing Loss/genetics
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Megalencephaly/genetics
- "Mi-2 Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- Musculoskeletal Abnormalities/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The CHD4-related syndrome: a comprehensive investigation of the clinical spectrum, genotype-phenotype correlations, and molecular basis.
**Authors:** Weiss K, Lazar HP, Kurolap A, Martinez AF, Paperna T, Cohen L, Smeland MF, Whalen S, Heide S, Keren B, Terhal P, Irving M, Takaku M, Roberts JD, Petrovich RM, Schrier Vergano SA, Kenney A, Hove H, DeChene E, Quinonez SC, Colin E, Ziegler A, Rumple M, Jain M, Monteil D, Roeder ER, Nugent K, van Haeringen A, Gambello M, Santani A, Medne L, Krock B, Skraban CM, Zackai EH, Dubbs HA, Smol T, Ghoumid J, Parker MJ, Wright M, Turnpenny P, Clayton-Smith J, Metcalfe K, Kurumizaka H, Gelb BD, Baris Feldman H, Campeau PM, Muenke M, Wade PA, Lachlan K
**Journal:** Genet Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-019-0612-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-019-0612-0)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2020 Feb;22(2):389-397. doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0612-0. Epub 2019
Aug  7.

The CHD4-related syndrome: a comprehensive investigation of the clinical 
spectrum, genotype-phenotype correlations, and molecular basis.

Weiss K(1), Lazar HP(2), Kurolap A(3)(4), Martinez AF(5), Paperna T(3), Cohen 
L(6), Smeland MF(7), Whalen S(8), Heide S(9), Keren B(9), Terhal P(10), Irving 
M(11), Takaku M(2), Roberts JD(2), Petrovich RM(2), Schrier Vergano SA(12)(13), 
Kenney A(12), Hove H(14), DeChene E(15), Quinonez SC(16), Colin E(17), Ziegler 
A(17), Rumple M(18), Jain M(5)(19), Monteil D(20), Roeder ER(21), Nugent K(21), 
van Haeringen A(22), Gambello M(23), Santani A(15), Medne L(24), Krock B(15), 
Skraban CM(24), Zackai EH(24), Dubbs HA(25), Smol T(26)(27), Ghoumid J(26)(27), 
Parker MJ(28), Wright M(29), Turnpenny P(30), Clayton-Smith J(31)(32), Metcalfe 
K(31)(32), Kurumizaka H(33), Gelb BD(34), Baris Feldman H(3)(4), Campeau PM(35), 
Muenke M(5), Wade PA(#)(2), Lachlan K(#)(36).

Author information:
(1)The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel. 
k_weiss@rambam.health.gov.il.
(2)Epigenetics and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel.
(4)The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute 
of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(5)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)Genetics Institute, Schneider Children's Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, 
Norway.
(8)UF de génétique clinique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares des Anomalies du 
développement et syndromes malformatifs, APHP, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France.
(9)AP-HP, Département de Génétique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares 
"Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs" Hôpital de la Pitié 
Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Genetics, Utrecht University Medical Center, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.
(12)Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of The 
King's Daughters, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(14)Centre for Rare Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(15)Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics, Metabolism and Genomic 
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(17)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, University Hospital Angers, Angers, 
France.
(18)Banner Child Neurology, Glendale, AZ, USA.
(19)Bone and Osteogenesis Imperfecta Department, Kennedy Krieger Institute, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(20)Department of Pediatrics, Naval Medical Center Portsmouth, Portsmouth, VA, 
USA.
(21)Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College 
of Medicine, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(22)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(23)Department of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA, USA.
(24)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(25)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(26)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lille University Hospital, CHU Lille, 
Lille, France.
(27)EA7364 RADEME (Research Team on Rare Developmental and Metabolic Diseases), 
Lille 2 University, Lille, France.
(28)Sheffield Children's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Western Bank, Sheffield, 
UK.
(29)Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre for Life, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, UK.
(30)University of Exeter Medical School, Clinical Genetics Royal Devon & Exeter 
Hospital, Exeter, UK.
(31)Institute of Evolution, Systems and Genomics, Faculty of Medical and Human 
Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, 
Manchester, UK.
(32)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Manchester, UK.
(33)Laboratory of Structural Biology, Graduate School of Advanced Science & 
Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan.
(34)Mindich Child Health and Development Institute and Department of Pediatrics, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(35)Department of Pediatrics, University of Montreal and CHU Sainte-Justine, 
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(36)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospital Southampton NHS Trust. 
Department of Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Southampton University, 
Southampton, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Genet Med. 2020 Mar;22(3):669. doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0727-3.

PURPOSE: Sifrim-Hitz-Weiss syndrome (SIHIWES) is a recently described 
multisystemic neurodevelopmental disorder caused by de novo variants inCHD4. In 
this study, we investigated the clinical spectrum of the disorder, 
genotype-phenotype correlations, and the effect of different missense variants 
on CHD4 function.
METHODS: We collected clinical and molecular data from 32 individuals with 
mostly de novo variants in CHD4, identified through next-generation sequencing. 
We performed adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis and nucleosome remodeling 
assays on variants from five different CHD4 domains.
RESULTS: The majority of participants had global developmental delay, mild to 
moderate intellectual disability, brain anomalies, congenital heart defects, and 
dysmorphic features. Macrocephaly was a frequent but not universal finding. 
Additional common abnormalities included hypogonadism in males, skeletal and 
limb anomalies, hearing impairment, and ophthalmic abnormalities. The majority 
of variants were nontruncating and affected the SNF2-like region of the protein. 
We did not identify genotype-phenotype correlations based on the type or 
location of variants. Alterations in ATP hydrolysis and chromatin remodeling 
activities were observed in variants from different domains.
CONCLUSION: The CHD4-related syndrome is a multisystemic neurodevelopmental 
disorder. Missense substitutions in different protein domains alter CHD4 
function in a variant-specific manner, but result in a similar phenotype in 
humans.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-019-0612-0
PMCID: PMC8900827
PMID: 31388190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]