---
reference_id: "PMID:37627255"
title: "Manganese-Induced Parkinsonism: Evidence from Epidemiological and Experimental Studies."
authors:
- Lucchini R
- Tieu K
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/biom13081190
keywords:
- Humans
- Manganese/toxicity
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/chemically induced, epidemiology"
- "Parkinson Disease/epidemiology, etiology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Manganese-Induced Parkinsonism: Evidence from Epidemiological and Experimental Studies.
**Authors:** Lucchini R, Tieu K
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom13081190](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13081190)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2023 Jul 30;13(8):1190. doi: 10.3390/biom13081190.

Manganese-Induced Parkinsonism: Evidence from Epidemiological and Experimental 
Studies.

Lucchini R(1), Tieu K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Florida International 
University, Miami, FL 33199, USA.
(2)Biomolecular Sciences Institute, Florida International University, Miami, FL 
33199, USA.

Manganese (Mn) exposure has evolved from acute, high-level exposure causing 
manganism to low, chronic lifetime exposure. In this latter scenario, the target 
areas extend beyond the globus pallidus (as seen with manganism) to the entire 
basal ganglia, including the substantia nigra pars compacta. This change of 
exposure paradigm has prompted numerous epidemiological investigations of the 
occurrence of Parkinson's disease (PD), or parkinsonism, due to the long-term 
impact of Mn. In parallel, experimental research has focused on the underlying 
pathogenic mechanisms of Mn and its interactions with genetic susceptibility. In 
this review, we provide evidence from both types of studies, with the aim to 
link the epidemiological data with the potential mechanistic interpretation.

DOI: 10.3390/biom13081190
PMCID: PMC10452806
PMID: 37627255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.