---
reference_id: "PMID:31672631"
title: Combined application of angiotensin converting enzyme and chitotriosidase analysis improves the laboratory diagnosis of sarcoidosis.
authors:
- Enyedi A
- Csongrádi A
- Altorjay IT
- Beke GL
- Váradi C
- Enyedi EE
- Kiss DR
- Bányai E
- Kalina E
- Kappelmayer J
- Tóth A
- Papp Z
- Takács I
- Fagyas M
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2019.10.010
keywords:
- Adult
- Blood Chemical Analysis
- Female
- Hexosaminidases/blood
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A/blood
- "Sarcoidosis/blood, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Combined application of angiotensin converting enzyme and chitotriosidase analysis improves the laboratory diagnosis of sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Enyedi A, Csongrádi A, Altorjay IT, Beke GL, Váradi C, Enyedi EE, Kiss DR, Bányai E, Kalina E, Kappelmayer J, Tóth A, Papp Z, Takács I, Fagyas M
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2019.10.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2019.10.010)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2020 Jan;500:155-162. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2019.10.010. Epub
2019  Oct 28.

Combined application of angiotensin converting enzyme and chitotriosidase
analysis improves the laboratory diagnosis of sarcoidosis.

Enyedi A(1), Csongrádi A(2), Altorjay IT(3), Beke GL(4), Váradi C(5), Enyedi
EE(4), Kiss DR(4), Bányai E(4), Kalina E(6), Kappelmayer J(6), Tóth A(7), Papp
Z(7), Takács I(5), Fagyas M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 22 Moricz
Zsigmond str., H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary; University of Debrecen, Doctoral School
of Clinical Medicine, Hungary.
(2)Division of Clinical Physiology, Department of Cardiology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Debrecen, 22 Moricz Zsigmond str., H-4032 Debrecen,
Hungary; University of Debrecen, Kálmán Laki Doctoral School of Biomedical and
Clinical Sciences, Hungary.
(3)University of Debrecen, Kálmán Laki Doctoral School of Biomedical and
Clinical Sciences, Hungary; Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Debrecen, 22 Moricz Zsigmond str., H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
(4)Division of Clinical Physiology, Department of Cardiology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Debrecen, 22 Moricz Zsigmond str., H-4032 Debrecen,
Hungary.
(5)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 22 Moricz
Zsigmond str., H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Debrecen, 98 Nagyerdei str., H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
(7)Division of Clinical Physiology, Department of Cardiology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Debrecen, 22 Moricz Zsigmond str., H-4032 Debrecen,
Hungary; HAS-UD Vascular Biology and Myocardial Pathophysiology Research Group,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
(8)Division of Clinical Physiology, Department of Cardiology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Debrecen, 22 Moricz Zsigmond str., H-4032 Debrecen,
Hungary. Electronic address: fagyasmiklos@med.unideb.hu.

Establishing the diagnosis of sarcoidosis most often requires biopsy and
histopathologic evaluation, since there is no single marker with sufficient
specificity and sensitivity for the disease. Our aims were to determine and
compare the diagnostic accuracies of several potential biomarkers and to develop
a combined biomarker analysis tool for the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. 133 healthy
individuals and 104 patients with suspected sarcoidosis and diagnostic thoracic
surgery were enrolled into this study. Histopathologic results were contrasted
to biomarker levels of chitotriosidase (CTO), serum amyloid-A (SAA), soluble
interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R), lysozyme (LZM) or angiotensin converting enzyme
(ACE). Sarcoidosis was confirmed by histopathology in 69 patients. CTO activity,
sIL-2R concentration and ACE activity could discriminate between sarcoidosis and
control patients, while SAA and LZM concentrations could not. A new combined
parameter, which was derived from the multiplication of ACE by CTO activities
(double product) showed the best diagnostic accuracy in this clinical study:
(AUC = 0.898, sensitivity: 90.5%, specificity: 79.3%, positive and negative
predictive values: 90.5% and 79.3%, respectively). Sarcoidosis can be diagnosed
with the combined analysis of ACE and CTO activities more accurately than with
single serum biomarkers in the absence of invasive biopsy in the majority of
cases with pulmonary manifestation of sarcoidosis.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2019.10.010
PMID: 31672631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
