---
reference_id: "PMID:29630333"
title: "Different Positron Emission Tomography Tau Tracers Bind to Multiple Binding Sites on the Tau Fibril: Insight from Computational Modeling."
authors:
- Murugan NA
- Nordberg A
- Ågren H
journal: ACS Chem Neurosci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00093
keywords:
- "Amyloid beta-Peptides/chemistry, metabolism"
- Animals
- Binding Sites
- Humans
- Molecular Docking Simulation
- Molecular Dynamics Simulation
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- Protein Multimerization
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- Radiopharmaceuticals/chemistry
- "tau Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Different Positron Emission Tomography Tau Tracers Bind to Multiple Binding Sites on the Tau Fibril: Insight from Computational Modeling.
**Authors:** Murugan NA, Nordberg A, Ågren H
**Journal:** ACS Chem Neurosci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00093](https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00093)

## Content

1. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2018 Jul 18;9(7):1757-1767. doi: 
10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00093. Epub 2018 May 2.

Different Positron Emission Tomography Tau Tracers Bind to Multiple Binding 
Sites on the Tau Fibril: Insight from Computational Modeling.

Murugan NA(1), Nordberg A(2)(3), Ågren H(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Theoretical Chemistry and Biology, School of Biotechnology , 
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) , AlbaNova University Center, S-106 91 
Stockholm , Sweden.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Center of Alzheimer 
Research, Division of Clinical Geriatric , Karolinska Institutet , Huddinge , 
S-141 86 Stockholm , Sweden.
(3)Theme Aging , Karolinska University Hospital , Huddinge , S-141 86 Stockholm 
, Sweden.
(4)Department of Physics and Astronomy , Uppsala University , SE-751 20 Uppsala 
, Sweden.

Using the recently reported cryo-EM structure for the tau fibril [ Fitzpatrick 
et al. (2017) Nature 547, 185-190 ], which is a potential target concerning 
Alzheimer's disease, we present the first molecular modeling studies on its 
interaction with various positron emission tomography (PET) tracers. 
Experimentally, based on the binding assay studies, at least three different 
high-affinity binding sites have been reported for tracers in the tau fibril. 
Herein, through integrated modeling using molecular docking, molecular dynamics, 
and binding free energy calculations, we provide insight into the binding 
patterns of various tracers to the tau fibril. We suggest that there are four 
different high-affinity binding sites available for many of the studied tracers 
showing varying binding affinity to different binding sites. Thus, PBB3 binds 
most strongly to site 4, and interestingly, this site is not a preferable site 
for any other tracers. For THK5351, our data show that it strongly binds to 
sites 3 and 1, the former one being more preferable. We also find that MK6240 
and T807 bind to site 1 specifically. The modeling data also give some insight 
into whether a tracer bound to a specific site can be replaced by others or not. 
For example, the displacement of T807 by PBB3 as reported experimentally can 
also be explained and attributed to the larger binding affinity of the latter 
compound in all binding sites. The binding free energy results explain very well 
the small binding affinity of THK523 compared to all the aryl quinoline moieties 
containing THK tracers. The ability of certain tau tracers, like FDDNP and 
THK523, to bind to amyloid fibrils has also been investigated. Furthermore, such 
off-target interaction of tau tracers with amyloid beta fibrils has been 
validated using a quantum mechanical fragmentation approach.

DOI: 10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00093
PMID: 29630333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]