---
reference_id: "PMID:42307907"
title: "AAVrh.10hFXN Gene Therapy for the Cardiomyopathy of Friedreich Ataxia: A Nonrandomized Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Crystal RG
- Weinsaft JW
- Kaminsky SM
- Caragiulo A
- Savage N
- Patel A
- Gavrilova RH
- Perlman SL
- Galbraith M
- Kahlon U
- Krishnan U
- Kaner RJ
- Sanders A
- Vo M
- Sarva H
- Yoo A
- Sondhi D
- De BP
- Mezey JG
- Aubert G
- Khan A
- Selvan N
- Bhalla N
- Adler E
- Zesiewicz T
journal: JAMA Cardiol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2026.1699
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AAVrh.10hFXN Gene Therapy for the Cardiomyopathy of Friedreich Ataxia: A Nonrandomized Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Crystal RG, Weinsaft JW, Kaminsky SM, Caragiulo A, Savage N, Patel A, Gavrilova RH, Perlman SL, Galbraith M, Kahlon U, Krishnan U, Kaner RJ, Sanders A, Vo M, Sarva H, Yoo A, Sondhi D, De BP, Mezey JG, Aubert G, Khan A, Selvan N, Bhalla N, Adler E, Zesiewicz T
**Journal:** JAMA Cardiol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamacardio.2026.1699](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2026.1699)

## Content

1. JAMA Cardiol. 2026 Jun 17:e261699. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2026.1699. Online 
ahead of print.

AAVrh.10hFXN Gene Therapy for the Cardiomyopathy of Friedreich Ataxia: A 
Nonrandomized Clinical Trial.

Crystal RG(1), Weinsaft JW(2), Kaminsky SM(1), Caragiulo A(1), Savage N(1), 
Patel A(3), Gavrilova RH(4), Perlman SL(5), Galbraith M(1), Kahlon U(1), 
Krishnan U(2), Kaner RJ(1), Sanders A(6), Vo M(7), Sarva H(7), Yoo A(7), Sondhi 
D(1), De BP(1), Mezey JG(1)(8), Aubert G(9), Khan A(9), Selvan N(9), Bhalla 
N(9), Adler E(9), Zesiewicz T(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Morsani College of Medicine, 
University of South Florida, Tampa.
(4)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(5)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA Health 
Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, New York.
(7)Department of Neurology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York.
(8)Department of Computational Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.
(9)Lexeo Therapeutics, New York, New York.
(10)Department of Neurology, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South 
Florida, Tampa.

IMPORTANCE: Friedreich ataxia (FA), a fatal, autosomal recessive disorder caused 
by pathogenic variants in the frataxin (FXN) gene, is characterized by 
progressive neurologic and cardiac disease, with cardiac disease being the major 
cause of death. Preclinical studies have demonstrated that systemic 
administration of AAVrh.10hFXN, an rh.10 serotype cardiotropic adenoassociated 
virus (AAV) vector expressing the normal human FXN coding sequence, reverses the 
cardiomyopathy in FXN-deficient mice.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the safety and preliminary efficacy of administration of 
AAVrh.10hFXN to adults with FA cardiomyopathy.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This nonrandomized clinical trial evaluates 
the pooled data of 2 independent, open-label, dose-escalation trials that used 
the same gene therapy vector and similar clinical protocols among patients with 
FA cardiomyopathy at academic medical centers. Data were collected from February 
22, 2022, to October 4, 2025, for trial 1 and from February 14, 2023, to 
September 10, 2025, for trial 2 and analyzed together from November 5, 2025, to 
March 12, 2026.
INTERVENTION: AAVrh.10hFXN, administered intravenously in 3 dose cohorts 
(1.8 × 1011, 5.6 × 1011, and 1.2 × 1012 vector genomes per kilogram of body 
weight).
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: In addition to safety as the primary outcome, 
multiple parameters of exploratory end points were assessed, including cardiac 
biopsy levels of FXN protein, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging-derived left 
ventricular mass index (LVMI), and serum high-sensitivity (hs) troponin I.
RESULTS: Seventeen patients with FA cardiomyopathy (mean [SD] age, 25 [6] years; 
11 [65%] female) were followed up for a mean (SD) of 20 (8) months. There were 4 
serious adverse events, 3 possibly related to prednisone immunosuppression and 1 
possibly vector-related myocarditis 12 months after therapy, all of which 
resolved. Other adverse events were transient, nonserious, or not treatment 
related. In all 8 patients with cardiac biopsy 3 months after therapy, there 
were higher levels of cardiac FXN (dose cohort 1, 20%; cohort 2, 81%; cohort 3, 
123%). After therapy, LVMI was lower by at least 10% in 9 patients and 
stabilized in 8 patients. Excluding the patient with myocarditis, posttherapy 
values of serum hs troponin I were lower by at least 10% in 15 patients and 
higher by at least 10% in 2 patients.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Findings of this nonrandomized clinical trial suggest 
that intravenous administration of AAVrh.10hFXN was well tolerated and may be a 
potential treatment for FA cardiomyopathy, as evidenced by preliminary 
improvement in exploratory efficacy end points.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifiers: NCT05302271 and NCT05445323.

DOI: 10.1001/jamacardio.2026.1699
PMCID: PMC13276668
PMID: 42307907

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Crystal 
reported grants from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) and 
consulting fees, royalties, stock, and stock options from Lexeo Therapeutics 
during the conduct of the study; and consulting fees, royalties, stock, and 
stock options from Lexeo Therapeutics outside the submitted work; in addition, 
Dr Crystal has a patent for 10224-04-US pending for Lexeo Therapeutics. Dr 
Weinsaft reported consulting fees from Lexeo Therapeutics, Adverum 
Biotechnologies, and AAVLIFE and a grant from the National Institutes of Health 
during the conduct of the study; and consulting fees from Faction Imaging 
outside the submitted work. Dr Kaminsky reported salary from the NHLBI and 
royalties and equity from Lexeo Therapeutics during the conduct of the study; 
and royalties and equity from Lexeo Therapeutics outside the submitted work; in 
addition, Dr Kaminsky had a patent for Methods for Treating FA pending for Lexeo 
Therapeutics. Dr Patel reported serving on an advisory board for Lexeo 
Therapeutics during the conduct of the study; and serving on an advisory board 
for Lexeo Therapeutics outside the submitted work. Dr Kaner reported grants from 
Weill Cornell Medicine during the conduct of the study. Dr Sarva reported 
clinical trial support from Blue Rock, Prevail, Insightec, Novo Nordisk, Biogen, 
Bukwang, Biohaven, Genentech, Meira, Vima, Cerevance, Neuroderm, UCB, Sun 
Pharma, Bial, and Iregene and advisory board fees from Novo Nordisk and 
Neuroderm outside the submitted work. Dr Sondhi reported equity from Lexeo 
Therapeutics during the conduct of the study; in addition, Dr Sondhi had a 
patent application with royalties paid for Methods for Treating FA. Dr Aubert 
reported personal fees, salary, stock, and stock options from Lexeo Therapeutics 
during the conduct of the study. Dr Khan reported personal fees, salary, stock, 
and stock options from Lexeo Therapeutics during the conduct of the study; and 
personal fees, salary, stock, and stock options from Lexeo Therapeutics outside 
the submitted work. Dr Selvan reported salary, stock, and stock options with 
Lexeo Therapeutics during the conduct of the study. Dr Bhalla reported salary, 
stock, and stock options with Lexeo Therapeutics during the conduct of the 
study. Dr Adler reported personal fees, salary, stock, and stock options from 
Lexeo Therapeutics, Myoventive, and Rocket Pharmaceuticals and grants from the 
California Institute for Regenerative Medicine outside the submitted work. Dr 
Zesiewicz reported grants from the University of South Florida and research 
funding and advisory board fees from Lexeo Therapeutics during the conduct of 
the study; and research funding and advisory board fees from Lexeo Therapeutics 
outside the submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.