---
reference_id: "PMID:22708291"
title: "[Parvovirus B19 DNA testing in Polish blood donors, 2004-2010]."
authors:
- Grabarczyk P
- Korzeniowska J
- Liszewski G
- Kalińska A
- Sulkowska E
- Krug-Janiak M
- Kopacz A
- Łetowska M
- Brojer E
journal: Przegl Epidemiol
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Parvovirus B19 DNA testing in Polish blood donors, 2004-2010].
**Authors:** Grabarczyk P, Korzeniowska J, Liszewski G, Kalińska A, Sulkowska E, Krug-Janiak M, Kopacz A, Łetowska M, Brojer E
**Journal:** Przegl Epidemiol (2012)

## Content

1. Przegl Epidemiol. 2012;66(1):7-12.

[Parvovirus B19 DNA testing in Polish blood donors, 2004-2010].

[Article in Polish]

Grabarczyk P(1), Korzeniowska J, Liszewski G, Kalińska A, Sulkowska E, 
Krug-Janiak M, Kopacz A, Łetowska M, Brojer E.

Author information:
(1)Zaklad Wirusologii, Instytut Hematologii i Transfuzjologii w Warszawie, 
Regionalne Centrum Krwiodawstwa i Krwiolecznictwa w Lublinie. 
pgrabarczyk@ihit.waw.pl

Since 2004 Polish blood donors have been tested for parvovirus B19 (B19V) DNA. 
The screening testing has been performed in donors of plasma for fractionation 
and anti-D and anti-HBs production and donors of erythrocytes used for 
immunization. AIM is to present methods of the testing, quality control and 
results in period 2004-2010.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Testing was performed in individual donation testing (IDT) 
in Regional Blood Transfusion Center (RBTC) in Lublin or in pools of 24 in 
Institute of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine in Warsaw (IHTM). Quantitative 
testing with real-time PCR was preceded with nucleic acid isolation on silica 
based methods (Prepito Viral DNA/RNA, Chemagen and QIAamp DNA Mini Kit, QIAGEN). 
Amplification was performed initially with home made method and later with 
commercial assay (Artus Parvo B19 RG PCR Kit on Rotor Gene 6 000). In total 17 
625 donations were tested: 8 539 in pools and 9 090 individually. Beside routine 
external quality control programmes in which both laboratories participated 
(Proficiency Study VQC,Amsterdam, Holand; EQA Programe, Glasgow, Scotland), 
panel containing negative samples, positive with very high DNA B 19V level and 
plasma infected with genotype 2 was prepared for RBTC in Lublin.
RESULTS: B19V infection frequency was 1:980 donations, low viraemic donations 
were detected most frequently (1:1 037). It was identified only one donation 
with DNA load that could cause potential health risk for plasma product 
recipients (1:17 625). In one of the donors B 19V DNA was observed for 3 years 
and 3 months. In acute or persistent phase of infection no clinical or 
laboratory symptoms (morphology of peripheral blood, ALT) were observed. Due to 
risk of underestimation of viral load connected with viral genome polymorphism 
all donations with B19V positive result were not allowed to be clinically used.

PMID: 22708291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]