---
reference_id: "PMID:31864384"
title: "Early onset retinal dystrophies: clinical clues to diagnosis for pediatricians."
authors:
- Suppiej A
- Marino S
- Reffo ME
- Maritan V
- Vitaliti G
- Mailo J
- Falsaperla R
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-019-0760-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early onset retinal dystrophies: clinical clues to diagnosis for pediatricians.
**Authors:** Suppiej A, Marino S, Reffo ME, Maritan V, Vitaliti G, Mailo J, Falsaperla R
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-019-0760-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-019-0760-5)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2019 Dec 21;45(1):168. doi: 10.1186/s13052-019-0760-5.

Early onset retinal dystrophies: clinical clues to diagnosis for pediatricians.

Suppiej A(1)(2), Marino S(3), Reffo ME(4), Maritan V(5), Vitaliti G(3), Mailo 
J(6), Falsaperla R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences - Pediatric Section, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy. agnese.suppiej@unife.it.
(2)Robert Hollman Foundation, Padua, Italy. agnese.suppiej@unife.it.
(3)Paediatric Operative Unit and Acute and Emergency, Policlinico Vittorio 
Emanuele University Hospital of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(4)Robert Hollman Foundation, Padua, Italy.
(5)Ophthalmology Unit, Azienda ULS 6, Euganea, Italy.
(6)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Stoller Children's Hospital, Edmonton, 
Alberta, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Inherited retinal dystrophies are major cause of severe 
progressive vision loss in children. Early recognition and diagnosis are 
essential for timely visual rehabilitation during the appropriate stages of the 
visual development, as well as for genetic diagnosis and possible gene therapy. 
The aim of this study is to characterize a pattern of the initial visual 
symptoms, which could help the pediatricians and the primary care providers to 
suspect an inherited retinal disorder in its early stage.
METHODS: We analyzed the initial clinical symptoms, based on parental report 
during the first visit to specialist, in 50 children diagnosed with retinal 
dystrophy confirmed by full-field electroretinography. The analysis included the 
age of symptoms onset and the type of visual symptoms, both in the total 
population and in the following diagnostic subgroups: rod-cone dystrophy (n.17), 
cone-rod dystrophy (n.12), achromatopsia (n.13), congenital stationary night 
blindness (n.6) and Leber's congenital amaurosis (n.2).
RESULTS: The majority of children (80%) had the onset of clinical symptoms 
before one year of age. The most frequent visual complaints reported by parents 
were nystagmus (76%), visual loss (28%) and photophobia (8%). Nystagmus was the 
first symptom reported by parents if the disease onset was before the age of six 
months, while the onset after the six months of age was more likely associated 
with the complain of vision loss.
CONCLUSIONS: Low vision and nystagmus observed by parents, particularly in the 
first year of life, may represent a red flag, prompting an appropriate 
ophthalmological workup for inherited retinal dystrophy.

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-019-0760-5
PMCID: PMC6925422
PMID: 31864384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.