---
reference_id: "PMID:29970925"
title: "Growth characteristics in individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta in North America: results from a multicenter study."
authors:
- Jain M
- Tam A
- Shapiro JR
- Steiner RD
- Smith PA
- Bober MB
- Hart T
- Cuthbertson D
- Krischer J
- Mullins M
- Bellur S
- Byers PH
- Pepin M
- Durigova M
- Glorieux FH
- Rauch F
- Lee B
- Sutton VR
- Members of the Brittle Bone Disorders Consortium*
- Nagamani SCS
journal: Genet Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-018-0045-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Body Height/physiology
- Body Mass Index
- Body Weight/physiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- North America
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/drug therapy, epidemiology, physiopathology"
- Pamidronate/therapeutic use
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth characteristics in individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta in North America: results from a multicenter study.
**Authors:** Jain M, Tam A, Shapiro JR, Steiner RD, Smith PA, Bober MB, Hart T, Cuthbertson D, Krischer J, Mullins M, Bellur S, Byers PH, Pepin M, Durigova M, Glorieux FH, Rauch F, Lee B, Sutton VR, Members of the Brittle Bone Disorders Consortium*, Nagamani SCS
**Journal:** Genet Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-018-0045-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-018-0045-1)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2019 Feb;21(2):275-283. doi: 10.1038/s41436-018-0045-1. Epub 2018
Jul  4.

Growth characteristics in individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta in North
America: results from a multicenter study.

Jain M(#)(1)(2), Tam A(#)(1), Shapiro JR(2), Steiner RD(3)(4), Smith PA(5),
Bober MB(6), Hart T(7), Cuthbertson D(8), Krischer J(8), Mullins M(1), Bellur
S(1), Byers PH(9), Pepin M(9), Durigova M(10), Glorieux FH(10), Rauch F(10), Lee
B(1)(11), Sutton VR(#)(1)(11); , Members of the Brittle Bone Disorders
Consortium*,; Nagamani SCS(#)(12)(13).

Collaborators: Eyre DR, Krakow D, Tosi L, Raggio CL, Orwoll ES, Rush ET.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Bone and Osteogenesis Imperfecta, Kennedy Krieger Institute,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health
and Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(4)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA.
(5)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)Division of Medical Genetics, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children,
Wilmington, Delaware, USA.
(7)Osteogenesis Imperfecta Foundation, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
(8)College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(9)Departments of Medicine and Pathology, Division of Medical Genetics,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(10)Shriners Hospital for Children, Canada and McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.
(11)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(12)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA. Nagamani@bcm.edu.
(13)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA. Nagamani@bcm.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) predisposes people to recurrent fractures,
bone deformities, and short stature. There is a lack of large-scale systematic
studies that have investigated growth parameters in OI.
METHODS: Using data from the Linked Clinical Research Centers, we compared
height, growth velocity, weight, and body mass index (BMI) in 552 individuals
with OI. Height, weight, and BMI were plotted on Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention normative curves.
RESULTS: In children, the median z-scores for height in OI types I, III, and IV
were -0.66, -6.91, and -2.79, respectively. Growth velocity was diminished in OI
types III and IV. The median z-score for weight in children with OI type III was
-4.55. The median z-scores for BMI in children with OI types I, III, and IV were
0.10, 0.91, and 0.67, respectively. Generalized linear model analyses
demonstrated that the height z-score was positively correlated with the severity
of the OI subtype (P < 0.001), age, bisphosphonate use, and rodding (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: From the largest cohort of individuals with OI, we provide median
values for height, weight, and BMI z-scores that can aid the evaluation of
overall growth in the clinic setting. This study is an important first step in
the generation of OI-specific growth curves.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-018-0045-1
PMCID: PMC6320321
PMID: 29970925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
