---
reference_id: "PMID:30338514"
title: Interventions for reducing inflammation in familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Wu B
- Xu T
- Li Y
- Yin X
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interventions for reducing inflammation in familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Wu B, Xu T, Li Y, Yin X
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub3](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub3)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Oct 19;10(10):CD010893. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub3.

Interventions for reducing inflammation in familial Mediterranean fever.

Wu B(1), Xu T, Li Y, Yin X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, No.37,Guoxue 
Lane, Chengdu, Sichuan, China, 610041.

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022 Mar 29;3:CD010893. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub4.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Mar 20;(3):CD010893. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub2.

BACKGROUND: Familial Mediterranean fever, a hereditary auto-inflammatory 
disease, mainly affects ethnic groups living in the Mediterranean region. Early 
studies reported colchicine as a potential drug for preventing attacks of 
familial Mediterranean fever. For those people who are colchicine-resistant or 
intolerant, drugs such as rilonacept, anakinra, canakinumab, etanercept, 
infliximab, thalidomide and interferon-alpha might be beneficial. This is an 
updated version of the review.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of interventions for reducing 
inflammation in people with familial Mediterranean fever.
SEARCH METHODS: We used detailed search strategies to search the following 
databases: CENTRAL; MEDLINE; Embase; Chinese Biomedical Literature Database 
(CBM); China National Knowledge Infrastructure Database (CNKI); Wan Fang; and 
VIP. In addition, we also searched the clinical trials registries including 
ClinicalTrials.gov, the International Standard Randomized Controlled Trial 
Number Register, the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform and the 
Chinese Clinical Trial Registry, as well as references listed in relevant 
reports.Date of last search: 21 August 2018.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized controlled studies (RCTs) of people diagnosed 
with familial Mediterranean fever, comparing active interventions (including 
colchicine, anakinra, rilonacept, canakinumab, etanercept, infliximab, 
thalidomide, interferon-alpha, ImmunoGuard™ (a herbal dietary supplement) and 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) with placebo or no treatment, or 
comparing active drugs to each other.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: The authors independently selected studies, 
extracted data and assessed risk of bias. We pooled data to present the risk 
ratio or mean difference with their 95% confidence intervals. We assessed 
overall evidence quality according to the GRADE approach.
MAIN RESULTS: We included nine RCTs with a total of 249 participants (aged three 
to 53 years); five were of cross-over and four of parallel design. Six studies 
used oral colchicine, one used oral ImmunoGuard™ and the remaining two used 
rilonacept or anakinra as a subcutaneous injection. The duration of each study 
arm ranged from one to eight months.The three studies of ImmunoGuard™, 
rilonacept and anakinra were generally well-designed, except for an unclear risk 
of detection bias in one of these. However, some inadequacy existed in the four 
older studies on colchicine, which had an unclear risk of selection bias, 
detection bias and reporting bias, and also a high risk of attrition bias and 
other potential bias. Neither of the two studies comparing a single to a divided 
dose of colchicine were adequately blinded, furthermore one study had an unclear 
risk of selection bias and reporting bias, a high risk of attrition bias and 
other potential bias.We aimed to report on the number of participants 
experiencing an attack, the timing of attacks, the prevention of amyloid A 
amyloidosis, any adverse drug reactions and the response of a number of 
biochemical markers from the acute phase of an attack, but data were not 
available for all outcomes across all comparisons.One study (15 participants) 
reported a significant reduction in the number of people experiencing attacks at 
three months with 0.6 mg colchicine three times daily (14% versus 100%), risk 
ratio 0.21 (95% confidence interval 0.05 to 0.95) (low-quality evidence). A 
further study (22 participants) of 0.5 mg colchicine twice daily showed no 
significant reduction in the number of participants experiencing attacks at two 
months (low-quality evidence). A study of rilonacept in individuals who were 
colchicine-resistant or intolerant (14 participants) also showed no reduction at 
three months (moderate-quality evidence). Likewise, a study of anakinra given to 
colchicine-resistant people (25 participants) showed no reduction in the number 
of participants experiencing an attack at four months (moderate-quality 
evidence).Three studies reported no significant differences in duration of 
attacks: one comparing colchicine to placebo (15 participants) (very low-quality 
evidence); one comparing single-dose colchicine to divided-dose colchicine (90 
participants) (moderate-quality evidence); and one comparing rilonacept to 
placebo (14 participants) (low-quality evidence). Three studies reported no 
significant differences in the number of days between attacks: two comparing 
colchicine to placebo (24 participants in total) (very low-quality evidence); 
and one comparing rilonacept to placebo (14 participants) (low-quality 
evidence).No study reported on the prevention of amyloid A amyloidosis.One study 
of colchicine reported loose stools and frequent bowel movements (very 
low-quality evidence) and a second reported diarrhoea (very low-quality 
evidence). The rilonacept study reported no significant differences in 
gastrointestinal symptoms, hypertension, headache, respiratory tract infections, 
injection site reactions and herpes, compared to placebo (low-quality evidence). 
The ImmunoGuard study observed no side effects (moderate-quality evidence). The 
anakinra study reported no significant differences between intervention and 
placebo, including injection site reaction, headache, presyncope, dyspnea and 
itching (moderate-quality evidence). When comparing single and divided doses of 
colchicine, one study reported no difference in adverse events (including 
anorexia, nausea, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, vomiting and elevated liver 
enzymes) between groups (moderate-quality evidence) and the second study 
reported no adverse effects were detected.The rilonacept study reported no 
significant reduction in acute phase response indicators after three months 
(low-quality evidence). In the ImmunoGuard™ study, these indicators were not 
reduced after one month of treatment (moderate-quality evidence). The anakinra 
study, reported that C-reactive protein was significantly reduced after four 
months (moderate-quality evidence). One of the single dose versus divided dose 
colchicine studies reported no significant reduction in acute phase response 
indicators after eight months (low-quality evidence), while the second study 
reported no significant reduction in serum amyloid A concentration after six 
months (moderate-quality evidence).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: There were limited RCTs assessing interventions for people 
with familial Mediterranean fever. Based on the evidence, three times daily 
colchicine appears to reduce the number of people experiencing attacks, 
colchicine single dose and divided dose might not be different for children with 
familial Mediterranean fever and anakinra might reduce C-reactive protein in 
colchicine-resistant participants; however, only a few RCTs contributed data for 
analysis. Further RCTs examining active interventions, not only colchicine, are 
necessary before a comprehensive conclusion regarding the efficacy and safety of 
interventions for reducing inflammation in familial Mediterranean fever can be 
drawn.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010893.pub3
PMCID: PMC6517233
PMID: 30338514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare: none known.