---
reference_id: "PMID:39009815"
title: Building a translational cancer dependency map for The Cancer Genome Atlas.
authors:
- Shi X
- Gekas C
- Verduzco D
- Petiwala S
- Jeffries C
- Lu C
- Murphy E
- Anton T
- Vo AH
- Xiao Z
- Narayanan P
- Sun BC
- "D'Souza AL"
- Barnes JM
- Roy S
- Ramathal C
- Flister MJ
- Dezso Z
journal: Nat Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s43018-024-00789-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Building a translational cancer dependency map for The Cancer Genome Atlas.
**Authors:** Shi X, Gekas C, Verduzco D, Petiwala S, Jeffries C, Lu C, Murphy E, Anton T, Vo AH, Xiao Z, Narayanan P, Sun BC, D'Souza AL, Barnes JM, Roy S, Ramathal C, Flister MJ, Dezso Z
**Journal:** Nat Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s43018-024-00789-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-024-00789-y)

## Content

1. Nat Cancer. 2024 Aug;5(8):1176-1194. doi: 10.1038/s43018-024-00789-y. Epub
2024  Jul 15.

Building a translational cancer dependency map for The Cancer Genome Atlas.

Shi X(#)(1), Gekas C(#)(1), Verduzco D(#)(2), Petiwala S(2), Jeffries C(2), Lu 
C(2), Murphy E(2), Anton T(2), Vo AH(2), Xiao Z(1), Narayanan P(1), Sun BC(1), 
D'Souza AL(1), Barnes JM(2), Roy S(1), Ramathal C(2), Flister MJ(3), Dezso Z(4).

Author information:
(1)AbbVie Bay Area, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Pfizer Oncology Research and Development, Bothell, WA, USA. 
michael.flister@pfizer.com.
(4)AbbVie Bay Area, South San Francisco, CA, USA. zoltan.dezso@abbvie.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Cancer dependency maps have accelerated the discovery of tumor vulnerabilities 
that can be exploited as drug targets when translatable to patients. The Cancer 
Genome Atlas (TCGA) is a compendium of 'maps' detailing the genetic, epigenetic 
and molecular changes that occur during the pathogenesis of cancer, yet it lacks 
a dependency map to translate gene essentiality in patient tumors. Here, we used 
machine learning to build translational dependency maps for patient tumors, 
which identified tumor vulnerabilities that predict drug responses and disease 
outcomes. A similar approach was used to map gene tolerability in healthy 
tissues to prioritize tumor vulnerabilities with the best therapeutic windows. A 
subset of patient-translatable synthetic lethalities were experimentally tested, 
including PAPSS1/PAPSS12 and CNOT7/CNOT78, which were validated in vitro and in 
vivo. Notably, PAPSS1 synthetic lethality was driven by collateral deletion of 
PAPSS2 with PTEN and was correlated with patient survival. Finally, the 
translational dependency map is provided as a web-based application for 
exploring tumor vulnerabilities.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s43018-024-00789-y
PMCID: PMC11358024
PMID: 39009815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors except M.J.F. are employees of 
AbbVie. M.J.F. was an employee of AbbVie at the time of the study and is 
currently a full-time employee of Pfizer. The design, study conduct and 
financial support for this research were provided by AbbVie. AbbVie participated 
in the interpretation of data, review and approval of the publication.