---
reference_id: "PMID:28846673"
title: "Skeletal evolution in Marfan syndrome: growth curves from a French national cohort."
authors:
- Benoist G
- Tubach F
- Roy C
- Rioux S
- Michelon-Jouneaux M
- Chevallier B
- Jondeau G
- Stheneur C
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/pr.2017.210
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skeletal evolution in Marfan syndrome: growth curves from a French national cohort.
**Authors:** Benoist G, Tubach F, Roy C, Rioux S, Michelon-Jouneaux M, Chevallier B, Jondeau G, Stheneur C
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/pr.2017.210](https://doi.org/10.1038/pr.2017.210)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2018 Jan;83(1-1):71-77. doi: 10.1038/pr.2017.210. Epub 2017 Sep
27.

Skeletal evolution in Marfan syndrome: growth curves from a French national 
cohort.

Benoist G(1), Tubach F(1), Roy C(1), Rioux S(1), Michelon-Jouneaux M(1), 
Chevallier B(1), Jondeau G(1), Stheneur C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ambroise Paré Hospital, APHP, Boulogne-Billancourt, 
France.

BackgroundTo describe the growth patterns of children affected by Marfan 
syndrome (MFS) compared with those of unaffected children and to create growth 
charts.MethodsAn observational study of children referred to the French National 
MFS Reference Centre. A total of 259 children carrying an FBN1 gene mutation and 
fulfilling Ghent 1 criteria (MFS group) and 474 mutation-negative sibling 
controls (non-MFS group) were evaluated. Both groups were compared with 
French-accepted reference nomograms (Reference group).ResultsBoys and girls from 
the MFS group were significantly taller than those in the non-MFS group and in 
the reference group at all ages (P<0.0001). But, MFS children's overgrowth 
reduced with age. At 17 years of age, the mean height (MFS vs. non-MFS) was 
191.2±8.4 cm (+2.9 SD) vs. 182.9±8.1 (+1.6 SD) for boys and 178.3±7.6 cm 
(+2.7 SD) vs. 169.5±6.8 (+1.2 SD) for girls, respectively. By contrast, the mean 
BMI of children in the MFS group was similar to those in the non-MFS group and 
inferior to the values of French general population, evolving around 
-1 SD.ConclusionGrowth patterns differ in patients with an FBN1 mutation. 
Knowing the growth parameters should allow physicians to better counsel patients 
and detect the associated diseases. The provided curves could also help to 
predict the final height.

DOI: 10.1038/pr.2017.210
PMID: 28846673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]