---
reference_id: "PMID:27193360"
title: "Some Unusual Neuropsychological Syndromes: Somatoparaphrenia, Akinetopsia, Reduplicative Paramnesia, Autotopagnosia."
authors:
- Ardila A
journal: Arch Clin Neuropsychol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/arclin/acw021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Some Unusual Neuropsychological Syndromes: Somatoparaphrenia, Akinetopsia, Reduplicative Paramnesia, Autotopagnosia.
**Authors:** Ardila A
**Journal:** Arch Clin Neuropsychol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/arclin/acw021](https://doi.org/10.1093/arclin/acw021)

## Content

1. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2016 Aug;31(5):456-64. doi: 10.1093/arclin/acw021.
Epub  2016 May 4.

Some Unusual Neuropsychological Syndromes: Somatoparaphrenia, Akinetopsia, 
Reduplicative Paramnesia, Autotopagnosia.

Ardila A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Florida International 
University, Miami, FL, USA ardilaa@fiu.edu.

Some unusual neuropsychological syndromes are rarely reported in the 
neuropsychological literature. This paper presents a review of four of these 
unusual clinical syndromes: (1) somatoparaphrenia (delusional belief in which a 
patient states that the limb contralateral to a brain pathology, does not belong 
to him/her); (2) akinetopsia (cortical syndrome in which patient losses the 
ability to perceive visual motion); (3) reduplicative paramnesia (believe that a 
familiar place, person, object, or body part has been duplicated); and (4) 
autotopagnosia (disturbance of body schema involving the loss of ability to 
localize, recognize, or identify the specific parts of one's body). It is 
concluded that regardless of their rarity, it is fundamental to take them into 
consideration in order to understand how the brain organizes cognition; their 
understanding is also crucial in the clinical analysis of patients with brain 
pathologies.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/arclin/acw021
PMID: 27193360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]