---
reference_id: "PMID:31646622"
title: "Severe early-onset manifestations of pseudoxanthoma elasticum resulting from the cumulative effects of several deleterious mutations in ENPP1, ABCC6 and HBB: transient improvement in ectopic calcification with sodium thiosulfate."
authors:
- Omarjee L
- Nitschke Y
- Verschuere S
- Bourrat E
- Vignon MD
- Navasiolava N
- Leftheriotis G
- Kauffenstein G
- Rutsch F
- Vanakker OM
- Martin L
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.18632
keywords:
- "Calcinosis/drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- "ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family C Proteins/genetics"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/drug therapy, genetics"
- Pyrophosphatases/genetics
- Thiosulfates
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe early-onset manifestations of pseudoxanthoma elasticum resulting from the cumulative effects of several deleterious mutations in ENPP1, ABCC6 and HBB: transient improvement in ectopic calcification with sodium thiosulfate.
**Authors:** Omarjee L, Nitschke Y, Verschuere S, Bourrat E, Vignon MD, Navasiolava N, Leftheriotis G, Kauffenstein G, Rutsch F, Vanakker OM, Martin L
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.18632](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.18632)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2020 Aug;183(2):367-372. doi: 10.1111/bjd.18632. Epub 2019 Dec
22.

Severe early-onset manifestations of pseudoxanthoma elasticum resulting from the
cumulative effects of several deleterious mutations in ENPP1, ABCC6 and HBB:
transient improvement in ectopic calcification with sodium thiosulfate.

Omarjee L(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Nitschke Y(6), Verschuere S(7), Bourrat E(8), Vignon
MD(9), Navasiolava N(1)(2), Leftheriotis G(10), Kauffenstein G(1), Rutsch F(6),
Vanakker OM(7), Martin L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)MitoVasc Institute, UMR CNRS 6015/INSERM 1083, 49100, Angers, France.
(2)PXE Reference Centre (MAGEC Nord), University Hospital of Angers, Angers,
France.
(3)University of Rennes, CHU Rennes, INSERM CIC1414, Vascular Medicine Unit,
Rennes, France.
(4)PXE Vascular Consultation Centre, CHU Rennes, 35000, Rennes, France.
(5)Vascular Medicine Unit, Redon Hospital, 35600, Redon, France.
(6)Münster University Children's Hospital, Münster, Germany.
(7)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, APHP, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France.
(9)Department of Pathology, Saint-Louis Hospital, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Physiology and Vascular Investigation, Nice University
Hospital, Nice, France.

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a rare disorder characterized by fragmentation
and progressive calcification of elastic fibres in connective tissues. Overlap
has been reported between the inherited PXE phenotype associated with ENPP1,
ABCC6 or NT5E mutations and acquired PXE clinical manifestations associated with
haemoglobinopathies induced by HBB mutations. No treatment is currently
available for PXE. A young boy presented with severe early-onset systemic
calcifications occurring in the skin as elastosis perforans serpiginosa (EPS)
and in the arteries, causing mesenteric and limb ischaemia. Analyses revealed
deleterious ABCC6, ENPP1 and HBB mutations. The diagnosis of severe PXE was
retained and we have coined the term 'PXE+ syndrome' to describe the cumulative
effects of the various mutations in this uncommon phenotype. Given the severity,
rapid progression and a potentially fatal prognosis, intravenous sodium
thiosulfate (STS) was initiated at 25 g three times weekly for 6 months.
Numerous side-effects prompted dosage adjustment to 10 g intravenously daily.
Treatment efficacy was evaluated at 6 months. Asthaenia, anorexia and
pre-/postprandial pain had subsided, entailing weight gain. Abdominal EPS had
diminished. Calcific stenosis of the coeliac and mesenteric arteries was no
longer detectable on arterial ultrasonography. Follow-up revealed only transient
efficacy of STS. Discontinuation of treatment to evaluate the persistence of
effects resulted in relapse of the initial symptomatology after 4 months. STS
efficacy is conceivably due to strong antioxidant properties and chelation of
calcium to form soluble calcium thiosulfate complexes. This case is suggestive
of PXE+ syndrome for which STS may represent potential treatment in severe
cases. What's already known about this topic? Generalized arterial calcification
of infancy may occur in association with ABCC6 mutations and pseudoxanthoma
elasticum (PXE) can be linked to ENPP1 mutations. A PXE-like phenotype has also
been reported in a subset of patients with inherited haemoglobinopathies, namely
sickle cell disease or β-thalassaemia, related to HBB mutations. To date, there
is still no cure for PXE. What does this study add? We report a severe case of
PXE resulting from the cumulative effects of several deleterious mutations in
ENPP1, ABCC6 and HBB. We suggest the term 'PXE+ syndrome' to describe such
patients. Sodium thiosulfate therapy could represent a potential option in
severe cases of PXE+ syndrome.

© 2019 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.18632
PMID: 31646622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
