---
reference_id: "PMID:36769308"
title: Chronic Kidney Disease as a Comorbidity in Heart Failure.
authors:
- Szlagor M
- Dybiec J
- Młynarska E
- Rysz J
- Franczyk B
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24032988
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Kidney Disease as a Comorbidity in Heart Failure.
**Authors:** Szlagor M, Dybiec J, Młynarska E, Rysz J, Franczyk B
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24032988](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24032988)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Feb 3;24(3):2988. doi: 10.3390/ijms24032988.

Chronic Kidney Disease as a Comorbidity in Heart Failure.

Szlagor M(1), Dybiec J(1), Młynarska E(1), Rysz J(2), Franczyk B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrocardiology, Medical University of Lodz, ul. Zeromskiego 
113, 90-549 Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Hypertension and Family Medicine, Medical 
University of Lodz, ul. Żeromskiego 113, 90-549 Łódź, Poland.

Heart failure (HF) is one of the greatest problems in healthcare and it often 
coexists with declining renal function. The pathophysiology between the heart 
and the kidneys is bidirectional. Common mechanisms leading to the dysfunction 
of these organs result in a vicious cycle of cardiorenal deterioration. It is 
also associated with difficulties in the treatment of aggravating HF and chronic 
kidney disease (CKD) and, as a consequence, recurrent hospitalizations and 
death. As the worsening of renal function has an undeniably negative impact on 
the outcomes in patients with HF, searching for new treatment strategies and 
identification of biomarkers is necessary. This review is focused on the 
pathomechanisms in chronic kidney disease in patients with HF and therapeutic 
strategies for co-existing CKD and HF.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24032988
PMCID: PMC9918100
PMID: 36769308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.