---
reference_id: "PMID:39776112"
title: "Positive Clinical, Neuropsychological, and Metabolic Impact of Liver Transplantation in Patients With Argininosuccinate Lyase Deficiency."
authors:
- Siri B
- Greco B
- Martinelli D
- Cairoli S
- Guarnera A
- Longo D
- Napolitano A
- Parrillo C
- Ravà L
- Simeoli R
- Spagnoletti G
- Taurisano R
- Veraldi S
- Pietrobattista A
- Spada M
- Dionisi-Vici C
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12843
keywords:
- Humans
- Liver Transplantation
- Argininosuccinic Aciduria
- Male
- Female
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Argininosuccinic Acid
- Adolescent
- Neuropsychological Tests
- Argininosuccinate Lyase/genetics
- Biomarkers/blood
- Hyperammonemia
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Positive Clinical, Neuropsychological, and Metabolic Impact of Liver Transplantation in Patients With Argininosuccinate Lyase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Siri B, Greco B, Martinelli D, Cairoli S, Guarnera A, Longo D, Napolitano A, Parrillo C, Ravà L, Simeoli R, Spagnoletti G, Taurisano R, Veraldi S, Pietrobattista A, Spada M, Dionisi-Vici C
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12843](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12843)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2025 Jan;48(1):e12843. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12843.

Positive Clinical, Neuropsychological, and Metabolic Impact of Liver
Transplantation in Patients With Argininosuccinate Lyase Deficiency.

Siri B(1), Greco B(1), Martinelli D(1), Cairoli S(1), Guarnera A(2), Longo D(2),
Napolitano A(3), Parrillo C(3), Ravà L(4), Simeoli R(1), Spagnoletti G(5),
Taurisano R(1), Veraldi S(1), Pietrobattista A(1), Spada M(5), Dionisi-Vici
C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolic Diseases and Hepatology, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Neuroradiology Unit, Imaging Department, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital,
IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Medical Physics Unit, Risk Management Enterprise, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Epidemiology, Clinical Pathways and Clinical Risk Unit, Bambino Gesù
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(5)Division of Hepatobiliopancreatic Surgery, Liver and Kidney Transplantation,
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Liver transplantation (LTx) is increasingly used in Urea Cycle Defects (UCDs) to
prevent recurrent hyperammonemia and related neurological irreversible injury.
Among UCDs, argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) has a more complex
phenotype than other UCDs, with long-term neurocognitive deficits. Therefore,
the role of LTx in ASLD is still debated. The impact of LTx on nine patients
with early-onset ASLD was assessed through pre- and post-LTx clinical,
neuropsychological, MRI and biochemical evaluations. After LTx, no episodes of
metabolic decompensations were reported. Neuropsychological evaluations
documented significant improvement in cognitive/developmental functioning
especially in patients transplanted in early childhood. Improvements were also
highlighted in daily living skills and emotional-behavioral problems, with a
reduction in attention disturbances and somatic complaints. Movement disorders
resolved after LTx in patient transplanted in early childhood. Any patients
developed epilepsy with stability of EEG alterations after LTx. A positive
effect of LTx on other disease-related outcomes such as growth, diet,
medications, hospitalizations, and long-term ASLD-related complications was
highlighted. The primary biomarker argininosuccinic acid dramatically reduced in
plasma after transplantation with a decreasing trend in CSF at long-term
follow-up. Moreover, health-related quality of life improved after LTx,
especially when assessed through MetabQoL, a tool designed for intoxication
diseases such as ASLD. In conclusion, our study showed a global beneficial
impact of LTx in early-onset ASLD patients to avoid episodes of hyperammonemia,
and improve neurocognitive outcome, adaptive and behavioral deficits when
performed in early childhood with a dramatic benefit in terms of quality of
life.

© 2025 The Author(s). Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12843
PMCID: PMC11706762
PMID: 39776112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
