---
reference_id: "PMID:20169667"
title: "Randomized phase II trial of paclitaxel plus carboplatin therapy versus irinotecan plus cisplatin therapy as first-line chemotherapy for clear cell adenocarcinoma of the ovary: a JGOG study."
authors:
- Takakura S
- Takano M
- Takahashi F
- Saito T
- Aoki D
- Inaba N
- Noda K
- Sugiyama T
- Ochiai K
- Japanese Gynecologic Oncology Group
journal: Int J Gynecol Cancer
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/igc.0b013e3181cafb47
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Clear Cell/drug therapy"
- Adult
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Camptothecin/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives"
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage"
- "Cisplatin/administration & dosage"
- Female
- Humans
- Irinotecan
- Middle Aged
- Ovarian Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Paclitaxel/administration & dosage"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized phase II trial of paclitaxel plus carboplatin therapy versus irinotecan plus cisplatin therapy as first-line chemotherapy for clear cell adenocarcinoma of the ovary: a JGOG study.
**Authors:** Takakura S, Takano M, Takahashi F, Saito T, Aoki D, Inaba N, Noda K, Sugiyama T, Ochiai K, Japanese Gynecologic Oncology Group
**Journal:** Int J Gynecol Cancer (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/igc.0b013e3181cafb47](https://doi.org/10.1111/igc.0b013e3181cafb47)

## Content

1. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2010 Feb;20(2):240-7. doi: 10.1111/igc.0b013e3181cafb47.

Randomized phase II trial of paclitaxel plus carboplatin therapy versus
irinotecan plus cisplatin therapy as first-line chemotherapy for clear cell
adenocarcinoma of the ovary: a JGOG study.

Takakura S(1), Takano M, Takahashi F, Saito T, Aoki D, Inaba N, Noda K, Sugiyama
T, Ochiai K; Japanese Gynecologic Oncology Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Jikei University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Paclitaxel plus carboplatin (TC) is generally considered to be the
"gold standard" regimen for treatment of epithelial ovarian carcinomas. Little
data are available, however, on the use of this regimen in patients with clear
cell adenocarcinoma of the ovary (CCC). Combination chemotherapy with irinotecan
hydrochloride plus cisplatin has been reported to be effective for primary and
recurrent or resistant CCC. We compared these 2 combinations in patients with
CCC.
METHODS: Patients (n = 99) with CCC were randomly assigned to receive either 180
mg/m2 paclitaxel on day 1 plus AUC 6 mg/mL x minute carboplatin on day 1 every
21 days (TC arm) or 60 mg/m2 irinotecan hydrochloride on days 1, 8, 15 plus 60
mg/m2 cisplatin on day 1 every 28 days (CPT-P arm).
RESULTS: Percentages of patients receiving the scheduled 6 cycles of
chemotherapy in the TC and CPT-P arms were 70.8% and 72.0%, respectively.
Although toxicity was well tolerated in both arms, the toxicity profile of each
arm differed. Progression-free survival (PFS) showed no significant difference
between the 2 treatment groups. Because there were more patients with large
residual disease in the CPT-P arm, we performed a subset analysis by removing
those patients, and then compared the PFS with that of patients without residual
disease or with residual disease less than 2 cm. The PFS tended to be longer in
the CPT-P group, although the difference was not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: A phase III randomized trial is required to elucidate the
effectiveness of CPT-P combination chemotherapy for CCC.

DOI: 10.1111/igc.0b013e3181cafb47
PMID: 20169667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
