---
reference_id: "PMID:36082189"
title: "Familial Mediterranean fever: a differential diagnosis for the surgical abdomen."
authors:
- Cliff-Patel N
- Yusuf BS
- Hamdani S
- Ziauddin V
journal: JRSM Open
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/20542704221123433
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean fever: a differential diagnosis for the surgical abdomen.
**Authors:** Cliff-Patel N, Yusuf BS, Hamdani S, Ziauddin V
**Journal:** JRSM Open (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/20542704221123433](https://doi.org/10.1177/20542704221123433)

## Content

1. JRSM Open. 2022 Sep 1;13(9):20542704221123433. doi: 10.1177/20542704221123433.
 eCollection 2022 Sep.

Familial Mediterranean fever: a differential diagnosis for the surgical abdomen.

Cliff-Patel N(1), Yusuf BS(2)(3), Hamdani S(1), Ziauddin V(1).

Author information:
(1)East Surrey Hospital, Redhill, UK.
(2)Royal London Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, England.

FMF is characterised by dysregulation of the inflammatory process in the body, 
presenting as recurrent episodes of serositis. Patients with FMF commonly 
present with episodes of fever, peritonitis, synovitis, pleuritis, arthritis, 
and occasionally pericarditis. We present a case of a young 19-year old female, 
who presented to hospital four times over several months with intermittent 
fevers, abdominal pain and pleuritic chest pain. After being initially admitted 
under the surgical team, she was reviewed by the medical team who referred her 
for genetic testing, which subsequently confirmed the diagnosis. She was started 
on colchicine, and her symptoms remain well controlled one-year post diagnosis.

© 2022 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1177/20542704221123433
PMCID: PMC9445484
PMID: 36082189

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.