---
reference_id: "PMID:37884563"
title: Bladder cancer.
authors:
- Dyrskjøt L
- Hansel DE
- Efstathiou JA
- Knowles MA
- Galsky MD
- Teoh J
- Theodorescu D
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-023-00468-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Treatment Outcome
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Urinary Bladder/surgery
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bladder cancer.
**Authors:** Dyrskjøt L, Hansel DE, Efstathiou JA, Knowles MA, Galsky MD, Teoh J, Theodorescu D
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-023-00468-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-023-00468-9)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2023 Oct 26;9(1):58. doi: 10.1038/s41572-023-00468-9.

Bladder cancer.

Dyrskjøt L(1)(2), Hansel DE(3), Efstathiou JA(4), Knowles MA(5), Galsky MD(6), 
Teoh J(7), Theodorescu D(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Division of Molecular Medicine, Leeds Institute of Medical Research at St 
James's, St James's University Hospital, Leeds, UK.
(6)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(7)S.H. Ho Urology Centre, Department of Surgery, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(8)Department of Urology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
dan.theodorescu@cshs.org.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA. dan.theodorescu@cshs.org.
(10)Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA. dan.theodorescu@cshs.org.

Bladder cancer is a global health issue with sex differences in incidence and 
prognosis. Bladder cancer has distinct molecular subtypes with multiple 
pathogenic pathways depending on whether the disease is non-muscle invasive or 
muscle invasive. The mutational burden is higher in muscle-invasive than in 
non-muscle-invasive disease. Commonly mutated genes include TERT, FGFR3, TP53, 
PIK3CA, STAG2 and genes involved in chromatin modification. Subtyping of both 
forms of bladder cancer is likely to change considerably with the advent of 
single-cell analysis methods. Early detection signifies a better disease 
prognosis; thus, minimally invasive diagnostic options are needed to improve 
patient outcomes. Urine-based tests are available for disease diagnosis and 
surveillance, and analysis of blood-based cell-free DNA is a promising tool for 
the detection of minimal residual disease and metastatic relapse. Transurethral 
resection is the cornerstone treatment for non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer 
and intravesical therapy can further improve oncological outcomes. For 
muscle-invasive bladder cancer, radical cystectomy with neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
is the standard of care with evidence supporting trimodality therapy. 
Immune-checkpoint inhibitors have demonstrated benefit in non-muscle-invasive, 
muscle-invasive and metastatic bladder cancer. Effective management requires a 
multidisciplinary approach that considers patient characteristics and molecular 
disease characteristics.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-023-00468-9
PMCID: PMC11218610
PMID: 37884563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests L.D. has sponsored research 
agreements with Natera, C2i Genomics, AstraZeneca, Photocure and Ferring, has an 
advisory/consulting role at Ferring, MSD and UroGen, has received speaker 
honoraria from AstraZeneca, Pfizer and Roche, and is a board member for 
BioXpedia. D.E.H. is an advisory board member for AstraZeneca. M.D.G. receives 
or has received research funding from Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, Dendreon, 
AstraZeneca, Merck and Genentech. M.D.G. is or was a consultant for Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Merck, Genentech, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, EMD Serono, SeaGen, 
Janssen, Numab, Dragonfly, GlaxoSmithKline, Basilea, UroGen, Rappta 
Therapeutics, Alligator, Silverback, Fujifilm, Curis, Gilead, Bicycle, Asieris, 
Abbvie, Analogue Devices and Veracyte. J.A.E. is or was a consultant/advisory 
board member and receives or has received honoraria from Blue Earth Diagnostics, 
Boston Scientific, AstraZeneca, Lantheus, IBA, Astellas, Pfizer, Merck, Roivant 
Pharma, Myovant Sciences, Janssen, Bayer Healthcare, Progenics Pharmaceuticals, 
Genentech, Gilead, Angiodynamics and UptoDate. The other authors declare no 
competing interests.