---
reference_id: "PMID:35025076"
title: "Psychiatric Adverse Reactions to Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase Inhibitors in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Analysis of Spontaneous Reports Submitted to the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System."
authors:
- Sisi M
- Fusaroli M
- De Giglio A
- Facchinetti F
- Ardizzoni A
- Raschi E
- Gelsomino F
journal: Target Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11523-021-00865-8
keywords:
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/pathology"
- Crizotinib/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Retrospective Studies
- United States
- United States Food and Drug Administration
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychiatric Adverse Reactions to Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase Inhibitors in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Analysis of Spontaneous Reports Submitted to the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System.
**Authors:** Sisi M, Fusaroli M, De Giglio A, Facchinetti F, Ardizzoni A, Raschi E, Gelsomino F
**Journal:** Target Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11523-021-00865-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11523-021-00865-8)

## Content

1. Target Oncol. 2022 Jan;17(1):43-51. doi: 10.1007/s11523-021-00865-8. Epub 2022
 Jan 13.

Psychiatric Adverse Reactions to Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase Inhibitors in
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Analysis of Spontaneous Reports Submitted to the FDA
Adverse Event Reporting System.

Sisi M(1), Fusaroli M(2), De Giglio A(3)(4), Facchinetti F(5), Ardizzoni
A(3)(4), Raschi E(2), Gelsomino F(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, Policlinico S.
Orsola-Malpighi, Alma Mater Studiorum-University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
monia.sisi@studio.unibo.it.
(2)Pharmacology Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma Mater
Studiorum-University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, Policlinico S.
Orsola-Malpighi, Alma Mater Studiorum-University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(4)Divisione di Oncologia Medica, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(5)Institut Gustave Roussy, Inserm, Biomarqueurs Prédictifs et Nouvelles
Stratégies Thérapeutiques en Oncologie, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif,
France.

BACKGROUND: The development of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) has improved the survival outcomes of patients with advanced
ALK-rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The adverse events (AEs)
related to ALK inhibitors are fairly well known; notably, about 20% of patients
receiving lorlatinib experienced cognitive effects and behavioral alterations in
pivotal trials. Therefore, psychiatric disorders could represent AEs of special
interest for all ALK TKIs, deserving careful assessment in the post-marketing
setting.
OBJECTIVE: We conducted a real-world pharmacovigilance study on psychiatric AEs
with marketed ALK inhibitors in subjects with advanced NSCLC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed an observational, retrospective analysis of
spontaneous reports submitted to the Food and Drug Administration Adverse Events
Reporting System (FAERS, as of December 2020), selecting psychiatric AEs to ALK
TKIs approved in NSCLC (crizotinib, ceritinib, alectinib, brigatinib,
lorlatinib). These AEs were independently scrutinized by three oncologists
applying predefined exclusion criteria, described in terms of
clinical/demographic features and assessed for drug-related causality according
to an adaptation of the WHO-UMC system, a standardized probabilistic algorithm.
RESULTS: Among 584 reported psychiatric AEs, 95 cases were selected as
potentially treatment related, with higher reporting frequency for lorlatinib
(26, 2.8%), followed by brigatinib (10, 1.2%), alectinib (18, 0.7%), ceritinib
(12, 0.6%), and crizotinib (29, 0.3%). Reported psychiatric symptoms were mood
disorders (39), psychotic disorders (24), and anxiety, agitation, and
irritability (25). In the majority (74%) of cases, psychiatric AEs were serious
and required hospitalization in about 32% of patients; 15.8% of retained cases
were considered as highly probable and 69.5% as probable. Drug discontinuation
was recorded in 31.6% of the reported cases, with the highest proportion for
lorlatinib (65.4%).
CONCLUSION: Notwithstanding limitations, our study found a higher proportion of
psychiatric AEs with lorlatinib, but also raised the hypothesis of psychiatric
reactions as a class effect of ALK TKIs.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-021-00865-8
PMCID: PMC8783913
PMID: 35025076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. F. Facchinetti reports personal fees from
BMS and ROCHE, outside the submitted work. Prof. A. Ardizzoni reports grants and
personal fees from BMS, personal fees from Eli-Lilly, Pfizer, MSD and
Boehringer; grants from Celgene, outside the submitted work. Dr. F. Gelsomino
reports personal fees from AstraZeneca and Eli-Lilly, outside the submitted
work. Prof E. Raschi reports personal fees from Novartis, outside the submitted
work. Dr. M. Sisi, Dr. M. Fusaroli, Dr. A. De Giglio declare that they have no
conflicts of interest that might be relevant to the contents of this article.
