---
reference_id: "PMID:36755093"
title: Aberrant phase separation and nucleolar dysfunction in rare genetic diseases.
authors:
- Mensah MA
- Niskanen H
- Magalhaes AP
- Basu S
- Kircher M
- Sczakiel HL
- Reiter AMV
- Elsner J
- Meinecke P
- Biskup S
- Chung BHY
- Dombrowsky G
- Eckmann-Scholz C
- Hitz MP
- Hoischen A
- Holterhus PM
- Hülsemann W
- Kahrizi K
- Kalscheuer VM
- Kan A
- Krumbiegel M
- Kurth I
- Leubner J
- Longardt AC
- Moritz JD
- Najmabadi H
- Skipalova K
- Snijders Blok L
- Tzschach A
- Wiedersberg E
- Zenker M
- Garcia-Cabau C
- Buschow R
- Salvatella X
- Kraushar ML
- Mundlos S
- Caliebe A
- Spielmann M
- Horn D
- Hnisz D
journal: Nature
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05682-1
keywords:
- "Intrinsically Disordered Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Frameshift Mutation
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital"
- Humans
- "Arginine/genetics, metabolism"
- Phase Transition
- "HMGB1 Protein/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- Polydactyly
- Syndrome
- Tibia/abnormalities
- "Cell Nucleolus/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aberrant phase separation and nucleolar dysfunction in rare genetic diseases.
**Authors:** Mensah MA, Niskanen H, Magalhaes AP, Basu S, Kircher M, Sczakiel HL, Reiter AMV, Elsner J, Meinecke P, Biskup S, Chung BHY, Dombrowsky G, Eckmann-Scholz C, Hitz MP, Hoischen A, Holterhus PM, Hülsemann W, Kahrizi K, Kalscheuer VM, Kan A, Krumbiegel M, Kurth I, Leubner J, Longardt AC, Moritz JD, Najmabadi H, Skipalova K, Snijders Blok L, Tzschach A, Wiedersberg E, Zenker M, Garcia-Cabau C, Buschow R, Salvatella X, Kraushar ML, Mundlos S, Caliebe A, Spielmann M, Horn D, Hnisz D
**Journal:** Nature (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-022-05682-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05682-1)

## Content

1. Nature. 2023 Feb;614(7948):564-571. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05682-1. Epub 2023
 Feb 8.

Aberrant phase separation and nucleolar dysfunction in rare genetic diseases.

Mensah MA(#)(1)(2)(3), Niskanen H(#)(4), Magalhaes AP(4), Basu S(4), Kircher 
M(5)(6), Sczakiel HL(1)(2)(3), Reiter AMV(1), Elsner J(1), Meinecke P(7), Biskup 
S(8), Chung BHY(9), Dombrowsky G(10)(11), Eckmann-Scholz C(12), Hitz MP(10)(11), 
Hoischen A(13)(14), Holterhus PM(15), Hülsemann W(16), Kahrizi K(17), Kalscheuer 
VM(3), Kan A(18), Krumbiegel M(19), Kurth I(20), Leubner J(21), Longardt AC(22), 
Moritz JD(23), Najmabadi H(17), Skipalova K(1), Snijders Blok L(14), Tzschach 
A(24), Wiedersberg E(25), Zenker M(26), Garcia-Cabau C(27), Buschow R(28), 
Salvatella X(27)(29), Kraushar ML(4), Mundlos S(1)(2)(3)(30), Caliebe A(6), 
Spielmann M(31)(32)(33), Horn D(34), Hnisz D(35).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)BIH Biomedical Innovation Academy, Berlin Institute of Health at 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)RG Development and Disease, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Genome Regulation, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 
Berlin, Germany.
(5)Exploratory Diagnostic Sciences, Berlin Institute of Health at 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospitals Schleswig-Holstein, 
University of Lübeck and Kiel University, Lübeck, Kiel, Germany.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Center for Genomics and Transcriptomics (CeGaT), Tübingen, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, School of Clinical 
Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong 
Kong.
(10)Department of Congenital Heart Disease and Pediatric Cardiology, University 
Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics, Carl von Ossietzky University, Oldenburg, 
Germany.
(12)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital 
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life 
Sciences, Radboud Expertise Center for Immunodeficiency and Autoinflammation and 
Radboud Center for Infectious Disease (RCI), Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(14)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, University 
Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Schleswig-Holstein, Germany.
(16)Handchirurgie, Katholisches Kinderkrankenhaus Wilhelmstift, Hamburg, 
Germany.
(17)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(18)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Queen Mary Hospital, Pok Fu Lam, 
Hong Kong.
(19)Institute of Human Genetics, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany.
(20)Institute for Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Medical Faculty, RWTH 
Aachen University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(21)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Center Schleswig-Holstein, 
Kiel, Germany.
(23)Department of Radiology and Neuroradiology, Pediatric Radiology, University 
Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(24)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(25)Zentrum für Kinder-und Jugendmedizin, Helios Kliniken Schwerin, Schwerin, 
Germany.
(26)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Otto-von-Guericke 
University, Magdeburg, Germany.
(27)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona 
Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(28)Microscopy Core Facility, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 
Berlin, Germany.
(29)ICREA, Passeig Lluís Companys 23, Barcelona, Spain.
(30)BCRT-Berlin Institute of Health Center for Regenerative Therapies, Berlin, 
Germany.
(31)RG Development and Disease, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 
Berlin, Germany. Malte.Spielmann@uksh.de.
(32)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospitals Schleswig-Holstein, 
University of Lübeck and Kiel University, Lübeck, Kiel, Germany. 
Malte.Spielmann@uksh.de.
(33)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Hamburg, 
Lübeck, Kiel, Lübeck, Germany. Malte.Spielmann@uksh.de.
(34)Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin 
and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Denise.Horn@charite.de.
(35)Department of Genome Regulation, Max Planck Institute for Molecular 
Genetics, Berlin, Germany. hnisz@molgen.mpg.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Thousands of genetic variants in protein-coding genes have been linked to 
disease. However, the functional impact of most variants is unknown as they 
occur within intrinsically disordered protein regions that have poorly defined 
functions1-3. Intrinsically disordered regions can mediate phase separation and 
the formation of biomolecular condensates, such as the nucleolus4,5. This 
suggests that mutations in disordered proteins may alter condensate properties 
and function6-8. Here we show that a subset of disease-associated variants in 
disordered regions alter phase separation, cause mispartitioning into the 
nucleolus and disrupt nucleolar function. We discover de novo frameshift 
variants in HMGB1 that cause brachyphalangy, polydactyly and tibial aplasia 
syndrome, a rare complex malformation syndrome. The frameshifts replace the 
intrinsically disordered acidic tail of HMGB1 with an arginine-rich basic tail. 
The mutant tail alters HMGB1 phase separation, enhances its partitioning into 
the nucleolus and causes nucleolar dysfunction. We built a catalogue of more 
than 200,000 variants in disordered carboxy-terminal tails and identified more 
than 600 frameshifts that create arginine-rich basic tails in transcription 
factors and other proteins. For 12 out of the 13 disease-associated variants 
tested, the mutation enhanced partitioning into the nucleolus, and several 
variants altered rRNA biogenesis. These data identify the cause of a rare 
complex syndrome and suggest that a large number of genetic variants may 
dysregulate nucleoli and other biomolecular condensates in humans.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-05682-1
PMCID: PMC9931588
PMID: 36755093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D. Hnisz and X.S. are founders and scientific 
advisors of Nuage Therapeutics. The other authors declare no competing 
interests.