---
reference_id: "PMID:22537653"
title: Transthyretin amyloidosis and the kidney.
authors:
- Lobato L
- Rocha A
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.08720811
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transthyretin amyloidosis and the kidney.
**Authors:** Lobato L, Rocha A
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.08720811](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.08720811)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Aug;7(8):1337-46. doi: 10.2215/CJN.08720811. Epub 
2012 Apr 26.

Transthyretin amyloidosis and the kidney.

Lobato L(1), Rocha A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Hospital de Santo António, Centro Hospitalar do 
Porto, Porto, Portugal. lmlobato@icbas.up.pt

The amyloidoses are protein-misfolding disorders associated with progressive 
organ dysfunction. Immunoglobulin light chain is the most common, amyloid A the 
longest recognized, and transthyretin-associated amyloidosis (ATTR) the most 
frequent inherited systemic form. Although ATTR, an autosomal-dominant disease, 
is associated with at least 100 different transthyretin (TTR) mutations, the 
single amino-acid substitution of methionine for valine at position 30 is the 
most common mutation. Each variant has a different organ involvement, although 
clinical differences attributed to environmental and genetic factors exist 
within the same mutation. Peripheral neuropathy and cardiomyopathy are broadly 
described, and insights into disease reveal that kidney impairment and 
proteinuria are also clinical features. This review combines clinical and 
laboratory findings of renal involvement from the main geographic regions of 
disease occurrence and for different mutations of TTR. Fifteen nephropathic 
variants have been described, but the TTR V30M mutation is the best documented. 
Nephropathy affects patients with late-onset neuropathy, low penetrance in the 
family, and cardiac dysrhythmias. Microalbuminuria can be the disorder's first 
presentation, even before the onset of neuropathy. Amyloid renal deposits 
commonly occur, even in the absence of urinary abnormalities. The experience 
with renal replacement therapy is based on hemodialysis, which is associated 
with poor survival. Because TTR is synthesized mainly in the liver, liver 
transplantation has been considered an acceptable treatment; simultaneous 
liver-kidney transplantation is recommended to avoid recurrence of nephropathy. 
In addition, the kidney-safety profile of new drugs in development may soon be 
available.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.08720811
PMID: 22537653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]