---
reference_id: "PMID:9817913"
title: Detection of specific antibodies in saliva during dengue infection.
authors:
- Cuzzubbo AJ
- Vaughn DW
- Nisalak A
- Suntayakorn S
- Aaskov J
- Devine PL
journal: J Clin Microbiol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1128/JCM.36.12.3737-3739.1998
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of specific antibodies in saliva during dengue infection.
**Authors:** Cuzzubbo AJ, Vaughn DW, Nisalak A, Suntayakorn S, Aaskov J, Devine PL
**Journal:** J Clin Microbiol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JCM.36.12.3737-3739.1998](https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.36.12.3737-3739.1998)

## Content

1. J Clin Microbiol. 1998 Dec;36(12):3737-9. doi:
10.1128/JCM.36.12.3737-3739.1998.

Detection of specific antibodies in saliva during dengue infection.

Cuzzubbo AJ(1), Vaughn DW, Nisalak A, Suntayakorn S, Aaskov J, Devine PL.

Author information:
(1)PanBio Pty Ltd., Windsor, Queensland, Australia.

Saliva was collected prospectively from patients presenting with suspected 
dengue infection 4 to 8 days after the onset of symptoms and assayed by a 
commercial dengue immunoglobulin M (IgM) and IgG capture enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (PanBio Dengue Duo ELISA). Laboratory diagnosis was 
based on virus isolation and on hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assay and an 
in-house IgM and IgG capture ELISA. With a positive result defined as either 
salivary IgM or IgG levels above the cutoff value, an overall sensitivity of 92% 
was obtained for both primary- and secondary-dengue patients (22 of 24), while 
no patients with non-flavivirus infections (n = 11) and no healthy laboratory 
donors (n = 17) showed elevation of salivary antidengue antibody (100% 
specificity). Salivary IgG levels correlated well with serum HAI titer (r = 
0.78), and salivary IgG levels could be used to distinguish between primary- and 
secondary-dengue virus infections.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.36.12.3737-3739.1998
PMCID: PMC105280
PMID: 9817913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]