---
reference_id: "PMID:17145604"
title: Managing antiphospholipid antibodies and antiphospholipid syndrome in children.
authors:
- Kamat AV
- D'Cruz DP
- Hunt BJ
journal: Haematologica
year: '2006'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Managing antiphospholipid antibodies and antiphospholipid syndrome in children.
**Authors:** Kamat AV, D'Cruz DP, Hunt BJ
**Journal:** Haematologica (2006)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2006 Dec;91(12):1674-80.

Managing antiphospholipid antibodies and antiphospholipid syndrome in children.

Kamat AV(1), D'Cruz DP, Hunt BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, Guys' & St Thomas' Foundation Trust London SE1 
7EH, UK.

Antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) and antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) are 
increasingly being recognized in children. Transient non-pathogenic aPL are 
often seen after childhood infections, while thrombotic events seem rare in 
those with true aPL. We discuss the main scenarios faced when dealing with 
children with aPL--asymtomatic aPL, primary APS and secondary APS. Children with 
thrombotic events present difficult management problems, as there is little 
evidence-based medicine in this area. We discuss the manifestations and 
management of childhood aPL--asymptomatic aPL, primary and secondary APS 
elucidated with case histories. Insufficient safety data on anticoagulation and 
limited information on the effects of warfarin, use of aspirin, duration and 
intensity of anticoagulation are some of the unresolved issues in managing aPL 
and APS in children. Multicenter randomized controlled trials may provide 
answers to some of these issues.

PMID: 17145604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]