---
reference_id: "PMID:24433566"
title: "Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency: an under-diagnosed disease in Chinese children."
authors:
- Geng L
- Li DY
- Ou W
- Yang Q
- Fang T
- Chen P
- Yang M
- Gong S
journal: BMC Pediatr
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-14-11
keywords:
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis"
- China
- Glucose Tolerance Test
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Sucrase-Isomaltase Complex/deficiency
- Sucrose
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency: an under-diagnosed disease in Chinese children.
**Authors:** Geng L, Li DY, Ou W, Yang Q, Fang T, Chen P, Yang M, Gong S
**Journal:** BMC Pediatr (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2431-14-11](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2431-14-11)

## Content

1. BMC Pediatr. 2014 Jan 16;14:11. doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-14-11.

Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency: an under-diagnosed disease in Chinese 
children.

Geng L(1), Li DY, Ou W, Yang Q, Fang T, Chen P, Yang M, Gong S.

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical College, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. genglan_2001@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency (CSID) is a rare genetic 
disorder. The prevalence of CSID in Chinese population is unknown and no single 
case has been reported.
METHODS: Sucrose tolerance tests were performed in three children suspected of 
CSID. Glucose tolerance tests were performed to exclude glucose malabsorption. 
Blood glucose was measured at fasting and at 30 min, 60 min, 120 min, and 180 
min of the study. Gastrointestinal symptoms were recorded up to 4 hours after 
the study.
RESULTS: From December 2008 to June 2011, three children, ranging from 16 to 19 
months old, were referred to our tertiary children's hospital due to chronic 
watery diarrhea and failure to thrive. Laboratory investigations including 
complete blood counts, ESR, CRP, and serum immunoglobulins were normal. Routine 
stool culture for bacteria and exam for parasites were negative. Upper 
endoscopy, colonoscopy and histology were unremarkable. All children failed 
lactose-free and amino acid-based formulas. All three children had flat sucrose 
tolerance tests and began to have watery stool 2-4 hours after feeding sucrose 
test solution. The glucose tolerance tests were normal and no children developed 
watery stools up to 4 hours after feeding glucose test solution.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first case series of CSID in Chinese children. The 
diagnosis of CSID can be made based on clinical suspicion and sucrose tolerance 
test. CSID is probably an under-diagnosed or misdiagnosed disease in Chinese 
children and should be considered in children with chronic watery diarrhea.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2431-14-11
PMCID: PMC3927221
PMID: 24433566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]