---
reference_id: "PMID:25838181"
title: The Lowe syndrome protein OCRL1 is required for endocytosis in the zebrafish pronephric tubule.
authors:
- Oltrabella F
- Pietka G
- Ramirez IB
- Mironov A
- Starborg T
- Drummond IA
- Hinchliffe KA
- Lowe M
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005058
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Polarity
- Endocytosis
- Endosomes/metabolism
- Gene Deletion
- "Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-2/genetics, metabolism"
- Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/genetics
- "Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/genetics, metabolism"
- Pronephros/metabolism
- "Zebrafish/embryology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Zebrafish Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Lowe syndrome protein OCRL1 is required for endocytosis in the zebrafish pronephric tubule.
**Authors:** Oltrabella F, Pietka G, Ramirez IB, Mironov A, Starborg T, Drummond IA, Hinchliffe KA, Lowe M
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1005058](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1005058)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 2;11(4):e1005058. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005058.
eCollection 2015 Apr.

The Lowe syndrome protein OCRL1 is required for endocytosis in the zebrafish
pronephric tubule.

Oltrabella F(1), Pietka G(1), Ramirez IB(1), Mironov A(1), Starborg T(1),
Drummond IA(2), Hinchliffe KA(1), Lowe M(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.
(2)Nephrology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital and Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts, United States of
America.

Lowe syndrome and Dent-2 disease are caused by mutation of the inositol
5-phosphatase OCRL1. Despite our increased understanding of the cellular
functions of OCRL1, the underlying basis for the renal tubulopathy seen in both
human disorders, of which a hallmark is low molecular weight proteinuria, is
currently unknown. Here, we show that deficiency in OCRL1 causes a defect in
endocytosis in the zebrafish pronephric tubule, a model for the mammalian renal
tubule. This coincides with a reduction in levels of the scavenger receptor
megalin and its accumulation in endocytic compartments, consistent with reduced
recycling within the endocytic pathway. We also observe reduced numbers of early
endocytic compartments and enlarged vacuolar endosomes in the sub-apical region
of pronephric cells. Cell polarity within the pronephric tubule is unaffected in
mutant embryos. The OCRL1-deficient embryos exhibit a mild ciliogenesis defect,
but this cannot account for the observed impairment of endocytosis. Catalytic
activity of OCRL1 is required for renal tubular endocytosis and the endocytic
defect can be rescued by suppression of PIP5K. These results indicate for the
first time that OCRL1 is required for endocytic trafficking in vivo, and
strongly support the hypothesis that endocytic defects are responsible for the
renal tubulopathy in Lowe syndrome and Dent-2 disease. Moreover, our results
reveal PIP5K as a potential therapeutic target for Lowe syndrome and Dent-2
disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005058
PMCID: PMC4383555
PMID: 25838181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
