---
reference_id: "PMID:40615413"
title: "Shared genetic architecture between eating disorders, mental health conditions, and cardiometabolic diseases: a comprehensive population-wide study across two countries."
authors:
- Meijsen J
- Hu K
- Wei D
- Aicoboaie S
- Davies HL
- Zhang R
- Lundberg M
- Zetterberg R
- Pasman J
- Ye W
- Werge T
- Bulik CM
- Fang F
- Buil A
- Micali N
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-61496-5
keywords:
- Humans
- Denmark/epidemiology
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/genetics, epidemiology"
- Female
- Sweden/epidemiology
- Male
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Adult
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/genetics, epidemiology"
- "Mental Disorders/genetics, epidemiology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- "Bulimia Nervosa/genetics, epidemiology"
- Mental Health
- "Metabolic Diseases/genetics, epidemiology"
- "Anorexia Nervosa/genetics, epidemiology"
- Middle Aged
- Risk Factors
- Registries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shared genetic architecture between eating disorders, mental health conditions, and cardiometabolic diseases: a comprehensive population-wide study across two countries.
**Authors:** Meijsen J, Hu K, Wei D, Aicoboaie S, Davies HL, Zhang R, Lundberg M, Zetterberg R, Pasman J, Ye W, Werge T, Bulik CM, Fang F, Buil A, Micali N
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-61496-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61496-5)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 Jul 4;16(1):6193. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-61496-5.

Shared genetic architecture between eating disorders, mental health conditions,
and cardiometabolic diseases: a comprehensive population-wide study across two
countries.

Meijsen J(#)(1)(2), Hu K(#)(3), Wei D(3), Aicoboaie S(4)(5), Davies HL(4)(5),
Zhang R(6), Lundberg M(4), Zetterberg R(4), Pasman J(6)(7), Ye W(6), Werge
T(4)(8), Bulik CM(6)(9)(10), Fang F(3), Buil A(4), Micali N(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Center Sct. Hans,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Mental Health Services Copenhagen, Roskilde,
Denmark. joeri.jeroen.meijsen@regionh.dk.
(2)Center for Eating and feeding Disorders Research, Mental Health Center
Ballerup, Copenhagen University Hospital, Mental Health Services Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. joeri.jeroen.meijsen@regionh.dk.
(3)Unit of Integrative Epidemiology, Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Center Sct. Hans,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Mental Health Services Copenhagen, Roskilde,
Denmark.
(5)Center for Eating and feeding Disorders Research, Mental Health Center
Ballerup, Copenhagen University Hospital, Mental Health Services Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Psychiatry, Amsterdam UMC location
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(10)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(11)Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Center Sct. Hans,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Mental Health Services Copenhagen, Roskilde,
Denmark. nadia.micali@regionh.dk.
(12)Center for Eating and feeding Disorders Research, Mental Health Center
Ballerup, Copenhagen University Hospital, Mental Health Services Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. nadia.micali@regionh.dk.
(13)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, UK. nadia.micali@regionh.dk.
(#)Contributed equally

Eating disorders arise from a complex interaction of genetic and environmental
influences. Here we provide comprehensive population-level estimates of the
heritability of eating disorders and their genetic relationships with various
mental health and cardiometabolic disorders (CMDs), expanding beyond genome-wide
association studies. We examined the heritability of three eating
disorders-anorexia nervosa (AN), bulimia nervosa (BN), and other eating
disorders (OED)-and investigated shared familial and genetic risk factors with
mental health disorders and CMDs. Using national register data from Denmark and
Sweden (1972-2016), we analysed clinical diagnoses for over 67,000 individuals
with eating disorders, their first-degree relatives, and matched controls from
populations totalling 17 million. Heritability estimates were moderate,
h2AN = 36%, h2BN = 39%, and h2OED = 30% and genetic correlations revealed
substantial overlap between AN and obsessive-compulsive disorder (rg = 0.65) and
moderate correlations with other mental health disorders such as autism
(rg = 0.36). Significant genetic associations were also identified between
eating disorders and CMDs, showing strong replication across both countries.
These findings emphasise the genetic foundations of eating disorders and their
shared genetic architecture with mental health and CMDs. This research enhances
our understanding of comorbidity patterns and has important implications for
developing integrated treatment approaches.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-61496-5
PMCID: PMC12227696
PMID: 40615413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: N.M. receives an honorarium
as associate editor on the European Eating Disorders Review. C.B. receives
royalties from Pearson Education Inc. and has served as a consultant with
Orbimed. All other authors declare no competing interests. Ethical approval: The
use of Danish data was approved by the Danish Health Data Authority (project no.
FSEID-00003339) and the Danish Data Protection Agency. By Danish law, informed
consent is not required for register-based studies. The use of Swedish data was
approved by the regional ethics review board in Stockholm, Sweden, with DNR
2012/1814-31/4.
