---
reference_id: "PMID:17526800"
title: "Cowden syndrome and Bannayan Riley Ruvalcaba syndrome represent one condition with variable expression and age-related penetrance: results of a clinical study of PTEN mutation carriers."
authors:
- Lachlan KL
- Lucassen AM
- Bunyan D
- Temple IK
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.049981
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genotype
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/classification, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics, physiology"
- Penetrance
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cowden syndrome and Bannayan Riley Ruvalcaba syndrome represent one condition with variable expression and age-related penetrance: results of a clinical study of PTEN mutation carriers.
**Authors:** Lachlan KL, Lucassen AM, Bunyan D, Temple IK
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2007.049981](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2007.049981)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2007 Sep;44(9):579-85. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.049981. Epub 2007
May  25.

Cowden syndrome and Bannayan Riley Ruvalcaba syndrome represent one condition 
with variable expression and age-related penetrance: results of a clinical study 
of PTEN mutation carriers.

Lachlan KL(1), Lucassen AM, Bunyan D, Temple IK.

Author information:
(1)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton University Hospitals Trust, 
Southampton, UK. katherine.lachlan@suht.swest.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: The most commonly reported phenotypes described in patients with 
PTEN mutations are Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS), with childhood 
onset, macrocephaly, lipomas and developmental delay, and Cowden Syndrome (CS), 
an adult-onset condition recognised by mucocutaneous signs, with a risk of 
cancers, in particular those of the thyroid and breast. It has been suggested 
that BRRS and CS are the same condition, but the literature continues to 
separate them and seek a genotype-phenotype correlation.
OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical features of patients with known PTEN mutations 
and observe any genotype-phenotype correlation.
METHODS: In total, 42 people (25 probands and 17 non-probands) from 26 families 
of all ages with PTEN mutations were recruited through the UK clinical genetics 
services. A full clinical history and examination were undertaken.
RESULTS: We were unable to demonstrate a genotype-phenotype correlation. 
Furthermore, our findings in a 31-year-old woman with CS and an exon 1 deletion 
refutes previous reports that whole exon deletions are only found in patients 
with a BRRS phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Careful phenotyping gives further support for the suggestion that 
BRRS and CS are actually one condition, presenting variably at different ages, 
as in other tumour-suppressor disorders such as neurofibromatosis type 1. This 
has important counselling implications, such as advice about cancer 
surveillance, for children diagnosed with BRRS.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2007.049981
PMCID: PMC2597943
PMID: 17526800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]