---
reference_id: "PMID:18570303"
title: Characterization of PLA2G6 as a locus for dystonia-parkinsonism.
authors:
- Paisan-Ruiz C
- Bhatia KP
- Li A
- Hernandez D
- Davis M
- Wood NW
- Hardy J
- Houlden H
- Singleton A
- Schneider SA
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/ana.21415
keywords:
- Adult
- Cerebellum/pathology
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 22"
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- "Dystonia/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Family Health
- Female
- Group VI Phospholipases A2/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Iron Deficiencies
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of PLA2G6 as a locus for dystonia-parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Paisan-Ruiz C, Bhatia KP, Li A, Hernandez D, Davis M, Wood NW, Hardy J, Houlden H, Singleton A, Schneider SA
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.21415](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.21415)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2009 Jan;65(1):19-23. doi: 10.1002/ana.21415.

Characterization of PLA2G6 as a locus for dystonia-parkinsonism.

Paisan-Ruiz C(1), Bhatia KP, Li A, Hernandez D, Davis M, Wood NW, Hardy J,
Houlden H, Singleton A, Schneider SA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, Intramural Research
Program, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2009 Jan;65(1):2-3. doi: 10.1002/ana.21609.
    Ann Neurol. 2010 Jan;67(1):148. doi: 10.1002/ana.21663.

BACKGROUND: Although many recessive loci causing parkinsonism dystonia have been
identified, these do not explain all cases of the disorder.
METHODS: We used homozygosity mapping and mutational analysis in three
individuals from two unrelated families who presented with adult-onset
levodopa-responsive dystonia-parkinsonism, pyramidal signs and
cognitive/psychiatric features, and cerebral and cerebellar atrophy on magnetic
resonance imaging but absent iron in the basal ganglia.
RESULTS: We identified areas of homozygosity on chromosome 22 and, subsequently,
PLA2G6 mutations.
INTERPRETATION: PLA2G6 mutations are associated with infantile neuroaxonal
dystrophy and have been reported previously to cause early cerebellar signs, and
the syndrome was classified as neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
(type 2). Our cases have neither of these previously pathognomic features. Thus,
mutations in PLA2G6 should additionally be considered in patients with
adult-onset dystonia-parkinsonism even with absent iron on brain imaging.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21415
PMCID: PMC9016626
PMID: 18570303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has stated any conflict of
interest.
