---
reference_id: "PMID:3558731"
title: Thyroxine and 3,5,3'-triiodothyronine content of thyroglobulin in thyroid needle aspirates in hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism.
authors:
- Laurberg P
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '1987'
doi: 10.1210/jcem-64-5-969
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thyroxine and 3,5,3'-triiodothyronine content of thyroglobulin in thyroid needle aspirates in hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism.
**Authors:** Laurberg P
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem-64-5-969](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem-64-5-969)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1987 May;64(5):969-74. doi: 10.1210/jcem-64-5-969.

Thyroxine and 3,5,3'-triiodothyronine content of thyroglobulin in thyroid needle 
aspirates in hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism.

Laurberg P.

Thyroglobulin (Tg) was obtained by fine needle aspiration from patients with 
untreated hyperthyroidism due to Graves' disease and untreated hypothyroidism to 
determine whether alterations in its T4 and T3 content could account for the 
disproportionately high serum T3 compared to serum T4 found in both diseases. 
For comparison aspiration was performed from normal thyroid tissue in euthyroid 
patients operated for solitary thyroid lesions. The average amounts of Tg 
aspirated were: normal 177 +/- 52 (SE) micrograms, n = 7, hyperthyroidism 82 +/- 
32 micrograms (n = 8); hypothyroidism 4.6 +/- 1.9 micrograms, n = 9. The 
iodothyronine content of Tg was, normal, T4 3.7 +/- 0.5 mol/mol, T3 0.28 +/- 
0.04 mol/mol, T4/T3 13.7 +/- 1.4; hyperthyroidism, T4 3.8 +/- 1.0, T3 0.59 +/- 
0.15, T4/T3 6.8 +/- 1.1; hypothyroidism, T4 3.3 +/- 0.5, T3 0.54 +/- 0.09, T4/T3 
6.8 +/- 0.7. The iodine content of Tg was 28 +/- 3.1 atoms/mol in the euthyroid 
subjects and 31 +/- 7.3 atoms/mol in hyperthyroid patients. Hence, both 
untreated hyperthyroidism and untreated hypothyroidism were characterized by Tg 
with a normal T4 but a relatively high T3 content. This is probably related to 
the prolonged hyperstimulation of functioning follicular cells present in both 
diseases. The relatively high T3 content of Tg could not alone explain the 
relatively high T3 production compared to T4 production in these two thyroid 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem-64-5-969
PMID: 3558731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]