---
reference_id: "PMID:33077072"
title: Equine Idiopathic Systemic Granulomatous Disease With Manifestation in the Cerebellum Associated With Equid Gammaherpesvirus 2.
authors:
- Nolte LC
- Rosiak M
- Baechlein C
- Baumgärtner W
- Allnoch L
journal: J Equine Vet Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2020.103225
keywords:
- Animals
- Cerebellum
- Female
- Granuloma/veterinary
- Horse Diseases
- Horses
- Rhadinovirus
- Skin Diseases/veterinary
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Equine Idiopathic Systemic Granulomatous Disease With Manifestation in the Cerebellum Associated With Equid Gammaherpesvirus 2.
**Authors:** Nolte LC, Rosiak M, Baechlein C, Baumgärtner W, Allnoch L
**Journal:** J Equine Vet Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jevs.2020.103225](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jevs.2020.103225)

## Content

1. J Equine Vet Sci. 2020 Nov;94:103225. doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2020.103225. Epub
2020  Aug 15.

Equine Idiopathic Systemic Granulomatous Disease With Manifestation in the
Cerebellum Associated With Equid Gammaherpesvirus 2.

Nolte LC(1), Rosiak M(1), Baechlein C(2), Baumgärtner W(3), Allnoch L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover,
Foundation, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Institute of Virology, Department of Infectious Diseases, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Foundation, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover,
Foundation, Hannover, Germany; Center for Systems Neuroscience, Hannover,
Germany. Electronic address: wolfgang.baumgaertner@tiho-hannover.de.

Idiopathic systemic granulomatous disease (ISGD), also known as equine
sarcoidosis is an uncommon disease of horses, manifesting in exfoliative
dermatitis and granulomatous inflammation in various organs. The current report
presents a case of a 15-year-old Hanoverian mare with a 4-month history of
weight loss, recurrent fever, skin lesions, and movement disorders. Pathological
examination revealed granulomatous and necrotizing inflammation in the skin,
regional lymph nodes, and cerebellum. Based on histological,
immunohistochemical, and microbiological findings, the diagnosis of ISGD was
made. Sequencing of the polymerase chain reaction product of pooled brain tissue
revealed the presence of equid gammaherpesvirus 2 DNA. This case is the first
description of generalized ISGD with granulomatous dermatitis simultaneously
affecting the skin and cerebellum.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jevs.2020.103225
PMID: 33077072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
