---
reference_id: "PMID:12130547"
title: "Regulation of prolactin, GH, and Pit-1 gene expression in anterior pituitary by Pitx2: An approach using Pitx2 mutants."
authors:
- Quentien MH
- Pitoia F
- Gunz G
- Guillet MP
- Enjalbert A
- Pellegrini I
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1210/endo.143.8.8962
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulation of prolactin, GH, and Pit-1 gene expression in anterior pituitary by Pitx2: An approach using Pitx2 mutants.
**Authors:** Quentien MH, Pitoia F, Gunz G, Guillet MP, Enjalbert A, Pellegrini I
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1210/endo.143.8.8962](https://doi.org/10.1210/endo.143.8.8962)

## Content

1. Endocrinology. 2002 Aug;143(8):2839-51. doi: 10.1210/endo.143.8.8962.

Regulation of prolactin, GH, and Pit-1 gene expression in anterior pituitary by 
Pitx2: An approach using Pitx2 mutants.

Quentien MH(1), Pitoia F, Gunz G, Guillet MP, Enjalbert A, Pellegrini I.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Interactions Cellulaires Neuroendocriniennes, Unité Mixte de 
Recherche 6544, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de la 
Méditerranée, Institut Fédératif Jean Roche, Faculté de Médecine Nord, Marseille 
13916, France.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2002 Aug;143(8):2836-8. doi: 10.1210/endo.143.8.9999.

The transcription factor Pitx2 is required for the morphogenesis of anterior 
structures such as the eye, teeth, and anterior pituitary. We investigated the 
functional properties of Pitx2 missense mutants previously reported in 
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome, using reporter genes under the control of pituitary 
target gene [human (h)PRL, hGH, hPit-1] promoters transfected in nonpituitary 
and pituitary cell lines. The five mutants appeared to be transcriptionally 
defective despite conserved DNA-binding in CV1 cells. In addition, one mutation, 
R91P, almost completely blocked the wt-Pitx2-induced activation of the target 
promoters, prevented the Pitx2/Pit-1 synergistic activation of the hPRL 
promoter, and was able to counteract the Pitx1-driven transactivation effects. 
The dominant negative properties of this mutant were further established in 
cells endogenously expressing Pitx2 because transfection of R91P in GH4C1 
somatolactotroph cells resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of basal 
activities of the pituitary promoters. These results, which show that Pitx2 
mutants are defective in activating pituitary target genes, confirm the critical 
role of this homeodomain factor in the differentiated functions of the pituitary 
somatolactotroph cells. Furthermore, these results might form the basis for 
future experiments because dominant negative forms of Pitx2 such as R91P might 
provide instructive tools to further delineate the detailed mechanisms mediating 
Pitx2 functions in cell proliferation and differentiation.

DOI: 10.1210/endo.143.8.8962
PMID: 12130547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]