---
reference_id: "PMID:35006266"
title: Safety and Effectiveness of Long-term Intravenous Administration of Edaravone for Treatment of Patients With Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
authors:
- Witzel S
- Maier A
- Steinbach R
- Grosskreutz J
- Koch JC
- Sarikidi A
- Petri S
- Günther R
- Wolf J
- Hermann A
- Prudlo J
- Cordts I
- Lingor P
- Löscher WN
- Kohl Z
- Hagenacker T
- Ruckes C
- Koch B
- Spittel S
- Günther K
- Michels S
- Dorst J
- Meyer T
- Ludolph AC
- German Motor Neuron Disease Network (MND-NET)
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.4893
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and Effectiveness of Long-term Intravenous Administration of Edaravone for Treatment of Patients With Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.
**Authors:** Witzel S, Maier A, Steinbach R, Grosskreutz J, Koch JC, Sarikidi A, Petri S, Günther R, Wolf J, Hermann A, Prudlo J, Cordts I, Lingor P, Löscher WN, Kohl Z, Hagenacker T, Ruckes C, Koch B, Spittel S, Günther K, Michels S, Dorst J, Meyer T, Ludolph AC, German Motor Neuron Disease Network (MND-NET)
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.4893](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.4893)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2022 Feb 1;79(2):121-130. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.4893.

Safety and Effectiveness of Long-term Intravenous Administration of Edaravone 
for Treatment of Patients With Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.

Witzel S(1)(2), Maier A(3), Steinbach R(4), Grosskreutz J(5), Koch JC(6), 
Sarikidi A(7), Petri S(7), Günther R(8)(9), Wolf J(10), Hermann A(11)(12), 
Prudlo J(12)(13), Cordts I(14), Lingor P(14)(15), Löscher WN(16), Kohl Z(17), 
Hagenacker T(18), Ruckes C(19), Koch B(3), Spittel S(20), Günther K(1), Michels 
S(1), Dorst J(1)(2), Meyer T(3)(20), Ludolph AC(1)(2); German Motor Neuron 
Disease Network (MND-NET).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.
(2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Site Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(3)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität 
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Centre 
for ALS and other Motor Neuron Diseases, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Thuringian Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology, University Hospital 
Jena, Jena, Germany.
(5)Precision Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(8)Department of Neurology, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(9)DZNE, Site Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(10)Department of Neurology, Diakonissenkrankenhaus, Mannheim, Germany.
(11)Translational Neurodegeneration Section "Albrecht Kossel," Department of 
Neurology, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
(12)DZNE, Site Rostock/Greifswald, Rostock, Germany.
(13)Department of Neurology, University Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
(14)Department of Neurology, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany.
(15)DZNE, Site Munich, Munich, Germany.
(16)Department of Neurology, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(17)Department of Neurology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(18)Department of Neurology, University Medicine Essen, Essen, Germany.
(19)University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University, 
Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Trials (IZKS), Mainz, Germany.
(20)Ambulanzpartner Soziotechnologie APST GmbH, Berlin, Germany.

Erratum in
    JAMA Neurol. 2022 Jul 1;79(7):727. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.1581.

Comment in
    JAMA Neurol. 2022 Feb 1;79(2):117-118. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.4193.

IMPORTANCE: Intravenous edaravone is approved as a disease-modifying drug for 
patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but evidence for efficacy is 
limited to short-term beneficial effects shown in the MCI186-ALS19 study in a 
subpopulation in which efficacy was expected.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the long-term safety and effectiveness of intravenous 
edaravone therapy for patients with ALS in a real-world clinical setting.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Multicenter, propensity score-matched cohort 
study conducted between June 2017 and March 2020 at 12 academic ALS referral 
centers associated with the German Motor Neuron Disease Network. Of 1440 
patients screened, 738 were included in propensity score matching. Final 
analyses included 324 patients with ALS comprising 194 patients who started 
intravenous edaravone treatment (141 received ≥4 consecutive treatment cycles; 
130 matched) and 130 propensity score-matched patients with ALS receiving 
standard therapy. All patients had probable or definite ALS according to the El 
Escorial criteria, with disease onset between December 2012 and April 2019. 
Subgroups were defined by applying the MCI186-ALS19 study inclusion criteria to 
evaluate whether patients would have been considered eligible (EFAS) or 
ineligible (non-EFAS).
EXPOSURES: Intravenous edaravone plus riluzole vs riluzole only.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Patient characteristics and systematic safety 
assessment for patients who received at least 1 dose of intravenous edaravone. 
Effectiveness assessment of edaravone was conducted among patients who received 
at least 4 treatment cycles compared with propensity score-matched patients with 
ALS who received only standard therapy. Primary outcome was disease progression 
measured by decrease in the ALS Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALSFRS-R) 
score. Secondary outcomes were survival probability, time to ventilation, and 
change in disease progression before vs during treatment. To account for the 
matched design, patients receiving edaravone and their corresponding matched 
controls were regarded as related samples in disease progression analyses; 
stratification for propensity score quintiles was used for survival probability 
and time to ventilation analyses.
RESULTS: A total of 194 patients started intravenous edaravone treatment; 125 
(64%) were male, and the median age was 57.5 years (IQR, 50.7-63.8 years). 
Potential adverse effects were observed in 30 cases (16%), most notably 
infections at infusion sites and allergic reactions. Disease progression among 
116 patients treated for a median of 13.9 months (IQR, 8.9-13.9 months) with 
edaravone did not differ from 116 patients treated for a median of 11.2 months 
(IQR, 6.4-20.0 months) with standard therapy (ALSFRS-R points/month, -0.91 [95% 
CI, -0.69 to -1.07] vs -0.85 [95% CI, -0.66 to -0.99]; P = .37). No significant 
differences were observed in the secondary end points of survival probability, 
time to ventilation, and change in disease progression. Similarly, outcomes 
between patients treated with edaravone and matched patients did not differ 
within the EFAS and non-EFAS subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This cohort study using propensity score matching 
found that, although long-term intravenous edaravone therapy for patients with 
ALS was feasible and mainly well tolerated, it was not associated with any 
disease-modifying benefit. Intravenous edaravone may not provide a clinically 
relevant additional benefit compared with standard therapy alone.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.4893
PMCID: PMC8749709
PMID: 35006266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Witzel 
reported grants from the Charcot Foundation for ALS Research and the Medical 
Faculty of Ulm University outside the submitted work. Dr Maier reported personal 
fees from Merz Pharma GmbH outside the submitted work. Dr Grosskreutz reported 
grants from Deutsche Gesellschaft für Muskelkranke eV, the Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research, and the Motor Neurone Disease Association, UK; and 
personal fees from Alexion, Biogen, and UCB outside the submitted work. Dr Petri 
reported grants from Deutsche Gesellschaft für Muskelkranke, the EU Joint 
Programme–Neurodegenerative Disease Research, and the German-Israeli Foundation; 
and personal fees from Biogen, ITF Pharma, and Roche outside the submitted work. 
Dr R. Günther reported personal fees from Biogen and Roche outside the submitted 
work. Dr Hermann reported grants from the Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Muskelkranke, the Helmholtz Foundation, 
Hermann und Lilly-Schilling-Stiftung für medizinische Foschung im 
Stifterverband, and Innovationsausschuss des G-BA; and personal fees from Biogen 
and Desitin outside the submitted work. Dr Lingor reported personal fees from 
Desitin outside the submitted work; and holding a patent for EP 2825175 B1, US 
9.980,972 B2 issued to University Medicine Göttingen. Dr Löscher reported 
personal fees from Alexion, Alnylam, Akcea, Biogen, CSL Behring, Janssen, 
Kedrion, Sanofi, Pfizer, and Roche outside the submitted work. Dr Hagenacker 
reported grants from Biogen, Novartis Gene Therapies, Roche, and Sanofi-Genzyme; 
and personal fees from Alexion, Biogen, Novartis Gene Therapies, Roche, and 
Sanofi-Genzyme outside the submitted work. Dr Meyer reported grants from 
Apellis, Cytokinetics, and Orphazyme; personal fees from Biogen and Mitsubishi 
Tanabe Pharma; and cofounding Ambulanzpartner Soziotechnologie GmbH outside the 
submitted work. Dr Ludolph reported grants from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft; 
and personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Biogen, Desitin Pharma, Hoffmann-La 
Roche, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Neurologie, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, Novartis, 
Syneos Health, and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries outside the submitted work. No 
other disclosures were reported.