---
reference_id: "PMID:25435114"
title: Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Satwani P
- Kahn J
- Dvorak CC
journal: Pediatr Clin North Am
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.pcl.2014.09.003
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation/methods
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myelomonocytic, Juvenile/complications, therapy"
- "Transplantation, Homologous"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Satwani P, Kahn J, Dvorak CC
**Journal:** Pediatr Clin North Am (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pcl.2014.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcl.2014.09.003)

## Content

1. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2015 Feb;62(1):95-106. doi: 10.1016/j.pcl.2014.09.003.

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.

Satwani P(1), Kahn J(2), Dvorak CC(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation,
Columbia University Medical Center Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital of New
York-Presbyterian, 3959 Broadway, CHN-1002, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic
address: ps2087@columbia.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation,
Columbia University Medical Center Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital of New
York-Presbyterian, 3959 Broadway, CHN-1002, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Allergy, Immunology, and Bone Marrow Transplant,
Benioff Children's Hospital, University of California San Francisco, 505
Parnassus Ave., M-659, San Francisco, CA, 94143-1278, USA.

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML), a rare myeloid malignancy that occurs
in young children, is considered a clonal disease originating in pluripotent
stem cells of the hematopoietic system. The pathogenesis of JMML involves
disruption of signal transduction through the RAS pathway, with resultant
selective hypersensitivity of JMML cells to granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor. Progress has been made in understanding aspects of
the molecular basis of JMML. How these molecular mechanisms may lead to targeted
therapeutics and improved outcomes remains to be elucidated. Allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplant is the only curative option for children with
JMML, and it is fraught with frequent relapse and significant toxicity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pcl.2014.09.003
PMID: 25435114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
