---
reference_id: "PMID:32491705"
title: Maple Syrup Urine Disease.
authors:
- Hassan SA
- Gupta V
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Maple Syrup Urine Disease.
**Authors:** Hassan SA, Gupta V

## Content

1. Maple Syrup Urine Disease.

Hassan SA(1), Gupta V(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026
Jan–.
2024 Mar 3.

Author information:
(1)Dow University of Health Sciences
(2)Wellness Psychiatry P.C

Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is a defect of amino acid metabolism due to
abnormal activity of the branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKAD)
complex. This complex is responsible for breaking down the 3 essential
branched-chain amino acids (BCAA): isoleucine, leucine, and valine. These BCAA
are usually used for energy production or increased protein (ie, muscle)
synthesis through their effect on the mTOR signaling pathway. In the
brain, BCAA's function is to promote protein and neurotransmitter synthesis and
energy production.  MSUD, also known as branched-chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase
deficiency, occurs when an underlying defect in the BCKAD complex located in the
cellular mitochondria disrupts the metabolism of BCAA, which leads to their
accumulation in the plasma, brain, and other tissues as well as their respective
derivative ketoacids in the urine. It classically manifests in the neonatal
period with failure to thrive, delayed developmental milestones, feeding
difficulties, lethargy, irritability, and a maple syrup odor first noticeable in
the cerumen and then the urine. If left untreated, the most severe, classic form
of MSUD can quickly lead to irreversible neurological injury manifesting as
brain damage, seizures, a coma, or central respiratory failure within just 7 to
10 days after birth. Death in untreated individuals with the severe form of the
disorder occurs within 2 months. Good clinical outcomes can be expected if
management is initiated early and expectantly, but any significant lapse in
treatment can result in permanent brain damage or worse. Long-term treatment
consists of significant, lifelong dietary restrictions of branched-chain amino
acids and close, continuing metabolic monitoring, but acute exacerbations with
decompensation may occur, requiring emergency management.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32491705

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Syed Adeel Hassan declares no
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Vikas
Gupta declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
