---
reference_id: "PMID:35153095"
title: "Diphtheria and tetanus seroepidemiology among children in Ukraine, 2017."
authors:
- Khetsuriani N
- Zaika O
- Slobodianyk L
- Scobie HM
- Cooley G
- Dimitrova SD
- Stewart B
- Geleishvili M
- Allahverdiyeva V
- "O'Connor P"
- Huseynov S
journal: Vaccine
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.02.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diphtheria and tetanus seroepidemiology among children in Ukraine, 2017.
**Authors:** Khetsuriani N, Zaika O, Slobodianyk L, Scobie HM, Cooley G, Dimitrova SD, Stewart B, Geleishvili M, Allahverdiyeva V, O'Connor P, Huseynov S
**Journal:** Vaccine (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.02.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.02.006)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2022 Mar 15;40(12):1810-1820. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.02.006.
Epub  2022 Feb 10.

Diphtheria and tetanus seroepidemiology among children in Ukraine, 2017.

Khetsuriani N(1), Zaika O(2), Slobodianyk L(3), Scobie HM(4), Cooley G(4), 
Dimitrova SD(4), Stewart B(4), Geleishvili M(5), Allahverdiyeva V(6), O'Connor 
P(7), Huseynov S(7).

Author information:
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, USA. Electronic 
address: nck7@cdc.gov.
(2)Public Health Center, Ministry of Health of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine; South 
Caucasus Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Program, CDC South Caucasus 
Office, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(3)South Caucasus Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Program, CDC South 
Caucasus Office, Tbilisi, Georgia; World Health Organization (WHO) Country 
Office in Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
(4)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, USA.
(5)South Caucasus Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Program, CDC South 
Caucasus Office, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(6)World Health Organization (WHO) Country Office in Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
(7)WHO Regional Office for Europe, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: The drastic decline of Ukraine's immunization coverage since 2009 
led to concerns about potential resurgence diphtheria and tetanus, along with 
other vaccine-preventable diseases.
METHODS: To assess population immunity against diphtheria and tetanus, we tested 
specimens from the serosurvey conducted in 2017 among children born in 
2006-2015, the birth cohorts targeted by the nationwide outbreak response 
immunization following a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 1 outbreak 
in Zakarpattya province in 2015. We surveyed four regions of Ukraine, using 
cluster sampling in Zakarpattya, Sumy, and Odessa provinces and simple random 
sampling in Kyiv City. We tested serum specimens for IgG antibodies against 
diphtheria and tetanus, using microbead assays (MBA). We estimated 
seroprevalence and calculated 95% confidence intervals. We also obtained 
information on the immunization status of surveyed children.
RESULTS: Seroprevalence of ≥0.1 IU/mL diphtheria antibodies was <80% in all 
survey sites (50.0%-79.2%). Seroprevalence of ≥0.1 IU/mL tetanus antibodies was 
≥80% in Sumy, Kyiv City, and Odessa (80.2%-89.1%) and 61.6% in Zakarpattya. 
Across the sites, the proportion of children vaccinated age-appropriately with 
diphtheria-tetanus-containing vaccines (DTCV) was 28.5%-57.4% among children 
born in 2006-2010 and 34.1%-54.3% among children born in 2011-2015. The 
proportion of recipients of <3 DTCV doses increased from 7.1%-16.7% among 
children born in 2006-2010 to 19.8%-38.6% among children born in 2011-2015, as 
did the proportion of recipients of zero DTCV doses (2.6%-8.8% versus 
8.0%-14.0%, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Protection against diphtheria among children born in 2006-2015 was 
suboptimal (<80%), particularly in Zakarpattya. Protection against tetanus was 
adequate (≥80%) except in Zakarpattya. Diphtheria-tetanus immunization status 
was suboptimal across all sites. Catch-up vaccination of 
unvaccinated/under-vaccinated children and other efforts to increase 
immunization coverage would close these immunity gaps and prevent the resurgence 
of diphtheria and tetanus in Ukraine, particularly in Zakarpattya.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2022.02.006
PMCID: PMC10351878
PMID: 35153095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.