---
reference_id: "PMID:7643358"
title: Perinatal lethal osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Cole WG
- Dalgleish R
journal: J Med Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.32.4.284
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perinatal lethal osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Cole WG, Dalgleish R
**Journal:** J Med Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.32.4.284](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.32.4.284)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 1995 Apr;32(4):284-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.32.4.284.

Perinatal lethal osteogenesis imperfecta.

Cole WG(1), Dalgleish R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Perinatal lethal osteogenesis imperfecta is the result of heterozygous mutations 
of the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes that encode the alpha 1(I) and alpha 2(I) chains 
of type I collagen, respectively. Point mutations resulting in the substitution 
of Gly residues in Gly-X-Y amino acid triplets of the triple helical domain of 
the alpha 1(I) or alpha 2(I) chains are the most frequent mutations. They 
interrupt the repetitive Gly-X-Y structure that is mandatory for the formation 
of a stable triple helix. Most babies have their own private de novo mutation. 
However, the recurrence rate is about 7% owing to germline mosaicism in one 
parent. The mutations act in a dominant negative manner as the mutant pro alpha 
chains are incorporated into type I procollagen molecules that also contain 
normal pro alpha chains. The abnormal molecules are poorly secreted, more 
susceptible to degradation, and impair the formation of the extracellular 
matrix. The collagen fibres are abnormally organised and mineralisation is 
impaired. The severity of the clinical phenotype appears to be related to the 
type of mutation, its location in the alpha chain, the surrounding amino acid 
sequences, and the level of expression of the mutant allele.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.32.4.284
PMCID: PMC1050377
PMID: 7643358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]