---
reference_id: "PMID:35868574"
title: Oxygen-dependent regulation of permeability in low resistance intestinal epithelial cells infected with Giardia lamblia.
authors:
- Souza JB
- Tsantarlis K
- Tonelli RR
journal: Exp Parasitol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2022.108329
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxygen-dependent regulation of permeability in low resistance intestinal epithelial cells infected with Giardia lamblia.
**Authors:** Souza JB, Tsantarlis K, Tonelli RR
**Journal:** Exp Parasitol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exppara.2022.108329](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exppara.2022.108329)

## Content

1. Exp Parasitol. 2022 Sep;240:108329. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2022.108329. Epub 
2022 Jul 19.

Oxygen-dependent regulation of permeability in low resistance intestinal 
epithelial cells infected with Giardia lamblia.

Souza JB(1), Tsantarlis K(1), Tonelli RR(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia, Universidade 
Federal de São Paulo, 04023-062, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia, Universidade 
Federal de São Paulo, 04023-062, São Paulo, SP, Brazil; Departamento de Ciências 
Farmacêuticas, Instituto de Ciências Ambientais, Químicas e Farmacêuticas, 
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, 09913-030, Diadema, SP, Brazil. Electronic 
address: r.tonelli@unifesp.br.

Intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) reside in a highly anaerobic environment that 
is subject to daily fluctuations in partial oxygen pressure (pO2), depending on 
intestinal tissue perfusion. This condition, known as physiological hypoxia, has 
a major impact on the maintenance of gut homeostasis, such as effects on the 
integrity and function of the intestinal epithelial barrier. Giardia lamblia is 
a microaerophilic protozoan parasite that infects and colonizes the small 
intestine of its host, causing watery diarrhea. The disease, known as 
giardiasis, is associated with enhanced intestinal permeability and disruption 
or reorganization of tight junction (TJ) proteins between IECs. Given the 
central role of oxygen in gut homeostasis, in this study, we aimed to evaluate 
whether pO2 affects intestinal permeability (flux of ions and macromolecules) 
and TJ protein expression in human IECs during G. lamblia infection. Using human 
cell lines HuTu-80 and Caco-2 as models of "loose" (low resistance) and "tight" 
(high resistance) intestines, respectively, we elucidated that low pO2 drives 
intestinal barrier dysfunction in IECs infected with trophozoites through 
dephosphorylation of protein kinase C (PKC α/β II). Additionally, we 
demonstrated that IECs infected with trophozoites in the presence of a 
pharmacological PKC activator (phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate) partially 
restored the barrier function, which was correlated with increased protein 
expression levels of zonula occludens (ZO)-2 and occludin. Collectively, these 
results support the emerging theory that molecular oxygen impacts gut 
homeostasis during Giardia infection via direct host signaling pathways. These 
findings further our knowledge regarding Giardia-host interactions and the 
pathophysiological mechanisms of human giardiasis.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2022.108329
PMID: 35868574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]