---
reference_id: "PMID:18769474"
title: Proline affects brain function in 22q11DS children with the low activity COMT 158 allele.
authors:
- Vorstman JA
- Turetsky BI
- Sijmens-Morcus ME
- de Sain MG
- Dorland B
- Sprong M
- Rappaport EF
- Beemer FA
- Emanuel BS
- Kahn RS
- van Engeland H
- Kemner C
journal: Neuropsychopharmacology
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/npp.2008.132
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proline affects brain function in 22q11DS children with the low activity COMT 158 allele.
**Authors:** Vorstman JA, Turetsky BI, Sijmens-Morcus ME, de Sain MG, Dorland B, Sprong M, Rappaport EF, Beemer FA, Emanuel BS, Kahn RS, van Engeland H, Kemner C
**Journal:** Neuropsychopharmacology (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/npp.2008.132](https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2008.132)

## Content

1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009 Feb;34(3):739-46. doi: 10.1038/npp.2008.132.
Epub  2008 Sep 3.

Proline affects brain function in 22q11DS children with the low activity COMT 
158 allele.

Vorstman JA(1), Turetsky BI, Sijmens-Morcus ME, de Sain MG, Dorland B, Sprong M, 
Rappaport EF, Beemer FA, Emanuel BS, Kahn RS, van Engeland H, Kemner C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. J.A.S.vorstman@umcutrecht.nl

The association between the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) and psychiatric 
disorders, particularly psychosis, suggests a causal relationship between 
22q11DS genes and abnormal brain function. The genes 
catechol-O-methyl-transferase (COMT) and proline dehydrogenase both reside 
within the commonly deleted region of 22q11.2. COMT activity and proline levels 
may therefore be altered in 22q11DS individuals. Associations of both COMT(158) 
genotype and elevated serum proline levels with abnormal brain function have 
been reported. Fifty-six 22q11DS children and 75 healthy controls were assessed 
on physiological measures of brain function, including prepulse inhibition (PPI) 
of startle, P50 auditory sensory gating and smooth pursuit eye movements (SPEM). 
COMT(158) genotype and plasma proline levels were determined in the 22q11DS 
children. We hypothesized an interaction between the COMT(158) genotype and 
proline, predicting the strongest negative effect of high proline on brain 
function to occur in 22q11DS children who are carriers of the COMT(met) allele. 
Of the three physiological measures, only SPEM and PPI were abnormal in the 
patient sample. With regard to the SPEM performance, there was a significant 
interaction between the COMT(158) genotype and proline level with significantly 
decreased SPEM performance in children with high plasma proline levels and the 
low activity COMT(met) allele. A similar interaction effect was not observed 
with regard to PPI. These findings are consistent with a model in which elevated 
proline negatively affects brain function by an increase in dopamine in the 
prefrontal cortex. 22q11DS patients with low dopamine catabolic capacity are 
therefore especially vulnerable to this functional disruption.

DOI: 10.1038/npp.2008.132
PMCID: PMC2817942
PMID: 18769474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST None.