---
reference_id: "PMID:27743896"
title: Procalcitonin in Crohn's disease with fever episodes, a variable to differentiate intra-abdominal abscess from disease flares.
authors:
- Ge X
- Hu D
- Cao Y
- Liu Z
- Ding C
- Tian H
- Gong J
- Zhu W
- Li N
- Li J
journal: Int J Surg
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2016.10.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Procalcitonin in Crohn's disease with fever episodes, a variable to differentiate intra-abdominal abscess from disease flares.
**Authors:** Ge X, Hu D, Cao Y, Liu Z, Ding C, Tian H, Gong J, Zhu W, Li N, Li J
**Journal:** Int J Surg (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijsu.2016.10.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsu.2016.10.011)

## Content

1. Int J Surg. 2016 Dec;36(Pt A):34-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2016.10.011. Epub
2016  Oct 12.

Procalcitonin in Crohn's disease with fever episodes, a variable to 
differentiate intra-abdominal abscess from disease flares.

Ge X(1), Hu D(2), Cao Y(3), Liu Z(3), Ding C(1), Tian H(1), Gong J(4), Zhu W(1), 
Li N(5), Li J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, China; Department of Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital 
of Nanchang University, China.
(3)Drum Tower Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, China. Electronic address: jinlingh_gongjf@163.com.
(5)Department of General Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, China. Electronic address: jinlingh_lining@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Crohn's Disease (CD) is a chronic inflammatory disease accompanied 
by many complications, such as intra-abdominal abscess (IAA). A frequent problem 
in CD is the discrimination of fever caused by exacerbated bowel inflammation or 
IAA.
METHODS: A total of 80 CD patients complaining with fever episodes were included 
prospectively. PCT, C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR), and white blood cell count (WBC) were evaluated on admission. IAA was 
identified based on image studies and response to antibiotic therapy by 
physicians blind to the serum PCT level. At last, correlation between serum PCT 
level and patients' disease activity was also investigated.
RESULTS: Sixteen patients were identified with IAA, which showed significantly 
higher serum PCT level when compared with those patients who have no IAA 
(0.505 ng/ml vs 0.112 ng/ml, p < 0.01). PCT is a better biomarker of IAA in CD 
patients compared with CRP, ESR and WBC (AUC = 0.954, 0.757, 0.771 and 0.554, 
respectively). And the cutoff value for PCT in differentiating patients with and 
without IAA was 0.35 ng/ml. Correlation between serum PCT level and CDAI score 
(r = 0.575) was weaker than that of CRP and ESR (r = 0.628 and 0.634 
respectively), but stronger than that of WBC (r = 0.162).
CONCLUSION: PCT can be an additional marker for detecting IAA in CD patients 
with fever episodes, and may serve as a new serological marker of disease 
activity.

Copyright © 2016 IJS Publishing Group Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2016.10.011
PMID: 27743896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]