---
reference_id: "PMID:32222129"
title: "Tuberous sclerosis: a review of the past, present, and future."
authors:
- Uysal SP
- Şahin M
journal: Turk J Med Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3906/sag-2002-133
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tuberous sclerosis: a review of the past, present, and future.
**Authors:** Uysal SP, Şahin M
**Journal:** Turk J Med Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3906/sag-2002-133](https://doi.org/10.3906/sag-2002-133)

## Content

1. Turk J Med Sci. 2020 Nov 3;50(SI-2):1665-1676. doi: 10.3906/sag-2002-133.

Tuberous sclerosis: a review of the past, present, and future.

Uysal SP(1), Şahin M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston Children’s Hospital, 
Boston Massachusetts, USA

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant, multisystem disorder 
that is characterized by cellular and tissue dysplasia in several organs. With 
the advent of genetic and molecular techniques, mutations in the TSC1 or TSC2 
genes were discovered to be responsible for mTOR overactivation, which is the 
underlying mechanism of pathogenesis. TSC is a highly heterogenous clinical 
entity with variable presentations and severity of disease. The brain, heart, 
skin, eyes, kidneys, and lungs are commonly involved in this syndrome, with 
neurologic symptoms comprising a significant source of morbidity and mortality. 
In 2012, the diagnostic criteria for TSC were revised by the International 
Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Consensus panel, and genetic testing was incorporated 
into the guidelines. Early detection of cardiac rhabdomyomas or TSC-associated 
skin lesions can suggest the diagnosis and underlie the importance of clinical 
vigilance. Animal studies have demonstrated the benefit of using mTOR inhibitors 
for various symptoms of TSC, and they have been successfully translated into 
clinical trials with significant improvement in symptom burden. Subependymal 
giant cell astrocytomas, renal angiomyolipomas, and epilepsy are the three 
FDA-approved indications in relation to TSC for the use of everolimus, which is 
a first generation mTOR inhibitor. Rapamycin has been FDA approved for 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Other TSC symptoms that could potentially benefit from 
this class of medication are currently under investigation. TSC constitutes a 
unique combination of protean physical symptoms and neurobehavioral 
abnormalities. TSC associated neuropsychiatric disorders (TAND), including 
intellectual disability, mood disorders, and autism spectrum disorder, represent 
significant challenges but remain underdiagnosed and undertreated. The TAND 
checklist is a useful tool for routine use in the clinical evaluation of TSC 
patients. A multidisciplinary treatment plan, based on the specific problems and 
needs of individuals, is the key to management of this genetic condition. 
Ongoing research studies have been providing promising leads for developing 
novel mechanistic strategies to address the pathophysiology of TSC.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License.

DOI: 10.3906/sag-2002-133
PMCID: PMC7672342
PMID: 32222129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: none declared