---
reference_id: PMID:36455457
title: "Cisplatin-induced ototoxicity: From signaling network to therapeutic targets."
authors:
- Wang X
- Zhou Y
- Wang D
- Wang Y
- Zhou Z
- Ma X
- Liu X
- Dong Y
journal: Biomed Pharmacother
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2022.114045
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cisplatin/toxicity, metabolism"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/toxicity, metabolism"
- "Hair Cells, Auditory"
- "Ototoxicity/etiology, metabolism"
- Cochlea
- Apoptosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cisplatin-induced ototoxicity: From signaling network to therapeutic targets.
**Authors:** Wang X, Zhou Y, Wang D, Wang Y, Zhou Z, Ma X, Liu X, Dong Y
**Journal:** Biomed Pharmacother (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopha.2022.114045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2022.114045)

## Content

1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2023 Jan;157:114045. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2022.114045. 
Epub 2022 Nov 28.

Cisplatin-induced ototoxicity: From signaling network to therapeutic targets.

Wang X(1), Zhou Y(2), Wang D(1), Wang Y(1), Zhou Z(1), Ma X(1), Liu X(3), Dong 
Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of 
China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics & gynecology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(3)Department of Surgical Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of China 
Medical University, Shenyang, China. Electronic address: liuxf777@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of 
China Medical University, Shenyang, China. Electronic address: 
dydlxf_1218@163.com.

Administration of cisplatin, a common chemotherapeutic drug, has an inevitable 
side effect of sensorineural hearing loss. The main etiologies are stria 
vascularis injury, spiral ganglion degeneration, and hair cell death. Over 
several decades, the research scope of cisplatin-induced ototoxicity has 
expanded with the discovery of the molecular mechanism mediating inner ear cell 
death, highlighting the roles of reactive oxygen species and transport channels 
for cisplatin uptake into inner ear cells. Upon entering hair cells, cisplatin 
disrupts organelle metabolism, induces oxidative stress, and targets DNA to 
cause intracellular damage. Recent studies have also reported the role of 
inflammation in cisplatin-induced ototoxicity. In this article, we preform a 
narrative review of the latest reported molecular mechanisms of 
cisplatin-induced ototoxicity, from extracellular to intracellular. We build up 
a signaling network starting with cisplatin entering into the inner ear through 
the blood labyrinth barrier, disrupting cochlear endolymph homeostasis, and 
activating inflammatory responses of the outer hair cells. After entering the 
hair cells, cisplatin causes hair cell death via DNA damage, redox system 
imbalance, and mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum dysfunction, culminating 
in programmed cell death including apoptosis, necroptosis, autophagic death, 
pyroptosis, and ferroptosis. Based on the mentioned mechanisms, prominent 
therapeutic targets, such as channel-blocking drugs of cisplatin transporter, 
construction of cisplatin structural analogues, anti-inflammatory drugs, 
antioxidants, cell death inhibitors, and others, were collated. Considering the 
recent research efforts, we have analyzed the feasibility of the aforementioned 
therapeutic strategies and proposed our otoprotective approaches to overcome 
cisplatin-induced ototoxicity.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2022.114045
PMID: 36455457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors have 
no relevant financial interests to disclose.