---
reference_id: "PMID:28177518"
title: Unique prevalence of oncogenic genetic alterations in young patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
authors:
- Tanaka K
- Hida T
- Oya Y
- Yoshida T
- Shimizu J
- Mizuno T
- Kuroda H
- Sakakura N
- Yoshimura K
- Horio Y
- Sakao Y
- Yatabe Y
journal: Cancer
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.30539
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Adenocarcinoma of Lung
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Female
- Gene Fusion
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Smoking/epidemiology
- Survival Rate
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unique prevalence of oncogenic genetic alterations in young patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Tanaka K, Hida T, Oya Y, Yoshida T, Shimizu J, Mizuno T, Kuroda H, Sakakura N, Yoshimura K, Horio Y, Sakao Y, Yatabe Y
**Journal:** Cancer (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.30539](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.30539)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2017 May 15;123(10):1731-1740. doi: 10.1002/cncr.30539. Epub 2017 Feb
8.

Unique prevalence of oncogenic genetic alterations in young patients with lung
adenocarcinoma.

Tanaka K(1), Hida T(1), Oya Y(1), Yoshida T(1), Shimizu J(1), Mizuno T(2),
Kuroda H(2), Sakakura N(2), Yoshimura K(3), Horio Y(1), Sakao Y(2), Yatabe Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Aichi Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Department of Biomedical Statistics, Innovative Clinical Research Center,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Aichi Cancer Center
Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinoma in the young is a rare entity, and the oncogenic
genetic alterations (GAs) and clinical characteristics associated with this
disease are poorly understood. Conversely, it has been demonstrated that young
age at diagnosis defines unique biology in other cancers. For this report, the
effects of young age on lung adenocarcinoma are reported.
METHODS: The authors retrospectively screened 1746 consecutive patients who were
diagnosed with stage I through IV adenocarcinoma between 2009 and 2015 and
identified 81 who were aged 40 years or younger at diagnosis. The clinical and
genetic characteristics of this younger population were analyzed.
RESULTS: Of the 81 younger patients identified, 36 (44%) were men, 36 (44%) were
never smokers, and the median age was 36 years (range, 26-40 years).
Thirty-three patients (41%) harbored anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
translocations, 24 (30%) had epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations,
and 2 (2%) had v-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS)
mutations. Rare oncogenic GAs also were studied in patients who had wild-type
ALK/EGFR/KRAS adenocarcinoma, including 4 patients with HER2 mutations, 2 with
Ret proto-oncogene (RET) translocations, and 2 with ROS proto-oncogene 1
receptor tyrosine kinase (ROS1) translocations. Notably, oncogenic GAs (P <
.001), ALK (P < .001) and ROS1 (P = .033) translocations, and HER2 mutations (P
< .001) were associated with young age, and a similar trend was observed for RET
translocations (P = .108). Younger patients who had adenocarcinoma without GAs
had a significantly worse prognosis compared with older patients without GAs
(overall survival, 8.9 vs 16.4 months; P < .001) and patients with GAs (24.9
months; P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Younger patients with adenocarcinoma have a distinctly unique
prevalence of oncogenic GAs. Comprehensive oncogenic GA screening is especially
recommended for personalized medicine strategies in this population. Cancer
2017;123:1731-1740. © 2017 American Cancer Society.

© 2016 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.30539
PMID: 28177518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
