---
reference_id: "PMID:33652962"
title: "Effects of Microbiota Imbalance in Anxiety and Eating Disorders: Probiotics as Novel Therapeutic Approaches."
authors:
- Navarro-Tapia E
- Almeida-Toledano L
- Sebastiani G
- Serra-Delgado M
- García-Algar Ó
- Andreu-Fernández V
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22052351
keywords:
- Animals
- "Anxiety/microbiology, therapy"
- "Anxiety Disorders/microbiology, therapy"
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/microbiology, therapy"
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Humans
- Probiotics/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of Microbiota Imbalance in Anxiety and Eating Disorders: Probiotics as Novel Therapeutic Approaches.
**Authors:** Navarro-Tapia E, Almeida-Toledano L, Sebastiani G, Serra-Delgado M, García-Algar Ó, Andreu-Fernández V
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22052351](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22052351)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Feb 26;22(5):2351. doi: 10.3390/ijms22052351.

Effects of Microbiota Imbalance in Anxiety and Eating Disorders: Probiotics as
Novel Therapeutic Approaches.

Navarro-Tapia E(1), Almeida-Toledano L(2)(3), Sebastiani G(4), Serra-Delgado
M(2)(3), García-Algar Ó(1)(4), Andreu-Fernández V(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Grup de Recerca Infancia i Entorn (GRIE), Institut d'investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, 08950 Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain.
(3)BCNatal, Fetal Medicine Research Center (Hospital Sant Joan de Déu and
Hospital Clínic), University of Barcelona, 08950 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Neonatology, Hospital Clínic-Maternitat, ICGON, BCNatal, 08028
Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Health, Valencian International University (VIU), 46002
Valencia, Spain.

Anxiety and eating disorders produce a physiological imbalance that triggers
alterations in the abundance and composition of gut microbiota. Moreover, the
gut-brain axis can be altered by several factors such as diet, lifestyle,
infections, and antibiotic treatment. Diet alterations generate gut dysbiosis,
which affects immune system responses, inflammation mechanisms, the intestinal
permeability, as well as the production of short chain fatty acids and
neurotransmitters by gut microbiota, which are essential to the correct function
of neurological processes. Recent studies indicated that patients with
generalized anxiety or eating disorders (anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and
binge-eating disorders) show a specific profile of gut microbiota, and this
imbalance can be partially restored after a single or multi-strain probiotic
supplementation. Following the PRISMA methodology, the current review addresses
the main microbial signatures observed in patients with generalized anxiety
and/or eating disorders as well as the importance of probiotics as a preventive
or a therapeutic tool in these pathologies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22052351
PMCID: PMC7956573
PMID: 33652962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to
publish the results.
