---
reference_id: "PMID:20301562"
title: Familial Hemiplegic Migraine.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Jen JC
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Hemiplegic Migraine.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Jen JC

## Content

1. Familial Hemiplegic Migraine.

Jen JC(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2001 Jul 17 [updated 2024 Jul 4].

Author information:
(1)Department of NeurologyIcahn School of Medicine at Mount SinaiNew York, New
York

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) falls within the
category of migraine with aura. In migraine with aura (including FHM) the
neurologic symptoms of aura are unequivocally localizable to the cerebral cortex
or brain stem and include visual disturbance (most common), sensory loss (e.g.,
numbness or paresthesias of the face or an extremity), and dysphasia (difficulty
with speech). FHM must include motor involvement, such as hemiparesis (weakness
of an extremity). Hemiparesis occurs with at least one other symptom during FHM
aura. Neurologic deficits with FHM attacks can be prolonged for hours to days
and may outlast the associated migrainous headache. FHM is often earlier in
onset than typical migraine, frequently beginning in the first or second decade;
the frequency of attacks tends to decrease with age. Approximately 40%-50% of
families with CACNA1A-FHM have cerebellar signs ranging from nystagmus to
progressive, usually late-onset mild ataxia.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of FHM can be established in a
proband: (1) who fulfills criteria for migraine with aura; (2) in whom the aura
includes fully reversible motor weakness and visual, sensory, or language
symptoms; and (3) who has at least one first- or second-degree relative with
similar attacks that fulfill the diagnostic criteria for hemiplegic migraine.
The molecular diagnosis can be established in a proband by identification of a
heterozygous pathogenic variant in ATP1A2, CACNA1A, PRRT2, or SCN1A.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: A trial of acetazolamide for
individuals with CACNA1A-FHM or a trial of prophylactic migraine medications
(e.g., tricyclic antidepressants, beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers,
anti-seizure medications) for all FHM types may be warranted for frequent
attacks. Anti-seizure treatment may be necessary for seizures, which are
prevalent in ATP1A2-FHM. Corticosteroids in children with cerebral edema to
reduce life-threatening manifestations. Surveillance: Neurologic evaluation to
assess change in attack frequency and/or seizures, development of movement
disorder, developmental delay, and/or learning disability annually or more
frequently for worsening symptoms. Agents/circumstances to avoid:
Vasoconstricting agents because of the risk of stroke; cerebral angiography as
it may precipitate a severe attack.
GENETIC COUNSELING: FHM and simplex hemiplegic migraine caused by a heterozygous
ATP1A2, CACNA1A, PRRT2, or SCN1A pathogenic variant are inherited in an
autosomal dominant manner. Because the diagnosis of FHM requires at least one
affected first-degree relative, most individuals diagnosed with FHM have an
affected parent. Individuals with simplex hemiplegic migraine (i.e., individuals
with an FHM-causing pathogenic variant and an apparently negative family
history) may have a de novo pathogenic variant or a pathogenic variant inherited
from an asymptomatic parent. Each child of an individual with FHM has a 50%
chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Once an FHM-causing pathogenic
variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal testing for a
pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301562
