---
reference_id: "PMID:37331373"
title: "Global, regional, and national prevalence and mortality burden of sickle cell disease, 2000-2021: a systematic analysis from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021."
authors:
- GBD 2021 Sickle Cell Disease Collaborators
journal: Lancet Haematol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00118-7
keywords:
- Infant
- Child
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Humans
- Prevalence
- Global Burden of Disease
- beta-Thalassemia
- Morbidity
- Risk Factors
- "Anemia, Sickle Cell/epidemiology"
- Global Health
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global, regional, and national prevalence and mortality burden of sickle cell disease, 2000-2021: a systematic analysis from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021.
**Authors:** GBD 2021 Sickle Cell Disease Collaborators
**Journal:** Lancet Haematol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00118-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00118-7)

## Content

1. Lancet Haematol. 2023 Aug;10(8):e585-e599. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00118-7.
 Epub 2023 Jun 15.

Global, regional, and national prevalence and mortality burden of sickle cell
disease, 2000-2021: a systematic analysis from the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2021.

GBD 2021 Sickle Cell Disease Collaborators.

Collaborators: Thomson AM, McHugh TA, Oron AP, Teply C, Lonberg N, Vilchis Tella
V, Wilner LB, Fuller K, Hagins H, Aboagye RG, Aboye MB, Abu-Gharbieh E, Abu-Zaid
A, Addo IY, Ahinkorah BO, Ahmad A, AlRyalat SAS, Amu H, Aravkin AY, Arulappan J,
Atout MMW, Badiye AD, Bagherieh S, Banach M, Banakar M, Bardhan M, Barrow A,
Bedane DA, Bensenor IM, Bhagavathula AS, Bhardwaj P, Bhardwaj PV, Bhat AN,
Bhutta ZA, Bilalaga MM, Bishai JD, Bitaraf S, Boloor A, Butt MH, Chattu VK, Chu
DT, Dadras O, Dai X, Danaei B, Dang AK, Demisse FW, Dhimal M, Diaz D, Djalalinia
S, Dongarwar D, Elhadi M, Elmonem MA, Esezobor CI, Etaee F, Eyawo O, Fagbamigbe
AF, Fatehizadeh A, Force LM, Gardner WM, Ghaffari K, Gill PS, Golechha M, Goleij
P, Gupta VK, Hasani H, Hassan TS, Hassen MB, Ibitoye SE, Ikiroma AI, Iwu CCD,
James PB, Jayaram S, Jebai R, Jha RP, Joseph N, Kalantar F, Kandel H, Karaye IM,
Kassahun WD, Khan IA, Khanmohammadi S, Kisa A, Kompani F, Krishan K, Landires I,
Lim SS, Mahajan PB, Mahjoub S, Majeed A, Marasini BP, Meresa HA, Mestrovic T,
Minhas S, Misganaw A, Mokdad AH, Monasta L, Mustafa G, Nair TS, Narasimha Swamy
S, Nassereldine H, Natto ZS, Naveed M, Nayak BP, Noubiap JJ, Noyes T, Nri-Ezedi
CA, Nwatah VE, Nzoputam CI, Nzoputam OJ, Okonji OC, Onikan AO, Owolabi MO, Patel
J, Pati S, Pawar S, Petcu IR, Piel FB, Qattea I, Rahimi M, Rahman M, Rawaf S,
Redwan EMM, Rezaei N, Saddik B, Saeed U, Saheb Sharif-Askari F, Samy AM,
Schumacher AE, Shaker E, Shetty A, Sibhat MM, Singh JA, Suleman M, Sunuwar DR,
Szeto MD, Tamuzi JJL, Tat NY, Taye BT, Temsah MH, Umair M, Valadan Tahbaz S,
Wang C, Wickramasinghe ND, Yigit A, Yiğit V, Yunusa I, Zaman BA, Zangiabadian M,
Zheng P, Hay SI, Naghavi M, Murray CJL, Kassebaum NJ.

Erratum in
    Lancet Haematol. 2023 Aug;10(8):e574. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00215-6.

Comment in
    Lancet Haematol. 2023 Aug;10(8):e558-e559. doi:
10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00169-2.

BACKGROUND: Previous global analyses, with known underdiagnosis and single cause
per death attribution systems, provide only a small insight into the suspected
high population health effect of sickle cell disease. Completed as part of the
Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study (GBD) 2021, this
study delivers a comprehensive global assessment of prevalence of sickle cell
disease and mortality burden by age and sex for 204 countries and territories
from 2000 to 2021.
METHODS: We estimated cause-specific sickle cell disease mortality using
standardised GBD approaches, in which each death is assigned to a single
underlying cause, to estimate mortality rates from the International
Classification of Diseases (ICD)-coded vital registration, surveillance, and
verbal autopsy data. In parallel, our goal was to estimate a more accurate
account of sickle cell disease health burden using four types of epidemiological
data on sickle cell disease: birth incidence, age-specific prevalence,
with-condition mortality (total deaths), and excess mortality (excess deaths).
Systematic reviews, supplemented with ICD-coded hospital discharge and insurance
claims data, informed this modelling approach. We employed DisMod-MR 2.1 to
triangulate between these measures-borrowing strength from predictive covariates
and across age, time, and geography-and generated internally consistent
estimates of incidence, prevalence, and mortality for three distinct genotypes
of sickle cell disease: homozygous sickle cell disease and severe sickle cell
β-thalassaemia, sickle-haemoglobin C disease, and mild sickle cell
β-thalassaemia. Summing the three models yielded final estimates of incidence at
birth, prevalence by age and sex, and total sickle cell disease mortality, the
latter of which was compared directly against cause-specific mortality estimates
to evaluate differences in mortality burden assessment and implications for the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
FINDINGS: Between 2000 and 2021, national incidence rates of sickle cell disease
were relatively stable, but total births of babies with sickle cell disease
increased globally by 13·7% (95% uncertainty interval 11·1-16·5), to 515 000
(425 000-614 000), primarily due to population growth in the Caribbean and
western and central sub-Saharan Africa. The number of people living with sickle
cell disease globally increased by 41·4% (38·3-44·9), from 5·46 million
(4·62-6·45) in 2000 to 7·74 million (6·51-9·2) in 2021. We estimated 34 400
(25 000-45 200) cause-specific all-age deaths globally in 2021, but total sickle
cell disease mortality burden was nearly 11-times higher at 376 000
(303 000-467 000). In children younger than 5 years, there were 81 100
(58 800-108 000) deaths, ranking total sickle cell disease mortality as 12th
(compared to 40th for cause-specific sickle cell disease mortality) across all
causes estimated by the GBD in 2021.
INTERPRETATION: Our findings show a strikingly high contribution of sickle cell
disease to all-cause mortality that is not apparent when each death is assigned
to only a single cause. Sickle cell disease mortality burden is highest in
children, especially in countries with the greatest under-5 mortality rates.
Without comprehensive strategies to address morbidity and mortality associated
with sickle cell disease, attainment of SDG 3.1, 3.2, and 3.4 is uncertain.
Widespread data gaps and correspondingly high uncertainty in the estimates
highlight the urgent need for routine and sustained surveillance efforts,
further research to assess the contribution of conditions associated with sickle
cell disease, and widespread deployment of evidence-based prevention and
treatment for those with sickle cell disease.
FUNDING: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00118-7
PMCID: PMC10390339
PMID: 37331373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests L M Force reports
support for this Article from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; grants or
contracts from Conquer Cancer Foundation, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
St Baldrick's Foundation, and National Institutes of Health (NIH) Loan Repayment
Program; leadership or fiduciary roles in board, society, committee or advocacy
groups, unpaid with Lancet Oncology International Advisory Board, outside the
submitted work. K Fuller reports support for this Article from the Institute for
Health Metrics and Evaluation and the Gates Foundation. P Gill reports other
support as a National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Senior
Investigator; the views expressed in this publication are those of the author
and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the UK Department of Health and Social
Care; all outside the submitted work. N J Kassebaum reports grant funding
support for this Article from the Gates Foundation. K Kewal reports other
non-financial support from UGC Centre of Advanced Study, CAS II, Department of
Anthropology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India; all outside the submitted
work. F B Piel reports grants or contracts from the National Health Service Race
and Health Observatory; consulting fees from Bluebird Bio; payment or honoraria
for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational
events from King's Sickle Cell Preceptorship 2023; support for attending
meetings or travel from 4th Global Sickle Cell Disease Congress; participation
on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board with Fondation Pierre Fabre;
all outside the submitted work. J A Singh reports consulting fees from
Crealta/Horizon, Medisys, Fidia, PK Med, Two labs, Adept Field Solutions,
Clinical Care Options, ClearView Healthcare Partners, Putnam Associates, Focus
Forward, Navigant Consulting, Spherix, MedIQ, Jupiter Life Science, UBM, Trio
Health, Medscape, WebMD, and Practice Point Communications; and the NIH and the
American College of Rheumatology; payment or honoraria for lectures,
presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from
the speaker's bureau of Simply Speaking; support for attending meetings or
travel from the steering committee of OMERACT; participation on a data safety
monitoring board or advisory board as a member of the US Food and Drug
Administration Arthritis Advisory Committee; leadership or fiduciary roles in
board, society, committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid with OMERACT as a
steering committee member; leadership or fiduciary roles in board, society,
committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid with the Veterans Affairs of
Rheumatology Field Advisory Committee as a chair; leadership or fiduciary roles
in board, society, committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid with UAB
Cochrane Musculoskeletal Group Satellite Center on Network Meta-analysis as the
editor and director; stock or stock options in TPT Global Tech, Vaxart
Pharmaceuticals, Atyu Biopharma, Adaptimmune Therapeutics, GeoVax Labs, Pieris
Pharmaceuticals, Enzolytics, Seres Therapeutics, Tonix Pharmaceuticals, and
Charlotte's Web Holdings, with previously owned stock options in Amarin, Viking,
and Moderna Pharmaceuticals; all outside the submitted work.
