---
reference_id: "PMID:14579545"
title: Thallium toxicity and the role of Prussian blue in therapy.
authors:
- Hoffman RS
journal: Toxicol Rev
year: '2003'
doi: 10.2165/00139709-200322010-00004
keywords:
- Animals
- Antidotes/therapeutic use
- Environmental Pollutants/toxicity
- Ferrocyanides/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Poisoning/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Thallium/toxicity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thallium toxicity and the role of Prussian blue in therapy.
**Authors:** Hoffman RS
**Journal:** Toxicol Rev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00139709-200322010-00004](https://doi.org/10.2165/00139709-200322010-00004)

## Content

1. Toxicol Rev. 2003;22(1):29-40. doi: 10.2165/00139709-200322010-00004.

Thallium toxicity and the role of Prussian blue in therapy.

Hoffman RS(1).

Author information:
(1)New York City Poison Center, New York, New York, USA. BOBHOFF@POL.NET

Thallium salts have been used as medicinal agents, as key ingredients in a 
variety of manufacturing processes, and as a potent rodenticide. Additionally, 
environmental concerns are growing, as thallium is a waste product of coal 
combustion and the manufacturing of cement. Thallium salts are rapidly and 
nearly completely absorbed by virtually all routes, with gastrointestinal 
exposure being the most common route to produce toxicity. Thallium enters cells 
by a unique process governed by its similarity in charge and ionic radius to 
potassium. Although the exact mechanism of toxicity has not been established, 
thallium interferes with energy production at essential steps in glycolysis, the 
Krebs cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation. Additional effects include 
inhibition of sodium-potassium-adenosine triphosphatase and binding to 
sulfhydryl groups. The major manifestations of toxicity consist of a rapidly 
progressive, ascending, extremely painful sensory neuropathy and alopecia. 
Unlike exposure to most metal salts, gastrointestinal symptoms of thallium 
toxicity are relatively minor, and constipation is more characteristic than 
diarrhoea. Many other findings such as an autonomic neuropathy, cranial nerve 
abnormalities, altered mental status, motor weakness, cardiac, hepatic, and 
renal effects are described, but are less specific. Thallium also crosses the 
placenta freely and produces abnormalities in animals as well as fetal demise, 
overt toxicity and congenital abnormalities in humans. There are no controlled 
trials of treatments in thallium-poisoned patients. Thus, the literature is 
predominated by very small animal studies and case reports with very limited 
data. Strong evidence speaks against the use of traditional metal chelators such 
as dimercaprol (British Anti-Lewisite) and penicillamine, and the latter may 
cause redistribution of thallium into the central nervous system. Likewise, 
forced potassium diuresis appears harmful. The use of single- or multiple-dose 
activated charcoal is supported by in vitro binding experiments and some animal 
data, and charcoal haemoperfusion may be a useful adjunct. Multiple animal 
studies give evidence for enhanced elimination and improved survival with 
Prussian blue. Unfortunately, despite the fact that many humans have been 
treated with Prussian blue, the data presented are insufficient to comment 
definitively on its efficacy. However, Prussian blue's safety profile is 
superior to that of other proposed therapies and it should be considered the 
drug of choice in acute thallium poisoning. Public health efforts should focus 
on greater restrictions on access to, and use of, thallium salts.

DOI: 10.2165/00139709-200322010-00004
PMID: 14579545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]