---
reference_id: "PMID:26900326"
title: A novel H395R mutation in MKKS/BBS6 causes retinitis pigmentosa and polydactyly without other findings of Bardet-Biedl or McKusick-Kaufman syndrome.
authors:
- Hulleman JD
- Nguyen A
- Ramprasad VL
- Murugan S
- Gupta R
- Mahindrakar A
- Angara R
- Sankurathri C
- Mootha VV
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2016'
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics
- "Blotting, Western"
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Group II Chaperonins/genetics
- HEK293 Cells
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Hydrocolpos/genetics
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Plasmids
- Polydactyly/genetics
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/cytology
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Siblings
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Uterine Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel H395R mutation in MKKS/BBS6 causes retinitis pigmentosa and polydactyly without other findings of Bardet-Biedl or McKusick-Kaufman syndrome.
**Authors:** Hulleman JD, Nguyen A, Ramprasad VL, Murugan S, Gupta R, Mahindrakar A, Angara R, Sankurathri C, Mootha VV
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2016)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2016 Jan 24;22:73-81. eCollection 2016.

A novel H395R mutation in MKKS/BBS6 causes retinitis pigmentosa and polydactyly 
without other findings of Bardet-Biedl or McKusick-Kaufman syndrome.

Hulleman JD(1), Nguyen A(2), Ramprasad VL(3), Murugan S(3), Gupta R(3), 
Mahindrakar A(4), Angara R(5), Sankurathri C(4), Mootha VV(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX; Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX.
(3)MedGenome, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
(4)Srikiran Institute of Ophthalmology, Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(5)Sai Sudha Hospital, Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX; Srikiran Institute of Ophthalmology, Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh, 
India; McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development/Center for Human 
Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX.

PURPOSE: To identify the causative mutation in two siblings from a 
consanguineous family in India with retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and polydactyly 
without other findings of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS). We also performed 
functional characterization of the mutant protein to explore its role in this 
limited form of BBS.
METHODS: The siblings underwent a thorough ophthalmological examination, 
including retinal optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging, and an extensive 
physical examination with abdominal ultrasonography to characterize the disease 
phenotype. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) using a panel targeting retinal 
degeneration genes was performed on genomic DNA samples from the siblings and 
parents. Upon identification of the causative mutation, functional 
characterization was accomplished by performing protein-protein interaction 
studies in human embryonic kidney (HEK-293T) and human adult retinal pigmented 
epithelium (ARPE-19) cells.
RESULTS: The two siblings showed signs of RP and polydactyly. The patients did 
not have truncal obesity, renal anomalies, hydrometrocolpos, congenital heart 
disease, or overt cognitive defects. NGS identified a homozygous c.1184A>G 
mutation in the MKKS/BBS6 gene in both patients resulting in a p.H395R 
substitution in the MKKS/BBS6 protein. This mutant protein decreased the 
interaction of MKKS/BBS6 with BBS12 but did so to a different extent in the 
HEK-293T versus ARPE-19 cells. Nonetheless, the effect of the H395R variant on 
disrupting interactions with BBS12 was not as profound as other reported 
MKKS/BBS6 mutations associated with syndromic RP.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel H395R substitution in MKKS/BBS6 that results 
in a unique phenotype of only RP and polydactyly. Our observations reaffirm the 
notion that mutations in MKKS/BBS6 cause phenotypic heterogeneity and do not 
always result in classic MKKS or BBS findings.

PMCID: PMC4734152
PMID: 26900326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]