---
reference_id: "PMID:31989345"
title: "Management of dysphagia in Huntington's disease: a descriptive review."
authors:
- Pizzorni N
- Pirola F
- Ciammola A
- Schindler A
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-020-04265-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of dysphagia in Huntington's disease: a descriptive review.
**Authors:** Pizzorni N, Pirola F, Ciammola A, Schindler A
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-020-04265-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-020-04265-0)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2020 Jun;41(6):1405-1417. doi: 10.1007/s10072-020-04265-0. Epub
2020  Jan 27.

Management of dysphagia in Huntington's disease: a descriptive review.

Pizzorni N(1), Pirola F(2), Ciammola A(3), Schindler A(2).

Author information:
(1)Phoniatric Unit, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences "L. Sacco", 
University of Milan, Via GB Grassi 74, 20157, Milan, Italy. 
nicole.pizzorni@virgilio.it.
(2)Phoniatric Unit, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences "L. Sacco", 
University of Milan, Via GB Grassi 74, 20157, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurology and Laboratory of Neuroscience, IRCCS Istituto 
Auxologico Italiano, Piazzale Brescia 20, 20145, Milan, Italy.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a rare neurodegenerative disorder of the central 
nervous system characterized by involuntary choreatic movements, cognitive, 
behavioral, and psychiatric disturbances. Most HD suffer from dysphagia and 
aspiration pneumonia is the leading cause of death. However, little is known 
about dysphagia management in HD. A revision of the literature was conducted to 
depict the state of the art on the assessment and treatment of dysphagia in HD. 
Literature search of the last 10 years was performed using PubMed and EMBASE. 
Twenty-four studies were included: 16 cross-sectional studies, 2 case reports, 2 
case series, 2 open-label trials, 1 pre-post study, and 1 randomized controlled 
trial. Based on the studies retrieved, dysphagia should be assessed from the 
early stage of the disease, especially when specific clinical markers occur. 
Timing for dysphagia re-assessment should be based on the recommendation of the 
swallowing experts on the individual case. Instrumental assessment of swallowing 
by videofluoroscopy or videoendoscopy is feasible and recommended to diagnose 
dysphagia in patients with HD. Clinical assessment tools and patient-reported 
outcome measures may be used to complete the swallowing examination, but not to 
replace instrumental assessment. The impact of pharmacological and 
rehabilitative treatments on dysphagia in HD has been little studied in 
literature. While the effect of tetrabenazine on swallowing is still 
controversial, compensatory strategies seem to be applicable and efficacious. To 
date, there are no well-proven rehabilitative strategies to improve swallowing 
function in patients with HD. The topic of dysphagia in HD remains poorly 
studied compared with its clinical relevance.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-020-04265-0
PMID: 31989345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]