---
reference_id: "PMID:39769082"
title: "Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus: The Importance of Metabolism and Aging."
authors:
- Kordowitzki P
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms252413318
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Aging/metabolism, physiology"
- "Encephalitis Virus, Eastern Equine/metabolism"
- "Encephalomyelitis, Eastern Equine/metabolism, virology"
- "Encephalomyelitis, Equine/virology"
- Horses/virology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus: The Importance of Metabolism and Aging.
**Authors:** Kordowitzki P
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms252413318](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms252413318)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Dec 12;25(24):13318. doi: 10.3390/ijms252413318.

Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus: The Importance of Metabolism and Aging.

Kordowitzki P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preclinical and Basic Sciences, Faculty of Biological and 
Veterinary Sciences, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 87-100 Torun, Poland.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) is a mosquito-transmitted alphavirus 
that, among humans, can cause a severe and often fatal illness. The zoonotic 
EEEV enzootic cycle involves a cycle of transmission between Culiseta melanura 
and avian hosts, frequently resulting in spillover to dead-end vertebrate hosts 
such as humans and horses. Interestingly, it has been described that the W132G 
mutation of the very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), the receptor of 
EEEV, significantly enhanced the VLDLR-mediated cell attachment of EEEV. The 
patient's metabolism plays a pivotal role in shaping the complex landscape of 
viral zoonosis. EEEV represents a significant public health concern due to its 
severe clinical outcomes, challenging epidemiological characteristics, and 
certain risk factors that heighten susceptibility among specific populations or 
age groups. Age is one of several predictors that can impact the outcome of EEEV 
infection; juvenile animals appear to be particularly vulnerable to severe 
disease. This has also been observed in natural infections, as children are 
often the most severely impacted humans. The aim of this piece is to shed light 
on the intricate relationship between human metabolism and the Eastern equine 
encephalitis virus.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252413318
PMCID: PMC11680025
PMID: 39769082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.