---
reference_id: "PMID:41537702"
title: Exploratory Analysis of Biomarkers and Treatment Outcomes from the COLUMBUS Study in BRAF V600E/K-Mutant Advanced or Metastatic Melanoma.
authors:
- Dummer R
- Deng S
- Xie T
- Pathan N
- Saffari H
- Robert C
- Arance A
- de Groot JWB
- Garbe C
- Gogas HJ
- Gutzmer R
- Krajsová I
- Liszkay G
- Loquai C
- Mandala M
- Schadendorf D
- Yamazaki N
- Ascierto PA
- Davis CB
- Shah K
- Hamilton P
- di Pietro A
- Flaherty K
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-3262
keywords:
- Humans
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Male
- Female
- Mutation
- "Sulfonamides/administration & dosage"
- Middle Aged
- "Benzimidazoles/administration & dosage"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- "Vemurafenib/administration & dosage"
- "Carbamates/administration & dosage"
- Aged
- Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- Retrospective Studies
- Prognosis
- "Circulating Tumor DNA/blood, genetics"
- "Benzamides/administration & dosage"
- Exome Sequencing
- Neoplasm Metastasis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploratory Analysis of Biomarkers and Treatment Outcomes from the COLUMBUS Study in BRAF V600E/K-Mutant Advanced or Metastatic Melanoma.
**Authors:** Dummer R, Deng S, Xie T, Pathan N, Saffari H, Robert C, Arance A, de Groot JWB, Garbe C, Gogas HJ, Gutzmer R, Krajsová I, Liszkay G, Loquai C, Mandala M, Schadendorf D, Yamazaki N, Ascierto PA, Davis CB, Shah K, Hamilton P, di Pietro A, Flaherty K
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-3262](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-3262)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2026 Apr 1;32(7):1266-1276. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-3262.

Exploratory Analysis of Biomarkers and Treatment Outcomes from the COLUMBUS
Study in BRAF V600E/K-Mutant Advanced or Metastatic Melanoma.

Dummer R(1), Deng S(2), Xie T(2), Pathan N(2), Saffari H(3), Robert C(4), Arance
A(5), de Groot JWB(6), Garbe C(7), Gogas HJ(8), Gutzmer R(9), Krajsová I(10),
Liszkay G(11), Loquai C(12), Mandala M(13), Schadendorf D(14)(15), Yamazaki
N(16), Ascierto PA(17), Davis CB(2), Shah K(2), Hamilton P(2), di Pietro A(18),
Flaherty K(19).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Zurich , Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Pfizer , La Jolla, California.
(3)Pfizer , South San Francisco, California.
(4)Gustave Roussy and Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, France.
(5)Hospital Clinic of Barcelona and IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Isala Oncology Center, Zwolle, Netherlands.
(7)University Hospital Tübingen , Tübingen, Germany.
(8)National and Kapodistrian University of Athens , Athens, Greece.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Ruhr University Bochum, Minden, Germany.
(10)General Teaching Hospital in Prague , Prague, Czech Republic.
(11)National Institute of Oncology , Budapest, Hungary.
(12)Department of Dermatology, Fachklinik Hornheide, Muenster, Germany.
(13)University of Perugia , Perugia, Italy.
(14)University Hospital Essen, West German Cancer Center and German Cancer
Consortium, Partner Site Essen, Essen, Germany.
(15)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) West, Campus Essen, and Research
Alliance Ruhr, Research Center One Health, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany.
(16)National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(17)Melanoma Unit, Cancer Immunotherapy and Innovative Therapies, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori IRCCS Fondazione Pascale, Naples, Italy.
(18)Pfizer , Milan, Italy.
(19)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts.

PURPOSE: Treatment with encorafenib ± binimetinib is associated with improved
survival versus vemurafenib in patients with BRAF V600E/K-mutant advanced
melanoma. We retrospectively analyzed genomic and transcriptomic data from the
phase III COLUMBUS trial to identify molecular correlates of benefit with
encorafenib ± binimetinib.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In COLUMBUS, patients with BRAF V600E/K-mutant locally
advanced, unresectable, or metastatic melanoma (n = 921) were randomized to
receive encorafenib plus binimetinib, encorafenib, or vemurafenib. We used
whole-exome sequencing (n = 666), whole-transcriptome sequencing (RNA
sequencing; n = 514), and assessment of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) at
baseline (n = 336) and on treatment (cycle 2 day 1, n = 184) to evaluate
biomarker associations with progression-free and overall survival.
RESULTS: Survival benefits with encorafenib plus binimetinib versus vemurafenib
were greatest in patients with higher tumor mutational burden (TMB) and those
with evidence of tumor immune infiltration (i.e., higher cytolytic score, PD-L1
expression, or IFNγ gene signature scores). Clustering of gene expression
profiles identified three tumor subgroups, including an "immune" subgroup
associated with improved survival. Detection of BRAF V600 alterations in
baseline ctDNA was associated with shorter survival; clearance of BRAF V600
alterations at cycle 2 day 1 was associated with improved survival across arms.
CONCLUSIONS: The greatest benefits of encorafenib plus binimetinib were observed
in patients with evidence of high TMB and/or tumor-immune infiltration,
suggesting potential immune contributions to efficacy, which were not observed
with vemurafenib. BRAF V600 detectability in ctDNA seems to have utility as a
marker of prognosis and response in this population.

©2026 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-3262
PMCID: PMC13040209
PMID: 41537702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R. Dummer has intermittent, project-focused
consulting and/or advisory relationships with Novartis, MSD, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Roche, Amgen, Takeda, Pierre Fabre, Sun Pharma, Sanofi, CatalYm, Second
Genome, Regeneron, T3 Pharma, MaxiVAX SA, Pfizer, Simcere, and Iovance outside
the submitted work; is a senior medical advisor of Oncobit; and has participated
on Derma2go outside the submitted work. S. Deng reports employment, stock, and
other ownership interests with Pfizer. C. Robert reports personal fees from
Pierre Fabre, Bristol Myers Squibb, MSD, Merck, Roche, Pfizer, Sun Pharma,
Regeneron, Maat Pharma, Iovance, Moderna, and Immatics outside the submitted
work. A. Arance reports other support from BioNTech, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Genmab, MSD, Biontech, HUYABIO International, Immunocore, IO Biotech, Iovance
Biotherapeutics, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Replimune, and Sairopa outside the
submitted work. C. Garbe reports personal fees from CeCaVa, MSD, NeraCare, and
Philogen outside the submitted work. H.J. Gogas reports grants from ARRAY during
the conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from Bristol Myers Squibb,
MSD, and Regeneron; and grants from Pfizer and Replimmune outside the submitted
work. R. Gutzmer reports other support from Novartis during the conduct of the
study; grants from Amgen, Sanofi, Regeneron, Kyowa-Kirin, Almirall, SUN Pharma,
and Recordati; and personal fees from Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, MSD,
Almirall, Pierre Fabre, Merck, SUN Pharma, Sanofi, Regeneron, Immunocore,
Delcath, Kyowa-Kirin, Incyte, and Janssen outside the submitted work. C. Loquai
reports advisory board membership, travel reimbursement, and honoraria from
Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck, BioNTech, Regeneron, Lilly, Pfizer, Sanofi, MSD,
Novartis, and Almirall Hermal. M. Mandala reports grants and personal fees from
Novartis and personal fees from Regeneron, Bristol Myers Squibb, Sun Pharma,
MSD, and Immunocore outside the submitted work. D. Schadendorf reports personal
fees, nonfinancial support, and other support from Regeneron and Pierre Fabre;
grants, personal fees, nonfinancial support, and other support from MSD; grants,
personal fees, and other support from Bristol Myers Squibb; personal fees from
Novartis; personal fees and other support from Immatics, Immunocore, IOBioTech,
Philogen, and BioNTech; and personal fees from Allmiral, Boehringer Ingelheim,
ImCheck, Iovance, Neracare, SkylineDX, Merck-Serono, Moderna, EeBeTe, and Ipsen
during the conduct of the study. N. Yamazaki reports personal fees from ONO;
grants and personal fees from Bristol Myers Squibb, MSD, and Novartis; and
grants from HUYA and Regeneron outside the submitted work. P.A. Ascierto reports
grants and personal fees from Bristol Myers Squibb, Roche-Genentech, and
Medicenna; personal fees and other support from Pierre Fabre, Pfizer, Bio AI
Health, Replimmune, Philogen, and MSD; and personal fees from Novartis, Sun
Pharma, Immunocore, Italfarmaco, Boehringer Ingelheim, Regeneron, Nouscom,
ValoTx, Erasca, IO-Biontech, Anaveon, Genmab, Menarini, Incyte, and ImCheck
Therapeutics outside the submitted work. K. Shah reports employment, stock, and
other ownership interests with Pfizer. P. Hamilton reports employment, stock,
and other ownership interests with Pfizer. A. di Pietro reports employment,
stock, and other ownership interests with Pfizer. K.T. Flaherty reports other
support from Khora Therapeutics, Clovis Oncology, Kinnate Biopharma, Checkmate
Pharmaceuticals, Strata Oncology, Scorpion Therapeutics, PIC Therapeutics,
Apricity, Parabalis, Tvarrdi, xCures, Monopteros, Vibliome, ALX Oncology,
Karkinos, Soley Therapeutics, Alterome, IntrECate, PreDICTA, Tasca Therapeutics,
Genentech, Takeda, Transcode Therapeutics, Nextech Invest, and Novartis during
the conduct of the study. No disclosures were reported by the other authors.
