---
reference_id: "PMID:38043079"
title: Extension of the cone-beam CT field-of-view using two complementary short scans.
authors:
- Belotti G
- Fattori G
- Baroni G
- Rit S
journal: Med Phys
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mp.16869
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extension of the cone-beam CT field-of-view using two complementary short scans.
**Authors:** Belotti G, Fattori G, Baroni G, Rit S
**Journal:** Med Phys (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mp.16869](https://doi.org/10.1002/mp.16869)

## Content

1. Med Phys. 2024 May;51(5):3391-3404. doi: 10.1002/mp.16869. Epub 2023 Dec 3.

Extension of the cone-beam CT field-of-view using two complementary short scans.

Belotti G(1), Fattori G(2), Baroni G(1)(3), Rit S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, CartCasLab, 
Politecnico di Milano (MI), Milan, Italy.
(2)Center for Proton Therapy, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland.
(3)Centro Nazionale di Adroterapia Oncologica (CNAO), Pavia (PV), Italy.
(4)Univ Lyon, CREATIS, INSA-Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, UJM-Saint 
Etienne, CNRS, Inserm, CREATIS UMR5220, U1294, Lyon, France.

BACKGROUND: Robotic C-arm cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) scanners provide 
fast in-room imaging in radiotherapy. Their mobility extends beyond performing a 
gantry rotation, but they might encounter obstructions to their motion which 
limit the gantry angle range. The axial field-of-view (FOV) of a reconstructed 
CBCT image depends on the acquisition geometry. When imaging a large anatomical 
location, such as the thorax, abdomen, or pelvis, a centered cone beam might be 
insufficient to acquire untruncated projection images. Some CBCT scanners can 
laterally displace their detector and collimate the beam to increase the FOV, 
but the gantry must then perform a 360∘ rotation to provide complete data 
for reconstruction.
PURPOSE: To extend the FOV of a CBCT image with a single short scan (gantry 
angle range of 180∘ +  fan angle) using two complementary short scans.
METHODS: We defined an acquisition protocol using two short scans during which 
the source follows the same trajectory and where the detector has equal and 
opposite tilt and/or offset between the two scans, which we refer to as 
complementary scans. We created virtual acquisitions using a Monte Carlo 
simulator on a digital anthropomorphic phantom and on a computed tomography (CT) 
scan of a patient abdomen. For our proposed method, each simulation produced two 
complementary sets of projections, which were weighted for redundancies and used 
to reconstruct one CBCT image. We compared the resulting images to the ground 
truth phantoms and simulations of conventional scans.
RESULTS: Reconstruction artifacts were slightly more prominent in the 
complementary scans w.r.t. a complete scan with untruncated projections but 
matched those in a single short scan without truncation. When analyzing 
reconstructed scans from simulated projections with scatter and corrected with 
prior CT information, we found a global agreement between complementary and 
conventional scan approaches.
CONCLUSIONS: When dealing with a limited range of motion of the gantry of a CBCT 
scanner, two complementary short scans are a technically valid alternative to a 
full 360 ∘ scan with equal FOV. This approach enables FOV extension without 
collisions or hardware upgrades.

© 2023 The Authors. Medical Physics published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of American Association of Physicists in Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/mp.16869
PMID: 38043079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]