---
reference_id: "PMID:3044463"
title: Abdominal pain, indigestion, anorexia, nausea and vomiting.
authors:
- Bruppacher R
- Gyr N
- Fisch T
journal: Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1016/0950-3528(88)90004-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abdominal pain, indigestion, anorexia, nausea and vomiting.
**Authors:** Bruppacher R, Gyr N, Fisch T
**Journal:** Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0950-3528(88)90004-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/0950-3528(88)90004-8)

## Content

1. Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol. 1988 Apr;2(2):275-92. doi: 
10.1016/0950-3528(88)90004-8.

Abdominal pain, indigestion, anorexia, nausea and vomiting.

Bruppacher R, Gyr N, Fisch T.

Non-specific abdominal complaints are a very frequent cause of discomfort. Even 
if only comparatively few are brought to the attention of the physician, they 
account for a considerable portion of the reasons for seeking medical care, both 
in acute and chronic conditions. On the other hand, few drugs are free of the 
suspicion of causing abdominal complaints, which make up between one-tenth and 
one-third of reported adverse reactions. A wide variety of possible alternative 
or concomitant causes makes a clear causative attribution to suspected drugs 
very difficult. This holds especially true for the ill-defined conditions of 
indigestion and anorexia. For nausea and vomiting, specific scales have been 
developed which facilitate differentiation between drugs causing these effects 
most frequently and most intensively. They have been applied in cytostatic 
therapy, where this is one of the most frequently encountered problems, but 
nausea and vomiting can seriously affect compliance in many other treatments. 
Somatic abdominal pain results in most instances from the irritation of the 
parietal peritoneum and is usually the effect of a lesion. This may or may not 
be caused by a drug, but this cause should be the first consideration. Visceral 
pain may result from functional disturbance of secretory glands or of the 
muscular coat, from drug action on bowel content or from irritation of the 
mucosa, all of which are frequently interrelated. Most frequently suspected 
pharmacological causes are drugs with anticholinergic action, antibiotics, 
potassium supplements and non-steroidal, anti-inflammatory agents. Drug-induced 
hyperinsulinism and porphyria are rare cases. Abuse of laxatives should always 
be considered because of its prevalence. A great number of other untoward drug 
effects have been described in the literature, but rarely merit first 
consideration. With the exception of promptly occurring or persistent emesis, 
gastrointestinal symptoms usually are not pathognomonic for drug effects and are 
the result of several factors. The usual approach to identifying an adverse drug 
effect is to delineate the functional or structural disorder, and to associate 
this diagnosis with possible pharmacodynamic aetiologies.

DOI: 10.1016/0950-3528(88)90004-8
PMID: 3044463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]