---
reference_id: "PMID:31621627"
title: "Dystonia-Ataxia with early handwriting deterioration in COQ8A mutation carriers: A case series and literature review."
authors:
- Galosi S
- Barca E
- Carrozzo R
- Schirinzi T
- Quinzii CM
- Lieto M
- Vasco G
- Zanni G
- Di Nottia M
- Galatolo D
- Filla A
- Bertini E
- Santorelli FM
- Leuzzi V
- Haas R
- Hirano M
- Friedman J
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.09.015
keywords:
- Adult
- "Ataxia/complications, epidemiology, etiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- Disease Progression
- "Dystonic Disorders/epidemiology, etiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Handwriting
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/complications, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- "Muscle Weakness/complications, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Ubiquinone/deficiency, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dystonia-Ataxia with early handwriting deterioration in COQ8A mutation carriers: A case series and literature review.
**Authors:** Galosi S, Barca E, Carrozzo R, Schirinzi T, Quinzii CM, Lieto M, Vasco G, Zanni G, Di Nottia M, Galatolo D, Filla A, Bertini E, Santorelli FM, Leuzzi V, Haas R, Hirano M, Friedman J
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.09.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.09.015)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2019 Nov;68:8-16. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.09.015. Epub 2019 Sep 28.

Dystonia-Ataxia with early handwriting deterioration in COQ8A mutation carriers:
A case series and literature review.

Galosi S(1), Barca E(2), Carrozzo R(3), Schirinzi T(4), Quinzii CM(2), Lieto
M(5), Vasco G(6), Zanni G(3), Di Nottia M(3), Galatolo D(7), Filla A(5), Bertini
E(3), Santorelli FM(7), Leuzzi V(1), Haas R(8), Hirano M(2), Friedman J(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Neuroscience, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurology and H. Houston Merritt Neuromuscular Clinical
Research Center, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Unit of Muscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of
Neurosciences, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(4)Unit of Muscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of
Neurosciences, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, Rome, Italy; Department of
Systems Medicine, University of Roma Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive and Odontostomatologic Sciences,
Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(6)Unit of Neurorehabilitation, Department of Neurosciences, IRCCS Bambino Gesù
Children Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(7)Molecular Medicine IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy.
(8)Departments of Neurosciences and Pediatrics, University of California San
Diego, San Diego, CA, USA; Division of Neurology Rady Children's Hospital, San
Diego, CA, USA.
(9)Departments of Neurosciences and Pediatrics, University of California San
Diego, San Diego, CA, USA; Division of Neurology Rady Children's Hospital, San
Diego, CA, USA; Rady Children's Institute for Genomic Medicine, San Diego, CA,
USA. Electronic address: jrfriedman@ucsd.edu.

Cerebellar ataxia is a hallmark of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) deficiency associated
with COQ8A mutations. We present four patients, one with novel COQ8A pathogenic
variants all with early, prominent handwriting impairment, dystonia and only
mild ataxia. To better define the phenotypic spectrum and course of COQ8A
disease, we review the clinical presentation and evolution in 47 reported cases.
Individuals with COQ8A mutation display great clinical variability and
unpredictable responses to CoQ10 supplementation. Onset is typically during
infancy or childhood with ataxic features associated with developmental delay or
regression. When disease onset is later in life, first symptoms can include:
incoordination, epilepsy, tremor, and deterioration of writing. The natural
history is characterized by a progression to a multisystem brain disease
dominated by ataxia, with disease severity inversely correlated with age at
onset. Six previously reported cases share with ours, a clinical phenotype
characterized by slowly progressive or static writing difficulties, focal
dystonia, and speech disorder, with only minimal ataxia. The combination of
writing difficulty, dystonia and ataxia is a distinctive constellation that is
reminiscent of a previously described clinical entity called Dystonia Ataxia
Syndrome (DYTCA) and is an important clinical indicator of COQ8A mutations, even
when ataxia is mild or absent.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.09.015
PMID: 31621627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
