---
reference_id: "PMID:30940144"
title: "A review on low-dimensional physics-based models of systemic arteries: application to estimation of central aortic pressure."
authors:
- Zhou S
- Xu L
- Hao L
- Xiao H
- Yao Y
- Qi L
- Yao Y
journal: Biomed Eng Online
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12938-019-0660-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review on low-dimensional physics-based models of systemic arteries: application to estimation of central aortic pressure.
**Authors:** Zhou S, Xu L, Hao L, Xiao H, Yao Y, Qi L, Yao Y
**Journal:** Biomed Eng Online (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12938-019-0660-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12938-019-0660-3)

## Content

1. Biomed Eng Online. 2019 Apr 2;18(1):41. doi: 10.1186/s12938-019-0660-3.

A review on low-dimensional physics-based models of systemic arteries: 
application to estimation of central aortic pressure.

Zhou S(1), Xu L(2)(3), Hao L(1), Xiao H(4), Yao Y(1), Qi L(1), Yao Y(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Sino-Dutch Biomedical and Information Engineering School, Northeastern 
University, Shenyang, 110819, China.
(2)Sino-Dutch Biomedical and Information Engineering School, Northeastern 
University, Shenyang, 110819, China. xuls@bmie.neu.edu.cn.
(3)Neusoft Research of Intelligent Healthcare Technology, Co. Ltd., Shenyang, 
110167, China. xuls@bmie.neu.edu.cn.
(4)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Modern Photoelectric Detection Technology and 
Instrument, School of Optoelectronic Information, Chongqing University of 
Technology, Chongqing, 400054, China.
(5)Neusoft Research of Intelligent Healthcare Technology, Co. Ltd., Shenyang, 
110167, China.

The physiological processes and mechanisms of an arterial system are complex and 
subtle. Physics-based models have been proven to be a very useful tool to 
simulate actual physiological behavior of the arteries. The current 
physics-based models include high-dimensional models (2D and 3D models) and 
low-dimensional models (0D, 1D and tube-load models). High-dimensional models 
can describe the local hemodynamic information of arteries in detail. With 
regard to an exact model of the whole arterial system, a high-dimensional model 
is computationally impracticable since the complex geometry, viscosity or 
elastic properties and complex vectorial output need to be provided. For 
low-dimensional models, the structure, centerline and viscosity or elastic 
properties only need to be provided. Therefore, low-dimensional modeling with 
lower computational costs might be a more applicable approach to represent 
hemodynamic properties of the entire arterial system and these three types of 
low-dimensional models have been extensively used in the study of cardiovascular 
dynamics. In recent decades, application of physics-based models to estimate 
central aortic pressure has attracted increasing interest. However, to our best 
knowledge, there has been few review paper about reconstruction of central 
aortic pressure using these physics-based models. In this paper, three types of 
low-dimensional physical models (0D, 1D and tube-load models) of systemic 
arteries are reviewed, the application of three types of models on estimation of 
central aortic pressure is taken as an example to discuss their advantages and 
disadvantages, and the proper choice of models for specific researches and 
applications are advised.

DOI: 10.1186/s12938-019-0660-3
PMCID: PMC6446386
PMID: 30940144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.