---
reference_id: "PMID:32899328"
title: "Psychosocial Influence of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome in Daily Life of Patients: A Qualitative Study."
authors:
- Palomo-Toucedo IC
- Leon-Larios F
- Reina-Bueno M
- Vázquez-Bautista MDC
- Munuera-Martínez PV
- Domínguez-Maldonado G
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph17176425
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Psychosocial Influence of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome in Daily Life of Patients: A Qualitative Study.
**Authors:** Palomo-Toucedo IC, Leon-Larios F, Reina-Bueno M, Vázquez-Bautista MDC, Munuera-Martínez PV, Domínguez-Maldonado G
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph17176425](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17176425)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Sep 3;17(17):6425. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph17176425.

Psychosocial Influence of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome in Daily Life of Patients: A 
Qualitative Study.

Palomo-Toucedo IC(1), Leon-Larios F(2), Reina-Bueno M(1), Vázquez-Bautista 
MDC(1), Munuera-Martínez PV(1), Domínguez-Maldonado G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Podiatry, University of Seville, 41009 Seville, Spain.
(2)Department of Nursing, University of Seville, 41009 Seville, Spain.

(1) Background: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a heterogeneous group of connective 
tissue disorders causing pain, fatigue, and disabilities; it has several 
implications for patients who suffer from this disease. The major clinical 
manifestations of EDS include joint hypermobility, skin hyperextensibility, and 
generalized connective tissue fragility. This research aims to explore their 
perceptions and experiences about the phycological and social spheres. (2) 
Methods: Semistructured interviews were carried out. Participants were 
encouraged to talk about issues related to their disease by asking open-ended 
questions in one to one interview. The interview guide included questions to 
identify the syndrome's influence on the social and psychological life of 
patients All interviews were audio recorded, fully transcribed, and analyzed 
using the phenomenological theoretical framework. The method of analysis was the 
thematic interpreting of perspectives and approaches. (3) Results: 31 
individuals were proposed to participate in this study. Five patients refused to 
participate, so a total of 26 interviews were performed. Six themes ((1) Pain 
and its consequences on a daily basis; (2) The need to name the problem: the 
diagnosis; (3) Restructuring leisure and social relationships; (4) Limitations 
due to economic conditions; (5) Psychological impact of the disease situation; 
(6) Professional limitations) and four subthemes ((1) The value of partner 
support; (2) The weather influence on social plans; (3) Physical exercise and 
illness; (4) Support groups) emerged from the data. (4) Conclusions: This study 
revealed the impact of the syndrome on the social and daily life of patients, 
and not only in a physical level, but also in a psychological and social 
approach. These findings allow healthcare providers to know more about this 
disease in order to support and give advice to patients about the changes they 
will have to make.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17176425
PMCID: PMC7503231
PMID: 32899328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.