---
reference_id: "PMID:25879992"
title: "Differentiation between severe HELLP syndrome and thrombotic microangiopathy, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and other imitators."
authors:
- Pourrat O
- Coudroy R
- Pierre F
journal: Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2015.03.017
keywords:
- Antiphospholipid Syndrome
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Fatty Liver
- Female
- HELLP Syndrome/diagnosis
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic"
- Pre-Eclampsia
- Pregnancy
- "Purpura, Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic"
- Sepsis
- Thrombotic Microangiopathies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differentiation between severe HELLP syndrome and thrombotic microangiopathy, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and other imitators.
**Authors:** Pourrat O, Coudroy R, Pierre F
**Journal:** Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejogrb.2015.03.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejogrb.2015.03.017)

## Content

1. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2015 Jun;189:68-72. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2015.03.017. Epub 2015 Mar 25.

Differentiation between severe HELLP syndrome and thrombotic microangiopathy, 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and other imitators.

Pourrat O(1), Coudroy R(2), Pierre F(3).

Author information:
(1)Obstetric Medicine Clinic, Intensive Care and Internal Medicine Unit, 
University of Poitiers, Jean Bernard Hospital, Poitiers Cedex, France. 
Electronic address: olivier.pourrat@chu-poitiers.fr.
(2)Intensive Care and Internal Medicine Unit, University of Poitiers, Jean 
Bernard Hospital, Poitiers Cedex, France.
(3)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University of Poitiers, Jean 
Bernard Hospital, Poitiers Cedex, France.

Pre-eclampsia complicated by severe HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and 
low platelet count) syndrome is a multi-organ disease, and can be difficult to 
differentiate from thrombotic microangiopathy (appearing as thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura or hemolytic uremic syndrome), acute fatty liver, 
systemic erythematous lupus, antiphospholipid syndrome and severe sepsis. Many 
papers have highlighted the risks of misdiagnosis resulting in severe 
consequences for maternal health, and this can be fatal when thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura is misdiagnosed as severe HELLP syndrome. The aim of 
this paper is to propose relevant markers to differentiate pre-eclampsia 
complicated by severe HELLP syndrome from its imitators, even in the worrying 
situation of apparently indistinguishable conditions, and thereby assist 
clinical decision-making regarding whether or not to commence plasma exchange. 
Relevant identifiers to establish the most accurate diagnosis include the 
frequency of each disease and anamnestic data. Frank hemolysis, need for 
dialysis, neurological involvement and absence of disseminated intravascular 
coagulation are indicative of thrombotic microangiopathy. The definitive marker 
for thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is undetectable ADAMTS 13 activity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2015.03.017
PMID: 25879992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]