---
reference_id: "PMID:27055168"
title: Listeria Meningitis in an Immunocompetent Child.
authors:
- Villa G
- Diana MC
- Solari N
- Bandettini R
- Sorrentino S
- Loy A
- Losurdo G
- Renna S
journal: Pediatr Emerg Care
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000000687
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Listeria Meningitis in an Immunocompetent Child.
**Authors:** Villa G, Diana MC, Solari N, Bandettini R, Sorrentino S, Loy A, Losurdo G, Renna S
**Journal:** Pediatr Emerg Care (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PEC.0000000000000687](https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0000000000000687)

## Content

1. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2017 Aug;33(8):579-581. doi: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000000687.

Listeria Meningitis in an Immunocompetent Child.

Villa G(1), Diana MC, Solari N, Bandettini R, Sorrentino S, Loy A, Losurdo G, 
Renna S.

Author information:
(1)From the *Emergency Department of Paediatrics, Departments of †Clinical 
Pathology and Microbiology and ‡Hematology and Oncology, and §Infectious 
Diseases Unit, G. Gaslini Children's Hospital, Genoa, Italy.

Listeria monocytogenes is a facultative anerobic, gram-positive bacillus that is 
isolated from the soil, vegetables, and wild or domestic animals. Listeria 
infection is usually found in the older adults, immunocompromised patients, 
pregnant women, and newborns, whereas it is rare in healthy infants and 
children. Listeria monocytogenes may cause meningitis, meningoencephalitis, 
brain abscess, pyogenic arthritis, osteomyelitis, and liver abscess in children. 
The course of meningoencephalitis by Listeria is often severe and even fatal. 
Complications such as acute hydrocephalus, brain abscess, and spine abscess can 
develop, and the mortality associated with listeriosis is significantly high. We 
present a case of a previously healthy 7-year-old boy who developed Listeria 
monocytogenes meningitis.

DOI: 10.1097/PEC.0000000000000687
PMID: 27055168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]