---
reference_id: "PMID:29689068"
title: Role of the keratin 1 and keratin 10 tails in the pathogenesis of ichthyosis hystrix of Curth Macklin.
authors:
- Terrinoni A
- Didona B
- Caporali S
- Chillemi G
- Lo Surdo A
- Paradisi M
- Annichiarico-Petruzzelli M
- Candi E
- Bernardini S
- Melino G
journal: PLoS One
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195792
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Dermatitis, Seborrheic/genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Ichthyosis/genetics
- Infant
- "Keratin-1/chemistry, genetics"
- "Keratin-10/chemistry, genetics"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Protein Conformation
- Protein Domains
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the keratin 1 and keratin 10 tails in the pathogenesis of ichthyosis hystrix of Curth Macklin.
**Authors:** Terrinoni A, Didona B, Caporali S, Chillemi G, Lo Surdo A, Paradisi M, Annichiarico-Petruzzelli M, Candi E, Bernardini S, Melino G
**Journal:** PLoS One (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0195792](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195792)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2018 Apr 24;13(4):e0195792. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195792.
eCollection 2018.

Role of the keratin 1 and keratin 10 tails in the pathogenesis of ichthyosis
hystrix of Curth Macklin.

Terrinoni A(1), Didona B(2), Caporali S(1), Chillemi G(3), Lo Surdo A(1),
Paradisi M(1), Annichiarico-Petruzzelli M(4), Candi E(1)(4), Bernardini S(1),
Melino G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of
Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(2)Center of Dermatological Rare Diseases, IDI-IRCCS, Via dei Monti di Creta,
Rome Italy.
(3)SCAI SuperComputing Applications and Innovation Department, Cineca, Via dei
Tizii 6, Rome, Italy.
(4)Biochemistry Laboratory, IDI-IRCCS, via Monti di Creta, Rome, Italy.

Ichthyosis Hystrix of Curth-Macklin (IH-CM) is a rare manifestation of
epidermolytic ichthyosis (EI) that is characterised by generalised spiky or
verrucous hyperkeratosis. The disorder is further distinguished by the presence
of binucleated cells in the affected skin, whereas epidermolysis and clumping of
tonofilaments, as seen in EI, are absent. While IH-CM is associated with
mutations in the keratin 1 (KRT1) gene, reports to date have indicated that
mutations in the KRT1 gene result in an aberrant and truncated protein tail,
essentially affecting the function of the V2 domain. Here, we studied a female
sporadic patient who was born with diffused erythrodermic hyperkeratosis and who
presented at the age of 13 months with an intense and widespread hyperkeratosis
with a papillomatous appearance and typical palmoplantar keratoderma. Genetic
analysis demonstrated a "de novo" mutation in the keratin 10 gene (KRT10)
consisting of a three-base-pair deletion, resulting in the substitution of amino
acids p.Glu445 and p.Ile446 by Asp at the end of the 2B domain of the protein.
We performed structural and functional studies showing that this mutation
modifies the structure of the paired 2B and V2 K1/10 domains, leading to the
disease phenotype. Our results highlight the importance and complexity of the
KRT1/10 V2 domain in keratin dimer formation and the potential consequences of
its alteration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195792
PMCID: PMC5918167
PMID: 29689068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
