---
reference_id: "PMID:7602782"
title: "[Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase]."
authors:
- Fujii H
journal: Nihon Rinsho
year: '1995'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase].
**Authors:** Fujii H
**Journal:** Nihon Rinsho (1995)

## Content

1. Nihon Rinsho. 1995 May;53(5):1221-5.

[Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujii H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Blood Transfusion Medicine, Tokyo Women's Medical College.

Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) plays a key role in the generation of 
NADPH which is essential for maintaining glutathione in the reduce state, and in 
the production of ribose 5-phosphate for the synthesis of nucleotides. G6PD in 
its active form is either a dimer or tetramer consisting identical subunits. The 
gene for G6PD is located on the X chromosome. Human red cell G6PD consists of 
515 amino acids with a molecular weight of 59,265 daltons. Deficiency of G6PD is 
the most common metabolic disorder, and is associated with chronic and drug- or 
infection-induced hemolytic anemia. It is estimated that 400 million people in 
the world are affected. The mutations responsible for about 73 variants have 
been determined. Some of them have polymorphic frequencies in different 
populations. Except for seven kinds of variants with small gene deletion, splice 
site deletion of intron or three nucleotide substitutions, all of those were 
found to be produced by one or two nucleotide substitutions. Molecular studies 
disclosed that all the class 1 variants associated with chronic hemolysis have 
the mutations surrounding either the substrate or the NADP binding site.

PMID: 7602782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]