---
reference_id: "PMID:20301612"
title: Hirschsprung Disease Overview – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Parisi MA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschsprung Disease Overview – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Parisi MA

## Content

1. Hirschsprung Disease Overview – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE
ONLY.

Parisi MA(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2025.
2002 Jul 12 [updated 2015 Oct 1].

Author information:
(1)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), or congenital intestinal 
aganglionosis, is a birth defect characterized by complete absence of neuronal 
ganglion cells from a portion of the intestinal tract. The aganglionic segment 
includes the distal rectum and a variable length of contiguous proximal 
intestine. In 80% of individuals, aganglionosis is restricted to the 
rectosigmoid colon (short-segment disease); in 15%-20%, aganglionosis extends 
proximal to the sigmoid colon (long-segment disease); in about 5%, aganglionosis 
affects the entire large intestine (total colonic aganglionosis). Rarely, the 
aganglionosis extends into the small bowel or even more proximally to encompass 
the entire bowel (total intestinal aganglionosis). HSCR is considered a 
neurocristopathy, a disorder of cells and tissues derived from the neural crest, 
and may occur as an isolated finding or as part of a multisystem disorder. 
Affected infants frequently present in the first two months of life with 
symptoms of impaired intestinal motility such as failure to pass meconium within 
the first 48 hours of life, constipation, emesis, abdominal pain or distention, 
and occasionally diarrhea. However, because the initial diagnosis of HSCR may be 
delayed until late childhood or adulthood, HSCR should be considered in anyone 
with lifelong severe constipation. Individuals with HSCR are at risk for 
enterocolitis and/or potentially lethal intestinal perforation.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of HSCR requires histopathologic demonstration 
of absence of enteric ganglion cells in the distal rectum. Suction biopsies of 
rectal mucosa and submucosa are the preferred diagnostic test in most centers 
because they can be performed safely without general anesthesia. Syndromes 
associated with HSCR are diagnosed by clinical findings, cytogenetic analysis, 
or in some cases, by specific molecular or biochemical tests. Isolated HSCR 
(i.e., HSCR in the absence of related systemic findings) is a disorder 
associated with pathogenic variants in a number of genes.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Recurrence risk depends on the underlying cause.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Resection of the aganglionic segment 
and anastomosis of proximal bowel to the anus ("pull-through") is the standard 
treatment for HSCR. Individuals with extensive intestinal aganglionosis who 
develop irreversible intestinal failure may be candidates for intestinal 
transplantation.

Copyright © 1993-2025, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301612