---
reference_id: "PMID:21464791"
title: Orbital manifestations of Noonan syndrome.
authors:
- Randolph JC
- Sokol JA
- Lee HB
- Nunery WR
journal: Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/IOP.0b013e318209976c
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orbital manifestations of Noonan syndrome.
**Authors:** Randolph JC, Sokol JA, Lee HB, Nunery WR
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IOP.0b013e318209976c](https://doi.org/10.1097/IOP.0b013e318209976c)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011 Nov-Dec;27(6):e160-3. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0b013e318209976c.

Orbital manifestations of Noonan syndrome.

Randolph JC(1), Sokol JA, Lee HB, Nunery WR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, Kentucky, USA.

Noonan syndrome describes a rare multisystem condition that manifests with 
Turner syndrome phenotype combined with numerous systemic and facial 
characteristics. The most common systemic findings include cardiac defects, 
short stature, chest deformity, hearing loss, and bleeding diatheses. Patients 
with Noonan syndrome are also at a greater risk of developing various types of 
malignancies. Facial characteristics of Noonan syndrome consist of broad 
forehead, low-set ears, short and webbed neck, and low hairline. External ocular 
findings include hypertelorism, ptosis, epicanthal folds, antimongoloid slant, 
downward-sloping palpebral fissures, and malar flattening. In this case series 
and review of the literature, the authors present 2 cases of Noonan syndrome 
that embody the diverse spectrum of orbital manifestations associated with this 
rare disorder. The first case demonstrates more profound orbital pathology, 
including bilateral orbital giant cell reparative granulomas, proptosis, 
hypertelorism, shallow orbits, upper eyelid ptosis, and lower eyelid retraction. 
The second case displays classic Turner-syndrome-like facial characteristics 
including a broad forehead with low hairline, low-set ears, and short and webbed 
neck. Orbital findings were subtle and consisted of bilateral lower eyelid 
retraction and shallow orbits. In conclusion, Noonan syndrome is a rare 
congenital disorder with a wide spectrum of clinical findings. Various 
intraorbital and extraorbital tumors may occur in patients with Noonan syndrome, 
with giant cell reparative granuloma being the most commonly encountered. In 
patients with orbital tumors and eyelid retraction, the authors describe 
successful treatment through decompression, tumor extraction, and lower eyelid 
retractor release. Patients who present with ocular irritation and exposure due 
to less severe lower eyelid malposition may be successfully treated with lower 
eyelid retraction repair combined with lateral internal tarsoconjunctival 
tarsorrhaphy.

DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0b013e318209976c
PMID: 21464791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]