---
reference_id: "PMID:37428401"
title: Cognitive Interventions for Neurodegenerative Disease.
authors:
- Krellman JW
- Mercuri G
journal: Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s11910-023-01283-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive Interventions for Neurodegenerative Disease.
**Authors:** Krellman JW, Mercuri G
**Journal:** Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11910-023-01283-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-023-01283-1)

## Content

1. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2023 Sep;23(9):461-468. doi: 
10.1007/s11910-023-01283-1. Epub 2023 Jul 10.

Cognitive Interventions for Neurodegenerative Disease.

Krellman JW(1), Mercuri G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, 710 West 
168Th Street, New York, NY, 10032-3784, USA. jk3878@cumc.columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, 710 West 
168Th Street, New York, NY, 10032-3784, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To critically review recent research in the development of 
non-pharmacological interventions to improve cognitive functioning in 
individuals with Alzheimer's disease (AD) or Parkinson's disease (PD).
RECENT FINDINGS: Cognitive interventions can be grouped into three categories: 
cognitive stimulation (CS), cognitive training (CT), and cognitive 
rehabilitation (CR). CS confers temporary, nonspecific benefits and might 
slightly reduce dementia risk for neurologically healthy individuals. CT can 
improve discrete cognitive functions, but durability is limited and real-world 
utility is unclear. CR treatments are holistic and flexible and, therefore, most 
promising but are difficult to simulate and study under rigorous experimental 
conditions. Optimally effective CR is unlikely to be found in a single approach 
or treatment paradigm. Clinicians must be competent in a variety of 
interventions and select those interventions best tolerated by the patient and 
most relevant to their needs and goals. The progressive nature of 
neurodegenerative disease necessitates that treatment be consistent, open-ended 
in duration, and sufficiently dynamic to meet the patient's changing needs as 
their disease progresses.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-023-01283-1
PMID: 37428401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]