---
reference_id: "PMID:19778711"
title: "Joubert syndrome: insights into brain development, cilium biology, and complex disease."
authors:
- Doherty D
journal: Semin Pediatr Neurol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2009.06.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Joubert syndrome: insights into brain development, cilium biology, and complex disease.
**Authors:** Doherty D
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Neurol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.spen.2009.06.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spen.2009.06.002)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2009 Sep;16(3):143-54. doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2009.06.002.

Joubert syndrome: insights into brain development, cilium biology, and complex 
disease.

Doherty D(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Washington and Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA. 
ddoher@u.washington.edu

Joubert syndrome (JS) is a primarily autosomal recessive condition characterized 
by hypotonia, ataxia, abnormal eye movements, and intellectual disability with a 
distinctive mid-hindbrain malformation (the "molar tooth sign"). Variable 
features include retinal dystrophy, cystic kidney disease, liver fibrosis and 
polydactyly. Recently, substantial progress has been made in our understanding 
of the genetic basis of JS, including identification of seven causal genes 
(NPHP1, AHI1, CEP290, RPGRIP1L, TMEM67/MKS3, ARL13B and CC2D2A). Despite this 
progress, the known genes account for <50% of cases and few strong 
genotype-phenotype correlations exist in JS; however, genetic testing can be 
prioritized based on clinical features. While all seven JS genes have been 
implicated in the function of the primary cilium/basal body organelle (PC/BB), 
little is known about how the PC/BB is required for brain, kidney, retina and 
liver development/function, nor how disruption of PC/BB function leads to 
diseases of these organs. Recent work on the function of the PC/BB indicates 
that the organelle is required for multiple signaling pathways including sonic 
hedgehog, WNT and platelet derived growth factor. Due to shared clinical 
features and underlying molecular pathophysiology, JS is included in the rapidly 
expanding group of disorders called ciliopathies. The ciliopathies are emerging 
as models for more complex diseases, where sequence variants in multiple genes 
contribute to the phenotype expressed in any given patient.

DOI: 10.1016/j.spen.2009.06.002
PMCID: PMC2804071
PMID: 19778711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]