---
reference_id: "PMID:18474210"
title: "Genetics of clinical features and subtypes of schizophrenia: a review of the recent literature."
authors:
- Fanous AH
- Kendler KS
journal: Curr Psychiatry Rep
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/s11920-008-0028-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of clinical features and subtypes of schizophrenia: a review of the recent literature.
**Authors:** Fanous AH, Kendler KS
**Journal:** Curr Psychiatry Rep (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11920-008-0028-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-008-0028-z)

## Content

1. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2008 Apr;10(2):164-70. doi: 10.1007/s11920-008-0028-z.

Genetics of clinical features and subtypes of schizophrenia: a review of the 
recent literature.

Fanous AH(1), Kendler KS.

Author information:
(1)Washington VA Medical Center, 50 Irving Street NW, Washington, DC 20422, USA. 
ayman.fanous@med.va.gov

Since its earliest descriptions, schizophrenia has been thought to be clinically 
heterogeneous. Symptomatic features and subtypes tend to aggregate in families, 
suggesting that genetic factors contribute to individual differences in illness 
presentation. Over the past 5 years, evidence from genetic linkage and 
association studies has mounted to suggest that some susceptibility genes are 
etiologic factors for more or less specific illness subtypes. Furthermore, 
modifier genes may affect clinical features dimensionally only after a given 
patient is already affected with the illness. In this paper, we review recent 
findings supporting the existence of such "modifier" genes. To date, DTNBP1 has 
provided the greatest evidence of illness modification, as associations with 
negative and cognitive symptoms and worse outcome have been published in 
independent samples. Future directions include using whole-genome association 
studies to search for genetic modifiers of schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1007/s11920-008-0028-z
PMID: 18474210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]