---
reference_id: "PMID:9728913"
title: GFR alpha1-deficient mice have deficits in the enteric nervous system and kidneys.
authors:
- Enomoto H
- Araki T
- Jackman A
- Heuckeroth RO
- Snider WD
- Johnson EM Jr
- Milbrandt J
journal: Neuron
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80541-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Survival/physiology
- Central Nervous System/cytology
- Drosophila Proteins
- "Enteric Nervous System/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- Female
- Gene Targeting
- Glial Cell Line-Derived Neurotrophic Factor Receptors
- "Kidney/abnormalities, physiopathology"
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Neurons/cytology, metabolism"
- Peripheral Nervous System/cytology
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Outcome
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GFR alpha1-deficient mice have deficits in the enteric nervous system and kidneys.
**Authors:** Enomoto H, Araki T, Jackman A, Heuckeroth RO, Snider WD, Johnson EM Jr, Milbrandt J
**Journal:** Neuron (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80541-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80541-3)

## Content

1. Neuron. 1998 Aug;21(2):317-24. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80541-3.

GFR alpha1-deficient mice have deficits in the enteric nervous system and
kidneys.

Enomoto H(1), Araki T, Jackman A, Heuckeroth RO, Snider WD, Johnson EM Jr,
Milbrandt J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) signals through a receptor
complex composed of the Ret tyrosine kinase and a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-
(GPI-) anchored cell surface coreceptor, either GDNF family receptor alpha1 (GFR
alpha1) or GFR alpha2. To investigate the usage of these coreceptors for GDNF
signaling in vivo, gene targeting was used to produce mice lacking the GFR
alpha1 coreceptor. GFR alpha1-deficient mice demonstrate absence of enteric
neurons and agenesis of the kidney, characteristics that are reminiscent of both
GDNF- and Ret-deficient mice. Midbrain dopaminergic and motor neurons in GFR
alpha1 null mice were normal. Minimal or no neuronal losses were observed in a
number of peripheral ganglia examined, including the superior cervical and
nodose, which are severely affected in both Ret- and GDNF-deficient mice. These
results suggest that while stringent physiologic pairing exists between GFR
alpha1 and GDNF in renal and enteric nervous system development, significant
cross-talk between GDNF and other GFR alpha coreceptors must occur in other
neuronal populations.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80541-3
PMID: 9728913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
