---
reference_id: "PMID:28324015"
title: Paternally Inherited DLK1 Deletion Associated With Familial Central Precocious Puberty.
authors:
- Dauber A
- Cunha-Silva M
- Macedo DB
- Brito VN
- Abreu AP
- Roberts SA
- Montenegro LR
- Andrew M
- Kirby A
- Weirauch MT
- Labilloy G
- Bessa DS
- Carroll RS
- Jacobs DC
- Chappell PE
- Mendonca BB
- Haig D
- Kaiser UB
- Latronico AC
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2016-3677
keywords:
- Black People
- Brazil
- Calcium-Binding Proteins
- Child
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone/agonists
- Humans
- "Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/blood, genetics"
- "Membrane Proteins/blood, genetics"
- Paternal Inheritance/genetics
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Puberty, Precocious/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paternally Inherited DLK1 Deletion Associated With Familial Central Precocious Puberty.
**Authors:** Dauber A, Cunha-Silva M, Macedo DB, Brito VN, Abreu AP, Roberts SA, Montenegro LR, Andrew M, Kirby A, Weirauch MT, Labilloy G, Bessa DS, Carroll RS, Jacobs DC, Chappell PE, Mendonca BB, Haig D, Kaiser UB, Latronico AC
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2016-3677](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2016-3677)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017 May 1;102(5):1557-1567. doi:
10.1210/jc.2016-3677.

Paternally Inherited DLK1 Deletion Associated With Familial Central Precocious 
Puberty.

Dauber A(1), Cunha-Silva M(2), Macedo DB(2), Brito VN(2), Abreu AP(3), Roberts 
SA(4), Montenegro LR(2), Andrew M(1), Kirby A(5), Weirauch MT(6), Labilloy G(7), 
Bessa DS(2), Carroll RS(3), Jacobs DC(8), Chappell PE(8), Mendonca BB(2), Haig 
D(9), Kaiser UB(3), Latronico AC(2).

Author information:
(1)Cincinnati Center for Growth Disorders, Division of Endocrinology, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229.
(2)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratório de Hormônios e 
Genética Molecular/LIM42, Hospital das Clínicas, Disciplina de Endocrinologia, 
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo 01246-093, Brazil.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Hypertension, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.
(4)Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115.
(5)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02114.
(6)Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology, Division of Biomedical 
Informatics and Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229.
(7)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon 
State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331.
(9)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

CONTEXT: Central precocious puberty (CPP) results from premature activation of 
the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. Few genetic causes of CPP have been 
identified, with the most common being mutations in the paternally expressed 
imprinted gene MKRN3.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the genetic etiology of CPP in a large multigenerational 
family.
DESIGN: Linkage analysis followed by whole-genome sequencing was performed in a 
family with five female members with nonsyndromic CPP. Detailed phenotyping was 
performed at the time of initial diagnosis and long-term follow-up, and 
circulating levels of Delta-like 1 homolog (DLK1) were measured in affected 
individuals. Expression of DLK1 was measured in mouse hypothalamus and in 
kisspeptin-secreting neuronal cell lines in vitro.
SETTING: Endocrine clinic of an academic medical center.
PATIENTS: Patients with familial CPP were studied.
RESULTS: A complex defect of DLK1 (∼14-kb deletion and 269-bp duplication) was 
identified in this family. This deletion included the 5' untranslated region and 
the first exon of DLK1, including the translational start site. Only family 
members who inherited the defect from their father have precocious puberty, 
consistent with the known imprinting of DLK1. The patients did not demonstrate 
additional features of the imprinted disorder Temple syndrome except for 
increased fat mass. Serum DLK1 levels were undetectable in all affected 
individuals. Dlk1 was expressed in mouse hypothalamus and in kisspeptin 
neuron-derived cell lines.
CONCLUSION: We identified a genomic defect in DLK1 associated with isolated 
familial CPP. MKRN3 and DLK1 are both paternally expressed imprinted genes. 
These findings suggest a role of genomic imprinting in regulating the timing of 
human puberty.

Copyright © 2017 by the Endocrine Society

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2016-3677
PMCID: PMC5443333
PMID: 28324015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]