---
reference_id: "PMID:37685334"
title: "The Differential Diagnosis of Congenital Developmental Midline Nasal Masses: Histopathological, Clinical, and Radiological Aspects."
authors:
- Kotowski M
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13172796
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Differential Diagnosis of Congenital Developmental Midline Nasal Masses: Histopathological, Clinical, and Radiological Aspects.
**Authors:** Kotowski M
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics13172796](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13172796)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Aug 29;13(17):2796. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics13172796.

The Differential Diagnosis of Congenital Developmental Midline Nasal Masses: 
Histopathological, Clinical, and Radiological Aspects.

Kotowski M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Poznan University of Medical 
Sciences, 60-572 Poznań, Poland.

Developmental midline nasal masses including nasal dermoids (NDs), 
encephaloceles (EPHCs), and nasal glial heterotopias (NGHs) are a consequence of 
disrupted embryonal developmental processes in the frontonasal region. Surgery 
is the only method of treatment in order to prevent local and intracranial 
inflammatory complications as well as distant deformities of the facial 
skeleton. Due to their rarity, similar location, and clinical and radiological 
symptoms, meticulous preoperative differential diagnostics is mandatory. The aim 
of this thorough literature review was to present and discuss all clinical, 
histopathological, and radiological aspects of NDs, NGHs, and EPHCs that are 
crucial for their differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13172796
PMCID: PMC10486988
PMID: 37685334

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.