---
reference_id: "PMID:18040749"
title: "Risk of malignancy in resected cystic tumors of the pancreas < or =3 cm in size: is it safe to observe asymptomatic patients? A multi-institutional report."
authors:
- Lee CJ
- Scheiman J
- Anderson MA
- Hines OJ
- Reber HA
- Farrell J
- Kochman ML
- Foley PJ
- Drebin J
- Oh YS
- Ginsberg G
- Ahmad N
- Merchant NB
- Isbell J
- Parikh AA
- Stokes JB
- Bauer T
- Adams RB
- Simeone DM
journal: J Gastrointest Surg
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/s11605-007-0381-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk of malignancy in resected cystic tumors of the pancreas < or =3 cm in size: is it safe to observe asymptomatic patients? A multi-institutional report.
**Authors:** Lee CJ, Scheiman J, Anderson MA, Hines OJ, Reber HA, Farrell J, Kochman ML, Foley PJ, Drebin J, Oh YS, Ginsberg G, Ahmad N, Merchant NB, Isbell J, Parikh AA, Stokes JB, Bauer T, Adams RB, Simeone DM
**Journal:** J Gastrointest Surg (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11605-007-0381-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11605-007-0381-y)

## Content

1. J Gastrointest Surg. 2008 Feb;12(2):234-42. doi: 10.1007/s11605-007-0381-y.
Epub  2007 Nov 27.

Risk of malignancy in resected cystic tumors of the pancreas < or =3 cm in size: 
is it safe to observe asymptomatic patients? A multi-institutional report.

Lee CJ(1), Scheiman J, Anderson MA, Hines OJ, Reber HA, Farrell J, Kochman ML, 
Foley PJ, Drebin J, Oh YS, Ginsberg G, Ahmad N, Merchant NB, Isbell J, Parikh 
AA, Stokes JB, Bauer T, Adams RB, Simeone DM.

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Recent international consensus guidelines propose that cystic pancreatic tumors 
less than 3 cm in size in asymptomatic patients with no radiographic features 
concerning for malignancy are safe to observe; however, there is little 
published data to support this recommendation. The purpose of this study was to 
determine the prevalence of malignancy in this group of patients using 
pancreatic resection databases from five high-volume pancreatic centers to 
assess the appropriateness of these guidelines. All pancreatic resections 
performed for cystic neoplasms < or =3 cm in size were evaluated over the time 
period of 1998-2006. One hundred sixty-six cases were identified, and the 
clinical, radiographic, and pathological data were reviewed. The correlation 
with age, gender, and symptoms (abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, jaundice, 
presence of pancreatitis, unexplained weight loss, and anorexia), radiographic 
features suggestive of malignancy by either computed tomography, magnetic 
resonance imaging, or endoscopic ultrasound (presence of solid component, 
lymphadenopathy, or dilated main pancreatic duct or common bile duct), and the 
presence of malignancy was assessed using univariate and multivariate analysis. 
Among the 166 pancreatic resections for cystic pancreatic tumors < or =3 cm, 135 
cases were benign [38 serous cystadenomas, 35 mucinous cystic neoplasms, 60 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN), 1 cystic papillary tumor, and 1 
cystic islet cell tumor], whereas 31 cases were malignant (14 mucinous cystic 
adenocarcinomas and 13 invasive carcinomas and 4 in situ carcinomas arising in 
the setting of IPMN). A greater incidence of cystic neoplasms was seen in female 
patients (99/166, 60%). Gender was a predictor of malignant pathology, with male 
patients having a higher incidence of malignancy (19/67, 28%) compared to female 
patients (12/99, 12%; p < 0.02). Older age was associated with malignancy (mean 
age 67 years in patients with malignant disease vs 62 years in patients with 
benign lesions (p < 0.05). A majority of the patients with malignancy were 
symptomatic (28/31, 90%). Symptoms that correlated with malignancy included 
jaundice (p < 0.001), weight loss (p < 0.003), and anorexia (p < 0.05). 
Radiographic features that correlated with malignancy were presence of a solid 
component (p < 0.0001), main pancreatic duct dilation (p = 0.002), common bile 
duct dilation (p < 0.001), and lymphadenopathy (p < 0.002). Twenty-seven of 
31(87%) patients with malignant lesions had at least one radiographic feature 
concerning for malignancy. Forty-five patients (27%) were identified as having 
asymptomatic cystic neoplasms. All but three (6.6%) of the patients in this 
group had benign disease. Of the patients that had no symptoms and no 
radiographic features, 1 out of 30 (3.3%) had malignancy (carcinoma in situ 
arising in a side branch IPMN). Malignancy in cystic neoplasms < or =3 cm in 
size was associated with older age, male gender, presence of symptoms (jaundice, 
weight loss, and anorexia), and presence of concerning radiographic features 
(solid component, main pancreatic duct dilation, common bile duct dilation, and 
lymphadenopathy). Among asymptomatic patients that displayed no discernable 
radiographic features suggestive of malignancy who underwent resection, the 
incidence of occult malignancy was 3.3%. This study suggests that a group of 
patients with small cystic pancreatic neoplasms who have low risk of malignancy 
can be identified, and selective resection of these lesions may be appropriate.

DOI: 10.1007/s11605-007-0381-y
PMID: 18040749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]