---
reference_id: "PMID:4164676"
title: "Studies on the metabolic error in Refsum's disease."
authors:
- Steinberg D
- Mize CE
- Avigan J
- Fales HM
- Eldjarn L
- Try K
- Stokke O
- Refsum S
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1967'
doi: 10.1172/JCI105533
keywords:
- Adult
- Carbon Dioxide/metabolism
- Carbon Isotopes
- Cholesterol
- Deuterium/metabolism
- "Fatty Acids/biosynthesis, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mevalonic Acid/metabolism
- Middle Aged
- Refsum Disease/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Studies on the metabolic error in Refsum's disease.
**Authors:** Steinberg D, Mize CE, Avigan J, Fales HM, Eldjarn L, Try K, Stokke O, Refsum S
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1967)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI105533](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI105533)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1967 Mar;46(3):313-22. doi: 10.1172/JCI105533.

Studies on the metabolic error in Refsum's disease.

Steinberg D, Mize CE, Avigan J, Fales HM, Eldjarn L, Try K, Stokke O, Refsum S.

Studies utilizing mevalonic acid-2-(14)C and D(2)O as precursors failed to
provide evidence for an appreciable rate of endogenous biosynthesis of phytanic
acid in a patient with Refsum's disease. Orally administered tracer doses of
phytol-U-(14)C were well absorbed both by seven normal control subjects (61 to
94%) and by two patients with Refsum's disease (74 and 80%). The fraction of the
absorbed dose converted to (14)CO(2) in 12 hours was 3.5 and 5.8% in Refsum's
disease patients and averaged 20.9% in seven control subjects. Labeled phytanic
acid was demonstrated in the plasma of both control subjects and patients given
phytol-U-(14)C, establishing phytol in the diet as a potential precursor of
phytanic acid. This labeled phytanic acid had disappeared almost completely from
the plasma of the seven control subjects by 24 to 48 hours, whereas it persisted
at high concentrations in the plasma of the two patients for many days. We
conclude that the phytanic acid accumulating in Refsum's disease is primarily of
exogenous origin and that patients with Refsum's disease have a relative block
in the degradation of phytanic acid and possibly other similar branched-chain
compounds. This may relate to a deficiency in mechanisms for release of phytanic
acid from stored ester forms or, more probably, to reactions essential to
oxidative degradation of the carbon skeleton.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI105533
PMCID: PMC297052
PMID: 4164676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
