---
reference_id: "PMID:35851174"
title: Parental knowledge of dental erosion and erosion-related risk factors in children.
authors:
- Nihtyanova T
- Sapunarova P
- Belcheva-Krivorova A
- Petrova S
journal: Folia Med (Plovdiv)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3897/folmed.63.e55879
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parental knowledge of dental erosion and erosion-related risk factors in children.
**Authors:** Nihtyanova T, Sapunarova P, Belcheva-Krivorova A, Petrova S
**Journal:** Folia Med (Plovdiv) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3897/folmed.63.e55879](https://doi.org/10.3897/folmed.63.e55879)

## Content

1. Folia Med (Plovdiv). 2021 Aug 31;63(4):541-545. doi: 10.3897/folmed.63.e55879.

Parental knowledge of dental erosion and erosion-related risk factors in 
children.

Nihtyanova T(1), Sapunarova P(1), Belcheva-Krivorova A(1), Petrova S(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical University of Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.

INTRODUCTION: Dental erosion in children has been steadily on the increase in 
recent years. This is mainly due to the contemporary eating habits of the new 
generations and their upbringing from an early age to prefer foods and beverages 
with high acid content.
AIM: To study the knowledge of parents about dental erosion and the most common 
risk factors associated with it.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data were gathered through a direct individual 
questionnaire administered to the parents of children aged 3 to 5 years. The 
results were analyzed by descriptive statistics and the Pearson chi-squared test 
for independence using SPSS 19.
RESULTS: A large proportion of respondents (68.5%) stated that they knew what 
dental erosion was. Most of them (77.4%) were aware of the detrimental effect of 
carbonated beverages. In contrast, only 23.8% were aware of the potentially 
harmful effect of excessive consumption of citrus fruits, and only 31.9% of 
parents considered the impact of excessive intake of fruit juices. 16.1% of the 
participants were informed about the erosive potential of some medicines such as 
vitamin C. Nearly half of the parents (46.6%) found vigorous tooth brushing 
damaging.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the high self-esteem, a low percentage of the respondents 
were actually aware of the most common risk factors for dental erosion in 
children.

This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and 
source are credited.

DOI: 10.3897/folmed.63.e55879
PMID: 35851174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]