---
reference_id: "PMID:36598939"
title: Iterative computational design and crystallographic screening identifies potent inhibitors targeting the Nsp3 macrodomain of SARS-CoV-2.
authors:
- Gahbauer S
- Correy GJ
- Schuller M
- Ferla MP
- Doruk YU
- Rachman M
- Wu T
- Diolaiti M
- Wang S
- Neitz RJ
- Fearon D
- Radchenko DS
- Moroz YS
- Irwin JJ
- Renslo AR
- Taylor JC
- Gestwicki JE
- von Delft F
- Ashworth A
- Ahel I
- Shoichet BK
- Fraser JS
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2212931120
keywords:
- Humans
- SARS-CoV-2
- COVID-19
- Crystallography
- Pandemics
- Ligands
- Molecular Docking Simulation
- Protease Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Antiviral Agents/pharmacology, chemistry"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Iterative computational design and crystallographic screening identifies potent inhibitors targeting the Nsp3 macrodomain of SARS-CoV-2.
**Authors:** Gahbauer S, Correy GJ, Schuller M, Ferla MP, Doruk YU, Rachman M, Wu T, Diolaiti M, Wang S, Neitz RJ, Fearon D, Radchenko DS, Moroz YS, Irwin JJ, Renslo AR, Taylor JC, Gestwicki JE, von Delft F, Ashworth A, Ahel I, Shoichet BK, Fraser JS
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2212931120](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2212931120)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Jan 10;120(2):e2212931120. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2212931120. Epub 2023 Jan 4.

Iterative computational design and crystallographic screening identifies potent
inhibitors targeting the Nsp3 macrodomain of SARS-CoV-2.

Gahbauer S(1), Correy GJ(2), Schuller M(3), Ferla MP(4)(5), Doruk YU(6), Rachman
M(1), Wu T(7)(8), Diolaiti M(6), Wang S(8), Neitz RJ(9), Fearon D(10)(11),
Radchenko DS(12)(13), Moroz YS(13)(14), Irwin JJ(1), Renslo AR(6)(9), Taylor
JC(4)(5), Gestwicki JE(7)(9), von Delft F(10)(11)(15)(16)(17), Ashworth A(6),
Ahel I(3), Shoichet BK(1), Fraser JS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158.
(2)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158.
(3)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3RE,
UK.
(4)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
(5)National Institute for Health Research Oxford Biomedical Research Centre,
Oxford OX4 2PG, UK.
(6)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158.
(7)Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158.
(8)Chemistry and Chemical Biology Graduate Program, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158.
(9)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Small Molecule Discovery Center,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158.
(10)Diamond Light Source Ltd., Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot
OX11 0DE, UK.
(11)Research Complex at Harwell Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot
OX11 0FA, UK.
(12)Enamine Ltd., Kyiv 02094, Ukraine.
(13)Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, Kyiv 01601, Ukraine.
(14)Chemspace, Kyiv 02094, Ukraine.
(15)Centre for Medicines Discovery, University of Oxford, Headington OX3 7DQ,
UK.
(16)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Headington OX3 7DQ,
UK.
(17)Department of Biochemistry, University of Johannesburg, Auckland Park 2006,
South Africa.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2022 Jul 28:2022.06.27.497816. doi: 10.1101/2022.06.27.497816.

The nonstructural protein 3 (NSP3) of the severe acute respiratory
syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) contains a conserved macrodomain enzyme
(Mac1) that is critical for pathogenesis and lethality. While small-molecule
inhibitors of Mac1 have great therapeutic potential, at the outset of the
COVID-19 pandemic, there were no well-validated inhibitors for this protein nor,
indeed, the macrodomain enzyme family, making this target a pharmacological
orphan. Here, we report the structure-based discovery and development of several
different chemical scaffolds exhibiting low- to sub-micromolar affinity for Mac1
through iterations of computer-aided design, structural characterization by
ultra-high-resolution protein crystallography, and binding evaluation. Potent
scaffolds were designed with in silico fragment linkage and by ultra-large
library docking of over 450 million molecules. Both techniques leverage the
computational exploration of tangible chemical space and are applicable to other
pharmacological orphans. Overall, 160 ligands in 119 different scaffolds were
discovered, and 153 Mac1-ligand complex crystal structures were determined,
typically to 1 Å resolution or better. Our analyses discovered selective and
cell-permeable molecules, unexpected ligand-mediated conformational changes
within the active site, and key inhibitor motifs that will template future drug
development against Mac1.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2212931120
PMCID: PMC9926234
PMID: 36598939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have organizational affiliations to
disclose, A.A. is a co-founder of Tango Therapeutics, Azkarra Therapeutics, and
Ovibio Corporation; a consultant for SPARC, Bluestar, ProLynx, Earli, Cura,
GenVivo, and GSK; a member of the SAB of Genentech, GLAdiator, Circle, and
Cambridge Science Corporation; receives grant/research support from SPARC and
AstraZeneca; and holds patents on the use of PARP inhibitors held jointly with
AstraZeneca, which he has benefited financially (and may do so in the future).
J.E.G. is consultant for Protego BioPharma and Contour Therapeutics as well as
founder of Kaizen Therapeutics. B.K.S. is co-founder of BlueDolphin, LLC, a
molecular docking contract research organization, Epiodyne, and Deep Apple
Therapeutics, Inc., both drug discovery companies, has recently consulted for
Umbra, Abbvie, and Dice Therapeutics, and is on the SAB of Schrodinger. J.J.I.
co-founded Deep Apple Therapeutics, Inc., and BlueDolphin, LLC. J.S.F. is a
consultant for, has equity in, and receives research support from Relay
Therapeutics. I.A. is a consultant for Dark Blue Therapeutics., Yes, the authors
have stock ownership to disclose, A.A. is a co-founder of Tango Therapeutics,
Azkarra Therapeutics, and Ovibio Corporation; a consultant for SPARC, Bluestar,
ProLynx, Earli, Cura, GenVivo, and GSK; a member of the SAB of Genentech,
GLAdiator, Circle, and Cambridge Science Corporation; receives grant/research
support from SPARC and AstraZeneca; and holds patents on the use of PARP
inhibitors held jointly with AstraZeneca, which he has benefited financially
(and may do so in the future). J.E.G. is consultant for Protego BioPharma and
Contour Therapeutics as well as founder of Kaizen Therapeutics. B.K.S. is
co-founder of BlueDolphin, LLC, a molecular docking contract research
organization, Epiodyne, and Deep Apple Therapeutics, Inc., both drug discovery
companies, has recently consulted for Umbra, Abbvie, and Dice Therapeutics, and
is on the SAB of Schrodinger. J.J.I. co-founded Deep Apple Therapeutics, Inc.,
and BlueDolphin, LLC. J.S.F. is a consultant for, has equity in, and receives
research support from Relay Therapeutics. I.A. is a consultant for Dark Blue
Therapeutics.
