---
reference_id: "PMID:31930599"
title: Inhibition of Ca(2+) channel surface expression by mutant bestrophin-1 in RPE cells.
authors:
- Cordes M
- Bucichowski P
- Alfaar AS
- Tsang SH
- Almedawar S
- Reichhart N
- Strauß O
journal: FASEB J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1096/fj.201901202RR
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bestrophins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Blotting, Western"
- CHO Cells
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cricetulus
- Humans
- Immunoprecipitation
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/cytology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of Ca(2+) channel surface expression by mutant bestrophin-1 in RPE cells.
**Authors:** Cordes M, Bucichowski P, Alfaar AS, Tsang SH, Almedawar S, Reichhart N, Strauß O
**Journal:** FASEB J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.201901202RR](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.201901202RR)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2020 Mar;34(3):4055-4071. doi: 10.1096/fj.201901202RR. Epub 2020 Jan
12.

Inhibition of Ca(2+) channel surface expression by mutant bestrophin-1 in RPE
cells.

Cordes M(1), Bucichowski P(1), Alfaar AS(1), Tsang SH(2)(3), Almedawar S(4),
Reichhart N(1), Strauß O(1).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Ophthalmology, Department of Ophthalmology, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, a corporate member of Freie Universität,
Humboldt-University, the Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Jonas Children's Vision Care, and Bernard & Shirlee Brown Glaucoma
Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia Stem Cell Initiative,
Departments of Ophthalmology Pathology & Cell Biology, Institute of Human
Nutrition, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York,
NY, USA.
(3)Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York,
NY, USA.
(4)Center for Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering (CMCB), Center for
Regenerative Therapies, Dresden (CRTD), Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden,
Germany.

The BEST1 gene product bestrophin-1, a Ca2+ -dependent anion channel, interacts
with CaV 1.3 Ca2+ channels in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). BEST1
mutations lead to Best vitelliform macular dystrophy. A common functional defect
of these mutations is reduced trafficking of bestrophin-1 into the plasma
membrane. We hypothesized that this defect affects the interaction partner CaV
1.3 channel affecting Ca2+ signaling and altered RPE function. Thus, we
investigated the protein interaction between CaV 1.3 channels and bestrophin-1
by immunoprecipitation, CaV 1.3 activity in the presence of mutant bestrophin-1
and intracellular trafficking of the interaction partners in confluent RPE
monolayers. We selected four BEST1 mutations, each representing one mutational
hotspot of the disease: T6P, F80L, R218C, and F305S. Heterologously expressed
L-type channels and mutant bestrophin-1 showed reduced interaction, reduced CaV
1.3 channel activity, and changes in surface expression. Transfection of
polarized RPE (porcine primary cells, iPSC-RPE) that endogenously express CaV
1.3 and wild-type bestrophin-1, with mutant bestrophin-1 confirmed reduction of
CaV 1.3 surface expression. For the four selected BEST1 mutations, presence of
mutant bestrophin-1 led to reduced CaV 1.3 activity by modulating pore-function
or decreasing surface expression. Reduced CaV 1.3 activity might open new ways
to understand symptoms of Best vitelliform macular dystrophy such as reduced
electro-oculogram, lipofuscin accumulation, and vision impairment.

© 2020 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201901202RR
PMID: 31930599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
