---
reference_id: "PMID:29466784"
title: Clinical, Hormonal, and Genetic Evaluation of Idiopathic Nonobstructive Azoospermia and Klinefelter Syndrome Patients.
authors:
- Kim SY
- Lee BY
- Oh AR
- Park SY
- Lee HS
- Seo JT
journal: Cytogenet Genome Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1159/000487039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, Hormonal, and Genetic Evaluation of Idiopathic Nonobstructive Azoospermia and Klinefelter Syndrome Patients.
**Authors:** Kim SY, Lee BY, Oh AR, Park SY, Lee HS, Seo JT
**Journal:** Cytogenet Genome Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000487039](https://doi.org/10.1159/000487039)

## Content

1. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2017;153(4):190-197. doi: 10.1159/000487039. Epub 2018
Feb  22.

Clinical, Hormonal, and Genetic Evaluation of Idiopathic Nonobstructive 
Azoospermia and Klinefelter Syndrome Patients.

Kim SY(1), Lee BY, Oh AR, Park SY, Lee HS, Seo JT.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Dankook 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

To investigate the clinical, hormonal, and genetic factors in infertile men with 
idiopathic nonobstructive azoospermia (NOA) or azoospermic Klinefelter syndrome 
(KFS), a total of 556 and 96 patients, respectively, were included in this 
study. All patient samples were analyzed cytogenetically. Serum reproductive 
hormone levels were measured. Microdeletions in the azoospermia factor (AZF) 
region of the Y chromosome were detected by multiplex PCR using 16 specific 
sequence-tagged sites. FSH and LH levels in both NOA and KFS patients were 
significantly higher than the normal range, and the testosterone level in KFS 
patients was significantly lower. Ninety-two (95.8%) of the KFS patients showed 
non-mosaic 47,XXY karyotypes and 47,XXY,inv(9)(p11.1q13); the other KFS patients 
had mosaic karyotypes of 47,XXY/46,XY, 47,XXY/46,XX, and 47,XXY/48,XXXY/46,XX. 
Among the 556 idiopathic NOA patients with normal karyotypes, 67 (12.05%) had 
microdeletions in the AZF region of the Y chromosome. Microdeletions were most 
frequently detected in the AZFc region, followed by AZFa, AZFb, AZFbc, and 
partial AZFc deletions. However, Y chromosome microdeletions were not found in 
any of the azoospermic KFS patients. In view of the hormonal and genetic 
abnormalities in infertile men with idiopathic NOA and with azoospermic KFS, 
genetic testing for karyotype, Y chromosome microdeletions, and hormonal 
parameters is advocated.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000487039
PMID: 29466784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]