---
reference_id: "PMID:33303506"
title: Rare case of Marchiafava-Bignami disease due to thiamine deficiency and malnutrition.
authors:
- Kinsley S
- Giovane RA
- Daly S
- Shulman D
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2020-238187
keywords:
- Aged
- Alcoholism/complications
- Corpus Callosum/pathology
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Malnutrition/complications
- "Marchiafava-Bignami Disease/complications, diagnosis"
- Thiamine/therapeutic use
- "Thiamine Deficiency/complications, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare case of Marchiafava-Bignami disease due to thiamine deficiency and malnutrition.
**Authors:** Kinsley S, Giovane RA, Daly S, Shulman D
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2020-238187](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2020-238187)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2020 Dec 10;13(12):e238187. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2020-238187.

Rare case of Marchiafava-Bignami disease due to thiamine deficiency and 
malnutrition.

Kinsley S(1), Giovane RA(2), Daly S(1), Shulman D(1).

Author information:
(1)Family Medicine, The University of Alabama System, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, USA.
(2)Family Medicine, RMCCA, UAB System, Greenville, Alabama, USA 
Richardgiovane357@gmail.com.

Marchiafava-Bignami disease (MBD) is a rare, toxic demyelinating disorder of the 
central nervous system associated with chronic alcoholism and malnutrition. The 
clinical presentation is varied and non-specific, including symptoms of acute 
dementia, impaired consciousness, dysarthria, hemiparesis, pyramidal tract 
signs, seizure activity, ataxia and signs of interhemispheric disconnection. The 
differential diagnosis of MBD may include Wernicke's encephalopathy, multiple 
sclerosis, encephalitis, infectious or paraneoplastic leucoencephalopathy, 
infarction, Alzheimer's disease, multi-infarct dementia and frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration (Pick) disease. The diagnosis of MBD is dependent on MRI findings 
of hyperintensity of the corpus callosum on T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion 
recovery T2 sequences, with or without extracallosal lesions. The use of MRI in 
diagnosis has allowed for early initiation of treatment with parenteral 
thiamine, and improved the prognosis of MBD from frequently fatal to a mortality 
of less than 8%. Administration of thiamine within 14 days of symptom onset has 
demonstrated statistically better outcomes over delayed treatment. We present a 
case report of MBD diagnosed in a 72-year-old woman who presented with ataxia 
and slurred speech, in an effort to highlight the importance of obtaining MRI in 
patients presenting with behavioural disturbance and neurological findings, as 
well as discuss the relationship between thiamine supplementation and 
demyelinating diseases in the central nervous system.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2020-238187
PMCID: PMC7733096
PMID: 33303506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.