---
reference_id: "PMID:36606642"
title: "Update on the Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Biomarkers of Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy With Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy."
authors:
- Yamamoto Y
- Liao YC
- Lee YC
- Ihara M
- Choi JC
journal: J Clin Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3988/jcn.2023.19.1.12
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on the Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Biomarkers of Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy With Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy.
**Authors:** Yamamoto Y, Liao YC, Lee YC, Ihara M, Choi JC
**Journal:** J Clin Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3988/jcn.2023.19.1.12](https://doi.org/10.3988/jcn.2023.19.1.12)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurol. 2023 Jan;19(1):12-27. doi: 10.3988/jcn.2023.19.1.12.

Update on the Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Biomarkers of Cerebral Autosomal 
Dominant Arteriopathy With Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy.

Yamamoto Y(#)(1), Liao YC(#)(2)(3)(4), Lee YC(2)(3)(4), Ihara M(1), Choi 
JC(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Osaka, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Brain Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Neurology, Jeju National University, Jeju, Korea.
(6)Institute for Medical Science, Jeju National University, Jeju, Korea. 
jaychoi@jejunu.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is the most common monogenic disorder of the 
cerebral small blood vessels. It is caused by mutations in the NOTCH3 gene on 
chromosome 19, and more than 280 distinct pathogenic mutations have been 
reported to date. CADASIL was once considered a very rare disease with an 
estimated prevalence of 1.3-4.1 per 100,000 adults. However, recent large-scale 
genomic studies have revealed a high prevalence of pathogenic NOTCH3 variants 
among the general population, with the highest risk being among Asians. The 
disease severity and age at onset vary significantly even among individuals who 
carry the same NOTCH3 mutations. It is still unclear whether a significant 
genotype-phenotype correlation is present in CADASIL. The accumulation of 
granular osmiophilic material in the vasculature is a characteristic feature of 
CADASIL. However, the exact pathogenesis of CADASIL remains largely unclear 
despite various laboratory and clinical observations being made. Major 
hypotheses proposed so far have included aberrant NOTCH3 signaling, toxic 
aggregation, and abnormal matrisomes. Several characteristic features have been 
observed in the brain magnetic resonance images of patients with CADASIL, 
including subcortical lacunar lesions and white matter hyperintensities in the 
anterior temporal lobe or external capsule, which were useful in differentiating 
CADASIL from sporadic stroke in patients. The number of lacunes and the degree 
of brain atrophy were useful in predicting the clinical outcomes of patients 
with CADASIL. Several promising blood biomarkers have also recently been 
discovered for CADASIL, which require further research for validation.

Copyright © 2023 Korean Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.3988/jcn.2023.19.1.12
PMCID: PMC9833879
PMID: 36606642

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.