---
reference_id: "PMID:34539601"
title: "Babesia microti: Pathogen Genomics, Genetic Variability, Immunodominant Antigens, and Pathogenesis."
authors:
- Puri A
- Bajpai S
- Meredith S
- Aravind L
- Krause PJ
- Kumar S
journal: Front Microbiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.697669
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Babesia microti: Pathogen Genomics, Genetic Variability, Immunodominant Antigens, and Pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Puri A, Bajpai S, Meredith S, Aravind L, Krause PJ, Kumar S
**Journal:** Front Microbiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmicb.2021.697669](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2021.697669)

## Content

1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Sep 3;12:697669. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.697669.
eCollection 2021.

Babesia microti: Pathogen Genomics, Genetic Variability, Immunodominant
Antigens, and Pathogenesis.

Puri A(1), Bajpai S(2), Meredith S(1), Aravind L(3), Krause PJ(4), Kumar S(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Emerging Pathogens, Division of Emerging and Transfusion
Transmitted Diseases, Office of Blood Research and Review, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, United
States.
(2)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Banasthali Vidyapith, Banasthali,
India.
(3)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(4)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public
Health and Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States.

More than 100 Babesia spp. tick-borne parasites are known to infect mammalian
and avian hosts. Babesia belong to Order Piroplasmid ranked in the Phylum
Apicomplexa. Recent phylogenetic studies have revealed that of the three genera
that constitute Piroplasmida, Babesia and Theileria are polyphyletic while
Cytauxzoon is nested within a clade of Theileria. Several Babesia spp. and
sub-types have been found to cause human disease. Babesia microti, the most
common species that infects humans, is endemic in the Northeastern and upper
Midwestern United States and is sporadically reported elsewhere in the world.
Most infections are transmitted by Ixodid (hard-bodied) ticks, although they
occasionally can be spread through blood transfusion and rarely via perinatal
transmission and organ transplantation. Babesiosis most often presents as a mild
to moderate disease, however infection severity ranges from asymptomatic to
lethal. Diagnosis is usually confirmed by blood smear or polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). Treatment consists of atovaquone and azithromycin or clindamycin
and quinine and usually is effective but may be problematic in immunocompromised
hosts. There is no human Babesia vaccine. B. microti genomics studies have only
recently been initiated, however they already have yielded important new
insights regarding the pathogen, population structure, and pathogenesis.
Continued genomic research holds great promise for improving the diagnosis,
management, and prevention of human babesiosis, and in particular, the
identification of lineage-specific families of cell-surface proteins with
potential roles in cytoadherence, immune evasion and pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2021 Puri, Bajpai, Meredith, Aravind, Krause and Kumar.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.697669
PMCID: PMC8446681
PMID: 34539601

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
