---
reference_id: "PMID:41278953"
title: Large-scale discovery of neural enhancers for cis-regulation therapies.
authors:
- McDiarmid TA
- Page NF
- Chardon FM
- Daza RM
- Chen GT
- Kosicki M
- James LM
- Nourie HC
- Laboy-Cintrón D
- Lee AS
- Vij P
- Calderon D
- Lalanne JB
- Martin BK
- Fink K
- Talkowski ME
- Muotri AR
- Philpot BD
- Pennacchio LA
- Geschwind DH
- Sanders SJ
- Ahituv N
- Shendure J
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1101/2025.11.04.686611
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large-scale discovery of neural enhancers for cis-regulation therapies.
**Authors:** McDiarmid TA, Page NF, Chardon FM, Daza RM, Chen GT, Kosicki M, James LM, Nourie HC, Laboy-Cintrón D, Lee AS, Vij P, Calderon D, Lalanne JB, Martin BK, Fink K, Talkowski ME, Muotri AR, Philpot BD, Pennacchio LA, Geschwind DH, Sanders SJ, Ahituv N, Shendure J
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2025.11.04.686611](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.04.686611)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Nov 5:2025.11.04.686611. doi: 
10.1101/2025.11.04.686611.

Large-scale discovery of neural enhancers for cis-regulation therapies.

McDiarmid TA(1)(2), Page NF(3)(4)(5), Chardon FM(1)(2), Daza RM(1)(2), Chen 
GT(6)(7), Kosicki M(8), James LM(9)(10), Nourie HC(9)(10), Laboy-Cintrón 
D(4)(5), Lee AS(11)(12)(13), Vij P(14), Calderon D(1), Lalanne JB(1), Martin 
BK(1)(2), Fink K(14), Talkowski ME(11)(12)(13), Muotri AR(15)(16), Philpot 
BD(9)(10)(17), Pennacchio LA(8)(18)(19), Geschwind DH(6)(7)(20)(21)(22), Sanders 
SJ(3)(5)(23), Ahituv N(4)(5), Shendure J(1)(2)(24)(25)(26).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Seattle Hub for Synthetic Biology, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Program in Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Center for Autism Research and Treatment, Semel Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(8)Environmental Genomics & System Biology Division, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(9)UNC Neuroscience Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(10)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, The University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(11)Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(12)Program in Medical & Population Genetics & Stanley Center for Psychiatric 
Research, Broad Institute of MIT & Harvard, Cambridge, MA.
(13)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(14)Stem Cell Program and Gene Therapy Center, Institute for Regenerative Cures, 
MIND Institute, and Department of Neurology, University of California Davis 
Health, Sacramento, CA 95817.
(15)Departments of Pediatrics; School of Medicine, UCSD, La Jolla, CA 92093, 
USA.
(16)Departments of Cellular Molecular Medicine; School of Medicine, UCSD, La 
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(17)Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, The University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(18)U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute, One Cyclotron Road, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(19)Comparative Biochemistry Program, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.
(20)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences; David Geffen School of 
Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(21)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(22)Institute of Precision Health, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(23)Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Medicine, Department of 
Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(24)Brotman Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.
(25)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(26)Allen Discovery Center for Cell Lineage Tracing, Seattle, WA, USA.

CRISPR-based gene activation (CRISPRa) has emerged as a promising therapeutic 
approach for neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) caused by haploinsufficiency. 
However, scaling this cis-regulatory therapy (CRT) paradigm requires pinpointing 
which candidate cis-regulatory elements (cCREs) are active in human neurons, and 
which can be targeted with CRISPRa to yield specific and therapeutic levels of 
target gene upregulation. Here, we combine Massively Parallel Reporter Assays 
(MPRAs) and a multiplex single cell CRISPRa screen to discover functional human 
neural enhancers whose CRISPRa targeting yields specific upregulation of NDD 
risk genes. First, we tested 5,425 candidate neuronal enhancers with MPRA, 
identifying 2,422 that are active in human neurons. Selected cCREs also 
displayed specific, autonomous in vivo activity in the developing mouse central 
nervous system. Next, we applied multiplex single-cell CRISPRa screening with 
15,643 gRNAs to test all MPRA-prioritized cCREs and 761 promoters of NDD genes 
in their endogenous genomic contexts. We identified hundreds of promoter- and 
enhancer-targeting CRISPRa gRNAs that upregulated 200 of the 337 NDD genes in 
human neurons, including 91 novel enhancer-gene pairs. Finally, we confirmed 
that several of the CRISPRa gRNAs identified here demonstrated selective and 
therapeutically relevant upregulation of SCN2A, CHD8, CTNND2 and TCF4 when 
delivered virally to patient cell lines, human cerebral organoids, and a 
humanized mouse model of hTcf4. Our results provide a comprehensive resource of 
active, target-linked human neural enhancers for NDD genes and corresponding 
gRNA reagents for CRT development. More broadly, this work advances 
understanding of neural gene regulation and establishes a generalizable strategy 
for discovering CRT gRNA candidates across cell types and haploinsufficient 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.11.04.686611
PMCID: PMC12637570
PMID: 41278953

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests S.J.S. receives research 
funding from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Incorporated. N.A. is the cofounder and on 
the scientific advisory board of Regel Therapeutics and received funding from 
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Incorporated. J.S. is on the scientific advisory board, 
a consultant, and/or a co-founder of Prime Medicine, Guardant Health, Camp4 
Therapeutics, Phase Genomics, Adaptive Biotechnologies, Sixth Street Capital, 
Pacific Biosciences, Somite AI and 10x Genomics. All other authors declare no 
competing interests. Dr. Muotri is the co-founder of and has an equity interest 
in TISMOO, a company dedicated to genetic analysis and human brain 
organogenesis, focusing on therapeutic applications customized to autism 
spectrum disorders and other neurological diseases. The terms of this 
arrangement have been reviewed and approved by the University of California San 
Diego, in accordance with its conflict-of-interest policies. UCSD has filed a 
patent application (WO2022072709A1), in which A.R.M. is an inventor.