---
reference_id: "PMID:22948303"
title: The diagnosis of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Piva e Mattos B
- Torres MA
- Rebelatto TF
- Loreto MS
- Scolari FL
journal: Arq Bras Cardiol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1590/s0066-782x2012000700013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The diagnosis of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Piva e Mattos B, Torres MA, Rebelatto TF, Loreto MS, Scolari FL
**Journal:** Arq Bras Cardiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1590/s0066-782x2012000700013](https://doi.org/10.1590/s0066-782x2012000700013)

## Content

1. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2012 Jul;99(1):665-75. doi: 10.1590/s0066-782x2012000700013.

The diagnosis of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Piva e Mattos B(1), Torres MA, Rebelatto TF, Loreto MS, Scolari FL.

Author information:
(1)Serviço de Cardiologia, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Brazil. 
bpmattos@cardiol.br

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a prevalent genetic disease characterized by left 
ventricular hypertrophy, presenting dynamic obstruction of outflow tract with 
subaortic gradient happening at rest in 30% of the cases. It is attributed to 
the intricate interaction between the anterior mitral leaflet, the 
interventricular septum and altered flow vectors generated in left ventricle 
along with changes in outflow tract geometry. Mitral regurgitation in varying 
degrees is found with or without association with structural deformities of the 
valve apparatus. The exercise echocardiogram evidences latent obstruction easily 
induced by exercise in 60 to 75% of non-obstructive forms. The determination of 
the gradient under this condition must be considered in routine investigation of 
patients with mild or no obstruction at rest. The evaluation of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy incorporates methods based on the ultrasound image, which, along 
with MRI, allow recognizing ventricular obstruction generating mechanisms, thus 
facilitating the diagnosis and management of obstructive and latent obstructive 
forms.

DOI: 10.1590/s0066-782x2012000700013
PMID: 22948303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]