---
reference_id: "PMID:27941963"
title: Clinical and Genetic Findings in Mexican Patients with Duane Anomaly and Radial Ray Malformations/Okihiro Syndrome.
authors:
- Chacón-Camacho ÓF
- Cabral-Macías J
- Ayala-Ramírez R
- Arteaga-Vázquez J
- Svyryd Y
- Helmes K
- Pérez-Hernández N
- Mutchinick OM
- Zenteno JC
journal: Rev Invest Clin
year: '2016'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Duane Retraction Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Exons
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Introns
- Male
- Mexico
- Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Genetic Findings in Mexican Patients with Duane Anomaly and Radial Ray Malformations/Okihiro Syndrome.
**Authors:** Chacón-Camacho ÓF, Cabral-Macías J, Ayala-Ramírez R, Arteaga-Vázquez J, Svyryd Y, Helmes K, Pérez-Hernández N, Mutchinick OM, Zenteno JC
**Journal:** Rev Invest Clin (2016)

## Content

1. Rev Invest Clin. 2016 Sep-Oct;68(5):269-274.

Clinical and Genetic Findings in Mexican Patients with Duane Anomaly and Radial
Ray Malformations/Okihiro Syndrome.

Chacón-Camacho ÓF(1), Cabral-Macías J(1), Ayala-Ramírez R(1), Arteaga-Vázquez
J(2), Svyryd Y(2), Helmes K(3), Pérez-Hernández N(3), Mutchinick OM(2), Zenteno
JC(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Department Research Unit, Instituto de Oftalmología Conde de
Valenciana, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Department of Genetics, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición
Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Centro de Rehabilitación Infantil Teletón, Oaxaca, Oax, Mexico.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Okihiro syndrome is an autosomal-dominant condition characterized by
radial ray malformations associated with Duane anomaly and other clinical
characteristics. SALL4 mutations have been identified in 80-90% of patients with
Duane- Radial ray defects/Okihiro syndrome. We report the clinical findings and
results of SALL4 sequencing from a group of Mexican patients with this disorder.
OBJECTIVE: Clinical description and identification of SALL4 mutations in Mexican
subjects with radial defects and Duane anomaly.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five unrelated index cases were studied. Complete
ophthalmologic and general physical examination was performed in all patients.
Polymerase chain reaction amplification and automated nucleotide sequencing of
coding exons and intron-exon junctions of SALL4 gene were carried out in genomic
DNA.
RESULTS: A novel heterozygous deletion was identified in one patient. Intragenic
heterozygous single nucleotide polymorphisms on SALL4 gene ruled out deletions
of some exons in other affected patients in whom non-pathogenic variants were
identified by Sanger sequencing. Likewise, multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification analysis ruled out large deletions in this gene.
CONCLUSION: We observed a low frequency of SALL4 mutations in Mexican patients
with clinical criteria of Okihiro syndrome.

PMID: 27941963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
