---
reference_id: "PMID:28346224"
title: Mutant α2-chimaerin signals via bidirectional ephrin pathways in Duane retraction syndrome.
authors:
- Nugent AA
- Park JG
- Wei Y
- Tenney AP
- Gilette NM
- DeLisle MM
- Chan WM
- Cheng L
- Engle EC
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1172/JCI88502
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cerebral Cortex/metabolism, pathology"
- "Chimerin 1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Duane Retraction Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Motor Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- "Receptor, EphA4/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "Spinal Cord/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant α2-chimaerin signals via bidirectional ephrin pathways in Duane retraction syndrome.
**Authors:** Nugent AA, Park JG, Wei Y, Tenney AP, Gilette NM, DeLisle MM, Chan WM, Cheng L, Engle EC
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI88502](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI88502)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2017 May 1;127(5):1664-1682. doi: 10.1172/JCI88502. Epub 2017
Mar  27.

Mutant α2-chimaerin signals via bidirectional ephrin pathways in Duane 
retraction syndrome.

Nugent AA, Park JG, Wei Y, Tenney AP, Gilette NM, DeLisle MM, Chan WM, Cheng L, 
Engle EC.

Duane retraction syndrome (DRS) is the most common form of congenital paralytic 
strabismus in humans and can result from α2-chimaerin (CHN1) missense mutations. 
We report a knockin α2-chimaerin mouse (Chn1KI/KI) that models DRS. Whole embryo 
imaging of Chn1KI/KI mice revealed stalled abducens nerve growth and selective 
trochlear and first cervical spinal nerve guidance abnormalities. Stalled 
abducens nerve bundles did not reach the orbit, resulting in secondary aberrant 
misinnervation of the lateral rectus muscle by the oculomotor nerve. By 
contrast, Chn1KO/KO mice did not have DRS, and embryos displayed abducens nerve 
wandering distinct from the Chn1KI/KI phenotype. Murine embryos lacking EPH 
receptor A4 (Epha4KO/KO), which is upstream of α2-chimaerin in corticospinal 
neurons, exhibited similar abducens wandering that paralleled previously 
reported gait alterations in Chn1KO/KO and Epha4KO/KO adult mice. Findings from 
Chn1KI/KI Epha4KO/KO mice demonstrated that mutant α2-chimaerin and EphA4 have 
different genetic interactions in distinct motor neuron pools: abducens neurons 
use bidirectional ephrin signaling via mutant α2-chimaerin to direct growth, 
while cervical spinal neurons use only ephrin forward signaling, and trochlear 
neurons do not use ephrin signaling. These findings reveal a role for ephrin 
bidirectional signaling upstream of mutant α2-chimaerin in DRS, which may 
contribute to the selective vulnerability of abducens motor neurons in this 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI88502
PMCID: PMC5409791
PMID: 28346224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.