---
reference_id: "PMID:30286250"
title: Lower body negative pressure to safely reduce intracranial pressure.
authors:
- Petersen LG
- Lawley JS
- Lilja-Cyron A
- Petersen JCG
- Howden EJ
- Sarma S
- Cornwell WK 3rd
- Zhang R
- Whitworth LA
- Williams MA
- Juhler M
- Levine BD
journal: J Physiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1113/JP276557
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Brain
- Female
- Gravitation
- Humans
- Intracranial Pressure
- Lower Body Negative Pressure
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Posture
- Space Flight
- Treatment Outcome
- Weightlessness
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lower body negative pressure to safely reduce intracranial pressure.
**Authors:** Petersen LG, Lawley JS, Lilja-Cyron A, Petersen JCG, Howden EJ, Sarma S, Cornwell WK 3rd, Zhang R, Whitworth LA, Williams MA, Juhler M, Levine BD
**Journal:** J Physiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1113/JP276557](https://doi.org/10.1113/JP276557)

## Content

1. J Physiol. 2019 Jan;597(1):237-248. doi: 10.1113/JP276557. Epub 2018 Nov 20.

Lower body negative pressure to safely reduce intracranial pressure.

Petersen LG(1)(2), Lawley JS(3)(4)(5), Lilja-Cyron A(6), Petersen JCG(1)(2), 
Howden EJ(3)(7), Sarma S(3)(4), Cornwell WK 3rd(3)(8), Zhang R(3)(4), Whitworth 
LA(4), Williams MA(9), Juhler M(6), Levine BD(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of California, San Diego, CA, 
USA.
(3)Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, Texas Health Presbyterian 
Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA.
(4)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(5)Institut für Sportwissenschaft, Universität Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of 
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(9)University of Washington School of Medicine, Departments of Neurology and 
Neurological Surgery, Seattle, WA, USA.

KEY POINTS: During long-term missions, some astronauts experience structural and 
functional changes of the eyes and brain which resemble signs/symptoms 
experienced by patients with intracranial hypertension. Weightlessness prevents 
the normal cerebral volume and pressure 'unloading' associated with upright 
postures on Earth, which may be part of the cerebral and ocular pathophysiology. 
By placing the lower body in a negative pressure device (LBNP) that pulls fluid 
away from cranial compartments, we simulated effects of gravity and 
significantly lowered pressure within the brain parenchyma and ventricle 
compartments. Application of incremental LBNP demonstrated a non-linear 
dose-response curve, suggesting 20 mmHg LBNP as the optimal level for reducing 
pressure in the brain without impairing cerebral perfusion pressure. This 
non-invasive method of reducing pressure in the brain holds potential as a 
countermeasure in space as well as having treatment potential for patients on 
Earth with traumatic brain injury or other pathology leading to intracranial 
hypertension.
ABSTRACT: Patients with elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) exhibit 
neuro-ocular symptoms including headache, papilloedema and loss of vision. Some 
of these symptoms are also present in astronauts during and after prolonged 
space-flight where lack of gravitational stress prevents daily lowering of ICP 
associated with upright posture. Lower body negative pressure (LBNP) simulates 
the effects of gravity by displacing fluid caudally and we hypothesized that 
LBNP would lower ICP without compromising cerebral perfusion. Ten cerebrally 
intact volunteers were included: six ambulatory neurosurgical patients with 
parenchymal ICP-sensors and four former cancer patients with Ommaya-reservoirs 
to the frontal horn of a lateral ventricle. We applied LBNP while recording ICP 
and blood pressure while supine, and during simulated intracranial hypertension 
by 15° head-down tilt. LBNP from 0 to 50 mmHg at increments of 10 mmHg lowered 
ICP in a non-linear dose-dependent fashion; when supine (n = 10), ICP was 
decreased from 15 ± 2 mmHg to 14 ± 4, 12 ± 5, 11 ± 4, 10 ± 3 and 9 ± 4 mmHg, 
respectively (P < 0.0001). Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), calculated as mean 
arterial blood pressure at midbrain level minus ICP, was unchanged (from 
70 ± 12 mmHg to 67 ± 9, 69 ± 10, 70 ± 12, 72 ± 13 and 74 ± 15 mmHg; P = 0.02). A 
15° head-down tilt (n = 6) increased ICP to 26 ± 4 mmHg, while application of 
LBNP lowered ICP (to 21 ± 4, 20 ± 4, 18 ± 4, 17 ± 4 and 17 ± 4 mmHg; P < 0.0001) 
and increased CPP (P < 0.01). An LBNP of 20 mmHg may be the optimal level to 
lower ICP without impairing CPP to counteract spaceflight-associated 
neuro-ocular syndrome in astronauts. Furthermore, LBNP holds clinical potential 
as a safe, non-invasive method for lowering ICP and improving CPP for patients 
with pathologically elevated ICP on Earth.

© 2018 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology © 2018 The Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1113/JP276557
PMCID: PMC6312426
PMID: 30286250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no financial conflict of 
interest.