---
reference_id: "PMID:19536142"
title: "In vitro analysis of LIPH mutations causing hypotrichosis simplex: evidence confirming the role of lipase H and lysophosphatidic acid in hair growth."
authors:
- Pasternack SM
- von Kügelgen I
- Müller M
- Oji V
- Traupe H
- Sprecher E
- Nöthen MM
- Janecke AR
- Betz RC
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.154
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- CHO Cells
- "Codon, Terminator"
- Cricetinae
- Cricetulus
- Frameshift Mutation
- Gene Duplication
- "Genes, Reporter"
- "Hair/enzymology, growth & development"
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/genetics, metabolism"
- In Vitro Techniques
- "Lipase/genetics, metabolism"
- Lysophospholipids/metabolism
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Substrate Specificity
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vitro analysis of LIPH mutations causing hypotrichosis simplex: evidence confirming the role of lipase H and lysophosphatidic acid in hair growth.
**Authors:** Pasternack SM, von Kügelgen I, Müller M, Oji V, Traupe H, Sprecher E, Nöthen MM, Janecke AR, Betz RC
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jid.2009.154](https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2009.154)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Dec;129(12):2772-6. doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.154. Epub
2009  Jun 18.

In vitro analysis of LIPH mutations causing hypotrichosis simplex: evidence 
confirming the role of lipase H and lysophosphatidic acid in hair growth.

Pasternack SM(1), von Kügelgen I, Müller M, Oji V, Traupe H, Sprecher E, Nöthen 
MM, Janecke AR, Betz RC.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn D-53111, Germany.

Hypotrichosis simplex (HS) is a group of isolated alopecias that can be 
inherited as an autosomal-dominant or an autosomal-recessive trait. Hair loss 
usually begins in early childhood, and is diffuse and progressive. Mutations in 
LIPH, which encodes lipase member H, have recently been shown to cause an 
autosomal-recessive form of HS. Here we describe an Austrian HS patient who was 
found to be carrying compound heterozygous mutations in the LIPH gene: a 7-bp 
frameshift duplication (c.403_409dup; p.Gln137HisfsX1) and a recently reported 
30-amino acid in-frame duplication (c.280_369dup; p.Gly94_Lys123dup). To examine 
the impact of LIPH mutations on lipid metabolism, we established an in vitro 
assay to measure the action of this phospholipase in a cell-based system. Both 
the 7-bp duplication frameshift mutation and all known in-frame mutations were 
observed to reduce the in vitro activity of the lipase in response to the 
addition of phosphatidic acid, the substrate of lipase H. The reduced production 
of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) led to a reduced response of cells expressing the 
human G-protein-coupled receptor p2y5 (p2y5) receptor. Our study increases the 
spectrum of known LIPH mutations and provides biochemical evidence for the 
important role of lipase H and its product LPA in human hair growth.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2009.154
PMID: 19536142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]