---
reference_id: "PMID:34625286"
title: "PTEN mutations in autism spectrum disorder and congenital hydrocephalus: developmental pleiotropy and therapeutic targets."
authors:
- DeSpenza T Jr
- Carlson M
- Panchagnula S
- Robert S
- Duy PQ
- Mermin-Bunnell N
- Reeves BC
- Kundishora A
- Elsamadicy AA
- Smith H
- Ocken J
- Alper SL
- Jin SC
- Hoffman EJ
- Kahle KT
journal: Trends Neurosci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2021.08.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PTEN mutations in autism spectrum disorder and congenital hydrocephalus: developmental pleiotropy and therapeutic targets.
**Authors:** DeSpenza T Jr, Carlson M, Panchagnula S, Robert S, Duy PQ, Mermin-Bunnell N, Reeves BC, Kundishora A, Elsamadicy AA, Smith H, Ocken J, Alper SL, Jin SC, Hoffman EJ, Kahle KT
**Journal:** Trends Neurosci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tins.2021.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2021.08.007)

## Content

1. Trends Neurosci. 2021 Dec;44(12):961-976. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2021.08.007.
Epub  2021 Oct 5.

PTEN mutations in autism spectrum disorder and congenital hydrocephalus: 
developmental pleiotropy and therapeutic targets.

DeSpenza T Jr(1), Carlson M(2), Panchagnula S(3), Robert S(3), Duy PQ(1), 
Mermin-Bunnell N(3), Reeves BC(4), Kundishora A(3), Elsamadicy AA(3), Smith 
H(3), Ocken J(3), Alper SL(5), Jin SC(6), Hoffman EJ(7), Kahle KT(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA; Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale School of 
Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; MD/PhD Program, Yale School 
of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(2)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale School of Medicine, Yale 
University, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Child Study Center, Program on 
Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06510, 
USA; Department of Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA; MD/PhD Program, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(5)Division of Nephrology and Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110, USA.
(7)Child Study Center, Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, Yale 
University, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Yale School of 
Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. Electronic address: 
ellen.hoffman@yale.edu.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA; Department of Genetics, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Physiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Yale-Rockefeller 
NIH Centers for Mendelian Genomics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA. Electronic address: kristopher.kahle@yale.edu.

The lack of effective treatments for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and 
congenital hydrocephalus (CH) reflects the limited understanding of the biology 
underlying these common neurodevelopmental disorders. Although ASD and CH have 
been extensively studied as independent entities, recent human genomic and 
preclinical animal studies have uncovered shared molecular pathophysiology. 
Here, we review and discuss phenotypic, genomic, and molecular similarities 
between ASD and CH, and identify the PTEN-PI3K-mTOR (phosphatase and tensin 
homolog-phosphoinositide 3-kinase-mammalian target of rapamycin) pathway as a 
common underlying mechanism that holds diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic 
promise for individuals with ASD and CH.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2021.08.007
PMCID: PMC8692171
PMID: 34625286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to report.