---
reference_id: "PMID:17572636"
title: Functional modeling of the ACVR1 (R206H) mutation in FOP.
authors:
- Groppe JC
- Shore EM
- Kaplan FS
journal: Clin Orthop Relat Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1097/BLO.0b013e318126c049
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional modeling of the ACVR1 (R206H) mutation in FOP.
**Authors:** Groppe JC, Shore EM, Kaplan FS
**Journal:** Clin Orthop Relat Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BLO.0b013e318126c049](https://doi.org/10.1097/BLO.0b013e318126c049)

## Content

1. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2007 Sep;462:87-92. doi: 10.1097/BLO.0b013e318126c049.

Functional modeling of the ACVR1 (R206H) mutation in FOP.

Groppe JC(1), Shore EM, Kaplan FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center at San 
Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA. groppe@biochem.uthscsa.edu

Individuals with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva are born with 
malformations of the great toes and develop a heterotopic skeleton during 
childhood because of an identical heterozygous mutation in the glycine-serine 
activation domain of ACVR1, a bone morphogenetic protein type I receptor. 
Substitution of adenine for guanine at nucleotide 617 replaces an evolutionarily 
conserved arginine with histidine at residue 206 of ACVR1 in all classically 
affected individuals, making this one of the most highly conserved 
disease-causing mutations in the human genome. To better understand the 
molecular constraints and physiological implications of this mutation, we 
performed in silico modeling of wild-type and mutant ACVR1. In both the 
wild-type ACVR1 model and template crystal structures (TbetaRI), the conserved 
arginine appears to form a salt bridge with an invariant aspartate residue. 
Although lysine, a conservative substitution in BMPRIA and BMPRIB, can be 
readily accommodated, histidine at residue 206 (like in fibrodysplasia 
ossificans progressiva) would participate in a salt bridge with the aspartate 
only at decreased intracellular pH and with extensive structural rearrangement. 
Protein modeling predicts that substitution with histidine, and only histidine, 
creates a pH-sensitive switch within the activation domain of the receptor that 
leads to ligand-independent activation of ACVR1 in fibrodysplasia ossificans 
progressiva.

DOI: 10.1097/BLO.0b013e318126c049
PMID: 17572636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]