---
reference_id: "PMID:33163364"
title: "Short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase deficiency causes prominent ketoacidosis with normal plasma lactate levels: A case report."
authors:
- Uesugi M
- Mori J
- Fukuhara S
- Fujii N
- Omae T
- Sasai H
- Ichimoto K
- Murayama K
- Osamura T
- Hosoi H
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2020.100672
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase deficiency causes prominent ketoacidosis with normal plasma lactate levels: A case report.
**Authors:** Uesugi M, Mori J, Fukuhara S, Fujii N, Omae T, Sasai H, Ichimoto K, Murayama K, Osamura T, Hosoi H
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2020.100672](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2020.100672)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2020 Oct 30;25:100672. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2020.100672. 
eCollection 2020 Dec.

Short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase deficiency causes prominent ketoacidosis with 
normal plasma lactate levels: A case report.

Uesugi M(1)(2), Mori J(1), Fukuhara S(2), Fujii N(2), Omae T(2), Sasai H(3), 
Ichimoto K(4), Murayama K(4), Osamura T(2), Hosoi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Japanese Red Cross Kyoto Daini Hospital, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, Gifu, 
Japan.
(4)Center for Medical Genetics, Department of Metabolism, Chiba Children's 
Hospital, Chiba, Japan.

We report a case of a 7-month-old boy with Short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase 
(ECHS1) deficiency concomitant with prominent ketoacidosis, and no elevation in 
plasma lactate levels. He suddenly became unconscious, after he had a lot of 
defecation. He was referred to our hospital by a local doctor because of a right 
conjugate deviation and hypotonia. Initial investigations revealed severe anion 
gap metabolic acidosis, hyperuricemia, hyperketonemia, and normal lactate levels 
in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain 
showed abnormal signals in the bilateral caudate nucleus and globus pallidus, 
suggesting the possibility of inborn errors of metabolism. Thus, analysis of 
acylcarnitine analysis and urine organic acid was performed but could not help 
diagnose his condition. We then performed mutation analysis using a DNA panel. 
We found the following heterozygous mutations in ECHS1: c.5C > T (p. Ala2Val) 
and c.176 A > G (p. Asn59Ser), leading to the diagnosis of Leigh encephalopathy. 
This case report expands our understanding of the multiple symptoms of ECHS1 
deficiency and emphasizes the importance of genetic testing for inborn errors of 
metabolism, such as ECHS1 deficiency, to initiate early treatment.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2020.100672
PMCID: PMC7606867
PMID: 33163364

Conflict of interest statement: None.