---
reference_id: "PMID:38407766"
title: "Characterizing Homozygous Variants in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome-Associated Genes Within Iranian Families: Unveiling a Founder Variant in BBS2, c.471G>A."
authors:
- Feizabadi MH
- Alerasool M
- Eslahi A
- Esmaeilzadeh E
- Mehrjardi MYV
- Saket M
- Farokhi S
- Fattahi Z
- Khorshid HRK
- Mojarrad M
journal: Biochem Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10528-023-10637-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterizing Homozygous Variants in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome-Associated Genes Within Iranian Families: Unveiling a Founder Variant in BBS2, c.471G>A.
**Authors:** Feizabadi MH, Alerasool M, Eslahi A, Esmaeilzadeh E, Mehrjardi MYV, Saket M, Farokhi S, Fattahi Z, Khorshid HRK, Mojarrad M
**Journal:** Biochem Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10528-023-10637-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10528-023-10637-w)

## Content

1. Biochem Genet. 2025 Feb;63(1):22-42. doi: 10.1007/s10528-023-10637-w. Epub
2024  Feb 26.

Characterizing Homozygous Variants in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome-Associated Genes 
Within Iranian Families: Unveiling a Founder Variant in BBS2, c.471G>A.

Feizabadi MH(1), Alerasool M(2)(3), Eslahi A(3), Esmaeilzadeh E(4), Mehrjardi 
MYV(5), Saket M(6), Farokhi S(3), Fattahi Z(1), Khorshid HRK(1), Mojarrad M(7).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Genetic Foundation of Khorasan Razavi, Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)Fetal Health Research Center, Hope Generation Foundation, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Diabetes Research Center, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical Sciences, 
Yazd, Iran.
(6)RP Eye Patients Supporting Institute, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. mojaradm@mums.ac.ir.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare inherited ciliopathy disorder 
characterized by a broad spectrum of clinical symptoms such as retinal 
dystrophy, obesity, polydactyly, genitourinary and kidney anomalies, learning 
disability, and hypogonadism. The understanding of the variants involved in 
BBS-causing genes remains incomplete, highlighting the need for further research 
to develop a molecular diagnostic strategy for this syndrome. Singleton 
whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed on sixteen patients. Our study 
revealed (1) nine patients carried eight homozygous pathogenic variants with 
four of them being novel (2) Specifically, a synonymous splicing variant 
(c.471G > A) in BBS2 gene in six patients with Baloch ethnicity. The 
identification of runs of homozygosity (ROH) calling was performed using the 
BCFtools/RoH software on WES data of patients harboring c.471G > A variant. The 
presence of shared homozygous regions containing the identified variant was 
confirmed in these patients. In-silico analysis predicted the effect of the 
c.471G > A variants on BBS2 mRNA splicing. This variant results in disrupted 
wild-type donor site and intron retention in the mature mRNA. (3) And a deletion 
of exons 14 to 17 in the BBS1 gene was identified in one patient by Copy-Number 
Variation (CNV) analysis using the ExomeDepth pipeline. Our results identified 
the founder variant c.471G > A in the BBS2 gene in the Baloch ethnicity of the 
Iranian population. This finding can guide the diagnostic approach of this 
syndrome in future studies.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10528-023-10637-w
PMID: 38407766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing Interests: The authors 
have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose. Ethical 
Approval: This study was performed in line with the principles of the 
Declaration of Helsinki. Approval was granted by the Research Ethics Committee 
of University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Science, Tehran, Iran (Date: 
2021-12-27/No: IR.USWR.REC.1400.235). Consent to Participate: Informed consent 
to participate in this research was obtained from all the patient’s parents. 
Consent to Publish: Informed consent for publication of the results was obtained 
from all the patient’s parents.