---
reference_id: "PMID:23206444"
title: "Association between C-reactive protein concentration and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Bunjhoo H
- Xiong W
- Xu Y
- Yang D
journal: J Int Med Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1177/030006051204000501
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between C-reactive protein concentration and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Bunjhoo H, Xiong W, Xu Y, Yang D
**Journal:** J Int Med Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1177/030006051204000501](https://doi.org/10.1177/030006051204000501)

## Content

1. J Int Med Res. 2012;40(5):1629-35. doi: 10.1177/030006051204000501.

Association between C-reactive protein concentration and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zhang Y(1), Bunjhoo H, Xiong W, Xu Y, Yang D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Key Laboratory of 
Pulmonary Diseases of the Ministry of Health of China, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

OBJECTIVE: This meta-analysis was conducted to summarize the association between 
the serum concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP) and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: MEDLINE(®), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and EMBASE 
databases were searched for relevant studies. Data were extracted; pooled 
weighted mean differences (WMDs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were 
calculated.
RESULTS: Twenty studies were selected for final inclusion in this analysis. 
Patients with COPD had higher serum CRP concentrations than healthy controls 
(WMD 4.72 mg/l, 95% CI 2.98, 6.47). In addition, patients with severe COPD had 
higher serum CRP concentrations than those with moderate COPD (WMD 1.26 mg/l, 
95% CI 0.78, 1.73). There was no significant difference in serum CRP 
concentration between patients with mild and moderate COPD (WMD 0.67 mg/l, 95% 
CI -0.08, 1.42).
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggested that patients with stable COPD had 
higher serum CRP concentrations than healthy controls. CRP might be an indicator 
of disease severity in patients with COPD, thus highlighting the importance of 
measuring serum CRP concentrations in patients with stable COPD.

DOI: 10.1177/030006051204000501
PMID: 23206444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]