---
reference_id: "PMID:38634941"
title: "Clinical characteristics, imaging findings, management, and outcomes of patients with scimitar syndrome at a tertiary referral healthcare center in Colombia."
authors:
- Aristizabal AM
- Guzmán-Serrano CA
- Mondol-Villamil NV
- Bolaños-Vallejo LM
- Mejia-Quiñones V
- Recio-Gómez MA
- García-Pretelt EC
- Mejía-González M
- Alvarez WM
- Gutiérrez-Gil JA
journal: Int J Cardiovasc Imaging
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10554-024-03102-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics, imaging findings, management, and outcomes of patients with scimitar syndrome at a tertiary referral healthcare center in Colombia.
**Authors:** Aristizabal AM, Guzmán-Serrano CA, Mondol-Villamil NV, Bolaños-Vallejo LM, Mejia-Quiñones V, Recio-Gómez MA, García-Pretelt EC, Mejía-González M, Alvarez WM, Gutiérrez-Gil JA
**Journal:** Int J Cardiovasc Imaging (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10554-024-03102-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10554-024-03102-1)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2024 Jun;40(6):1319-1328. doi: 
10.1007/s10554-024-03102-1. Epub 2024 Apr 18.

Clinical characteristics, imaging findings, management, and outcomes of patients 
with scimitar syndrome at a tertiary referral healthcare center in Colombia.

Aristizabal AM(1)(2), Guzmán-Serrano CA(3), Mondol-Villamil NV(1), 
Bolaños-Vallejo LM(1), Mejia-Quiñones V(1)(4), Recio-Gómez MA(1), García-Pretelt 
EC(1), Mejía-González M(5), Alvarez WM(1)(2), Gutiérrez-Gil JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, 
Universidad Icesi, Cali, Colombia.
(2)Departamento materno-infantil, Fundación Valle del Lili, Cardiología 
pediátrica, Cali, Colombia.
(3)Centro de Investigaciones Clínicas, Fundación Valle del Lili, Av. Simón 
Bolívar - Carrera 98 # 18-49 Cali, Cali, Colombia. carlos.guzman.s@fvl.org.co.
(4)Centro de Investigaciones Clínicas, Fundación Valle del Lili, Av. Simón 
Bolívar - Carrera 98 # 18-49 Cali, Cali, Colombia.
(5)Departamento de Radiología e imágenes Diagnósticas, Fundación Valle del Lili, 
Cali, Colombia.

Scimitar Syndrome is part of a complex spectrum of congenital cardiovascular 
anomalies related to anomalous pulmonary venous return. Depending on the extent 
of involvement, treatment can be either expectant or surgical. Prognosis and 
survival have been controversial, with some results supporting early surgical 
management. This research aims to disclose the outcomes and describe the 
management, clinical and imaging characteristics of patients diagnosed with 
Scimitar Syndrome treated in a tertiary referral healthcare center. Longitudinal 
descriptive observational study. The study included all patients diagnosed with 
scimitar syndrome in our institution between January/2011 and December/2022. A 
description of the sociodemographic and clinical characteristics, diagnostic 
tools used, treatment features, and patient outcomes is provided. Eleven 
patients were included, with a mean age at diagnosis of five years (CI 0-17), 
six of which were female (54.55%). Nine (81.82%) patients had evidence of a 
scimitar vein on the chest radiograph, six (54.55%) cardiac dextroposition, six 
(54.55%) pulmonary hypoplasia, five (45.45%) right pulmonary artery hypoplasia, 
and three (27.27%) had aortopulmonary collaterals. Four (36.36%) patients had 
horseshoe lungs, and four (36.36%) had bronchopulmonary sequestration. In the 
associations, two (18.18%) patients were found to have an atrial septal defect, 
three (27.27%) ventricular septal defect, and one (9%) had Tetralogy of Fallot. 
Pulmonary hypertension was demonstrated in two (18.18%) patients. Seven (63.64%) 
required surgical management to correct the scimitar vein, and two patients died 
due to unrelated complications. Scimitar syndrome presents diagnostic and 
treatment challenges, necessitating a multidisciplinary approach for timely 
care. Chest radiography and CT scans are primary diagnostic tools, with surgical 
intervention often warranted alongside other heart defects or significant 
hemodynamic repercussions. Medical management is effective for mild to moderate 
cases. Long-term patient outcomes remain uncertain due to study limitations, but 
improved life expectancy is anticipated with ongoing care.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10554-024-03102-1
PMCID: PMC11213797
PMID: 38634941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose. No use of any AI or large language model 
were used during the writing, processing or editing of the present manuscript.