---
reference_id: "PMID:34993154"
title: "Mutation of Hashimoto's Thyroiditis and Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma Related Genes and the Screening of Candidate Genes."
authors:
- Zhang L
- Zhou L
- Feng Q
- Li Q
- Ge M
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.813802
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of Hashimoto's Thyroiditis and Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma Related Genes and the Screening of Candidate Genes.
**Authors:** Zhang L, Zhou L, Feng Q, Li Q, Ge M
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2021.813802](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2021.813802)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2021 Dec 21;11:813802. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.813802. eCollection
 2021.

Mutation of Hashimoto's Thyroiditis and Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma Related 
Genes and the Screening of Candidate Genes.

Zhang L(1)(2), Zhou L(3), Feng Q(4), Li Q(5), Ge M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Center of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck 
Surgery, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital (People's Hospital of Hangzhou 
Medical College), Key Laboratory of Endocrine Gland Diseases of Zhejiang 
Province, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Second Clinical Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Radiology (Ultrasound), Cancer Hospital of the University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Institute of Cancer and 
Basic Medicine (IBMC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) Key Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of 
Nanomaterials and Nano Safety & Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) Center for 
Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology of 
China, Beijing, China.
(5)Scientific Research Department, Cancer Hospital of the University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Institute of Cancer and Basic 
Medicine (IBMC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, China.

Clinical studies have shown similarities in the genetic background and 
biological functional characteristics between Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) and 
papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), and that HT may increase risks of PTC. Here, 
we set to determine the gene expression specificity of HT and PTC by screening 
related genes or co-expressed genes and exploring their genetic correlation. 
Referencing the Oncomine database, HT-related genes were discovered to be 
expressed in many different types of thyroid cancer, such as TSHR that is highly 
expressed in thyroid cancer. An in-depth genetic analysis and verification of 35 
cancer and paracancerous tissue pairs from patients with thyroid cancer, and 35 
tissues and blood cells pairs from patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis was 
conducted. Gene chip technology research showed that TSHR, BACH2, FOXE1, 
RNASET2, CTLA4, PTPN22, IL2RA and other HT-related genes were all expressed in 
PTC, in which TSHR was significantly over-expressed in PTC patients sensitive to 
radioactive iodine therapy, while BACH2 was significantly under-expressed in 
these patients. The biologically significant candidate Tag SNP highlighted from 
HT-related genes was screened by the high-throughput detection method. Somatic 
mutations in patients with HT and PTC were detected by target region capture 
technique, and 75 mutations were found in patients with HT and PTC. The upstream 
regulatory factors of the different genes shared by HT and PTC were analyzed 
based on Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), and it was found that HIF-1α and 
PD-L1 could be used as important upstream regulatory signal molecules. These 
results provide a basis for screening key diagnostic genes of PTC by 
highlighting the relationship between some HT-related genes and their 
polymorphisms in the pathogenesis of PTC.

Copyright © 2021 Zhang, Zhou, Feng, Li and Ge.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.813802
PMCID: PMC8724914
PMID: 34993154

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.