---
reference_id: "PMID:33845006"
title: Classification Criteria For Pars Planitis.
authors:
- Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) Working Group
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2021.03.045
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Classification Criteria For Pars Planitis.
**Authors:** Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) Working Group
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajo.2021.03.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajo.2021.03.045)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2021 Aug;228:268-274. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2021.03.045. Epub
2021  Apr 15.

Classification Criteria For Pars Planitis.

Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) Working Group.

Collaborators: Jabs DA, Denniston AK, Dick AD, Dunn JP, Kramer M, Oden N, Okada 
AA, Palestine AG, Read RW, Thorne JE, Trusko BE.

PURPOSE: To determine classification criteria for pars planitis.
DESIGN: Machine learning of cases with pars planitis and 4 other intermediate 
uveitides.
METHODS: Cases of intermediate uveitides were collected in an 
informatics-designed preliminary database, and a final database was constructed 
of cases achieving supermajority agreement on the diagnosis, using formal 
consensus techniques. Cases were split into a training set and a validation set. 
Machine learning using multinomial logistic regression was used on the training 
set to determine a parsimonious set of criteria that minimized the 
misclassification rate among the intermediate uveitides. The resulting criteria 
were evaluated on the validation set.
RESULTS: Five hundred eighty-nine cases of intermediate uveitides, including 226 
cases of pars planitis, were evaluated by machine learning. The overall accuracy 
for intermediate uveitides was 99.8% in the training set and 99.3% in the 
validation set (95% confidence interval 96.1, 99.9). Key criteria for pars 
planitis included unilateral or bilateral intermediate uveitis with either 1) 
snowballs in the vitreous or 2) snowbanks on the pars plana. Key exclusions 
included: 1) multiple sclerosis, 2) sarcoidosis, and 3) syphilis. The 
misclassification rates for pars planitis were 0% in the training set and 1.7% 
in the validation set, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The criteria for pars planitis had a low misclassification rate and 
appeared to perform sufficiently well for use in clinical and translational 
research.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2021.03.045
PMCID: PMC8634775
PMID: 33845006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Douglas A. Jabs: none; 
Alastair K. Denniston: none; Andrew D. Dick: consultant: AbbVie, Alimera, 
Apitope, Astellas, Gyroscope, Janssen, Roche; James P. Dunn: none; Michal 
Kramer: none; Neal Oden: none; Annabelle A. Okada: consultant: AbbVie Japan, 
Astellas Pharma Japan, Bayer AG, Daiichi Sankyo; lecture fees: Alcon Pharm 
Japan, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, Novartis Pharma Japan, Santen Pharmaceutical 
Corporation, Senju Pharmaceutical Corporation; grant support from Alcon Pharma 
Japan, Bayer Yakuhin, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma; Alan G. Palestine: none; Russell 
Read: none; Jennifer E. Thorne: Dr. Thorne engaged in a portion of this research 
as a consultant and was compensated for the consulting service; Brett E. Trusko: 
none; Steven Yeh: none.