---
reference_id: PMID:26785478
title: Stem cells and healthy aging.
authors:
- Goodell MA
- Rando TA
journal: Science
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1126/science.aab3388
keywords:
- Adult Stem Cells/physiology
- Aging/physiology
- Animals
- Cellular Senescence
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Genetic Drift
- Health
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- Organ Specificity
- "Selection, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Stem cells and healthy aging.
**Authors:** Goodell MA, Rando TA
**Journal:** Science (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aab3388](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aab3388)

## Content

1. Science. 2015 Dec 4;350(6265):1199-204. doi: 10.1126/science.aab3388.

Stem cells and healthy aging.

Goodell MA(1), Rando TA(2).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine Center, Center for Cell and Gene 
Therapy, and Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA. goodell@bcm.edu rando@stanford.edu.
(2)Glenn Center for the Biology of Aging and Department of Neurology and 
Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA, and Center for Regenerative Rehabilitation, Veterans Administration 
Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. goodell@bcm.edu 
rando@stanford.edu.

Research into stem cells and aging aims to understand how stem cells maintain 
tissue health, what mechanisms ultimately lead to decline in stem cell function 
with age, and how the regenerative capacity of somatic stem cells can be 
enhanced to promote healthy aging. Here, we explore the effects of aging on stem 
cells in different tissues. Recent research has focused on the ways that genetic 
mutations, epigenetic changes, and the extrinsic environmental milieu influence 
stem cell functionality over time. We describe each of these three factors, the 
ways in which they interact, and how these interactions decrease stem cell 
health over time. We are optimistic that a better understanding of these changes 
will uncover potential strategies to enhance stem cell function and increase 
tissue resiliency into old age.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aab3388
PMID: 26785478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]