---
reference_id: "PMID:32129902"
title: Global trends in intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma incidence from 1993 to 2012.
authors:
- Florio AA
- Ferlay J
- Znaor A
- Ruggieri D
- Alvarez CS
- Laversanne M
- Bray F
- McGlynn KA
- Petrick JL
journal: Cancer
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/cncr.32803
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Bile Duct Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Cholangiocarcinoma/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Time Factors
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Global trends in intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma incidence from 1993 to 2012.
**Authors:** Florio AA, Ferlay J, Znaor A, Ruggieri D, Alvarez CS, Laversanne M, Bray F, McGlynn KA, Petrick JL
**Journal:** Cancer (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cncr.32803](https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.32803)

## Content

1. Cancer. 2020 Jun 1;126(11):2666-2678. doi: 10.1002/cncr.32803. Epub 2020 Mar
4.

Global trends in intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma incidence from 
1993 to 2012.

Florio AA(1), Ferlay J(2), Znaor A(2), Ruggieri D(3), Alvarez CS(1), Laversanne 
M(2), Bray F(2), McGlynn KA(1), Petrick JL(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 
Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)Cancer Surveillance Section, International Agency for Research on Cancer, 
Lyon, France.
(3)Information Management Services, Inc, Rockville, Maryland.
(4)Slone Epidemiology Center, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (ICCs) and extrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinomas (ECCs) are highly lethal bile duct tumors. Their incidence 
can be difficult to estimate because of changes in cancer coding over time. No 
studies to date have examined their global incidence and trends with 
high-quality topography- and histology-specific cancer registry data. Therefore, 
this study examined ICC and ECC incidence with the Cancer Incidence in Five 
Continents Plus database.
METHODS: Regional and national cancer registry data were used to estimate 
age-standardized incidence rates (ASRs) per 100,000 person-years, 95% confidence 
intervals, and average annual percent changes (AAPCs) for ICC in 38 countries 
and for ECC in 33 countries from 1993 to 2012. ICC and ECC trends were tabulated 
and plotted by country. Rates versus birth cohort by age were plotted, and an 
age-period-cohort analysis was performed to assess age and cohort incidence rate 
ratios.
RESULTS: The highest rates of ICC and ECC were in Asia, specifically South Korea 
(ASR for ICC, 2.80; ASR for ECC, 2.24), Thailand (ASR for ICC, 2.19; ASR for 
ECC, 0.71), and Japan (ASR for ICC, 0.95; ASR for ECC, 0.83). Between 1993 and 
2012, incidence rates of both ICC and ECC increased in most countries. The 
largest ASR increases over the study period occurred in Latvia (AAPC, 20.1%) and 
China (AAPC, 11.1%) for ICC and in Thailand (AAPC, 8.8%) and Colombia (AAPC, 
8.5%) for ECC.
CONCLUSIONS: In the 20 years examined, ICC and ECC incidence increased in the 
majority of countries worldwide. ICC and ECC incidence may continue to increase 
because of metabolic and infectious etiologic factors. Efforts to further 
elucidate risk factors contributing to these increases in incidence are 
warranted.

© 2020 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.32803
PMCID: PMC7323858
PMID: 32129902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to disclose.

Cholangiocarcinomas (CCAs) are rare tumors that originate from cholangiocytes in the bile ducts. CCAs are classified as intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (ICC), which are primary liver tumors, if they occur in the part of the bile duct inside the liver or extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (ECC), which are biliary tract tumors, if they occur in the part of the bile duct outside the liver.1 ICCs account for 10-12% of liver cancers, while ECCs account for approximately one-third of biliary tract cancers.2,3 ECCs include both hilar (also known as Klatskin tumors) and distal subtypes.

Several risk factors are related to risk of both ICC and ECC.4 Chronic conditions including primary sclerosing cholangitis and Caroli’s disease are associated with a 21- to 97-fold increased risk of CCA.5-8 In Asian countries, additional known risk factors include liver flukes and hepatolithiasis.8-10 Other reported risk factors include metabolic conditions (e.g., obesity, diabetes, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease [NAFLD]), excess alcohol consumption, and hepatitis B or C virus infection, although risk factors tend to vary substantially by geographic region.5,7,8,11-14

Changes in International Classification of Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O) coding over time has resulted in some misclassification of ICCs and ECCs.2,15 In the first version of the ICD-O, Klatskin tumors did not have a unique morphology code.16 The second version, ICD-O-2, was published in 1990 and assigned Klatskin tumors a unique morphology code (8162/3), but cross-referenced the morphology code to the topography code for intrahepatic bile duct cancer (C22.1), causing incorrect classification of Klatskin tumors as ICC.17 In 2000, the ICD-O-3 partially rectified the coding by cross-referencing Klatskin tumors to both intrahepatic (C22.1) and extrahepatic bile duct cancers (C24.1).1 The misclassification has generally resulted in an overestimation of ICC cases and an underestimation in ECC cases, particularly prior to ICD-O-3.15,18

Given the changes to ICD-O coding schemes, CCA incidence can be difficult to estimate. Additionally, ICC rates are often not reported separately from overall primary liver cancer rates. A recent study reported that intrahepatic bile duct cancer mortality had increased and extrahepatic bile duct cancer mortality had either plateaued or decreased worldwide.19 However, this study was based on mortality data, which are not rigorously verified, and did not include morphology codes to examine CCA. No studies have compared global ICC and ECC incidence trends using topography- and morphology-specific data. Therefore, we examined the incidence of ICC and ECC for a 20-year period using cancer registry data from the International Agency for Research on Cancer’s (IARC) Cancer Incidence in Five Continents plus (CI5plus) database.

Cancer registry data from the CI5plus database were used to calculate ICC and ECC incidence rates between 1993 and 2012.20 CI5plus contains annual-based data on cancer site, sex, age at diagnosis, age-specific populations, age-standardized incidence, and, where available, histology. CI5plus has high data quality standards for registry inclusion in the database, as previously published.21,22 Data quality evaluation is based on comparability to previous years and similar populations, completeness (e.g., case finding procedures), validity and accuracy (e.g., registrar expertise, multiple source confirmation), and timeliness of reporting.

ICC (ICD, 10th edition [ICD-10] diagnostic code C22 and ICD-O-3 morphology codes 8050, 8140-8141, 8160-8161, 8260, 8440, 8480-8500, 8570-8572) data were obtained from the publicly available CI5plus dataset.1,23 Data for ECC (ICD-10 diagnostic code C22 and ICD-O-3 morphology code 8162 or ICD-10 diagnostic code C24.0 and ICD-O-3 morphology codes 8050, 8140-8141, 8160-8161, 8260, 8440, 8480-8500, 8570-8572, 8162) were obtained through a custom dataset prepared internally by IARC, with formal approval of cancer registries, as morphology codes are not available in the publicly available dataset.1,23

Countries were eligible for the current analysis if they were included in CI5plus between 1993 and 2012, provided morphology data, and, for ECC analyses, authorized ECC data use (Supplemental Table S1). Eligible countries that did not provide consent for ECC data use are still included in ICC analyses. We explored using publicly available extrahepatic bile duct cancer data in place of morphology-specific ECC data by examining the proportion of extrahepatic bile duct cancer cases classified as ECC in countries that did provide consent. Based on this analysis, we determined that extrahepatic bile duct cancer data were not a good proxy for ECC (Supplemental Table S2). Therefore, countries that did not consent are excluded from all ECC analyses. Thus, a total of 38 countries contributed ICC data and 33 contributed ECC data. Of these, 15 countries contributed national-level data (Supplemental Table 1). All other countries are represented by aggregated regional data to estimate national incidence.

Age-standardized incidence rates (ASR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) per 100,000 person-years were calculated for ICC and ECC within each country. All rates were age-adjusted to the world standard population using 5-year age groups.24 Additionally, the average annual percent changes (AAPC) and corresponding 95% CIs for 1993-2012 were calculated to summarize the change in incidence over time. Trends for ICC and ECC were plotted on the midpoint of each time interval on a semi-log scale by country. For selected countries, ICC and ECC were plotted together by calendar year to compare incidence rates using 2-year groupings (1993-1994, 1995-1996, etc.).

Rates for 2008-2012 were plotted on a bar graph to compare ICC and ECC rates using the most recent data available. ICC:ECC incidence rate ratios were calculated to determine within-country differences in incidence.

Five-year synthetic birth cohorts were estimated by subtracting the midpoint of the 5-year age group (ages 25-84) from single year of diagnosis. Incidence rates versus birth cohort were then plotted for each 5-year age group on a semi-log scale for selected countries. Additionally, age-period-cohort models were fitted to examine incidence rate ratios of age at diagnosis and birth cohort relative to the reference cohort 1940, assuming the overall period slope was zero,25 thus obtaining a unique set of parameters.

Data management and analyses were conducted using SAS (v9.4, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Figures were created in SigmaPlot (v12.5, SY Software Inc., San Jose, CA). AAPC modelling was performed using the Joinpoint Regression Program (v4.6.0.0, IMS, Inc., Calverton, MD). Age-period-cohort models were fitted in R (v1.2.1335, RStudio, Inc., Boston, MA).

In the most recent 5-year period, ICC incidence rates were higher than ECC rates in most countries (Figure 1). South Korea (ASR=2.80) and Thailand (ASR=2.19) had the highest ICC rates, while South Korea (ASR=2.24) and Japan (ASR=0.83) had the highest ECC rates (Table 1). In some countries, there was distinct variability between ICC and ECC rates (e.g., Philippines ICC:ECC ratio=5.9:1, Costa Rica 4.6:1), while other countries had equivalent rates of ICC and ECC (Ireland, Canada, Norway 1.0:1).

Overall, ICC incidence increased in the majority of countries between 1993 and 2012 (Table 1 and Figure 2). Large, significant increases in ICC incidence occurred in Latvia (AAPC=20.1%), Ireland (AAPC=10.5%), and Poland (AAPC=8.7%; Table 1). Modest, non-significant declines over the study period were noted in several countries, mostly in Asia (Philippines AAPC=−2.4%, Thailand AAPC=−1.0%, Denmark AAPC=−1.0%, Japan AAPC=−0.7%). For the most recent 5-year period, there was evidence of ICC decreasing or plateauing in several other countries, including Czech Republic, New Zealand, and Switzerland (Figure 2). Within-region variability was most pronounced in Asian and Western European countries.

ECC incidence increased in almost every country examined (Table 1 and Figure 3). Colombia (AAPC=8.5%), Ireland (AAPC=6.4%), Canada (AAPC=4.7%), and France (AAPC=2.0%) had significant increases in ECC rates over the study period (Table 1). The only significant decrease in ECC incidence was observed in Costa Rica (AAPC=−6.2%). Temporal trends in ECC incidence between 1993 and 2012 are displayed in Figure 3. Recent increases in ECC incidence were observed in Norway, Malta, China, Thailand, Ecuador, and New Zealand. Some regions had stable or similar rates, including Central Europe, Southern Europe, and Oceania. Conversely, Asian, Eastern European, and North American countries had notable variability in rates over the study period.

In France, Thailand, and the United Kingdom (U.K.), ICC rates were higher than ECC rates for all years (Figure 4). The U.K. had the greatest difference in ICC and ECC rates for the most recent time period. Within-country rates of ICC and ECC were most similar in Italy, South Korea, and the United States (U.S.), though ICC rates were slightly higher in all three countries.

Trends in 5-year age-specific ICC and ECC rates by birth year for selected countries are presented in Figure 5, and the incidence rate ratio is presented in Figure 6. Rates of ICC rapidly increased with successive birth cohorts in Australia, France, and the U.K. While ICC incidence rates in South Korea and U.S. have not increased as rapidly, ICC rates have increased in the youngest birth cohorts. In Thailand, ICC rates have plateaued and decreased in the most recent birth cohorts examined. ECC incidence rates decreased with successive generations in France and South Korea. In Australia, Thailand, U.K., and U.S., rates plateaued but have begun to increase again in the most recent birth cohorts. Examining incidence rates by age at diagnosis, trends by age at diagnosis were similar for ICC and ECC in all selected countries except Thailand, where the peak age at ICC diagnosis occurred around 15 years earlier than ECC diagnosis.

Results for the most recent time period were similar by sex (Supplemental Figures S1 and S2). Males had higher rates of ICC than females in most countries (Supplemental Figure S3). However, ICC rates were higher among females than males in all Central and South American countries (Brazil M:F ratio=0.8:1, Costa Rica 0.8:1, Ecuador 0.8:1, and Colombia 0.9:1). For ECC, incidence rates were greater among males than females in almost all countries examined (Supplemental Figure S4). Additionally, the AAPC in incidence rates over the study period did not substantially differ from the main results when examined by sex (Supplemental Tables S3 and S4).

During the 20 years examined, incidence rates of ICC and ECC increased in the majority of countries examined worldwide. Nonsignificant decreases in ICC incidence were observed in a few higher-risk Asian countries, including Thailand. Significant increases in incidence occurred in historically lower-risk countries, including numerous European countries, Costa Rica, and Australia for ICC and Ireland, Colombia, Canada, and France for ECC. The highest incidence rates occurred in historically higher-risk Asian countries, with South Korea having the highest rates of both ICC and ECC. Incidence rates increased in the youngest birth cohorts, with the exception of Thailand for ICC and South Korea and France for ECC.

This is the first international analysis to examine population-based incidence rates of ICC and ECC as reported to high-quality cancer registries. Two prior analyses, one examining international trends using 32 countries and one examining European rates, found an increase in ICC mortality in most countries, although data were from death certificates only and lacked morphology information.19,26 Additionally, an international analysis of liver cancer done by our group found that ICC incidence had increased in multiple countries between 1978 and 2007, but did not examine ECC.27 Several prior reports have examined ECC incidence as reported to cancer registries. A German study of incidence and mortality found a stabilization of ECC rates between 1998 and 2008.28 Another analysis using registry data found a decrease in ECC incidence in the U.K. between 1990 and 2008 and an increase in the U.S. between 2001 and 2007.29 Finally, a study utilizing cancer registry data from the U.S. found significant increases in both ICC and ECC incidence between 1999 and 2013.3

In the majority of countries examined, incidence of ICC was higher than ECC. It is posited that the predominance of ICC over ECC could be due to misclassification of ECC as ICC. Until 1990, Klatskin tumors did not have a unique morphology code. Case-series from single U.S. institutions have reported that Klatskin tumors were the most commonly diagnosed type of CCA.30-32 In contrast, an analysis of SEER data found that ICC accounted for 53% of all CCA diagnosed, distal ECC accounted for 42%, and Klatskin tumors accounted for only 5%.33 In the U.K., questionnaires administered to cancer registrars found evidence of misclassification of ECC as intrahepatic tumors,29 as registrars did not recognize that ‘hilar’ is synonymous with Klatskin tumors. Additionally, registrars would typically classify cholangiocarcinoma as ICC, if intra- or extrahepatic was not specified.29 Thus, efforts to improve CCA classification are needed. This has been taken into consideration by the latest available revision of ICD-O-3 classification, ICD-O-3.2, recommended for use from 2020.

The impact of CCA misclassification has been quantified in several studies. One analysis conducted in SEER found that, from 1992-2000, ICCs were overestimated by 13% and ECCs were underestimated by 15% due to misclassification of Klatskin tumors.15 Two additional studies using SEER data found that Klatskin tumors were misclassified as ICCs 90% of the time prior to 2000, but were only misclassified as ICCs 45% of the time between 2000 and 2007.34,35 The authors found an increase35 or stability34 in ICC incidence and an increase in ECC incidence. In all studies, analyses with and without correctly reclassifying Klatskin tumors yielded similar results, indicating that misclassified Klatskin tumors are probably not driving the observed increase in ECC incidence.15,34,35 Overall, evidence from SEER, a long-standing, high-quality cancer registry program, suggests that the increases in incidence may not be related to Klatskin tumor misclassification.

Risk factors that could be causing the increase in CCA incidence are largely unknown. However, in higher-risk Southeast Asian countries, parasitic infections are key risk factors. Liver flukes are parasitic trematodes that, when ingested via raw, pickled, or undercooked fish, can live in the host biliary system for decades.36 These flukes cause chronic irritation and increased cellular turnover, which can increase the susceptibility of cholangiocytes to endogenous and exogenous carcinogens.14,37 Risk of CCA has been estimated to increase 4-5-fold with liver fluke infection in places such as South Korea (Clonorchis sinensis) and Thailand (Opisthorchis viverrini).38 Efforts to combat liver fluke infections, particularly in Thailand, have been ongoing since 1950 and include community education, screening for existing infection, and personal hygiene improvements.39 National programs in Thailand achieved a decrease in prevalence of liver fluke infection from 14.7% in 1981 to 9.6% in 2001.39 A recent effort to implement community-based control programs holds even more promise; the Lawa Project in Northeast Thailand has achieved a reduction in the prevalence of locally sourced fish infected with liver flukes from as high as 70% to less than 1%.40 Efforts to eliminate liver fluke infection may be contributing to the modest decrease in CCA incidence in several Asian countries, though continued monitoring of liver flukes and CCA incidence is necessary to fully understand the impact of these programs.

Some evidence suggests that metabolic conditions, including obesity, diabetes, and NAFLD, may be contributing to the rise in CCA incidence, particularly in historically lower-risk countries. Worldwide, 39% of adults are overweight and 13% are obese.41 In parallel to the increased prevalence of overweight and obesity, NAFLD prevalence is estimated to be 20-30% in Western countries and as high as 18% in Asian countries.42 These metabolic conditions have been associated with increased risk of CCA worldwide.5,43 In a recent meta-analysis, obesity and diabetes were found to increase ICC risk by 50%.44 In the U.S., a study found NAFLD to be associated with a 3-fold increased risk of ICC and ECC among adults 65 years and older.5 Metabolic conditions may be contributing to CCA risk even in higher-risk regions where, traditionally, infectious agents are the predominant risk factor. In a Thai study, a significantly greater proportion of CCA patients had diabetes compared to non-CCA patients nationwide.45 Similarly, diabetes was associated with a 2-6-fold increased risk of CCA in a hospital-based study in South Korea.46 The chronic inflammation associated with these conditions modifies cancer risk by causing DNA damage, alterations in apoptosis, and cellular proliferation, which can lead to cell transformation and cholangiocarcinogenesis.47,48 As prevalence of these conditions is expected to continue rising, further research is warranted in elucidating the impact they have on CCA incidence and progression.49

The primary strength of this study is the use of CI5plus data, which contains high-quality international cancer registry data. Previous studies have been limited to single-country incidence or global mortality estimation to examine CCA.19,50 Additionally, we were able to obtain both morphology and topography information for ECC, allowing for more precise incidence estimates than if only topography (i.e., extrahepatic bile duct) information were available. Prior reports estimating incidence based on extrahepatic bile duct incidence or mortality data may not accurately represent ECC. We found extreme variability in the proportion of extrahepatic bile duct cases that were histologically confirmed ECC cases between countries, demonstrating the unreliability of using extrahepatic bile duct cases as a proxy for ECC. While the ICD-O misclassification issues are a key limitation to CCA analyses, we only included ECC data where it was possible to obtain both morphology and topography information. We also reclassified Klatskin tumors that were cross-referenced as intrahepatic to extrahepatic.

A limitation of this analysis is the inability to examine incidence in several understudied regions, particularly Africa, the Middle East, Central America, and South America. Registry infrastructure in these regions is improving, but data for the current study period were either unavailable or did not meet eligibility criteria. Another limitation is the lack of nationally representative data, whereby regional registries were pooled to estimate national incidence. Additionally, the study period was limited by the most current years available in CI5plus. Though it would be informative to examine incidence after 2012, the data are not yet available due to the extensive data quality evaluation performed prior to publishing CI5plus updates. Lastly, Klatskin tumors can invade the liver by the time of diagnosis, which may lead to some ECCs being misclassified as ICCs, resulting in possible underestimation in ECC incidence in the current study.51

In conclusion, ICC and ECC incidence increased in the majority of countries examined between 1993 and 2012. Global estimates of ICC and ECC using high-quality, topography- and morphology-specific data are key to better understanding the epidemiology of CCA. The regional differences in incidence and trends should be used to further elucidate the etiology of these rare, but highly lethal, tumors.