---
reference_id: "PMID:38856159"
title: Bi-allelic variants in MYH3 cause recessively-inherited arthrogryposis.
authors:
- Morali B
- Miranda V
- Raelson J
- Grimard G
- Glavas P
- Audibert F
- Dumont NA
- Barone J
- Bamshad M
- Lemyre E
- Campeau PM
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14570
keywords:
- Humans
- "Arthrogryposis/genetics, pathology"
- Alleles
- Male
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Pedigree
- Molecular Motor Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bi-allelic variants in MYH3 cause recessively-inherited arthrogryposis.
**Authors:** Morali B, Miranda V, Raelson J, Grimard G, Glavas P, Audibert F, Dumont NA, Barone J, Bamshad M, Lemyre E, Campeau PM
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14570](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14570)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2024 Oct;106(4):483-487. doi: 10.1111/cge.14570. Epub 2024 Jun 10.

Bi-allelic variants in MYH3 cause recessively-inherited arthrogryposis.

Morali B(1), Miranda V(1), Raelson J(2), Grimard G(3), Glavas P(3), Audibert 
F(4), Dumont NA(2), Barone J(1), Bamshad M(5)(6), Lemyre E(1), Campeau PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, CHU Sainte-Justine, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, CHU Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics and Genome Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.

Arthrogryposis is a clinical feature defined by congenital joint contractures in 
two or more different body areas which occurs in between 1/3000 and 1/5000 live 
births. Variants in multiple genes have been associated with distal 
arthrogryposis syndromes. Heterozygous variants in MYH3 have been identified to 
cause the dominantly-inherited distal arthrogryposis conditions, Freeman-Sheldon 
syndrome, Sheldon-Hall syndrome, and multiple pterygium syndrome. In contrast, 
MYH3 variants underlie both dominantly and recessively inherited Contractures, 
Pterygia, and Spondylocarpotarsal Fusion syndromes (CPSFS) which are 
characterized by extensive bony abnormalities in addition to congenital 
contractures. Here we report two affected sibs with distal arthrogryposis born 
to unaffected, distantly related parents. Sequencing revealed that both sibs 
were homozygous for two ultra-rare MYH3 variants, c.3445G>A (p.Glu1149Lys) and 
c.4760T>C (p.Leu1587Pro). Sequencing and deletion/duplication analysis of 169 
other arthrogryposis genes yielded no other compelling candidate variants. This 
is the first report of biallelic variants in MYH3 being implicated in a distal 
arthrogryposis phenotype without the additional features of CPSFS. Thus, akin to 
CPSFS, both dominant and recessively inherited distal arthrogryposis can be 
caused by variants in MYH3.

© 2024 The Author(s). Clinical Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14570
PMID: 38856159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]