---
reference_id: "PMID:8398608"
title: Clinical features of systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Hochberg MC
- Petri M
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1097/00002281-199305050-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features of systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Hochberg MC, Petri M
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00002281-199305050-00005](https://doi.org/10.1097/00002281-199305050-00005)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 1993 Sep;5(5):575-86. doi: 
10.1097/00002281-199305050-00005.

Clinical features of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Hochberg MC(1), Petri M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore 21201.

Descriptive and analytic clinical research investigations dealing with systemic 
lupus erythematosus have focused on disease manifestations involving the heart, 
kidneys, and central nervous system, the complications of corticosteroid 
therapy, particularly cardiovascular and peripheral vascular disease, and 
outcomes of pregnancy. Studies exploring prognostic factors in patients with 
lupus nephritis as well as risk factors for the development of cardiovascular 
disease emphasize the importance of control of comorbid conditions, particularly 
hypertension and hyperlipidemia, in preventing poor outcomes in patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus. The effectiveness of parenterally administered 
pulse cyclophosphamide has been demonstrated in patients with severe central 
nervous system involvement, and the effectiveness of plasmapheresis in patients 
with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura was reviewed.

DOI: 10.1097/00002281-199305050-00005
PMID: 8398608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]