---
reference_id: "PMID:35627182"
title: Independent COL5A1 Variants in Cats with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
authors:
- Kiener S
- Apostolopoulos N
- Schissler J
- Hass PK
- Leuthard F
- Jagannathan V
- Schuppisser C
- Soto S
- Welle M
- Mayer U
- Leeb T
- Fischer NM
- Kaessmeyer S
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13050797
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Independent COL5A1 Variants in Cats with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kiener S, Apostolopoulos N, Schissler J, Hass PK, Leuthard F, Jagannathan V, Schuppisser C, Soto S, Welle M, Mayer U, Leeb T, Fischer NM, Kaessmeyer S
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13050797](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13050797)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Apr 29;13(5):797. doi: 10.3390/genes13050797.

Independent COL5A1 Variants in Cats with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.

Kiener S(1)(2), Apostolopoulos N(3)(4), Schissler J(5), Hass PK(6), Leuthard 
F(1)(2), Jagannathan V(1), Schuppisser C(7), Soto S(2)(8), Welle M(2)(8), Mayer 
U(3), Leeb T(1)(2), Fischer NM(9), Kaessmeyer S(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, 3001 Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Dermfocus, University of Bern, 3001 Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Anicura Kleintierspezialisten Augsburg, 86157 Augsburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin, 2015 Linden Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(5)Department of Clinical Sciences, James L. Voss Veterinary Teaching Hospital, 
Fort Collins, CO 80525, USA.
(6)Division of Veterinary Anatomy, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, 3001 
Bern, Switzerland.
(7)VET Zentrum AG, 8422 Pfungen, Switzerland.
(8)Institute of Animal Pathology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, 3001 
Bern, Switzerland.
(9)Dermatology Unit, Clinic for Small Animal Internal Medicine, Vetsuisse 
Faculty, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

We investigated four cats with similar clinical skin-related signs strongly 
suggestive of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS). Cases no. 1 and 4 were unrelated and 
the remaining two cases, no. 2 and 3, were reportedly siblings. 
Histopathological changes were characterized by severely altered dermal collagen 
fibers. Transmission electron microscopy in one case demonstrated abnormalities 
in the collagen fibril organization and structure. The genomes of the two 
unrelated affected cats and one of the affected siblings were sequenced and 
individually compared to 54 feline control genomes. We searched for private 
protein changing variants in known human EDS candidate genes and identified 
three independent heterozygous COL5A1 variants. COL5A1 is a well-characterized 
candidate gene for classical EDS. It encodes the proα1 chain of type V collagen, 
which is needed for correct collagen fibril formation and the integrity of the 
skin. The identified variants in COL5A1 are c.112_118+15del or r.spl?, c.3514A>T 
or p.(Lys1172*), and c.3066del or p.(Gly1023Valfs*50) for cases no. 1, 2&3, and 
4, respectively. They presumably all lead to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, which 
results in haploinsufficiency of COL5A1 and causes the alterations of the 
connective tissue. The whole genome sequencing approach used in this study 
enables a refinement of the diagnosis for the affected cats as classical EDS. It 
further illustrates the potential of such experiments as a precision medicine 
approach in animals with inherited diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13050797
PMCID: PMC9140822
PMID: 35627182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.