---
reference_id: "PMID:20340138"
title: "Overview of the mutation spectrum in familial exudative vitreoretinopathy and Norrie disease with identification of 21 novel variants in FZD4, LRP5, and NDP."
authors:
- Nikopoulos K
- Venselaar H
- Collin RW
- Riveiro-Alvarez R
- Boonstra FN
- Hooymans JM
- Mukhopadhyay A
- Shears D
- van Bers M
- de Wijs IJ
- van Essen AJ
- Sijmons RH
- Tilanus MA
- van Nouhuys CE
- Ayuso C
- Hoefsloot LH
- Cremers FP
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21250
keywords:
- Animals
- Binding Sites/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Eye Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Family Health
- "Frizzled Receptors/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "LDL-Receptor Related Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-5
- Mice
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Retinal Diseases/genetics
- Signal Transduction
- "Vitreoretinopathy, Proliferative/genetics"
- Wnt Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overview of the mutation spectrum in familial exudative vitreoretinopathy and Norrie disease with identification of 21 novel variants in FZD4, LRP5, and NDP.
**Authors:** Nikopoulos K, Venselaar H, Collin RW, Riveiro-Alvarez R, Boonstra FN, Hooymans JM, Mukhopadhyay A, Shears D, van Bers M, de Wijs IJ, van Essen AJ, Sijmons RH, Tilanus MA, van Nouhuys CE, Ayuso C, Hoefsloot LH, Cremers FP
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21250](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21250)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Jun;31(6):656-66. doi: 10.1002/humu.21250.

Overview of the mutation spectrum in familial exudative vitreoretinopathy and 
Norrie disease with identification of 21 novel variants in FZD4, LRP5, and NDP.

Nikopoulos K(1), Venselaar H, Collin RW, Riveiro-Alvarez R, Boonstra FN, 
Hooymans JM, Mukhopadhyay A, Shears D, van Bers M, de Wijs IJ, van Essen AJ, 
Sijmons RH, Tilanus MA, van Nouhuys CE, Ayuso C, Hoefsloot LH, Cremers FP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Wnt signaling is a crucial component of the cell machinery orchestrating a 
series of physiological processes such as cell survival, proliferation, and 
migration. Among the plethora of roles that Wnt signaling plays, its canonical 
branch regulates eye organogenesis and angiogenesis. Mutations in the genes 
encoding the low density lipoprotein receptor protein 5 (LRP5) and frizzled 4 
(FZD4), acting as coreceptors for Wnt ligands, cause familial exudative 
vitreoretinopathy (FEVR). Moreover, mutations in the gene encoding NDP, a ligand 
for these Wnt receptors, cause Norrie disease and FEVR. Both FEVR and Norrie 
disease share similar phenotypic characteristics, including abnormal 
vascularization of the peripheral retina and formation of fibrovascular masses 
in the eye that can lead to blindness. In this mutation update, we report 21 
novel variants for FZD4, LRP5, and NDP, and discuss the putative functional 
consequences of missense mutations. In addition, we provide a comprehensive 
overview of all previously published variants in the aforementioned genes and 
summarize the phenotypic characteristics in mouse models carrying mutations in 
the orthologous genes. The increasing molecular understanding of Wnt signaling, 
related to ocular development and blood supply, offers more tools for accurate 
disease diagnosis that may be important in the development of therapeutic 
interventions.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21250
PMID: 20340138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]