---
reference_id: "PMID:37080828"
title: "Long COVID: pathophysiological factors and abnormalities of coagulation."
authors:
- Turner S
- Khan MA
- Putrino D
- Woodcock A
- Kell DB
- Pretorius E
journal: Trends Endocrinol Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2023.03.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long COVID: pathophysiological factors and abnormalities of coagulation.
**Authors:** Turner S, Khan MA, Putrino D, Woodcock A, Kell DB, Pretorius E
**Journal:** Trends Endocrinol Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tem.2023.03.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2023.03.002)

## Content

1. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2023 Jun;34(6):321-344. doi:
10.1016/j.tem.2023.03.002.  Epub 2023 Apr 19.

Long COVID: pathophysiological factors and abnormalities of coagulation.

Turner S(1), Khan MA(2), Putrino D(3), Woodcock A(4), Kell DB(5), Pretorius 
E(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Stellenbosch 
University, Stellenbosch, Private Bag X1, Matieland, 7602, South Africa.
(2)North West Lung Centre, Manchester University Hospitals, Manchester, M23 9LT, 
UK.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation and Human Performance, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(4)The University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK; 
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, CityLabs, Manchester, M13 9NQ, UK.
(5)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Stellenbosch 
University, Stellenbosch, Private Bag X1, Matieland, 7602, South Africa; 
Department of Biochemistry and Systems Biology, Institute of Systems, Molecular 
and Integrative Biology, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of 
Liverpool, Crown St, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK; The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre 
for Biosustainability, Building 220, Kemitorvet, Technical University of 
Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. Electronic address: dbk@liv.ac.uk.
(6)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Stellenbosch 
University, Stellenbosch, Private Bag X1, Matieland, 7602, South Africa; 
Department of Biochemistry and Systems Biology, Institute of Systems, Molecular 
and Integrative Biology, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of 
Liverpool, Crown St, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK. Electronic address: 
resiap@sun.ac.za.

Acute COVID-19 infection is followed by prolonged symptoms in approximately one 
in ten cases: known as Long COVID. The disease affects ~65 million individuals 
worldwide. Many pathophysiological processes appear to underlie Long COVID, 
including viral factors (persistence, reactivation, and bacteriophagic action of 
SARS CoV-2); host factors (chronic inflammation, metabolic and endocrine 
dysregulation, immune dysregulation, and autoimmunity); and downstream impacts 
(tissue damage from the initial infection, tissue hypoxia, host dysbiosis, and 
autonomic nervous system dysfunction). These mechanisms culminate in the 
long-term persistence of the disorder characterized by a thrombotic 
endothelialitis, endothelial inflammation, hyperactivated platelets, and 
fibrinaloid microclots. These abnormalities of blood vessels and coagulation 
affect every organ system and represent a unifying pathway for the various 
symptoms of Long COVID.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tem.2023.03.002
PMCID: PMC10113134
PMID: 37080828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests None are declared by 
the authors.