---
reference_id: "PMID:38815052"
title: "Acute Flaccid Myelitis: Mid-Term Clinical Course of Knee Extension Paralysis and Outcomes of Nerve Transfer."
authors:
- Doi K
- Hattori Y
- Maruyama A
- Marei AE
- Sakamoto S
- Sasaki J
- Hayashi K
- Fujita M
journal: J Bone Joint Surg Am
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2106/JBJS.23.01268
keywords:
- Humans
- Nerve Transfer/methods
- Male
- Female
- Myelitis/surgery
- "Paralysis/surgery, etiology"
- Child
- "Central Nervous System Viral Diseases/surgery, diagnosis"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Neuromuscular Diseases/complications, surgery"
- Knee Joint/surgery
- Recovery of Function
- Femoral Nerve
- Electromyography
- Adolescent
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Flaccid Myelitis: Mid-Term Clinical Course of Knee Extension Paralysis and Outcomes of Nerve Transfer.
**Authors:** Doi K, Hattori Y, Maruyama A, Marei AE, Sakamoto S, Sasaki J, Hayashi K, Fujita M
**Journal:** J Bone Joint Surg Am (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2106/JBJS.23.01268](https://doi.org/10.2106/JBJS.23.01268)

## Content

1. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2024 Oct 16;106(20):1876-1887. doi:
10.2106/JBJS.23.01268.  Epub 2024 May 30.

Acute Flaccid Myelitis: Mid-Term Clinical Course of Knee Extension Paralysis and
Outcomes of Nerve Transfer.

Doi K(1), Hattori Y(1), Maruyama A(1), Marei AE(2), Sakamoto S(1), Sasaki J(1),
Hayashi K(1), Fujita M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Ogori Daiichi General Hospital, Yamaguchi,
Japan.
(2)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Tanta University Hospital, Tanta,
El- Gharbia Governorate, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a rare debilitating
poliomyelitis-like illness characterized by the sudden onset of flaccid palsy in
the extremities. The purpose of this study was to report the mid-term clinical
course of knee extension in AFM and the effect of contralateral obturator
nerve-to-femoral nerve transfer (CONFNT) for restoration of knee extension in
AFM.
METHODS: Twenty-six patients with lower extremity palsy due to AFM were referred
to our clinic for possible surgical reconstruction. Their median age was 4.0
years, and the first evaluation of the palsy was done at a mean of 6 months
after paralysis onset. The paralysis ranged from lower limb monoplegia to
quadriplegia. The clinical course of knee extension was assessed using the
British Medical Research Council (MRC) grading scale and surface
electromyography (EMG). Five patients with unilateral paralysis of knee
extension underwent CONFNT.
RESULTS: The mean follow-up period for 19 limbs with complete paralysis of knee
extension (MRC grade M0) in 13 patients who were evaluated for spontaneous
recovery was 43 months. No patient who had complete paralysis of knee extension
at >6 months and paralysis of the hip adductor muscle had improvement of knee
extension to better than M2. Five of the original 26 patients were treated with
CONFNT and followed for a mean of 61 months. Two of 5 patients had the CONFNT ≤8
months after paralysis onset and obtained M4 knee extension. Only 1 of the 3
patients with CONFNT performed approximately 12 months after paralysis onset
obtained M3 knee extension; the other 2 obtained only M1 or M2 knee extension.
CONCLUSIONS: The paralysis of the lower extremity in our patients with AFM was
similar to that in poliomyelitis. However, in AFM, spontaneous recovery of knee
extension was possible if there were signs of recovery from hip adductor
paralysis up to 6 months after paralysis onset. CONFNT may enhance the recovery
of knee extension and seems to be a reliable reconstruction for restoring knee
extension if performed no more than 8 months after paralysis onset.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic Level IV . See Instructions for Authors for a
complete description of levels of evidence.

Copyright © 2024 by The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, Incorporated.

DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.23.01268
PMID: 38815052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: No external funding was received for
this study. The Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest forms are provided
with the online version of the article ( http://links.lww.com/JBJS/I47 ).
