---
reference_id: "PMID:38996209"
title: Midterm Outcomes of Multimodal Approach to Treating Severe Scoliosis in Patients With Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
authors:
- Hori Y
- McDonald TC
- Thornley P
- Almeida da Silva LC
- Kaymaz B
- Rogers KJ
- Yorgova PK
- Bober MB
- Carroll R
- Kruse RW
- Franzone JM
- Shah SA
journal: J Am Acad Orthop Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5435/JAAOS-D-23-00889
keywords:
- Humans
- Scoliosis/surgery
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications
- Female
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Spinal Fusion/methods
- Adolescent
- Treatment Outcome
- Pedicle Screws
- Child
- Osteotomy/methods
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Traction/methods
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein 2/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Diphosphonates/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Bone Cements/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Midterm Outcomes of Multimodal Approach to Treating Severe Scoliosis in Patients With Osteogenesis Imperfecta.
**Authors:** Hori Y, McDonald TC, Thornley P, Almeida da Silva LC, Kaymaz B, Rogers KJ, Yorgova PK, Bober MB, Carroll R, Kruse RW, Franzone JM, Shah SA
**Journal:** J Am Acad Orthop Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5435/JAAOS-D-23-00889](https://doi.org/10.5435/JAAOS-D-23-00889)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2024 Sep 15;32(18):e951-e960. doi:
10.5435/JAAOS-D-23-00889. Epub 2024 Jul 10.

Midterm Outcomes of Multimodal Approach to Treating Severe Scoliosis in Patients
With Osteogenesis Imperfecta.

Hori Y(1), McDonald TC, Thornley P, Almeida da Silva LC, Kaymaz B, Rogers KJ,
Yorgova PK, Bober MB, Carroll R, Kruse RW, Franzone JM, Shah SA.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nemours Children's Health,
Wilmington, DE (Hori, Thornley, Almeida da Silva, Kaymaz, Rogers, Yorgova,
Bober, Carroll, Kruse, Franzone, Shah), and the Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, University of South Alabama Health, Mobile, AL (McDonald).

INTRODUCTION: The surgical management of severe scoliosis in patients with
osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is challenging because of curve rigidity, small
stature, and inherent bone fragility. This study evaluated the midterm outcomes
of our multimodal approach to address these issues, integrating perioperative
bisphosphonate therapy, preoperative/intraoperative traction, various
osteotomies, segmental pedicle screw instrumentation with cement augmentation,
and bone morphogenetic protein-2 application.
METHODS: A single-center retrospective review of 30 patients (average age 14.1 ±
2.2 years; 18 were female) diagnosed with OI and scoliosis was conducted. These
patients underwent posterior spinal fusion between 2008 and 2020 and completed a
minimum follow-up of 2 years. We measured radiographic parameters at each visit
and reviewed the incidence of complications. A mixed-effects model was used to
evaluate changes in radiographic parameters from preoperative measurements to
the first and latest follow-ups.
RESULTS: The patient cohort consisted of 2 individuals with type I OI, 20 with
type III, 6 with type IV, and 2 with other types (types V and VIII). Surgical
intervention led to a notable improvement in the major curve magnitude from 76°
to 36°, with no notable correction loss. In addition, the minor curve, apical
vertical translation, lowest instrumented vertebra tilt, and pelvic obliquity
were also improved. In the sagittal plane, thoracic kyphosis and lumbar lordosis
remained unchanged while thoracolumbar kyphosis markedly improved. Two patients
experienced proximal junctional kyphosis with screw pullout, one of whom
required revision surgery. One patient developed a superficial infection that
was successfully treated with oral antibiotics. No instances of neurologic
deficits or cement extravasation were observed.
DISCUSSION: This study demonstrated the effectiveness and safety of our
multimodal approach to treating scoliosis in patients with OI, achieving a 53%
major curve correction with minimal complications over 2-year follow-up. These
findings provide notable insights into managing scoliosis in this population.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level IV (case series).

Copyright © 2024 by the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons.

DOI: 10.5435/JAAOS-D-23-00889
PMID: 38996209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
