---
reference_id: "PMID:29724658"
title: Human hepatocyte transplantation corrects the inherited metabolic liver disorder arginase deficiency in mice.
authors:
- Angarita SAK
- Truong B
- Khoja S
- Nitzahn M
- Rajbhandari AK
- Zhuravka I
- Duarte S
- Lin MG
- Lam AK
- Cederbaum SD
- Lipshutz GS
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.04.005
keywords:
- Animals
- Arginase/physiology
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Hepatocytes/cytology, transplantation"
- Humans
- "Liver Diseases/enzymology, pathology, therapy"
- Male
- "Metabolic Diseases/enzymology, pathology, therapy"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human hepatocyte transplantation corrects the inherited metabolic liver disorder arginase deficiency in mice.
**Authors:** Angarita SAK, Truong B, Khoja S, Nitzahn M, Rajbhandari AK, Zhuravka I, Duarte S, Lin MG, Lam AK, Cederbaum SD, Lipshutz GS
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.04.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.04.005)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2018 Jun;124(2):114-123. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.04.005.
Epub  2018 Apr 21.

Human hepatocyte transplantation corrects the inherited metabolic liver disorder
arginase deficiency in mice.

Angarita SAK(1), Truong B(2), Khoja S(1), Nitzahn M(3), Rajbhandari AK(4),
Zhuravka I(4), Duarte S(1), Lin MG(1), Lam AK(1), Cederbaum SD(5), Lipshutz
GS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
CA, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(3)Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
CA, United States; Molecular Biology Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine
at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(4)Behavioral Testing Core Facility, Department of Psychology and Brain Research
Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United
States.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, The David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, United States; Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research
Center at UCLA, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United
States.
(6)Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
CA, United States; Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States; Molecular
Biology Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA,
United States; Department of Psychiatry, The David Geffen School of Medicine at
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States; Intellectual and Developmental
Disabilities Research Center at UCLA, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA,
Los Angeles, CA, United States; Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States; Department of Urology, David
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States; Semel
Institute for Neuroscience, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, United States; Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell
Research at UCLA, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA,
United States. Electronic address: glipshutz@mednet.ucla.edu.

The transplantation, engraftment, and expansion of primary hepatocytes have the
potential to be an effective therapy for metabolic disorders of the liver
including those of nitrogen metabolism. To date, such methods for the treatment
of urea cycle disorders in murine models has only been minimally explored.
Arginase deficiency, an inherited disorder of nitrogen metabolism that presents
in the first two years of life, has the potential to be treated by such methods.
To explore the potential of this approach, we mated the conditional arginase
deficient mouse with a mouse model deficient in fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase
(FAH) and with Rag2 and IL2-Rγ mutations to give a selective advantage to
transplanted (normal) human hepatocytes. On day -1, a uroplasminogen-expressing
adenoviral vector was administered intravenously followed the next day with the
transplantation of 1 × 106 human hepatocytes (or vehicle alone) by intrasplenic
injection. As the initial number of administered hepatocytes would be too low to
prevent hepatotoxicity-induced mortality, NTBC cycling was performed to allow
for hepatocyte expansion and repopulation. While all control mice died, all
except one human hepatocyte transplanted mice survived. Four months after
hepatocyte transplantation, 2 × 1011 genome copies of AAV-TBG-Cre recombinase
was administered IV to disrupt endogenous hepatic arginase expression. While all
control mice died within the first month, human hepatocyte transplanted mice did
well. Ammonia and amino acids, analyzed in both groups before and after
disruption of endogenous arginase expression, while well-controlled in the
transplanted group, were markedly abnormal in the controls. Ammonium challenging
further demonstrated the durability and functionality of the human repopulated
liver. In conclusion, these studies demonstrate that human hepatocyte
repopulation in the murine liver can result in effective treatment of arginase
deficiency.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.04.005
PMCID: PMC5976549
PMID: 29724658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
