---
reference_id: "PMID:36630732"
title: "Platelet-rich plasma injection for empty nose syndrome: A case report."
authors:
- Lee DW
- Kim JY
- Kwon JH
journal: Am J Otolaryngol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2022.103750
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Platelet-rich plasma injection for empty nose syndrome: A case report.
**Authors:** Lee DW, Kim JY, Kwon JH
**Journal:** Am J Otolaryngol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjoto.2022.103750](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjoto.2022.103750)

## Content

1. Am J Otolaryngol. 2023 Mar-Apr;44(2):103750. doi:
10.1016/j.amjoto.2022.103750.  Epub 2022 Dec 21.

Platelet-rich plasma injection for empty nose syndrome: A case report.

Lee DW(1), Kim JY(1), Kwon JH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kosin University College 
of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kosin University College 
of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: entkwon@hanmail.net.

Empty nose syndrome (ENS) is a relatively rare disease found in patients who 
have undergone sinonasal surgery, characterized by excessive reduction of the 
turbinate, causing intranasal turbulence and loss of receptors within the nasal 
mucosa. Patients diagnosed with the disease usually experience symptoms 
including dryness of the nose, nasal pain, paradoxical nasal obstruction, and 
crusts in the nasal cavity. ENS can be treated with conservative care such as 
nasal irrigation or nasal moisturizers. Accurate efficacy of surgical treatment 
of ENS is often difficult to predict and is accompanied by operational obstacles 
and complications. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) has recently gained attention as a 
regenerative therapy in several medical fields. We present two cases of ENS 
treated by injection of PRP as a simple and less invasive method, and describe 
its efficacy with nasal endoscopy and subjective questionnaires.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2022.103750
PMID: 36630732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.