---
reference_id: "PMID:36634299"
title: Cancer Risk Associated With PTEN Pathogenic Variants Identified Using Multigene Hereditary Cancer Panel Testing.
authors:
- Cummings S
- Alfonso A
- Hughes E
- Kucera M
- Mabey B
- Singh N
- Eng C
journal: JCO Precis Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1200/PO.22.00415
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Breast Neoplasms/genetics
- Phenotype
- Thyroid Neoplasms
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer Risk Associated With PTEN Pathogenic Variants Identified Using Multigene Hereditary Cancer Panel Testing.
**Authors:** Cummings S, Alfonso A, Hughes E, Kucera M, Mabey B, Singh N, Eng C
**Journal:** JCO Precis Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1200/PO.22.00415](https://doi.org/10.1200/PO.22.00415)

## Content

1. JCO Precis Oncol. 2023 Jan;7:e2200415. doi: 10.1200/PO.22.00415.

Cancer Risk Associated With PTEN Pathogenic Variants Identified Using Multigene 
Hereditary Cancer Panel Testing.

Cummings S(1), Alfonso A(1), Hughes E(1), Kucera M(1), Mabey B(1), Singh N(1), 
Eng C(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Myriad Genetics Inc, Salt Lake City, UT.
(2)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.
(3)Center for Personalized Genetic Healthcare, Cleveland Clinic Community Care, 
Cleveland, OH.
(4)Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.
(5)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, and CASE Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.

PURPOSE: PTEN-associated clinical syndromes such as Cowden syndrome (CS) 
increase cancer risk and have historically been diagnosed based upon phenotypic 
criteria. Because not all patients clinically diagnosed with CS have PTEN 
pathogenic variants (PVs), and not all patients with PTEN PVs have been 
clinically diagnosed with CS, the cancer risk conferred by PTEN PVs calculated 
from cohorts of patients with clinical diagnoses of CS/CS-like phenotypes may be 
inaccurate.
METHODS: We assessed a consecutive cohort of 727,091 individuals tested 
clinically for hereditary cancer risk, with a multigene panel between September 
2013 and February 2022. Multivariable logistic regression models accounting for 
personal and family cancer history, age, sex, and ancestry were used to quantify 
disease risks associated with PTEN PVs.
RESULTS: PTEN PVs were detected in 0.027% (193/727,091) of the study population, 
and were associated with a high risk of female breast cancer (odds ratio [OR], 
7.88; 95% CI, 5.57 to 11.16; P = 2.3 × 10-31), endometrial cancer (OR, 13.51; 
95% CI, 8.77 to 20.83; P = 4.2 × 10-32), thyroid cancer (OR, 4.88; 95% CI, 2.64 
to 9.01; P = 4.0 × 10-7), and colon polyposis (OR, 31.60; CI, 15.60 to 64.02; P 
= 9.0 × 10-22). We observed modest evidence suggesting that PTEN PVs may be 
associated with ovarian cancer risk (OR, 3.77; 95% CI, 1.71 to 8.32; P = 9.9 × 
10-4). Among patients with similar personal/family history and ancestry, every 
5-year increase in age of diagnosis decreased the likelihood of detecting a PTEN 
PV by roughly 60%.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that PTEN PVs are associated with significantly 
increased risk for a range of cancers. Together with the observation that PTEN 
PV carriers had earlier disease onset relative to otherwise comparable 
noncarriers, our results may guide screening protocols, inform risk-management 
strategies, and warrant enhanced surveillance approaches that improve clinical 
outcomes for PTEN PV carriers, regardless of their clinical presentation.

DOI: 10.1200/PO.22.00415
PMCID: PMC9928870
PMID: 36634299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information 
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered 
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I 
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate 
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's 
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
ascopubs.org/po/author-center. Open Payments is a public database containing 
information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed physicians 
(Open Payments). Shelly Cummings Employment: Myriad Genetics Stock and Other 
Ownership Interests: Myriad Genetics Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Myriad 
Genetics Andrew Alfonso Employment: Myriad Genetics Stock and Other Ownership 
Interests: Myriad Genetics Elisha Hughes Employment: Myriad Genetics Stock and 
Other Ownership Interests: Myriad Genetics Brent Mabey Employment: Myriad 
Genetics Stock and Other Ownership Interests: Myriad Genetics Research Funding: 
Myriad Genetics Nanda Singh Employment: Myriad Genetics Stock and Other 
Ownership Interests: Myriad Genetics Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual 
Property: Royalties for gene patents through the University of Utah, my former 
employer Charis Eng Stock and Other Ownership Interests: Family Care Path Inc 
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: I am the inventor of 
MyLegacy/MyFHH (a web-based, patient-entered family health history tool with 
risk algorithms and clinical decision support pushed to the point of care). This 
invention is utlized in Cleveland Clinic spin off company, Family Care Path Inc 
(see above) Uncompensated Relationships: Family Care Path Inc No other potential 
conflicts of interest were reported.