---
reference_id: "PMID:31345641"
title: Molecular epidemiology and intercontinental spread of cholera.
authors:
- Mutreja A
- Dougan G
journal: Vaccine
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.07.038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular epidemiology and intercontinental spread of cholera.
**Authors:** Mutreja A, Dougan G
**Journal:** Vaccine (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.07.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.07.038)

## Content

1. Vaccine. 2020 Feb 29;38 Suppl 1:A46-A51. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.07.038. 
Epub 2019 Jul 22.

Molecular epidemiology and intercontinental spread of cholera.

Mutreja A(1), Dougan G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, United 
Kingdom; Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad, 
Haryana 121001, India; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 
1S, United Kingdom. Electronic address: am872@medschl.cam.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, United 
Kingdom; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1S, United 
Kingdom.

Whole genome sequence analysis has revealed the phylogenetic structure of Vibrio 
cholerae and has shown that the current seventh pandemic is highly clonal, 
emerging from a single source. Such analysis has the potential to become a 
powerful public health tool as we build public sequence databases, and as the 
speed of sequencing and analysis increases. Examples of such studies, as applied 
to different settings of the disease cholera, are described and discussed.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.07.038
PMID: 31345641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that there are no conflict of interest.