---
reference_id: "PMID:38027523"
title: Outcomes of cochlear implantation in 75 patients with auditory neuropathy.
authors:
- Wu J
- Chen J
- Ding Z
- Fan J
- Wang Q
- Dai P
- Han D
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1281884
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of cochlear implantation in 75 patients with auditory neuropathy.
**Authors:** Wu J, Chen J, Ding Z, Fan J, Wang Q, Dai P, Han D
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2023.1281884](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2023.1281884)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2023 Nov 13;17:1281884. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1281884. 
eCollection 2023.

Outcomes of cochlear implantation in 75 patients with auditory neuropathy.

Wu J(#)(1), Chen J(#)(1), Ding Z(1), Fan J(1), Wang Q(1), Dai P(1), Han D(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Lab of Hearing Impairment Science of Ministry of Education, Key Lab of 
Hearing Impairment Prevention and Treatment of Beijing, National Clinical 
Research Center for Otolaryngologic Diseases, College of Otolaryngology Head and 
Neck Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Medical School, Beijing, 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Cochlear implantation (CI) outcomes in patients with auditory 
neuropathy (AN) are variable, which hampers patients' decisions on CI.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to assess the outcomes of CI in individuals diagnosed 
with AN and to examine the various factors that may influence the effectiveness 
of this intervention.
METHODS: A total of 75 patients diagnosed with AN were included in the study. 
The hearing threshold, the score of categories of auditory performance (CAP), 
speech intelligibility rating (SIR), and speech audiometry were tested. Genetic 
testing was conducted by medical exome sequencing in 46 patients.
RESULTS: After CI, the average aided hearing threshold for patients with 
prelingual and post-lingual onset was 38.25 ± 6.63 dB and 32.58 ± 9.26 dB, 
respectively; CAP score improved to 5.52 ± 1.64 (p < 0.001) and 6.00 ± 0.96 
(p < 0.001), respectively; SIR score increased to 3.57 ± 1.22 (p < 0.001) and 
4.15 ± 0.95 (p < 0.001), respectively. Maximum speech recognition ranged from 58 
to 93% for prelingual onset patients and 43 to 98% for those with post-lingual 
onset. Speech outcomes of CI in cases with cochlear nerve (CN) deficiency were 
significantly poorer (p = 0.008). Molecular etiologies, including TWIST1, ACTG1, 
m.A7445G, and a copy-number variant (CNV) carrying ACTB, were related to AN 
here.
CONCLUSION: CI is a viable therapy option for patients with AN; CN deficiency 
might impact outcomes of CI.

Copyright © 2023 Wu, Chen, Ding, Fan, Wang, Dai and Han.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1281884
PMCID: PMC10679445
PMID: 38027523

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.