---
reference_id: "PMID:28911043"
title: "Multidrug-Resistant Candida: Epidemiology, Molecular Mechanisms, and Treatment."
authors:
- Arendrup MC
- Patterson TF
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix131
keywords:
- Animals
- Antifungal Agents/pharmacology
- Azoles/pharmacology
- "Candida/classification, drug effects"
- Candida glabrata/drug effects
- "Candidiasis, Invasive/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- "Critical Illness/epidemiology, therapy"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Drug Resistance, Multiple, Fungal"
- Echinocandins/pharmacology
- Humans
- Microbial Sensitivity Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multidrug-Resistant Candida: Epidemiology, Molecular Mechanisms, and Treatment.
**Authors:** Arendrup MC, Patterson TF
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jix131](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jix131)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2017 Aug 15;216(suppl_3):S445-S451. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix131.

Multidrug-Resistant Candida: Epidemiology, Molecular Mechanisms, and Treatment.

Arendrup MC(1)(2)(3), Patterson TF(4).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Mycology, Statens Serum Institut.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Rigshospitalet.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, San Antonio Center for Medical Mycology, UT 
Health San Antonio, and the South Texas Veterans Health Care System.

Invasive Candida infections remain an important cause of morbidity and 
mortality, especially in hospitalized and immunocompromised or critically ill 
patients. A limited number of antifungal agents from only a few drug classes are 
available to treat patients with these serious infections. Resistance can be 
either intrinsic or acquired. Resistance mechanisms are not exchanged between 
Candida; thus, acquired resistance either emerges in response to an antifungal 
selection pressure in the individual patient or, more rarely, occur due to 
horizontal transmission of resistant strains between patients. Although 
multidrug resistance is uncommon, increasing reports of multidrug resistance to 
the azoles, echinocandins, and polyenes have occurred in several Candida 
species, most notably Candida glabrata and more recently Candida auris. Drivers 
are overall antifungal use, subtherapeutic drug levels at sites of 
infection/colonization, drug sequestration in the biofilm matrix, and, in the 
setting of outbreaks, suboptimal infection control. Moreover, recent research 
suggests that DNA mismatch repair gene mutations may facilitate acquisition of 
resistance mutations in C. glabrata specifically. Diagnosis of 
antifungal-resistant Candida infections is critical to the successful management 
of patients with these infections. Reduction of unnecessary use of antifungals 
via antifungal stewardship is critical to limit multidrug resistance emergence.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix131
PMID: 28911043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]