---
reference_id: "PMID:28982343"
title: "Study of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: 5 Years Retrospective Egyptian Study."
authors:
- Hagag AA
- Badraia IM
- Elfarargy MS
- Abd Elmageed MM
- Abo-Ali EA
journal: Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2174/1871530317666171003160350
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Study of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: 5 Years Retrospective Egyptian Study.
**Authors:** Hagag AA, Badraia IM, Elfarargy MS, Abd Elmageed MM, Abo-Ali EA
**Journal:** Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1871530317666171003160350](https://doi.org/10.2174/1871530317666171003160350)

## Content

1. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets. 2018 Feb 13;18(2):155-162. doi: 
10.2174/1871530317666171003160350.

Study of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency: 5 Years Retrospective 
Egyptian Study.

Hagag AA(1), Badraia IM(1), Elfarargy MS(1), Abd Elmageed MM(1), Abo-Ali EA(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, Gharbia, Egypt.
(2)Public Health Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, Gharbia, 
Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most 
common enzyme deficiency worldwide that causes a spectrum of diseases including 
neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, acute and chronic hemolysis after exposure to 
oxidative stress.
AIM OF THE WORK: This five years retrospective study was carried out to study 
the demographic, clinical and laboratory data of 1000 patients with G6PD 
deficiency anemia registered in Hematology Unit, Pediatric Department, Tanta 
University Hospital.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Data were collected from patient's files, from November 
2011 to November 2016, using the pre-designed questionnaires to obtain the 
complete history, clinical presentation and laboratory investigations including 
the complete blood count, red blood cells morphology, liver and renal functions 
and quantitative assay of G6PD enzyme activity by spectrophotometric method.
RESULTS: Males were more commonly affected than females (932 males versus 68 
females). The highest prevalence of hemolytic crisis in G6PD deficiency patients 
was found within the age group of 1-3 years (920 patients; 92%) with mean age of 
the first presentation of 22.8±15.54 months. Patients presented mainly with 
pallor (1000 patients; 100%), dark red urine (896 patients; 89.6%) and jaundice 
(878 patients; 87.8%) after 24-72 hours of exposure to the precipitating factors 
(mean: 36±17.73 hours). Diets were the most common precipitating factor of 
hemolysis in patients with G6PD deficiency (834 patients; 83.4% of studied 
cases) especially fava beans (326 patients; 32.6%) and falafel (194 patients; 
19.4%) which were the most common precipitating food products causing hemolysis 
followed by chick pea (108 patients; 10.8%), broad bean (76 patients; 7.6%), 
green pea (44 patients; 4.4%), pea nuts (38 patients; 3.8%), lentil (28 
patients; 2.8%), and lastly black eyed peas (20 patients; 2 %). Infections were 
the 2nd most common cause of hemolysis (124 patients; 12.4%) including pneumonia 
(34 patients; 3.4%), tonsillitis (32 patients; 3.2%), typhoid fever (28 
patients; 2.8%), hepatitis A (18 patients; 1.8%) and urinary tract infection (12 
patients; 1.2%). Drugs were the least common cause of hemolysis (42 patients; 
4.2%) including diclofenac sodium (24 patients; 2.4%), ibuprofen (8 patients; 
0.8%), acetylsalicylic acid (4 patients; 0.4%), co-trimoxazole (4 patients; 
0.4%) and nitrofurantion (2 patients; 0.2%). There was normocytic normochromic 
anemia with reticulocytosis and Heinz bodies in pre-transfusion complete blood 
picture in all studied cases. G6PD assay show marked decrease in enzyme level at 
time of presentation in all cases with the commonest G6PD enzyme level of 3-4 
U/gm Hb (592 patients; 59.2%).
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS: G6PD deficiency anemia presented mainly with 
pallor, dark red urine and jaundice after exposure to certain diets, drugs and 
diseases and therefore patients with G6PD deficiency should avoid exposure to 
these precipitating factors of hemolysis. We can also recommend large neonatal 
screening programs to detect cases of G6PD deficiency before the occurrence of 
acute hemolysis and molecular studies to detect G6PD enzyme variant in Egypt.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1871530317666171003160350
PMID: 28982343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]