---
reference_id: "PMID:1303629"
title: Birth prevalence study of the Apert syndrome.
authors:
- Cohen MM Jr
- Kreiborg S
- Lammer EJ
- Cordero JF
- Mastroiacovo P
- Erickson JD
- Roeper P
- Martínez-Frías ML
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320420505
keywords:
- Acrocephalosyndactylia/epidemiology
- California/epidemiology
- Denmark/epidemiology
- Georgia/epidemiology
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Italy/epidemiology
- Mutation/genetics
- Nebraska/epidemiology
- Population Surveillance
- Prevalence
- Spain/epidemiology
- Washington/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Birth prevalence study of the Apert syndrome.
**Authors:** Cohen MM Jr, Kreiborg S, Lammer EJ, Cordero JF, Mastroiacovo P, Erickson JD, Roeper P, Martínez-Frías ML
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320420505](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320420505)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1992 Mar 1;42(5):655-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320420505.

Birth prevalence study of the Apert syndrome.

Cohen MM Jr(1), Kreiborg S, Lammer EJ, Cordero JF, Mastroiacovo P, Erickson JD, 
Roeper P, Martínez-Frías ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Biology, Faculty of Dentistry, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet. 1993 Feb 1;45(3):392-3. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320450322.

Estimates of the Apert syndrome birth prevalence and the mutation rate are 
reported for Washington State, Nebraska, Denmark, Italy, Spain, Atlanta, and 
Northern California. Data were pooled to increase the number of Apert births (n 
= 57) and produce a more stable birth prevalence estimate. Birth prevalence of 
the Apert syndrome was calculated to be approximately 15.5/1,000,000 births, 
which is twice the rate determined in earlier studies. The major reason appears 
to be incomplete ascertainment in the earlier studies. The similarity of the 
point estimates and the narrow bounds of the confidence limits in the present 
study suggest that the birth prevalence of the Apert syndrome over different 
populations is fairly uniform. The mutation rate was calculated to be 7.8 x 
10(-6) per gene per generation. Apert syndrome accounts for about 4.5% of all 
cases of craniosynostosis. The mortality rate appears to be increased compared 
to that experienced in the general population; however, further study of the 
problem is necessary.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320420505
PMID: 1303629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]