---
reference_id: "PMID:8723096"
title: Phenotypic expressions of a Gly 154Arg mutation in type II collagen in two unrelated patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD).
authors:
- Kaitila I
- Körkkö J
- Marttinen E
- Ala-Kokko L
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1996'
doi: "10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:1<111::AID-AJMG21>3.0.CO;2-Q"
keywords:
- Adult
- Aging
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Arginine
- Base Sequence
- Bone Development
- Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging
- Collagen/genetics
- Female
- Genotype
- Glycine
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/classification, genetics, physiopathology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Radiography
- Spine/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic expressions of a Gly 154Arg mutation in type II collagen in two unrelated patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD).
**Authors:** Kaitila I, Körkkö J, Marttinen E, Ala-Kokko L
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:1<111::AID-AJMG21>3.0.CO;2-Q](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:1<111::AID-AJMG21>3.0.CO;2-Q)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1996 May 3;63(1):111-22. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:1<111::AID-AJMG21>3.0.CO;2-Q.

Phenotypic expressions of a Gly 154Arg mutation in type II collagen in two 
unrelated patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD).

Kaitila I(1), Körkkö J, Marttinen E, Ala-Kokko L.

Author information:
(1)Department Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Finland.

Type II collagenopathies consist of chondrodysplasias ranging from lethal to 
mild in severity. A large number of mutations has been found in the COL2A1 gene. 
Glycine substitutions have been the most common types of mutation. 
Genotype-phenotype correlations in type II collagenopathies have not been 
established, partly because of insufficient clinical and radiographic 
description of the patients. We found a glycine-to-arginine substitution at 
position 154 in type II collagen in two unrelated isolated propositi with 
spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia and provide a comparative clinical and 
radiographic analysis from birth to young adulthood for this condition. The 
clinical phenotype was disproportionate short stature with varus/valgus 
deformities of the lower limbs requiring corrective osteotomies, and lumbar 
lordosis. The skeletal radiographs showed an evolution from short tubular bones, 
delayed epiphyseal development, and mild vertebral involvement to severe 
metaphyseal dysplasia with dappling irregularities, and hip "dysplasia." The 
metaphyseal abnormalities disappeared by adulthood.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960503)63:1<111::AID-AJMG21>3.0.CO;2-Q
PMID: 8723096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]