---
reference_id: "PMID:23340379"
title: Progressive hereditary hearing impairment caused by a MYO6 mutation resembles presbyacusis.
authors:
- Oonk AM
- Leijendeckers JM
- Lammers EM
- Weegerink NJ
- Oostrik J
- Beynon AJ
- Huygen PL
- Kunst HP
- Kremer H
- Snik AF
- Pennings RJ
journal: Hear Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.12.015
keywords:
- Acoustic Stimulation
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Audiometry, Pure-Tone"
- "Audiometry, Speech"
- Auditory Threshold
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Hearing/genetics
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics, physiopathology, psychology"
- Heredity
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Myosin Heavy Chains/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Presbycusis/genetics, physiopathology, psychology"
- Speech Perception
- "Vestibule, Labyrinth/physiopathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progressive hereditary hearing impairment caused by a MYO6 mutation resembles presbyacusis.
**Authors:** Oonk AM, Leijendeckers JM, Lammers EM, Weegerink NJ, Oostrik J, Beynon AJ, Huygen PL, Kunst HP, Kremer H, Snik AF, Pennings RJ
**Journal:** Hear Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heares.2012.12.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2012.12.015)

## Content

1. Hear Res. 2013 May;299:88-98. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.12.015. Epub 2013 Jan
 20.

Progressive hereditary hearing impairment caused by a MYO6 mutation resembles
presbyacusis.

Oonk AM(1), Leijendeckers JM, Lammers EM, Weegerink NJ, Oostrik J, Beynon AJ,
Huygen PL, Kunst HP, Kremer H, Snik AF, Pennings RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing & Genes, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
a.oonk@kno.umcn.nl

Since deafness is the most common sensorineural disorder in humans, better
understanding of the underlying causes is necessary to improve counseling and
rehabilitation. A Dutch family with autosomal dominantly inherited sensorineural
hearing loss was clinically and genetically assessed. The MYO6 gene was selected
to be sequenced because of similarities with other, previously described DFNA22
phenotypes and a pathogenic c.3610C > T (p.R1204W) mutation was found to
co-segregate with the disease. This missense mutation results in a flat
configured audiogram with a mild hearing loss, which becomes severe to profound
and gently to steeply downsloping later in life. The age-related typical
audiograms (ARTA) constructed for this family resemble presbyacusis. Speech
audiometry and results of loudness scaling support the hypothesis that the
phenotype of this specific MYO6 mutation mimics presbyacusis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.12.015
PMID: 23340379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
