---
reference_id: "PMID:9295069"
title: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a child with the CHIME neuroectodermal dysplasia syndrome.
authors:
- Schnur RE
- Greenbaum BH
- Heymann WR
- Christensen K
- Buck AS
- Reid CS
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1997'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a child with the CHIME neuroectodermal dysplasia syndrome.
**Authors:** Schnur RE, Greenbaum BH, Heymann WR, Christensen K, Buck AS, Reid CS
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1997)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1997 Oct 3;72(1):24-9.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a child with the CHIME neuroectodermal dysplasia 
syndrome.

Schnur RE(1), Greenbaum BH, Heymann WR, Christensen K, Buck AS, Reid CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA. schnurre@umdnj.edu

The "CHIME" syndrome (MIM#280000) is a rare neuroectodermal disorder comprised 
of Colobomas of the eye, Heart defects, Ichthyosiform dermatosis, Mental 
retardation, and Ear defects. We report on the sixth child with this syndrome 
and the first of these to develop acute lymphoblastic leukemia at age 4 1/2 
years. Her major problems included a migratory ichthyosiform dermatosis, 
multiple skin infections and infestations, bilateral retinal coloboma, 
developmental delay, seizures, infantile macrosomia, facial anomalies, a 
duplicated renal collecting system, and conductive hearing loss. Histologic 
examination of the skin demonstrated findings of an epidermal nevus with deep 
rete pegs, hyperkeratosis, and a markedly increased granular layer. The cause of 
the CHIME syndrome is unknown, but the disorder is easily recognized because of 
the striking phenotype. The diagnosis is important to make because of the 
potential for associated congenital heart disease, neurologic compromise, 
possible autosomal recessive inheritance, and possible association with 
malignancy.

PMID: 9295069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]