---
reference_id: "PMID:30306257"
title: "Macrophage-microbe interaction: lessons learned from the pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis."
authors:
- BoseDasgupta S
- Pieters J
journal: Semin Immunopathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00281-018-0710-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Macrophage-microbe interaction: lessons learned from the pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
**Authors:** BoseDasgupta S, Pieters J
**Journal:** Semin Immunopathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00281-018-0710-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00281-018-0710-0)

## Content

1. Semin Immunopathol. 2018 Nov;40(6):577-591. doi: 10.1007/s00281-018-0710-0.
Epub  2018 Oct 10.

Macrophage-microbe interaction: lessons learned from the pathogen Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis.

BoseDasgupta S(1), Pieters J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
Kharagpur, West Bengal, 721302, India. somdeb@iitkgp.ac.in.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Biozentrum, University of Basel, 50-70 
Klingelbergstrasse, 4056, Basel, Switzerland. jean.pieters@unibas.ch.

Macrophages, being the cornerstone of the immune system, have adapted the 
ancient nutrient acquisition mechanism of phagocytosis to engulf various 
infectious organisms thereby helping to orchestrate an appropriate host 
response. Phagocytosis refers to the process of internalization and degradation 
of particulate material, damaged and senescent cells and microorganisms by 
specialized cells, after which the vesicle containing the ingested particle, the 
phagosome, matures into acidic phagolysosomes upon fusion with hydrolytic 
enzyme-containing lysosomes. The destructive power of the macrophage is further 
exacerbated through the induction of macrophage activation upon a variety of 
inflammatory stimuli. Despite being the end-point for many phagocytosed 
microbes, the macrophage can also serve as an intracellular survival niche for a 
number of intracellular microorganisms. One microbe that is particularly 
successful at surviving within macrophages is the pathogen Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, which can efficiently manipulate the macrophage at several levels, 
including modulation of the phagocytic pathway as well as interfering with a 
number of immune activation pathways that normally would lead to eradication of 
the internalized bacilli. M. tuberculosis excels at circumventing destruction 
within macrophages, thus establishing itself successfully for prolonged times 
within the macrophage. In this contribution, we describe a number of general 
features of macrophages in the context of their function to clear an infection, 
and highlight the strategies employed by M. tuberculosis to counter macrophage 
attack. Interestingly, research on the evasion tactics employed by M. 
tuberculosis within macrophages not only helps to design strategies to curb 
tuberculosis, but also allows a better understanding of host cell biology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00281-018-0710-0
PMID: 30306257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]