---
reference_id: "PMID:25102574"
title: Identifying the causes of contact dermatitis.
authors:
- Jones R
- Horn HM
journal: Practitioner
year: '2014'
keywords:
- Allergens/adverse effects
- "Dermatitis, Allergic Contact/diagnosis, etiology, immunology"
- "Dermatitis, Irritant/diagnosis, etiology"
- Humans
- Irritants/adverse effects
- Skin Tests
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identifying the causes of contact dermatitis.
**Authors:** Jones R, Horn HM
**Journal:** Practitioner (2014)

## Content

1. Practitioner. 2014 Jun;258(1772):27-31, 3.

Identifying the causes of contact dermatitis.

Jones R, Horn HM.

Contact dermatitis results from skin contact with an exogenous substance. It can 
be caused by direct contact, airborne particles, vapours or light. Individuals 
of any age can be affected. The two most common variants are irritant contact 
dermatitis (ICD) and allergic contact dermatitis (ACD). ICD is more common and 
has a worse prognosis. Other less common forms of contact dermatitis include 
photocontact allergy and, in food handlers, protein contact dermatitis. ICD is a 
form of eczema and is induced by direct inflammatory pathways without prior 
sensitisation. Classical ACD is mediated by type 4 cell-mediated immunity. 
Sensitisation occurs within 5 to 16 days of skin contact with a potential 
allergen but at this first exposure there is no inflammation. Frequent exposure 
and high concentrations of potential allergens increase the risk of 
sensitisation. If eczema is recurrent/persistent, or occurs in an individual 
with no previous history of eczema, contact dermatitis should be considered. 
Dorsal aspects of the hands are most often affected by ICD, usually with 
involvement of the finger webs. Cumulative effects of water, soaps and 
detergents are the most common cause of ICD which affects the hands more often 
than any other site. Nickel, fragrances, rubber accelerators and biocides are 
the most common sensitisers in ACD. Patients with leg ulcers and stasis eczema 
are at especially high risk of developing allergies to ingredients of their 
topical treatments, dressings and bandages. If ACD is suspected the patient 
should be referred to secondary care for patch testing. Age should not be a 
deterrent to patch testing. Accurate diagnosis, avoidance of identified 
allergens and protection from irritants are the key to successful treatment.

PMID: 25102574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]