---
reference_id: "PMID:29958291"
title: Enhancing radiosensitivity of melanoma cells through very high dose rate pulses released by a plasma focus device.
authors:
- Buontempo F
- Orsini E
- Zironi I
- Isolan L
- Cappellini A
- Rapino S
- Tartari A
- Mostacci D
- Cucchi G
- Martelli AM
- Sumini M
- Castellani G
journal: PLoS One
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0199312
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enhancing radiosensitivity of melanoma cells through very high dose rate pulses released by a plasma focus device.
**Authors:** Buontempo F, Orsini E, Zironi I, Isolan L, Cappellini A, Rapino S, Tartari A, Mostacci D, Cucchi G, Martelli AM, Sumini M, Castellani G
**Journal:** PLoS One (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0199312](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0199312)

## Content

1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

PLoS One. 2018 Jun 29;13(6):e0199312. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0199312. 
eCollection 2018.

Enhancing radiosensitivity of melanoma cells through very high dose rate pulses 
released by a plasma focus device.

Buontempo F(1), Orsini E(1), Zironi I(2)(3)(4), Isolan L(5)(6), Cappellini A(7), 
Rapino S(4)(8), Tartari A(5), Mostacci D(5), Cucchi G(5), Martelli AM(1), Sumini 
M(3)(5), Castellani G(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Bologna, Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, 
Bologna, Italy.
(2)University of Bologna, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Bologna, Italy.
(3)University of Bologna, Department of Chemistry "G. Ciamician", Bologna, 
Italy.
(4)Interdepartmental Centre "L. Galvani" (CIG) for integrated studies of 
bioinformatics, biophysics and biocomplexity, Bologna, Italy.
(5)European Institute of Oncology and Monzino Cardiac Center Foundation 
(IEO-CCM), Milano, Italy.
(6)University of Bologna, Department of Industrial Engineering, Bologna, Italy.
(7)University of Cassino and Southern Lazio, Department of Human Social and 
Health Sciences, Cassino, Italy.
(8)National Institute for Nuclear Physics (INFN), Bologna, Italy.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2018 Sep 21;13(9):e0204692. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204692.

Retraction in
    PLoS One. 2023 Nov 14;18(11):e0294549. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0294549.

Radiation therapy is a useful and standard tumor treatment strategy. Despite 
recent advances in delivery of ionizing radiation, survival rates for some 
cancer patients are still low because of recurrence and radioresistance. This is 
why many novel approaches have been explored to improve radiotherapy outcome. 
Some strategies are focused on enhancement of accuracy in ionizing radiation 
delivery and on the generation of greater radiation beams, for example with a 
higher dose rate. In the present study we proposed an in vitro research of the 
biological effects of very high dose rate beam on SK-Mel28 and A375, two 
radioresistant human melanoma cell lines. The beam was delivered by a pulsed 
plasma device, a "Mather type" Plasma Focus for medical applications. We 
hypothesized that this pulsed X-rays generator is significantly more effective 
to impair melanoma cells survival compared to conventional X-ray tube. Very high 
dose rate treatments were able to reduce clonogenic efficiency of SK-Mel28 and 
A375 more than the X-ray tube and to induce a greater, less easy-to-repair DNA 
double-strand breaks. Very little is known about biological consequences of such 
dose rate. Our characterization is preliminary but is the first step toward 
future clinical considerations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0199312
PMCID: PMC6025851
PMID: 29958291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.