---
reference_id: "PMID:20362275"
title: Mutations in the gene encoding the RER protein FKBP65 cause autosomal-recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Alanay Y
- Avaygan H
- Camacho N
- Utine GE
- Boduroglu K
- Aktas D
- Alikasifoglu M
- Tuncbilek E
- Orhan D
- Bakar FT
- Zabel B
- Superti-Furga A
- Bruckner-Tuderman L
- Curry CJ
- Pyott S
- Byers PH
- Eyre DR
- Baldridge D
- Lee B
- Merrill AE
- Davis EC
- Cohn DH
- Akarsu N
- Krakow D
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.022
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Skin/pathology
- Tacrolimus Binding Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding the RER protein FKBP65 cause autosomal-recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Alanay Y, Avaygan H, Camacho N, Utine GE, Boduroglu K, Aktas D, Alikasifoglu M, Tuncbilek E, Orhan D, Bakar FT, Zabel B, Superti-Furga A, Bruckner-Tuderman L, Curry CJ, Pyott S, Byers PH, Eyre DR, Baldridge D, Lee B, Merrill AE, Davis EC, Cohn DH, Akarsu N, Krakow D
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.022)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Apr 9;86(4):551-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.022. Epub 
2010 Apr 1.

Mutations in the gene encoding the RER protein FKBP65 cause autosomal-recessive 
osteogenesis imperfecta.

Alanay Y(1), Avaygan H, Camacho N, Utine GE, Boduroglu K, Aktas D, Alikasifoglu 
M, Tuncbilek E, Orhan D, Bakar FT, Zabel B, Superti-Furga A, Bruckner-Tuderman 
L, Curry CJ, Pyott S, Byers PH, Eyre DR, Baldridge D, Lee B, Merrill AE, Davis 
EC, Cohn DH, Akarsu N, Krakow D.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University 
Medical Faculty, Ankara 06100, Turkey.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Oct 8;87(4):572-3.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Aug 13;87(2):306-7; author reply 308. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.020.

Osteogenesis imperfecta is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous brittle 
bone disorder that results from defects in the synthesis, structure, or 
posttranslational modification of type I procollagen. Dominant forms of OI 
result from mutations in COL1A1 or COL1A2, which encode the chains of the type I 
procollagen heterotrimer. The mildest form of OI typically results from 
diminished synthesis of structurally normal type I procollagen, whereas 
moderately severe to lethal forms of OI usually result from structural defects 
in one of the type I procollagen chains. Recessively inherited OI, usually 
phenotypically severe, has recently been shown to result from defects in the 
prolyl-3-hydroxylase complex that lead to the absence of a single 
3-hydroxyproline at residue 986 of the alpha1(I) triple helical domain. We 
studied a cohort of five consanguineous Turkish families, originating from the 
Black Sea region of Turkey, with moderately severe recessively inherited OI and 
identified a novel locus for OI on chromosome 17. In these families, and in a 
Mexican-American family, homozygosity for mutations in FKBP10, which encodes 
FKBP65, a chaperone that participates in type I procollagen folding, was 
identified. Further, we determined that FKBP10 mutations affect type I 
procollagen secretion. These findings identify a previously unrecognized 
mechanism in the pathogenesis of OI.

(c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.022
PMCID: PMC2850430
PMID: 20362275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]