---
reference_id: "PMID:36055214"
title: Bi-allelic LETM1 variants perturb mitochondrial ion homeostasis leading to a clinical spectrum with predominant nervous system involvement.
authors:
- Kaiyrzhanov R
- Mohammed SEM
- Maroofian R
- Husain RA
- Catania A
- Torraco A
- Alahmad A
- Dutra-Clarke M
- Grønborg S
- Sudarsanam A
- Vogt J
- Arrigoni F
- Baptista J
- Haider S
- Feichtinger RG
- Bernardi P
- Zulian A
- Gusic M
- Efthymiou S
- Bai R
- Bibi F
- Horga A
- Martinez-Agosto JA
- Lam A
- Manole A
- Rodriguez DP
- Durigon R
- Pyle A
- Albash B
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Murphy D
- Martinelli D
- Bugiardini E
- Allis K
- Lamperti C
- Reipert S
- Risom L
- Laugwitz L
- Di Nottia M
- McFarland R
- Vilarinho L
- Hanna M
- Prokisch H
- Mayr JA
- Bertini ES
- Ghezzi D
- Østergaard E
- Wortmann SB
- Carrozzo R
- Haack TB
- Taylor RW
- Spinazzola A
- Nowikovsky K
- Houlden H
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.07.007
keywords:
- Calcium-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Homeostasis/genetics
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Mitochondria/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Nervous System/metabolism
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bi-allelic LETM1 variants perturb mitochondrial ion homeostasis leading to a clinical spectrum with predominant nervous system involvement.
**Authors:** Kaiyrzhanov R, Mohammed SEM, Maroofian R, Husain RA, Catania A, Torraco A, Alahmad A, Dutra-Clarke M, Grønborg S, Sudarsanam A, Vogt J, Arrigoni F, Baptista J, Haider S, Feichtinger RG, Bernardi P, Zulian A, Gusic M, Efthymiou S, Bai R, Bibi F, Horga A, Martinez-Agosto JA, Lam A, Manole A, Rodriguez DP, Durigon R, Pyle A, Albash B, Dionisi-Vici C, Murphy D, Martinelli D, Bugiardini E, Allis K, Lamperti C, Reipert S, Risom L, Laugwitz L, Di Nottia M, McFarland R, Vilarinho L, Hanna M, Prokisch H, Mayr JA, Bertini ES, Ghezzi D, Østergaard E, Wortmann SB, Carrozzo R, Haack TB, Taylor RW, Spinazzola A, Nowikovsky K, Houlden H
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.07.007)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2022 Sep 1;109(9):1692-1712. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.07.007.

Bi-allelic LETM1 variants perturb mitochondrial ion homeostasis leading to a
clinical spectrum with predominant nervous system involvement.

Kaiyrzhanov R(1), Mohammed SEM(2), Maroofian R(1), Husain RA(3), Catania A(4),
Torraco A(5), Alahmad A(6), Dutra-Clarke M(7), Grønborg S(8), Sudarsanam A(9),
Vogt J(9), Arrigoni F(10), Baptista J(11), Haider S(12), Feichtinger RG(13),
Bernardi P(14), Zulian A(14), Gusic M(15), Efthymiou S(1), Bai R(16), Bibi
F(17), Horga A(18), Martinez-Agosto JA(19), Lam A(20), Manole A(1), Rodriguez
DP(21), Durigon R(21), Pyle A(22), Albash B(23), Dionisi-Vici C(24), Murphy
D(25), Martinelli D(24), Bugiardini E(1), Allis K(16), Lamperti C(4), Reipert
S(26), Risom L(27), Laugwitz L(28), Di Nottia M(5), McFarland R(29), Vilarinho
L(30), Hanna M(1), Prokisch H(31), Mayr JA(13), Bertini ES(5), Ghezzi D(32),
Østergaard E(33), Wortmann SB(34), Carrozzo R(5), Haack TB(35), Taylor RW(29),
Spinazzola A(21), Nowikovsky K(36), Houlden H(37).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, University College London, Queen
Square, Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Physiology, Pathophysiology
and Biophysics, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna 1210, Austria.
(3)Department of Neuropediatrics, Jena University Hospital, Jena 07747, Germany;
Center for Rare Diseases, Jena University Hospital, Jena 07747, Germany.
(4)Unit of Medical Genetics and Neurogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan 20126, Italy.
(5)Unit of Muscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Laboratory of Molecular
Medicine, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome 00146, Italy.
(6)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Translational and Clinical
Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle
Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK; Kuwait Medical Genetics Centre, Al-Sabah Medical Area
80901, Kuwait.
(7)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School
of Medicine, the University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA.
(8)Center for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Department of
Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9,
Copenhagen 2100, Denmark.
(9)West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women's and Children's
Hospital, Birmingham B15 2TG, UK.
(10)Paediatric Radiology and Neuroradiology Department, V. Buzzi Children's
Hospital, Milan 20154, Italy.
(11)Peninsula Medical School, Faculty of Health, University of Plymouth,
Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK.
(12)Paediatrics Wah Medical College NUMS, Wah Cantonment, Punjab 44000,
Pakistan.
(13)University Children's Hospital, Salzburger Landeskliniken (SALK) and
Paracelsus Medical University (PMU), Salzburg 5020, Austria.
(14)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Via Ugo Bassi 58/B,
Padova 35131, Italy.
(15)Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg 85764,
Germany; DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Munich
Heart Alliance, Munich 81675, Germany; Institute of Human Genetics, Technical
University of Munich, Munich 81675, Germany.
(16)GeneDx Inc, Gaithersburg, MD 20877, USA.
(17)Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Pir Mehar Ali Shah Arid
Agriculture University, Rawalpindi 44000, Pakistan.
(18)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, University College London, Queen
Square, Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK; Neuromuscular Diseases
Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital Clinico San Carlos and San Carlos Health
Research Institute (IdISSC), Madrid 28040, Spain.
(19)Department of Human Genetics, Division of Medical Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(20)Neurometabolic Unit, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery,
London, UK; Department of Chemical Pathology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, WC1N
3BG London, UK.
(21)Department of Clinical Movement Neurosciences, Royal Free Campus, University
College of London, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(22)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Translational and Clinical
Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle
Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(23)Kuwait Medical Genetics Centre, Al-Sabah Medical Area 80901, Kuwait.
(24)Division of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome 00146,
Italy.
(25)Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences, UCL Queen Square
Institute of Neurology, University College London, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(26)Core Facility of Cell Imaging and Ultrastructure Research, University of
Vienna, Djerassiplatz 1, 1030 Wien, Austria.
(27)Department of Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet
Blegdamsvej, Copenhagen 2100, Denmark.
(28)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tuebingen,
72076 Tübingen, Germany; Department of Neuropediatrics, Developmental Neurology
and Social Pediatrics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen 72076, Germany.
(29)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Translational and Clinical
Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle
Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK; NHS Highly Specialised Service for Rare Mitochondrial
Disorders, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon
Tyne NE1 4LP, UK.
(30)Unit of Neonatal Screening, Metabolism and Genetics, Department of Human
Genetics, National Institute of Health Dr Ricardo Jorge, Porto 4000-055,
Portugal.
(31)Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg 85764,
Germany; Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich, Munich
81675, Germany.
(32)Unit of Medical Genetics and Neurogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan 20126, Italy; Department of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, University of Milan, Milan 20122, Italy.
(33)Department of Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet
Blegdamsvej, Copenhagen 2100, Denmark; Institute for Clinical Medicine,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark.
(34)University Children's Hospital, Salzburger Landeskliniken (SALK) and
Paracelsus Medical University (PMU), Salzburg 5020, Austria; Institute of
Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg 85764, Germany; Institute
of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich, Munich 81675, Germany;
Radboud Center for Mitochondrial Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Amalia
Children's Hospital, Radboudumc, Nijmegen 6525 EZ, the Netherlands.
(35)Department of Neuropediatrics, Developmental Neurology and Social
Pediatrics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen 72076, Germany; Centre for Rare
Diseases, University of Tuebingen, Tübingen 72076, Germany.
(36)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Physiology, Pathophysiology
and Biophysics, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna 1210, Austria;
Department of Internal Medicine I, ASCTR and Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna 1090, Austria. Electronic address:
karin.nowikovsky@vetmeduni.ac.at.
(37)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, University College London, Queen
Square, Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK. Electronic address:
h.houlden@ucl.ac.uk.

Leucine zipper-EF-hand containing transmembrane protein 1 (LETM1) encodes an
inner mitochondrial membrane protein with an osmoregulatory function controlling
mitochondrial volume and ion homeostasis. The putative association of LETM1 with
a human disease was initially suggested in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, a disorder
that results from de novo monoallelic deletion of chromosome 4p16.3, a region
encompassing LETM1. Utilizing exome sequencing and international gene-matching
efforts, we have identified 18 affected individuals from 11 unrelated families
harboring ultra-rare bi-allelic missense and loss-of-function LETM1 variants and
clinical presentations highly suggestive of mitochondrial disease. These
manifested as a spectrum of predominantly infantile-onset (14/18, 78%) and
variably progressive neurological, metabolic, and dysmorphic symptoms, plus
multiple organ dysfunction associated with neurodegeneration. The common
features included respiratory chain complex deficiencies (100%), global
developmental delay (94%), optic atrophy (83%), sensorineural hearing loss
(78%), and cerebellar ataxia (78%) followed by epilepsy (67%), spasticity (53%),
and myopathy (50%). Other features included bilateral cataracts (42%),
cardiomyopathy (36%), and diabetes (27%). To better understand the pathogenic
mechanism of the identified LETM1 variants, we performed biochemical and
morphological studies on mitochondrial K+/H+ exchange activity, proteins, and
shape in proband-derived fibroblasts and muscles and in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, which is an important model organism for mitochondrial osmotic
regulation. Our results demonstrate that bi-allelic LETM1 variants are
associated with defective mitochondrial K+ efflux, swollen mitochondrial matrix
structures, and loss of important mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation
protein components, thus highlighting the implication of perturbed mitochondrial
osmoregulation caused by LETM1 variants in neurological and mitochondrial
pathologies.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.07.007
PMCID: PMC9502063
PMID: 36055214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
