---
reference_id: "PMID:36670079"
title: Clinical and genetic findings in Chinese families with congenital ectopia lentis.
authors:
- Liu X
- Niu L
- Zhang L
- Jiang L
- Liu K
- Wu X
- Liu X
- Wang J
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2140
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic findings in Chinese families with congenital ectopia lentis.
**Authors:** Liu X, Niu L, Zhang L, Jiang L, Liu K, Wu X, Liu X, Wang J
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.2140](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.2140)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2023 May;11(5):e2140. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2140. Epub 2023
 Jan 20.

Clinical and genetic findings in Chinese families with congenital ectopia 
lentis.

Liu X(1), Niu L(2), Zhang L(3), Jiang L(1), Liu K(2), Wu X(3), Liu X(1), Wang 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Eye Hospital, Jinan University, Shenzhen Eye Institute, Shenzhen, 
Guangdong, China.
(2)Shenzhen Institute of Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital 
of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
China.
(3)Postgraduate Training Base of Jinzhou Medical University, Shenzhen Key 
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Shenzhen Eye Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: Congenital ectopia lentis (EL) refers to the congenital dysplasia or 
weakness of the lens suspensory ligament, resulting in an abnormal position of 
the crystalline lens, which can appear as isolated EL or as an ocular 
manifestation of a syndrome, such as the Marfan syndrome. The fibrillin-1 
protein encoded by the FBN1 gene is an essential component of the lens zonules. 
Mutations in FBN1 are the leading causes of congenital EL and Marfan syndrome. 
Owing to the complexity and individual heterogeneity of FBN1 gene mutations, the 
correlation between FBN1 mutation characteristics and various clinical 
phenotypes remains unclear.
METHODS: This study describes the clinical characteristics and identifies 
possible causative genes in eight families with Marfan syndrome or isolated EL 
using Sanger and whole-exome sequencing.
RESULTS: Eight FBN1 mutations were identified in these families, of which three 
(c.5065G > C, c.1600 T > A, and c.2210G > C) are reported for the first time. 
Based on in silico analyses, we hypothesized that these mutations may be 
pathogenic by affecting the fibrillin-1 protein structure and function.
CONCLUSION: These findings expand the number of known mutations involved in EL 
and provide a reference for the research on their genotype and phenotype 
associations.

© 2023 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2140
PMCID: PMC10178797
PMID: 36670079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.