---
reference_id: "PMID:38465699"
title: "Visual snow syndrome: recent advances in understanding the pathophysiology and potential treatment approaches."
authors:
- Aeschlimann SA
- Klein A
- Schankin CJ
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000001258
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual snow syndrome: recent advances in understanding the pathophysiology and potential treatment approaches.
**Authors:** Aeschlimann SA, Klein A, Schankin CJ
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WCO.0000000000001258](https://doi.org/10.1097/WCO.0000000000001258)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2024 Jun 1;37(3):283-288. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000001258.
 Epub 2024 Mar 11.

Visual snow syndrome: recent advances in understanding the pathophysiology and 
potential treatment approaches.

Aeschlimann SA(1), Klein A, Schankin CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Visual snow syndrome (VSS) is a disorder characterized by 
persistent visual disturbances, including the visual snow phenomenon, 
palinopsia, heightened perception of entoptic phenomena, impaired night vision, 
and photophobia. The purpose of this review is to provide an update on recent 
findings over the past 18 months in VSS research and to summarize the current 
state of treatment approaches.
RECENT FINDINGS: Electrophysiological studies have revealed cortical 
hyperresponsivity in visual brain areas, imaging studies demonstrated 
microstructural and functional connectivity alterations in multiple cortical and 
thalamic regions and investigated glutamatergic and serotoninergic 
neurotransmission. These findings suggest that VSS might be a network 
disorder.Only few treatment studies are currently available demonstrating 
limited response to medication and even worsening or triggering of visual 
symptoms by certain antidepressants. Promising nonpharmacological treatments 
include mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, the use of chromatic filters, and 
research on visual noise adaption and neuro-optometric visual rehabilitation 
therapy (NORT). However, the level of evidence is still low and further research 
is needed including larger trials and involving objective measures of individual 
dysfunction.
SUMMARY: Although there has been recent progress, we still have not fully 
understood the nature of VSS. Further research is needed on a clinical and 
pathophysiological level to successfully treat the condition.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000001258
PMCID: PMC11064904
PMID: 38465699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Christoph J. Schankin: Consulting, Advisory 
Boards, Speaker, Travel Sup-port for/from Abbvie, Allergan, Almirall, Amgen, Eli 
Lilly, Grünenthal, Lund-beck, MindMed, Novartis, Pfizer, TEVA Pharmaceuticals. 
Part-time employee at Zynnon. The remaining authors have no conflicts of 
interest.