---
reference_id: "PMID:35028497"
title: Cutaneous mastocytosis in childhood.
authors:
- Nemat K
- Abraham S
journal: Allergol Select
year: '2022'
doi: 10.5414/ALX02304E
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous mastocytosis in childhood.
**Authors:** Nemat K, Abraham S
**Journal:** Allergol Select (2022)
**DOI:** [10.5414/ALX02304E](https://doi.org/10.5414/ALX02304E)

## Content

1. Allergol Select. 2022 Jan 5;6:1-10. doi: 10.5414/ALX02304E. eCollection 2022.

Cutaneous mastocytosis in childhood.

Nemat K(1)(2), Abraham S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Praxis für Kinderpneumologie/Allergologie am Kinderzentrum Dresden (Kid).
(2)Interdisziplinäre Pädiatrisch-dermatologische Sprechstunde, Universitäts 
AllergieCentrum (UAC) Dresden, and.
(3)Klinik für Dermatologie, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus Dresden, 
Germany.

Mastocytoses are characterized by clonal proliferation of mast cells in various 
tissues. In childhood, cutaneous mastocytosis (CM) occurs almost exclusively. It 
is confined to the skin, and has a good prognosis. The most common form is the 
maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis (MPCM), formerly called urticaria 
pigmentosa. A distinction is made between a monomorphic variant of MPCM with 
multiple small, roundish maculopapular skin lesions and the - more common - 
polymorphic variant with larger lesions of variable size. One quarter of CM 
diagnosed in childhood are mastocytomas, which often occur solitary or at 
multiple sites. The diffuse variant of CM (DCM), which affects 5% of children 
with CM, should be distinguished from these forms. Systemic mastocytoses (SM) 
with mast cell infiltrates in the bone marrow or other extracutaneous tissues, 
such as the gastrointestinal tract, occur predominantly in adults. The diagnosis 
of CM is usually made clinically: Manifestation in infancy, typical morphology 
and distribution, pathognomonic Darier sign. Basal serum tryptase is determined 
if DCM or systemic mastocytosis are to be diagnosed. Children with mastocytosis 
should be managed in a specialized outpatient clinic. For affected families, 
detailed information about the clinical picture including prognosis assessment 
is essential. Mast cell mediated symptoms are controlled by oral non-sedating 
antihistamines if needed.

© Dustri-Verlag Dr. K. Feistle.

DOI: 10.5414/ALX02304E
PMCID: PMC8750954
PMID: 35028497