---
reference_id: "PMID:38525349"
title: Immune attack on megakaryocytes in immune thrombocytopenia.
authors:
- Petito E
- Gresele P
journal: Res Pract Thromb Haemost
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.rpth.2024.102345
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune attack on megakaryocytes in immune thrombocytopenia.
**Authors:** Petito E, Gresele P
**Journal:** Res Pract Thromb Haemost (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rpth.2024.102345](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rpth.2024.102345)

## Content

1. Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2024 Mar 14;8(1):102345. doi: 
10.1016/j.rpth.2024.102345. eCollection 2024 Jan.

Immune attack on megakaryocytes in immune thrombocytopenia.

Petito E(1), Gresele P(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Internal and Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

A State of the Art lecture titled "Immune Attack on Megakaryocytes in ITP: The 
Role of Megakaryocyte Impairment" was presented at the International Society on 
Thrombosis and Haemostasis Congress in 2023. Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is an 
acquired autoimmune disorder caused by autoantibodies against platelet surface 
glycoproteins that provoke increased clearance of circulating platelets, leading 
to reduced platelet number. However, there is also evidence of a direct effect 
of antiplatelet autoantibodies on bone marrow megakaryocytes. Indeed, 
immunologic cells responsible for autoantibody production reside in the bone 
marrow; megakaryocytes progressively express during their maturation the same 
glycoproteins against which ITP autoantibodies are directed, and platelet 
autoantibodies have been detected in the bone marrow of patients with ITP. 
In vitro studies using ITP sera or monoclonal antibodies against platelet and 
megakaryocyte surface glycoproteins have shown an impairment of many steps of 
megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis, such as megakaryocyte differentiation and 
maturation, migration from the osteoblastic to the vascular niche, adhesion to 
extracellular matrix proteins, and proplatelet formation, resulting in impaired 
and ectopic platelet production in the bone marrow and diminished platelet 
release in the bloodstream. Moreover, cytotoxic T cells may target bone marrow 
megakaryocytes, resulting in megakaryocyte destruction. Altogether, these 
findings suggest that antiplatelet autoantibodies and cellular immunity against 
bone marrow megakaryocytes may significantly contribute to thrombocytopenia in 
some patients with ITP. Finally, we summarize relevant new data on this topic 
presented during the 2023 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis 
Congress. The complete unraveling of the mechanisms of immune attack-induced 
impairment of megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis may open the way to new 
therapeutic approaches.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.rpth.2024.102345
PMCID: PMC10960061
PMID: 38525349