---
reference_id: "PMID:21211844"
title: High-resolution in vivo imaging in achromatopsia.
authors:
- Thomas MG
- Kumar A
- Kohl S
- Proudlock FA
- Gottlob I
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2010.08.053
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Color Vision Defects/diagnosis
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Retina/pathology
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High-resolution in vivo imaging in achromatopsia.
**Authors:** Thomas MG, Kumar A, Kohl S, Proudlock FA, Gottlob I
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2010.08.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2010.08.053)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2011 May;118(5):882-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2010.08.053. Epub 
2011 Jan 6.

High-resolution in vivo imaging in achromatopsia.

Thomas MG(1), Kumar A, Kohl S, Proudlock FA, Gottlob I.

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Group, School of Medicine, University of Leicester, Leicester, 
United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: To characterize the retinal changes in patients with achromatopsia 
using an ultrahigh-resolution (UHR) spectral-domain optical coherence tomography 
(OCT) to examine how human achromatopsia corresponds to its animal model.
DESIGN: Comparative case series.
PARTICIPANTS AND CONTROLS: Ultrahigh-resolution OCT (Copernicus; OPTOPOL 
Technology S.A., Zawiercie, Poland; 3-μm axial resolution) was used to obtain 
scans from 13 patients (26 eyes) with achromatopsia and from 20 controls (40 
eyes).
METHODS: A 3-dimensional scan program (743×75; A×B scan) sampling a 7×7-mm 
retinal area centered at the fovea was used to obtain tomograms of the fovea. 
Individual B-scans at the fovea were exported and analyzed using ImageJ (Wayne 
Rasband, National Institute of Health) for reflectance profiles and morphologic 
abnormalities.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Gross morphologic changes in OCT were characterized. 
Specifically, inner segment and outer segment (IS/OS) junction and cone outer 
segment tip (COST) disruption was noted. Using the reflectance profiles, foveal 
depth, thickness of the outer nuclear layer (ONL), and retinal thickness (RT) 
were measured.
RESULTS: A characteristic so-called punched out hyporeflective zone (HRZ) was 
noted in 7 of 13 patients; this was age-dependent (P = 0.001). The area of the 
HRZ was asymmetric with the nasal area being significantly greater than the 
temporal area (P = 0.002). In all patients, there was disruption of the IS/OS 
junction at the foveal or parafoveal regions, or both. Five of 13 patients also 
had a disrupted COST reflectivity. There was significant (P = 1.1×10(-6)) ONL 
thinning in the achromats compared with controls, which was age-dependent (P = 
0.0002). Foveal maldevelopment was seen in 9 of 13 patients. The achromats also 
had a significantly reduced foveal depth (P = 7.7×10(-6)) and RT (P = 
1.46×10(-9)) compared with controls.
CONCLUSIONS: A range of signs in achromatopsia are described that can be 
detected using UHR OCT. The IS/OS junction and COST reflectivity disruption and 
presence of HRZ and ONL thinning are signs of cone photoreceptor degeneration. 
The latter 2 are age-dependent, which suggests that achromatopsia is a 
progressive disorder. In addition, foveal maldevelopment is described; this 
represents a fetal developmental defect linked to cone photoreceptor 
degeneration.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2010.08.053
PMID: 21211844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]