---
reference_id: "PMID:26593290"
title: New Thoughts on Immunoglobulin G4-Related Sclerosing Cholangitis.
authors:
- Smit WL
- Culver EL
- Chapman RW
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2015.08.004
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- Chemokines/metabolism
- "Cholangitis, Sclerosing/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Prognosis
- "T-Lymphocytes, Helper-Inducer/immunology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Thoughts on Immunoglobulin G4-Related Sclerosing Cholangitis.
**Authors:** Smit WL, Culver EL, Chapman RW
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2015.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2015.08.004)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2016 Feb;20(1):47-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2015.08.004. Epub
2015  Oct 6.

New Thoughts on Immunoglobulin G4-Related Sclerosing Cholangitis.

Smit WL(1), Culver EL(2), Chapman RW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center, 
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands; 
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus, Oxford 
OX3 7BN, UK.
(2)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headley Way, 
Headington, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK; Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Old Road Campus, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
(3)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headley Way, 
Headington, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK; Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Old Road Campus, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. Electronic address: 
Roger.chapman@ndm.ox.ac.uk.

Immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-related sclerosing cholangitis (IgG4-SC) is the biliary 
manifestation of the multisystem IgG4-related disease. IgG4-SC presents with 
biliary strictures and/or masses that can bear a striking similarity to other 
malignant and inflammatory diseases. Diagnosis is based on a combination of 
clinical, biochemical, radiological, and histologic findings with careful 
exclusion of malignant disease. Corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment 
with good clinical, biochemical, and radiological responses. This review 
provides a comprehensive overview of the current knowledge of the prevalence, 
clinical features, radiology and histology findings, diagnosis, treatment, 
natural history, and pathophysiology of IgG4-SC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2015.08.004
PMID: 26593290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]