---
reference_id: "PMID:37367883"
title: A Distinctive Metabolomics Profile and Potential Biomarkers for Very Long Acylcarnitine Dehydrogenase Deficiency (VLCADD) Diagnosis in Newborns.
authors:
- Sebaa R
- AlMalki RH
- Alseraty W
- Abdel Rahman AM
journal: Metabolites
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/metabo13060725
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Distinctive Metabolomics Profile and Potential Biomarkers for Very Long Acylcarnitine Dehydrogenase Deficiency (VLCADD) Diagnosis in Newborns.
**Authors:** Sebaa R, AlMalki RH, Alseraty W, Abdel Rahman AM
**Journal:** Metabolites (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/metabo13060725](https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo13060725)

## Content

1. Metabolites. 2023 Jun 5;13(6):725. doi: 10.3390/metabo13060725.

A Distinctive Metabolomics Profile and Potential Biomarkers for Very Long 
Acylcarnitine Dehydrogenase Deficiency (VLCADD) Diagnosis in Newborns.

Sebaa R(1), AlMalki RH(2), Alseraty W(3), Abdel Rahman AM(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Laboratories, College of Applied Medical Sciences, 
Shaqra University, Al-Dawadmi 17472, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Metabolomics Section, Department of Clinical Genomics, Center for Genomics 
Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre (KFSHRC), Riyadh 
11211, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Nursing, College of Applied Medical Sciences, Shaqra 
University, Al-Dawadmi 17472, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, Al 
Faisal University, Riyadh 11533, Saudi Arabia.

Very long-chain acylcarnitine dehydrogenase deficiency (VLCADD) is a rare 
inherited metabolic disorder associated with fatty acid β-oxidation and 
characterized by genetic mutations in the ACADVL gene and accumulations of 
acylcarnitines. VLCADD, developed in neonates or later adults, can be diagnosed 
using newborn bloodspot screening (NBS) or genetic sequencing. These techniques 
have limitations, such as a high false discovery rate and variants of uncertain 
significance (VUS). As a result, an extra diagnostic tool is needed to deliver 
improved performance and health outcomes. As VLCADD is linked with metabolic 
disturbance, we postulated that newborn patients with VLCADD could display a 
distinct metabolomics pattern compared to healthy newborns and other disorders. 
Herein, we applied an untargeted metabolomics approach using liquid 
chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) to measure the global 
metabolites in dried blood spot (DBS) cards collected from VLCADD newborns (n = 
15) and healthy controls (n = 15). Two hundred and six significantly 
dysregulated endogenous metabolites were identified in VLCADD, in contrast to 
healthy newborns. Fifty-eight and one hundred and eight up- and down-regulated 
endogenous metabolites were involved in several pathways such as tryptophan 
biosynthesis, aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis, amino sugar and nucleotide sugar 
metabolism, pyrimidine metabolism and pantothenate, and CoA biosynthesis. 
Furthermore, biomarker analyses identified 3,4-Dihydroxytetradecanoylcarnitine 
(AUC = 1), PIP (20:1)/PGF1alpha) (AUC = 0.982), and PIP2 (16:0/22:3) (AUC = 
0.978) as potential metabolic biomarkers for VLCADD diagnosis. Our findings 
showed that compared to healthy newborns, VLCAADD newborns exhibit a distinctive 
metabolic profile, and identified potential biomarkers that can be used for 
early diagnosis, which improves the identification of the affected patients 
earlier. This allows for the timely administration of proper treatments, leading 
to improved health. However, further studies with large independent cohorts of 
VLCADD patients with different ages and phenotypes need to be studied to 
validate our potential diagnostic biomarkers and their specificity and accuracy 
during early life.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo13060725
PMCID: PMC10301765
PMID: 37367883

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest concerning this article’s research, authorship, and publication.