---
reference_id: "PMID:22017532"
title: Cardiac Troponin T (TNNT2) mutations are less prevalent in Indian hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients.
authors:
- Rani DS
- Nallari P
- Dhandapany PS
- Tamilarasi S
- Shah A
- Archana V
- AshokKumar M
- Narasimhan C
- Singh L
- Thangaraj K
journal: DNA Cell Biol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1089/dna.2011.1366
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac Troponin T (TNNT2) mutations are less prevalent in Indian hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients.
**Authors:** Rani DS, Nallari P, Dhandapany PS, Tamilarasi S, Shah A, Archana V, AshokKumar M, Narasimhan C, Singh L, Thangaraj K
**Journal:** DNA Cell Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1089/dna.2011.1366](https://doi.org/10.1089/dna.2011.1366)

## Content

1. DNA Cell Biol. 2012 Apr;31(4):616-24. doi: 10.1089/dna.2011.1366. Epub 2011
Oct  21.

Cardiac Troponin T (TNNT2) mutations are less prevalent in Indian hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy patients.

Rani DS(1), Nallari P, Dhandapany PS, Tamilarasi S, Shah A, Archana V, 
AshokKumar M, Narasimhan C, Singh L, Thangaraj K.

Author information:
(1)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.

We sought to determine the frequency of the genetic variations in the Troponin T 
(TNNT2) gene and its association in Indian cardiomyopathy patients. Sequencing 
of the entire TNNT2 gene in 162 hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients, 
along with 179 healthy controls, revealed a total of 15 variants. These included 
an A28V missense mutation, a novel single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
(g.7239;G→A) predicted to disturb the splicing significantly, three SNPs, 
rs3729547 (C→T), rs3729843 (G→A), rs3729842 (C→T), which were in high linkage 
disequilibrium, and a 5 bp polymorphism that skipped exon 4 during splicing, 
which was found to be significantly higher in HCM patients (del/del genotype, 
p=0.00011; deletion allele, p=0.00008). Further studies on the 5 bp polymorphism 
in 2092 randomly selected individuals belonging to 39 ethnic and endogamous 
populations from 19 states of India, and representing the major linguistic 
Indian families, revealed that the South and the Northwest Indians have a high 
frequency of 5 bp deletions. The missense mutations in TNNT2 are responsible for 
15%-20% of familial HCM by impairing the function of the heart muscle. However, 
other than the 5 bp polymorphism, our comprehensive study on the Indian HCM 
patients have lowered the occurrence and overall prevalence of supposedly more 
aggressive and worst disease causing percentage of missense mutations in TNNT2 
dramatically.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2011.1366
PMID: 22017532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]