---
reference_id: "PMID:38341276"
title: "Management of adult patients with podocytopathies: an update from the ERA Immunonephrology Working Group."
authors:
- Mirioglu S
- Daniel-Fischer L
- Berke I
- Ahmad SH
- Bajema IM
- Bruchfeld A
- Fernandez-Juarez GM
- Floege J
- Frangou E
- Goumenos D
- Griffith M
- Moran SM
- van Kooten C
- Steiger S
- Stevens KI
- Turkmen K
- Willcocks LC
- Kronbichler A
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfae025
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Child
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/complications"
- Kidney/pathology
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid"
- Kidney Diseases/pathology
- Podocytes/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of adult patients with podocytopathies: an update from the ERA Immunonephrology Working Group.
**Authors:** Mirioglu S, Daniel-Fischer L, Berke I, Ahmad SH, Bajema IM, Bruchfeld A, Fernandez-Juarez GM, Floege J, Frangou E, Goumenos D, Griffith M, Moran SM, van Kooten C, Steiger S, Stevens KI, Turkmen K, Willcocks LC, Kronbichler A
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfae025](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfae025)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2024 Mar 27;39(4):569-580. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfae025.

Management of adult patients with podocytopathies: an update from the ERA 
Immunonephrology Working Group.

Mirioglu S(1)(2), Daniel-Fischer L(3), Berke I(4), Ahmad SH(5), Bajema IM(6), 
Bruchfeld A(7)(8), Fernandez-Juarez GM(9), Floege J(10), Frangou E(11), Goumenos 
D(12), Griffith M(13), Moran SM(14), van Kooten C(15), Steiger S(16), Stevens 
KI(17), Turkmen K(18), Willcocks LC(5), Kronbichler A(19).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Bezmialem Vakif University School of Medicine, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Immunology, Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Division of Pediatric Nephrology and Gastroenterology, Department of 
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Comprehensive Center for Pediatrics, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(5)Department of Renal Medicine, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University 
Hospitals, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Linköping University, 
Linköping, Sweden.
(8)Department of Renal Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital and CLINTEC 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Unversitatio Fundacion Alcorcon, Alcorcon, 
Spain.
(10)Division of Nephrology, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(11)Department of Nephrology, Limassol General Hospital, Limassol, Cyprus; 
University of Nicosia Medical School, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(12)Department of Nephrology and Renal Transplantation, Patras University 
Hospital, Patras, Greece.
(13)Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust Renal and Transplant Centre, 
Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(14)Cork University Hospital, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(15)Division of Nephrology and Transplant Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(16)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine IV, Hospital of the 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(17)Glasgow Renal and Transplant Unit, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, 
Glasgow, UK.
(18)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Necmettin Erbakan 
University, Konya, Turkey.
(19)Department of Internal Medicine IV, Nephrology and Hypertension, Medical 
University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

Erratum in
    Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2025 May 30;40(6):1260. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfae215.

The histopathological lesions, minimal change disease (MCD) and focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) are entities without immune complex deposits which can 
cause podocyte injury, thus are frequently grouped under the umbrella of 
podocytopathies. Whether MCD and FSGS may represent a spectrum of the same 
disease remains a matter of conjecture. Both frequently require repeated 
high-dose glucocorticoid therapy with alternative immunosuppressive treatments 
reserved for relapsing or resistant cases and response rates are variable. There 
is an unmet need to identify patients who should receive immunosuppressive 
therapies as opposed to those who would benefit from supportive strategies. 
Therapeutic trials focusing on MCD are scarce, and the evidence used for the 
2021 Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) guideline for the 
management of glomerular diseases largely stems from observational and pediatric 
trials. In FSGS, the differentiation between primary forms and those with 
underlying genetic variants or secondary forms further complicates trial design. 
This article provides a perspective of the Immunonephrology Working Group (IWG) 
of the European Renal Association (ERA) and discusses the KDIGO 2021 Clinical 
Practice Guideline for the Management of Glomerular Diseases focusing on the 
management of MCD and primary forms of FSGS in the context of recently published 
evidence, with a special emphasis on the role of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, 
supportive treatment options and ongoing clinical trials in the field.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfae025
PMCID: PMC11024823
PMID: 38341276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.M. received honoraria from Baxter, and support 
for meeting registration and travel from Abdi Ibrahim Otsuka, Amgen, Roche, and 
Sanofi Genzyme. L.D.-F. received research grants from Delta 4. I.M.B. consulted 
for Boehringer-Ingelheim, GSK, Novartis, Catalyst Biosciences, Toleranzia, Vera, 
and Hansa Biopharma and received educational grants from CSL Vifor. She is the 
owner of BiPath and on the BOD of the Renal Pathology Society. A.B. received 
consultancy fees and honoraria from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Fresenius, and 
CSL Vifor. M.G. received an advisory board fee from Retrophin. K.I.S. received 
consultancy fees from Bayer and Boehringer Ingelheim. A.K. received consultancy 
fees from CSL Vifor, Otsuka, GSK, Walden Biosciences, Catalyst Biosciences, and 
Delta4; and received unrestricted research grants from CSL Vifor and Otsuka. 
S.M., E.F., S.S., and A.K. are editorial board members of the journal NDT. The 
remaining authors disclosed no conflicts of interest.