---
reference_id: "PMID:32945524"
title: Cytoglobin-expressing cells in the splenic cords contribute to splenic fibrosis in cirrhotic patients.
authors:
- Iimuro Y
- Yada A
- Okada T
- Nakamura I
- Suzumura K
- Xu J
- Sudo M
- Nishiguchi S
- Kawada N
- Hatano E
- Fujimoto J
journal: Histol Histopathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.14670/HH-18-257
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytoglobin-expressing cells in the splenic cords contribute to splenic fibrosis in cirrhotic patients.
**Authors:** Iimuro Y, Yada A, Okada T, Nakamura I, Suzumura K, Xu J, Sudo M, Nishiguchi S, Kawada N, Hatano E, Fujimoto J
**Journal:** Histol Histopathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.14670/HH-18-257](https://doi.org/10.14670/HH-18-257)

## Content

1. Histol Histopathol. 2020 Nov;35(11):1319-1328. doi: 10.14670/HH-18-257. Epub 
2020 Sep 18.

Cytoglobin-expressing cells in the splenic cords contribute to splenic fibrosis 
in cirrhotic patients.

Iimuro Y(1)(2), Yada A(1), Okada T(1), Nakamura I(1), Suzumura K(1), Xu J(1), 
Sudo M(1), Nishiguchi S(3), Kawada N(4), Hatano E(1), Fujimoto J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan.
(2)Department of Surgery, Yamanashi Central Hospital, Yamanashi, Japan. 
siimuro@hyo-med.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, 
Hyogo, Japan.
(4)Department of Hepatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University, 
Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Among several noninvasive evaluation methods of portal 
hypertension (PH), the measurement of spleen stiffness is a reliable method for 
predicting esophageal variceal bleeding; however, the underlying mechanisms for 
increased stiffness remain unclear. We attempted to elucidate the pathological 
changes to the spleen and the underlying mechanisms in patients with PH.
METHODS: Histological examination was performed using splenic tissues from 42 
patients with PH who underwent laparoscopic splenectomy, and the results were 
compared with those from patients without PH.
RESULTS: In addition to splenic sinus congestion, diffuse fibrosis was detected 
in the splenic cords in the red pulp of patients with PH. The degree of the 
fibrosis was well correlated with severity in thrombocytopenia and splenomegaly. 
Cells expressing α-smooth muscle actin dramatically increased in the splenic 
cord. Cytoglobin (Cygb) expression was detected in human splenic cords as 
reported in animal reticular cells, and fluorescent double immunostaining 
revealed that these cells expressed α-smooth muscle actin in patients with PH, 
suggesting transformation of Cygb-expressing cells to myofibroblastic cells. 
Expression levels of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase (NOX) 
2, nitrotyrosine, and transforming growth factor-β were markedly upregulated in 
the red pulp of patients with PH, implying a significant role of oxidative 
stress in the mechanism for splenic fibrosis.
CONCLUSION: Splenic fibrosis progresses along with advancement of PH. 
Cygb-expressing cells in the splenic cord possibly participate in this process 
through mechanisms including oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.14670/HH-18-257
PMID: 32945524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]