---
reference_id: "PMID:33963941"
title: Association of Gasdermin B Gene GSDMB Polymorphisms with Risk of Allergic Diseases.
authors:
- Karunas AS
- Fedorova YY
- Gimalova GF
- Etkina EI
- Khusnutdinova EK
journal: Biochem Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10528-021-10073-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Gasdermin B Gene GSDMB Polymorphisms with Risk of Allergic Diseases.
**Authors:** Karunas AS, Fedorova YY, Gimalova GF, Etkina EI, Khusnutdinova EK
**Journal:** Biochem Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10528-021-10073-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10528-021-10073-8)

## Content

1. Biochem Genet. 2021 Dec;59(6):1527-1543. doi: 10.1007/s10528-021-10073-8. Epub
 2021 May 8.

Association of Gasdermin B Gene GSDMB Polymorphisms with Risk of Allergic 
Diseases.

Karunas AS(1)(2)(3), Fedorova YY(4)(5), Gimalova GF(6)(7), Etkina EI(8), 
Khusnutdinova EK(6)(7)(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Federal Research Centre of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russia. carunas@list.ru.
(2)Saint Petersburg State University, Saint Petersburg, Russia. carunas@list.ru.
(3)Bashkir State Medical University of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian 
Federation, Ufa, Russia. carunas@list.ru.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Federal Research Centre of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russia. fedorova-y@yandex.ru.
(5)Saint Petersburg State University, Saint Petersburg, Russia. 
fedorova-y@yandex.ru.
(6)Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Federal Research Centre of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russia.
(7)Saint Petersburg State University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(8)Bashkir State Medical University of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian 
Federation, Ufa, Russia.
(9)Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russia.

The GSDMB gene encodes gasdermin B from the family of gasdermin 
domain-containing proteins involved in various cellular processes related to 
tumor development and progression, such as differentiation, cell cycle control 
and apoptosis. Previously, we conducted GWAS on asthma in the Volga-Ural region 
of Russia and found SNPs associated with asthma with genome-wide significance 
(rs9303277, rs8067378, rs2290400, rs7216389, rs4795405) and located in the 
chromosomal region 17q12-q21, which contains IKZF3 (IKAROS family zinc finger 
3), ZPBP2 (zona pellucida binding protein-like), GSDMB (gasdermin B), ORMDL3 
(orosomucoid 1-like 3) and LRRC3C (leucine-rich repeat-containing 3C) genes. In 
the present study, we investigated the association of SNPs of the GSDMB gene 
with the development of various allergic diseases and their combined 
manifestations in individuals of Russian, Tatar and Bashkir ethnic origin. Our 
results revealed that polymorphic variants rs7216389, rs2290400 and rs2305480 
are associated with the development of allergic diseases as well as with asthma 
and asthma combined with allergic rhinitis. We did not reveal the association of 
rs7216389 and rs2290400 with the development of allergic rhinitis and atopic 
dermatitis in the groups of patients without asthma symptoms. This may reflect a 
more important role of these SNPs in the development of asthma.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10528-021-10073-8
PMID: 33963941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]