---
reference_id: "PMID:38860595"
title: Outcomes with inpatient use of midodrine in patients with heart failure and kidney failure on maintenance dialysis.
authors:
- Patel N
- Alvarez Concejo B
- Lo KB
- Mishra M
- Kattubadi A
- Rangaswami J
journal: Acta Cardiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/00015385.2024.2365608
keywords:
- Humans
- "Midodrine/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Heart Failure/physiopathology, drug therapy, mortality, therapy, complications"
- Male
- Female
- Renal Dialysis
- Aged
- Inpatients
- Stroke Volume/physiology
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- "Vasoconstrictor Agents/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/therapy, complications, mortality"
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- "Renal Insufficiency/complications, physiopathology, epidemiology"
- Treatment Outcome
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes with inpatient use of midodrine in patients with heart failure and kidney failure on maintenance dialysis.
**Authors:** Patel N, Alvarez Concejo B, Lo KB, Mishra M, Kattubadi A, Rangaswami J
**Journal:** Acta Cardiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00015385.2024.2365608](https://doi.org/10.1080/00015385.2024.2365608)

## Content

1. Acta Cardiol. 2024 Jul;79(5):545-548. doi: 10.1080/00015385.2024.2365608. Epub
 2024 Jun 11.

Outcomes with inpatient use of midodrine in patients with heart failure and
kidney failure on maintenance dialysis.

Patel N(1), Alvarez Concejo B(1), Lo KB(2), Mishra M(3), Kattubadi A(1),
Rangaswami J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Louisiana State University Health,
Shreveport, LA, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital Heart &
Vascular Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Research Informatics, Ochsner Center for Academic
Excellence, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(4)Division of Nephrology, George Washington University School of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Midodrine, an FDA-approved medication for orthostatic hypotension,
is also used off-label to manage hypotension in dialysis patients, including
those with heart failure. However, in patients with reduced ejection fraction
(HFrEF) and/or right heart failure, midodrine is potentially harmful. No known
studies examine the safety of midodrine in hospitalised kidney failure patients
with HF.
METHODS: The TriNetX database was queried for hospitalised kidney failure
patients with HFrEF and/or right heart failure who experienced hypotension (SBP
< 110 mm Hg or MAP < 70 mm Hg). Excluding those needing critical care or
vasopressors, we compared cohorts based on midodrine use, matching for
comorbidities.
RESULTS: Analysis showed patients on midodrine had a higher 6-month mortality
risk ratio (RR 1.53, 95% CI 1.037 to 2.246) and Hazard Ratio (HR 1.54, 95% CI
1.022 to 2.317) compared to those not on midodrine, indicating an association
with increased mortality.
CONCLUSION: This study illuminates the complexities in treating hospitalised
patients with kidney failure and HF. Our findings, drawn from an exploratory
analysis, indicate that inpatient midodrine use is associated with increased
6-month mortality. This may reflect deleterious effects from vasoconstriction
and/or unmeasured confounders in this vulnerable population. This investigation,
utilising TriNetX, was limited by access to deidentified aggregate data,
preventing detailed exploration of specifics such as timing, dosage, and
indications for midodrine use. Moreover, given its observational nature,
cause-effect relationship cannot be established. Our findings indicate an
increased mortality associated with midodrine use for hypotension, underscoring
the need for further research and consideration of alternative strategies.

DOI: 10.1080/00015385.2024.2365608
PMID: 38860595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
