---
reference_id: "PMID:19155270"
title: Reduced expression of fukutin related protein in mice results in a model for fukutin related protein associated muscular dystrophies.
authors:
- Ackroyd MR
- Skordis L
- Kaluarachchi M
- Godwin J
- Prior S
- Fidanboylu M
- Piercy RJ
- Muntoni F
- Brown SC
journal: Brain
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awn335
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Southern"
- Cell Movement
- "Cerebral Cortex/metabolism, pathology"
- Chimera
- Dystroglycans/metabolism
- Female
- Gene Targeting
- Genotype
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Models, Animal"
- "Muscular Dystrophies/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pentosyltransferases
- Phenotype
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Transferases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reduced expression of fukutin related protein in mice results in a model for fukutin related protein associated muscular dystrophies.
**Authors:** Ackroyd MR, Skordis L, Kaluarachchi M, Godwin J, Prior S, Fidanboylu M, Piercy RJ, Muntoni F, Brown SC
**Journal:** Brain (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awn335](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awn335)

## Content

1. Brain. 2009 Feb;132(Pt 2):439-51. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn335. Epub 2009 Jan 20.

Reduced expression of fukutin related protein in mice results in a model for
fukutin related protein associated muscular dystrophies.

Ackroyd MR(1), Skordis L, Kaluarachchi M, Godwin J, Prior S, Fidanboylu M,
Piercy RJ, Muntoni F, Brown SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience, Hammersmith Hospital,
Imperial College, London, UK.

Mutations in fukutin related protein (FKRP) are responsible for a common group
of muscular dystrophies ranging from adult onset limb girdle muscular
dystrophies to severe congenital forms with associated structural brain
involvement, including Muscle Eye Brain disease. A common feature of these
disorders is the variable reduction in the glycosylation of skeletal muscle
alpha-dystroglycan. In order to gain insight into the pathogenesis and clinical
variability, we have generated two lines of mice, the first containing a
missense mutation and a neomycin cassette, FKRP-Neo(Tyr307Asn) and the second
containing the FKRP(Tyr307Asn) mutation alone. We have previously associated
this missense mutation with a severe muscle-eye-brain phenotype in several
families. Homozygote Fkrp-Neo(Tyr307Asn) mice die soon after birth and show a
reduction in the laminin-binding epitope of alpha-dystroglycan in muscle, eye
and brain, and have reduced levels of FKRP transcript. Homozygous
Fkrp(Tyr307Asn) mice showed no discernible phenotype up to 6 months of age,
contrary to the severe clinical course observed in patients with the same
mutation. These results suggest the generation of a mouse model for FKRP related
muscular dystrophy requires a knock-down rather than a knock-in strategy in
order to give rise to a disease phenotype.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awn335
PMID: 19155270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
