---
reference_id: "PMID:32741831"
title: Early-Onset Familial Alzheimer Disease Variant PSEN2 N141I Heterozygosity is Associated with Altered Microglia Phenotype.
authors:
- Fung S
- Smith CL
- Prater KE
- Case A
- Green K
- Osnis L
- Winston C
- Kinoshita Y
- Sopher B
- Morrison RS
- Garden GA
- Jayadev S
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-200492
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-Onset Familial Alzheimer Disease Variant PSEN2 N141I Heterozygosity is Associated with Altered Microglia Phenotype.
**Authors:** Fung S, Smith CL, Prater KE, Case A, Green K, Osnis L, Winston C, Kinoshita Y, Sopher B, Morrison RS, Garden GA, Jayadev S
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-200492](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-200492)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;77(2):675-688. doi: 10.3233/JAD-200492.

Early-Onset Familial Alzheimer Disease Variant PSEN2 N141I Heterozygosity is 
Associated with Altered Microglia Phenotype.

Fung S(1), Smith CL(1), Prater KE(1), Case A(1), Green K(1), Osnis L(1), Winston 
C(1), Kinoshita Y(2), Sopher B(1), Morrison RS(2), Garden GA(3), Jayadev S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Early-onset familial Alzheimer disease (EOFAD) is caused by 
heterozygous variants in the presenilin 1 (PSEN1), presenilin 2 (PSEN2), and APP 
genes. Decades after their discovery, the mechanisms by which these genes cause 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) or promote AD progression are not fully understood. 
While it is established that presenilin (PS) enzymatic activity produces 
amyloid-β (Aβ), PSs also regulate numerous other cellular functions, some of 
which intersect with known pathogenic drivers of neurodegeneration. Accumulating 
evidence suggests that microglia, resident innate immune cells in the central 
nervous system, play a key role in AD neurodegeneration.
OBJECTIVE: Previous work has identified a regulatory role for PS2 in microglia. 
We hypothesized that PSEN2 variants lead to dysregulated microglia, which could 
further contribute to disease acceleration. To mimic the genotype of EOFAD 
patients, we created a transgenic mouse expressing PSEN2 N141I on a mouse 
background expressing one wildtype PS2 and two PS1 alleles.
RESULTS: Microglial expression of PSEN2 N141I resulted in impaired γ-secretase 
activity as well as exaggerated inflammatory cytokine release, NFκB activity, 
and Aβ internalization. In vivo, PS2 N141I mice showed enhanced IL-6 and TREM2 
expression in brain as well as reduced branch number and length, an indication 
of "activated" morphology, in the absence of inflammatory stimuli. LPS 
intraperitoneal injection resulted in higher inflammatory gene expression in PS2 
N141I mouse brain relative to controls.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that PSEN2 N141I heterozygosity is 
associated with disrupted innate immune homeostasis, suggesting EOFAD variants 
may promote disease progression through non-neuronal cells beyond canonical 
dysregulated Aβ production.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-200492
PMCID: PMC7592656
PMID: 32741831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors’ disclosures available online 
(https://www.j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/20-0492r1).