---
reference_id: "PMID:23878362"
title: "Does epithelial sodium channel hyperactivity contribute to cystic fibrosis lung disease?"
authors:
- Hobbs CA
- Da Tan C
- Tarran R
journal: J Physiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.240861
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does epithelial sodium channel hyperactivity contribute to cystic fibrosis lung disease?
**Authors:** Hobbs CA, Da Tan C, Tarran R
**Journal:** J Physiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1113/jphysiol.2012.240861](https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2012.240861)

## Content

1. J Physiol. 2013 Sep 15;591(18):4377-87. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.240861.
Epub  2013 Jul 22.

Does epithelial sodium channel hyperactivity contribute to cystic fibrosis lung 
disease?

Hobbs CA(1), Da Tan C, Tarran R.

Author information:
(1)R. Tarran: 7125 Thurston Bowles Building, UNC, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7248, 
USA. robert_tarran@med.unc.edu.

  Airway epithelia absorb Na+ through the epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC) and 
secrete Cl- through the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
(CFTR) anion channel. This balance maintains sufficient airway surface liquid 
hydration to permit efficient mucus clearance, which is needed to maintain 
sterility of the lung. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common autosomal recessive 
inherited disease caused by mutations in the CFTR gene that lead to the 
reduction or elimination of the CFTR protein. CF is a multi-organ disease that 
affects epithelia lining the intestines, lungs, pancreas, sweat ducts and vas 
deferens, among others. CF lungs are characterized by viscous, dehydrated mucus, 
persistent neutrophilia and chronic infections. ENaC is negatively regulated by 
CFTR and, in patients with CF, the absence of CFTR results in a double hit of 
reduced Cl-/HCO3- and H2O secretion as well as ENaC hyperactivity and increased 
Na+ and H2O absorption. Together, these effects are hypothesized to trigger 
mucus dehydration, resulting in a failure to clear mucus. Rehydrating CF mucus 
has become a recent clinical focus and yields important end-points for clinical 
trials. However, while ENaC hyperactivity in CF airways has been detected in 
vivo and in vitro, recent data have brought the role of ENaC in CF lung disease 
pathogenesis into question. This review will focus on our current understanding 
of the contribution of ENaC to CF pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.240861
PMCID: PMC3784186
PMID: 23878362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]