---
reference_id: "PMID:27689547"
title: "Steroid/Antiviral for the treatment of Bell's palsy: Double blind randomized clinical trial."
authors:
- Khedr EM
- Badry R
- Ali AM
- Abo El-Fetoh N
- El-Hammady DH
- Ghandour AM
- Abdel-Haleem A
journal: Restor Neurol Neurosci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3233/RNN-150605
keywords:
- Acyclovir/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Bell Palsy/drug therapy
- Double-Blind Method
- Electromyography
- "Evoked Potentials, Motor/drug effects, physiology"
- Facial Nerve/physiopathology
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Neural Conduction/drug effects
- Severity of Illness Index
- Steroids/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Steroid/Antiviral for the treatment of Bell's palsy: Double blind randomized clinical trial.
**Authors:** Khedr EM, Badry R, Ali AM, Abo El-Fetoh N, El-Hammady DH, Ghandour AM, Abdel-Haleem A
**Journal:** Restor Neurol Neurosci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3233/RNN-150605](https://doi.org/10.3233/RNN-150605)

## Content

1. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2016 Nov 22;34(6):897-905. doi: 10.3233/RNN-150605.

Steroid/Antiviral for the treatment of Bell's palsy: Double blind randomized 
clinical trial.

Khedr EM(1), Badry R(1), Ali AM(1), Abo El-Fetoh N(1), El-Hammady DH(2), 
Ghandour AM(2), Abdel-Haleem A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Assiut University Hospital, Assiut, Egypt.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Assiut University Hospital, 
Assiut, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: A large number of patients with Bell's palsy fail to recover facial 
function completely after steroid therapy. Only a few small trials have been 
conducted to test whether outcomes can be improved by the addition of antiviral 
therapy.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy of treatment with steroid alone versus 
steroid + antiviral in a group of patients with moderately severe to severe 
acute Bell's palsy.
METHODS: Fifty eligible patients out of a total of 65 with acute onset Bell's 
palsy were randomized to receive the two treatments. Evaluation was performed 
before starting treatment, after 2 weeks of treatment and 3 months after onset, 
using the House and Brackmann facial nerve grading system (HB) and the 
Sunnybrook grading system.This study was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, 
number NCT02328079.
RESULTS: Both treatments had comparable demographics and clinical scores at 
baseline. There was greater improvement in the mean HB and Sunnybrook scores of 
the steroid + antiviral group in comparison to steroid group at 3 months. At the 
end of the 3rd month, 17 patients (68%) had good recovery and 8 patients (32%) 
had poor recovery in the steroid group compared with 23 patients (92%) and 2 
(8%) respectively in the steroid and antiviral group (p = 0.034).
CONCLUSION: The combination of steroid and antiviral treatment increases the 
possibility of recovery in moderately severe to complete acute Bell's palsy.

DOI: 10.3233/RNN-150605
PMID: 27689547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]