---
reference_id: "PMID:12352881"
title: Orthotopic liver transplantation for unresectable hepatoblastoma.
authors:
- Srinivasan P
- McCall J
- Pritchard J
- Dhawan A
- Baker A
- Vergani GM
- Muiesan P
- Rela M
- David Heaton N
journal: Transplantation
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1097/00007890-200209150-00011
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Graft Survival/physiology
- "Hepatoblastoma/pathology, secondary, surgery"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/immunology, mortality, pathology, surgery"
- "Liver Transplantation/mortality, pathology, physiology"
- Lung Neoplasms/secondary
- "Lymphocytes, Tumor-Infiltrating/immunology, pathology"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Survival Rate
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orthotopic liver transplantation for unresectable hepatoblastoma.
**Authors:** Srinivasan P, McCall J, Pritchard J, Dhawan A, Baker A, Vergani GM, Muiesan P, Rela M, David Heaton N
**Journal:** Transplantation (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00007890-200209150-00011](https://doi.org/10.1097/00007890-200209150-00011)

## Content

1. Transplantation. 2002 Sep 15;74(5):652-5. doi:
10.1097/00007890-200209150-00011.

Orthotopic liver transplantation for unresectable hepatoblastoma.

Srinivasan P(1), McCall J, Pritchard J, Dhawan A, Baker A, Vergani GM, Muiesan 
P, Rela M, David Heaton N.

Author information:
(1)Liver Transplant Surgical Service, Institute of Liver Studies, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: The outcome of treatment for advanced hepatoblastoma has recently 
improved after the introduction of preoperative or pre- and postoperative 
cisplatin-containing chemotherapy combined with complete surgical excision. The 
role of liver transplantation in a population of patients who have received this 
regimen has not been clearly defined.
METHODS: Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) was performed in 13 children, 
aged 5 months to 11 years (median 27 months), who were assessed with 
unresectable hepatoblastoma, and whose pretreatment extent-of-disease was based 
on radiologic findings of group III (n=11) and group IV (n=2). One child with a 
multifocal tumor showed pulmonary metastases at presentation, but, according to 
radiologic studies, the deposits resolved with chemotherapy before liver 
transplantation. One other child showed exophytic extension of the primary tumor 
infiltrating the porta hepatis and body of the pancreas. All 13 patients 
received preoperative chemotherapy to reduce the size of the primary tumor(s) 
and to treat metastatic spread.
RESULTS: Twelve children underwent elective OLT; all are alive and show normal 
graft function at a mean follow-up of 33 months (range 1-108). One child shows 
evidence of recurrent disease in the form of pulmonary metastases. One child 
underwent emergency OLT for acute liver failure after (incomplete) extended 
right hepatectomy and died from respiratory failure, with no evidence of 
recurrent tumor 3 weeks posttransplant.
CONCLUSIONS: Liver transplantation is an effective treatment for unresectable 
unifocal or multifocal hepatoblastoma confined to the liver. A multidisciplinary 
approach to the management of hepatoblastoma, with thoughtful collaboration 
between pediatric oncologists, hepatologists, and liver surgeons, is essential.

DOI: 10.1097/00007890-200209150-00011
PMID: 12352881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]