---
reference_id: "PMID:37329145"
title: "Clinical presentation and evaluation of epilepsy with eyelid myoclonia: Results of an international expert consensus panel."
authors:
- Smith KM
- Wirrell EC
- Andrade DM
- Choi H
- Trenité DK
- Jones H
- Knupp KG
- Mugar J
- Nordli DR Jr
- Riva A
- Stern JM
- Striano P
- Thiele EA
- Zawar I
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/epi.17683
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical presentation and evaluation of epilepsy with eyelid myoclonia: Results of an international expert consensus panel.
**Authors:** Smith KM, Wirrell EC, Andrade DM, Choi H, Trenité DK, Jones H, Knupp KG, Mugar J, Nordli DR Jr, Riva A, Stern JM, Striano P, Thiele EA, Zawar I
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.17683](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.17683)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2023 Sep;64(9):2330-2341. doi: 10.1111/epi.17683. Epub 2023 Jun 29.

Clinical presentation and evaluation of epilepsy with eyelid myoclonia: Results 
of an international expert consensus panel.

Smith KM(1), Wirrell EC(1), Andrade DM(2), Choi H(3), Trenité DK(4), Jones H(5), 
Knupp KG(6), Mugar J(7), Nordli DR Jr(8), Riva A(9), Stern JM(10), Striano P(9), 
Thiele EA(11), Zawar I(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(7)Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(9)Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Istituto Giannina Gaslini 
and Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, 
Maternal and Child Health, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(10)Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(11)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(12)Department of Neurology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to determine areas of consensus among 
an international panel of experts for the clinical presentation and diagnosis of 
epilepsy with eyelid myoclonia (EEM; formerly known as Jeavons syndrome) to 
improve a timely diagnosis.
METHODS: An international steering committee was convened of physicians and 
patients/caregivers with expertise in EEM. This committee summarized the current 
literature and identified an international panel of experts (comprising 25 
physicians and five patients/caregivers). This international expert panel 
participated in a modified Delphi process, including three rounds of surveys to 
determine areas of consensus for the diagnosis of EEM.
RESULTS: There was a strong consensus that EEM is a female predominant 
generalized epilepsy syndrome with onset between 3 and 12 years of age and that 
eyelid myoclonia must be present to make the diagnosis. There was a strong 
consensus that eyelid myoclonia may go unrecognized for years prior to an 
epilepsy diagnosis. There was consensus that generalized tonic-clonic and 
absence seizures are typically or occasionally seen in patients. There was a 
consensus that atonic or focal seizures should lead to the consideration of 
reclassification or alternate diagnoses. There was a strong consensus that 
electroencephalography is required, whereas magnetic resonance imaging is not 
required for diagnosis. There was a strong consensus to perform genetic testing 
(either epilepsy gene panel or whole exome sequencing) when one or a combination 
of factors was present: family history of epilepsy, intellectual disability, or 
drug-resistant epilepsy.
SIGNIFICANCE: This international expert panel identified multiple areas of 
consensus regarding the presentation and evaluation of EEM. These areas of 
consensus may be used to inform clinical practice to shorten the time to the 
appropriate diagnosis.

© 2023 The Authors. Epilepsia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.17683
PMID: 37329145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]