---
reference_id: "PMID:35216372"
title: Novel Loss of Function Variant in BCKDK Causes a Treatable Developmental and Epileptic Encephalopathy.
authors:
- Boemer F
- Josse C
- Luis G
- Di Valentin E
- Thiry J
- Cello C
- Caberg JH
- Dadoumont C
- Harvengt J
- Lumaka A
- Bours V
- Debray FG
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23042253
keywords:
- 3-Methyl-2-Oxobutanoate Dehydrogenase (Lipoamide)/genetics
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Amino Acids, Branched-Chain/genetics"
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/genetics, pathology"
- Brain/pathology
- "Brain Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Cell Line
- "Epilepsy, Generalized/genetics"
- Female
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Loss of Function Mutation/genetics
- Male
- Phosphorylation/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Loss of Function Variant in BCKDK Causes a Treatable Developmental and Epileptic Encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Boemer F, Josse C, Luis G, Di Valentin E, Thiry J, Cello C, Caberg JH, Dadoumont C, Harvengt J, Lumaka A, Bours V, Debray FG
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23042253](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23042253)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Feb 18;23(4):2253. doi: 10.3390/ijms23042253.

Novel Loss of Function Variant in BCKDK Causes a Treatable Developmental and 
Epileptic Encephalopathy.

Boemer F(1), Josse C(2)(3), Luis G(1), Di Valentin E(4), Thiry J(2), Cello C(1), 
Caberg JH(5), Dadoumont C(6), Harvengt J(7), Lumaka A(3), Bours V(7), Debray 
FG(8).

Author information:
(1)Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Department of Human Genetics, CHU of Liege, 
University of Liege, 4000 Liege, Belgium.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, CHU of Liege, University of Liege, 4000 
Liege, Belgium.
(3)Laboratory of Human Genetics, Department of Biomedical and Preclinical 
Sciences, Groupe Interdisciplinaire de Génoprotéomique Appliquée-Recherche 
(GIGA-R), University of Liege, 4000 Liege, Belgium.
(4)Viral Vector Platform, Groupe Interdisciplinaire de Génoprotéomique 
Appliquée-Recherche (GIGA-R), University of Liege, 4000 Liege, Belgium.
(5)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Human Genetics, CHU of Liege, 
University of Liege, 4000 Liege, Belgium.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, CHC MontLégia, 4000 Liege, Belgium.
(7)Center of Genetics, Department of Human Genetics, CHU of Liege, University of 
Liege, 4000 Liege, Belgium.
(8)Metabolic Unit, Department of Human Genetics, CHU of Liege, University of 
Liege, 4000 Liege, Belgium.

Branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) are essential amino acids playing crucial 
roles in protein synthesis and brain neurotransmission. Branched-chain ketoacid 
dehydrogenase (BCKDH), the flux-generating step of BCAA catabolism, is tightly 
regulated by reversible phosphorylation of its E1α-subunit. BCKDK is the kinase 
responsible for the phosphorylation-mediated inactivation of BCKDH. In three 
siblings with severe developmental delays, microcephaly, autism spectrum 
disorder and epileptic encephalopathy, we identified a new homozygous in-frame 
deletion (c.999_1001delCAC; p.Thr334del) of BCKDK. Plasma and cerebrospinal 
fluid concentrations of BCAA were markedly reduced. Hyperactivity of BCKDH and 
over-consumption of BCAA were demonstrated by functional tests in cells 
transfected with the mutant BCKDK. Treatment with pharmacological doses of BCAA 
allowed the restoring of BCAA concentrations and greatly improved seizure 
control. Behavioral and developmental skills of the patients improved to a 
lesser extent. Importantly, a retrospective review of the newborn screening 
results allowed the identification of a strong decrease in BCAA concentrations 
on dried blood spots, suggesting that BCKDK is a new treatable metabolic 
disorder probably amenable to newborn screening programs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23042253
PMCID: PMC8878489
PMID: 35216372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest that 
could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the results presented in 
this study.