---
reference_id: "PMID:35806438"
title: Impaired Bestrophin Channel Activity in an iPSC-RPE Model of Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy (BVMD) from an Early Onset Patient Carrying the P77S Dominant Mutation.
authors:
- Navinés-Ferrer A
- Ruiz-Nogales S
- Navarro R
- Pomares E
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23137432
keywords:
- "Bestrophins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Chloride Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Mutation
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/metabolism
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired Bestrophin Channel Activity in an iPSC-RPE Model of Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy (BVMD) from an Early Onset Patient Carrying the P77S Dominant Mutation.
**Authors:** Navinés-Ferrer A, Ruiz-Nogales S, Navarro R, Pomares E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23137432](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23137432)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jul 4;23(13):7432. doi: 10.3390/ijms23137432.

Impaired Bestrophin Channel Activity in an iPSC-RPE Model of Best Vitelliform
Macular Dystrophy (BVMD) from an Early Onset Patient Carrying the P77S Dominant
Mutation.

Navinés-Ferrer A(1)(2), Ruiz-Nogales S(1)(2), Navarro R(1)(3), Pomares E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Fundació de Recerca de l'Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular, 08035 Barcelona,
Spain.
(2)Departament de Genètica, Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular (IMO), Grupo
Miranza, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Departament de Retina, Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular (IMO), Grupo Miranza,
08035 Barcelona, Spain.

Best Vitelliform Macular dystrophy (BVMD) is the most prevalent of the
distinctive retinal dystrophies caused by mutations in the BEST1 gene. This
gene, which encodes for a homopentameric calcium-activated ion channel, is
crucial for the homeostasis and function of the retinal pigment epithelia (RPE),
the cell type responsible for recycling the visual pigments generated by
photoreceptor cells. In BVMD patients, mutations in this gene induce functional
problems in the RPE cell layer with an accumulation of lipofucsin that evolves
into cell death and loss of sight. In this work, we employ iPSC-RPE cells
derived from a patient with the p.Pro77Ser dominant mutation to determine the
correlation between this variant and the ocular phenotype. To this purpose, gene
and protein expression and localization are evaluated in iPSC-RPE cells along
with functional assays like phagocytosis and anion channel activity. Our cell
model shows no differences in gene expression, protein expression/localization,
or phagocytosis capacity, but presents an increased chloride entrance,
indicating that the p.Pro77Ser variant might be a gain-of-function mutation. We
hypothesize that this variant disturbs the neck region of the BEST1 channel,
affecting channel function but maintaining cell homeostasis in the short term.
This data shed new light on the different phenotypes of dominant mutations in
BEST1, and emphasize the importance of understanding its molecular mechanisms.
Furthermore, the data widen the knowledge of this pathology and open the door
for a better diagnosis and prognosis of the disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23137432
PMCID: PMC9266689
PMID: 35806438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
