---
reference_id: "PMID:37454040"
title: "Genetic Epidemiology and Clinical Characteristics of Patients with Spinocerebellar Ataxias in an Unexplored Brazilian State, Using Strategies for Resource-Limited Settings."
authors:
- Moraes DBV
- Coradine TLC
- Silva EVL
- Sobreira-Neto MA
- Marques W Jr
- Gitaí LLG
- Tumas V
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-023-01581-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Brazil/epidemiology
- Molecular Epidemiology
- Resource-Limited Settings
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Epidemiology and Clinical Characteristics of Patients with Spinocerebellar Ataxias in an Unexplored Brazilian State, Using Strategies for Resource-Limited Settings.
**Authors:** Moraes DBV, Coradine TLC, Silva EVL, Sobreira-Neto MA, Marques W Jr, Gitaí LLG, Tumas V
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-023-01581-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-023-01581-x)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2024 Apr;23(2):609-619. doi: 10.1007/s12311-023-01581-x. Epub 2023
 Jul 15.

Genetic Epidemiology and Clinical Characteristics of Patients with
Spinocerebellar Ataxias in an Unexplored Brazilian State, Using Strategies for
Resource-Limited Settings.

Moraes DBV(1), Coradine TLC(2), Silva EVL(2), Sobreira-Neto MA(3), Marques W
Jr(4), Gitaí LLG(5)(6), Tumas V(7).

Author information:
(1)Postgraduate Program, Department of Neurosciences and Behavioral Sciences,
Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Campus Universitário -
Rua Bernardino de Campos, 1000 - Centro, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 65470-000, Brazil.
(2)Graduation Course, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Alagoas, Campus
Universitário, Avenida Lourival Melo Mota S/N, Tabuleiro dos Martins, CEP
57.072-900, Maceió, Alagoas, Brazil.
(3)Division of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Ceará, Rua
Prof. Costa Mendes, 1408 - 4°, Andar, CEP: 60.430-140, Fortaleza, Brazil.
(4)Department of Neurosciences and Behavioral Sciences, Ribeirão Preto Medical
School, University of São Paulo, Campus Universitário - Rua Bernardino de
Campos, 1000 - Centro, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 65470-000, Brazil.
(5)Division of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Alagoas,
Campus Universitário, Avenida Lourival Melo Mota S/N, Tabuleiro dos Martins, CEP
57.072-900, Maceió, Alagoas, Brazil. liviagitai@gmail.com.br.
(6), Maceió, Brazil. liviagitai@gmail.com.br.
(7)Department of Neurosciences and Behavioral Sciences, Ribeirão Preto Medical
School, University of São Paulo, Campus Universitário - Rua Bernardino de
Campos, 1000 - Centro, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 65470-000, Brazil.
tumasv@fmrp.usp.br.

Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) have a worldwide average prevalence of 2.7 cases
per 100,000 individuals, with significant geographic variability. This study
aimed to develop resource-limited strategies to detect and characterize the
frequency and genetic-clinical profile of SCAs in an unexplored population from
Alagoas State, a low Human Development Index state in northeastern Brazil.
Active search strategies were employed to identify individuals with a diagnosis
or clinical suspicion of SCAs, and a protocol for clinical and molecular
evaluation was applied in collaboration with a reference center in
Neurogenetics. A total of 73 individuals with SCAs were identified, with a
minimum estimated prevalence of 2.17 cases per 100,000 inhabitants. SCA3 was the
most common type (75.3%), followed by SCA7 (15.1%), SCA1 (6.8%), and SCA2
(2.7%). Patients with SCA3 subphenotype 2 were the most predominant. Detailed
analysis of patients with SCA3 and SCA7 revealed age at onset and clinical
features congruent with other studies, with gait disturbance and reduced visual
capacity in SCA7 as the main initial manifestations. The study also identified
many asymptomatic individuals at risk of developing SCAs. These findings
demonstrate that simple and collaborative strategies can enhance the detection
capacity of rare diseases such as SCAs in resource-limited settings and that
Alagoas State has a minimum estimated prevalence of SCAs similar to the world
average.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-023-01581-x
PMID: 37454040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
