---
reference_id: "PMID:16014652"
title: Hereditary Pick's disease with the G272V tau mutation shows predominant three-repeat tau pathology.
authors:
- Bronner IF
- ter Meulen BC
- Azmani A
- Severijnen LA
- Willemsen R
- Kamphorst W
- Ravid R
- Heutink P
- van Swieten JC
journal: Brain
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awh591
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary Pick's disease with the G272V tau mutation shows predominant three-repeat tau pathology.
**Authors:** Bronner IF, ter Meulen BC, Azmani A, Severijnen LA, Willemsen R, Kamphorst W, Ravid R, Heutink P, van Swieten JC
**Journal:** Brain (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awh591](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awh591)

## Content

1. Brain. 2005 Nov;128(Pt 11):2645-53. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh591. Epub 2005 Jul
13.

Hereditary Pick's disease with the G272V tau mutation shows predominant 
three-repeat tau pathology.

Bronner IF(1), ter Meulen BC, Azmani A, Severijnen LA, Willemsen R, Kamphorst W, 
Ravid R, Heutink P, van Swieten JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Section Medical Genomics and Center for 
Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, VU University Medical Center and VU 
University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 have been 
associated with mutations in the microtubule associated protein tau (MAPT or 
tau) gene. This disorder is characterized by a large spectrum of neuronal and 
glial tau lesions in different brain regions. Pick bodies were found in a family 
with hereditary Pick's disease with the G272V mutation and in several families 
with other tau mutations in exons 9 and 11-13. The biochemical composition of 
Pick bodies varies between these mutations. Until recently, no detailed 
biochemical characterization of G272V brain material was done owing to 
unavailability of fresh frozen brain material. We now report a detailed study 
using the immunohistochemistry, western blots and electron microscopy of two 
brains with the G272V mutation that recently became available. Both brains 
showed severe neuronal loss in the temporal cortex, whereas in the frontal 
cortex the loss was less; and abundant Pick bodies in the dentate gyrus of the 
hippocampus, and caudate nucleus. The Pick bodies consisted exclusively of 
three-repeat (3R) isoforms, as was demonstrated by isoform-specific antibodies 
and supported by western blot analysis of sarkosyl-insoluble tau. These 
observations confirm that this family diagnosed with hereditary Pick disease 
meets all the criteria for this condition, including the presence of Pick bodies 
that are unphosphorylated at Ser262 and contain twisted filaments with long 
periodicity consisting only of 3R tau.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh591
PMID: 16014652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]