---
reference_id: "PMID:23843797"
title: Protein Kinase C α Modulates Estrogen-Receptor-Dependent Transcription and Proliferation in Endometrial Cancer Cells.
authors:
- Thorne AM
- Jackson TA
- Willis VC
- Bradford AP
journal: Obstet Gynecol Int
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1155/2013/537479
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein Kinase C α Modulates Estrogen-Receptor-Dependent Transcription and Proliferation in Endometrial Cancer Cells.
**Authors:** Thorne AM, Jackson TA, Willis VC, Bradford AP
**Journal:** Obstet Gynecol Int (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2013/537479](https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/537479)

## Content

1. Obstet Gynecol Int. 2013;2013:537479. doi: 10.1155/2013/537479. Epub 2013 Jun
17.

Protein Kinase C α Modulates Estrogen-Receptor-Dependent Transcription and
Proliferation in Endometrial Cancer Cells.

Thorne AM(1), Jackson TA, Willis VC, Bradford AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Endometrial cancer is the most common invasive gynecologic malignancy in
developed countries. The most prevalent endometrioid tumors are linked to
excessive estrogen exposure and hyperplasia. However, molecular mechanisms and
signaling pathways underlying their etiology and pathophysiology remain poorly
understood. We have shown that protein kinase C α (PKC α ) is aberrantly
expressed in endometrioid tumors and is an important mediator of endometrial
cancer cell survival, proliferation, and invasion. In this study, we demonstrate
that expression of active, myristoylated PKC α conferred ligand-independent
activation of estrogen-receptor- (ER-) dependent promoters and enhanced
responses to estrogen. Conversely, knockdown of PKC α reduced ER-dependent gene
expression and inhibited estrogen-induced proliferation of endometrial cancer
cells. The ability of PKC α to potentiate estrogen activation of ER-dependent
transcription was attenuated by inhibitors of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
and Akt. Evidence suggests that PKC α and estrogen signal transduction pathways
functionally interact, to modulate ER-dependent growth and transcription. Thus,
PKC α signaling, via PI3K/Akt, may be a critical element of the hyperestrogenic
environment and activation of ER that is thought to underlie the development of
estrogen-dependent endometrial hyperplasia and malignancy. PKC α -dependent
pathways may provide much needed prognostic markers of aggressive disease and
novel therapeutic targets in ER positive tumors.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/537479
PMCID: PMC3703424
PMID: 23843797
