---
reference_id: "PMID:35923208"
title: The Role of Branched-Chain Amino Acids and Branched-Chain α-Keto Acid Dehydrogenase Kinase in Metabolic Disorders.
authors:
- Du C
- Liu WJ
- Yang J
- Zhao SS
- Liu HX
journal: Front Nutr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fnut.2022.932670
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Branched-Chain Amino Acids and Branched-Chain α-Keto Acid Dehydrogenase Kinase in Metabolic Disorders.
**Authors:** Du C, Liu WJ, Yang J, Zhao SS, Liu HX
**Journal:** Front Nutr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnut.2022.932670](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2022.932670)

## Content

1. Front Nutr. 2022 Jul 18;9:932670. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2022.932670. eCollection 
2022.

The Role of Branched-Chain Amino Acids and Branched-Chain α-Keto Acid 
Dehydrogenase Kinase in Metabolic Disorders.

Du C(1)(2)(3)(4), Liu WJ(1)(2)(3), Yang J(1)(2)(3), Zhao SS(1)(2)(3)(5), Liu 
HX(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Health Sciences Institute, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(3)Liaoning Key Laboratory of Obesity and Glucose/Lipid Associated Metabolic 
Diseases, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(5)Department of Gynecology, Cancer Hospital of China Medical University, 
Liaoning Cancer Hospital & Institute, Shenyang, China.

Branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs), composed of leucine, isoleucine, and valine, 
are important essential amino acids in human physiology. Decades of studies have 
revealed their roles in protein synthesis, regulating neurotransmitter 
synthesis, and the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR). BCAAs are found to be 
related to many metabolic disorders, such as insulin resistance, obesity, and 
heart failure. Also, many diseases are related to the alteration of the BCAA 
catabolism enzyme branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase kinase (BCKDK), 
including maple syrup urine disease, human autism with epilepsy, and so on. In 
this review, diseases and the corresponding therapies are discussed after the 
introduction of the catabolism and detection methods of BCAAs and BCKDK. Also, 
the interaction between microbiota and BCAAs is highlighted.

Copyright © 2022 Du, Liu, Yang, Zhao and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2022.932670
PMCID: PMC9339795
PMID: 35923208

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.