---
reference_id: "PMID:29361068"
title: Meeting the Informational, Educational, and Psychosocial Support Needs of Persons Living With Dementia and Their Family Caregivers.
authors:
- Whitlatch CJ
- Orsulic-Jeras S
journal: Gerontologist
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/geront/gnx162
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meeting the Informational, Educational, and Psychosocial Support Needs of Persons Living With Dementia and Their Family Caregivers.
**Authors:** Whitlatch CJ, Orsulic-Jeras S
**Journal:** Gerontologist (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/geront/gnx162](https://doi.org/10.1093/geront/gnx162)

## Content

1. Gerontologist. 2018 Jan 18;58(suppl_1):S58-S73. doi: 10.1093/geront/gnx162.

Meeting the Informational, Educational, and Psychosocial Support Needs of 
Persons Living With Dementia and Their Family Caregivers.

Whitlatch CJ(1), Orsulic-Jeras S(1).

Author information:
(1)Benjamin Rose Institute on Aging, Cleveland, Ohio.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Meeting the unique and changing needs of individuals 
living with Alzheimer's disease and their family caregivers can be very 
challenging given the dynamic and often unpredictable nature of the disease. 
Effective programs are available to help families manage the challenges they 
will face.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This article first describes the educational, 
information, and support needs of individuals living dementia and their family 
caregivers across all stages of Alzheimer's. Next, we describe the variety of 
services and program models targeted to the needs of individuals living with 
Alzheimer's disease or other types of dementia and their families.
RESULTS: These programs can help ensure that person- and family-centered care is 
maintained from time of first symptoms through end-of-life.
DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS: We end with our recommendations for maintaining 
person- and family-centered care through the provision of targeted information, 
education, and support to individuals and their families.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/geront/gnx162
PMID: 29361068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]