---
reference_id: PMID:39534420
title: "Trypsin in pancreatitis: The culprit, a mediator, or epiphenomenon?"
authors:
- Gukovskaya AS
- Lerch MM
- Mayerle J
- Sendler M
- Ji B
- Saluja AK
- Gorelick FS
- Gukovsky I
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v30.i41.4417
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Trypsin/metabolism
- Trypsinogen/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Pancreatitis/metabolism, pathology, genetics, etiology"
- "Acinar Cells/pathology, metabolism"
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Pancreas/pathology, enzymology"
- Enzyme Activation
- "Pancreas, Exocrine/pathology, metabolism, enzymology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trypsin in pancreatitis: The culprit, a mediator, or epiphenomenon?
**Authors:** Gukovskaya AS, Lerch MM, Mayerle J, Sendler M, Ji B, Saluja AK, Gorelick FS, Gukovsky I
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v30.i41.4417](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v30.i41.4417)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2024 Nov 7;30(41):4417-4438. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v30.i41.4417.

Trypsin in pancreatitis: The culprit, a mediator, or epiphenomenon?

Gukovskaya AS(1)(2), Lerch MM(3), Mayerle J(4), Sendler M(5), Ji B(6), Saluja 
AK(7), Gorelick FS(8), Gukovsky I(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90073, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los 
Angeles, CA 90073, United States. agukovsk@ucla.edu.
(3)Department of Medicine, Ludwig Maximilian University Hospital, Munich 81377, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Medicine II, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Munich 
81377, Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine A, University of Greifswald, Greifswald 17475, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, United 
States.
(7)Department of Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, 
FL 33136, United States.
(8)Departments of Cell Biology and Internal Medicine, Yale University School of 
Medicine and VA West Haven, New Haven, CT 06519, United States.
(9)Department of Medicine, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los 
Angeles, CA 90073, United States.

Pancreatitis is a common, life-threatening inflammatory disease of the exocrine 
pancreas. Its pathogenesis remains obscure, and no specific or effective 
treatment is available. Gallstones and alcohol excess are major etiologies of 
pancreatitis; in a small portion of patients the disease is hereditary. 
Pancreatitis is believed to be initiated by injured acinar cells (the main 
exocrine pancreas cell type), leading to parenchymal necrosis and local and 
systemic inflammation. The primary function of these cells is to produce, store, 
and secrete a variety of enzymes that break down all categories of nutrients. 
Most digestive enzymes, including all proteases, are secreted by acinar cells as 
inactive proforms (zymogens) and in physiological conditions are only activated 
when reaching the intestine. The generation of trypsin from inactive trypsinogen 
in the intestine plays a critical role in physiological activation of other 
zymogens. It was proposed that pancreatitis results from proteolytic 
autodigestion of the gland, mediated by premature/inappropriate trypsinogen 
activation within acinar cells. The intra-acinar trypsinogen activation is 
observed in experimental models of acute and chronic pancreatitis, and in human 
disease. On the basis of these observations, it has been considered the central 
pathogenic mechanism of pancreatitis - a concept with a century-old history. 
This review summarizes the data on trypsinogen activation in experimental and 
genetic rodent models of pancreatitis, particularly the more recent genetically 
engineered mouse models that mimic mutations associated with hereditary 
pancreatitis; analyzes the mechanisms mediating trypsinogen activation and 
protecting the pancreas against its' damaging effects; discusses the gaps in our 
knowledge, potential therapeutic approaches, and directions for future research. 
We conclude that trypsin is not the culprit in the disease pathogenesis but, at 
most, a mediator of some pancreatitis responses. Therefore, the search for 
effective therapies should focus on approaches to prevent or normalize other 
intra-acinar pathologic processes, such as defective autophagy leading to 
parenchymal cell death and unrelenting inflammation.

©The Author(s) 2024. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v30.i41.4417
PMCID: PMC11551668
PMID: 39534420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.