---
reference_id: "PMID:28402023"
title: "Heart rate recovery improvement in patients following acute myocardial infarction: exercise training, β-blocker therapy or both."
authors:
- Medeiros WM
- de Luca FA
- de Figueredo Júnior AR
- Mendes FAR
- Gun C
journal: Clin Physiol Funct Imaging
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/cpf.12420
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heart rate recovery improvement in patients following acute myocardial infarction: exercise training, β-blocker therapy or both.
**Authors:** Medeiros WM, de Luca FA, de Figueredo Júnior AR, Mendes FAR, Gun C
**Journal:** Clin Physiol Funct Imaging (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cpf.12420](https://doi.org/10.1111/cpf.12420)

## Content

1. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging. 2018 May;38(3):351-359. doi: 10.1111/cpf.12420.
Epub  2017 Apr 12.

Heart rate recovery improvement in patients following acute myocardial 
infarction: exercise training, β-blocker therapy or both.

Medeiros WM(1)(2)(3), de Luca FA(1), de Figueredo Júnior AR(2), Mendes FAR(3), 
Gun C(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Exercise Physiology and Cardiac Rehabilitation (GERFE), 
Department of Medicine and Physiotherapy, Santo Amaro University (UNISA), São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Pulmonary Function and Clinical Exercise Physiology Unit (SEFICE), 
Respiratory Division, Department of Medicine, Federal University of São Paulo 
(UNIFESP), São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation and Functional Capacity, School of 
Physiotherapy, Ibirapuera University (UNIB), São Paulo, Brazil.

Heart rate recovery (HRR) is a strong mortality predictor. Exercise training 
(ET) and β-blocker therapy have significant impact on the HRR of patients 
following myocardial infarction (MI). However, the combination of ET and 
β-blocker therapy, as well as its effectiveness in patients with a more 
compromised HRR (≤12 bpm), has been under-studied. Male patients (n = 64) 
post-MI were divided: Training + β-blocker (n = 19), Training (n = 15), 
β-blocker (n = 11) and Control (n = 19). Participants performed an ergometric 
test before and after 3 months of intervention. HRR was obtained during 5 min of 
recovery and corrected by the cardiac reserve (HRRcorrCR ). Compared to 
pre-intervention, HRRcorrCR was significantly increased during the 1st and 2nd 
minutes of recovery in the Training + β-blocker group (70·5% and 37·5%, 
respectively; P<0·05). A significant improvement, lasting from the 1st to the 
4th minute of recovery, was also observed in the Training group (47%, 50%, 25% 
and 8·7%, respectively; P<0·05). In contrast, the β-blocker group showed a 
reduction in HRRcorrCR during the 2nd and 3rd minutes of recovery (-21·2% and 
-16·3%, respectively; P<0·05). In addition, interventions involving ET 
(Training + βb, Training) were significantly more effective in patients with a 
pre-intervention HRR ≤ 12 bpm than for patients with HRR > 12 bpm. Combination 
of β-blocker therapy with ET does not compromise the effect of training and 
instead promotes HRR and aerobic capacity improvement. In addition, this 
combination is particularly beneficial for individuals presenting with a more 
compromised HRR. However, chronic administration of β-blocker therapy alone did 
not promote improvement in HRR or aerobic capacity.

© 2017 Scandinavian Society of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine. 
Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cpf.12420
PMID: 28402023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]