---
reference_id: "PMID:39948021"
title: "Characterizing circulating biomarkers for childhood dementia disorders: A scoping review of clinical trials."
authors:
- "D'Silva A"
- Barnes J
- Djafar J
- Bhattacharya K
- Yan J
- Mohammad S
- Bandodkar S
- Johnson A
- Tchan M
- Miteff C
- Elvidge KL
- Dale RC
- Farrar M
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurot.2025.e00546
keywords:
- Humans
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Dementia/blood, diagnosis"
- Child
- Clinical Trials as Topic/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterizing circulating biomarkers for childhood dementia disorders: A scoping review of clinical trials.
**Authors:** D'Silva A, Barnes J, Djafar J, Bhattacharya K, Yan J, Mohammad S, Bandodkar S, Johnson A, Tchan M, Miteff C, Elvidge KL, Dale RC, Farrar M
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurot.2025.e00546](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurot.2025.e00546)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2025 Mar;22(2):e00546. doi: 10.1016/j.neurot.2025.e00546. 
Epub 2025 Feb 12.

Characterizing circulating biomarkers for childhood dementia disorders: 
A scoping review of clinical trials.

D'Silva A(1), Barnes J(2), Djafar J(2), Bhattacharya K(3), Yan J(4), Mohammad 
S(4), Bandodkar S(3), Johnson A(2), Tchan M(5), Miteff C(6), Elvidge KL(7), Dale 
RC(4), Farrar M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Sydney Children's Hospitals Network, Sydney, 
Australia; Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, School of Clinical 
Medicine, UNSW Medicine and Health, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia; UNSW RNA Institute, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia. Electronic address: a.dsilva@unsw.edu.au.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Sydney Children's Hospitals Network, Sydney, 
Australia; Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, School of Clinical 
Medicine, UNSW Medicine and Health, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia.
(3)Sydney Children's Hospitals' Network, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia; Clinical 
School, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Faculty of Medicine and Health, 
University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Clinical School, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia; Kids Neuroscience Centre, The 
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of 
Sydney, Clinical School, NSW, Australia.
(5)Department of Genetic Medicine, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW 2145, 
Australia; Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(6)Children, Young People and Families Directorate of Hunter New England Local 
Health District and John Hunter Children's Hospital, New Lambton Heights, NSW 
2305, Australia.
(7)Childhood Dementia Initiative, Brookvale, NSW, 2100, Australia.
(8)Department of Neurology, The Sydney Children's Hospitals Network, Sydney, 
Australia; Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, School of Clinical 
Medicine, UNSW Medicine and Health, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia; UNSW RNA Institute, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia.

Childhood dementias, a group of neurological disorders are characterised by 
neurocognitive decline, with physical and psychosocial impacts for individuals. 
With therapy available for <5 ​% of childhood dementias, there is a high level 
of unmet need. Integration of biomarkers in clinical trials are important to 
characterize distinctive biological activities and interrogate targets for 
therapeutic development. This study reviewed four clinical trial registries to 
examine circulating biomarkers in childhood dementias. Findings from 262 studies 
were synthesized across 49/72 (68 ​%) childhood dementia disorders. 
Disease-related biomarkers were associated with 1) the primary pathophysiology 
2) downstream pathogenic events 3) drug-related pharmacokinetics, safety and/or 
tolerability. The predominant biological measures were metabolites linked to the 
primary pathophysiological pathway (102 measures, 185 studies), while use of 
cytoskeletal proteins (3 measures, 15 studies), inflammatory mediators (19 
measures, 24 studies), oxidative stress-related analytes (15 measures, 8 
studies), neurotransmitters or related neuro-metabolites (3 measures, 5 studies) 
were limited. A range of potential biomarkers are used in clinical trials; 
however, their use is inconsistent and under utilised among conditions. 
Development of a panel of biomarkers has potential to interrogate and link 
shared biological pathways across the heterogeneity of childhood dementias to 
exert a significant impact for the development of disease-modifying therapies.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurot.2025.e00546
PMCID: PMC12014410
PMID: 39948021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Kristina 
Elvidge is the Head of Research at the Childhood Dementia Initiative. All other 
authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.