---
reference_id: "PMID:26300262"
title: MCM9 Is Required for Mammalian DNA Mismatch Repair.
authors:
- Traver S
- Coulombe P
- Peiffer I
- Hutchins JR
- Kitzmann M
- Latreille D
- Méchali M
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.07.010
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Base Sequence
- "Chromatin/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA Helicases/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA Mismatch Repair/genetics, physiology"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Microsatellite Instability
- "Minichromosome Maintenance Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- MutL Protein Homolog 1
- "MutS Homolog 2 Protein/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- MutS Homolog 3 Protein
- "Nuclear Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MCM9 Is Required for Mammalian DNA Mismatch Repair.
**Authors:** Traver S, Coulombe P, Peiffer I, Hutchins JR, Kitzmann M, Latreille D, Méchali M
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2015.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2015.07.010)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2015 Sep 3;59(5):831-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.07.010. Epub 2015
 Aug 20.

MCM9 Is Required for Mammalian DNA Mismatch Repair.

Traver S(1), Coulombe P(1), Peiffer I(1), Hutchins JR(1), Kitzmann M(1), 
Latreille D(2), Méchali M(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of DNA Replication and Genome Dynamics, Institute of Human 
Genetics, CNRS, 141 rue de la Cardonille, 34396 Montpellier, France.
(2)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS, 141 rue de 
la Cardonille, 34396 Montpellier, France.
(3)Laboratory of DNA Replication and Genome Dynamics, Institute of Human 
Genetics, CNRS, 141 rue de la Cardonille, 34396 Montpellier, France. Electronic 
address: mechali@igh.cnrs.fr.

DNA mismatch repair (MMR) is an evolutionarily conserved process that corrects 
DNA polymerase errors during replication to maintain genomic integrity. In E. 
coli, the DNA helicase UvrD is implicated in MMR, yet an analogous helicase 
activity has not been identified in eukaryotes. Here, we show that mammalian 
MCM9, a protein involved in replication and homologous recombination, forms a 
complex with MMR initiation proteins (MSH2, MSH3, MLH1, PMS1, and the clamp 
loader RFC) and is essential for MMR. Mcm9-/- cells display microsatellite 
instability and MMR deficiency. The MCM9 complex has a helicase activity that is 
required for efficient MMR since wild-type but not helicase-dead MCM9 restores 
MMR activity in Mcm9-/- cells. Moreover, MCM9 loading onto chromatin is 
MSH2-dependent, and in turn MCM9 stimulates the recruitment of MLH1 to 
chromatin. Our results reveal a role for MCM9 and its helicase activity in 
mammalian MMR.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.07.010
PMID: 26300262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]