---
reference_id: "PMID:29144448"
title: Regeneration of the entire human epidermis using transgenic stem cells.
authors:
- Hirsch T
- Rothoeft T
- Teig N
- Bauer JW
- Pellegrini G
- De Rosa L
- Scaglione D
- Reichelt J
- Klausegger A
- Kneisz D
- Romano O
- Secone Seconetti A
- Contin R
- Enzo E
- Jurman I
- Carulli S
- Jacobsen F
- Luecke T
- Lehnhardt M
- Fischer M
- Kueckelhaus M
- Quaglino D
- Morgante M
- Bicciato S
- Bondanza S
- De Luca M
journal: Nature
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nature24487
keywords:
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Lineage
- Cell Self Renewal
- Cell Tracking
- Child
- "Clone Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "Dermis/cytology, pathology"
- Epidermal Cells
- Epidermis/pathology
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa, Junctional/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Keratinocytes/cytology, metabolism, transplantation"
- Male
- Proviruses/genetics
- Regeneration
- "Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- Transgenes/genetics
- Kalinin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regeneration of the entire human epidermis using transgenic stem cells.
**Authors:** Hirsch T, Rothoeft T, Teig N, Bauer JW, Pellegrini G, De Rosa L, Scaglione D, Reichelt J, Klausegger A, Kneisz D, Romano O, Secone Seconetti A, Contin R, Enzo E, Jurman I, Carulli S, Jacobsen F, Luecke T, Lehnhardt M, Fischer M, Kueckelhaus M, Quaglino D, Morgante M, Bicciato S, Bondanza S, De Luca M
**Journal:** Nature (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature24487](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24487)

## Content

1. Nature. 2017 Nov 16;551(7680):327-332. doi: 10.1038/nature24487. Epub 2017 Nov
 8.

Regeneration of the entire human epidermis using transgenic stem cells.

Hirsch T(1), Rothoeft T(2), Teig N(2), Bauer JW(3), Pellegrini G(4)(5), De Rosa 
L(5), Scaglione D(6), Reichelt J(3), Klausegger A(3), Kneisz D(3), Romano O(7), 
Secone Seconetti A(5), Contin R(5), Enzo E(5), Jurman I(8), Carulli S(9), 
Jacobsen F(1), Luecke T(10), Lehnhardt M(1), Fischer M(2), Kueckelhaus M(1), 
Quaglino D(7), Morgante M(8), Bicciato S(7), Bondanza S(9), De Luca M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Burn Centre, BG University Hospital 
Bergmannsheil, Ruhr University Bochum, 44789 Bochum, Germany.
(2)Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, University Children's 
Hospital, Ruhr University Bochum, 44791 Bochum, Germany.
(3)EB House Austria and Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of the 
Paracelsus Medical University, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.
(4)Department of Surgery, Medicine, Dentistry and Morphological Sciences, 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41124 Modena, Italy.
(5)Center for Regenerative Medicine "Stefano Ferrari", Department of Life 
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41125 Modena, Italy.
(6)IGA Technology Services s.r.l., 33100 Udine, Italy.
(7)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41125 
Modena, Italy.
(8)Istituto di Genomica Applicata and Dipartimento di Scienze Agroalimentari, 
Ambientali e Animali, University of Udine, 33100 Udine, Italy.
(9)Holostem Terapie Avanzate s.r.l., 41125 Modena, Italy.
(10)Department of Neuropaediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Ruhr 
University Bochum, 44791 Bochum, Germany.

Comment in
    Nature. 2017 Nov 8;551(7679):141. doi: 10.1038/551141a.
    Nature. 2017 Nov 16;551(7680):306-307. doi: 10.1038/nature24753.
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2018 Jan;19(1):1. doi: 10.1038/nrm.2017.124.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2018 Jan;19(1):4-5. doi: 10.1038/nrg.2017.106.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2018 Jan 4;22(1):14-15. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2017.12.005.
    Nature. 2018 Dec;564(7735):S14-S15. doi: 10.1038/d41586-018-07640-2.

Junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB) is a severe and often lethal genetic 
disease caused by mutations in genes encoding the basement membrane component 
laminin-332. Surviving patients with JEB develop chronic wounds to the skin and 
mucosa, which impair their quality of life and lead to skin cancer. Here we show 
that autologous transgenic keratinocyte cultures regenerated an entire, fully 
functional epidermis on a seven-year-old child suffering from a devastating, 
life-threatening form of JEB. The proviral integration pattern was maintained in 
vivo and epidermal renewal did not cause any clonal selection. Clonal tracing 
showed that the human epidermis is sustained not by equipotent progenitors, but 
by a limited number of long-lived stem cells, detected as holoclones, that can 
extensively self-renew in vitro and in vivo and produce progenitors that 
replenish terminally differentiated keratinocytes. This study provides a 
blueprint that can be applied to other stem cell-mediated combined ex vivo cell 
and gene therapies.

DOI: 10.1038/nature24487
PMCID: PMC6283270
PMID: 29144448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests G.P. and M.D.L. 
are co-founders and member of the Board of Directors of Holostem Terapie 
Avanzate (HTA), s.r.l, Modena, Italy; Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A. (a co-founder 
of HTA), holds an Orphan Drug Medicinal Product designation (EU/3/15/1465) for 
the transgenic cultures used in this paper.