---
reference_id: "PMID:19945427"
title: PEDF regulates osteoclasts via osteoprotegerin and RANKL.
authors:
- Akiyama T
- Dass CR
- Shinoda Y
- Kawano H
- Tanaka S
- Choong PF
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.139
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bone Resorption/metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Differentiation/drug effects
- "Eye Proteins/pharmacology, physiology"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred BALB C"
- "Nerve Growth Factors/pharmacology, physiology"
- "Osteoclasts/metabolism, pathology, physiology"
- Osteoprotegerin/biosynthesis
- RANK Ligand/biosynthesis
- "Serpins/pharmacology, physiology"
- Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PEDF regulates osteoclasts via osteoprotegerin and RANKL.
**Authors:** Akiyama T, Dass CR, Shinoda Y, Kawano H, Tanaka S, Choong PF
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.139](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.139)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 1;391(1):789-94. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.139. Epub 2009 Nov 27.

PEDF regulates osteoclasts via osteoprotegerin and RANKL.

Akiyama T(1), Dass CR, Shinoda Y, Kawano H, Tanaka S, Choong PF.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Orthopaedics and Surgery, University of Melbourne, St 
Vincent's Health, Melbourne, Australia.

Bone homeostasis is maintained through a balance between bone formation and 
resorption. Bone resorption is mainly carried out by a specific type of cell 
called the osteoclast (OCL). Previously, expression of pigment 
epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), the most potent endogenous inhibitor of 
angiogenesis, has been demonstrated in bone tissue and it known to induce 
differentiation in osteoblastic cells. Furthermore, therapeutic effects of PEDF 
on osteosarcoma, a prevalent primary bone tumor, with inhibition of bone 
destruction has been shown. Thus, PEDF is possibly involved in bone homeostasis 
as an inhibitor of bone resorption. To address this involvement, we studied the 
effect of PEDF on OCL function. OCL differentiation, RANKL-mediated survival and 
bone resorption activity were inhibited by PEDF in a dose-dependent manner. PEDF 
upregulated osteoprotegerin (OPG), which naturally blocks OCL maturation, in 
primary osteoblasts and OCL precursor cells. These results suggest that PEDF 
inhibits OCL function via regulating OPG expression, and thereby contributes to 
the maintenance of bone homeostasis.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.139
PMID: 19945427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]