---
reference_id: "PMID:34718050"
title: Role of the IgG4-related cholangitis autoantigen annexin A11 in cholangiocyte protection.
authors:
- Herta T
- Kersten R
- Chang JC
- Hubers L
- Go S
- Tolenaars D
- Paulusma CC
- Nathanson MH
- Elferink RO
- van de Graaf SFJ
- Beuers U
journal: J Hepatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2021.10.009
keywords:
- Aged
- "Annexins/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Autoantigens/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Biopsy/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- "Cholangitis/etiology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin G4-Related Disease/complications, physiopathology"
- Liver/pathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Protective Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of the IgG4-related cholangitis autoantigen annexin A11 in cholangiocyte protection.
**Authors:** Herta T, Kersten R, Chang JC, Hubers L, Go S, Tolenaars D, Paulusma CC, Nathanson MH, Elferink RO, van de Graaf SFJ, Beuers U
**Journal:** J Hepatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhep.2021.10.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2021.10.009)

## Content

1. J Hepatol. 2022 Feb;76(2):319-331. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2021.10.009. Epub 2021
Oct 27.

Role of the IgG4-related cholangitis autoantigen annexin A11 in cholangiocyte
protection.

Herta T(1), Kersten R(2), Chang JC(1), Hubers L(1), Go S(1), Tolenaars D(1),
Paulusma CC(1), Nathanson MH(3), Elferink RO(1), van de Graaf SFJ(1), Beuers
U(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology and Tytgat Institute for Liver
and Intestinal Research, AGEM, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, location
AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology and Tytgat Institute for Liver
and Intestinal Research, AGEM, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, location
AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Section of Digestive Diseases, Department of
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, USA.
(3)Section of Digestive Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, USA.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology and Tytgat Institute for Liver
and Intestinal Research, AGEM, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, location
AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: u.h.beuers@amsterdamumc.nl.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Annexin A11 was identified as autoantigen in IgG4-related
cholangitis (IRC), a B-cell driven disease. Annexin A11 modulates
calcium-dependent exocytosis, a crucial mechanism for insertion of proteins into
their target membranes. Human cholangiocytes form an apical 'biliary bicarbonate
umbrella' regarded as defense against harmful hydrophobic bile acid influx. The
bicarbonate secretory machinery comprises the chloride/bicarbonate exchanger AE2
and the chloride channel ANO1. We aimed to investigate the expression and
function of annexin A11 in human cholangiocytes and a potential role of
IgG1/IgG4-mediated autoreactivity against annexin A11 in the pathogenesis of
IRC.
METHODS: Expression of annexin A11 in human liver was studied by
immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. In human control and ANXA11
knockdown H69 cholangiocytes, intracellular pH, AE2 and ANO1 surface expression,
and bile acid influx were examined using ratio microspectrofluorometry, cell
surface biotinylation, and 22,23-3H-glycochenodeoxycholic acid permeation,
respectively. The localization of annexin A11-mEmerald and ANO1-mCherry was
investigated by live-cell microscopy in H69 cholangiocytes after incubation with
IRC patient serum containing anti-annexin A11 IgG1/IgG4-autoantibodies or
disease control serum.
RESULTS: Annexin A11 was strongly expressed in human cholangiocytes, but not
hepatocytes. Knockdown of ANXA11 led to reduced plasma membrane expression of
ANO1, but not AE2, alkalization of intracellular pH and uncontrolled bile acid
influx. High intracellular calcium conditions led to annexin A11 membrane shift
and colocalization with ANO1. Incubation with IRC patient serum inhibited
annexin A11 membrane shift and reduced ANO1 surface expression.
CONCLUSION: Cholangiocellular annexin A11 mediates apical membrane abundance of
the chloride channel ANO1, thereby supporting biliary bicarbonate secretion.
Insertion is inhibited by IRC patient serum containing anti-annexin A11
IgG1/IgG4-autoantibodies. Anti-annexin A11 autoantibodies may contribute to the
pathogenesis of IRC by weakening the 'biliary bicarbonate umbrella'.
LAY SUMMARY: We previously identified annexin A11 as a specific autoantigen in
immunoglobulin G4-related cholangitis (IRC), a B-cell driven disease affecting
the bile ducts. Human cholangiocytes are protected against harmful hydrophobic
bile acid influx by a defense mechanism referred to as the 'biliary bicarbonate
umbrella'. We found that annexin A11 is required for the formation of a robust
bicarbonate umbrella. Binding of patient-derived annexin A11 autoantibodies
inhibits annexin A11 function, possibly contributing to bile duct damage by
weakening the biliary bicarbonate umbrella in patients with IRC.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2021.10.009
PMCID: PMC10804347
PMID: 34718050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no
conflict of interest with regard to this work. Please refer to the accompanying
ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.
