---
reference_id: "PMID:39777366"
title: Image Guidance is Associated with Improved Freedom From Recurrence After Superficial Radiation Therapy for Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer.
authors:
- McClure EM
- Sedor G
- Moloney M
- Jin Y
- Yu L
- Kattan MW
journal: Adv Radiat Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.adro.2024.101463
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Image Guidance is Associated with Improved Freedom From Recurrence After Superficial Radiation Therapy for Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer.
**Authors:** McClure EM, Sedor G, Moloney M, Jin Y, Yu L, Kattan MW
**Journal:** Adv Radiat Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.adro.2024.101463](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adro.2024.101463)

## Content

1. Adv Radiat Oncol. 2024 Feb 9;9(12):101463. doi: 10.1016/j.adro.2024.101463.
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Image Guidance is Associated with Improved Freedom From Recurrence After
Superficial Radiation Therapy for Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer.

McClure EM(1), Sedor G(2), Moloney M(3), Jin Y(4), Yu L(5), Kattan MW(4).

Author information:
(1)University Hospitals Geauga Medical Center, Chardon, OH.
(2)Columbia University Irving Medical Center, Vagelos College of Physicians &
Surgeons, New York, New York.
(3)New York Institute of Technology College of Osteopathic Medicine, Old
Westbury, New York.
(4)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
Ohio.
(5)Laserderm Dermatology, Smithtown, New York.

Expression of concern in
    Adv Radiat Oncol. 2024 Oct 18;9(12):101605. doi: 10.1016/j.adro.2024.101605.

PURPOSE: This is the first study to quantify the 2-year freedom from recurrence
for individuals with nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC) such as basal cell carcinoma
(BCC), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and squamous carcinoma in situ (SCCIS)
treated with image guided superficial radiation therapy (IGSRT) versus SRT
without image guidance.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: This retrospective cohort study evaluates the 2-year
freedom recurrence rate of NMSCs treated by IGSRT (March 2016 to January 2022)
and compares it to existing data on NMSCs treated by SRT via 1 sample proportion
tests. Individuals >18 years old with biopsy-proven SCC, SCCIS, and/or BCC
treated with IGSRT were included in the study, and 1602 patients/2880 treated
lesions were followed until January 14, 2022. SRT literature was identified
through an Ovid Medline search.
RESULTS: All NMSCs treated by IGSRT in this cohort had an aggregate 2-year
freedom from recurrence of 99.23%. The recurrence rate for BCC (N = 1382) was
1.1%, for SCC (N = 904) 0.8%, and for SCCIS (N = 594) 0.0%. These recurrence
rates are significantly improved compared with a pooled study that evaluated
NMSCs across histology and BCCs alone treated without image guidance (standard
SRT) (P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: IGSRT offers a paradigm-shifting treatment option for patients with
NMSCs - offering statistically significantly improved outcomes compared with
standard SRT and a more desirable toxicity profile to surgical options. This
study demonstrates that IGSRT is associated with remarkably low recurrence
rates, which are statistically significantly improved from the previous
generation of SRT and in line with modern outcomes for Mohs micrographic
surgery.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.adro.2024.101463
PMCID: PMC11704900
PMID: 39777366

Conflict of interest statement: Lio Yu and Michael W. Kattan are paid
consultants for SkinCure Oncology. No other authors have conflicts of interest
to declare.
