---
reference_id: "PMID:7670477"
title: A recurrent mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 causes hypochondroplasia.
authors:
- Bellus GA
- McIntosh I
- Smith EA
- Aylsworth AS
- Kaitila I
- Horton WA
- Greenhaw GA
- Hecht JT
- Francomano CA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1038/ng0795-357
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/genetics, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A recurrent mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 causes hypochondroplasia.
**Authors:** Bellus GA, McIntosh I, Smith EA, Aylsworth AS, Kaitila I, Horton WA, Greenhaw GA, Hecht JT, Francomano CA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0795-357](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0795-357)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1995 Jul;10(3):357-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0795-357.

A recurrent mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain of fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 3 causes hypochondroplasia.

Bellus GA(1), McIntosh I, Smith EA, Aylsworth AS, Kaitila I, Horton WA, Greenhaw 
GA, Hecht JT, Francomano CA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

Hypochondroplasia (MIM 146000) is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia with 
skeletal features similar to but milder than those seen in achondroplasia. 
Within the past year, the achondroplasia locus has been mapped to 4p 16.3 (refs 
5-7) and mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene have 
been identified in patients with the disorder. More than 95% of 242 cases 
reported so far are accounted for by a single Gly380Arg mutation. McKusick et 
al. proposed that achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia are allelic based on the 
similarities in phenotype between the two disorders and the identification of a 
severely dwarfed individual whose father had achondroplasia and whose mother had 
hypochondroplasia. There is also genetic linkage evidence that hypochondroplasia 
and achondroplasia map to the same locus. We therefore began a systematic 
screening of FGFR3 to detect mutations in patients with hypochondroplasia. We 
now report a single FGFR3 mutation found in 8 out of 14 unrelated patients with 
hypochondroplasia. This mutation causes a C to A transversion at nucleotide 
1620, resulting in an Asn540Lys substitution in the proximal tyrosine kinase 
domain.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0795-357
PMID: 7670477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]