---
reference_id: "PMID:33568542"
title: Association of Mitochondrial DNA Genomic Variation With Risk of Pick Disease.
authors:
- Valentino RR
- Heckman MG
- Johnson PW
- Baker MC
- Soto-Beasley AI
- Walton RL
- Koga S
- Roemer SF
- Suh E
- Uitti RJ
- Trojanowski JQ
- Grossman M
- Van Deerlin VM
- Rademakers R
- Wszolek ZK
- Dickson DW
- Ross OA
journal: Neurology
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000011649
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Mitochondrial DNA Genomic Variation With Risk of Pick Disease.
**Authors:** Valentino RR, Heckman MG, Johnson PW, Baker MC, Soto-Beasley AI, Walton RL, Koga S, Roemer SF, Suh E, Uitti RJ, Trojanowski JQ, Grossman M, Van Deerlin VM, Rademakers R, Wszolek ZK, Dickson DW, Ross OA
**Journal:** Neurology (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000011649](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000011649)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2021 Mar 30;96(13):e1755-e1760. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000011649. 
Epub 2021 Feb 10.

Association of Mitochondrial DNA Genomic Variation With Risk of Pick Disease.

Valentino RR(1), Heckman MG(1), Johnson PW(1), Baker MC(1), Soto-Beasley AI(1), 
Walton RL(1), Koga S(1), Roemer SF(1), Suh E(1), Uitti RJ(1), Trojanowski JQ(1), 
Grossman M(1), Van Deerlin VM(1), Rademakers R(1), Wszolek ZK(1), Dickson DW(1), 
Ross OA(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neuroscience (R.R.V., M.C.B., A.I.S.-B., R.L.W., S.K., 
S.F.R., R.R., D.W.D., O.A.R.), Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics 
(M.G.H., P.W.J.), Department of Neurology (R.J.U., Z.K.W.), and Department of 
Clinical Genomics (O.A.R.), Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL; Perelman School of 
Medicine (E.S., J.Q.T., V.M.V.D.) and Department of Neurology (M.G.), University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; and VIB-UAntwerp Center for Molecular Neurology 
(R.R.), University of Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)From the Department of Neuroscience (R.R.V., M.C.B., A.I.S.-B., R.L.W., S.K., 
S.F.R., R.R., D.W.D., O.A.R.), Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics 
(M.G.H., P.W.J.), Department of Neurology (R.J.U., Z.K.W.), and Department of 
Clinical Genomics (O.A.R.), Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL; Perelman School of 
Medicine (E.S., J.Q.T., V.M.V.D.) and Department of Neurology (M.G.), University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; and VIB-UAntwerp Center for Molecular Neurology 
(R.R.), University of Antwerp, Belgium. ross.owen@mayo.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether stable polymorphisms that define mitochondrial 
haplogroups in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are associated with Pick disease risk, 
we genotyped 52 pathologically confirmed cases of Pick disease and 910 
neurologically healthy controls and performed case-control association analysis.
METHODS: Fifty-two pathologically confirmed cases of Pick disease from Mayo 
Clinic Florida (n = 38) and the University of Pennsylvania (n = 14) and 910 
neurologically healthy controls collected from Mayo Clinic Florida were 
genotyped for unique mtDNA haplogroup-defining variants. Mitochondrial 
haplogroups were determined, and in a case-control analysis, associations of 
mtDNA haplogroups with risk of Pick disease were evaluated with logistic 
regression models that were adjusted for age and sex.
RESULTS: No individual mtDNA haplogroups or superhaplogroups were significantly 
associated with risk of Pick disease after adjustment for multiple testing (p < 
0.0021, considered significant). However, nominally significant (p < 0.05) 
associations toward an increased risk of Pick disease were observed for mtDNA 
haplogroup W (5.8% cases vs 1.6% controls, odds ratio [OR] 4.78, p = 0.020) and 
subhaplogroup H4 (5.8% cases vs 1.2% controls, OR 4.82, p = 0.021).
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that mtDNA variation is not a disease driver 
but may influence disease susceptibility. Ongoing genetic assessments in larger 
cohorts of Pick disease are currently underway.

© 2021 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000011649
PMCID: PMC8055308
PMID: 33568542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]