---
reference_id: "PMID:34083039"
title: Relationships among smoking, oxidative stress, inflammation, macromolecular damage, and cancer.
authors:
- Caliri AW
- Tommasi S
- Besaratinia A
journal: Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2021.108365
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationships among smoking, oxidative stress, inflammation, macromolecular damage, and cancer.
**Authors:** Caliri AW, Tommasi S, Besaratinia A
**Journal:** Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mrrev.2021.108365](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrrev.2021.108365)

## Content

1. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 2021 Jan-Jun;787:108365. doi: 
10.1016/j.mrrev.2021.108365. Epub 2021 Jan 11.

Relationships among smoking, oxidative stress, inflammation, macromolecular 
damage, and cancer.

Caliri AW(1), Tommasi S(1), Besaratinia A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, USC Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, M/C 9603, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, USC Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, M/C 9603, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. Electronic address: 
besarati@med.usc.edu.

Smoking is a major risk factor for a variety of diseases, including cancer and 
immune-mediated inflammatory diseases. Tobacco smoke contains a mixture of 
chemicals, including a host of reactive oxygen- and nitrogen species (ROS and 
RNS), among others, that can damage cellular and sub-cellular targets, such as 
lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. A growing body of evidence supports a key 
role for smoking-induced ROS and the resulting oxidative stress in inflammation 
and carcinogenesis. This comprehensive and up-to-date review covers four 
interrelated topics, including 'smoking', 'oxidative stress', 'inflammation', 
and 'cancer'. The review discusses each of the four topics, while exploring the 
intersections among the topics by highlighting the macromolecular damage 
attributable to ROS. Specifically, oxidative damage to macromolecular targets, 
such as lipid peroxidation, post-translational modification of proteins, and DNA 
adduction, as well as enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidant defense 
mechanisms, and the multi-faceted repair pathways of oxidized lesions are 
described. Also discussed are the biological consequences of oxidative damage to 
macromolecules if they evade the defense mechanisms and/or are not repaired 
properly or in time. Emphasis is placed on the genetic- and epigenetic 
alterations that may lead to transcriptional deregulation of 
functionally-important genes and disruption of regulatory elements. 
Smoking-associated oxidative stress also activates the inflammatory response 
pathway, which triggers a cascade of events of which ROS production is an 
initial yet indispensable step. The release of ROS at the site of damage and 
inflammation helps combat foreign pathogens and restores the injured tissue, 
while simultaneously increasing the burden of oxidative stress. This creates a 
vicious cycle in which smoking-related oxidative stress causes inflammation, 
which in turn, results in further generation of ROS, and potentially increased 
oxidative damage to macromolecular targets that may lead to cancer initiation 
and/or progression.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2021.108365
PMCID: PMC8287787
PMID: 34083039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest. The sponsors of the study had no role in study 
design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, writing of the 
report, or in the decision to submit for publication.