---
reference_id: "PMID:38089767"
title: "Contemporary review on spontaneous coronary artery dissection: insights into the angiographic finding and differential diagnosis."
authors:
- Kovacevic M
- Jarakovic M
- Milovancev A
- Cankovic M
- Petrovic M
- Bjelobrk M
- Ilic A
- Srdanovic I
- Tadic S
- Dabovic D
- Crnomarkovic B
- Komazec N
- Dracina N
- Apostolovic S
- Stanojevic D
- Kunadian V
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1278453
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contemporary review on spontaneous coronary artery dissection: insights into the angiographic finding and differential diagnosis.
**Authors:** Kovacevic M, Jarakovic M, Milovancev A, Cankovic M, Petrovic M, Bjelobrk M, Ilic A, Srdanovic I, Tadic S, Dabovic D, Crnomarkovic B, Komazec N, Dracina N, Apostolovic S, Stanojevic D, Kunadian V
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2023.1278453](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2023.1278453)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Nov 27;10:1278453. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1278453. 
eCollection 2023.

Contemporary review on spontaneous coronary artery dissection: insights into the 
angiographic finding and differential diagnosis.

Kovacevic M(1)(2), Jarakovic M(1)(2), Milovancev A(1)(2), Cankovic M(1)(2), 
Petrovic M(1)(2), Bjelobrk M(1)(2), Ilic A(1)(2), Srdanovic I(1)(2), Tadic 
S(1)(2), Dabovic D(1)(2), Crnomarkovic B(2), Komazec N(2), Dracina N(2), 
Apostolovic S(3)(4), Stanojevic D(4), Kunadian V(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Serbia.
(2)Cardiology Clinic, Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases of Vojvodina, Sremska 
Kamenica, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, University of Niš, Niš, Serbia.
(4)Clinic for Cardiology, Clinical Center Niš, Niš, Serbia.
(5)Faculty of Medical Sciences, Translational and Clinical Research Institute, 
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(6)Cardiothoracic Centre, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD), although in the majority of cases 
presents as an acute coronary syndrome (ACS), has different pathophysiology from 
atherosclerosis that influences specific angiography findings and enables most 
patients to be solved by optimal medical therapy rather than percutaneous 
coronary intervention (PCI). Therefore, accurate diagnosis is essential for 
adequate treatment of each patient as management of SCAD differs from that of 
ACS of atherosclerotic aetiology. So far, invasive coronary angiography remains 
the most important diagnostic tool in suspected SCAD. However, there are 
ambiguous cases that can mimic SCAD. In this review, the authors summarize 
current knowledge about the diagnostic algorithms, particularly angiographic 
features of SCAD, pitfalls of angiography, and the role of intracoronary imaging 
in the context of SCAD diagnosis. Finally, apart from the pathognomonic 
angiographic features of SCAD that are thoroughly discussed in this review, the 
authors focus on obscure angiography findings and findings that can mimic SCAD 
as well. Differential diagnosis and the timely recognition of SCAD are crucial 
as there are differences in the acute and long-term management of SCAD and other 
causes of ACS.

© 2023 Kovacevic, Jarakovic, Milovancev, Cankovic, Petrovic, Bjelobrk, Ilic, 
Srdanovic, Tadic, Dabovic, Crnomarkovic, Komazec, Dracina, Apostolovic, 
Stanojevic and Kunadian.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1278453
PMCID: PMC10711615
PMID: 38089767

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.