---
reference_id: "PMID:24126481"
title: "Diagnosis and management of Graves disease: a global overview."
authors:
- Bartalena L
journal: Nat Rev Endocrinol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2013.193
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of Graves disease: a global overview.
**Authors:** Bartalena L
**Journal:** Nat Rev Endocrinol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrendo.2013.193](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2013.193)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2013 Dec;9(12):724-34. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2013.193. Epub 
2013 Oct 15.

Diagnosis and management of Graves disease: a global overview.

Bartalena L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Insubria, 
Endocrine Unit, Ospedale di Circolo, Viale Borri, 57, 21100 Varese, Italy.

Graves disease is an autoimmune disorder characterized by goitre, 
hyperthyroidism and, in 25% of patients, Graves ophthalmopathy. The 
hyperthyroidism is caused by thyroid hypertrophy and stimulation of function, 
resulting from interaction of anti-TSH-receptor antibodies (TRAb) with the TSH 
receptor on thyroid follicular cells. Measurements of serum levels of TRAb and 
thyroid ultrasonography represent the most important diagnostic tests for Graves 
disease. Management of the condition currently relies on antithyroid drugs, 
which mainly inhibit thyroid hormone synthesis, or ablative treatments 
((131)I-radiotherapy or thyroidectomy) that remove or decrease thyroid tissue. 
None of these treatments targets the disease process, and patients with treated 
Graves disease consequently experience either a high rate of recurrence, if 
receiving antithyroid drugs, or lifelong hypothyroidism, after ablative therapy. 
Geographical differences in the use of these therapies exist, partially owing to 
the availability of skilled thyroid surgeons and suitable nuclear medicine 
units. Novel agents that might act on the disease process are currently under 
evaluation in preclinical or clinical studies, but evidence of their efficacy 
and safety is lacking.

DOI: 10.1038/nrendo.2013.193
PMID: 24126481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]