---
reference_id: "PMID:37152963"
title: "Graves' disease as a driver of depression: a mechanistic insight."
authors:
- Song Y
- Wang X
- Ma W
- Yang Y
- Yan S
- Sun J
- Zhu X
- Tang Y
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1162445
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Graves' disease as a driver of depression: a mechanistic insight.
**Authors:** Song Y, Wang X, Ma W, Yang Y, Yan S, Sun J, Zhu X, Tang Y
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1162445](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1162445)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Apr 20;14:1162445. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1162445. eCollection 2023.

Graves' disease as a driver of depression: a mechanistic insight.

Song Y(1), Wang X(1), Ma W(2), Yang Y(3), Yan S(1), Sun J(4), Zhu X(5), Tang 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.
(2)Centre for Evidence-Based Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese 
Medicine, Beijing, China.
(3)Tongling Municipal hospital, Anhui, China.
(4)Department of Geriatrics, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen 
Peking University-The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Medical 
Center, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(5)Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing, 
China.

Graves' disease (GD) is characterized by diffuse enlargement and overactivity of 
the thyroid gland, which may be accompanied by other physical symptoms. Among 
them, depression can dramatically damage patients' quality of life, yet its 
prevalence in GD has not received adequate attention. Some studies have 
established a strong correlation between GD and increased risk of depression, 
though the data from current study remains limited. The summary of mechanistic 
insights regarding GD and depression has underpinned possible pathways by which 
GD contributes to depression. In this review, we first summarized the clinical 
evidence that supported the increased prevalence of depression by GD. We then 
concentrated on the mechanistic findings related to the acceleration of 
depression in the context of GD, as mounting evidence has indicated that GD 
promotes the development of depression through various mechanisms, including 
triggering autoimmune responses, inducing hormonal disorders, and influencing 
the thyroid-gut-microbiome-brain axis. Finally, we briefly presented potential 
therapeutic approaches to decreasing the risk of depression among patients with 
GD.

Copyright © 2023 Song, Wang, Ma, Yang, Yan, Sun, Zhu and Tang.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1162445
PMCID: PMC10157224
PMID: 37152963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.