---
reference_id: "PMID:38863853"
title: Trends in Shortages of Lead Chelators From 2001 to 2022.
authors:
- Whitledge JD
- Soto P
- Glowacki KM
- Calello DP
- Fox ER
- Mazer-Amirshahi M
journal: J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5863/1551-6776-29.3.306
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trends in Shortages of Lead Chelators From 2001 to 2022.
**Authors:** Whitledge JD, Soto P, Glowacki KM, Calello DP, Fox ER, Mazer-Amirshahi M
**Journal:** J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5863/1551-6776-29.3.306](https://doi.org/10.5863/1551-6776-29.3.306)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther. 2024 Jun;29(3):306-315. doi:
10.5863/1551-6776-29.3.306. Epub 2024 Jun 10.

Trends in Shortages of Lead Chelators From 2001 to 2022.

Whitledge JD(1)(2), Soto P(3)(4), Glowacki KM(5), Calello DP(6)(7), Fox ER(8),
Mazer-Amirshahi M(3)(9).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical Toxicology Fellowship (JDW), Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine (JDW), Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Boston, MA.
(3)National Capital Poison Center (PS, MMA), Washington, DC.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine (PS), The George Washington University
School of Medicine, Washington, DC.
(5)Georgetown University School of Medicine (KMG), Washington, DC.
(6)Rutgers New Jersey Medical School (DPC), Newark, NJ.
(7)New Jersey Poison Information and Education System (DPC), Newark, NJ.
(8)Department of Pharmacy Services (ERF), University of Utah Health, Salt Lake
City, UT.
(9)Department of Emergency Medicine (MMA), MedStar Washington Hospital Center,
Washington, DC.

OBJECTIVE: The study aims to describe drug shortages affecting lead chelators in
the United States from 2001 through 2022.
METHODS: Drug shortage data were retrieved from the University of Utah Drug
Information Service from January 1, 2001, through December 31, 2022. Shortages
of first- and second-line lead chelators were analyzed. Drug class, formulation,
administration route, shortage reason, shortage duration, generic status,
single-source status, and presence of temporally overlapping shortages were
examined. Total shortage months, percentages of study period on shortage, and
median shortage durations were calculated.
RESULTS: Thirteen lead chelator shortages were reported during the study period.
Median duration was 7.4 months and the longest shortage (24.8 months) involved
calcium disodium edetate. Calcium disodium edetate and dimercaprol had the
greatest number of shortages, 4 each, and 61.5% of shortages involved parenteral
medications. Median shortage duration was 14.2 months for parenteral agents and
2.2 months for non-parenteral agents. All shortages involved generic,
single-source products. Supply/demand and manufacturing problems were the most
common shortage reasons provided. Overlapping shortages occurred for 3.7% of the
study period. Median shortage duration increased from 3 to 11 months in the
second half of the study period, and 61.5% of shortages occurred in the second
half of the study period.
CONCLUSIONS: All chelators experienced multiple shortages, which became
increasingly frequent and prolonged over time. Concurrent shortages occurred,
potentially hampering substitution between different agents. Health care
stakeholders must build supply chain resilience and develop guidelines regarding
how to modify chelation therapy based on shortage conditions.

Copyright. Pediatric Pharmacy Association. All rights reserved. For permissions,
email: membership@pediatricpharmacy.org.

DOI: 10.5863/1551-6776-29.3.306
PMCID: PMC11163907
PMID: 38863853

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures. MMA, DPC, KMG, PS, and JDW declare
no conflicts or financial interest in any product or service mentioned in the
manuscript, including grants, equipment, medications, employment, gifts, and
honoraria. ERF leads the University of Utah Drug Information Service (UUDIS).
The UUDIS has a contract with Vizient (a GPO) to provide drug shortage
information. The total amount represents less than 5% of the UUDIS budget. No
funds are paid directly to Erin Fox. Erin Fox receives partial travel support
for providing continuing education on drug shortages from the Drug Information
Association.
