---
reference_id: "PMID:17305517"
title: Inflammatory cells and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Tetley TD
journal: Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy
year: '2005'
doi: 10.2174/156801005774912824
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammatory cells and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Tetley TD
**Journal:** Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy (2005)
**DOI:** [10.2174/156801005774912824](https://doi.org/10.2174/156801005774912824)

## Content

1. Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy. 2005 Dec;4(6):607-18. doi: 
10.2174/156801005774912824.

Inflammatory cells and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Tetley TD(1).

Author information:
(1)Lung Cell Biology, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College, London 
SW3 6LY, UK. t.tetley@imperial.ac.uk

A major contributory factor to the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) is the inflammatory response to cigarette smoke. However, when 
those with COPD stop smoking, a continuous cycle of inflammation can lead to 
continued decline in lung function. Understanding the role of inflammatory cells 
in COPD is difficult because it is a mixture of diseases--bronchitis, small 
airways disease and emphysema--that exhibit different patterns of inflammation 
and different pathology. Neutrophils and macrophages have been implicated in 
this process; they release proteolytic enzymes and generate oxidants, which 
cause tissue damage, as well as cytokines and chemokines, which can potentiate 
inflammation and trigger an immune response. Analysis of sputum and 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid shows increases in both neutrophils and macrophages 
in respiratory secretions in COPD subjects; neutrophils are the predominant cell 
in the conducting airways, whereas macrophages are the major cell in secretions 
from the small airways and parenchyma. Airway tissue neutrophils are increased 
in the large and small airways during infection and exacerbations, whilst 
parenchymal neutrophil numbers are inversely related to alveolar wall 
destruction, suggesting that they are not involved in the progression of 
emphysema. Macrophages are increased throughout the respiratory tract airway 
lumen and epithelium in COPD and are positively related to severity of disease, 
airway obstruction and degree of alveolar wall damage in emphysema. Unactivated 
T-lymphocytes do not linger in lung tissue. Activated (eg due to antigenic 
stimulus) memory T cells home in to the lung and act as effector cells. CD-8+ T 
cell differentiation into memory cells is facilitated by CD4+ T cells. Binding 
of CD-8+ T cells to collagen stimulates proliferation and mediator production 
which may contribute to the inflammatory response. CD8+ cytotoxic/suppressor T 
cells release cytotoxic perforins and granzyme B which cause cell death and 
apoptosis, a feature of emphysema. Lung secretions contain only a small 
percentage of T cells; most T-lymphocytes reside in the subepithelial and smooth 
muscle region of the tissue. During COPD, there is either an increase in the 
CD8+/CD4+ ratio of T cells, or an increase in the in total numbers of both CD8+ 
and CD4+ T cells, in the tissue. Smoking status, smoking history, degree of 
airway obstruction and emphysema are all related to increased CD8+ cells and/or 
CD8+/CD4+ ratio. During severe emphysema requiring lung volume reduction 
surgery, there is a considerable increase in macrophages, neutrophils, 
eosinophils, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells which relates to the severity of the disease. 
Interestingly, the marked increase in luminal CD8+ cells results in an increased 
ratio of CD8+/CD4+ T cells that is not seen in the parenchymal tissue. The 
florid inflammation observed in severe emphysema is suggested to be related to 
latent viral infection.

DOI: 10.2174/156801005774912824
PMID: 17305517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]