---
reference_id: "PMID:30651381"
title: "Lysosomal storage disorders - challenges, concepts and avenues for therapy: beyond rare diseases."
authors:
- Marques ARA
- Saftig P
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1242/jcs.221739
keywords:
- Animals
- Autophagy
- Exocytosis
- Humans
- "Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Lysosomal Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lysosomes/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Rare Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lysosomal storage disorders - challenges, concepts and avenues for therapy: beyond rare diseases.
**Authors:** Marques ARA, Saftig P
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.221739](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.221739)

## Content

1. J Cell Sci. 2019 Jan 16;132(2):jcs221739. doi: 10.1242/jcs.221739.

Lysosomal storage disorders - challenges, concepts and avenues for therapy: 
beyond rare diseases.

Marques ARA(1), Saftig P(2).

Author information:
(1)Biochemisches Institut, Christian Albrechts-Universität Kiel, Olshausenstr. 
40, D-24098 Kiel, Germany.
(2)Biochemisches Institut, Christian Albrechts-Universität Kiel, Olshausenstr. 
40, D-24098 Kiel, Germany psaftig@biochem.uni-kiel.de.

The pivotal role of lysosomes in cellular processes is increasingly appreciated. 
An understanding of the balanced interplay between the activity of acidic 
hydrolases, lysosomal membrane proteins and cytosolic proteins is required. 
Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are characterized by disturbances in this 
network and by intralysosomal accumulation of substrates, often only in certain 
cell types. Even though our knowledge of these diseases has increased and 
therapies have been established, many aspects of the molecular pathology of LSDs 
remain obscure. This Review aims to discuss how lysosomal storage affects 
functions linked to lysosomes, such as membrane repair, autophagy, exocytosis, 
lipid homeostasis, signalling cascades and cell viability. Therapies must aim to 
correct lysosomal storage not only morphologically, but reverse its 
(patho)biochemical consequences. As different LSDs have different molecular 
causes, this requires custom tailoring of therapies. We will discuss the major 
advantages and drawbacks of current and possible future therapies for LSDs. 
Study of the pathological molecular mechanisms underlying these 'experiments of 
nature' often yields information that is relevant for other conditions found in 
the general population. Therefore, more common diseases may profit from a 
correction of impaired lysosomal function.

© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.221739
PMID: 30651381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.