---
reference_id: "PMID:39438706"
title: "The clinical outcome, pathologic spectrum, and genomic landscape for 454 cases of salivary mucoepidermoid carcinoma."
authors:
- Wang X
- Bai J
- Yan J
- Li B
journal: NPJ Precis Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41698-024-00735-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical outcome, pathologic spectrum, and genomic landscape for 454 cases of salivary mucoepidermoid carcinoma.
**Authors:** Wang X, Bai J, Yan J, Li B
**Journal:** NPJ Precis Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41698-024-00735-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41698-024-00735-2)

## Content

1. NPJ Precis Oncol. 2024 Oct 22;8(1):238. doi: 10.1038/s41698-024-00735-2.

The clinical outcome, pathologic spectrum, and genomic landscape for 454 cases 
of salivary mucoepidermoid carcinoma.

Wang X(1)(2), Bai J(1)(2), Yan J(1)(2), Li B(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Peking University School and Hospital of 
Stomatology & National Engineering Research Center of Oral Biomaterials and 
Digital Medical Devices, Beijing, PR China.
(2)Research Unit of Precision Pathologic Diagnosis in Tumors of the Oral and 
Maxillofacial Regions, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (2019RU034), Beijing, 
PR China.
(3)Department of Oral Pathology, Peking University School and Hospital of 
Stomatology & National Engineering Research Center of Oral Biomaterials and 
Digital Medical Devices, Beijing, PR China. kqlibinbin@bjmu.edu.cn.
(4)Research Unit of Precision Pathologic Diagnosis in Tumors of the Oral and 
Maxillofacial Regions, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (2019RU034), Beijing, 
PR China. kqlibinbin@bjmu.edu.cn.

Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) is the most common malignant salivary tumor. A 
complete understanding of the high heterogeneity of MEC in histology and 
genetics would help in accurate diagnosis and treatment. Therefore, We evaluated 
the clinical features, treatment outcomes, and pathological parameters of 454 
MECs and analyzed their genomic features using whole-exome sequencing and 
whole-transcriptome sequencing. We found that MECs predominantly occurred in 
females and those in their 4th-5th decades. The parotid gland was the most 
frequently affected site. All patients underwent complete mass resection with 
lobectomy; 414 patients were alive without relapse at follow-up, after an 
average period of 62 months (1-116 months). The disease progressed after initial 
treatment in 40 patients. The lungs were the most common site of distant 
metastasis. For classical MECs, histologic gradings of the AFIP, modified 
Healey, and MSK systems were significantly associated with recurrence and lymph 
nodal metastasis; these gradings were significantly related to lymph nodal 
metastasis for the subtypes. Older age, minor salivary gland involvement, 
clinical symptoms, high TNM stage, high-grade tumor, and improper surgical 
modality were the main prognostic factors. BAP1 was the most frequently mutated 
gene in MEC. Mutations in CDKN2A, MET, and TP53 were more frequently found in 
aggressive tumor phenotypes. MAML2 rearrangement was observed in 42% of 
patients, and EWSR1 rearrangement in 8%. Specific genetic events (in TP53 and 
FBXW7) with CRTC1::MAML2 fusion superimposed might be associated with 
unfavorable prognosis. This study provides new insights into precision 
therapeutic strategies for MEC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41698-024-00735-2
PMCID: PMC11496733
PMID: 39438706

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.