---
reference_id: "PMID:35803230"
title: "Type-I-interferon signaling drives microglial dysfunction and senescence in human iPSC models of Down syndrome and Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Jin M
- Xu R
- Wang L
- Alam MM
- Ma Z
- Zhu S
- Martini AC
- Jadali A
- Bernabucci M
- Xie P
- Kwan KY
- Pang ZP
- Head E
- Liu Y
- Hart RP
- Jiang P
journal: Cell Stem Cell
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2022.06.007
keywords:
- Alzheimer Disease/pathology
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- Animals
- Down Syndrome/metabolism
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Interferons/metabolism
- Mice
- Microglia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type-I-interferon signaling drives microglial dysfunction and senescence in human iPSC models of Down syndrome and Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Jin M, Xu R, Wang L, Alam MM, Ma Z, Zhu S, Martini AC, Jadali A, Bernabucci M, Xie P, Kwan KY, Pang ZP, Head E, Liu Y, Hart RP, Jiang P
**Journal:** Cell Stem Cell (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stem.2022.06.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2022.06.007)

## Content

1. Cell Stem Cell. 2022 Jul 7;29(7):1135-1153.e8. doi:
10.1016/j.stem.2022.06.007.

Type-I-interferon signaling drives microglial dysfunction and senescence in
human iPSC models of Down syndrome and Alzheimer's disease.

Jin M(1), Xu R(1), Wang L(2), Alam MM(1), Ma Z(1), Zhu S(1), Martini AC(3),
Jadali A(1), Bernabucci M(2), Xie P(1), Kwan KY(1), Pang ZP(2), Head E(3), Liu
Y(4), Hart RP(1), Jiang P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Piscataway,
NJ 08854, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology and Child Health Institute of New
Jersey, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08901,
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery and Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX
77030, USA; Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Robert Stempel College
of Public Health and Social Work, Center for Translational Science, Florida
International University, Miami, FL 34987, USA.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Piscataway,
NJ 08854, USA. Electronic address: peng.jiang@rutgers.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2022 Jul 7;29(7):1007-1008. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2022.06.008.

Microglia are critical in brain development and Alzheimer's disease (AD)
etiology. Down syndrome (DS) is the most common genetic developmental disorder
and risk factor for AD. Surprisingly, little information is available on the
impact of trisomy of human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) on microglial functions during
DS brain development and in AD in DS. Using induced pluripotent stem cell
(iPSC)-based organoid and chimeric mouse models, we report that DS microglia
exhibit an enhanced synaptic pruning function, which alters neuronal synaptic
functions. In response to human brain tissue-derived pathological tau, DS
microglia undergo cellular senescence and exhibit elevated type-I-interferon
signaling. Mechanistically, knockdown of Hsa21-encoded type I interferon
receptors, IFNARs, rescues the DS microglial phenotypes both during brain
development and in response to pathological tau. Our findings provide in vivo
evidence that human microglia respond to pathological tau by exhibiting
dystrophic phenotypes. Targeting IFNARs may improve DS microglial functions and
prevent senescence.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2022.06.007
PMCID: PMC9345168
PMID: 35803230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
