---
reference_id: "PMID:18611256"
title: "Abetalipoproteinemia: two case reports and literature review."
authors:
- Zamel R
- Khan R
- Pollex RL
- Hegele RA
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-19
keywords:
- "Abetalipoproteinemia/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- "Vitamin A/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Vitamin E/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abetalipoproteinemia: two case reports and literature review.
**Authors:** Zamel R, Khan R, Pollex RL, Hegele RA
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-3-19](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-3-19)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2008 Jul 8;3:19. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-19.

Abetalipoproteinemia: two case reports and literature review.

Zamel R(1), Khan R, Pollex RL, Hegele RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario,
London, Ontario, Canada. rzamel2@uwo.ca

Abetalipoproteinemia (ABL, OMIM 200100) is a rare, autosomal recessive disorder,
characterized by fat malabsorption, acanthocytosis and hypocholesterolemia in
infancy. Later in life, deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins is associated with
development of atypical retinitis pigmentosa, coagulopathy, posterior column
neuropathy and myopathy. ABL results from mutations in the gene encoding the
large subunit of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP; OMIM 157147). To
date at least 33 MTP mutations have been identified in 43 ABL patients. We
describe the clinical progress of two patients, both currently in the fifth
decade of life, who were diagnosed with ABL as children and were treated with
high oral doses of fat soluble vitamins, including vitamin E over the last three
decades. Treatment appears to have been associated with arrest of the neuropathy
and other complications in both patients. Because pharmacologic inhibition of
MTP is being developed as a novel approach to reduce plasma cholesterol for
prevention of cardiovascular disease, defining the long-term clinical features
of patients with a natural deficiency in MTP might provide some insight into the
possible effects of such treatments. We review the range of clinical,
biochemical and molecular perturbations in ABL.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-19
PMCID: PMC2467409
PMID: 18611256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
