---
reference_id: "PMID:34145717"
title: "Physical therapy treatment of hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: A systematic review."
authors:
- Reychler G
- De Backer MM
- Piraux E
- Poncin W
- Caty G
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62393
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Physical therapy treatment of hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Reychler G, De Backer MM, Piraux E, Poncin W, Caty G
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62393](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62393)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Oct;185(10):2986-2994. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62393. Epub 
2021 Jun 19.

Physical therapy treatment of hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: A systematic 
review.

Reychler G(1)(2)(3), De Backer MM(1)(3), Piraux E(1)(3), Poncin W(1)(3), Caty 
G(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique (IREC), Pôle de Pneumologie, 
ORL & Dermatologie, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Service de Pneumologie, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(3)Secteur de Kinésithérapie et Ergothérapie, Cliniques universitaires 
Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Service de Médecine Physique, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, 
Belgium.

Physiotherapy techniques are regularly prescribed in the hypermobile type 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (hEDS) and they are appreciated by the patients. The 
objective of this systematic review was to investigate the effect of the 
different physiotherapy techniques related to the children and adult patients 
with hEDS. PubMed, SPORTDiscus, Cochrane Library, PEDro, Scopus, and Embase 
databases were analyzed from inception to April 2020. Characteristics of the 
studies (authors), patients (sample size, sex, age, Beighton score), and 
nonpharmacological treatment (length of the program, number of session, duration 
of the session, and type of intervention), and the results with the dropout rate 
were extracted. From the 1045 retrieved references, 6 randomized controlled 
trial with a sample size ranging from 20 to 57 patients were included in the 
systematic review. There was a huge heterogeneity in the interventions. The 
durations of the program were from 4 to 8 weeks. Pain or proprioception 
demonstrated significant improvements in the intervention group regardless of 
the type of intervention. A benefit of the inspiratory muscle training was 
observed on functional exercise capacity. The quality of life was systematically 
improved. Physiotherapy benefits on proprioception and pain in patients with 
hEDS even if robust randomized control studies are missing.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62393
PMID: 34145717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]