---
reference_id: "PMID:21468143"
title: "C-reactive protein in rheumatology: biology and genetics."
authors:
- Rhodes B
- Fürnrohr BG
- Vyse TJ
journal: Nat Rev Rheumatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2011.37
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C-reactive protein in rheumatology: biology and genetics.
**Authors:** Rhodes B, Fürnrohr BG, Vyse TJ
**Journal:** Nat Rev Rheumatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrrheum.2011.37](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrrheum.2011.37)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2011 May;7(5):282-9. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2011.37. Epub
2011  Apr 5.

C-reactive protein in rheumatology: biology and genetics.

Rhodes B(1), Fürnrohr BG, Vyse TJ.

Author information:
(1)King's College London, Guy's Hospital Campus, Great Maze Pond, London SE1 
9RT, UK.

Measurement of serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level is in widespread clinical 
use as a sensitive marker of inflammation. CRP has a role in the clearance of 
bacteria and of dying and altered cells, and might also have more complex 
immunomodulatory functions. Impaired clearance of apoptotic cells is important 
in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), raising the 
possibility that CRP dysregulation plays a part in this process. We review the 
available functional and genetic evidence supporting a role for CRP in the 
pathogenesis of SLE, but recognize that inconsistencies in the existing data 
mean that conclusions have to be interpreted with caution. More consistent is 
the evidence that the genetic variants influencing basal CRP level also 
influence the magnitude of the acute-phase rise in CRP level in active 
inflammation. Initial reports suggest that these genetic effects might be large 
enough to directly influence clinical decision-making processes that are based 
on an interpretation of CRP thresholds. This concept is explored further in this 
article, particularly in relation to the use of the CRP-based disease activity 
score in the evaluation of rheumatoid arthritis, where a systematic 
under-scoring or over-scoring of disease activity could result from a failure to 
consider the genetic influences on CRP level.

DOI: 10.1038/nrrheum.2011.37
PMID: 21468143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]