---
reference_id: "PMID:40086732"
title: "Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy Natural History Study Report 2: Fundus Autofluorescence and OCT."
authors:
- Laich Y
- Georgiou M
- Fujinami K
- Daich Varela M
- Fujinami-Yokokawa Y
- Hashem SA
- de Guimaraes TAC
- Mahroo OA
- Webster AR
- Michaelides M
journal: Ophthalmol Retina
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.oret.2025.03.004
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography/methods
- Fundus Oculi
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Visual Acuity
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Follow-Up Studies
- Young Adult
- Adolescent
- Child
- Aged
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy Natural History Study Report 2: Fundus Autofluorescence and OCT.
**Authors:** Laich Y, Georgiou M, Fujinami K, Daich Varela M, Fujinami-Yokokawa Y, Hashem SA, de Guimaraes TAC, Mahroo OA, Webster AR, Michaelides M
**Journal:** Ophthalmol Retina (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.oret.2025.03.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oret.2025.03.004)

## Content

1. Ophthalmol Retina. 2025 Sep;9(9):899-907. doi: 10.1016/j.oret.2025.03.004.
Epub  2025 Mar 12.

Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy Natural History Study Report 2: Fundus
Autofluorescence and OCT.

Laich Y(1), Georgiou M(2), Fujinami K(3), Daich Varela M(4), Fujinami-Yokokawa
Y(5), Hashem SA(4), de Guimaraes TAC(4), Mahroo OA(4), Webster AR(4),
Michaelides M(6).

Author information:
(1)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; Eye Center,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(2)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; Jones Eye
Institute, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas.
(3)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom; Laboratory of
Visual Physiology, Division of Vision Research, National Institute of Sensory
Organs, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United
Kingdom; Laboratory of Visual Physiology, Division of Vision Research, National
Institute of Sensory Organs, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical
Center, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Health Policy and Management, Keio
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom; UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: michel.michaelides@ucl.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: To analyze the retinal imaging findings and natural history of Best
vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD).
DESIGN: Single-center retrospective, consecutive, observational study.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients with a clinical diagnosis of BVMD, from pedigrees with a
likely disease-causing monoallelic variant in BEST1.
METHODS: Data were extracted from electronic and physical case notes. Retinal
imaging with OCT and fundus autofluorescence (FAF) was analyzed
cross-sectionally and longitudinally.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Qualitative and quantitative OCT and FAF analysis.
RESULTS: Two hundred twenty-two patients (127 men) from 141 families were
included. Mean central retinal thickness on OCT at baseline was 337.2 μm for the
right eye and 341.1 μm for the left eye, with a mean annual thickness loss of
5.7 and 5.2 μm, respectively. The presence of the OCT features: previtelliform
lesion, solid vitelliform lesion, vitelliform lesion with subretinal fluid, and
focal choroidal excavation were associated with a better mean visual acuity
(VA), whereas the presence of intraretinal fluid and atrophy/fibrosis were
correlated with a worse mean VA. Fundus autofluorescence showed an area of
hyperautofluorescence at the posterior pole in 138 eyes (34.7%), a circumscribed
area of hyperautofluorescence superior or superotemporal of the optic nerve head
in 53 eyes (13.3%), fibrotic changes in 48 eyes (12.1%), and atrophy in 41 eyes
(10.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: Best vitelliform macular dystrophy shows a wide spectrum of
phenotypes on OCT and FAF imaging. The slow and variable disease course may pose
a challenge in identification of early end points for therapeutic trials aimed
at altering kinetics of degeneration.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE(S): Proprietary or commercial disclosures may be found in
the Footnotes and Disclosures at the end of this article.

Copyright © 2025 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oret.2025.03.004
PMID: 40086732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
