---
reference_id: "PMID:27235921"
title: Toxoplasmosis, Parvovirus, and Cytomegalovirus in Pregnancy.
authors:
- Feldman DM
- Keller R
- Borgida AF
journal: Clin Lab Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.cll.2016.01.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toxoplasmosis, Parvovirus, and Cytomegalovirus in Pregnancy.
**Authors:** Feldman DM, Keller R, Borgida AF
**Journal:** Clin Lab Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cll.2016.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cll.2016.01.011)

## Content

1. Clin Lab Med. 2016 Jun;36(2):407-19. doi: 10.1016/j.cll.2016.01.011. Epub 2016
 Mar 8.

Toxoplasmosis, Parvovirus, and Cytomegalovirus in Pregnancy.

Feldman DM(1), Keller R(2), Borgida AF(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Prenatal Testing Center, Hartford 
Hospital, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, 85 Jefferson Street, 
#625, Farmington, CT 06102, USA. Electronic address: 
Deborah.feldman@hhchealth.org.
(2)Maternal Fetal Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology, UConn Health Center, 
University of Connecticut School of Medicine, 263 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, 
CT 06030, USA.
(3)Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Prenatal Testing Center, Hartford 
Hospital, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, 85 Jefferson Street, 
#625, Farmington, CT 06102, USA.

There are several infections in adults that warrant special consideration in 
pregnant women given the potential fetal consequences. Among these are 
toxoplasmosis, parvovirus B19, and cytomegalovirus. These infections have an 
important impact on the developing fetus, depending on the timing of infection. 
This article reviews the modes of transmission as well as maternal and neonatal 
effects of each of these infections. In addition, the article outlines 
recommended testing, fetal surveillance, and treatment where indicated.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cll.2016.01.011
PMID: 27235921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]