---
reference_id: "PMID:38671641"
title: "Patient Characteristics, Treatment, and Survival in Pleuropulmonary Blastoma: An Analysis from the National Cancer Database."
authors:
- Chidiac C
- Sferra SR
- Kunisaki SM
- Rhee DS
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/children11040424
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient Characteristics, Treatment, and Survival in Pleuropulmonary Blastoma: An Analysis from the National Cancer Database.
**Authors:** Chidiac C, Sferra SR, Kunisaki SM, Rhee DS
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children11040424](https://doi.org/10.3390/children11040424)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2024 Apr 2;11(4):424. doi: 10.3390/children11040424.

Patient Characteristics, Treatment, and Survival in Pleuropulmonary Blastoma: An
Analysis from the National Cancer Database.

Chidiac C(1), Sferra SR(2), Kunisaki SM(1), Rhee DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) is a rare childhood tumor originating from the
lung or pleura, typically treated with surgery, chemotherapy (CTx), and/or
radiation therapy (RTx). This study aimed to assess patient and tumor features,
treatment methods, and survival rates in PPB. We retrospectively analyzed PPB
patients under 18 from 2004 to 2019, using the National Cancer Database (NCDB).
We assessed 5-year overall survival (OS) rates based on disease presentation and
treatment regimens, using Kaplan-Meier curves and Cox proportional regression.
Among 144 cases identified, 45.9% were female, with a median age of 2 years
(interquartile range 1-3). In all, 62.5% of tumors originated from the lung, and
10.4% from the pleura. Moreover, 6.9% were bilateral, and the median tumor size
was 8.9 cm, with 4.2% presenting with metastases. The 5-year OS rate was 79.6%,
with no significant change over time (2004-2009, 77.6%; 2010-2014, 90.8%;
2015-2019, OS 75.3%; p = 0.08). In all, 5.6% received CTx alone, 31.3% surgery
alone, 45.8% surgery/CTx, and 17.4% surgery/CTx/RTx. The OS rates were
comparable between the surgery/CTx/RTx (80.0%) and surgery/CTx (76.5%) groups
(adjusted Hazard Ratio, 1.72; 95% CI, 0.57-5.19; p = 0.34). Therefore, due to
the unchanged survival rates over time, further prospective multicenter studies
are needed to determine the optimal multimodal treatment regimens for this rare
pediatric tumor.

DOI: 10.3390/children11040424
PMCID: PMC11049483
PMID: 38671641

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
