---
reference_id: PMID:35024303
title: Recommendations for the use of the acetaminophen hepatotoxicity model for mechanistic studies and how to avoid common pitfalls.
authors:
- Jaeschke H
- Adelusi OB
- Akakpo JY
- Nguyen NT
- Sanchez-Guerrero G
- Umbaugh DS
- Ding WX
- Ramachandran A
journal: Acta Pharm Sin B
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2021.09.023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recommendations for the use of the acetaminophen hepatotoxicity model for mechanistic studies and how to avoid common pitfalls.
**Authors:** Jaeschke H, Adelusi OB, Akakpo JY, Nguyen NT, Sanchez-Guerrero G, Umbaugh DS, Ding WX, Ramachandran A
**Journal:** Acta Pharm Sin B (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.apsb.2021.09.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2021.09.023)

## Content

1. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2021 Dec;11(12):3740-3755. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2021.09.023. 
Epub 2021 Sep 30.

Recommendations for the use of the acetaminophen hepatotoxicity model for 
mechanistic studies and how to avoid common pitfalls.

Jaeschke H(1), Adelusi OB(1), Akakpo JY(1), Nguyen NT(1), Sanchez-Guerrero G(1), 
Umbaugh DS(1), Ding WX(1), Ramachandran A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology & Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Acetaminophen (APAP) is a widely used analgesic and antipyretic drug, which is 
safe at therapeutic doses but can cause severe liver injury and even liver 
failure after overdoses. The mouse model of APAP hepatotoxicity recapitulates 
closely the human pathophysiology. As a result, this clinically relevant model 
is frequently used to study mechanisms of drug-induced liver injury and even 
more so to test potential therapeutic interventions. However, the complexity of 
the model requires a thorough understanding of the pathophysiology to obtain 
valid results and mechanistic information that is translatable to the clinic. 
However, many studies using this model are flawed, which jeopardizes the 
scientific and clinical relevance. The purpose of this review is to provide a 
framework of the model where mechanistically sound and clinically relevant data 
can be obtained. The discussion provides insight into the injury mechanisms and 
how to study it including the critical roles of drug metabolism, mitochondrial 
dysfunction, necrotic cell death, autophagy and the sterile inflammatory 
response. In addition, the most frequently made mistakes when using this model 
are discussed. Thus, considering these recommendations when studying APAP 
hepatotoxicity will facilitate the discovery of more clinically relevant 
interventions.

© 2021 Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2021.09.023
PMCID: PMC8727921
PMID: 35024303