---
reference_id: "PMID:9779808"
title: Prenatal ultrasonographic description and postnatal pathological findings in atelosteogenesis type 1.
authors:
- Bejjani BA
- Oberg KC
- Wilkins I
- Moise A
- Langston C
- Superti-Furga A
- Lupski JR
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1998'
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/pathology"
- "Bone and Bones/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Female
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Male
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Radiography
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal ultrasonographic description and postnatal pathological findings in atelosteogenesis type 1.
**Authors:** Bejjani BA, Oberg KC, Wilkins I, Moise A, Langston C, Superti-Furga A, Lupski JR
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1998)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Oct 12;79(5):392-5.

Prenatal ultrasonographic description and postnatal pathological findings in 
atelosteogenesis type 1.

Bejjani BA(1), Oberg KC, Wilkins I, Moise A, Langston C, Superti-Furga A, Lupski 
JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. bbejjani@bcm.tmc.edu

Atelosteogenesis type 1 (AO1) is a rare lethal chondrodysplasia characterized by 
incomplete ossification of cartilage anlagen. Histologically, the cartilage 
contains irregular clusters that occasionally include giant chondrocytes. 
Pulmonary hypoplasia is a characteristic finding that has been presumed to be 
the cause of neonatal lethality. We report on a male fetus with AO1 and document 
the early ultrasonographic/ radiologic progression of this disorder from 15 
weeks gestation until delivery at 41 weeks. While the radiological findings we 
describe are typical of AO1 by the lack of proximal and middle phalangeal 
ossification, the complete radiological picture showed considerable overlap with 
boomerang dysplasia. Although pulmonary hypoplasia was present, it was moderate 
and considered unlikely to be the sole cause of death. Detailed neonatal and 
postmortem examination showed severe subglottic hypoplasia and tracheomalacia. 
The tracheal walls were supported by thin and pliable cartilaginous plates that 
allowed luminal collapse with minimal pressure. The marked luminal narrowing, 
tracheomalacia, and temporal proximity of extubation to demise support tracheal 
collapse as a major contributor to the death in AO1. The detailed description of 
this patient should contribute to earlier diagnosis of this condition; 
anticipation of the poor prognosis in AO1 is essential for appropriate genetic 
counseling of the parents and for determining postnatal treatment options.

PMID: 9779808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]