---
reference_id: "PMID:18448329"
title: Human models of aromatase deficiency.
authors:
- Zirilli L
- Rochira V
- Diazzi C
- Caffagni G
- Carani C
journal: J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2008.03.026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human models of aromatase deficiency.
**Authors:** Zirilli L, Rochira V, Diazzi C, Caffagni G, Carani C
**Journal:** J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jsbmb.2008.03.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2008.03.026)

## Content

1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 Apr;109(3-5):212-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2008.03.026. Epub 2008 Mar 20.

Human models of aromatase deficiency.

Zirilli L(1), Rochira V, Diazzi C, Caffagni G, Carani C.

Author information:
(1)Integrated Department of Medicine, Endocrinology and Metabolism, and 
Geriatrics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via Giardini 1355, 41100 
Modena, Italy.

Estrogens exert a wide range of biological effects in both sexes also on 
non-reproductive systems and organs. Human congenital estrogen deficiency, due 
to an inactivating mutation of the aromatase gene, leads to the lack of the 
estrogen synthesis, with gonadotropins and circulating testosterone ranging from 
normal to elevated. The aromatese-deficient females show hyperandrogenism and 
virilization at birth with ambiguous genitalia. During childhood there are a 
dysfunction in the LHRH-LH/FSH axis and a progressive delay in bone age. At 
puberty they show primary amenorrhea, no breast development, worsening of the 
virilization and the absence of growth spurt. The clinical phenotype in the male 
affected subjects comprises tall stature, persistent linear growth and delayed 
bone age, osteopenia/osteoporosis, eunuchoid body proportion, different degrees 
of glucose-insulin and of fertility impairment. These phenotypes suggest the 
physiological role of estrogens on the skeleton, on pituitary function, on the 
reproductive system, on glucose metabolism, being the precise mechanism on each 
of these functions not yet known in detail. The estradiol replacement treatment 
leads to a complete epiphyseal closure and to the skeletal maturation. Moreover, 
the increasing knowledge on the role of estrogen in several metabolic pathways 
could be important for a better management of several metabolic diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2008.03.026
PMID: 18448329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]