---
reference_id: "PMID:29401456"
title: A phylogenetic method to perform genome-wide association studies in microbes that accounts for population structure and recombination.
authors:
- Collins C
- Didelot X
journal: PLoS Comput Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005958
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A phylogenetic method to perform genome-wide association studies in microbes that accounts for population structure and recombination.
**Authors:** Collins C, Didelot X
**Journal:** PLoS Comput Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005958](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005958)

## Content

1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Feb 5;14(2):e1005958. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005958.  eCollection 2018 Feb.

A phylogenetic method to perform genome-wide association studies in microbes 
that accounts for population structure and recombination.

Collins C(1), Didelot X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom.

Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) in microbial organisms have the potential 
to vastly improve the way we understand, manage, and treat infectious diseases. 
Yet, microbial GWAS methods established thus far remain insufficiently able to 
capitalise on the growing wealth of bacterial and viral genetic sequence data. 
Facing clonal population structure and homologous recombination, existing GWAS 
methods struggle to achieve both the precision necessary to reject spurious 
findings and the power required to detect associations in microbes. In this 
paper, we introduce a novel phylogenetic approach that has been tailor-made for 
microbial GWAS, which is applicable to organisms ranging from purely clonal to 
frequently recombining, and to both binary and continuous phenotypes. Our 
approach is robust to the confounding effects of both population structure and 
recombination, while maintaining high statistical power to detect associations. 
Thorough testing via application to simulated data provides strong support for 
the power and specificity of our approach and demonstrates the advantages 
offered over alternative cluster-based and dimension-reduction methods. Two 
applications to Neisseria meningitidis illustrate the versatility and potential 
of our method, confirming previously-identified penicillin resistance loci and 
resulting in the identification of both well-characterised and novel drivers of 
invasive disease. Our method is implemented as an open-source R package called 
treeWAS which is freely available at https://github.com/caitiecollins/treeWAS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005958
PMCID: PMC5814097
PMID: 29401456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.