---
reference_id: "PMID:36030347"
title: Sex, gender, and subclinical hypertensiveorgan damage-heart.
authors:
- Cuspidi C
- Gherbesi E
- Sala C
- Tadic M
journal: J Hum Hypertens
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41371-022-00750-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex, gender, and subclinical hypertensiveorgan damage-heart.
**Authors:** Cuspidi C, Gherbesi E, Sala C, Tadic M
**Journal:** J Hum Hypertens (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41371-022-00750-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41371-022-00750-5)

## Content

1. J Hum Hypertens. 2023 Aug;37(8):626-633. doi: 10.1038/s41371-022-00750-5. Epub
 2022 Aug 27.

Sex, gender, and subclinical hypertensiveorgan damage-heart.

Cuspidi C(1), Gherbesi E(2), Sala C(2), Tadic M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, 
Italy. cesare.cuspidi@unimib.it.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milano 
and Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore IRCCS Policlinico di Milano, Milano, Italy.
(3)Department of Cardiology, University Hospital "Dr. Dragisa Misovic-Dedinje", 
Belgrade, Serbia.

Hypertension-mediated organ damage (HMOD) at cardiac level include a variety of 
abnormal phenotypes of recognized adverse prognostic value. Although the risk of 
cardiac HMOD is related with the severity of BP elevation, the interaction of 
numerous non-hemodynamic factors plays a relevant role in this unfavorable 
dynamic process. In particular, sex-related differences in cardiovascular (CV) 
risk factors and HMOD have been increasingly described. The objective of the 
present review is to provide comprehensive, updated information on sex-related 
differences in cardiac HMOD, focusing on the most important manifestations of 
subclinical hypertensive heart disease such as left ventricular hypertrophy 
(LVH), LV systolic and diastolic dysfunction, left atrial and aortic dilatation. 
Current evidence, based on cross-sectional and longitudinal observational 
studies as well as real-world registries and randomized controlled trials, 
suggests that women are more at risk of developing (and maintaining) LVH, 
concentric remodeling and subclinical LV dysfunction, namely the 
morpho-functional features of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. It 
should be pointed out, however, that further studies are needed to fill the gap 
in defining gender-based optimal therapeutic strategies in order to protect 
women's hearts.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41371-022-00750-5
PMID: 36030347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]