---
reference_id: "PMID:20301589"
title: "Nonsyndromic 46,XX Testicular Disorders/Differences of Sex Development."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Délot EC
- Vilain EJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonsyndromic 46,XX Testicular Disorders/Differences of Sex Development.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Délot EC, Vilain EJ

## Content

1. Nonsyndromic 46,XX Testicular Disorders/Differences of Sex Development.

Délot EC(1), Vilain EJ(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2003 Oct 30 [updated 2022 May 26].

Author information:
(1)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Children's National Hospital;,
Department of Genomics and Precision Medicine, George Washington University,
Washington, DC

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Nonsyndromic 46,XX testicular disorders/differences of
sex development (DSD) are characterized by: the presence of a 46,XX karyotype;
external genitalia ranging from typical male to ambiguous; two testicles;
azoospermia; absence of müllerian structures; and absence of other syndromic
features, such as congenital anomalies outside of the genitourinary system,
learning disorders / cognitive impairment, or behavioral issues. Approximately
85% of individuals with nonsyndromic 46,XX testicular DSD present after puberty
with normal pubic hair and normal penile size but small testes, gynecomastia,
and sterility resulting from azoospermia. Approximately 15% of individuals with
nonsyndromic 46,XX testicular DSD present at birth with ambiguous genitalia.
Gender role and gender identity are reported as male. If untreated, males with
46,XX testicular DSD experience the consequences of testosterone deficiency.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Diagnosis of nonsyndromic 46,XX testicular DSD is based on
the combination of clinical findings, endocrine testing, and cytogenetic
testing. Endocrine studies usually show hypergonadotropic hypogonadism secondary
to testicular failure. Cytogenetic studies at the 550-band level demonstrate a
46,XX karyotype. SRY, the gene that encodes the sex-determining region Y
protein, is the principal gene known to be associated with 46,XX testicular DSD.
Approximately 80% of individuals with nonsyndromic 46,XX testicular DSD are SRY
positive, as shown by use of FISH or chromosomal microarray. Other causes in
SRY-negative individuals include small copy number variants (CNVs) in or around
SOX3 or SOX9 and specific heterozygous pathogenic variants in NR5A1 or WT1.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Similar to that for other causes of
testosterone deficiency. After age 14 years, low-dose testosterone therapy is
initiated and gradually increased to reach adult levels. In affected individuals
with short stature who are eligible for growth hormone therapy, testosterone
therapy is either delayed or given at lower doses initially in order to maximize
growth potential. Reduction mammoplasty may be considered if gynecomastia
remains an issue following testosterone replacement therapy. Standard treatment
for osteopenia, hypospadias, and cryptorchidism. Providers are encouraged to
anticipate the need for further psychological support. Surveillance: Measurement
of length/height at each visit. Assessment of mood, libido, energy, erectile
function, acne, breast tenderness, and presence or progression of gynecomastia
at each visit in adolescence and adulthood. For those on testosterone
replacement therapy: measurement of serum testosterone levels every three months
(just prior to the next injection) until testosterone dose is optimized; then
annual measurement of serum testosterone levels, lipid profile, and liver
function tests. Measurement of hematocrit at three, six, and 12 months after
initiation of testosterone therapy, then annually thereafter. Digital rectal
examination and measurement of serum prostate-specific antigen at three, six,
and 12 months after initiation of testosterone therapy in adults, then annually
thereafter. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry scan every three to five years
after puberty or annually, if osteopenia has been identified.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Contraindications to testosterone replacement
therapy include prostate cancer (known or suspected) and breast cancer; oral
androgens such as methyltestosterone and fluoxymesterone should not be given
because of liver toxicity.
GENETIC COUNSELING: The mode of inheritance and recurrence risk to sibs of a
proband with a nonsyndromic 46,XX testicular DSD depend on the molecular
diagnosis in the proband and the genetic status of the parents. SRY-positive
46,XX testicular DSD is generally not inherited because it results from de novo
abnormal interchange between the Y chromosome and the X chromosome, resulting in
the presence of SRY on the X chromosome and infertility. In the rare cases when
SRY is translocated to another chromosome or when fertility is preserved,
sex-limited autosomal dominant inheritance is observed. Pathogenic variants in
NR5A1 are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, with reduced penetrance
and variable expressivity. If a fertile parent is heterozygous, they will pass
the variant to 50% of their offspring; offspring who are XX are at risk for
testicular or ovotesticular DSD. To date, all known individuals with CNVs in or
around SOX3 whose parents have undergone molecular genetic testing have the
disorder as a result of a de novo pathogenic variant. In this scenario, the risk
to sibs is low. Autosomal dominant inheritance has been documented for familial
cases thought to be caused by CNVs in or around SOX9. However, only those with a
46,XX karyotype will be affected. To date, all known individuals with a
pathogenic WT1 variant that causes nonsyndromic 46,XX testicular DSD whose
parents have undergone molecular genetic testing have the disorder as a result
of a de novo pathogenic variant. In this scenario, the risk to sibs is low.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301589
