---
reference_id: "PMID:39556016"
title: Phase 1 Study of AAV9.LAMP2B Gene Therapy in Danon Disease.
authors:
- Greenberg B
- Taylor M
- Adler E
- Colan S
- Ricks D
- Yarabe P
- Battiprolu P
- Shah G
- Patel K
- Coggins M
- Carou-Keenan S
- Schwartz JD
- Rossano JW
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2412392
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Humans
- Male
- Young Adult
- Dependovirus/genetics
- "Genetic Therapy/adverse effects, methods"
- "Genetic Vectors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/blood, complications, genetics, therapy"
- "Heart Failure/blood, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Lysosomal-Associated Membrane Protein 2/analysis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Myocardium/metabolism, pathology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Biomarkers/blood
- Troponin I/blood
- Follow-Up Studies
- Peptide Fragments
- "Natriuretic Peptide, Brain"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase 1 Study of AAV9.LAMP2B Gene Therapy in Danon Disease.
**Authors:** Greenberg B, Taylor M, Adler E, Colan S, Ricks D, Yarabe P, Battiprolu P, Shah G, Patel K, Coggins M, Carou-Keenan S, Schwartz JD, Rossano JW
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2412392](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2412392)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2025 Mar 6;392(10):972-983. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2412392. Epub
2024  Nov 18.

Phase 1 Study of AAV9.LAMP2B Gene Therapy in Danon Disease.

Greenberg B(1), Taylor M(2), Adler E(1), Colan S(3), Ricks D(4), Yarabe P(4),
Battiprolu P(4), Shah G(4), Patel K(4), Coggins M(4), Carou-Keenan S(4),
Schwartz JD(4), Rossano JW(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Diego Medical Center, La Jolla.
(2)University of Colorado, Anschutz, Medical Center, Aurora.
(3)Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston.
(4)Rocket Pharmaceuticals, Cranbury, NJ.
(5)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
(6)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

BACKGROUND: Danon disease is a rare, X-linked, monogenic cardiomyopathy caused
by mutations in the lysosomal-associated membrane 2 gene (LAMP2), which encodes
the LAMP2 protein. In male patients, the predominant phenotype is progressive
cardiac hypertrophy, cardiac dysfunction, and early death. There are no directed
therapies for the disease.
METHODS: In this phase 1 study, we evaluated the safety and efficacy of a single
infusion of RP-A501, a recombinant adeno-associated virus serotype 9 containing
the transgene LAMP2B, which encodes an isoform of LAMP2. The primary outcomes
were the safety and toxic effects of RP-A501, myocardial LAMP2 transduction and
protein expression, stabilization of or reduction in heart-failure symptoms, and
stabilization of or improvement in cardiac structure and function. Key secondary
outcomes were sustained reduction in or stabilization of symptoms, immunologic
response to RP-A501, end-stage heart failure, and overall survival. Exploratory
outcomes included improvement in serologic markers of cardiac disease,
patient-reported outcomes, and quality-of-life assessments.
RESULTS: RP-A501 infusion was administered to seven male patients with Danon
disease: five who were 15 years of age or older and two who were between 11 and
14 years of age. All the patients received a transient immunomodulatory regimen
of prednisone, tacrolimus or sirolimus, and rituximab. Phase 1 data over 24 to
54 months, including interim data from a long-term follow-up study, are reported
here. One patient had complement-mediated thrombotic microangiopathy (grade 4)
with thrombocytopenia and acute kidney injury. Three patients had
glucocorticoid-related exacerbation (grade 3) of Danon disease-related skeletal
myopathy. One patient with left ventricular systolic dysfunction at baseline had
progressive heart failure and underwent transplantation 5 months after infusion.
In the six patients with normal left ventricular ejection fraction at baseline,
we observed cardiac LAMP2 protein expression and a reduction from baseline in or
stabilization of the left ventricular mass index, preservation of left
ventricular ejection fraction, and reduction in or stabilization of the levels
of cardiac troponin I and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide. At 24 to 54
months, all the patients were alive, with complete resolution of side effects.
CONCLUSIONS: A single infusion of RP-A501 appeared to be safe and was associated
with cardiac LAMP2 expression and evidence of clinical improvement over a period
of 24 to 54 months. (Funded by Rocket Pharmaceuticals; ClinicalTrials.gov
number, NCT03882437.).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2412392
PMID: 39556016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
