---
reference_id: "PMID:25267340"
title: Compound heterozygous PNPLA6 mutations cause Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome with late-onset ataxia.
authors:
- Deik A
- Johannes B
- Rucker JC
- Sánchez E
- Brodie SE
- Deegan E
- Landy K
- Kajiwara Y
- Scelsa S
- Saunders-Pullman R
- Paisán-Ruiz C
journal: J Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7516-3
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Ataxia/genetics
- Exons
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Hypogonadism/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phospholipases/genetics
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
- "Retinal Dystrophies/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Acyltransferases
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Compound heterozygous PNPLA6 mutations cause Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome with late-onset ataxia.
**Authors:** Deik A, Johannes B, Rucker JC, Sánchez E, Brodie SE, Deegan E, Landy K, Kajiwara Y, Scelsa S, Saunders-Pullman R, Paisán-Ruiz C
**Journal:** J Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-014-7516-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-014-7516-3)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2014 Dec;261(12):2411-23. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7516-3. Epub 2014 
Sep 30.

Compound heterozygous PNPLA6 mutations cause Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome with 
late-onset ataxia.

Deik A(1), Johannes B, Rucker JC, Sánchez E, Brodie SE, Deegan E, Landy K, 
Kajiwara Y, Scelsa S, Saunders-Pullman R, Paisán-Ruiz C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center, 
University of Pennsylvania, 330 S. 9th Street, Philadelphia, PA, 19107, USA.

PNPLA6 mutations, known to be associated with the development of motor neuron 
phenotypes, have recently been identified in families with Boucher-Neuhäuser 
syndrome. Boucher-Neuhäuser is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterized 
by the co-occurrence of cerebellar ataxia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and 
chorioretinal dystrophy. Gait ataxia in Boucher-Neuhäuser usually manifests 
before early adulthood, although onset in the third or fourth decade has also 
been reported. However, given the recent identification of PNPLA6 mutations as 
the cause of this condition, the determining factors of age of symptom onset 
still need to be established. Here, we have identified a sporadic 
Boucher-Neuhäuser case with late-onset gait ataxia and relatively milder retinal 
changes due to compound heterozygous PNPLA6 mutations. Compound heterozygosity 
was confirmed by cloning and sequencing the patient's genomic DNA from coding 
exons 26-29. Furthermore, both mutations (one novel and one known) fell in the 
phospholipase esterase domain, where most pathogenic mutations seem to cluster. 
Taken together, we herein confirm PNPLA6 mutations as the leading cause of 
Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome and suggest inquiring about a history of hypogonadism 
or visual changes in patients presenting with late-onset gait ataxia. We also 
advocate for neuroophthalmologic evaluation in suspected cases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-014-7516-3
PMCID: PMC4245359
PMID: 25267340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Boucher–Neuhäuser (B–N; MIM #215470) is a rare syndrome characterized by the triad of early-onset autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia (ARCA), hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and chorioretinal dystrophy [1, 2]. Gait ataxia in Boucher–Neuhäuser has been typically reported between the first and third decades of life; later ages of onset are rare [1, 3–5]. Although sporadic cases without apparent consanguinity have been reported, most reports are among siblings (about 80 %) [6, 7], often of consanguineous parents [3, 6]. It is unclear whether there is a reporting bias away from sporadic cases in this autosomal recessive disorder, but this seems plausible. Its genetic causes have recently been established by the identification of PNPLA6 (patatin-like phospholipase domain containing 6) mutations in both B–N and Gordon–Holmes (G–H) syndromes. PNPLA6 genetic variability was known to be implicated in motor neuron phenotypes including spastic paraplegia [8, 9]. PNPLA6 (MIM #603197; 19p13.2) encodes for a neuropathy target esterase (NTE). Five different transcripts have been identified, with the longest transcript, transcript variant 1 (NM_001166111.1), encoding a protein (NP_001159583.1) of 1,375 amino acids. In this study, we have identified a sporadic case of B–N syndrome with an unusually late age of onset of ataxic symptoms due to compound heterozygous PNPLA6 mutations. Details of her phenotype, including ophthalmologic findings, are described.

Due to the recent identification of PNPLA6 mutations in B–N syndrome [6, 10], these were investigated in a patient with sporadic B–N syndrome. The ethics committees at both Mount Sinai Beth Israel and Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai approved this study, and written informed consent was obtained from the participant. The participant’s DNA samples were isolated from whole blood using standard procedures. Genomic primers for PCR amplifications covering exons and intron–exon boundaries were designed using a primer design public website (http://ihg.gsf.de/ihg/ExonPrimer.html; primer sequences available upon request). All purified PCR products were then sequenced in both forward and reverse directions with Applied Biosystems BigDye terminator v3.1 sequencing chemistry as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting sequencing reactions were resolved on an ABI3130 genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster city, CA, USA) and analyzed using Sequencer 5.2.3 software (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). Due to the lack of additional family members, and to verify that both mutations identified in this study were located intrans, the patient’s genomic DNA containing both PNPLA6 mutations was amplified by PCR using forward primer 5′-ATGGAGGCCCGAATTCCTAAGTGCTGCTTGCTCACCC-3′ and reverse primer 5′-GCCGCGGTACCTCGAGCATACCACTCTGGGCTTTAAGTAGC-3′, and Phusion High-Fidelity polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Purified PCR fragment of 2,801 bp was cloned into pCMV-HA vector (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA) using In-Fusion® HD following the manufacturer’s protocol. Ten independent colonies were picked randomly and sequenced in both directions as described above. PredictSNP (http://loschmidt.chemi.muni.cz/predictsnp), which is a consensus of six prediction tools [11], and Mutation Taster (http://www.mutationtaster.org) were used for mutation pathogenicity prediction. The HomoloGene database from NCBI web site (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/homologene) was also used to examine the conservation of the PNPLA6 p.Ser1173Arg mutation in different species.

This 59-year-old woman, born to non-consanguineous parents from Spain and Italy, had normal development until adolescence, when it was noted that she had primary amenorrhea. Hormone therapy for 1 year in her 20s led to menses, but was poorly tolerated and stopped. First onset of neurological symptoms was at age 43, when she noted mild, but progressive, binocular vertical or oblique diplopia on lateral gaze in either direction. Between ages 50–51 she developed gait imbalance and veering to either side, which slowly worsened. When she was 54–55 years her voice became “raspy”.

At age 58, her symptoms started to worsen rapidly over several months. She started to feel mentally clouded and developed word-finding difficulties, although this did not interfere with everyday function. She also reported anhedonia. Of note, she had no monocular visual symptoms, but had seen ophthalmologists in the past who noted retinal abnormalities, suggesting either macular degeneration or a “burn from the sun”.

On examination, she had excellent recall of short- and long-term events. However, her Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) score was 19/30 (normal >25), with deficits in attention, visuospatial abilities, and delayed recall. She had a scanning quality to her speech, with mild labial and lingual dysarthria. She had decreased hearing to finger rub on the left.

Visual acuity was 20/25 bilaterally. Color vision (Ishihara) was 10/10 plates correct in both eyes. There was no afferent pupillary defect. She had hypometric vertical and horizontal saccades, saccadic smooth pursuit, gaze-evoked nystagmus and poor visual suppression of vestibular ocular reflexes. Although ocular motor range was full, she had an alternating skew deviation on lateral gaze, which explained her diplopia on lateral gaze. There was also a small esophoria in central position that increased in right and left gaze.

Retinal atrophy was evident on the dilated fundoscopic exam, as is shown in Fig. 1. Spectral mode ocular coherence tomography (OCT) imaging (Heidelberg Spectralis) confirmed these changes (Fig. 2). The phototopic electroretinogram (ERG) was reduced by 50 %, but scotopic function reduction was less severe. Goldmann visual field showed bitemporal central defects and a slight blind spot enlargement bilaterally, as well as a small paracentral scotoma to the I2 isopter on the left (Fig. 3a, b).

She had normal strength, tone and no tremor. Reflexes were normal, except for reduced ankle jerks, and there was mild vibratory loss in her toes. She had dysdiadochokinesia in her arms and legs, dysmetria on heel-to-shin but not on finger-to-nose, and significant overshoot on the finger chase task, bilaterally. Her stance was wide-based, her gait was ataxic with occasional veering to either side, and she was able to tandem walk with much difficulty.

Family history was notable for her mother developing dementia and parkinsonism in her 50s, and death at the age of 77. The patient’s mother also lost eight full-term children within 1 day of their birth, and had three spontaneous abortions of unknown gestation lengths. The patient’s only sibling to survive the perinatal period was her full brother, who is in his 60s.

Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Fig. 4a, b) demonstrated superior cerebellar/vermian atrophy and prominent cerebellar folia, with a normal pituitary gland and only minimal, likely age-related periventricular white matter disease. Electromyography and nerve conduction studies (EMG/NCS) showed absent bilateral tibial H reflexes, and absent medial plantar mixed nerve response. The sural and peroneal sensory response amplitudes were in the lower range of normal. Peroneal and tibial F wave minimal latencies were also normal. The peroneal CMAP amplitude and conduction velocity were normal. There were borderline, high-amplitude motor unit potentials and fibrillations in the gastrocnemius muscle. Overall, the study was consistent with a mild distal axonal neuropathy.

Blood chemistries and thyroid hormones, rheumatologic tests, vitamin E level and paraneoplastic panel were all normal. Luteinizing hormone was low at 0.1 mIU/mL (normal postmenopausal 7.7–58.5), as was follicular stimulating hormone (0.3 mIU/mL, normal postmenopausal 25.8–134.8). Prolactin, estradiol, and random cortisol were within normal ranges (6 ng/mL, 13.23 pg/mL and 3.6 μg/dL, respectively).

Chromosome analysis was performed by Integrated Genetics and revealed a normal female 46, XX karyotype. Mitochondrial DNA mutation and deletion testing for the commercial GeneDx panel of 58 known disease-associated mutations was negative. Subsequent sequencing of the mitochondrial genome showed a m.5780 G>A sequence change in the MT-TC gene, which has previously been associated with sensorineural hearing loss but has also been described as a benign polymorphism [12, 13]. Testing for SCA-7 at Athena Diagnostics, Inc., showed a normal number of 10 CAG repeats for both alleles.

PNPLA6 mutational screening identified compound heterozygous pathogenic mutations, one known (c.3134C>T; p.Ser1045Leu) and one novel (c.3519C>G; p.Ser1173Arg), in coding exons 26 and 29, respectively. The longest transcript, transcript variant 1 (NM_001166111.1), was used for mutation nomenclature. This novel PNPLA6 mutation, which was found to be highly conserved among other orthologs and was predicted to be pathogenic by two computational methods (PredictSNP score: 0.61 and Mutation Taster score: 0.99), fell in the phospholipid esterase domain (Patatin-like domain) at the C-terminal, where the majority of pathogenic PNPLA6 mutations seem to cluster (Fig. 5a, b) [6]. The p.Ser1173Arg mutation was additionally absent in 188 ethnicity-matched, neurologically normal chromosomes tested by direct screening of PNPLA6 exon 29 and other public SNP databases such as dbSNP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/) and Exome Variant Server of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) Exome Sequencing Project (http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/) [14]. This, along with the fact that mutations located in the phospholipid esterase domain are prone to abolish the catalytic activity of NTE [6], support the pathogenic role of the novel mutation described here. To further examine whether mutations were transmitted from both parents and were located on separate alleles, the patient’s genomic DNA from coding exon 26 to exon 29 was cloned and sequenced. We observed that five out of ten clones only carried the p.Ser1045Leu mutation, while the other five carried the p.Ser1173Arg mutation alone. This indicates that both mutations were located on separate alleles (one mutation was, therefore, transmitted from the father and one from the mother).

In this study, we have identified a sporadic B–N case presenting with unusually late-onset gait ataxia due to compound heterozygous PNPLA6 mutations, confirming that genetic variability in PNPLA6 is probably the major cause of Boucher–Neuhäuser syndrome. Our case demonstrated the classic triad of B–N syndrome, which includes cerebellar ataxia, hypopituitary hypogonadism, and chorioretinal dystrophy [1, 2]. Like PLA2G6 (phospholipase A2, Group VI), PNPLA6 contains a patatin-like domain. Interestingly, while PLA2G6 mutations have been reported to cause infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, atypical parkinsonism, and neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation, PNPLA6 mutations have been typically related to hereditary spastic paraplegia, and, more recently, ataxia [6, 8, 15, 16]. Although these phenotypic heterogeneities are often seen in genes involved in diseases of the central nervous system [17], it is likely that this broad clinical spectrum relates to the complex role of the patatin-like domain within the brain, which is involved in brain lipid metabolism, neuronal development, intracellular membrane trafficking, and axon maintenance, among others [18, 19]. Given that lipid metabolism is a highly preserved function among species and tissue types, the multisystem effects of PNPLA6 mutations are not surprising. Indeed, PNPLA6 mutations can also cause autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia, spastic ataxia without chorioretinal dystrophy or hypogonadism, and Gordon–Holmes syndrome. G-H differs from B-N in that it lacks chorioretinal dystrophy, often has prominent spasticity [6], and may be due to either mutations in PNPLA6 or RNF216. Dysarthria is usually the presenting neurologic symptom in G-H, but ataxia leading to wheelchair dependency invariably ensues. Dementia is also prominent [20]. Because of phenotypic similarities between RNF216 and PNPLA6 gene mutation carriers, one may speculate that both of these genes are involved in a pathway with common downstream effects. Whether mutations in RNF216 also cause B–N has not been determined.

Whereas the clinical syndrome of B–N was first recognized and reported in 1969 (Table 1), only the cases reported by Synofzik et al. [6, 10] and now ours, have been diagnosed molecularly. In that case series, the age of ataxia onset ranged 6–27 years of age. B–N patients’ ataxic symptoms have been usually reported as subtle “clumsiness” and/or minor balance abnormalities progressing to a gait disorder, with or without dysarthria [6]. Taking into account all clinical B–N reports to date, our case is exceedingly unusual in that the first sign of cerebellar dysfunction (diplopia) appeared at age 43, and gait ataxia did not appear until age 50. Besides ataxia, hormonal dysfunction (resulting from involution of gonadotropic function) is typically not a prominent presenting feature, and it may precede gait ataxia by years. Further, cases may respond to treatment with exogenous gonadotropins, and while our patient did not have children, maintained physiological plasma testosterone concentrations, induced testicular enlargement and induction of spermatogenesis have been reported in G-H syndrome, which is also due to PNPLA6 mutations [21].

The ocular changes noted in B–N are distinctive in their pattern of progressive RPE and choriocapillaris atrophy, with macular changes in the posterior pole and mid-periphery of each eye. Deposition of brown pigment clumps in the mid-peripheral retina, known as pigmentary clumping, may also be present. Synofzik et al. [6, 10] recently published two separate reports of patients with PNPLA6 mutations including photographic examples of these chorioretinal changes and pigmentary clumping. In one of these reports few visual details were available, but in the other, fundoscopy and OCT findings of a 37-year-old woman with B–N with visual loss and ataxia were shown. OCT demonstrated retinal thinning and atrophy of choroidal vessels in our patient like in Synofzik’s, but the degree of chorioretinal dystrophy was much less severe in ours. Furthermore, our patient lacked pigmentary clumps. We find it interesting that, overall, our patient demonstrated a milder form of the chorioretinal process than previously reported, which is rather counterintuitive given our patient’s older age.

Published B–N case descriptions suggest that additional features may be present, including subcortical T2 white matter hyperintensities [7, 22], basal ganglia [3], midbrain [3], and cortical atrophy [23, 24], pyramidal tract abnormalities and hyperkinetic movements (Table 1). Cognitive decline was noted in our patient and others [1, 4, 7, 25], and we suspect it may constitute a more prominent feature than previously recognized [1]. Although our patient never underwent formal cognitive testing prior to our initial evaluation, she reported normal cognition earlier in her life, and a very clear history of recent cognitive decline. To our knowledge, previous reports of cognitive impairment in B–N patients were present early in the patients’ lives, and progressive decline has not been clearly documented [1, 4, 6, 7, 25].

PNPLA6 encodes for NTE, which is the key protein in the pathogenesis of organophosphorous (OP) compound-induced delayed neuropathy (OPIDN) [26]. In this condition, certain OP esters lead to a degeneration of long axons in the spinal cord and peripheral nerves, either through direct protein inhibition or through generation of neurotoxic complexes. Given the known role of PNPLA6 in the pathogenesis of neuropathy, it is plausible that loss of function mutations may predispose B–N patients to the development of polyneuropathy, which was largely subclinical in our patient as demonstrated only by her EMG/NCS.

NTE is also known to deacetylate intracellular phosphatidylcholine to produce glycerophosphocholine [27]. It has also been reported to avidly hydrolyze a number of lysophospholipids, indicating a role in intracellular membrane trafficking [28]. NTE is predicted to contain a single transmembrane domain, a tyrosine kinase phosphorylation site, and regions of cyclic nucleotide-binding sites (Fig. 5), the latter indicating that it may be regulated by either cAMP or cGMP [28]. Therefore, possible complex interactions between NTE and other molecules (including the transcriptase of RNF216) may give rise to the wide phenotypic spectrum associated with PNPLA6 genetic variability. Genotyping of other B–N cases is necessary to better understand PNPLA6-associated genotype–phenotype correlations.

Our patient’s family history was interesting, but of unclear significance. Since we did not have a sample of our patient’s mother’s DNA, we can only speculate about her possible carrier state. It is plausible that this heterozygous state may have predisposed her for what we can only hypothesize was a dementia with Lewy bodies phenotype. Of course, we also cannot exclude the possibility of a de novo mutation in our patient, which would make her mother’s phenotype completely coincidental.

In sum, we identified a novel B–N case with compound heterozygous PNPLA6 mutations, further confirming the causative role of PNPLA6 in B–N syndrome. Our case shows that sporadic-appearing gait ataxia beginning in the 50s can be due to PNPLA6 mutations, and that it is justified to query for a history of hypogonadism and retinal findings in adult-onset gait ataxia. Furthermore, we recognize that visual symptoms may be absent in patients with mild phenotypes, and suggest that patients in whom B–N is suspected undergo a neuroophthalmologic evaluation. Finally, our case adds weight to the assumption that PNPLA6 mutations are the leading cause of Boucher–Neuhäuser syndrome; since both of this patient’s mutations were located in the phospholipase esterase domain (where most pathogenic mutations seem to cluster, as shown in Fig. 5), we believe the phospholipase esterase domain will be the most appropriate molecular target for the development of novel therapeutic strategies.