---
reference_id: PMID:10973251
title: "Mutations in MKKS cause obesity, retinal dystrophy and renal malformations associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome."
authors:
- Katsanis N
- Beales PL
- Woods MO
- Lewis RA
- Green JS
- Parfrey PS
- Ansley SJ
- Davidson WS
- Lupski JR
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/79201
keywords:
- Alleles
- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Mapping
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA, Complementary/metabolism"
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Gene Deletion
- Genetic Linkage
- Genotype
- Group II Chaperonins
- Haplotypes
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Kidney/abnormalities
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Molecular Chaperones/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Obesity/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
- Retinal Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in MKKS cause obesity, retinal dystrophy and renal malformations associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Katsanis N, Beales PL, Woods MO, Lewis RA, Green JS, Parfrey PS, Ansley SJ, Davidson WS, Lupski JR
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/79201](https://doi.org/10.1038/79201)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Sep;26(1):67-70. doi: 10.1038/79201.

Mutations in MKKS cause obesity, retinal dystrophy and renal malformations 
associated with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Katsanis N(1), Beales PL, Woods MO, Lewis RA, Green JS, Parfrey PS, Ansley SJ, 
Davidson WS, Lupski JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder predominantly 
characterized by obesity, retinal dystrophy, polydactyly, learning difficulties, 
hypogenitalism and renal malformations, with secondary features that include 
diabetes mellitus, endocrinological dysfunction and behavioural abnormalities. 
Despite an initial expectation of genetic homogeneity due to relative clinical 
uniformity, five BBS loci have been reported, with evidence for additional loci 
in the human genome; however, no genes for BBS have yet been identified. We 
performed a genome screen with BBS families from Newfoundland that were excluded 
from BBS1-5 and identified linkage with D20S189. Fine-mapping reduced the 
critical interval to 1.9 cM between D20S851 and D20S189, encompassing a 
chaperonin-like gene. Mutations in this gene were recently reported to be 
associated with McKusick-Kaufman syndrome (MKKS; ref. 8). Given both the mapping 
position and clinical similarities of these two syndromes, we screened MKKS and 
identified mutations in five Newfoundland and two European-American BBS 
pedigrees. Most are frameshift alleles that are likely to result in a 
non-functional protein. Our data suggest that a complete loss of function of the 
MKKS product, and thus an inability to fold a range of target proteins, is 
responsible for the clinical manifestations of BBS.

DOI: 10.1038/79201
PMID: 10973251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]