---
reference_id: "PMID:34147645"
title: Treatment of brain metastases in ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Ceddia S
- Codacci-Pisanelli G
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2021.103400
keywords:
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- Brain Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of brain metastases in ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Ceddia S, Codacci-Pisanelli G
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.critrevonc.2021.103400](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2021.103400)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2021 Sep;165:103400. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2021.103400. Epub 2021 Jun 18.

Treatment of brain metastases in ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer.

Ceddia S(1), Codacci-Pisanelli G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Biotechnology, University of
Rome "la Sapienza", Corso della Repubblica, 79, 04100, Latina, Italy. Electronic
address: serena.ceddia@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Biotechnology, University of
Rome "la Sapienza", Corso della Repubblica, 79, 04100, Latina, Italy. Electronic
address: giovanni.codacci-pisanelli@uniroma1.it.

Brain metastases are quite frequent in patients with ALK-translocated non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC): they are often not amenable to surgical resection and
are generally treated with radiotherapy (RT). This however causes severe late
toxic side effects that may become invalidating considering the relatively long
survival provided by recent medical treatment with target therapies. Several
clinical trials have demonstrated that ALK-inhibitors (crizotinib, alectinib,
brigatinib) show excellent activity also against brain metastases. It is
therefore reasonable, in asymptomatic patients, to start treatment with specific
inhibitors: RT will be used at the time of tumor progression or when symptoms
appear. This sequence provides the best quality of life for patients.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2021.103400
PMID: 34147645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
