---
reference_id: "PMID:35512827"
title: "Uncommon Glioneuronal Tumors: A Radiologic and Pathologic Synopsis."
authors:
- Vaz A
- Cavalcanti MS
- da Silva Junior EB
- Ramina R
- de Almeida Teixeira BC
journal: AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A7465
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Ganglioglioma/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Neoplasms, Neuroepithelial/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Central Nervous System Neoplasms/pathology
- "Brain Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Neuroimaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uncommon Glioneuronal Tumors: A Radiologic and Pathologic Synopsis.
**Authors:** Vaz A, Cavalcanti MS, da Silva Junior EB, Ramina R, de Almeida Teixeira BC
**Journal:** AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3174/ajnr.A7465](https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A7465)

## Content

1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2022 Aug;43(8):1080-1089. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A7465. Epub
 2022 May 5.

Uncommon Glioneuronal Tumors: A Radiologic and Pathologic Synopsis.

Vaz A(1)(2), Cavalcanti MS(3), da Silva Junior EB(4), Ramina R(4), de Almeida 
Teixeira BC(5)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatric Radiology (A.V., B.C.d.A.T.), Hospital 
Pequeno Príncipe, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil andrevaz7@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine (A.V., B.C.d.A.T.), Universidade Federal do 
Paraná, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pathology (M.S.C.), Neopath Diagnostics & Research Center, 
Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil.
(4)Departments of Neurosurgery (E.B.d.S.J., R.R.).
(5)From the Department of Pediatric Radiology (A.V., B.C.d.A.T.), Hospital 
Pequeno Príncipe, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil.
(6)Neuroradiology (B.C.d.A.T.), Instituto de Neurologia de Curitiba, Curitiba, 
Paraná, Brazil.

Glioneuronal tumors are characterized exclusively by neurocytic elements 
(neuronal tumors) or a combination of neuronal and glial features (mixed 
neuronal-glial tumors). Most of these tumors occur in young patients and are 
related to epilepsy. While ganglioglioma, dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial 
tumor, and desmoplastic infantile tumor are common glioneuronal tumors, 
anaplastic ganglioglioma, papillary glioneuronal tumor, rosette-forming 
glioneuronal tumor, gangliocytoma, and central neurocytoma are less frequent. 
Advances in immunohistochemical and molecular diagnostics have improved the 
characterization of these tumors and favored the description of variants and new 
subtypes, some not yet classified by the World Health Organization. Not 
infrequently, the histologic findings of biopsies of glioneuronal tumors 
simulate low-grade glial neoplasms; however, some imaging findings favor the 
correct diagnosis, making neuroimaging essential for proper management. 
Therefore, the aim of this review was to present key imaging, histopathology, 
immunohistochemistry, and molecular findings of glioneuronal tumors and their 
variants.

© 2022 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A7465
PMCID: PMC9575428
PMID: 35512827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]