---
reference_id: "PMID:36319802"
title: IRAK1 Duplication in MECP2 Duplication Syndrome Does Not Increase Canonical NF-κB-Induced Inflammation.
authors:
- Gottschalk I
- Kölsch U
- Wagner DL
- Kath J
- Martini S
- Krüger R
- Puel A
- Casanova JL
- Jezela-Stanek A
- Rossi R
- Chehadeh SE
- Van Esch H
- von Bernuth H
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01390-7
keywords:
- NF-KappaB Inhibitor alpha/metabolism
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Humans
- Inflammation
- X-Linked Intellectual Disability
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Interleukin-1 Receptor-Associated Kinases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IRAK1 Duplication in MECP2 Duplication Syndrome Does Not Increase Canonical NF-κB-Induced Inflammation.
**Authors:** Gottschalk I, Kölsch U, Wagner DL, Kath J, Martini S, Krüger R, Puel A, Casanova JL, Jezela-Stanek A, Rossi R, Chehadeh SE, Van Esch H, von Bernuth H
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-022-01390-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-022-01390-7)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2023 Feb;43(2):421-439. doi: 10.1007/s10875-022-01390-7. Epub 
2022 Nov 2.

IRAK1 Duplication in MECP2 Duplication Syndrome Does Not Increase Canonical 
NF-κB-Induced Inflammation.

Gottschalk I(1)(2), Kölsch U(3), Wagner DL(2)(4)(5)(6), Kath J(2)(4), Martini 
S(2), Krüger R(1), Puel A(7)(8), Casanova JL(7)(8)(9)(10)(11), Jezela-Stanek 
A(12), Rossi R(13), Chehadeh SE(14), Van Esch H(15), von Bernuth 
H(16)(17)(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, Immunology and Critical Care 
Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie 
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of 
Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany.
(2)Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Berlin Institute 
of Health (BIH), Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 
13353, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Labor Berlin GmbH, Department of Immunology, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Berlin Center for Advanced Therapies (BeCAT), Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität, Berlin, Humboldt-Universität Zu 
Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany.
(5)Institute of Transfusion Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany.
(6)Institute of Medical Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM 
U1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France.
(8)Imagine Institute, University of Paris, Paris, France.
(9)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(10)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY, USA.
(11)Pediatric Hematology and Immunology Unit, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, 
AP-HP, Paris, France.
(12)Department of Genetics and Clinical Immunology, National Institute of 
Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases, Warsaw, Poland.
(13)Childrens' Hospital Neukölln, Vivantes GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
(14)Institute of Medical Genetics of Alsace (IGMA), Strasbourg, France.
(15)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Louvain, Belgium.
(16)Department of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, Immunology and Critical Care 
Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie 
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of 
Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany. horst.von-bernuth@charite.de.
(17)Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Berlin 
Institute of Health (BIH), Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger 
Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany. horst.von-bernuth@charite.de.
(18)Labor Berlin GmbH, Department of Immunology, Berlin, Germany. 
horst.von-bernuth@charite.de.
(19)Berlin Institute of Health, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany. horst.von-bernuth@charite.de.

PURPOSE: Besides their developmental and neurological phenotype, most patients 
with MECP2/IRAK1 duplication syndrome present with recurrent and severe 
infections, accompanied by strong inflammation. Respiratory infections are the 
most common cause of death. Standardized pneumological diagnostics, targeted 
anti-infectious treatment, and knowledge of the underlying pathomechanism that 
triggers strong inflammation are unmet clinical needs. We investigated the 
influence of IRAK1 overexpression on the canonical NF-κB signaling as a possible 
cause for excessive inflammation in these patients.
METHODS: NF-κB signaling was examined by measuring the production of 
proinflammatory cytokines and evaluating the IRAK1 phosphorylation and 
degradation as well as the IκBα degradation upon stimulation with IL-1β and TLR 
agonists in SV40-immortalized fibroblasts, PBMCs, and whole blood of 9 patients 
with MECP2/IRAK1 duplication syndrome, respectively.
RESULTS: Both, MECP2/IRAK1-duplicated patients and healthy controls, showed 
similar production of IL-6 and IL-8 upon activation with IL-1β and TLR2/6 
agonists in immortalized fibroblasts. In PBMCs and whole blood, both patients 
and controls had a similar response of cytokine production after stimulation 
with IL-1β and TLR4/2/6 agonists. Patients and controls had equivalent patterns 
of IRAK1 phosphorylation and degradation as well as IκBα degradation upon 
stimulation with IL-1β.
CONCLUSION: Patients with MECP2/IRAK1 duplication syndrome do not show increased 
canonical NF-κB signaling in immortalized fibroblasts, PBMCs, and whole blood. 
Therefore, we assume that these patients do not benefit from a therapeutic 
suppression of this pathway.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-022-01390-7
PMCID: PMC9628328
PMID: 36319802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.