---
reference_id: "PMID:17448935"
title: "Chikungunya, an epidemic arbovirosis."
authors:
- Pialoux G
- Gaüzère BA
- Jauréguiberry S
- Strobel M
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(07)70107-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chikungunya, an epidemic arbovirosis.
**Authors:** Pialoux G, Gaüzère BA, Jauréguiberry S, Strobel M
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(07)70107-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(07)70107-X)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2007 May;7(5):319-27. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(07)70107-X.

Chikungunya, an epidemic arbovirosis.

Pialoux G(1), Gaüzère BA, Jauréguiberry S, Strobel M.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Tenon, Service des Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales, Paris, 
France. gilles.pialoux@tnn.aphp.fr

Comment in
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2007 Oct;7(10):633. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(07)70217-7.

Chikungunya is an arboviral disease transmitted by aedes mosquitoes. The virus 
was first isolated in 1953 in Tanzania. Chikungunya virus is a member of the 
genus Alphavirus and the family Togaviridae. The disease typically consists of 
an acute illness characterised by fever, rash, and incapacitating arthralgia. 
The word chikungunya, used for both the virus and the disease, means "to walk 
bent over" in some east African languages, and refers to the effect of the joint 
pains that characterise this dengue-like infection. Chikungunya is a 
specifically tropical disease, but it is geographically restricted and outbreaks 
are relatively uncommon. It is only occasionally observed in travellers and 
military personnel. More than 266 000 people have been infected during the 
ongoing outbreak in Réunion, in which Aedes albopictus is the presumed vector. 
In the ongoing Indian outbreak, in which Aedes aegypti is the presumed vector, 1 
400 000 cases of chikungunya were reported during 2006. The reasons for the 
re-emergence of chikungunya on the Indian subcontinent, and for its 
unprecedented incidence rate in the Indian Ocean region, are unclear. Plausible 
explanations include increased tourism, chikungunya virus introduction into a 
naive population, and viral mutation.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(07)70107-X
PMID: 17448935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]