---
reference_id: "PMID:30989370"
title: Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies.
authors:
- Attarian S
- Fatehi F
- Rajabally YA
- Pareyson D
journal: J Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-019-09319-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Arthrogryposis/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Myelin Sheath
- Neural Conduction
- Neurologic Examination
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies.
**Authors:** Attarian S, Fatehi F, Rajabally YA, Pareyson D
**Journal:** J Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-019-09319-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-019-09319-8)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2020 Aug;267(8):2198-2206. doi: 10.1007/s00415-019-09319-8. Epub
2019  Apr 15.

Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies.

Attarian S(1), Fatehi F(2)(3), Rajabally YA(4), Pareyson D(5).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Disease and ALS Reference Center, Timone University Hospital,
Aix-Marseille University, CHU Timone, 264 rue Saint Pierre, 13385, Marseille
Cedex 05, France. sattarian@ap-hm.fr.
(2)Neuromuscular Disease and ALS Reference Center, Timone University Hospital,
Aix-Marseille University, CHU Timone, 264 rue Saint Pierre, 13385, Marseille
Cedex 05, France.
(3)Department of Neurology, Iranian Center of Neurological Research,
Neurosciences Institute, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Aston Brain Centre, Aston University, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Unit of Rare Neurodegenerative and Neurometabolic Diseases, Department of
Clinical Neurosciences, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta,
Milan, Italy.

Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) is characterized
by recurrent sensory and motor neuropathy in individual nerves starting in
adolescence or young adulthood, focal conduction abnormalities at entrapment
sites on nerve conduction studies, and sausage-like swellings (tomacula) of the
myelin sheaths by nerve biopsy. It is characterized genetically by the deletion
of the chromosome 17p11.2-p12 region including the peripheral myelin protein-22
gene in the overwhelming majority of cases. HNPP may be frequently
underdiagnosed or misdiagnosed owing to the heterogeneity of clinical and
electrophysiological appearance. The main objective of this review is to
describe clinical manifestations, paraclinical features such as
electrodiagnostic, pathological, radiological and genetics findings, and
possible treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-019-09319-8
PMID: 30989370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
