---
reference_id: "PMID:40846501"
title: "A diagnostic challenge: spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 presenting with dystonia and parkinsonism."
authors:
- Koren TJ
- Ahmad KE
- Kumar KR
- Lubomski M
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2025-266791
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/diagnosis, genetics, complications"
- Aged
- "Dystonia/etiology, diagnosis"
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/etiology, diagnosis"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Exome Sequencing
- Calcium Channels
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A diagnostic challenge: spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 presenting with dystonia and parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Koren TJ, Ahmad KE, Kumar KR, Lubomski M
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2025-266791](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2025-266791)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2025 Aug 22;18(8):e266791. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2025-266791.

A diagnostic challenge: spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 presenting with dystonia
and parkinsonism.

Koren TJ(1), Ahmad KE(2), Kumar KR(3)(4), Lubomski M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, New South
Wales, Australia taljkoren@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, New South
Wales, Australia.
(3)The University of Sydney Sydney Medical School, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.
(4)Concord Repatriation General Hospital Neurosciences Department, Concord, New
South Wales, Australia.

Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) are a group of hereditary cerebellar ataxias that
are autosomal dominant. They often manifest as an adult-onset progressive
neurodegenerative disease with predominantly cerebellar features of gait ataxia,
nystagmus and dysarthria. SCA6 is a subtype of SCA which has been historically
classified as 'pure cerebellar'. However, many patients may still present with
non-cerebellar features. We present a woman in her 70s who was referred to a
movement disorder clinic with rigidity, dystonia, upper limb contractures,
dysarthria, ocular disturbance and muscle atrophy, with a strong family history
of affected individuals. Whole exome sequencing identified 22 CAG repeats in the
CACNA1A gene, in keeping with SCA6. A review of the literature identified a
broader SCA6 phenotype, which can present with non-cerebellar features, and
present a diagnostic challenge.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2025. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2025-266791
PMID: 40846501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
