---
reference_id: "PMID:34755541"
title: Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy Is Associated With Emotional Dysregulation, Impulse Dyscontrol, and Apathy.
authors:
- Smith EE
- Crites S
- Wang M
- Charlton A
- Zwiers A
- Sekhon R
- Sajobi T
- Camicioli R
- McCreary CR
- Frayne R
- Ismail Z
journal: J Am Heart Assoc
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.022089
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy Is Associated With Emotional Dysregulation, Impulse Dyscontrol, and Apathy.
**Authors:** Smith EE, Crites S, Wang M, Charlton A, Zwiers A, Sekhon R, Sajobi T, Camicioli R, McCreary CR, Frayne R, Ismail Z
**Journal:** J Am Heart Assoc (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1161/JAHA.121.022089](https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.121.022089)

## Content

1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Nov 16;10(22):e022089. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.022089.
Epub  2021 Nov 10.

Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy Is Associated With Emotional Dysregulation, Impulse 
Dyscontrol, and Apathy.

Smith EE(1)(2), Crites S(3), Wang M(1)(4), Charlton A(1), Zwiers A(1), Sekhon 
R(1), Sajobi T(2)(4), Camicioli R(5), McCreary CR(1)(2)(6), Frayne R(1)(2)(6), 
Ismail Z(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences University of Calgary Alberta Canada.
(2)Hotchkiss Brain Institute Calgary Alberta Canada.
(3)Department of Psychiatry University of Calgary Alberta Canada.
(4)Department of Community Health Sciences University of Calgary Alberta Canada.
(5)Department of Medicine (Neurology) University of Alberta Edmonton Alberta 
Canada.
(6)Department of Radiology University of Calgary Alberta Canada.

Background Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) causes cognitive decline, but it is 
not known whether it is associated with neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS). Methods 
and Results Participants with CAA, mild cognitive impairment, mild dementia due 
to Alzheimer's disease, and normal cognition were recruited from stroke and 
dementia clinics and community advertising. NPS were captured using the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire short form. The number and total 
severity (number multiplied by severity of each symptom [mild, moderate, or 
severe]) of NPS were analyzed using generalized linear regression with a 
negative binomial link and multiple linear regression, adjusting for age, sex, 
and education. A total of 109 participants (43 with CAA, 15 with Alzheimer's 
disease, 28 with mild cognitive impairment, and 23 with normal cognition) (mean 
age 71.1 [SD=7.6]; 53.2% male) were included. The most frequent NPS in CAA were 
depression/dysphoria (48.8%), irritability/lability (37.2%), 
agitation/aggression (37.2%), apathy/indifference (34.9%), and anxiety (32.6%). 
In adjusted models, patients with CAA had 3.2 times (95% CI, 1.7-6.0) more NPS 
symptoms and 3.1 units (95% CI, 1.0-5.1) higher expected severity score. The 
number of NPS was similar to patients with mild cognitive impairment (3.2 times 
higher than controls) but less than in patients with Alzheimer's disease 
dementia (4.1 times higher than controls). Within patients with CAA, there were 
1.20 times (95% CI, 1.01-1.32) more NPS per 1% increase in white matter 
hyperintensity as a percentage of intracranial volume. Conclusions NPS are 
common in CAA, with a similar prevalence as in mild cognitive impairment. The 
association of the total number of NPS with higher white matter hyperintensity 
volume suggests that white matter damage may underlie some of these symptoms.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.121.022089
PMCID: PMC8751932
PMID: 34755541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]