---
reference_id: "PMID:35754673"
title: "Late presentation of lane-hamilton syndrome in a 33 year old female: A case report."
authors:
- Mishra SC
- Gupta A
- Sharma S
- Gupta A
journal: Int J Appl Basic Med Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/ijabmr.ijabmr_620_21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late presentation of lane-hamilton syndrome in a 33 year old female: A case report.
**Authors:** Mishra SC, Gupta A, Sharma S, Gupta A
**Journal:** Int J Appl Basic Med Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ijabmr.ijabmr_620_21](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijabmr.ijabmr_620_21)

## Content

1. Int J Appl Basic Med Res. 2022 Apr-Jun;12(2):137-139. doi: 
10.4103/ijabmr.ijabmr_620_21. Epub 2022 May 10.

Late presentation of lane-hamilton syndrome in a 33 year old female: A case 
report.

Mishra SC(1), Gupta A(2), Sharma S(1), Gupta A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Pathology, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Lane-Hamilton syndrome (LHS) is a rare syndromic association between idiopathic 
pulmonary hemosiderosis and celiac disease (CD). It is usually seen in children 
below 15 years of age. It can occasionally be seen in adults. We present the 
case of a 33-year-old female patient who presented with recurrent episodes of 
hemoptysis to the pulmonary outpatient department. She also gave a history of 
having frequent loose stools. She was admitted and investigated thoroughly and 
was found to be suffering from LHS which is a rare disease. High-resolution 
computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest and duodenal biopsy helped in concluding 
the diagnosis. She was started on gluten-free diet (GFD) and has responded well 
with no episodes of hemoptysis on 9-month follow-up and is in good general 
condition. This case highlights the importance of keeping a high index of 
suspicion of LHS in a young patient presenting with unexplained hemoptysis and 
diarrhea. In a known case of CD presenting with hemoptysis, a HRCT chest aids in 
the diagnosis of LHS. A GFD is the mainstay of long-term treatment, and 
adherence to this diet shows remarkable improvement in the symptoms of the 
patient and their overall general condition.

Copyright: © 2022 International Journal of Applied and Basic Medical Research.

DOI: 10.4103/ijabmr.ijabmr_620_21
PMCID: PMC9215191
PMID: 35754673

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.