---
reference_id: "PMID:31290619"
title: "Biallelic variants in COX4I1 associated with a novel phenotype resembling Leigh syndrome with developmental regression, intellectual disability, and seizures."
authors:
- Pillai NR
- AlDhaheri NS
- Ghosh R
- Lim J
- Streff H
- Nayak A
- Graham BH
- Hanchard NA
- Elsea SH
- Scaglia F
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61288
keywords:
- Alleles
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Electron Transport
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Leigh Disease/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Seizures/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic variants in COX4I1 associated with a novel phenotype resembling Leigh syndrome with developmental regression, intellectual disability, and seizures.
**Authors:** Pillai NR, AlDhaheri NS, Ghosh R, Lim J, Streff H, Nayak A, Graham BH, Hanchard NA, Elsea SH, Scaglia F
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61288](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61288)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Oct;179(10):2138-2143. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61288. Epub 
2019 Jul 10.

Biallelic variants in COX4I1 associated with a novel phenotype resembling Leigh 
syndrome with developmental regression, intellectual disability, and seizures.

Pillai NR(1)(2), AlDhaheri NS(1)(2)(3), Ghosh R(1), Lim J(2)(4), Streff H(1)(2), 
Nayak A(2)(4), Graham BH(5), Hanchard NA(1)(2), Elsea SH(1), Scaglia F(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas.
(2)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United 
Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, UAE.
(4)Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(5)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(6)Joint BCM-CUHK Center of Medical Genetics, Prince of Wales Hospital, ShaTin, 
Hong Kong SAR.

Autosomal recessive COX4I1 deficiency has been previously reported in a single 
individual with a homozygous pathogenic variant in COX4I1, who presented with 
short stature, poor weight gain, dysmorphic features, and features of Fanconi 
anemia. COX4I1 encodes subunit 4, isoform 1 of cytochrome c oxidase. Cytochrome 
c oxidase is a respiratory chain enzyme that plays an important role in 
mitochondrial electron transport and reduces molecular oxygen to water leading 
to the formation of ATP. Defective production of cytochrome c oxidase leads to a 
variable phenotypic spectrum ranging from isolated myopathy to Leigh syndrome. 
Here, we describe two siblings, born to consanguineous parents, who presented 
with encephalopathy, developmental regression, hypotonia, pathognomonic brain 
imaging findings resembling Leigh-syndrome, and a novel homozygous variant on 
COX4I1, expanding the known clinical phenotype associated with pathogenic 
variants in COX4I1.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61288
PMID: 31290619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]