---
reference_id: "PMID:35343188"
title: "CONCORDANCE: A real-world evidence study to evaluate the concordance of detecting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation by circulating tumor DNA* versus tissue biopsy in patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer."
authors:
- Prabhash K
- Biswas B
- Khurana S
- Batra U
- Biswas G
- Advani SH
- Mohapatra PN
- Rajappa S
- Sharma A
- Patil S
- Dattatreya PS
- Roy R
- Almel S
- Goyal G
- Warrier N
journal: Indian J Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/ijc.ijc_438_21
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/diagnosis, genetics"
- Circulating Tumor DNA/genetics
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Liquid Biopsy
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CONCORDANCE: A real-world evidence study to evaluate the concordance of detecting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation by circulating tumor DNA* versus tissue biopsy in patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Prabhash K, Biswas B, Khurana S, Batra U, Biswas G, Advani SH, Mohapatra PN, Rajappa S, Sharma A, Patil S, Dattatreya PS, Roy R, Almel S, Goyal G, Warrier N
**Journal:** Indian J Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ijc.ijc_438_21](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijc.ijc_438_21)

## Content

1. Indian J Cancer. 2022 Mar;59(Supplement):S11-S18. doi: 10.4103/ijc.ijc_438_21.

CONCORDANCE: A real-world evidence study to evaluate the concordance of
detecting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation by circulating tumor
DNA* versus tissue biopsy in patients with metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer.

Prabhash K(1), Biswas B(2), Khurana S(3), Batra U(4), Biswas G(5), Advani SH(6),
Mohapatra PN(7), Rajappa S(8), Sharma A(9), Patil S(10), Dattatreya PS(11), Roy
R(12), Almel S(13), Goyal G(14), Warrier N(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha Block,
Parel, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Tata Medical Center Trust, 14 MAR(EW), New
Town, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Ansari Nagar East, Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute & Research
Centre, Rohini, New Delhi, India.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Sparsh Hospitals and Critical Care (P) Ltd,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Sushrut Hospital, Chembur East, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Apollo Gleneagles Hospitals 58, Kolkata, West
Bengal, India.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, Basavatarakam Indo-American Cancer Hospital
and Research Institute, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Action Cancer Hospital, New Delhi, India.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, Healthcare Global Enterprises Ltd,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Omega Hospitals, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India.
(12)Department of Medical Oncology, Saroj Gupta Cancer Centre & Research
Institute, Thakurpukur, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(13)Department of Medical Oncology, P.D. Hinduja Hospital & Medical Research
Centre, 908 9th floor Research Department Veer Savarkar Marg Mahim, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India.
(14)Department of Medical Oncology, Max Super Speciality Hospital, Room No 143
Basement 2 Phase 6 Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar, Chandigarh, Punjab, India.
(15)Department of Medical Oncology, MVR Cancer Centre & Research Centre,
Vellalaserry NIT Poolacode Choolur, Kozhikode, Kerala, India.

BACKGROUND: Molecular tissue testing in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is
done for the assessment of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation.
EGFR mutation status is the basis for deciding the targeted treatment option for
patients with metastatic NSCLC. The nonavailability of tissue samples and
contraindications for biopsy pose a significant challenge. Hence, circulating
tumor DNA (ctDNA) by liquid biopsy can be a viable alternative for NSCLC
patients.
METHODS: This study was conducted at 15 sites across India. EGFR mutation
testing from plasma was done as part of the study at the central laboratory by
the next-generation sequencing (NGS) method, and EGFR mutation test results from
tissue samples (done as part of routine practice) were recorded for all the
patients.
RESULTS: Out of the total patients enrolled (N = 245), the majority (64.5%, n =
158) were men. The median age of patients was 58.0 (range: 26-84) years. The
concordance between plasma and tissue testing was found to be 82.9% (95%
confidence interval [CI]: 77.55, 87.45). The sensitivity and specificity of NGS
were 68.4% (95% CI: 56.92, 78.37) and 90.1% [95% CI: 84.36, 94.21),
respectively. Plasma testing detected 1.2% (n = 3) and tissue sample testing
detected 2.4% (n = 6) positive status of exon 20 T790M EGFR mutation. Out of the
total number of patients enrolled, 25 were tissue positive and plasma negative,
while 16 were plasma positive and tissue negative.
CONCLUSIONS: "> This real-world study in Indian patients suggests that plasma
testing for EGFR mutation analysis is a viable diagnostic option in newly
diagnosed advanced/metastatic NSCLC patients. The noninvasive plasma procedure
in patients without available/evaluable tumor sample may enable more patients to
receive appropriate targeted therapies by providing clinicians with valuable
insights into the patient's tumor mutation status.
CLINICALTRIALS.GOV IDENTIFIER: NCT03562819.

DOI: 10.4103/ijc.ijc_438_21
PMID: 35343188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None
