---
reference_id: "PMID:2485024"
title: Treatment of hypertensive heart disease with ACE inhibitors.
authors:
- Stumpe KO
journal: J Cardiovasc Pharmacol
year: '1987'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of hypertensive heart disease with ACE inhibitors.
**Authors:** Stumpe KO
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Pharmacol (1987)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1987;10 Suppl 6:S166-71.

Treatment of hypertensive heart disease with ACE inhibitors.

Stumpe KO(1).

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Universität-Poliklinik, Bonn, F.R.G.

Hypertensive left ventricular hypertrophy is associated with a variety of 
complications including congestive heart failure, arrhythmias, and ischemic 
heart disease. Unloading the system in time by antihypertensive drug treatment 
should prevent or reverse left ventricular hypertrophy. Although most 
antihypertensive agents can control blood pressure in a majority of patients, 
only a select subset of these pharmacologic agents will reverse left ventricular 
mass. There is evidence to suggest that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors can play an important role in protecting the heart during the various 
phases of evolution of hypertensive heart disease both acutely and on a 
long-term basis. Several studies in hypertensive humans and experimental animals 
have documented the effectiveness of ACE inhibitors in reducing cardiac 
hypertrophy. In hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy, the ACE 
inhibitor captopril 3 and 9 months after starting treatment significantly 
reduced left ventricular mass as well as left ventricular posterior wall and 
septal wall thickness. The mechanism of regression of left ventricular mass by 
ACE inhibition is speculative. The absence of a reflex hyperadrenergic state in 
the face of blood pressure control may be of importance. In addition, 
interference with angiotensin II generation by these agents may also play a role 
either through the myocardial effects of angiotensin II on protein synthesis or 
because of its facilitation of cardiac sympathetic neurotransmitter release. ACE 
inhibition appears to be associated with the maintenance of normal coronary flow 
reserve and in high renin states ACE inhibition may increase coronary blood 
flow. ACE inhibitors are also indicated under conditions of hypertensive heart 
failure.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2485024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]