---
reference_id: "PMID:38309995"
title: Polymorphisms and haplotypes of TOLLIP and MUC5B are associated with susceptibility and survival in patients with fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
authors:
- Mota PC
- Soares ML
- Ferreira AC
- Santos RF
- Rufo JC
- Vasconcelos D
- Carvalho A
- Guimarães S
- Vasques-Nóvoa F
- Cardoso C
- Melo N
- Alexandre AT
- Coelho D
- Novais-Bastos H
- Morais A
journal: Pulmonology
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.pulmoe.2024.01.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polymorphisms and haplotypes of TOLLIP and MUC5B are associated with susceptibility and survival in patients with fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
**Authors:** Mota PC, Soares ML, Ferreira AC, Santos RF, Rufo JC, Vasconcelos D, Carvalho A, Guimarães S, Vasques-Nóvoa F, Cardoso C, Melo N, Alexandre AT, Coelho D, Novais-Bastos H, Morais A
**Journal:** Pulmonology (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pulmoe.2024.01.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pulmoe.2024.01.002)

## Content

1. Pulmonology. 2025 Dec 31;31(1):2416788. doi: 10.1016/j.pulmoe.2024.01.002.
Epub  2024 Oct 24.

Polymorphisms and haplotypes of TOLLIP and MUC5B are associated with 
susceptibility and survival in patients with fibrotic hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis.

Mota PC(1)(2)(3), Soares ML(4)(5)(3), Ferreira AC(4)(3), Santos RF(3)(6), Rufo 
JC(7)(8)(9), Vasconcelos D(4)(3), Carvalho A(2)(10), Guimarães S(2)(11), 
Vasques-Nóvoa F(2)(12)(13), Cardoso C(1)(2)(3), Melo N(1), Alexandre AT(1), 
Coelho D(1)(2)(3), Novais-Bastos H(1)(2)(3), Morais A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Pneumologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, 
EPE, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(4)Laboratório de Apoio à Investigação em Medicina Molecular (LAIMM), 
Departamento de Biomedicina, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, 
Portugal.
(5)LAIMM, Núcleo de Recursos Laboratoriais, Unidade de Gestão de Conhecimento, 
Departamento de Recursos Comuns, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, 
Portugal.
(6)Escola Superior de Saúde - Instituto Politécnico do Porto, Portugal.
(7)Indoor Air Quality and Respiratory Health Lab, Laboratory for Integrative and 
Translational Research in Population Health (ITR), Porto, Portugal.
(8)EPIUnit - Instituto de Saúde Pública, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(9)Center for Translational Health and Medical Biotechnology Research (T.Bio), 
Escola Superior de Saúde, Instituto Politécnico do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(10)Departamento de Radiologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, 
EPE, Porto, Portugal.
(11)Departamento de Anatomia Patológica, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São 
João, EPE, Porto, Portugal.
(12)Departamento de Medicina Interna, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São 
João, EPE, Porto, Portugal.
(13)UnIC@RISE, Department of Surgery and Physiology, Portugal.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is an 
interstitial lung disease with diverse clinical features that can present a 
fibrotic phenotype similar to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) in genetically 
predisposed individuals. While several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
have been associated with IPF, the genetic factors contributing to fibrotic HP 
(fHP) remain poorly understood. This study investigated the association of MUC5B 
and TOLLIP variants with susceptibility, clinical presentation and survival in 
Portuguese patients with fHP.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A case-control study was undertaken with 97 fHP patients 
and 112 controls. Six SNPs residing in the MUC5B and TOLLIP genes and their 
haplotypes were analyzed. Associations with risk, survival, and clinical, 
radiographic, and pathological features of fHP were probed through comparisons 
among patients and controls.
RESULTS: MUC5B rs35705950 and three neighboring TOLLIP variants (rs3750920, 
rs111521887, and rs5743894) were associated with increased susceptibility to 
fHP. Minor allele frequencies were greater among fHP patients than in controls 
(40.7% vs 12.1%, P<0.0001; 52.6% vs 40.2%, P = 0.011; 22.7% vs 13.4%, P = 0.013; 
and 23.2% vs 12.9%, P = 0.006, respectively). Haplotypes formed by these 
variants were also linked to fHP susceptibility. Moreover, carriers of a 
specific haplotype (G-T-G-C) had a significant decrease in survival (adjusted 
hazard ratio 6.92, 95% CI 1.73-27.64, P = 0.006). Additional associations were 
found between TOLLIP rs111521887 and rs5743894 variants and decreased lung 
function at baseline, and the MUC5B SNP and radiographic features, further 
highlighting the influence of genetic factors in fHP.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that TOLLIP and MUC5B variants and haplotypes 
may serve as valuable tools for risk assessment and prognosis in fibrotic 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, potentially contributing to its patient 
stratification, and offer insights into the genetic factors influencing the 
clinical course of the condition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pulmoe.2024.01.002
PMID: 38309995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]