---
reference_id: "PMID:33683022"
title: Segmental overgrowth and aneurysms due to mosaic PDGFRB p.(Tyr562Cys).
authors:
- Chenbhanich J
- Hu Y
- Hetts S
- Cooke D
- Dowd C
- Devine P
- UCLA Clinical Genomics Center
- Russell B
- Kang SHL
- Chang VY
- Abla AA
- Cornett P
- Yeh I
- Lee H
- Martinez-Agosto JA
- Frieden IJ
- Shieh JT
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62126
keywords:
- Adult
- "Aging, Premature/genetics"
- "Aneurysm/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Child
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Germ-Line Mutation/genetics
- "Growth Disorders/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intracranial Aneurysm/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mosaicism
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/genetics"
- "Skin Abnormalities/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Segmental overgrowth and aneurysms due to mosaic PDGFRB p.(Tyr562Cys).
**Authors:** Chenbhanich J, Hu Y, Hetts S, Cooke D, Dowd C, Devine P, UCLA Clinical Genomics Center, Russell B, Kang SHL, Chang VY, Abla AA, Cornett P, Yeh I, Lee H, Martinez-Agosto JA, Frieden IJ, Shieh JT
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62126](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62126)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 May;185(5):1430-1436. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62126. Epub 
2021 Mar 8.

Segmental overgrowth and aneurysms due to mosaic PDGFRB p.(Tyr562Cys).

Chenbhanich J(1), Hu Y(2), Hetts S(3), Cooke D(3), Dowd C(3), Devine P(4)(5); 
UCLA Clinical Genomics Center; Russell B(6), Kang SHL(2), Chang VY(7), Abla 
AA(8), Cornett P(9), Yeh I(4)(10), Lee H(2)(11), Martinez-Agosto JA(3)(11), 
Frieden IJ(10), Shieh JT(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Division of Neurointerventional Radiology, Department of Radiology and 
Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, 
San Francisco, California, USA.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, 
California, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, 
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(8)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, 
California, USA.
(9)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University of California, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(10)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, 
California, USA.
(11)Department of Human Genetics, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.

Activating variants in the platelet-derived growth factor receptor β gene 
(PDGFRB) have been associated with Kosaki overgrowth syndrome, infantile 
myofibromatosis, and Penttinen premature aging syndrome. A recently described 
phenotype with fusiform aneurysm has been associated with mosaic PDGFRB 
c.1685A > G p.(Tyr562Cys) variant. Few reports however have examined the 
vascular phenotypes and mosaic effects of PDGFRB variants. We describe clinical 
characteristics of two patients with a recurrent mosaic PDGFRB p.(Tyr562Cys) 
variant identified via next-generation sequencing-based genetic testing. We 
observed intracranial fusiform aneurysm in one patient and found an additional 
eight patients with aneurysms and phenotypes associated with PDGFRB-activating 
variants through literature search. The conditions caused by PDGFRB-activating 
variants share overlapping features including overgrowth, premature aged skin, 
and vascular malformations including aneurysms. Aneurysms are progressive and 
can result in morbidities and mortalities in the absence of successful 
intervention. Germline and/or somatic testing for PDGFRB gene should be obtained 
when PDGFRB activating variant-related phenotypes are present. Whole-body 
imaging of the arterial tree and echocardiography are recommended after 
diagnosis. Repeating the imaging study within a 6- to 12-month period after 
detection is reasonable. Finally, further evaluation for the effectiveness and 
safety profile of kinase inhibitors in this patient population is warranted.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62126
PMID: 33683022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]