---
reference_id: "PMID:32450565"
title: "Novel Coronavirus-Induced Right Ventricular Failure and Point of Care Echocardiography: A Case Report."
authors:
- Chen L
- Upadhya G
- Guo US
- Belligund P
- Lee DK
- Shalom I
- Dubey GR
- Al-Ajam MR
- Mitre CA
journal: Cardiology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000508527
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Coronavirus-Induced Right Ventricular Failure and Point of Care Echocardiography: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Chen L, Upadhya G, Guo US, Belligund P, Lee DK, Shalom I, Dubey GR, Al-Ajam MR, Mitre CA
**Journal:** Cardiology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000508527](https://doi.org/10.1159/000508527)

## Content

1. Cardiology. 2020;145(7):467-472. doi: 10.1159/000508527. Epub 2020 May 25.

Novel Coronavirus-Induced Right Ventricular Failure and Point of Care 
Echocardiography: A Case Report.

Chen L(1)(2), Upadhya G(3), Guo US(4), Belligund P(5), Lee DK(5), Shalom I(5), 
Dubey GR(5), Al-Ajam MR(5), Mitre CA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Downstate Medical Center, State University 
of New York, Brooklyn, New York, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Brooklyn Campus, 
Veterans Affairs New York Harbor Healthcare System, Brooklyn, New York, USA.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Downstate Medical 
Center, State University of New York, Brooklyn, New York, USA.
(4)Sunrise Health Consortium, Southern Hills Hospital Family Medicine GME, Las 
Vegas, Nevada, USA.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Brooklyn Campus, Veterans Affairs New York Harbor Healthcare System, 
Brooklyn, New York, USA.
(6)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Brooklyn Campus, 
Veterans Affairs New York Harbor Healthcare System, Brooklyn, New York, USA, 
cristina.mitre@va.gov.

Various cardiovascular complications have been reported in patients with 
coronavirus disease 2019. Common complications include acute myocardial injury, 
myocarditis, arrhythmia, pericarditis, heart failure, and shock. We present a 
case of cor pulmonale diagnosed with serial point of care ultrasound. Given the 
current shortage of personal protective equipment (PPE) and high infectivity of 
this virus, we acknowledge the utility of this tool in obtaining important 
clinical information while minimizing exposure and PPE consumption.

© 2020 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000508527
PMCID: PMC7316647
PMID: 32450565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.