---
reference_id: "PMID:34909266"
title: Towards Precision Therapies for Inherited Disorders of Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation.
authors:
- Spaull RVV
- Soo AKS
- Hogarth P
- Hayflick SJ
- Kurian MA
journal: Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.5334/tohm.661
keywords:
- Brain
- Humans
- Iron
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Towards Precision Therapies for Inherited Disorders of Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation.
**Authors:** Spaull RVV, Soo AKS, Hogarth P, Hayflick SJ, Kurian MA
**Journal:** Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.5334/tohm.661](https://doi.org/10.5334/tohm.661)

## Content

1. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y). 2021 Nov 24;11:51. doi: 10.5334/tohm.661. 
eCollection 2021.

Towards Precision Therapies for Inherited Disorders of Neurodegeneration with 
Brain Iron Accumulation.

Spaull RVV(1)(2), Soo AKS(1)(2)(3), Hogarth P(4), Hayflick SJ(4), Kurian 
MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Neurosciences, Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease in 
Children, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, UCL, London, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children, London, UK.
(3)NIHR Great Ormond Street Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK.
(4)Departments of Molecular & Medical Genetics and Neurology, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, Oregon, US.

BACKGROUND: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) disorders 
comprise a group of rare but devastating inherited neurological diseases with 
unifying features of progressive cognitive and motor decline, and increased iron 
deposition in the basal ganglia. Although at present there are no proven 
disease-modifying treatments, the severe nature of these monogenic disorders 
lends to consideration of personalized medicine strategies, including targeted 
gene therapy. In this review we summarize the progress and future direction 
towards precision therapies for NBIA disorders.
METHODS: This review considered all relevant publications up to April 2021 using 
a systematic search strategy of PubMed and clinical trials databases.
RESULTS: We review what is currently known about the underlying pathophysiology 
of NBIA disorders, common NBIA disease pathways, and how this knowledge has 
influenced current management strategies and clinical trial design. The safety 
profile, efficacy and clinical outcome of clinical studies are reviewed. 
Furthermore, the potential for future therapeutic approaches is also discussed.
DISCUSSION: Therapeutic options in NBIAs remain very limited, with no proven 
disease-modifying treatments at present. However, a number of different 
approaches are currently under development with increasing focus on targeted 
precision therapies. Recent advances in the field give hope that novel 
strategies, such as gene therapy, gene editing and substrate replacement 
therapies are both scientifically and financially feasible for these conditions.
HIGHLIGHTS: This article provides an up-to-date review of the current literature 
about Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA), with a focus on 
disease pathophysiology, current and previously trialed therapies, and future 
treatments in development, including consideration of potential genetic therapy 
approaches.

Copyright: © 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.5334/tohm.661
PMCID: PMC8641530
PMID: 34909266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MAK and RVVS have received charitable funding 
from Great Ormond Street Hospital Children’s Charity and LifeArc to undertake a 
clinical trial of 4’-phosphopanetetheine for patients with PKAN. PH and SJH have 
held unpaid executive positions in the non-profit Spoonbill Foundation, which 
provided funding for research on 4’-phosphopantetheine.