---
reference_id: "PMID:35672312"
title: Neonatal gene therapy achieves sustained disease rescue of maple syrup urine disease in mice.
authors:
- Pontoizeau C
- Simon-Sola M
- Gaborit C
- Nguyen V
- Rotaru I
- Tual N
- Colella P
- Girard M
- Biferi MG
- Arnoux JB
- Rötig A
- Ottolenghi C
- de Lonlay P
- Mingozzi F
- Cavazzana M
- Schiff M
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30880-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal gene therapy achieves sustained disease rescue of maple syrup urine disease in mice.
**Authors:** Pontoizeau C, Simon-Sola M, Gaborit C, Nguyen V, Rotaru I, Tual N, Colella P, Girard M, Biferi MG, Arnoux JB, Rötig A, Ottolenghi C, de Lonlay P, Mingozzi F, Cavazzana M, Schiff M
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-022-30880-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30880-w)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2022 Jun 7;13(1):3278. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30880-w.

Neonatal gene therapy achieves sustained disease rescue of maple syrup urine 
disease in mice.

Pontoizeau C(1)(2)(3), Simon-Sola M(4), Gaborit C(4), Nguyen V(4), Rotaru I(4), 
Tual N(4), Colella P(5), Girard M(6)(7), Biferi MG(8), Arnoux JB(9), Rötig A(4), 
Ottolenghi C(10)(9)(4), de Lonlay P(9)(7), Mingozzi F(5), Cavazzana M(4)(11), 
Schiff M(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Necker Hospital, APHP, Biochemistry, Metabolomics Unit, Paris Cité 
University, Paris, France. clement.pontoizeau@aphp.fr.
(2)Necker Hospital, APHP, Reference Center for Inborn Error of Metabolism, 
Pediatrics Department, Paris Cité University, Filière G2M, Paris, France. 
clement.pontoizeau@aphp.fr.
(3)Inserm UMR_S1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, France. 
clement.pontoizeau@aphp.fr.
(4)Inserm UMR_S1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(5)Généthon INTEGRARE UMR-S951, University of Evry, Evry, France.
(6)Necker Hospital, APHP, Pediatric Hepatology Unit, Pediatrics Department, 
Paris Cité University, Paris, France.
(7)Inserm U1151, Institut Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(8)Sorbonne University, Inserm, Institute of Myology, Centre of Research in 
Myology, Paris, France.
(9)Necker Hospital, APHP, Reference Center for Inborn Error of Metabolism, 
Pediatrics Department, Paris Cité University, Filière G2M, Paris, France.
(10)Necker Hospital, APHP, Biochemistry, Metabolomics Unit, Paris Cité 
University, Paris, France.
(11)Necker Hospital, APHP, Biotherapies Department, Paris Cité University, 
Paris, France.
(12)Necker Hospital, APHP, Reference Center for Inborn Error of Metabolism, 
Pediatrics Department, Paris Cité University, Filière G2M, Paris, France. 
manuel.schiff@aphp.fr.
(13)Inserm UMR_S1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, France. manuel.schiff@aphp.fr.

Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is a rare recessively inherited metabolic 
disorder causing accumulation of branched chain amino acids leading to neonatal 
death, if untreated. Treatment for MSUD represents an unmet need because the 
current treatment with life-long low-protein diet is challenging to maintain, 
and despite treatment the risk of acute decompensations and neuropsychiatric 
symptoms remains. Here, based on significant liver contribution to the 
catabolism of the branched chain amino acid leucine, we develop a liver-directed 
adeno-associated virus (AAV8) gene therapy for MSUD. We establish and 
characterize the Bckdha (branched chain keto acid dehydrogenase a)-/- mouse that 
exhibits a lethal neonatal phenotype mimicking human MSUD. Animals were treated 
at P0 with intravenous human BCKDHA AAV8 vectors under the control of either a 
ubiquitous or a liver-specific promoter. BCKDHA gene transfer rescued the lethal 
phenotype. While the use of a ubiquitous promoter fully and sustainably rescued 
the disease (long-term survival, normal phenotype and correction of biochemical 
abnormalities), liver-specific expression of BCKDHA led to partial, though 
sustained rescue. Here we show efficacy of gene therapy for MSUD demonstrating 
its potential for clinical translation.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-30880-w
PMCID: PMC9174284
PMID: 35672312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: F.M. and M.-G.B. are employees and equity 
holders of Spark Therapeutics, a Roche company. We declare that C.P., M.S.-S., 
P.d.L., C.O., M.C., and M.S. are designated as inventors of the European Patent 
Application EP20305079.4 filed on Jan. 29, 2020 in the names of Inserm, 
Fondation Imagine, Université de Paris, and APHP for “Gene therapy for MSUD.” 
The remaining authors declare no competing interests.