---
reference_id: "PMID:9385368"
title: "Jackson-Weiss syndrome: identification of two novel FGFR2 missense mutations shared with Crouzon and Pfeiffer craniosynostotic disorders."
authors:
- Tartaglia M
- Di Rocco C
- Lajeunie E
- Valeri S
- Velardi F
- Battaglia PA
journal: Hum Genet
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1007/s004390050584
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Jackson-Weiss syndrome: identification of two novel FGFR2 missense mutations shared with Crouzon and Pfeiffer craniosynostotic disorders.
**Authors:** Tartaglia M, Di Rocco C, Lajeunie E, Valeri S, Velardi F, Battaglia PA
**Journal:** Hum Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004390050584](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004390050584)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 1997 Nov;101(1):47-50. doi: 10.1007/s004390050584.

Jackson-Weiss syndrome: identification of two novel FGFR2 missense mutations 
shared with Crouzon and Pfeiffer craniosynostotic disorders.

Tartaglia M(1), Di Rocco C, Lajeunie E, Valeri S, Velardi F, Battaglia PA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio di Biologia Cellulare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Jackson-Weiss syndrome is a rare skeletal disorder characterized by 
craniosynostosis associated with foot malformations. This condition is inherited 
as an autosomal dominant trait with complete penetrance and wide phenotypic 
heterogeneity. Mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene 
have been recently identified as causes of this syndrome and of at least four 
other craniosynostotic disorders, namely the Apert, Beare-Stevenson cutis 
gyrata, Crouzon and Pfeiffer syndromes. We report two novel FGFR2 missense 
mutations associated with phenotypes consistent with Jackson-Weiss syndrome. 
Both nucleotide changes predict a serine for cysteine-342 substitution in the 
second half of the third immunoglobulin-like domain. The replacement of Cys342 
with arginine has previously been reported in one of the three Jackson-Weiss 
cases investigated. Interestingly, both Cys342Ser and Cys342Arg substitutions 
have been found to be associated with the Crouzon and Pfeiffer phenotypes; a 
phenotypic heterogeneity, Crouzon vs Jackson-Weiss clinical features, has been 
also observed for Gln289Pro and Ala344Gly amino-acid changes. This finding 
indicates the genetic homogeneity of the "heterogeneous" Jackson-Weiss phenotype 
and a common molecular basis for these apparently "clinically distinct" 
craniosynostotic disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s004390050584
PMID: 9385368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]