---
reference_id: "PMID:23334384"
title: Hereditary causes of kidney stones and chronic kidney disease.
authors:
- Edvardsson VO
- Goldfarb DS
- Lieske JC
- Beara-Lasic L
- Anglani F
- Milliner DS
- Palsson R
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-012-2329-z
keywords:
- "Adenine Phosphoribosyltransferase/deficiency, genetics"
- Animals
- Child
- "Cystinuria/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- "Dent Disease/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heredity
- Humans
- "Hypercalciuria/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- "Hyperoxaluria, Primary/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- "Kidney Calculi/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- "Nephrocalcinosis/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- "Renal Tubular Transport, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
- Risk Factors
- "Urolithiasis/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary causes of kidney stones and chronic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Edvardsson VO, Goldfarb DS, Lieske JC, Beara-Lasic L, Anglani F, Milliner DS, Palsson R
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-012-2329-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-012-2329-z)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2013 Oct;28(10):1923-42. doi: 10.1007/s00467-012-2329-z. Epub
 2013 Jan 20.

Hereditary causes of kidney stones and chronic kidney disease.

Edvardsson VO(1), Goldfarb DS, Lieske JC, Beara-Lasic L, Anglani F, Milliner DS,
Palsson R.

Author information:
(1)The Rare Kidney Stone Consortium, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
vidare@landspitali.is

Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) deficiency, cystinuria, Dent disease,
familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis (FHHNC), and
primary hyperoxaluria (PH) are rare but important causes of severe kidney stone
disease and/or chronic kidney disease in children. Recurrent kidney stone
disease and nephrocalcinosis, particularly in pre-pubertal children, should
alert the physician to the possibility of an inborn error of metabolism as the
underlying cause. Unfortunately, the lack of recognition and knowledge of the
five disorders has frequently resulted in an unacceptable delay in diagnosis and
treatment, sometimes with grave consequences. A high index of suspicion coupled
with early diagnosis may reduce or even prevent the serious long-term
complications of these diseases. In this paper, we review the epidemiology,
clinical features, diagnosis, treatment, and outcome of patients with APRT
deficiency, cystinuria, Dent disease, FHHNC, and PH, with an emphasis on
childhood manifestations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-012-2329-z
PMCID: PMC4138059
PMID: 23334384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Goldfarb is
a consultant for Takeda.
