---
reference_id: "PMID:39791092"
title: "An Atypical Case of Marchiafava-Bignami Disease in a Young Chronic Alcoholic: Challenges in Diagnosis and Prognosis."
authors:
- Menrai D
- Gandam Venkata SK
- Bhuram SC
- Bhuram SS
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.75468
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Atypical Case of Marchiafava-Bignami Disease in a Young Chronic Alcoholic: Challenges in Diagnosis and Prognosis.
**Authors:** Menrai D, Gandam Venkata SK, Bhuram SC, Bhuram SS
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.75468](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.75468)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Dec 10;16(12):e75468. doi: 10.7759/cureus.75468. eCollection 2024
 Dec.

An Atypical Case of Marchiafava-Bignami Disease in a Young Chronic Alcoholic: 
Challenges in Diagnosis and Prognosis.

Menrai D(1), Gandam Venkata SK(1)(2), Bhuram SC(1), Bhuram SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Critical Care Medicine, Springfield Clinic, Springfield, USA.
(2)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Southern Illinois University School of 
Medicine, Springfield, USA.

A 27-year-old male patient with chronic alcohol use disorder was diagnosed with 
Marchiafava-Bignami disease (MBD) after experiencing an episode of 
unconsciousness. MRI scans revealed lesions in the corpus callosum and adjacent 
white matter. Despite prompt initiation of intensive treatment with high-dose 
thiamine and corticosteroids, the patient only partially recovered, remaining 
disoriented and exhibiting persistent neurological deficits during follow-up. 
MBD is a rare condition seen in individuals with chronic alcohol use disorder 
and malnutrition, often resulting in unfavorable outcomes despite prompt 
intervention. This case underscores the impact of the patient's young age at the 
onset of alcohol dependence, a low Glasgow Coma Scale score, and the presence of 
extracallosal lesions on his overall prognosis. We discuss the pathophysiology, 
presentation, and treatment. We also describe the role of each prognostic factor 
of MBD in an unfavourable outcome highlighting the need for a larger study to 
define various prognostic indicators at presentation and identify appropriate 
treatment approaches.

Copyright © 2024, Menrai et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.75468
PMCID: PMC11717062
PMID: 39791092

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent for treatment and open 
access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this study. 
Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all 
authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared 
that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted 
work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no 
financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any 
organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other 
relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships 
or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.