---
reference_id: "PMID:26874083"
title: "Ebola virus disease diagnosis by real-time RT-PCR: A comparative study of 11 different procedures."
authors:
- Cherpillod P
- Schibler M
- Vieille G
- Cordey S
- Mamin A
- Vetter P
- Kaiser L
journal: J Clin Virol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2016.01.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola virus disease diagnosis by real-time RT-PCR: A comparative study of 11 different procedures.
**Authors:** Cherpillod P, Schibler M, Vieille G, Cordey S, Mamin A, Vetter P, Kaiser L
**Journal:** J Clin Virol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcv.2016.01.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2016.01.017)

## Content

1. J Clin Virol. 2016 Apr;77:9-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2016.01.017. Epub 2016 Feb
2.

Ebola virus disease diagnosis by real-time RT-PCR: A comparative study of 11 
different procedures.

Cherpillod P(1), Schibler M(2), Vieille G(1), Cordey S(1), Mamin A(3), Vetter 
P(3), Kaiser L(1).

Author information:
(1)Swiss National Reference Centre for Emerging Viral Diseases, Geneva 
University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland; Laboratory of Virology, Geneva 
University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland; University of Geneva Medical School, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Laboratory of Virology, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland; 
University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
manuel.schibler@hcuge.ch.
(3)Laboratory of Virology, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland; 
University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of Ebola virus disease relies on the detection of 
viral RNA in blood by real-time reverse-transcription PCR. While several of 
these assays were developed during the unprecedented 2013-2015 Ebola virus 
disease outbreak in West Africa, few were applied in the field.
OBJECTIVES: To compare technical performances and practical aspects of 11 Ebola 
virus real-time reverse-transcription PCR procedures.
STUDY DESIGN: We selected the most promising assays using serial dilutions of 
culture-derived Ebola virus RNA and determined their analytical sensitivity and 
potential range of quantification using quantified in vitro transcribed RNA; 
viral load values in the serum of an Ebola virus disease patient obtained with 
these assays were reported. Finally, ease of use and turnaround times of these 
kits were evaluated.
RESULTS: Commercial assays were at least as sensitive as in-house tests. Five of 
the former (Altona, Roche, Fast-track Diagnostics, and Life Technologies) were 
selected for further evaluation. Despite differences in analytical sensitivity 
and limits of quantification, all of them were suitable for Ebola virus 
diagnosis and viral load estimation. The Lifetech Lyophilized Ebola Virus (Zaire 
2014) assay (Life Technologies) appeared particularly promising, displaying the 
highest analytical sensitivity and shortest turnaround time, in addition to 
requiring no reagent freezing.
CONCLUSIONS: Commercial kits were at least as sensitive as in-house tests and 
potentially easier to use in the field than the latter. This qualitative 
comparison of real-time reverse transcription PCR assays may serve as a basis 
for the design of future Ebola virus disease diagnostics.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2016.01.017
PMID: 26874083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]