---
reference_id: "PMID:35917229"
title: Therapeutic approach to neurological manifestations of Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Ascoli M
- Elia M
- Gasparini S
- Bonanni P
- Mastroianni G
- Cianci V
- Neri S
- Pascarella A
- Santangelo D
- Aguglia U
- Ferlazzo E
journal: Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/17512433.2022.2109463
keywords:
- "Angelman Syndrome/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- Epilepsy/drug therapy
- "Epilepsy, Generalized/drug therapy"
- Humans
- Valproic Acid/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic approach to neurological manifestations of Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Ascoli M, Elia M, Gasparini S, Bonanni P, Mastroianni G, Cianci V, Neri S, Pascarella A, Santangelo D, Aguglia U, Ferlazzo E
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17512433.2022.2109463](https://doi.org/10.1080/17512433.2022.2109463)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2022 Jul;15(7):843-850. doi:
10.1080/17512433.2022.2109463. Epub 2022 Aug 10.

Therapeutic approach to neurological manifestations of Angelman syndrome.

Ascoli M(1)(2), Elia M(3), Gasparini S(1)(2), Bonanni P(4), Mastroianni G(2),
Cianci V(2), Neri S(1)(2), Pascarella A(1)(2), Santangelo D(1)(2), Aguglia
U(1)(2)(5), Ferlazzo E(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Magna Graecia University,
Catanzaro, Italy.
(2)Regional Epilepsy Centre, Great Metropolitan Hospital
"Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli", Reggio, Calabria, Italy.
(3)Unit of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiopathology, Oasi Research Institute,
IRCCS, Troina, Italy.
(4)Epilepsy and Neurophysiology Unit, IRCCS Medea, Treviso, Italy.
(5)Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology, National Research Council,
Catanzaro, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurogenetic disorder due to deficient
expression of the maternal copy of the UBE3A gene, which encodes ubiquitin
ligase E3A protein. Severe developmental delay, seizures and other neurological
disorders characterize AS.
AREAS COVERED: In this review, we focus on a comprehensive therapeutic approach
to the most disabling neurological manifestations of AS: epilepsy, sleep
disturbances, behavioral and movement disorders. Articles were identified
through PubMed and Google Scholar up to October 2021.
EXPERT OPINION: Evidence for the treatment of neurological manifestations in AS
mainly derives from poor quality studies (case reports, small case series,
expert opinions). Seizures can be polymorphic and includes atypical absences,
myoclonic, generalized tonic-clonic, unilateral clonic, or atonic attacks.
Sodium valproate, levetiracetam, and benzodiazepines are the most commonly used
anti-seizure medications. Melatonin or mirtazapine seem to improve sleep
quality. Antipsychotics, antidepressants, and anxiolytics have been proposed for
the treatment of behavioral manifestations, but no evidence-based studies are
available. Non-pharmacological approach may also be useful. Mild dystonia is
common but usually does not significantly impact patients' motor performances.
Well-conducted clinical trials aimed to evaluate treatment of neurological
complications of AS are warranted. Gene and molecular precision therapies
represent a fascinating area of research in the future.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2022.2109463
PMID: 35917229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
