---
reference_id: "PMID:25405820"
title: Genetics of vasculitis.
authors:
- Carmona FD
- Martín J
- González-Gay MA
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000124
keywords:
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- Major Histocompatibility Complex/genetics
- Vasculitis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of vasculitis.
**Authors:** Carmona FD, Martín J, González-Gay MA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000124](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000124)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2015 Jan;27(1):10-7. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000124.

Genetics of vasculitis.

Carmona FD(1), Martín J, González-Gay MA.

Author information:
(1)aInstituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina 'López-Neyra', CSIC, Granada 
bDepartment of Rheumatology, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla, 
IDIVAL, Santander, Spain cUniversity of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South 
Africa.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: We aim to give an overview of the recent progress in the 
knowledge of the genetic component of vasculitides.
RECENT FINDINGS: Using a state-of-the-art imputation method to analyse the major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) region, Ombrello and colleagues narrowed down 
the association between human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B51 and Behçet's disease 
to a model of five amino acids of the HLA-B molecule involved in the binding of 
the antigen, the interactions with receptors on CD8 T cells and natural killer 
cells, and the signal peptide of HLA-B, suggesting a crucial role of the 
cellular cytotoxicity on this disease. Other recent genetic studies have 
identified several loci with strong effects on vasculitis predisposition, most 
of them representing important players in the immune and inflammatory response. 
These associations include ERAP1, CCR1-CCR3, STAT4, KLRC4, GIMAP4, and TNFAIP3 
in Behçet's disease; BLK and CD40 in Kawasaki disease; SERPINA1 and SEMA6A in 
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody associated vasculitides; IL12B and FCGR2A/ 
FCGR2A in Takayasu arteritis; and CECR1 in a newly defined vascular inflammatory 
syndrome associated with adenosine deaminase (ADA2) deficiency. Although other 
vasculitides, such as giant cell arteritis (GCA) or immunoglobulin A vasculitis, 
have not benefitted by the great advantage of the large-scale genetic analyses 
yet, some interesting associations have been recently suggested, such as the 
classical functional PTPN22 allele rs2476601 (R620W) with GCA.
SUMMARY: The analysis of high-throughput genotyping and exome-sequencing data 
has produced a considerable advance in the identification of consistent genetic 
risk factors in vasculitides during the last 3 years. Further collaborative 
efforts, which will increase the sample size, and the use of custom arrays like 
the immunochip, will definitively help to better understand the genetic basis of 
vasculitides and to identify the common and specific molecular pathways 
underlying their pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000124
PMID: 25405820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]