---
reference_id: "PMID:8253776"
title: Human X-linked phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity is associated with distinct point mutations in the PRPS1 gene.
authors:
- Roessler BJ
- Nosal JM
- Smith PR
- Heidler SA
- Palella TD
- Switzer RL
- Becker MA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1993'
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Cell Line
- "DNA, Complementary"
- Escherichia coli/genetics
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- "Isoenzymes/genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Point Mutation
- "Purine Nucleotides/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Ribose-Phosphate Pyrophosphokinase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- X Chromosome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human X-linked phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity is associated with distinct point mutations in the PRPS1 gene.
**Authors:** Roessler BJ, Nosal JM, Smith PR, Heidler SA, Palella TD, Switzer RL, Becker MA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1993)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Dec 15;268(35):26476-81.

Human X-linked phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity is
associated with distinct point mutations in the PRPS1 gene.

Roessler BJ(1), Nosal JM, Smith PR, Heidler SA, Palella TD, Switzer RL, Becker
MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109.

Superactivity of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRS) is an X
chromosome-linked disorder of purine metabolism, characterized by gout with uric
acid overproduction and, in some families, neurodevelopmental impairment. Two
highly homologous isoforms of PRS (PRS1 and PRS2), each encoded by a distinct X
chromosome-linked locus, have been identified, and PRS1 and 2 cDNAs have been
cloned. The entire 954-base pair translated regions of PRS1 and 2 cDNAs derived
from cultured lymphoblasts and fibroblasts from two patients in whom purine
nucleotide feedback resistance of PRS is associated with enzyme superactivity
and neurodevelopmental defects were examined by direct sequencing after
polymerase chain reaction amplification of PRS transcripts. Nucleotide sequences
of PRS2 cDNAs from the patients and normal individuals were identical. In
contrast, PRS1 cDNAs from the patients differ from normal PRS1 cDNA, each by a
single base substitution. PRS1 cDNA from patient N. B. showed an A to G
transition at nucleotide 341, corresponding to an asparagine to serine change at
amino acid residue 113 of mature PRS1. A G to C transversion at nucleotide 547,
indicating an aspartic acid to histidine change at amino acid 182, was found for
PRS1 cDNA from patient S. M. Point mutations at the sites identified in the PRS1
cDNAs of the two patients were confirmed by the results of RNase mapping
analysis. Normal, N. B., and S. M. PRS1 cDNAs were introduced into Escherichia
coli BL21 (DE3)/pLyS, and recombinant N. B. and S. M. PRS1s showed the purine
nucleotide feedback resistance phenotypes characteristic of PRS from patients'
cells.

PMID: 8253776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
