---
reference_id: "PMID:42144331"
title: "Asymptomatic Pulmonary Involvement as the Initial Presentation of Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome with a Novel COL3A1 Frameshift Variant: A Case Report."
authors:
- Nogawa H
- Suzuki H
- Kawabata Y
- Honma T
- Aso M
- Ota H
- Nawa S
- Hino T
- Hayashi S
journal: Intern Med
year: '2026'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.7307-26
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asymptomatic Pulmonary Involvement as the Initial Presentation of Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome with a Novel COL3A1 Frameshift Variant: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Nogawa H, Suzuki H, Kawabata Y, Honma T, Aso M, Ota H, Nawa S, Hino T, Hayashi S
**Journal:** Intern Med (2026)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.7307-26](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.7307-26)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 2026 May 16. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.7307-26. Online ahead
of  print.

Asymptomatic Pulmonary Involvement as the Initial Presentation of Vascular 
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome with a Novel COL3A1 Frameshift Variant: A Case Report.

Nogawa H(1), Suzuki H(1), Kawabata Y(2), Honma T(3), Aso M(1), Ota H(4), Nawa 
S(5), Hino T(1), Hayashi S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Yamagata Prefectural Central Hospital, 
Japan.
(2)Division of Diagnostic Pathology, Saitama Cardiovascular and Respiratory 
Center, Japan.
(3)Department of Radiology, Yamagata Prefectural Central Hospital, Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Yamagata Prefectural Shinjo Hospital, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Pulmonology, and Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Yamagata University, Japan.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Dokkyo Medical University, Japan.

Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS), a rare connective tissue disorder caused 
by pathogenic COL3A1 variants, rarely presents with isolated pulmonary 
manifestations in asymptomatic cases. We herein report the case of a 36-year-old 
asymptomatic man with incidentally discovered fluctuating pulmonary nodules and 
cavitary lesions. A histopathological examination revealed nodular fibrosis and 
focal pulmonary ossification, indicating a disruption of the pulmonary 
architecture and pulmonary hemosiderosis. Genetic testing revealed a novel 
COL3A1 frameshift variant, confirming that the attenuated vEDS phenotype is 
attributable to haploinsufficiency. This case report highlights the diagnostic 
significance of asymptomatic pulmonary diseases.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.7307-26
PMID: 42144331