---
reference_id: "PMID:33137293"
title: "Efficacy and safety of setmelanotide, an MC4R agonist, in individuals with severe obesity due to LEPR or POMC deficiency: single-arm, open-label, multicentre, phase 3 trials."
authors:
- Clément K
- van den Akker E
- Argente J
- Bahm A
- Chung WK
- Connors H
- De Waele K
- Farooqi IS
- Gonneau-Lejeune J
- Gordon G
- Kohlsdorf K
- Poitou C
- Puder L
- Swain J
- Stewart M
- Yuan G
- Wabitsch M
- Kühnen P
- Setmelanotide POMC and LEPR Phase 3 Trial Investigators
journal: Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-8587(20)30364-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adrenal Insufficiency/complications
- Adult
- Anti-Obesity Agents/therapeutic use
- Child
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- "Obesity/complications, drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- Pro-Opiomelanocortin/deficiency
- Prognosis
- "Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4/agonists"
- "Receptors, Leptin/deficiency"
- Young Adult
- "alpha-MSH/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of setmelanotide, an MC4R agonist, in individuals with severe obesity due to LEPR or POMC deficiency: single-arm, open-label, multicentre, phase 3 trials.
**Authors:** Clément K, van den Akker E, Argente J, Bahm A, Chung WK, Connors H, De Waele K, Farooqi IS, Gonneau-Lejeune J, Gordon G, Kohlsdorf K, Poitou C, Puder L, Swain J, Stewart M, Yuan G, Wabitsch M, Kühnen P, Setmelanotide POMC and LEPR Phase 3 Trial Investigators
**Journal:** Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-8587(20)30364-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(20)30364-8)

## Content

1. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2020 Dec;8(12):960-970. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(20)30364-8. Epub 2020 Oct 30.

Efficacy and safety of setmelanotide, an MC4R agonist, in individuals with
severe obesity due to LEPR or POMC deficiency: single-arm, open-label,
multicentre, phase 3 trials.

Clément K(1), van den Akker E(2), Argente J(3), Bahm A(4), Chung WK(5), Connors
H(6), De Waele K(7), Farooqi IS(8), Gonneau-Lejeune J(9), Gordon G(6), Kohlsdorf
K(10), Poitou C(1), Puder L(11), Swain J(12), Stewart M(6), Yuan G(6), Wabitsch
M(13), Kühnen P(14); Setmelanotide POMC and LEPR Phase 3 Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Pigeon-Kherchiche P, Flaus-Furmaniuk A, Bald M, Denzer C, von
Schnurbein J, Abawi O, Blume-Peytavi U, Krabusch P, Mai K, Schnabel D, Wiegand
S, Flück CE, Schulz E, Voss E, Bratina N, Weiss K, Martos-Moreno GÁ, Danset A,
Gougis P, Dubern B, Clément K, van den Akker ELT, Argente J, Bahm AL, Chung WK,
Connors HS, De Waele K, Farooqi IS, Gonneau-Lejeune J, Gordon GA, Poitou C,
Puder L, Swain JM, Stewart MW, Yuan G, Wabitsch M, Kühnen P.

Author information:
(1)Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Nutrition Department,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France; Sorbonne Université, INSERM,
NutriOmics Research Unit, Paris, France.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Sophia
Children's Hospital and Obesity Center CGG, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Endocrinology, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, University Hospital Niño Jesús, CIBER "Fisiopatología de la obesidad y
nutrición" (CIBEROBN), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, IMDEA Institute, Madrid,
Spain.
(4)Peel Memorial Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New
York, NY, USA.
(6)Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Endocrinology, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(8)Wellcome-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science and NIHR Cambridge Biomedical
Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(9)Université de la Réunion, Unité Transversale de Nutrition Clinique, CHU de la
Réunion, Réunion, France.
(10)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Center for Rare Endocrine
Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Ulm,
Ulm, Germany.
(11)Institute for Experimental Pediatric Endocrinology, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany;
Department for Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(12)HonorHealth Bariatric Center, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(13)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Center for Rare Endocrine
Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Ulm,
Ulm, Germany. Electronic address: martin.wabitsch@uniklinik-ulm.de.
(14)Institute for Experimental Pediatric Endocrinology, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
Electronic address: peter.kuehnen@charite.de.

Comment in
    Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2020 Dec;8(12):933-935. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(20)30366-1.

BACKGROUND: The melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), a component of the
leptin-melanocortin pathway, plays a part in bodyweight regulation. Severe
early-onset obesity can be caused by biallelic variants in genes that affect the
MC4R pathway. We report the results from trials of the MC4R agonist
setmelanotide in individuals with severe obesity due to either
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) deficiency obesity or leptin receptor (LEPR)
deficiency obesity.
METHODS: These single-arm, open-label, multicentre, phase 3 trials were done in
ten hospitals across Canada, the USA, Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands,
and the UK. Participants aged 6 years or older with POMC or LEPR deficiency
obesity received open-label setmelanotide for 12 weeks. Participants with at
least 5 kg weight loss (or ≥5% if weighing <100 kg at baseline) entered an
8-week placebo-controlled withdrawal sequence (including 4 weeks each of blinded
setmelanotide and placebo treatment) followed by 32 additional weeks of
open-label treatment. The primary endpoint, which was assessed in participants
who received at least one dose of study medication and had a baseline assessment
(full analysis set), was the proportion of participants with at least 10% weight
loss compared with baseline at approximately 1 year. A key secondary endpoint
was mean percentage change in the most hunger score of the 11-point Likert-type
scale at approximately 1 year on the therapeutic dose, which was assessed in a
subset of participants aged 12 years or older in the full analysis set who
demonstrated at least 5 kg weight loss (or ≥5% in paediatric participants if
baseline bodyweight was <100 kg) over the 12-week open-label treatment phase and
subsequently proceeded into the placebo-controlled withdrawal sequence,
regardless of later disposition. These studies are registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02896192 and NCT03287960.
FINDINGS: Between Feb 14, 2017, and Sept 7, 2018, ten participants were enrolled
in the POMC trial and 11 participants were enrolled in the LEPR trial, and
included in the full analysis and safety sets. Eight (80%) participants in the
POMC trial and five (45%) participants in the LEPR trial achieved at least 10%
weight loss at approximately 1 year. The mean percentage change in the most
hunger score was -27·1% (n=7; 90% CI -40·6 to -15·0; p=0·0005) in the POMC trial
and -43·7% (n=7; -54·8 to -29·1; p<0·0001) in the LEPR trial. The most common
adverse events were injection site reaction and hyperpigmentation, which were
reported in all ten participants in the POMC trial; nausea was reported in five
participants and vomiting in three participants. In the LEPR trial, the most
commonly reported treatment-related adverse events were injection site reaction
in all 11 participants, skin disorders in five participants, and nausea in four
participants. No serious treatment-related adverse events occurred in both
trials.
INTERPRETATION: Our results support setmelanotide for the treatment of obesity
and hyperphagia caused by POMC or LEPR deficiency.
FUNDING: Rhythm Pharmaceuticals.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-8587(20)30364-8
PMID: 33137293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
