---
reference_id: "PMID:27476654"
title: De Novo Mutations in SLC1A2 and CACNA1A Are Important Causes of Epileptic Encephalopathies.
authors:
- Epi4K Consortium
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.06.003
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Alleles
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- "Epilepsy/genetics, pathology"
- Excitatory Amino Acid Transporter 2
- Female
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gi-Go/genetics"
- Glutamate Plasma Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mosaicism
- Mutation
- N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferases/genetics
- "Receptors, GABA-A/genetics"
- Seizures/genetics
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De Novo Mutations in SLC1A2 and CACNA1A Are Important Causes of Epileptic Encephalopathies.
**Authors:** Epi4K Consortium
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.06.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.06.003)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Aug 4;99(2):287-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.06.003. Epub
 2016 Jul 28.

De Novo Mutations in SLC1A2 and CACNA1A Are Important Causes of Epileptic
Encephalopathies.

Epi4K Consortium(1).

Collaborators: Myers CT, McMahon JM, Schneider AL, Petrovski S, Allen AS,
Carvill GL, Zemel M, Saykally JE, LaCroix AJ, Heinzen EL, Hollingsworth G,
Nikanorova M, Corbett M, Gecz J, Coman D, Freeman J, Calvert S, Gill D, Carney
P, Lerman-Sagie T, Sampaio H, Cossette P, Delanty N, Dlugos D, Eichler EE,
Epstein MP, Glauser T, Johnson MR, Kuzniecky R, Marson AG, O'Brien TJ, Ottman R,
Petrou S, Poduri A, Pickrell WO, Chung SK, Rees MI, Sherr E, Sadleir LG,
Goldstein DB, Lowenstein DH, Møller RS, Berkovic SF, Scheffer IE, Mefford HC.

Author information:
(1)epi4k@columbia.edu

Epileptic encephalopathies (EEs) are the most clinically important group of
severe early-onset epilepsies. Next-generation sequencing has highlighted the
crucial contribution of de novo mutations to the genetic architecture of EEs as
well as to their underlying genetic heterogeneity. Our previous whole-exome
sequencing study of 264 parent-child trios revealed more than 290 candidate
genes in which only a single individual had a de novo variant. We sought to
identify additional pathogenic variants in a subset (n = 27) of these genes via
targeted sequencing in an unsolved cohort of 531 individuals with a diverse
range of EEs. We report 17 individuals with pathogenic variants in seven of the
27 genes, defining a genetic etiology in 3.2% of this unsolved cohort. Our
results provide definitive evidence that de novo mutations in SLC1A2 and CACNA1A
cause specific EEs and expand the compendium of clinically relevant genotypes
for GABRB3. We also identified EEs caused by genetic variants in ALG13, DNM1,
and GNAO1 and report a mutation in IQSEC2. Notably, recurrent mutations
accounted for 7/17 of the pathogenic variants identified. As a result of
high-depth coverage, parental mosaicism was identified in two out of 14 cases
tested with mutant allelic fractions of 5%-6% in the unaffected parents,
carrying significant reproductive counseling implications. These results confirm
that dysregulation in diverse cellular neuronal pathways causes EEs, and they
will inform the diagnosis and management of individuals with these devastating
disorders.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.06.003
PMCID: PMC4974067
PMID: 27476654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
