---
reference_id: PMID:16862044
title: "X-linked agammaglobulinemia: report on a United States registry of 201 patients."
authors:
- Winkelstein JA
- Marino MC
- Lederman HM
- Jones SM
- Sullivan K
- Burks AW
- Conley ME
- Cunningham-Rundles C
- Ochs HD
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1097/01.md.0000229482.27398.ad
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Agammaglobulinemia/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Age of Onset
- Cause of Death
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Registries
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked agammaglobulinemia: report on a United States registry of 201 patients.
**Authors:** Winkelstein JA, Marino MC, Lederman HM, Jones SM, Sullivan K, Burks AW, Conley ME, Cunningham-Rundles C, Ochs HD
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.md.0000229482.27398.ad](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.md.0000229482.27398.ad)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2006 Jul;85(4):193-202. doi: 
10.1097/01.md.0000229482.27398.ad.

X-linked agammaglobulinemia: report on a United States registry of 201 patients.

Winkelstein JA(1), Marino MC, Lederman HM, Jones SM, Sullivan K, Burks AW, 
Conley ME, Cunningham-Rundles C, Ochs HD.

Author information:
(1)From United States Immune Deficiency Network (JAW, MCM, CCR, HDO), the Immune 
Deficiency Foundation (JAW, MCM), the Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine (JAW, HML), the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (SMJ, AWB), 
the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine (KS), the University of 
Tennessee School of Medicine (MEC), the Mt Sinai School of Medicine (CCR), and 
the University of Washington School of Medicine (HDO).

X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) is a primary immunodeficiency caused by 
mutations in the gene for Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) that result in the 
deficient development of B lymphocytes and hypogammaglobulinemia. Because the 
disorder is uncommon, no single institution has had sufficient numbers of 
patients to develop a comprehensive clinical picture of the disorder. 
Accordingly, a national registry of United States residents with XLA was 
established in 1999 to provide an updated clinical view of the disorder in a 
large cohort of patients. A total of 201 patients were registered by 66 
physicians. The estimated birth rate for the 10-year period of 1988-1997 was 
1/379,000. Infection was the most common initial clinical presentation (85%), 
followed by a positive family history (41%) and neutropenia (11%). Although the 
average age of diagnosis was younger in patients with a positive family history 
(mean, 2.59 yr) than in patients with a negative family history (mean, 5.37 yr) 
(p < 0.001), only 34.5% of patients with a positive family history at the time 
of their birth were diagnosed before clinical symptoms developed-that is, based 
on family history alone. Seventy percent of patients had at least 1 episode of 
otitis, 62% at least 1 episode of pneumonia, 60% at least 1 episode of 
sinusitis, 23% at least 1 episode of chronic/recurrent diarrhea, 21% at least 1 
episode of conjunctivitis, 18% at least 1 episode of pyoderma and/or cellulitis, 
11% at least 1 episode of meningitis/encephalitis, 10% at least 1 episode of 
sepsis, 8% at least 1 episode of septic arthritis, 6% at least 1 episode of 
hepatitis, and 3% at least 1 episode of osteomyelitis. Fourteen of 201 (6.9%) 
patients were dead at the time they were entered in the Registry. However, in a 
prospective 4 /4-year follow-up of living patients, only 3/80 (3.75%) patients 
died. Causes of death included disseminated enterovirus infection (n = 6), 
pulmonary insufficiency (n = 5), adenovirus infection (n = 1), sepsis (n = 1), 
acquired immunodeficiency disease syndrome (AIDS) (n = 1), myocarditis (n = 1), 
hepatitis (n = 2), and stem cell transplantation (n = 1).

DOI: 10.1097/01.md.0000229482.27398.ad
PMID: 16862044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]