---
reference_id: "PMID:35945394"
title: Utility of myxedema score as a predictor of mortality in myxedema coma.
authors:
- Chaudhary S
- Das L
- Sharma N
- Sachdeva N
- Bhansali A
- Dutta P
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s40618-022-01884-6
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Myxedema/diagnosis, complications"
- "Coma/complications, diagnosis"
- Hypothyroidism/complications
- Thyroxine
- Hospital Mortality
- Sepsis/complications
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Utility of myxedema score as a predictor of mortality in myxedema coma.
**Authors:** Chaudhary S, Das L, Sharma N, Sachdeva N, Bhansali A, Dutta P
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40618-022-01884-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40618-022-01884-6)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2023 Jan;46(1):59-65. doi: 10.1007/s40618-022-01884-6.
Epub  2022 Aug 10.

Utility of myxedema score as a predictor of mortality in myxedema coma.

Chaudhary S(1), Das L(1), Sharma N(2), Sachdeva N(1), Bhansali A(1), Dutta P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (PGIMER), Nehru Extension Block, 1012, Chandigarh, 160012, India.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (PGIMER), Nehru Extension Block, 1012, Chandigarh, 160012, India. 
drpinakidutta12@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Myxedema crisis (MC) is a rare condition. There is a dearth of data 
regarding the predictors of mortality in MC. Predictive scores for mortality 
specific to the clinical and biochemical profile of MC are still lacking.
DESIGN AND METHODS: All consecutive patients presenting with MC from September 
2006 to December 2020 comprised the new cohort. Patients managed between January 
1999 and August 2006 comprised the old cohort. Both cohorts were compared for 
the determination of secular trends. Combined analysis of both the cohorts was 
done for clinico-demographic profile and predictors of mortality. Myxedema score 
(MS) and qSOFA (Quick Sequential Organ Failure Assessment) score were evaluated 
in all the patients.
RESULTS: A total of forty-one patients (new cohort; n = 18 and old cohort; 
n = 23) were enrolled into the study. There was a female predominance (80.5%). 
Nearly half (51.2%) of the patients were newly diagnosed with hypothyroidism on 
admission. Overall mortality was 60.9%. On comparative analysis among survivors 
and non-survivors, female gender (OR 20.4, p value 0.018), need for mechanical 
ventilation (OR16.4, p value 0.009), in-hospital hypotension (OR 9.1, p value 
0.020), and high qSOFA score (OR 7.1, p value 0.023) predicted mortality. MS 
of > 90 had significantly higher mortality (OR-11.8, p value - 0.026) while MS 
of > 110 had 100% mortality. There was no change in secular trends over last 
20 years. There was no difference in outcome of patients receiving oral or IV 
levothyroxine.
CONCLUSION: Myxedema crisis is associated with high mortality despite 
improvement in health care services. The current study is first to elucidate the 
role of the MS in predicting mortality in patients with MC.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Italian Society of 
Endocrinology (SIE).

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-022-01884-6
PMID: 35945394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]