---
reference_id: "PMID:17974913"
title: "Malignant astrocytic glioma: genetics, biology, and paths to treatment."
authors:
- Furnari FB
- Fenton T
- Bachoo RM
- Mukasa A
- Stommel JM
- Stegh A
- Hahn WC
- Ligon KL
- Louis DN
- Brennan C
- Chin L
- DePinho RA
- Cavenee WK
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1101/gad.1596707
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant astrocytic glioma: genetics, biology, and paths to treatment.
**Authors:** Furnari FB, Fenton T, Bachoo RM, Mukasa A, Stommel JM, Stegh A, Hahn WC, Ligon KL, Louis DN, Brennan C, Chin L, DePinho RA, Cavenee WK
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1596707](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1596707)

## Content

1. Genes Dev. 2007 Nov 1;21(21):2683-710. doi: 10.1101/gad.1596707.

Malignant astrocytic glioma: genetics, biology, and paths to treatment.

Furnari FB(1), Fenton T, Bachoo RM, Mukasa A, Stommel JM, Stegh A, Hahn WC, 
Ligon KL, Louis DN, Brennan C, Chin L, DePinho RA, Cavenee WK.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University of California at San Diego, 
La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

Malignant astrocytic gliomas such as glioblastoma are the most common and lethal 
intracranial tumors. These cancers exhibit a relentless malignant progression 
characterized by widespread invasion throughout the brain, resistance to 
traditional and newer targeted therapeutic approaches, destruction of normal 
brain tissue, and certain death. The recent confluence of advances in stem cell 
biology, cell signaling, genome and computational science and genetic model 
systems have revolutionized our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the 
genetics, biology and clinical behavior of glioblastoma. This progress is 
fueling new opportunities for understanding the fundamental basis for 
development of this devastating disease and also novel therapies that, for the 
first time, portend meaningful clinical responses.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1596707
PMID: 17974913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]