---
reference_id: "PMID:34807231"
title: "Time to Benefit of Bisphosphonate Therapy for the Prevention of Fractures Among Postmenopausal Women With Osteoporosis: A Meta-analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials."
authors:
- Deardorff WJ
- Cenzer I
- Nguyen B
- Lee SJ
journal: JAMA Intern Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.6745
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Time to Benefit of Bisphosphonate Therapy for the Prevention of Fractures Among Postmenopausal Women With Osteoporosis: A Meta-analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials.
**Authors:** Deardorff WJ, Cenzer I, Nguyen B, Lee SJ
**Journal:** JAMA Intern Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.6745](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.6745)

## Content

1. JAMA Intern Med. 2022 Jan 1;182(1):33-41. doi:
10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.6745.

Time to Benefit of Bisphosphonate Therapy for the Prevention of Fractures Among 
Postmenopausal Women With Osteoporosis: A Meta-analysis of Randomized Clinical 
Trials.

Deardorff WJ(1)(2), Cenzer I(1)(2), Nguyen B(1)(2), Lee SJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco.
(2)Geriatrics, Palliative and Extended Care Service Line, San Francisco Veterans 
Affairs Health Care System, San Francisco, California.

IMPORTANCE: The clinical decision to initiate bisphosphonate therapy for the 
treatment of osteoporosis requires balancing shorter-term harms and burdens (eg, 
gastroesophageal irritation or severe musculoskeletal pain) with longer-term 
benefits in reducing potential fractures.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the time to benefit (TTB) of bisphosphonate therapy for the 
prevention of nonvertebral and other fractures among postmenopausal women with 
osteoporosis.
DATA SOURCES: Randomized clinical trials (RCTs) were identified from systematic 
reviews commissioned by the US Preventive Services Task Force (1 review), the 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (1 review), the Cochrane Library (2 
reviews), and the Endocrine Society (1 review).
STUDY SELECTION: Studies selected were RCTs involving postmenopausal women with 
a diagnosis of osteoporosis based on existing vertebral fractures or bone 
mineral density T scores of -2.5 or lower. The selection process was focused on 
studies of alendronate, risedronate, and zoledronic acid because they are 
guideline-recommended first-line agents for reducing nonvertebral fractures. 
Studies were excluded if they did not focus on women with a primary diagnosis of 
osteoporosis, had no placebo arm, or had a lack of data on time to fracture.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Random-effects Weibull survival curves were 
fitted and Markov chain Monte Carlo methods were used to estimate the absolute 
risk reduction (ARR) and TTB for each study. These estimates were pooled using a 
random-effects meta-analysis model.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was the time to 3 different ARR 
thresholds (0.002, 0.005, and 0.010) for the first nonvertebral fracture. 
Secondary outcomes included the time to 4 ARR thresholds (0.001, 0.002, 0.005, 
and 0.010) for hip fracture, any clinical fracture, and clinical vertebral 
fracture.
RESULTS: Of 67 full-text articles identified, 10 RCTs comprising 23 384 
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis were included either as the original RCT 
or part of subsequently published pooled analyses. Among the studies, the number 
of participants ranged from 994 to 7765, with mean (SD) age ranging from 63 (7) 
years to 74 (3) years and follow-up duration ranging from 12 to 48 months. The 
pooled meta-analysis found that 12.4 months (95% CI, 6.3-18.4 months) were 
needed to avoid 1 nonvertebral fracture per 100 postmenopausal women receiving 
bisphosphonate therapy at an ARR of 0.010. To prevent 1 hip fracture, 200 
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis would need to receive bisphosphonate 
therapy for 20.3 months (95% CI, 11.0-29.7 months) at an ARR of 0.005. In 
addition, 200 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis would need to receive 
bisphosphonate therapy for 12.1 months (95% CI, 6.4-17.8 months) to avoid 1 
clinical vertebral fracture at an ARR of 0.005.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This meta-analysis found that the TTB of 
bisphosphonate therapy was 12.4 months to prevent 1 nonvertebral fracture per 
100 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. These results suggest that 
bisphosphonate therapy is most likely to benefit postmenopausal women with 
osteoporosis who have a life expectancy greater than 12.4 months.

DOI: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.6745
PMCID: PMC8609461
PMID: 34807231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.