---
reference_id: "PMID:15286787"
title: "Mutations in SLC6A19, encoding B0AT1, cause Hartnup disorder."
authors:
- Kleta R
- Romeo E
- Ristic Z
- Ohura T
- Stuart C
- Arcos-Burgos M
- Dave MH
- Wagner CA
- Camargo SR
- Inoue S
- Matsuura N
- Helip-Wooley A
- Bockenhauer D
- Warth R
- Bernardini I
- Visser G
- Eggermann T
- Lee P
- Chairoungdua A
- Jutabha P
- Babu E
- Nilwarangkoon S
- Anzai N
- Kanai Y
- Verrey F
- Gahl WA
- Koizumi A
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/ng1405
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Neutral/genetics"
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Mapping
- Hartnup Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Kidney/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in SLC6A19, encoding B0AT1, cause Hartnup disorder.
**Authors:** Kleta R, Romeo E, Ristic Z, Ohura T, Stuart C, Arcos-Burgos M, Dave MH, Wagner CA, Camargo SR, Inoue S, Matsuura N, Helip-Wooley A, Bockenhauer D, Warth R, Bernardini I, Visser G, Eggermann T, Lee P, Chairoungdua A, Jutabha P, Babu E, Nilwarangkoon S, Anzai N, Kanai Y, Verrey F, Gahl WA, Koizumi A
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1405](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1405)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Sep;36(9):999-1002. doi: 10.1038/ng1405. Epub 2004 Aug 1.

Mutations in SLC6A19, encoding B0AT1, cause Hartnup disorder.

Kleta R(1), Romeo E, Ristic Z, Ohura T, Stuart C, Arcos-Burgos M, Dave MH,
Wagner CA, Camargo SR, Inoue S, Matsuura N, Helip-Wooley A, Bockenhauer D, Warth
R, Bernardini I, Visser G, Eggermann T, Lee P, Chairoungdua A, Jutabha P, Babu
E, Nilwarangkoon S, Anzai N, Kanai Y, Verrey F, Gahl WA, Koizumi A.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, 10 Center Drive, MSC 1851, Building 10, Room
10C-107, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Hartnup disorder, an autosomal recessive defect named after an English family
described in 1956 (ref. 1), results from impaired transport of neutral amino
acids across epithelial cells in renal proximal tubules and intestinal mucosa.
Symptoms include transient manifestations of pellagra (rashes), cerebellar
ataxia and psychosis. Using homozygosity mapping in the original family in whom
Hartnup disorder was discovered, we confirmed that the critical region for one
causative gene was located on chromosome 5p15 (ref. 3). This region is
homologous to the area of mouse chromosome 13 that encodes the sodium-dependent
amino acid transporter B(0)AT1 (ref. 4). We isolated the human homolog of
B(0)AT1, called SLC6A19, and determined its size and molecular organization. We
then identified mutations in SLC6A19 in members of the original family in whom
Hartnup disorder was discovered and of three Japanese families. The protein
product of SLC6A19, the Hartnup transporter, is expressed primarily in intestine
and renal proximal tubule and functions as a neutral amino acid transporter.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1405
PMID: 15286787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
