---
reference_id: "PMID:29601558"
title: "[Differentiation of dyspnea in patients with asthma and lung sarcoidosis]."
authors:
- Płusa T
journal: Pol Merkur Lekarski
year: '2018'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Differentiation of dyspnea in patients with asthma and lung sarcoidosis].
**Authors:** Płusa T
**Journal:** Pol Merkur Lekarski (2018)

## Content

1. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2018 Mar 27;44(261):110-112.

[Differentiation of dyspnea in patients with asthma and lung sarcoidosis].

[Article in Polish]

Płusa T(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Faculty of Łazarski University in Warsaw, Poland.

Dyspnea as a subjective feeling of lack of air is the patients with the 
pathology of the respiratory system. Objectivization of this phenomenon is 
difficult, despite the introduction of questionnaires about the degree of 
dyspnoea. The results of these assessments do not always correlate with the 
results of spirometric tests. In patients with asthma, dyspnoea is caused by 
airway obstruction. In the case of patients with lung sarcoidosis, the 
complexity of the phenomenon causes that many mechanisms and factors are 
responsible for the dyspnea symptoms in these patients. Dyspnea in patients with 
sarcoidosis is progressive and is closely related to the extent of interstitial 
exchanges. The diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLco) determined in these 
patients reflects the degree of respiratory distress. Therapeutic procedures are 
also dependent on this parameter.

© 2018 MEDPRESS.

PMID: 29601558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]