---
reference_id: "PMID:23409742"
title: New clinical and molecular insights on Barth syndrome.
authors:
- Ferri L
- Donati MA
- Funghini S
- Malvagia S
- Catarzi S
- Lugli L
- Ragni L
- Bertini E
- Vaz FM
- Cooper DN
- Guerrini R
- Morrone A
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-27
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/genetics"
- Acyltransferases
- "Barth Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cardiomyopathies/genetics, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Carrier Screening
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
- Mutation
- Neutropenia/genetics
- Pedigree
- Pregnancy
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New clinical and molecular insights on Barth syndrome.
**Authors:** Ferri L, Donati MA, Funghini S, Malvagia S, Catarzi S, Lugli L, Ragni L, Bertini E, Vaz FM, Cooper DN, Guerrini R, Morrone A
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-8-27](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-8-27)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Feb 14;8:27. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-27.

New clinical and molecular insights on Barth syndrome.

Ferri L(1), Donati MA, Funghini S, Malvagia S, Catarzi S, Lugli L, Ragni L,
Bertini E, Vaz FM, Cooper DN, Guerrini R, Morrone A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Pharmacology and Child Health,
University of Florence and Paediatric Neurology Unit and Laboratories, Meyer
Children's Hospital, Viale Pieraccini n, 24, 50139 Florence, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Barth syndrome (BS) is an X-linked infantile-onset cardioskeletal
disease characterized by cardiomyopathy, hypotonia, growth delay, neutropenia
and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. It is caused by mutations in the TAZ gene
encoding tafazzin, a protein involved in the metabolism of cardiolipin, a
mitochondrial-specific phospholipid involved in mitochondrial energy production.
METHODS: Clinical, biochemical and molecular characterization of a group of six
male patients suspected of having BS. Three patients presented early with severe
metabolic decompensation including respiratory distress, oxygen desaturation and
cardiomyopathy and died within the first year of life. The remaining three
patients had cardiomyopathy, hypotonia and growth delay and are still alive.
Cardiomyopathy was detected during pregnancy through a routine check-up in one
patient. All patients exhibited 3-methylglutaconic aciduria and neutropenia,
when tested and five of them also had lactic acidosis.
RESULTS: We confirmed the diagnosis of BS with sequence analysis of the TAZ
gene, and found five new mutations, c.641A>G p.His214Arg, c.284dupG
(p.Thr96Aspfs*37), c.678_691del14 (p.Tyr227Trpfs*79), g.8009_16445del8437 and
g.[9777_9814del38; 9911-?_14402del] and the known nonsense mutation c.367C>T
(p.Arg123Term). The two gross rearrangements ablated TAZ exons 6 to 11 and
probably originated by non-allelic homologous recombination and by Serial
Replication Slippage (SRS), respectively. The identification of the breakpoints
boundaries of the gross deletions allowed the direct detection of heterozygosity
in carrier females.
CONCLUSIONS: Lactic acidosis associated with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria is
highly suggestive of BS, whilst the severity of the metabolic decompensation at
disease onset should be considered for prognostic purposes. Mutation analysis of
the TAZ gene is necessary for confirming the clinical and biochemical diagnosis
in probands in order to identify heterozygous carriers and supporting prenatal
diagnosis and genetic counseling.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-27
PMCID: PMC3599367
PMID: 23409742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
