---
reference_id: "PMID:11971089"
title: "Neuropsychiatric syndromes in lupus: prevalence using standardized definitions."
authors:
- Brey RL
- Holliday SL
- Saklad AR
- Navarrete MG
- Hermosillo-Romo D
- Stallworth CL
- Valdez CR
- Escalante A
- del Rincón I
- Gronseth G
- Rhine CB
- Padilla P
- McGlasson D
journal: Neurology
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.58.8.1214
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Cognition/physiology
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Hemodynamics/physiology
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/drug therapy, epidemiology, psychology"
- Male
- "Mental Disorders/epidemiology, psychology"
- Middle Aged
- "Nervous System Diseases/epidemiology, psychology"
- Neurologic Examination
- Neuropsychological Tests
- Prevalence
- Quality of Life
- Risk Factors
- Thrombosis/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychiatric syndromes in lupus: prevalence using standardized definitions.
**Authors:** Brey RL, Holliday SL, Saklad AR, Navarrete MG, Hermosillo-Romo D, Stallworth CL, Valdez CR, Escalante A, del Rincón I, Gronseth G, Rhine CB, Padilla P, McGlasson D
**Journal:** Neurology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.58.8.1214](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.58.8.1214)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2002 Apr 23;58(8):1214-20. doi: 10.1212/wnl.58.8.1214.

Neuropsychiatric syndromes in lupus: prevalence using standardized definitions.

Brey RL(1), Holliday SL, Saklad AR, Navarrete MG, Hermosillo-Romo D, Stallworth
CL, Valdez CR, Escalante A, del Rincón I, Gronseth G, Rhine CB, Padilla P,
McGlasson D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Neurology, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900,
USA. brey@uthscsa.edu

OBJECTIVE: The San Antonio Lupus Study of Neuropsychiatric Disease is a
longitudinal study designed to characterize the spectrum of and important risk
factors for specific neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE)
syndromes.
METHODS: Subjects must meet criteria for SLE and must be at least 18 years of
age. A standardized medical history, neurologic, rheumatologic, and psychiatric
examinations, computerized neuropsychological evaluation, and serologic testing
are performed.
RESULTS: This report is based on the first 128 subjects (120 women and 8 men)
who completed the initial study visit. Data from this initial study visit were
evaluated for the prevalence of NPSLE using the American College of Rheumatology
case definitions for 19 NPSLE syndromes. One or more NPSLE syndromes were
present in 80% of subjects: cerebrovascular disease (2, 2%; ischemic stroke);
headaches (73, 57%); mononeuropathy (9, 8%; median 8, ulnar 1); movement
disorder (1, 1%; chorea); neuropathy, cranial (2, 2%; trigeminal);
polyneuropathy (29, 22%; sensorimotor); seizures (21, 16%; partial); anxiety
disorder (27, 24%); major depressive-like episode (37, 28%); mood disorder with
depressive features (21, 19%); mood disorder with manic features (3, 3%); mood
disorder with mixed features (1, 1%); psychosis (6, 5%). In a subset of 67
patients who received standardized neuropsychological testing, 21% had normal
results. In the remainder, the following levels of impairment were seen: 43%
mild, 30% moderate, and 6% severe.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of NPSLE was high in this cohort of unselected
patients with SLE. Headaches, cognitive dysfunction, and psychiatric disorders
were the most common NPSLE syndromes seen. These results will be easily
comparable to other studies also using standardized diagnostic criteria.
However, the lack of ethnicity and language-matched normative neuropsychological
data may make comparisons of cognitive dysfunction in SLE populations difficult.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.58.8.1214
PMID: 11971089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
