---
reference_id: PMID:39064074
title: "The Role of HIF-1α in Retinopathy of Prematurity: A Review of Current Literature."
authors:
- Modrzejewska M
- Zdanowska O
- Połubiński P
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13144034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of HIF-1α in Retinopathy of Prematurity: A Review of Current Literature.
**Authors:** Modrzejewska M, Zdanowska O, Połubiński P
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13144034](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13144034)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Jul 10;13(14):4034. doi: 10.3390/jcm13144034.

The Role of HIF-1α in Retinopathy of Prematurity: A Review of Current 
Literature.

Modrzejewska M(1), Zdanowska O(2), Połubiński P(3).

Author information:
(1)2nd Department of Ophthalmology, Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, 
Powstańców Wielkopolskich 72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland.
(2)K. Marcinkowski University Hospital in Zielona Góra, 65-046 Zielona Góra, 
Poland.
(3)Scientific Association of Students, 2nd Department of Ophthalmology, 
Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Powstańców Wielkopolskich 72, 70-111 
Szczecin, Poland.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) plays a crucial role in regulating oxygen sensing 
and adaptation at the cellular level, overseeing cellular oxygen homeostasis, 
erythrocyte production, angiogenesis, and mitochondrial metabolism. The 
hypoxia-sensitive HIF-1α subunit facilitates tissue adaptation to hypoxic 
conditions, including the stimulation of proangiogenic factors. Retinopathy of 
prematurity (ROP) is a proliferative vascular disease of the retina that poses a 
significant risk to prematurely born children. If untreated, ROP can lead to 
retinal detachment, severe visual impairment, and even blindness. The 
pathogenesis of ROP is not fully understood; however, reports suggest that 
premature birth leads to the exposure of immature ocular tissues to high levels 
of exogenous oxygen and hyperoxia, which increase the synthesis of reactive 
oxygen species and inhibit HIF expression. During the ischemic phase, HIF-1α 
expression is stimulated in the hypoxia-sensitive retina, causing an 
overproduction of proangiogenic factors and the development of pathological 
neovascularization. Given the significant role of HIF-1α in the development of 
ROP, considering it as a potential molecular target for therapeutic strategies 
appears justified. This review synthesizes information from the last six years 
(2018-2024) using databases such as PubMed, Google Scholar, and BASE, focusing 
on the role of HIF-1α in the pathogenesis of ROP and its potential as a target 
for new therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13144034
PMCID: PMC11277540
PMID: 39064074

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.