---
reference_id: "PMID:33606121"
title: A missense variant in IFT122 associated with a canine model of retinitis pigmentosa.
authors:
- Kaukonen M
- Pettinen IT
- Wickström K
- Arumilli M
- Donner J
- Juhola IJ
- Holopainen S
- Turunen JA
- Yoshihara M
- Kere J
- Lohi H
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-021-02266-3
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics"
- Animals
- Breeding
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dog Diseases/genetics
- Dogs
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/pathology"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, pathology, veterinary"
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Transcriptome
- Whole Genome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A missense variant in IFT122 associated with a canine model of retinitis pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Kaukonen M, Pettinen IT, Wickström K, Arumilli M, Donner J, Juhola IJ, Holopainen S, Turunen JA, Yoshihara M, Kere J, Lohi H
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-021-02266-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-021-02266-3)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2021 Nov;140(11):1569-1579. doi: 10.1007/s00439-021-02266-3. Epub
2021 Feb 19.

A missense variant in IFT122 associated with a canine model of retinitis
pigmentosa.

Kaukonen M(1)(2)(3), Pettinen IT(1)(2)(3), Wickström K(4), Arumilli M(1)(2)(3),
Donner J(5), Juhola IJ(1)(2)(3), Holopainen S(1)(2)(3)(6), Turunen JA(3)(7),
Yoshihara M(8), Kere J(3)(8)(9), Lohi H(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
(2)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Veterinary Clinic Kamu, Oulu, Finland.
(5)Genoscoper Laboratories Ltd (Wisdom Health), Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Department of Equine and Small Animal Medicine, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden.
(9)Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program STEMM, University of Helsinki,
00014, Helsinki, Finland.
(10)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. hannes.lohi@helsinki.fi.
(11)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland. hannes.lohi@helsinki.fi.
(12)Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland. hannes.lohi@helsinki.fi.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a blinding eye disease affecting nearly two million
people worldwide. Dogs are affected with a similar illness termed progressive
retinal atrophy (PRA). Lapponian herders (LHs) are affected with several types
of inherited retinal dystrophies, and variants in PRCD and BEST1 genes have been
associated with generalized PRA and canine multifocal retinopathy 3 (cmr3),
respectively. However, all retinal dystrophy cases in LHs are not explained by
these variants, indicating additional genetic causes of disease in the breed. We
collected DNA samples from 10 PRA affected LHs, with known PRCD and BEST1
variants excluded, and 34 unaffected LHs. A genome-wide association study
identified a locus on CFA20 (praw = 2.4 × 10-7, pBonf = 0.035), and subsequent
whole-genome sequencing of an affected LH revealed a missense variant,
c.3176G>A, in the intraflagellar transport 122 (IFT122) gene. The variant was
also found in Finnish Lapphunds, in which its clinical relevancy needs to be
studied further. The variant interrupts a highly conserved residue, p.(R1059H),
in IFT122 and likely impairs its function. Variants in IFT122 have not been
associated with retinal degeneration in mammals, but the loss of ift122 in
zebrafish larvae impaired opsin transport and resulted in progressive
photoreceptor degeneration. Our study establishes a new spontaneous dog model to
study the role of IFT122 in RP biology, while the affected breed will benefit
from a genetic test for a recessive condition.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-021-02266-3
PMCID: PMC8519925
PMID: 33606121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HL is a paid consultant to, and JD an employee
of Genoscoper Laboratories Ltd, which will provide a genetic test for IFT122-PRA
in LHs.
