---
reference_id: "PMID:21397417"
title: Peroxisomal disorders with infantile seizures.
authors:
- Liang JS
- Lu JF
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.02.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisomal disorders with infantile seizures.
**Authors:** Liang JS, Lu JF
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2011.02.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2011.02.004)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2011 Oct;33(9):777-82. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.02.004. Epub
2011  Mar 11.

Peroxisomal disorders with infantile seizures.

Liang JS(1), Lu JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Medical Research, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan.

Peroxisomes are organelles responsible for multiple metabolic pathways including 
the biosynthesis of plasmalogens and the oxidation of branched-chain as well as 
very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs). Peroxisomal disorders (PDs) are 
heterogeneous groups of diseases and affect many organs with varying degrees of 
involvement. Even pathogenetically distinct PDs share some common symptoms. 
However, several PDs have uniquely characteristic clinical findings. The 
durations of survival in PDs are also variable. Infants with PDs are usually 
presented with developmental delay, visual and hearing impairment. Generalized 
hypotonia is present in severe cases. Epileptic seizures are also a common 
characteristic of patients with certain PDs. Nonetheless, the classification and 
evolution of epilepsy in PDs have not been elucidated in detail. Here, we review 
the relevant literatures and provide an overview of PDs with particular emphasis 
on the characteristics of seizures in infants.

Copyright © 2011 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.02.004
PMID: 21397417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]