---
reference_id: "PMID:17365175"
title: Functional effects of mutations identified in patients with multiminicore disease.
authors:
- Zorzato F
- Jungbluth H
- Zhou H
- Muntoni F
- Treves S
journal: IUBMB Life
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1080/15216540601187803
keywords:
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn"
- Humans
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- "Muscular Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- Selenoproteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional effects of mutations identified in patients with multiminicore disease.
**Authors:** Zorzato F, Jungbluth H, Zhou H, Muntoni F, Treves S
**Journal:** IUBMB Life (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15216540601187803](https://doi.org/10.1080/15216540601187803)

## Content

1. IUBMB Life. 2007 Jan;59(1):14-20. doi: 10.1080/15216540601187803.

Functional effects of mutations identified in patients with multiminicore 
disease.

Zorzato F(1), Jungbluth H, Zhou H, Muntoni F, Treves S.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Diagnostica, Universita' di Ferrara. 
Ferrara. Italy.

Multiminicore disease is a recessive congenital myopathy characterized by the 
presence of small cores or areas lacking oxidative enzymes, in skeletal muscle 
fibres. From a clinical point of view, the condition is widely heterogeneous and 
at least four phenotypes have been identified; genetic analysis has revealed 
that most patients with the classical form of multiminicore characterized by 
rigidity of the spine, early onset and respiratory impairment harbour recessive 
mutations in the SEPN1 gene, whereas the majority of patients belonging to the 
other categories, including patients with ophthalmoplegia or patients with a 
phenotype similar to central core disease, carry recessive mutations in the 
RYR1. In the present review we discuss the most recent findings on the 
functional effect of mutations in SEPN1 and RYR1 and discuss how they may 
adversely affect muscle function and lead to the clinical phenotype.

DOI: 10.1080/15216540601187803
PMID: 17365175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]