---
reference_id: "PMID:33757175"
title: Identification of key genes and evaluation of immune cell infiltration in vitiligo.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Hu W
- Lei Z
- Wang H
- Kang X
journal: Math Biosci Eng
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3934/mbe.2021057
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of key genes and evaluation of immune cell infiltration in vitiligo.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Hu W, Lei Z, Wang H, Kang X
**Journal:** Math Biosci Eng (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3934/mbe.2021057](https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2021057)

## Content

1. Math Biosci Eng. 2021 Jan 8;18(2):1051-1062. doi: 10.3934/mbe.2021057.

Identification of key genes and evaluation of immune cell infiltration in 
vitiligo.

Zhang X(1), Hu W(2), Lei Z(2), Wang H(2), Kang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi 830000, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region People's 
Hospital, Urumqi 830001, China.

BACKGROUND: To improve the understanding of the molecular mechanism of vitiligo 
is necessary to predict and formulate new targeted gene therapy strategies.
METHODS: GSE65127, GSE75819, GSE53146 and GSE90880 were collected, and obtained 
four groups of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) by limma R package. Through 
weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), the co-expression of genes 
with large variance in GSE65127 and GSE75819 was identified. Enrichment analysis 
of intersection gene between module genes and DEGs with the same up-regulated or 
down-regulated in GSE65127 and GSE75819 was performed. In addition, ssGSEA was 
used to identify the immune infiltration of vitiligo in four datasets.
RESULTS: A total of 3083 DEGs and 16 modules were identified from GSE65127, and 
5014 DEGs and 6 modules were screened from GSE75819. Finally, 77 important DEGs 
were identified. Enrichment analysis showed that 77 DEGs were mainly involved in 
spliceosome etc. The results of GSVA showed that melanogenesis, Fc gamma 
R-mediated phagocytosis, leishmaniasis, Wnt pathway and glycolipid metabolism 
were important KEGG pathways. The genes involved in these pathways were 
identified as key genes (MARCKSL1, MC1R, PNPLA2 and PRICKLE2). The AUC values of 
MC1R were the highest. Furthermore, different immune cells had different 
infiltration in vitiligo. There was a high correlation between immune cells and 
key genes.
CONCLUSIONS: MC1R was found as a key gene in vitiligo and involved in the 
melanogenesis. The immune cells were different infiltration in vitiligo. These 
results suggested that key genes may be used as markers of vitiligo, and were 
associated with immune cell, especially MC1R.

DOI: 10.3934/mbe.2021057
PMID: 33757175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]