---
reference_id: "PMID:34859074"
title: Expression Signatures of Long Noncoding RNAs in Left Ventricular Noncompaction.
authors:
- Tian Q
- Niu H
- Liu D
- Ta N
- Yang Q
- Norton V
- Wu Y
- Maiti AK
- Wu H
- Zheng Z
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.763858
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression Signatures of Long Noncoding RNAs in Left Ventricular Noncompaction.
**Authors:** Tian Q, Niu H, Liu D, Ta N, Yang Q, Norton V, Wu Y, Maiti AK, Wu H, Zheng Z
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2021.763858](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2021.763858)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Nov 10;8:763858. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.763858. 
eCollection 2021.

Expression Signatures of Long Noncoding RNAs in Left Ventricular Noncompaction.

Tian Q(1), Niu H(1)(2), Liu D(1)(3), Ta N(1)(4), Yang Q(1), Norton V(5), Wu 
Y(1)(6), Maiti AK(7), Wu H(5), Zheng Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, China.
(2)Department of Functional Examination, Shaanxi Provincial People's Hospital, 
Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital, Nanchang, 
China.
(4)Postoperative Cardiac Intensive Care Unit, Fuwai Hospital Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Vascular Biology Program, Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States.
(6)Department of Emergency, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an, China.
(7)Mydnavar, Department of Genetics and Genomics, Troy, MI, United States.

Long noncoding RNAs have gained widespread attention in recent years for their 
crucial role in biological regulation. They have been implicated in a range of 
developmental processes and diseases including cancer, cardiovascular, and 
neuronal diseases. However, the role of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in left 
ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) has not been explored. In this study, we 
investigated the expression levels of lncRNAs in the blood of LVNC patients and 
healthy subjects to identify differentially expressed lncRNA that develop LVNC 
specific biomarkers and targets for developing therapies using biological 
pathways. We used Agilent Human lncRNA array that contains both updated lncRNAs 
and mRNAs probes. We identified 1,568 upregulated and 1,141 downregulated (log 
fold-change > 2.0) lncRNAs that are differentially expressed between LVNC and 
the control group. Among them, RP11-1100L3.7 and XLOC_002730 are the most 
upregulated and downregulated lncRNAs. Using quantitative real-time reverse 
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-QPCR), we confirmed the differential 
expression of three top upregulated and downregulated lncRNAs along with two 
other randomly picked lncRNAs. Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathways analysis 
with these differentially expressed lncRNAs provide insight into the cellular 
pathway leading to LVNC pathogenesis. We also identified 1,066 upregulated and 
1,017 downregulated mRNAs. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) showed that G2M, 
Estrogen, and inflammatory pathways are enriched in differentially expressed 
genes (DEG). We also identified miRNA targets for these differentially expressed 
genes. In this study, we first report the use of LncRNA microarray to understand 
the pathogenesis of LVNC and to identify several lncRNA and genes and their 
targets as potential biomarkers.

Copyright © 2021 Tian, Niu, Liu, Ta, Yang, Norton, Wu, Maiti, Wu and Zheng.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.763858
PMCID: PMC8631435
PMID: 34859074

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.