---
reference_id: "PMID:20140240"
title: "Mutations in SLC29A3, encoding an equilibrative nucleoside transporter ENT3, cause a familial histiocytosis syndrome (Faisalabad histiocytosis) and familial Rosai-Dorfman disease."
authors:
- Morgan NV
- Morris MR
- Cangul H
- Gleeson D
- Straatman-Iwanowska A
- Davies N
- Keenan S
- Pasha S
- Rahman F
- Gentle D
- Vreeswijk MP
- Devilee P
- Knowles MA
- Ceylaner S
- Trembath RC
- Dalence C
- Kismet E
- Köseoğlu V
- Rossbach HC
- Gissen P
- Tannahill D
- Maher ER
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000833
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Breast Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10/genetics"
- Colony-Forming Units Assay
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Embryo, Mammalian/metabolism"
- Family
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Loci/genetics
- "Histiocytosis, Sinus/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Nucleoside Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
- "RNA, Small Interfering/metabolism"
- Syndrome
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in SLC29A3, encoding an equilibrative nucleoside transporter ENT3, cause a familial histiocytosis syndrome (Faisalabad histiocytosis) and familial Rosai-Dorfman disease.
**Authors:** Morgan NV, Morris MR, Cangul H, Gleeson D, Straatman-Iwanowska A, Davies N, Keenan S, Pasha S, Rahman F, Gentle D, Vreeswijk MP, Devilee P, Knowles MA, Ceylaner S, Trembath RC, Dalence C, Kismet E, Köseoğlu V, Rossbach HC, Gissen P, Tannahill D, Maher ER
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1000833](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000833)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Feb 5;6(2):e1000833. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000833.

Mutations in SLC29A3, encoding an equilibrative nucleoside transporter ENT3, 
cause a familial histiocytosis syndrome (Faisalabad histiocytosis) and familial 
Rosai-Dorfman disease.

Morgan NV(1), Morris MR, Cangul H, Gleeson D, Straatman-Iwanowska A, Davies N, 
Keenan S, Pasha S, Rahman F, Gentle D, Vreeswijk MP, Devilee P, Knowles MA, 
Ceylaner S, Trembath RC, Dalence C, Kismet E, Köseoğlu V, Rossbach HC, Gissen P, 
Tannahill D, Maher ER.

Author information:
(1)Wellchild Paediatric Research Centre and Department of Medical and Molecular 
Genetics, University of Birmingham College of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Edgbaston, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

The histiocytoses are a heterogeneous group of disorders characterised by an 
excessive number of histiocytes. In most cases the pathophysiology is unclear 
and treatment is nonspecific. Faisalabad histiocytosis (FHC) (MIM 602782) has 
been classed as an autosomal recessively inherited form of histiocytosis with 
similarities to Rosai-Dorfman disease (RDD) (also known as sinus histiocytosis 
with massive lymphadenopathy (SHML)). To elucidate the molecular basis of FHC, 
we performed autozygosity mapping studies in a large consanguineous family and 
identified a novel locus at chromosome 10q22.1. Mutation analysis of candidate 
genes within the target interval identified biallelic germline mutations in 
SLC29A3 in the FHC kindred and in two families reported to have familial RDD. 
Analysis of SLC29A3 expression during mouse embryogenesis revealed widespread 
expression by e14.5 with prominent expression in the central nervous system, 
eye, inner ear, and epithelial tissues including the gastrointestinal tract. 
SLC29A3 encodes an intracellular equilibrative nucleoside transporter (hENT3) 
with affinity for adenosine. Recently germline mutations in SLC29A3 were also 
described in two rare autosomal recessive disorders with overlapping phenotypes: 
(a) H syndrome (MIM 612391) that is characterised by cutaneous hyperpigmentation 
and hypertrichosis, hepatomegaly, heart anomalies, hearing loss, and 
hypogonadism; and (b) PHID (pigmented hypertrichosis with insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus) syndrome. Our findings suggest that a variety of clinical 
diagnoses (H and PHID syndromes, FHC, and familial RDD) can be included in a new 
diagnostic category of SLC29A3 spectrum disorder.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000833
PMCID: PMC2816679
PMID: 20140240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.