---
reference_id: "PMID:24002501"
title: Cabozantinib in progressive medullary thyroid cancer.
authors:
- Elisei R
- Schlumberger MJ
- Müller SP
- Schöffski P
- Brose MS
- Shah MH
- Licitra L
- Jarzab B
- Medvedev V
- Kreissl MC
- Niederle B
- Cohen EE
- Wirth LJ
- Ali H
- Hessel C
- Yaron Y
- Ball D
- Nelkin B
- Sherman SI
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.48.4659
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Anilides/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Calcitonin/analysis
- Carcinoembryonic Antigen/analysis
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Pyridines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cabozantinib in progressive medullary thyroid cancer.
**Authors:** Elisei R, Schlumberger MJ, Müller SP, Schöffski P, Brose MS, Shah MH, Licitra L, Jarzab B, Medvedev V, Kreissl MC, Niederle B, Cohen EE, Wirth LJ, Ali H, Hessel C, Yaron Y, Ball D, Nelkin B, Sherman SI
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2012.48.4659](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2012.48.4659)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Oct 10;31(29):3639-46. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.48.4659. Epub
2013 Sep 3.

Cabozantinib in progressive medullary thyroid cancer.

Elisei R(1), Schlumberger MJ, Müller SP, Schöffski P, Brose MS, Shah MH, Licitra
L, Jarzab B, Medvedev V, Kreissl MC, Niederle B, Cohen EE, Wirth LJ, Ali H,
Hessel C, Yaron Y, Ball D, Nelkin B, Sherman SI.

Author information:
(1)Rossella Elisei, University of Pisa, Pisa; Lisa Licitra, Fondazione Istituto
Di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico-Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan,
Italy; Martin J. Schlumberger, Institut Gustave Roussy, University Paris-Sud,
Villejuif, France; Stefan P. Müller, Universitatsklinikum Essen, Essen; Michael
C. Kreissl, Universitätsklinikum Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany; Patrick Schöffski,
University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Marcia S. Brose, University of
Pennsylvania Abramson Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA; Manisha H. Shah, Ohio
State University Medical Center, Columbus, OH; Barbara Jarzab, Centrum
Onkologii-Instytut im. Marii Skłodowskiej-Curie Oddział w Gliwicach, Gliwice,
Poland; Viktor Medvedev, Medical Radiological Research Centre of the Russian
Academy of Medical Sciences, Obninsk, Russia; Bruno Niederle, Medizinische
Universität Wien, Wien, Austria; Ezra E.W. Cohen, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL; Lori J. Wirth, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; Haythem
Ali, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI; Colin Hessel and Yifah Yaron,
Exelixis, South San Francisco, CA; Douglas Ball and Barry Nelkin, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; and Steven I. Sherman, University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2014 Jun 10;32(17):1864.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2013 Oct 10;31(29):3618-20. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2013.51.5098.

PURPOSE: Cabozantinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) of hepatocyte growth
factor receptor (MET), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2, and
rearranged during transfection (RET), demonstrated clinical activity in patients
with medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) in phase I.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a double-blind, phase III trial comparing
cabozantinib with placebo in 330 patients with documented radiographic
progression of metastatic MTC. Patients were randomly assigned (2:1) to
cabozantinib (140 mg per day) or placebo. The primary end point was
progression-free survival (PFS). Additional outcome measures included tumor
response rate, overall survival, and safety.
RESULTS: The estimated median PFS was 11.2 months for cabozantinib versus 4.0
months for placebo (hazard ratio, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.19 to 0.40; P < .001).
Prolonged PFS with cabozantinib was observed across all subgroups including by
age, prior TKI treatment, and RET mutation status (hereditary or sporadic).
Response rate was 28% for cabozantinib and 0% for placebo; responses were seen
regardless of RET mutation status. Kaplan-Meier estimates of patients alive and
progression-free at 1 year are 47.3% for cabozantinib and 7.2% for placebo.
Common cabozantinib-associated adverse events included diarrhea, palmar-plantar
erythrodysesthesia, decreased weight and appetite, nausea, and fatigue and
resulted in dose reductions in 79% and holds in 65% of patients. Adverse events
led to treatment discontinuation in 16% of cabozantinib-treated patients and in
8% of placebo-treated patients.
CONCLUSION: Cabozantinib (140 mg per day) achieved a statistically significant
improvement of PFS in patients with progressive metastatic MTC and represents an
important new treatment option for patients with this rare disease. This dose of
cabozantinib was associated with significant but manageable toxicity.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2012.48.4659
PMCID: PMC4164813
PMID: 24002501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' disclosures of potential conflicts of
interest and author contributions are found at the end of this article.
