---
reference_id: "PMID:37188488"
title: Cyclic intravenous pamidronate for an infant with osteogenesis imperfecta type II.
authors:
- Fukahori K
- Nirei J
- Yamawaki K
- Nagasaki K
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-252593
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Infant
- Humans
- Pamidronate/therapeutic use
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Bone Density
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- Bone Density Conservation Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cyclic intravenous pamidronate for an infant with osteogenesis imperfecta type II.
**Authors:** Fukahori K, Nirei J, Yamawaki K, Nagasaki K
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2022-252593](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2022-252593)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2023 May 15;16(5):e252593. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2022-252593.

Cyclic intravenous pamidronate for an infant with osteogenesis imperfecta type 
II.

Fukahori K(1), Nirei J(1), Yamawaki K(2), Nagasaki K(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, 
Japan.
(2)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Niigata University Graduate School 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.
(3)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, 
Japan nagasaki@med.niigata-u.ac.jp.

A woman in her 30s underwent a 17-week ultrasound which revealed short bowed 
long bones. Fetal CT at 28 weeks' gestation showed decreased ossification of the 
skull, a small bell-shaped thorax, hypoplastic vertebrae, and shortening and 
bowing of the long bones, leading to the diagnosis of osteogenesis imperfecta 
(OI) type II. The newborn was delivered via caesarean delivery, and tracheal 
intubation was performed due to the respiratory distress. A heterozygous variant 
in COL1A1 (c.1679G>T, p. Gly358Val) was ascertained, confirming the diagnosis of 
OI type II.Cyclic intravenous pamidronate was started at 41 days old with dose 
modification and was successfully administered every month. Currently, the 
infant is 8 months old without any new bone fracture. He was extubated 
successfully at 7 months of age and is now stable using high flow nasal cannula. 
The efficacy, safety, and optimal dose and timing of cyclic pamidronate for OI 
type II remain undefined. We report our experience of successful cyclic 
intravenous pamidronate treatment for an infant with OI type II.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2022-252593
PMCID: PMC10186469
PMID: 37188488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.