---
reference_id: "PMID:35008978"
title: Genetics of Autosomal Recessive Spastic Ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) and Role of Sacsin in Neurodegeneration.
authors:
- Bagaria J
- Bagyinszky E
- An SSA
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23010552
keywords:
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Disease Management
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- "Heat-Shock Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- "Muscle Spasticity/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Mutation
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- Phenotype
- Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of Autosomal Recessive Spastic Ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) and Role of Sacsin in Neurodegeneration.
**Authors:** Bagaria J, Bagyinszky E, An SSA
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23010552](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23010552)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 4;23(1):552. doi: 10.3390/ijms23010552.

Genetics of Autosomal Recessive Spastic Ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS)
and Role of Sacsin in Neurodegeneration.

Bagaria J(1), Bagyinszky E(2), An SSA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bionano Technology, Gachon University, Seongnam 13120, Korea.
(2)Department of Industrial and Environmental Engineering, Graduate School of
Environment, Gachon University, Seongnam 13120, Korea.

Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is an
early-onset neurodegenerative disease that was originally discovered in the
population from the Charlevoix-Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean (CSLSJ) region in Quebec.
Although the disease progression of ARSACS may start in early childhood, cases
with later onset have also been observed. Spasticity and ataxia could be common
phenotypes, and retinal optic nerve hypermyelination is detected in the majority
of patients. Other symptoms, such as pes cavus, ataxia and limb deformities, are
also frequently observed in affected individuals. More than 200 mutations have
been discovered in the SACS gene around the world. Besides French Canadians,
SACS genetics have been extensively studied in Tunisia or Japan. Recently,
emerging studies discovered SACS mutations in several other countries. SACS
mutations could be associated with pathogenicity either in the homozygous or
compound heterozygous stages. Sacsin has been confirmed to be involved in
chaperon activities, controlling the microtubule balance or cell migration.
Additionally, sacsin may also play a crucial role in regulating the
mitochondrial functions. Through these mechanisms, it may share common
mechanisms with other neurodegenerative diseases. Further studies are needed to
define the exact functions of sacsin. This review introduces the genetic
mutations discovered in the SACS gene and discusses its pathomechanisms and its
possible involvement in other neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23010552
PMCID: PMC8745260
PMID: 35008978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
