---
reference_id: "PMID:37723615"
title: Evaluation of Gastrointestinal System Complaints and Comorbidities in Pediatric Familial Mediterranean Fever Patients.
authors:
- Karakas HD
- Kuloglu Z
- Aydin F
- Ozdemir S
- Avar-Aydin PO
- Tuna Kirsaclioglu C
- Cakar N
- Ozcakar ZB
journal: J Clin Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000002027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of Gastrointestinal System Complaints and Comorbidities in Pediatric Familial Mediterranean Fever Patients.
**Authors:** Karakas HD, Kuloglu Z, Aydin F, Ozdemir S, Avar-Aydin PO, Tuna Kirsaclioglu C, Cakar N, Ozcakar ZB
**Journal:** J Clin Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RHU.0000000000002027](https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000002027)

## Content

1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2023 Dec 1;29(8):375-380. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000002027.
 Epub 2023 Sep 19.

Evaluation of Gastrointestinal System Complaints and Comorbidities in Pediatric 
Familial Mediterranean Fever Patients.

Karakas HD(1), Kuloglu Z(2), Aydin F(1), Ozdemir S(2), Avar-Aydin PO(1), Tuna 
Kirsaclioglu C(2), Cakar N(1), Ozcakar ZB(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Pediatric Rheumatology.
(2)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most prevalent hereditary 
autoinflammatory disease among children. Abdominal pain and various 
gastrointestinal system (GIS) manifestations may arise directly from FMF or 
concomitantly with FMF. This study aimed to evaluate GIS complaints and findings 
other than classic peritonitis attacks in patients with FMF and to interpret 
concomitant GIS and hepatic disorders in these patients.
METHODS: The medical and genetic findings of patients with FMF who attended our 
clinic between December 2011 and December 2021 were reviewed. Gastrointestinal 
system symptoms, liver function tests, abdominal images, and endoscopic and 
histopathological data were extracted from medical records.
RESULTS: A total of 576 pediatric patients (female, 52.3%) diagnosed with FMF 
were included. Among them, almost one-fifth displayed GIS complaints, such as 
abdominal pain, defecation problems, and dyspepsia, distinct from typical FMF 
attacks. High serum aminotransferase levels were detected in 18.4% of the 
patients, with viral infections being the most common cause of moderate/severe 
hypertransaminasemia. In addition, during follow-up, 26.9% of them were referred 
to the pediatric gastroenterology department. At least 1 gastroenterological and 
hepatobiliary disorder was detected in 17.5% of the patients because of organic 
and functional GIS disorders or hepatobiliary disorders, such as 
gastroesophageal reflux disease, esophagitis, functional dyspepsia, and 
inflammatory bowel diseases.
CONCLUSION: Various GIS and hepatic disorders can be encountered in children 
with FMF. The spectrum of these complaints and pathologies can range from 
frequently observed health problems to more severe diseases.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000002027
PMID: 37723615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.