---
reference_id: "PMID:35242632"
title: "Use of on-therapy ctDNA monitoring in a patient with KIF5B-RET fusion positive advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a case report."
authors:
- Yeung V
- Kim C
- Kiedrowski LA
- Liu SV
- Reuss JE
journal: Transl Lung Cancer Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.21037/tlcr-21-571
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of on-therapy ctDNA monitoring in a patient with KIF5B-RET fusion positive advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a case report.
**Authors:** Yeung V, Kim C, Kiedrowski LA, Liu SV, Reuss JE
**Journal:** Transl Lung Cancer Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tlcr-21-571](https://doi.org/10.21037/tlcr-21-571)

## Content

1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2022 Jan;11(1):111-116. doi: 10.21037/tlcr-21-571.

Use of on-therapy ctDNA monitoring in a patient with KIF5B-RET fusion positive
advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a case report.

Yeung V(1), Kim C(1), Kiedrowski LA(2), Liu SV(1), Reuss JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC,
USA.
(2)Guardant Health, Redwood City, CA, USA.

Molecular characterization of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has led to
marked improvements in the treatment of patients with advanced disease who
harbor driver mutations, including those with alterations in the RET
proto-oncogene. Liquid biopsy to detect circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is a
clinically validated tool to identify genomic alterations in advanced NSCLC at
diagnosis and disease progression. Whether ctDNA assessment can be integrated
into other aspects of patient care is an area of ongoing active research. Here,
we present the case of a 65-year-old female with KIF5B-RET fusion-positive
advanced NSCLC who underwent on-therapy ctDNA surveillance while being treated
on a phase 1b trial with the oral RET inhibitor RXDX-105. The patient initially
presented with right-sided flank discomfort, with a CT scan identifying a large
right lower lobe (RLL) lung mass and right-sided pleural effusion. CT-guided
biopsy confirmed thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) positive lung
adenocarcinoma. Subsequent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery to assess
resectability identified pleural studding, with pleural biopsy confirming
advanced unresectable disease. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) of tumor tissue
and peripheral blood confirmed the presence of a KIF5B-RET fusion, prompting
initiation of trial therapy RXDX-105. After 1 year on therapy, ctDNA became
detectable prompting early scans which identified disease progression. The
patient was subsequently enrolled onto a phase II trial of the RET inhibitor
pralsetinib, on which she continues to this day (2+ years) without detectable
KIF5B-RET ctDNA and with an ongoing minor response [stable disease per response
evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RECIST) v1.1] on imaging. This case
illustrates a potential role for on-therapy ctDNA monitoring as a non-invasive
method to evaluate treatment response and detect early relapse in patients with
advanced NSCLC. Prospective investigation is required to clearly define the
optimal integration of ctDNA testing into on-treatment surveillance in patients
with advanced NSCLC.

2022 Translational Lung Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr-21-571
PMCID: PMC8825655
PMID: 35242632

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
https://tlcr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tlcr-21-571/coif). CK reports
serving as a consultant or advisory board member for Novartis, Janssen,
Astrazeneca, Sanofi, PierianDx, and Diffuse pharmaceuticals. LAK reports
employment with and shareholder of Guardant Health. SVL reports serving as a
consultant or advisory board member for Amgen, AstraZeneca, Beigene, Blueprint
Medicines, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, G1 Therapeutics, Genentech,
Guardant Health, Inivata, Janssen, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Lilly, Merck,
PharmaMar, Pfizer, Regeneron and Takeda, and reports research funding (to
institution) from Alkermes, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Blueprint Medicines,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Genentech, Lilly, Lycera, Merck, Merus, Pfizer, Rain
Therapeutics, RAPT, Spectrum, and Turning Point Therapeutics. JER reports
research funding (to institution) from Conquer Cancer Foundation of ASCO and
reports serving as a consultant or advisory board member for Oncocyte. The other
authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
