---
reference_id: "PMID:24398331"
title: Natural history of autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome associated with FAS gene mutations.
authors:
- Price S
- Shaw PA
- Seitz A
- Joshi G
- Davis J
- Niemela JE
- Perkins K
- Hornung RL
- Folio L
- Rosenberg PS
- Puck JM
- Hsu AP
- Lo B
- Pittaluga S
- Jaffe ES
- Fleisher TA
- Rao VK
- Lenardo MJ
journal: Blood
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-535393
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Cell Proliferation
- Child
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Lymphocytes/pathology, physiology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Penetrance
- Young Adult
- fas Receptor/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural history of autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome associated with FAS gene mutations.
**Authors:** Price S, Shaw PA, Seitz A, Joshi G, Davis J, Niemela JE, Perkins K, Hornung RL, Folio L, Rosenberg PS, Puck JM, Hsu AP, Lo B, Pittaluga S, Jaffe ES, Fleisher TA, Rao VK, Lenardo MJ
**Journal:** Blood (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2013-10-535393](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2013-10-535393)

## Content

1. Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):1989-99. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-535393. Epub
2014  Jan 7.

Natural history of autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome associated with FAS
gene mutations.

Price S(1), Shaw PA, Seitz A, Joshi G, Davis J, Niemela JE, Perkins K, Hornung
RL, Folio L, Rosenberg PS, Puck JM, Hsu AP, Lo B, Pittaluga S, Jaffe ES,
Fleisher TA, Rao VK, Lenardo MJ.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Development Section, Laboratory of Immunology, Division of
Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD;

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Mar 27;123(13):1978. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-01-549477.

Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) presents in childhood with
nonmalignant lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly associated with a characteristic
expansion of mature CD4 and CD8 negative or double negative T-cell receptor
αβ(+) T lymphocytes. Patients often present with chronic multilineage cytopenias
due to autoimmune peripheral destruction and/or splenic sequestration of blood
cells and have an increased risk of B-cell lymphoma. Deleterious heterozygous
mutations in the FAS gene are the most common cause of this condition, which is
termed ALPS-FAS. We report the natural history and pathophysiology of 150
ALPS-FAS patients and 63 healthy mutation-positive relatives evaluated in our
institution over the last 2 decades. Our principal findings are that FAS
mutations have a clinical penetrance of <60%, elevated serum vitamin B12 is a
reliable and accurate biomarker of ALPS-FAS, and the major causes of morbidity
and mortality in these patients are the overwhelming postsplenectomy sepsis and
development of lymphoma. With longer follow-up, we observed a significantly
greater relative risk of lymphoma than previously reported. Avoiding splenectomy
while controlling hypersplenism by using corticosteroid-sparing treatments
improves the outcome in ALPS-FAS patients. This trial was registered at
www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00001350.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-535393
PMCID: PMC3968385
PMID: 24398331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
