---
reference_id: "PMID:33069387"
title: Treatment of Graves' ophthalmopathy.
authors:
- González-García A
- Sales-Sanz M
journal: Med Clin (Barc)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2020.07.031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Graves' ophthalmopathy.
**Authors:** González-García A, Sales-Sanz M
**Journal:** Med Clin (Barc) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medcli.2020.07.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medcli.2020.07.031)

## Content

1. Med Clin (Barc). 2021 Feb 26;156(4):180-186. doi:
10.1016/j.medcli.2020.07.031.  Epub 2020 Oct 14.

Treatment of Graves' ophthalmopathy.

[Article in English, Spanish]

González-García A(1), Sales-Sanz M(2).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Enfermedades Sistémicas Autoinmunes y Minoritarias, Servicio de 
Medicina Interna, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, IRYCIS, Madrid, España. 
Electronic address: andres.gonzalez@salud.madrid.org.
(2)CSUR de tumores orbitarios y cirugía de descompresión orbitaria en 
Oftalmopatía Tiroidea. Servicio de Oftalmología, Hospital Universitario Ramón y 
Cajal, IRYCIS, Madrid, España.

Comment in
    Med Clin (Barc). 2022 Jan 21;158(2):93. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2021.03.011.

Graves' ophthalmopathy is an inflammatory disease with primary involvement of 
the extraocular muscles and the orbit. It encompasses the most common 
extra-thyroid manifestation in patients with Graves-Basedow disease. The 
underlying cause is molecular mimicry with the TSH receptor in ocular 
fibroblasts, leading to an immuno-mediated pathogenesis. Glucocorticoids at high 
doses are the cornerstone in moderate-severe cases. However, some patients are 
corticorresistant or intolerant. In recent years, therapeutic novelties have 
been described in terms of the dosage of the immunosuppressive treatments used, 
as well as the emergence of biological therapy in this field. The objective of 
this review is to update the treatment of Graves' ophthalmopathy, as well as to 
present alternative options in patients resistant or intolerant to 
glucocorticoids.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medcli.2020.07.031
PMID: 33069387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]