---
reference_id: "PMID:16895672"
title: "[From Alport syndrome to benign familial hematuria: clinical and genetic aspect]."
authors:
- Maziers N
- Dahan K
- Pirson Y
journal: Nephrol Ther
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.nephro.2005.03.005
keywords:
- Autoantigens/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Y"
- Collagen Type IV/genetics
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Hematuria/etiology
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Prevalence
- Proteinuria/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [From Alport syndrome to benign familial hematuria: clinical and genetic aspect].
**Authors:** Maziers N, Dahan K, Pirson Y
**Journal:** Nephrol Ther (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nephro.2005.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nephro.2005.03.005)

## Content

1. Nephrol Ther. 2005 May;1(2):90-100. doi: 10.1016/j.nephro.2005.03.005. Epub
2005  Jun 1.

[From Alport syndrome to benign familial hematuria: clinical and genetic
aspect].

[Article in French]

Maziers N(1), Dahan K, Pirson Y.

Author information:
(1)Service de Néphrologie et Centre de Génétique Humaine, Cliniques
Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université Catholique de Louvain, 10, Avenue
Hippocrate, 1200 Bruxelles, Belgique.

Alport syndrome (AS) is a hereditary glomerulonephritis variably associated with
neural hearing loss and ocular abnormalities. The prevalence of the disease is
estimated at approximately 1 in 50,000 live births. AS arises from mutations in
genes encoding alpha chains constituting type IV collagen. In 85% of patients,
the disease results from mutations in the COL4A5 gene located on X chromosome.
In the hemizygous male, persistent microhematuria is present from early life,
then proteinuria and renal insufficiency occur with time, leading to end-stage
renal failure before age 40. In the heterozygous female, clinical manifestations
vary from completely healthy state to end-stage renal failure, most often
reached after the age of 40. In 15% of patients, the disease results from
mutations in either the COL4A3 or the COL4A4 gene, both located on chromosome 2.
When both alleles are mutated (autosomal recessive form), the phenotype is
constantly severe, resembling that of the hemizygous male in the X-linked form.
In the heterozygous individual, the clinical spectrum vary from the absence of
any manifestation to the development of proteinuria - the so-called
autosomal-dominant AS -, and even renal insufficiency, sometimes reaching
end-stage (after the age of 40) through the most frequently encountered
phenotype, i.e. a persistently isolated microhematuria, accounting for the
so-called benign familial hematuria (or healthy carrier state). The determinants
of the phenotype remain largely unknown, so that it may be risky to predict
renal prognosis in the individual with a single COL4A3/A4 mutation and an
isolated microhematuria at the time of examination.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nephro.2005.03.005
PMID: 16895672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
