---
reference_id: "PMID:29295631"
title: Mitochondrial Reactive Oxygen Species and Type 1 Diabetes.
authors:
- Chen J
- Stimpson SE
- Fernandez-Bueno GA
- Mathews CE
journal: Antioxid Redox Signal
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1089/ars.2017.7346
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial Reactive Oxygen Species and Type 1 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Chen J, Stimpson SE, Fernandez-Bueno GA, Mathews CE
**Journal:** Antioxid Redox Signal (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1089/ars.2017.7346](https://doi.org/10.1089/ars.2017.7346)

## Content

1. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2018 Nov 10;29(14):1361-1372. doi:
10.1089/ars.2017.7346.  Epub 2018 Feb 15.

Mitochondrial Reactive Oxygen Species and Type 1 Diabetes.

Chen J(1), Stimpson SE(1), Fernandez-Bueno GA(1), Mathews CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Florida College of Medicine , Gainesville, Florida.

SIGNIFICANCE: The complex etiology of type 1 diabetes (T1D) is the outcome of 
failures in regulating immunity in combination with beta cell perturbations. 
Mitochondrial dysfunction in beta cells and immune cells may be involved in T1D 
pathogenesis. Mitochondrial energy production is essential for the major task of 
beta cells (the secretion of insulin in response to glucose). Mitochondria are a 
major site of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Under immune attack, 
mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) participate in beta cell damage. Similarly, T cell 
fate during immune responses is tightly regulated by mitochondrial physiology, 
morphology, and metabolism. Production of mtROS is essential for signaling in 
antigen-specific T cell activation. Mitochondrial dysfunction in T cells has 
been noted as a feature of some human autoimmune diseases. Recent Advances: 
Preclinical and clinical studies indicate that mitochondrial dysfunction in beta 
cells sensitizes these cells to immune-mediated destruction via direct or 
indirect mechanisms. Sensitivity of beta cells to mtROS is associated with 
genetic T1D risk loci in human and the T1D-prone nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse. 
Mitochondrial dysfunction and altered metabolism have also been observed in 
immune cells of NOD mice and patients with T1D. This immune cell mitochondrial 
dysfunction has been linked to deleterious functional changes.
CRITICAL ISSUES: It remains unclear how mitochondria control T cell receptor 
signaling and downstream events, including calcium flux and activation of 
transcription factors during autoimmunity.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS: Mechanistic studies are needed to investigate the 
mitochondrial pathways involved in autoimmunity, including T1D. These studies 
should seek to identify the role of mitochondria in regulating innate and 
adaptive immune cell activity and beta cell failure.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2017.7346
PMCID: PMC6166689
PMID: 29295631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]