---
reference_id: "PMID:31158105"
title: "Somatic and germline sequencing in genitourinary oncology: genetics for the clinician."
authors:
- Shoag JE
- Wise DR
- Sharaf RN
- Sternberg CN
journal: Curr Opin Urol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000000643
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Somatic and germline sequencing in genitourinary oncology: genetics for the clinician.
**Authors:** Shoag JE, Wise DR, Sharaf RN, Sternberg CN
**Journal:** Curr Opin Urol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOU.0000000000000643](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOU.0000000000000643)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Urol. 2019 Jul;29(4):315-318. doi: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000000643.

Somatic and germline sequencing in genitourinary oncology: genetics for the 
clinician.

Shoag JE(1), Wise DR(2), Sharaf RN(3), Sternberg CN(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, New York Presbyterian Hospital, Weill Cornell 
Medicine.
(2)Department of Medicine, New York University Langone Health.
(3)Department of Medicine and Department of Healthcare Policy and Research.
(4)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Englander Institute for 
Precision Medicine, New York Presbyterian Hospital, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, New York, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Next-generation sequencing is becoming more accessible. This 
review focuses on the clinical application of somatic and germline sequencing to 
genitourinary oncology.
RECENT FINDINGS: Germline variants have been increasingly recognized as 
contributing to the development of genitourinary malignancies, particularly in 
patients with advanced disease. A variety of commercial and institutional 
technologies are in use to detect variants, with newer tools focused on 
integrating these results into the clinical workflow.
SUMMARY: DNA sequencing is becoming a valuable tool in caring for patients with 
genitourinary malignancies. Performing both somatic and germline sequencing will 
likely become standard practice. Interpretation and clinical application of 
these results can be challenging and often requires multidisciplinary expertise.

DOI: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000000643
PMCID: PMC9467627
PMID: 31158105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts of 
interest.