---
reference_id: PMID:22911550
title: Next-generation sequencing reveals the secrets of the chronic lymphocytic leukemia genome.
authors:
- Ramsay AJ
- Martínez-Trillos A
- Jares P
- Rodríguez D
- Kwarciak A
- Quesada V
journal: Clin Transl Oncol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s12094-012-0922-z
keywords:
- "Genome, Human"
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Lymphocytic, Chronic, B-Cell/genetics"
- Mutation
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods, trends"
- Spain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Next-generation sequencing reveals the secrets of the chronic lymphocytic leukemia genome.
**Authors:** Ramsay AJ, Martínez-Trillos A, Jares P, Rodríguez D, Kwarciak A, Quesada V
**Journal:** Clin Transl Oncol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12094-012-0922-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12094-012-0922-z)

## Content

1. Clin Transl Oncol. 2013 Jan;15(1):3-8. doi: 10.1007/s12094-012-0922-z. Epub
2012  Aug 22.

Next-generation sequencing reveals the secrets of the chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia genome.

Ramsay AJ(1), Martínez-Trillos A, Jares P, Rodríguez D, Kwarciak A, Quesada V.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Instituto Universitario de 
Oncología, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.

The study of the detailed molecular history of cancer development is one of the 
most promising techniques to understand and fight this diverse and prevalent 
disease. Unfortunately, this history is as diverse as cancer itself. Therefore, 
even with next-generation sequencing techniques, it is not easy to distinguish 
significant (driver) from random (passenger) events. The International Cancer 
Genome Consortium (ICGC) was formed to solve this fundamental issue by 
coordinating the sequencing of samples from 50 different cancer types and/or 
sub-types that are of clinical and societal importance. The contribution of 
Spain in this consortium has been focused on chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). 
This approach has unveiled new and unexpected events in the development of CLL. 
In this review, we introduce the approaches utilized by the consortium for the 
study of the CLL genome and discuss the recent results and future perspectives 
of this work.

DOI: 10.1007/s12094-012-0922-z
PMID: 22911550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]