---
reference_id: "PMID:10029254"
title: Outbreak of severe neurologic involvement associated with Enterovirus 71 infection.
authors:
- Komatsu H
- Shimizu Y
- Takeuchi Y
- Ishiko H
- Takada H
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0887-8994(98)00087-3
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Viral/blood"
- "Blotting, Southern"
- "Central Nervous System Infections/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, epidemiology, virology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease Outbreaks
- "Enterovirus/isolation & purification"
- "Enterovirus Infections/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, epidemiology, virology"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Japan/epidemiology
- Male
- "RNA, Viral/cerebrospinal fluid"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outbreak of severe neurologic involvement associated with Enterovirus 71 infection.
**Authors:** Komatsu H, Shimizu Y, Takeuchi Y, Ishiko H, Takada H
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0887-8994(98)00087-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0887-8994(98)00087-3)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 1999 Jan;20(1):17-23. doi: 10.1016/s0887-8994(98)00087-3.

Outbreak of severe neurologic involvement associated with Enterovirus 71 
infection.

Komatsu H(1), Shimizu Y, Takeuchi Y, Ishiko H, Takada H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Otsu Municipal Hospital, Shiga, Japan.

Enterovirus 71 has been associated with several outbreaks, as well as sporadic 
cases, of central nervous system infection and has a worldwide distribution. 
Seven children with encephalitis and five with aseptic meningitis caused by 
Enterovirus 71 were seen at Otsu Municipal Hospital during the summer of 1997. 
The infections were confirmed serologically, although detection of the viral 
genome in cerebrospinal fluid was unsuccessful. Seven children were diagnosed as 
having hand-foot-and-mouth syndrome, two were diagnosed as having herpangina, 
and three patients younger than 12 months old developed no eruptions. The skin 
or mucosal manifestations of this outbreak demonstrated considerable variation. 
The Enterovirus 71 strain that caused the outbreak had a strong neurovirulent 
tendency. Among the patients with encephalitis, symptoms originating from the 
impairment of diencephalon were seen in four patients, and those originating 
from cerebellar impairment were seen in two patients. Brain magnetic resonance 
imaging in one patient revealed an abnormality in the pons. The neurologic 
manifestations associated with Enterovirus 71 infection may be characterized by 
involvement of the cerebellum, brainstem, and diencephalon. Enterovirus 71 is 
one of the pathogenic viruses that cause hand-foot-and-mouth syndrome, as well 
as a variety of other clinical manifestations. The most important of these is 
neurologic disease, especially in infants and young children.

DOI: 10.1016/s0887-8994(98)00087-3
PMID: 10029254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]