---
reference_id: "PMID:36396345"
title: "Advanced hepatocellular carcinoma and palliative care: a scoping review."
authors:
- Tian T
- Guo J
- Hu JL
- Hu Y
- Guo P
- Yu XY
journal: BMJ Support Palliat Care
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/spcare-2022-003798
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/therapy"
- Palliative Care
- Liver Neoplasms/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advanced hepatocellular carcinoma and palliative care: a scoping review.
**Authors:** Tian T, Guo J, Hu JL, Hu Y, Guo P, Yu XY
**Journal:** BMJ Support Palliat Care (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/spcare-2022-003798](https://doi.org/10.1136/spcare-2022-003798)

## Content

1. BMJ Support Palliat Care. 2024 May 17;14(2):163-170. doi: 
10.1136/spcare-2022-003798.

Advanced hepatocellular carcinoma and palliative care: a scoping review.

Tian T(1), Guo J(2), Hu JL(3), Hu Y(4), Guo P(1), Yu XY(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, Hunan University of Tradtional Chinese Medicine, Changsha, 
Hunan, China.
(2)Graduate of School, GuangXi University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation, Affiliated Hospital of Jinggangshan University, 
Ji'An, Jiangxi, China.
(4)Department of Nursing, Chongqing City Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Chongqing, China.
(5)Department of Nursing, Chongqing City Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Chongqing, China yxy8383@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) have specific 
palliative care needs owing to the influence of the disease on abdominal pain, 
jaundice, bleeding, appetite, ascites, liver function and hepatic 
encephalopathy. This research would help develop care models and identify 
knowledge gaps in the field.
AIMS: To identify the palliative care needs and experiences of patients with 
advanced HCC.
METHODS: CINAHL, EMBASE and MEDLINE were used to search English literature from 
January 1998 to March 2022 for 'Palliative care' and 'Hepatocellular cancer' 
using precise inclusion and exclusion criteria.
RESULTS: The retrieves identified 2710 records, including 33 studies used in our 
research. Two additional studies were grey items. Among 35 studies, 13 studies 
were performed in Asia, 11 studies in North America, 8 studies in Europe and 3 
studies in Australia. Quantitative investigations were mostly descriptive or 
observational. Eight studies were conducted on a national scale, while two were 
in specific regions. 20 studies were conducted by a single institution. 22 
studies focused only on patients, 2 on family caregivers and 2 on healthcare 
professionals. 2 more studies concentrated on patients and family caregivers, 
while 6 concentrated on patients and healthcare professionals.
CONCLUSIONS: This scoping study illustrates the complexity of advanced HCC 
treatment and challenges in modern healthcare systems. Formulating appropriate 
referral criteria, integrating and coordinating care, and assessing care 
contents are crucial. To enhance the treatment of patients with advanced HCC, it 
is important to understand the relationships between research and service design 
across teams, disciplines and care settings.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/spcare-2022-003798
PMID: 36396345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.