---
reference_id: "PMID:11818366"
title: "Hepatitis C virus core protein inhibits microsomal triglyceride transfer protein activity and very low density lipoprotein secretion: a model of viral-related steatosis."
authors:
- Perlemuter G
- Sabile A
- Letteron P
- Vona G
- Topilco A
- Chrétien Y
- Koike K
- Pessayre D
- Chapman J
- Barba G
- Bréchot C
journal: FASEB J
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1096/fj.01-0396com
keywords:
- Animals
- "Apolipoprotein A-II/genetics, physiology"
- "Apolipoproteins B/blood, metabolism"
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Fatty Liver/etiology, metabolism"
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/complications"
- Humans
- Lipid Peroxidation
- "Lipoproteins, VLDL/metabolism"
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- Protein Disulfide-Isomerases/metabolism
- "Triglycerides/blood, metabolism"
- "Viral Core Proteins/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis C virus core protein inhibits microsomal triglyceride transfer protein activity and very low density lipoprotein secretion: a model of viral-related steatosis.
**Authors:** Perlemuter G, Sabile A, Letteron P, Vona G, Topilco A, Chrétien Y, Koike K, Pessayre D, Chapman J, Barba G, Bréchot C
**Journal:** FASEB J (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.01-0396com](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.01-0396com)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2002 Feb;16(2):185-94. doi: 10.1096/fj.01-0396com.

Hepatitis C virus core protein inhibits microsomal triglyceride transfer protein
activity and very low density lipoprotein secretion: a model of viral-related
steatosis.

Perlemuter G(1), Sabile A, Letteron P, Vona G, Topilco A, Chrétien Y, Koike K,
Pessayre D, Chapman J, Barba G, Bréchot C.

Author information:
(1)Liver Cancer and Molecular Virology, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale Unité 370, Faculté de Médecine Necker-Enfants Malades, 75730
Paris Cedex 15, France

Liver steatosis, which involves accumulation of intracytoplasmic lipid droplets,
is characteristic of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. By use of an in vivo
transgenic murine model, we demonstrate that hepatic overexpression of HCV core
protein interferes with the hepatic assembly and secretion of triglyceride-rich
very low density lipoproteins (VLDL). Core expression led to reduction in
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) activity and in the particle size
of nascent hepatic VLDL without affecting accumulation of MTP and protein
disulfide isomerase. Hepatic human apolipoprotein AII (apo AII) expression in
double-core/apo AII transgenic mice diminished intrahepatic core protein
accumulation and abrogated its effects on VLDL production. Apo AII and HCV core
colocalized in human HCV-infected liver biopsies, thus testifying to the
relevance of this interaction in productive HCV infection. Our results lead us
to propose a new pathophysiological animal model for induction of viral-related
steatosis whereby the core protein of HCV targets microsomal triglyceride
transfer protein activity and modifies hepatic VLDL assembly and secretion.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.01-0396com
PMID: 11818366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
