---
reference_id: "PMID:39174842"
title: Molecular diagnosis of Alpha-sarcoglycanopathies by NGS in seven Moroccan families and report of two novel variants.
authors:
- Rahmuni Y
- Kadiri YE
- Lyahyai J
- Sefiani A
- Ratbi I
journal: Ir J Med Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11845-024-03792-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Sarcoglycanopathies/genetics, diagnosis"
- Male
- Female
- Morocco
- Sarcoglycans/genetics
- Child
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Adult
- Adolescent
- "Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle/genetics, diagnosis"
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Child, Preschool"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Molecular diagnosis of Alpha-sarcoglycanopathies by NGS in seven Moroccan families and report of two novel variants.
**Authors:** Rahmuni Y, Kadiri YE, Lyahyai J, Sefiani A, Ratbi I
**Journal:** Ir J Med Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11845-024-03792-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11845-024-03792-5)

## Content

1. Ir J Med Sci. 2024 Dec;193(6):3071-3076. doi: 10.1007/s11845-024-03792-5. Epub
 2024 Aug 23.

Molecular diagnosis of Alpha-sarcoglycanopathies by NGS in seven Moroccan 
families and report of two novel variants.

Rahmuni Y(1)(2), Kadiri YE(3)(4), Lyahyai J(3), Sefiani A(3)(4), Ratbi I(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Team in Genomics and Molecular Epidemiology of Genetic Diseases, 
GENOPATH Center, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University Mohammed V of 
Rabat, Rabat, Morocco. rahmuniyasmina.24@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, National Institute of Health, Rabat, Morocco. 
rahmuniyasmina.24@gmail.com.
(3)Research Team in Genomics and Molecular Epidemiology of Genetic Diseases, 
GENOPATH Center, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University Mohammed V of 
Rabat, Rabat, Morocco.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, National Institute of Health, Rabat, Morocco.

BACKGROUND: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies constitute a heterogeneous group of 
neuromuscular diseases, both clinically and genetically. Limb-girdle muscular 
dystrophy by alpha-sarcoglycan deficiency or LGMD R3 α-sarcoglycan-related is a 
subtype of the autosomal recessive sarcoglycanopathies caused by variants in the 
alpha-sarcoglycan gene (SGCA) at 17q21.33. It appears in childhood by 
progressive weakness of pelvic and/or scapular girdle muscles and calf 
hypertrophy, with a wide range of clinical inter- and intra-familial clinical 
variability.
AIMS: Our report extends the molecular spectrum of SGCA gene with the 
identification of variant disease causing and will help for better management of 
patients and genetic counseling of families.
METHODS: In our study, seven unrelated families presented a clinical and 
paraclinical picture consistent with alpha-sarcoglycanopathy. A molecular study 
using Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) was carried out on them.
RESULTS: Six different homozygous variants of the SGCA gene were identified in 
the patients analyzed, including four previously reported variants and two novel 
variants predicted to be deleterious by the prediction tools.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results expand the spectrum of variants in Moroccan patients 
with sarcoglycanopathy, specifically LGMDR3, most importantly as this form is 
not common in the Moroccan population.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Royal Academy of Medicine in 
Ireland.

DOI: 10.1007/s11845-024-03792-5
PMID: 39174842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval: This study was 
approved by the Rabat ethics committee for Biomedical research (Approval Number: 
CERB-37–23). Consent to participate: Informed consent was obtained from all 
individual participants (or their parents) included in the study. Competing 
interests: The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.