---
reference_id: "PMID:27302097"
title: Gain-of-function mutations in SMAD4 cause a distinctive repertoire of cardiovascular phenotypes in patients with Myhre syndrome.
authors:
- Lin AE
- Michot C
- Cormier-Daire V
- "L'Ecuyer TJ"
- Matherne GP
- Barnes BH
- Humberson JB
- Edmondson AC
- Zackai E
- "O'Connor MJ"
- Kaplan JD
- Ebeid MR
- Krier J
- Krieg E
- Ghoshhajra B
- Lindsay ME
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37739
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Cardiovascular Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Child
- "Cryptorchidism/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Echocardiography
- Exons
- Facies
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Growth Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Smad4 Protein/genetics
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Treatment Outcome
- Ultrasonography
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gain-of-function mutations in SMAD4 cause a distinctive repertoire of cardiovascular phenotypes in patients with Myhre syndrome.
**Authors:** Lin AE, Michot C, Cormier-Daire V, L'Ecuyer TJ, Matherne GP, Barnes BH, Humberson JB, Edmondson AC, Zackai E, O'Connor MJ, Kaplan JD, Ebeid MR, Krier J, Krieg E, Ghoshhajra B, Lindsay ME
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37739](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37739)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Oct;170(10):2617-31. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37739. Epub
2016  Jun 14.

Gain-of-function mutations in SMAD4 cause a distinctive repertoire of 
cardiovascular phenotypes in patients with Myhre syndrome.

Lin AE(1), Michot C(2), Cormier-Daire V(2), L'Ecuyer TJ(3), Matherne GP(3), 
Barnes BH(4), Humberson JB(5), Edmondson AC(6), Zackai E(6), O'Connor MJ(7), 
Kaplan JD(8), Ebeid MR(9), Krier J(10), Krieg E(10), Ghoshhajra B(11)(12), 
Lindsay ME(11)(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, MassGeneral Hospital for 
Children, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. 
lin.angela@mgh.harvard.edu.
(2)INSERM UMR1163 Unit, Department of Genetics, Institut Imagine, Paris 
Descartes University-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Necker Enfants-Malades Hospital, 
Paris, France.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia 
Children's Hospital, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Virginia Children's Hospital, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(5)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia 
Children's Hospital, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(6)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(7)Division of Cardiology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(8)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi.
(9)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Mississippi 
Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi.
(10)Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(11)Thoracic Aortic Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(12)Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(13)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, MassGeneral 
Hospital for Children, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(14)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(15)Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

Myhre syndrome is a rare, distinctive syndrome due to specific gain-of-function 
mutations in SMAD4. The characteristic phenotype includes short stature, 
dysmorphic facial features, hearing loss, laryngotracheal anomalies, 
arthropathy, radiographic defects, intellectual disability, and a more recently 
appreciated spectrum of cardiovascular defects with a striking 
fibroproliferative response to surgical intervention. We report four newly 
described patients with typical features of Myhre syndrome who had (i) a mildly 
narrow descending aorta and restrictive cardiomyopathy; (ii) recurrent 
pericardial and pleural effusions; (iii) a large persistent ductus arteriosus 
with juxtaductal aortic coarctation; and (iv) restrictive pericardial disease 
requiring pericardiectomy. Additional information is provided about a fifth 
previously reported patient with fatal pericardial disease. A literature review 
of the cardiovascular features of Myhre syndrome was performed on 54 total 
patients, all with a SMAD4 mutation. Seventy percent had a cardiovascular 
abnormality including congenital heart defects (63%), pericardial disease (17%), 
restrictive cardiomyopathy (9%), and systemic hypertension (15%). Pericarditis 
and restrictive cardiomyopathy are associated with high mortality (three 
patients each among 10 deaths); one patient with restrictive cardiomyopathy also 
had epicarditis. Cardiomyopathy and pericardial abnormalities distinguish Myhre 
syndrome from other disorders caused by mutations in the TGF-β signaling cascade 
(Marfan, Loeys-Dietz, or Shprintzen-Goldberg syndromes). We hypothesize that the 
expanded spectrum of cardiovascular abnormalities relates to the ability of the 
SMAD4 protein to integrate diverse signaling pathways, including canonical 
TGF-β, BMP, and Activin signaling. The co-occurrence of congenital and acquired 
phenotypes demonstrates that the gene product of SMAD4 is required for both 
developmental and postnatal cardiovascular homeostasis. © 2016 Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37739
PMID: 27302097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]