---
reference_id: "PMID:35737103"
title: Familial Mediterranean fever may mimic acute appendicitis in children.
authors:
- Wekell P
- Wester T
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-022-05153-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean fever may mimic acute appendicitis in children.
**Authors:** Wekell P, Wester T
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-022-05153-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-022-05153-8)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2022 Aug;38(8):1099-1104. doi: 10.1007/s00383-022-05153-8. 
Epub 2022 Jun 23.

Familial Mediterranean fever may mimic acute appendicitis in children.

Wekell P(1)(2), Wester T(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, NU-Hospital Group, Uddevalla, Sweden.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Sahlgrenska Academy, Institute of Clinical 
Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden. tomas.wester@regionstockholm.se.
(4)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden. tomas.wester@regionstockholm.se.

Acute appendicitis is the most common surgical emergency in children. Diagnosis 
and management are often straightforward. However, familial Mediterranean fever 
is an important condition to consider in the assessment of children with acute 
abdominal pain, particularly in children with an origin in eastern Mediterranean 
basin where the disease is common. The key feature of familial Mediterranean 
fever is relapsing episodes of fever and serositis including peritonitis, 
pleurisy, or arthritis. The disease is treated with colchicine that prevents 
acute attacks, control subclinical inflammation between the attacks and the 
long-term complication of amyloidosis. The acute attacks may be a challenge to 
identify and distinguish from other causes of acute abdomen, including acute 
appendicitis, but also small bowel obstruction. Ultrasound and CT scan findings 
are nonspecific during acute attacks of familial Mediterranean fever, but 
imaging is useful to identify acute appendicitis and small bowel obstruction. 
The purpose of this article was to increase the awareness and knowledge of 
familial Mediterranean fever and provide support for the paediatric surgeon in 
the clinical care of these children in parts of the world where familial 
Mediterranean fever is rare.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-022-05153-8
PMCID: PMC9259538
PMID: 35737103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.