---
reference_id: "PMID:22296644"
title: ATP13A2 mutations impair mitochondrial function in fibroblasts from patients with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome.
authors:
- Grünewald A
- Arns B
- Seibler P
- Rakovic A
- Münchau A
- Ramirez A
- Sue CM
- Klein C
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.12.035
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- Mitochondria/genetics
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Parkinsonian Disorders/genetics
- Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ATP13A2 mutations impair mitochondrial function in fibroblasts from patients with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome.
**Authors:** Grünewald A, Arns B, Seibler P, Rakovic A, Münchau A, Ramirez A, Sue CM, Klein C
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.12.035](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.12.035)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Aug;33(8):1843.e1-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.12.035. Epub 2012 Jan 31.

ATP13A2 mutations impair mitochondrial function in fibroblasts from patients 
with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome.

Grünewald A(1), Arns B, Seibler P, Rakovic A, Münchau A, Ramirez A, Sue CM, 
Klein C.

Author information:
(1)Section of Clinical and Molecular Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, 
University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.

Mutations in ATP13A2 cause autosomal-recessive parkinsonism (Kufor-Rakeb 
syndrome; KRS). Because several other parkinsonism-associated proteins have been 
connected to mitochondrial function and mitophagy, we studied the impact of 
endogenous mutations in ATPase type 13A2 (ATP13A2) on mitochondria in 
fibroblasts from KRS patients compared with controls. In patients, we detected 
decreased adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthesis rates, increased mitochondrial 
DNA levels, a higher frequency of mitochondrial DNA lesions, increased oxygen 
consumption rates, and increased fragmentation of the mitochondrial network. 
Importantly, overexpression of wild-type ATP13A2 rescued the respiration 
phenotype. These findings collectively suggest that ATP13A2 contributes to the 
maintenance of a healthy mitochondrial pool, supporting the hypothesis that 
impaired mitochondrial clearance represents an important pathogenic mechanism 
underlying KRS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.12.035
PMID: 22296644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]