---
reference_id: "PMID:36905276"
title: The impact of gastrointestinal tract infection on acquiring dengue fever virus infection and haemorrhagic fever in Jeddah region, Saudi Arabia.
authors:
- Alghamdi S
- Ashshi A
- Kabrah A
- Atwah B
- Alkurbi MO
- Assas MB
journal: Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.14715/cmb/2022.68.9.7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The impact of gastrointestinal tract infection on acquiring dengue fever virus infection and haemorrhagic fever in Jeddah region, Saudi Arabia.
**Authors:** Alghamdi S, Ashshi A, Kabrah A, Atwah B, Alkurbi MO, Assas MB
**Journal:** Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.14715/cmb/2022.68.9.7](https://doi.org/10.14715/cmb/2022.68.9.7)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2022 Sep 30;68(9):45-50. doi: 
10.14715/cmb/2022.68.9.7.

The impact of gastrointestinal tract infection on acquiring dengue fever virus 
infection and haemorrhagic fever in Jeddah region, Saudi Arabia.

Alghamdi S(1), Ashshi A(2), Kabrah A(3), Atwah B(4), Alkurbi MO(5), Assas MB(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Medicine Department, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Umm 
Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia. ssalghamdi@uqu.edu.sa.
(2)Laboratory Medicine Department, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Umm 
Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia. amashshi@uqu.edu.sa.
(3)Laboratory Medicine Department, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Umm 
Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia. amkabrah@uqu.edu.sa.
(4)Laboratory Medicine Department, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Umm 
Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia. baatwah@uqu.edu.sa.
(5)Laboratory Medicine Department, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Umm 
Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia. mokurbi@uqu.edu.sa.
(6)Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Laboratory 
Technology, Immunology Group, King Abdul Aziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 
massas@kau.edu.sa.

This study aimed to investigate the relationship between gastrointestinal tract 
infection and dengue hemorrhagic fever. Dengue hemorrhagic fever is a syndrome 
caused by the dengue virus and primarily affects children below ten years of age 
and is spread by the Aedes aegypti mosquito. Gastrointestinal tract infection is 
a bacterial and parasitic infection that leads to gastrointestinal tract 
inflammation which involves the small intestine and the stomach. The 
relationship between the two can be manifested by gastrointestinal bleeding, 
acute pancreatitis, and fulminant liver failure. In this research work, 600 
blood and feces samples of different ages and sex (7-8 worms) were collected 
from Jeddah city. From the blood samples, serum was made and stored at -20°C 
until use. The frozen sera samples were investigated for sero-detection of 
DENV-NS1 antigen as a rapid, sensitive, and cost-effective test to detect 
asymptomatic acute DENV-infected donors and anti-DENV IgM and IgG antibodies. 
Feces samples were processed for the detection of parasites. The data acquired 
from these samples of all the 600 participants were analyzed and interpreted, 
followed by statistical analysis using GraphPad Prism 5.0 software. All the 
values were considered significant, which showed a value of less than 0.05. 
Results were expressed as with the range. This article documents that 
gastrointestinal tract manifestations frequently occur among patients with 
dengue hemorrhagic fever. There are close relationships between gastrointestinal 
tract infection and dengue hemorrhagic fever. In current work, it was 
established that dengue fever leads to gastrointestinal tract bleeding in the 
presence of intestinal parasites. Therefore, failure to identify the patients 
with this infection early enough can lead to an increased morbidity and 
mortality rate.

DOI: 10.14715/cmb/2022.68.9.7
PMID: 36905276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]