---
reference_id: "PMID:35782820"
title: "Intussusception in Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome: Management of Unusual Acute Abdominal Presentation."
authors:
- Sharma H
- Kaushik D
journal: Indian J Surg Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s13193-021-01448-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intussusception in Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome: Management of Unusual Acute Abdominal Presentation.
**Authors:** Sharma H, Kaushik D
**Journal:** Indian J Surg Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13193-021-01448-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13193-021-01448-9)

## Content

1. Indian J Surg Oncol. 2022 Jun;13(2):262-266. doi: 10.1007/s13193-021-01448-9. 
Epub 2021 Sep 11.

Intussusception in Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome: Management of Unusual Acute Abdominal 
Presentation.

Sharma H(1), Kaushik D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Tata Medical Center, Newtown, Kolkata India.
(2)Department of Anesthesia, Tata Medical Center, Kolakata, India.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant familial hamartomatous 
polyposis syndrome characterized by multiple gastrointestinal hamartomatous 
polyps and mucocutaneous melanin pigmentation. We report two cases, with no 
family history, presenting as emergency, one with perforation peritonitis due to 
spontaneous bowel disruption and another with bowel gangrene due to severe bowel 
congestion secondary to intussusception. Histological examination showed 
features of hamartomatous polyposis; other clinical features in these patients 
were suggestive of the diagnosis of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Given the multitude 
of carcinoma that these patients are susceptible to, aggressive screening 
protocols are recommended. Close monitoring and follow-up are essential in PJS 
patients for the prevention of potential complications, early detection of 
related malignancies due their increased risk for both intestinal and 
extraintestinal malignancies.

© Indian Association of Surgical Oncology 2021.

DOI: 10.1007/s13193-021-01448-9
PMCID: PMC9240161
PMID: 35782820

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestsThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interests.