---
reference_id: "PMID:32274173"
title: "Aerobic and breathing exercises improve dyspnea, exercise capacity and quality of life in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis patients: systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Hanada M
- Kasawara KT
- Mathur S
- Rozenberg D
- Kozu R
- Hassan SA
- Reid WD
journal: J Thorac Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.21037/jtd.2019.12.27
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aerobic and breathing exercises improve dyspnea, exercise capacity and quality of life in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis patients: systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Hanada M, Kasawara KT, Mathur S, Rozenberg D, Kozu R, Hassan SA, Reid WD
**Journal:** J Thorac Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.21037/jtd.2019.12.27](https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2019.12.27)

## Content

1. J Thorac Dis. 2020 Mar;12(3):1041-1055. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2019.12.27.

Aerobic and breathing exercises improve dyspnea, exercise capacity and quality
of life in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis patients: systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Hanada M(1)(2)(3), Kasawara KT(2), Mathur S(2), Rozenberg D(4)(5), Kozu R(1)(3),
Hassan SA(2)(6), Reid WD(2)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Cardiorespiratory Division, Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Nagasaki
University Hospital, Nagasaki, Japan.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(3)Department of Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation Science, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Canada.
(5)Respirology, Lung Transplant Program, Toronto General Hospital Research
Institute, University Health Network, Canada.
(6)Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada.
(7)Interdepartmental Division of Critical Care Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive disease
associated with significant dyspnea and limited exercise capacity. This
systematic review aimed to synthesize evidence of exercise interventions during
pulmonary rehabilitation that aim to improve exercise capacity, dyspnea, and
health-related quality of life (HRQL) in IPF patients.
METHODS: Searches were performed in MEDLINE, Embase, CENTRAL, SPORTDiscus,
PubMed and PEDro from inception to January 2019 using search terms for: (I)
participants: 'IPF or interstitial lung disease'; (II) interventions: 'aerobic
training or resistance training or respiratory muscle training'; and (III)
outcomes: 'exercise capacity or dyspnea or health-related quality of life'. Two
reviewers independently screened titles, abstracts and full texts to identify
eligible studies. Methodological quality of studies was assessed using the Downs
and Black checklist and meta-analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Of 1,677 articles identified, 14 were included (four randomized
controlled trials and 10 prospective pre-post design studies) that examined 362
patients receiving training and 95 control subjects. Exercise capacity was
measured with the 6-minute walk distance, peak oxygen consumption, peak work
rate, or endurance time for constant work rate cycling, which increased after
exercise [aerobic exercise; aerobic and breathing exercises; aerobic and
inspiratory muscle training (IMT) exercises] compared to the control groups.
Dyspnea scores improved after aerobic and breathing exercises. HRQL also
improved after aerobic exercise training alone or combined with breathing
exercises. Aerobic training alone or combined with IMT or breathing exercises
improved exercise capacity.
CONCLUSIONS: Breathing exercises appears to complement exercise training towards
improved dyspnea and HRQL in patients with IPF.

2020 Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.12.27
PMCID: PMC7139046
PMID: 32274173

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no
conflicts of interest to declare.
