---
reference_id: "PMID:19449259"
title: "Secondary attack rate of hepatitis A, varicella and mumps in household settings and reliability of family history to detect seronegative children for necessity of vaccination."
authors:
- Ceyhan M
- Tezer H
- Yildirim I
journal: Scand J Infect Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1080/00365540902968027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Secondary attack rate of hepatitis A, varicella and mumps in household settings and reliability of family history to detect seronegative children for necessity of vaccination.
**Authors:** Ceyhan M, Tezer H, Yildirim I
**Journal:** Scand J Infect Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00365540902968027](https://doi.org/10.1080/00365540902968027)

## Content

1. Scand J Infect Dis. 2009;41(6-7):501-6. doi: 10.1080/00365540902968027.

Secondary attack rate of hepatitis A, varicella and mumps in household settings 
and reliability of family history to detect seronegative children for necessity 
of vaccination.

Ceyhan M(1), Tezer H, Yildirim I.

Author information:
(1)Hacettepe University, Paediatric Infectious Diseases, Ankara, Turkey. 
mceyhan@hacettepe.edu.tr

Hepatitis A, varicella, and mumps are common in countries without universal 
immunization against these infections. Information about secondary household 
attack rates is limited. A prospective study was conducted in children <16 y of 
age who had household contact with the above infections. History for previous 
infections and vaccination was obtained from the parents. Specific antibodies in 
the sera during enrollment and at the end of the longest incubation periods were 
determined. A total of 113 children who had household contact with cases of 
varicella, hepatitis A, or mumps were enrolled. Secondary attack rate (SAR) was 
lower in hepatitis A (43.3%) than those for varicella (75.0%) and mumps (65.3%) 
(p<0.05). Rate of secondary asymptomatic infections was 25.6% in the hepatitis A 
group, 3.1% in the varicella group, and 16.6% in the mumps group. Positive 
predictive value (PPV) of the history was 100% for all 3 diseases and negative 
predictive value (NPV) was 85% for hepatitis A, 80.0% for varicella, and 56.2% 
for mumps. In conclusion, asymptomatic infections are important in the 
calculation of SARs in household contacts. PPV and NPV of medical history taken 
from parents might be useful when deciding the need for vaccination.

DOI: 10.1080/00365540902968027
PMID: 19449259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]