---
reference_id: "PMID:38146326"
title: A Case Report and Literature Review of a Rare Jejunal Solitary Peutz-Jeghers-Type Polyp Resected Endoscopically in an Elderly Patient Presenting with Subacute Gastrointestinal Bleeding.
authors:
- Alenezi T
- Marcus V
- Bessissow T
journal: Case Rep Gastrointest Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1155/2023/2391602
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case Report and Literature Review of a Rare Jejunal Solitary Peutz-Jeghers-Type Polyp Resected Endoscopically in an Elderly Patient Presenting with Subacute Gastrointestinal Bleeding.
**Authors:** Alenezi T, Marcus V, Bessissow T
**Journal:** Case Rep Gastrointest Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2023/2391602](https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/2391602)

## Content

1. Case Rep Gastrointest Med. 2023 Dec 18;2023:2391602. doi:
10.1155/2023/2391602.  eCollection 2023.

A Case Report and Literature Review of a Rare Jejunal Solitary 
Peutz-Jeghers-Type Polyp Resected Endoscopically in an Elderly Patient 
Presenting with Subacute Gastrointestinal Bleeding.

Alenezi T(1), Marcus V(2), Bessissow T(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, McGill University Health Centre, 
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.

Solitary Peutz-Jeghers-type polyp (SPJP) is a rare hamartomatous lesion. It is 
considered a different entity from Peutz-Jeghers syndrome despite similar 
histopathological findings. It can be found in the GI tract but rarely in the 
jejunum. Jejunal SPJP is susceptible to necrosis, ulceration, and 
intussusception, resulting in GI bleeding or small bowel obstruction. We 
describe a case of subacute gastrointestinal bleeding secondary to jejunal SPJP 
to share our approach to this challenging case using therapeutic endoscopy. An 
81-year-old male patient with a history of atrial fibrillation on warfarin with 
stable therapeutic INR levels presented with a 1-week history of melena, 
generalized fatigue, and shortness of breath on exertion and was found to have 
profound iron deficiency anemia. Esophageal gastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy 
failed to identify the source of bleeding; however, single-balloon enteroscopy 
detected a 4 cm polyp with a stalk in the proximal jejunum. Endoscopic 
polypectomy was performed, and the whole polyp was removed. Histopathological 
examination was consistent with Peutz-Jeghers polyp. The genetic analysis was 
negative for STK11 mutation. Follow-up magnetic resonance enterography and video 
capsule endoscopy did not reveal any other polypoid lesion in the GI tract. The 
patient's symptoms resolved gradually, and his hemoglobin level returned back to 
normal levels within 6 months. To our knowledge, this is the first case of 
endoscopic polypectomy during balloon-assisted enteroscopy for jejunal SPJP.

Copyright © 2023 Talal Alenezi et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/2391602
PMCID: PMC10749718
PMID: 38146326

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.