---
reference_id: "PMID:29257187"
title: "Diagnosis and Treatment Options for Achromatopsia: A Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Pascual-Camps I
- Barranco-Gonzalez H
- Aviñó-Martínez J
- Silva E
- Harto-Castaño M
journal: J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3928/01913913-20171117-01
keywords:
- Color Vision/physiology
- "Color Vision Defects/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Disease Management
- Electroretinography/methods
- Fluorescein Angiography/methods
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/pathology
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Treatment Options for Achromatopsia: A Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Pascual-Camps I, Barranco-Gonzalez H, Aviñó-Martínez J, Silva E, Harto-Castaño M
**Journal:** J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3928/01913913-20171117-01](https://doi.org/10.3928/01913913-20171117-01)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2018 Mar 1;55(2):85-92. doi: 
10.3928/01913913-20171117-01. Epub 2017 Dec 19.

Diagnosis and Treatment Options for Achromatopsia: A Review of the Literature.

Pascual-Camps I, Barranco-Gonzalez H, Aviñó-Martínez J, Silva E, Harto-Castaño 
M.

Achromatopsia is a complex inherited retinal disease that affects the cone cell 
function. It is usually an autosomal-recessive disease and is characterized by 
pendular nystagmus, poor visual acuity, lack of color vision, and marked 
photophobia. CNGA3, CNGB3, GNAT2, PDE6C, PDE6H, and ATF6 gene mutations have 
been identified as associated with this disease. New diagnostic and therapeutic 
tools are being studied. Optical coherence tomography and fundus 
autofluorescence are important imaging techniques that provide significant 
information about the progression of the disease. The genetic approach for these 
patients is a current important issue and gene therapy is an ongoing therapeutic 
option already being studied in clinical trials. The purpose of this review was 
to survey the current knowledge on diagnosis and treatment options in 
achromatopsia. [J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2018;55(2):85-92.].

Copyright 2017, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/01913913-20171117-01
PMID: 29257187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]