---
reference_id: "PMID:37264120"
title: "Does modulation of tau hyperphosphorylation represent a reasonable therapeutic strategy for Alzheimer's disease? From preclinical studies to the clinical trials."
authors:
- Basheer N
- Smolek T
- Hassan I
- Liu F
- Iqbal K
- Zilka N
- Novak P
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02113-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does modulation of tau hyperphosphorylation represent a reasonable therapeutic strategy for Alzheimer's disease? From preclinical studies to the clinical trials.
**Authors:** Basheer N, Smolek T, Hassan I, Liu F, Iqbal K, Zilka N, Novak P
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-023-02113-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-02113-z)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2023 Jun;28(6):2197-2214. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02113-z.
Epub  2023 Jun 2.

Does modulation of tau hyperphosphorylation represent a reasonable therapeutic 
strategy for Alzheimer's disease? From preclinical studies to the clinical 
trials.

Basheer N(1), Smolek T(1), Hassan I(2), Liu F(3), Iqbal K(3), Zilka N(4)(5), 
Novak P(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, 845 10, 
Slovakia.
(2)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences, Jamia Millia 
Islamia, Jamia Nagar, New Delhi, 110025, India.
(3)Department of Neurochemistry, Inge Grundke-Iqbal Research Floor, New York 
State Institute for Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities, 1050 Forest 
Hill Road, Staten Island, NY, 10314, USA.
(4)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, 845 10, 
Slovakia. norbert.zilka@savba.sk.
(5)AXON Neuroscience R&D Services SE, Bratislava, 811 02, Slovakia. 
norbert.zilka@savba.sk.
(6)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, 845 10, 
Slovakia. petr.novak@savba.sk.
(7)AXON Neuroscience CRM Services SE, Bratislava, 811 02, Slovakia. 
petr.novak@savba.sk.

Protein kinases (PKs) have emerged as one of the most intensively investigated 
drug targets in current pharmacological research, with indications ranging from 
oncology to neurodegeneration. Tau protein hyperphosphorylation was the first 
pathological post-translational modification of tau protein described in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), highlighting the role of PKs in neurodegeneration. The 
therapeutic potential of protein kinase inhibitors (PKIs)) and protein 
phosphatase 2 A (PP2A) activators in AD has recently been explored in several 
preclinical and clinical studies with variable outcomes. Where a number of 
preclinical studies demonstrate a visible reduction in the levels of phospho-tau 
in transgenic tauopathy models, no reduction in neurofibrillary lesions is 
observed. Amongst the few PKIs and PP2A activators that progressed to clinical 
trials, most failed on the efficacy front, with only a few still unconfirmed and 
potential positive trends. This suggests that robust preclinical and clinical 
data is needed to unequivocally evaluate their efficacy. To this end, we take a 
systematic look at the results of preclinical and clinical studies of PKIs and 
PP2A activators, and the evidence they provide regarding the utility of this 
approach to evaluate the potential of targeting tau hyperphosphorylation as a 
disease modifying therapy.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-023-02113-z
PMCID: PMC10611587
PMID: 37264120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NB, PN, TS, and NZ have received salary from 
AXON Neuroscience SE or one of its subsidiaries. PN has received payments from 
F. Hoffmann La Roche. Other authors do not declare any conflict of interest.