---
reference_id: "PMID:35290661"
title: "New dermatological findings of MIS-C: Can mucocutaneous involvement be associated with Severe Disease Course?"
authors:
- Akçay N
- Topkarcı Z
- Menentoğlu ME
- Oğur M
- Sofuoğlu Aİ
- Boydağ Güvenç K
- Baydemir C
- Şevketoğlu E
journal: Australas J Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ajd.13819
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New dermatological findings of MIS-C: Can mucocutaneous involvement be associated with Severe Disease Course?
**Authors:** Akçay N, Topkarcı Z, Menentoğlu ME, Oğur M, Sofuoğlu Aİ, Boydağ Güvenç K, Baydemir C, Şevketoğlu E
**Journal:** Australas J Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ajd.13819](https://doi.org/10.1111/ajd.13819)

## Content

1. Australas J Dermatol. 2022 May;63(2):228-234. doi: 10.1111/ajd.13819. Epub
2022  Mar 15.

New dermatological findings of MIS-C: Can mucocutaneous involvement be 
associated with Severe Disease Course?

Akçay N(1), Topkarcı Z(2), Menentoğlu ME(1), Oğur M(1), Sofuoğlu Aİ(1), Boydağ 
Güvenç K(1), Baydemir C(3), Şevketoğlu E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Bakırkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Research 
and Training Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Research and Training 
Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli University, 
Kocaeli, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about mucocutaneous involvement in critically ill 
patients with the multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C). The aim 
of our study was to describe the localisation and variety of rash and to 
investigate whether presenting with rash at admission alters the clinical course 
of MIS-C.
METHODS: This prospective, observational cohort study was conducted amongst 
children under 18 years of age who were admitted to our paediatric intensive 
care unit (PICU) between May 2020 and May 2021 with a possible diagnosis of 
MIS-C.
RESULTS: A total of 33 children with MIS-C, 21 boys (64%), with a median age of 
9.4 years (3.4-11.5) were enrolled. Twenty-four children presented with 
mucocutaneous symptoms (72%). Age, male gender, PICU length of stay, presenting 
symptoms, inotrope requirement, the existence of myocarditis or respiratory 
failure were higher but not significantly different in patients with rash 
compared to those without rash (P > 0.05). The median duration of symptoms 
before admission and presence of cervical lymphadenopathy were significantly 
higher in patients than those without rash (P < 0.05). Children with a rash had 
a significantly higher neutrophil count, CRP, procalcitonin, troponin levels and 
lower lymphocyte counts and albumin levels than those without rash (P < 0.05). 
Twelve children with rash (50%) had symmetrical intertriginous distribution. Two 
children had erythematous lesions on the areola and the surroundings. In 
conclusion, intertriginous involvement, periareolar erythema and other 
mucocutaneous manifestations might be the first alarming symptoms of moderate to 
severe MIS-C. Therefore, close monitoring with a multidisciplinary approach 
should be considered for these patients to assess potential disease progression.

© 2022 Australasian College of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ajd.13819
PMID: 35290661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]