---
reference_id: "PMID:18024592"
title: Complexity of rice-water stool from patients with Vibrio cholerae plays a role in the transmission of infectious diarrhea.
authors:
- Nelson EJ
- Chowdhury A
- Harris JB
- Begum YA
- Chowdhury F
- Khan AI
- Larocque RC
- Bishop AL
- Ryan ET
- Camilli A
- Qadri F
- Calderwood SB
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0706352104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complexity of rice-water stool from patients with Vibrio cholerae plays a role in the transmission of infectious diarrhea.
**Authors:** Nelson EJ, Chowdhury A, Harris JB, Begum YA, Chowdhury F, Khan AI, Larocque RC, Bishop AL, Ryan ET, Camilli A, Qadri F, Calderwood SB
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0706352104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0706352104)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 27;104(48):19091-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0706352104. Epub 2007 Nov 16.

Complexity of rice-water stool from patients with Vibrio cholerae plays a role 
in the transmission of infectious diarrhea.

Nelson EJ(1), Chowdhury A, Harris JB, Begum YA, Chowdhury F, Khan AI, Larocque 
RC, Bishop AL, Ryan ET, Camilli A, Qadri F, Calderwood SB.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Biology and 
Microbiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136 Harrison Avenue, Boston, 
MA 02111, USA.

At the International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh, 
one-half of the rice-water stool samples that were culture-positive for Vibrio 
cholerae did not contain motile V. cholerae by standard darkfield microscopy and 
were defined as darkfield-negative (DF(-)). We evaluated the host and microbial 
factors associated with DF status, as well as the impact of DF status on 
transmission. Viable counts of V. cholerae in DF(-) stools were three logs lower 
than in DF(+) stools, although DF(-) and DF(+) stools had similar direct counts 
of V. cholerae by microscopy. In DF(-) samples, non-V. cholerae bacteria 
outnumbered V. cholerae 10:1. Lytic V. cholerae bacteriophage were present in 
90% of DF(-) samples compared with 35% of DF(+) samples, suggesting that 
bacteriophage may limit culture-positive patients from producing DF(+) stools. 
V. cholerae in DF(-) and DF(+) samples were found both planktonically and in 
distinct nonplanktonic populations; the distribution of organisms between these 
compartments did not differ appreciably between DF(-) and DF(+) stools. This 
biology may impact transmission because epidemiological data suggested that 
household contacts of a DF(+) index case were at greater risk of infection with 
V. cholerae. We propose a model in which V. cholerae multiply in the small 
intestine to produce a fluid niche that is dominated by V. cholerae. If lytic 
phage are present, viable counts of V. cholerae drop, stools become DF(-), other 
microorganisms bloom, and cholera transmission is reduced.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0706352104
PMCID: PMC2141913
PMID: 18024592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.