---
reference_id: "PMID:21569238"
title: Clinical and animal research findings in pycnodysostosis and gene mutations of cathepsin K from 1996 to 2011.
authors:
- Xue Y
- Cai T
- Shi S
- Wang W
- Zhang Y
- Mao T
- Duan X
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-20
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and animal research findings in pycnodysostosis and gene mutations of cathepsin K from 1996 to 2011.
**Authors:** Xue Y, Cai T, Shi S, Wang W, Zhang Y, Mao T, Duan X
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-6-20](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-6-20)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2011 May 10;6:20. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-20.

Clinical and animal research findings in pycnodysostosis and gene mutations of 
cathepsin K from 1996 to 2011.

Xue Y(1), Cai T, Shi S, Wang W, Zhang Y, Mao T, Duan X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Stomatology, Fourth 
Military Medical University, 145 West Changle Road, Xi'an 710032, PR China.

Cathepsin K (CTSK) is a member of the papain-like cysteine protease family. 
Mutations in the CTSK gene cause a rare autosomal recessive bone disorder called 
pycnodysostosis (OMIM 265800). In order to follow the advances in the research 
about CTSK and pycnodysostosis, we performed a literature retrospective study of 
159 pycnodysostosis patients reported since 1996 and focused on the genetic 
characteristics of CTSK mutations and/or the clinical phenotypes of 
pycnodysostosis. Thirty three different CTSK mutations have been found in 59 
unrelated pycnodysostosis families. Of the 59 families, 37.29% are from Europe 
and 30.51% are from Asia. A total of 69.70% of the mutations were identified in 
the mature domain of CTSK, 24.24% in the proregion, and 6.06% in the preregion. 
The hot mutation spots are found in exons 6 and 7. CTSK mutations result in 
total loss or inactivity of the CTSK protein, which causes abnormal degradation 
of bone matrix proteins such as type I collagen. Skeletal abnormalities, 
including short stature, an increase in bone density with pathologic fractures, 
and open fontanels and sutures, are the typical phenotypes of pycnodysostosis. 
Research on Ctsk(-/-) mouse models was also reviewed here to elucidate the 
biological function of Ctsk and the mechanism of pycnodysostosis. New evidence 
suggests that Ctsk plays an important role in the immune system and may serve as 
a valid therapeutic target in the future treatment of pycnodysostosis.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-20
PMCID: PMC3113317
PMID: 21569238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]