---
reference_id: "PMID:3146367"
title: Clinical picture of primary HIV infection presenting as a glandular-fever-like illness.
authors:
- Gaines H
- von Sydow M
- Pehrson PO
- Lundbegh P
journal: BMJ
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1136/bmj.297.6660.1363
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical picture of primary HIV infection presenting as a glandular-fever-like illness.
**Authors:** Gaines H, von Sydow M, Pehrson PO, Lundbegh P
**Journal:** BMJ (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmj.297.6660.1363](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.297.6660.1363)

## Content

1. BMJ. 1988 Nov 26;297(6660):1363-8. doi: 10.1136/bmj.297.6660.1363.

Clinical picture of primary HIV infection presenting as a glandular-fever-like 
illness.

Gaines H(1), von Sydow M, Pehrson PO, Lundbegh P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Roslagstull Hospital, Karolinska Institute, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

The clinical symptoms and signs were assessed in 20 consecutive patients 
developing infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). All were male 
homosexuals and all presented with a glandular-fever-like illness. Changes in 
laboratory values were compared with findings in 40 HIV negative male homosexual 
controls. In the 10 patients for whom date of exposure to the virus could be 
established the incubation period was 11-28 days (median 14). One or two days 
after the sudden onset of fever patients developed sore throat, lymphadenopathy, 
rash, lethargy, coated tongue, tonsillar hypertrophy, dry cough, headache, 
myalgia, conjunctivitis, vomiting, night sweats, nausea, diarrhoea, and palatal 
enanthema. Twelve patients had painful, shallow ulcers in the mouth or on the 
genitals or anus or as manifested by oesophageal symptoms; these ulcers may have 
been the site of entry of the virus. During the first week after the onset of 
symptoms mild leucopenia, thrombocytopenia, and increased numbers of banded 
neutrophils were detected (p less than 0.0005). The mean duration of acute 
illness was 12.7 days (range 5-44). All patients remained healthy during a mean 
follow up period of 2.5 years. Heightened awareness of the typical clinical 
picture in patients developing primary HIV infection will alert the physician at 
an early stage and so aid prompt diagnosis and help contain the epidemic spread 
of AIDS.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.297.6660.1363
PMCID: PMC1835053
PMID: 3146367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]