---
reference_id: "PMID:24242359"
title: Epigenetics in immune-mediated pulmonary diseases.
authors:
- Liu Y
- Li H
- Xiao T
- Lu Q
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-013-8398-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Autoimmunity
- Environment
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Humans
- Immunity
- "Lung Diseases/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetics in immune-mediated pulmonary diseases.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Li H, Xiao T, Lu Q
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-013-8398-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-013-8398-3)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2013 Dec;45(3):314-30. doi:
10.1007/s12016-013-8398-3.

Epigenetics in immune-mediated pulmonary diseases.

Liu Y(1), Li H, Xiao T, Lu Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, People's Republic of China.

Immune-mediated pulmonary diseases are a group of diseases that resulted from
immune imbalance initiated by allergens or of unknown causes. Inflammatory
responses without restrictions cause tissue damage and remodeling, which leads
to airway hyperactivity, destruction of alveolar architecture, and a resultant
loss of lung function. Epigenetic mechanisms have been demonstrated to be
involved in inflammation, autoimmunity, and cancer. Recent studies have
identified that epigenetic changes also regulate molecular pathways in
immune-mediated lung diseases. Aberrant DNA methylation status, dysregulation of
histone modifications, as well as altered microRNAs expression could change
transcription activity of genes involved in the development of immune-mediated
pulmonary diseases, which contributes to skewed differentiation of T cells and
proliferation and activation of myofibroblasts, leading to overproduction of
inflammatory cytokines and excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix,
respectively. Aside from this, epigenetics also explains how environmental
exposure influence on gene transcription without genetic changes. It acts as a
mediator of the interaction between environmental factors and genetic factors.
Identification of the abnormal epigenetic marks in diseases provides novel
biomarkers for prediction and diagnosis and affords novel therapeutic targets
for those difficult clinical problems, such as steroid-resistance and rapidly
progressing fibrosis. In this review, we summarized the latest experimental and
translational epigenetic studies in immune-mediated pulmonary diseases,
including asthma, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, and
silicosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-013-8398-3
PMID: 24242359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
