---
reference_id: "PMID:38519595"
title: An overload of missense variants in the OTOG gene may drive a higher prevalence of familial Meniere disease in the European population.
authors:
- Parra-Perez AM
- Gallego-Martinez A
- Lopez-Escamez JA
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-024-02643-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An overload of missense variants in the OTOG gene may drive a higher prevalence of familial Meniere disease in the European population.
**Authors:** Parra-Perez AM, Gallego-Martinez A, Lopez-Escamez JA
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-024-02643-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-024-02643-8)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2024 Mar;143(3):423-435. doi: 10.1007/s00439-024-02643-8. Epub 2024
 Mar 22.

An overload of missense variants in the OTOG gene may drive a higher prevalence 
of familial Meniere disease in the European population.

Parra-Perez AM(1)(2)(3), Gallego-Martinez A(1)(2)(3), Lopez-Escamez JA(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Otolaryngology, Department of Surgery, Instituto de Investigación 
Biosanitaria, Ibs.GRANADA, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain.
(2)Sensorineural Pathology Programme, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red 
en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health, School of Medical Sciences, Meniere's Disease 
Neuroscience Research Program, The Kolling Institute, The University of Sydney, 
10 Westbourne St, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Division of Otolaryngology, Department of Surgery, Instituto de Investigación 
Biosanitaria, Ibs.GRANADA, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain. 
jose.lopezescamez@sydney.edu.au.
(5)Sensorineural Pathology Programme, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red 
en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),, Madrid, Spain. 
jose.lopezescamez@sydney.edu.au.
(6)Faculty of Medicine and Health, School of Medical Sciences, Meniere's Disease 
Neuroscience Research Program, The Kolling Institute, The University of Sydney, 
10 Westbourne St, Sydney, NSW, Australia. jose.lopezescamez@sydney.edu.au.

Meniere disease is a complex inner ear disorder with significant familial 
aggregation. A differential prevalence of familial MD (FMD) has been reported, 
being 9-10% in Europeans compared to 6% in East Asians. A broad genetic 
heterogeneity in FMD has been described, OTOG being the most common mutated 
gene, with a compound heterozygous recessive inheritance. We hypothesize that an 
OTOG-related founder effect may explain the higher prevalence of FMD in the 
European population. Therefore, the present study aimed to compare the allele 
frequency (AF) and distribution of OTOG rare variants across different 
populations. For this purpose, the coding regions with high constraint (low 
density of rare variants) were retrieved in the OTOG coding sequence in 
Non-Finnish European (NFE).. Missense variants (AF < 0.01) were selected from a 
100 FMD patient cohort, and their population AF was annotated using gnomAD v2.1. 
A linkage analysis was performed, and odds ratios were calculated to compare AF 
between NFE and other populations. Thirteen rare missense variants were observed 
in 13 FMD patients, with 2 variants (rs61978648 and rs61736002) shared by 5 
individuals and another variant (rs117315845) shared by two individuals. The 
results confirm the observed enrichment of OTOG rare missense variants in FMD. 
Furthermore, eight variants were enriched in the NFE population, and six of them 
were in constrained regions. Structural modeling predicts five missense variants 
that could alter the otogelin stability. We conclude that several variants 
reported in FMD are in constraint regions, and they may have a founder effect 
and explain the burden of FMD in the European population.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-024-02643-8
PMCID: PMC11043142
PMID: 38519595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.