---
reference_id: "PMID:37930434"
title: Activation of the integrated stress response rewires cardiac metabolism in Barth syndrome.
authors:
- Kutschka I
- Bertero E
- Wasmus C
- Xiao K
- Yang L
- Chen X
- Oshima Y
- Fischer M
- Erk M
- Arslan B
- Alhasan L
- Grosser D
- Ermer KJ
- Nickel A
- Kohlhaas M
- Eberl H
- Rebs S
- Streckfuss-Bömeke K
- Schmitz W
- Rehling P
- Thum T
- Higuchi T
- Rabinowitz J
- Maack C
- Dudek J
journal: Basic Res Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00395-023-01017-x
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Barth Syndrome/genetics
- Cystine
- Antioxidants
- Fatty Acids
- Glutamates
- Glutathione
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation of the integrated stress response rewires cardiac metabolism in Barth syndrome.
**Authors:** Kutschka I, Bertero E, Wasmus C, Xiao K, Yang L, Chen X, Oshima Y, Fischer M, Erk M, Arslan B, Alhasan L, Grosser D, Ermer KJ, Nickel A, Kohlhaas M, Eberl H, Rebs S, Streckfuss-Bömeke K, Schmitz W, Rehling P, Thum T, Higuchi T, Rabinowitz J, Maack C, Dudek J
**Journal:** Basic Res Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00395-023-01017-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00395-023-01017-x)

## Content

1. Basic Res Cardiol. 2023 Nov 6;118(1):47. doi: 10.1007/s00395-023-01017-x.

Activation of the integrated stress response rewires cardiac metabolism in Barth
syndrome.

Kutschka I(1), Bertero E(1)(2)(3), Wasmus C(1), Xiao K(4)(5), Yang L(6), Chen
X(7), Oshima Y(7), Fischer M(8), Erk M(1), Arslan B(1), Alhasan L(1), Grosser
D(1), Ermer KJ(1), Nickel A(1), Kohlhaas M(1), Eberl H(9), Rebs S(9),
Streckfuss-Bömeke K(9)(10), Schmitz W(11), Rehling P(12)(13), Thum T(4)(5)(14),
Higuchi T(7), Rabinowitz J(15), Maack C(1)(16), Dudek J(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Research, Comprehensive Heart Failure Center
(CHFC), University Clinic Würzburg, Am Schwarzenberg 15, Haus A15, 97078,
Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Cardiovascular Disease Unit, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino - Italian
IRCCS Cardiology Network, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Institute of Molecular and Translational Therapeutic Strategies, Hannover
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine (ITEM),
Nikolai-Fuchs-Straße 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany.
(6)Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320
Yueyang Rd, Shanghai, 200031, China.
(7)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Clinic Würzburg, Oberdürrbacher
Strasse 6, 97080, Würzburg, Germany.
(8)Division of Pediatric Cardiology and Intensive Care, University Hospital LMU
Munich, Marchioninistr. 15, 81377, Munich, Germany.
(9)Department for Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Würzburg,
Versbacher Strasse 9, 97078, Würzburg, Germany.
(10)Clinic for Cardiology and Pneumology, Georg-August University Göttingen and
DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site, Göttingen,
Germany.
(11)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Würzburg, Am
Hubland, 97074, Würzburg, Germany.
(12)University Göttingen, Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology,
Humboldtallee 23, 37072, Göttingen, Germany.
(13)Cluster of Excellence "Multiscale Bioimaging: From Molecular Machines to
Networks of Excitable Cells" (MBExC), University of Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany.
(14)Rebirth Center for Translational Regenerative Medicine, Hannover Medical
School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany.
(15)Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, 08544, USA.
(16)Medical Clinic I, University Clinic Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(17)Department of Translational Research, Comprehensive Heart Failure Center
(CHFC), University Clinic Würzburg, Am Schwarzenberg 15, Haus A15, 97078,
Würzburg, Germany. Dudek_J@ukw.de.

Barth Syndrome (BTHS) is an inherited cardiomyopathy caused by defects in the
mitochondrial transacylase TAFAZZIN (Taz), required for the synthesis of the
phospholipid cardiolipin. BTHS is characterized by heart failure, increased
propensity for arrhythmias and a blunted inotropic reserve. Defects in
Ca2+-induced Krebs cycle activation contribute to these functional defects, but
despite oxidation of pyridine nucleotides, no oxidative stress developed in the
heart. Here, we investigated how retrograde signaling pathways orchestrate
metabolic rewiring to compensate for mitochondrial defects. In mice with an
inducible knockdown (KD) of TAFAZZIN, and in induced pluripotent stem
cell-derived cardiac myocytes, mitochondrial uptake and oxidation of fatty acids
was strongly decreased, while glucose uptake was increased. Unbiased
transcriptomic analyses revealed that the activation of the eIF2α/ATF4 axis of
the integrated stress response upregulates one-carbon metabolism, which diverts
glycolytic intermediates towards the biosynthesis of serine and fuels the
biosynthesis of glutathione. In addition, strong upregulation of the
glutamate/cystine antiporter xCT increases cardiac cystine import required for
glutathione synthesis. Increased glutamate uptake facilitates anaplerotic
replenishment of the Krebs cycle, sustaining energy production and antioxidative
pathways. These data indicate that ATF4-driven rewiring of metabolism
compensates for defects in mitochondrial uptake of fatty acids to sustain energy
production and antioxidation.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00395-023-01017-x
PMCID: PMC10628049
PMID: 37930434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CM received speaker and consultancy honoraria
from Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca and Novo Nordisk. TT is founder and
shareholder of Cardior Pharmaceuticals (outside of this study). TT filed and
licensed patents about the use of noncoding RNAs (outside of the paper).
