---
reference_id: "PMID:38486086"
title: "cyp51A mutations, protein modeling, and efflux pump gene expression reveals multifactorial complexity towards understanding Aspergillus section Nigri azole resistance mechanism."
authors:
- Sen P
- Vijay M
- Kamboj H
- Gupta L
- Shankar J
- Vijayaraghavan P
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-55237-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# cyp51A mutations, protein modeling, and efflux pump gene expression reveals multifactorial complexity towards understanding Aspergillus section Nigri azole resistance mechanism.
**Authors:** Sen P, Vijay M, Kamboj H, Gupta L, Shankar J, Vijayaraghavan P
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-55237-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-55237-9)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Mar 14;14(1):6156. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-55237-9.

cyp51A mutations, protein modeling, and efflux pump gene expression reveals 
multifactorial complexity towards understanding Aspergillus section Nigri azole 
resistance mechanism.

Sen P(1), Vijay M(1), Kamboj H(1), Gupta L(1), Shankar J(2), Vijayaraghavan 
P(3).

Author information:
(1)Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Sector-125, 
Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Jaypee University of 
Information Technology, Solan, India.
(3)Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Sector-125, 
Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India. vrpooja@amity.edu.

Black Aspergillus species are the most common etiological agents of otomycosis, 
and pulmonary aspergillosis. However, limited data is available on their 
antifungal susceptibility profiles and associated resistance mechanisms. Here, 
we determined the azole susceptibility profiles of black Aspergillus species 
isolated from the Indian environment and explored the potential resistance 
mechanisms through cyp51A gene sequencing, protein homology modeling, and 
expression analysis of selected genes cyp51A, cyp51B, mdr1, and mfs based on 
their role in imparting resistance against antifungal drugs. In this study, we 
have isolated a total of 161 black aspergilli isolates from 174 agricultural 
soil samples. Isolates had variable resistance towards medical azoles; 
approximately 11.80%, 3.10%, and 1.24% of isolates were resistant to 
itraconazole (ITC), posaconazole (POS), and voriconazole (VRC), respectively. 
Further, cyp51A sequence analysis showed that non-synonymous mutations were 
present in 20 azole-resistant Aspergillus section Nigri and 10 susceptible 
isolates. However, Cyp51A homology modeling indicated insignificant protein 
structural variations because of these mutations. Most of the isolates showed 
the overexpression of mdr1, and mfs genes. Hence, the study concluded that 
azole-resistance in section Nigri cannot be attributed exclusively to the cyp51A 
gene mutation or its overexpression. However, overexpression of mdr1 and mfs 
genes may have a potential role in drug resistance.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-55237-9
PMCID: PMC10940716
PMID: 38486086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.