---
reference_id: "PMID:32866519"
title: Hepatitis B virus biology and life cycle.
authors:
- Tsukuda S
- Watashi K
journal: Antiviral Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2020.104925
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B virus biology and life cycle.
**Authors:** Tsukuda S, Watashi K
**Journal:** Antiviral Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.antiviral.2020.104925](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2020.104925)

## Content

1. Antiviral Res. 2020 Oct;182:104925. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2020.104925. Epub
 2020 Aug 28.

Hepatitis B virus biology and life cycle.

Tsukuda S(1), Watashi K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan; Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan; Department of Applied Biological Science, Tokyo University of Science, 
Noda, Japan; Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan; MIRAI, JST, Saitama, Japan. Electronic address: 
kwatashi@nih.go.jp.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) specifically infects hepatocytes and causes severe liver 
diseases. The HBV life cycle is unique in that the genomic DNA (relaxed-circular 
partially double-stranded DNA: rcDNA) is converted to a molecular template DNA 
(covalently closed circular DNA: cccDNA) to amplify a viral RNA intermediate, 
which is then reverse-transcribed back to viral DNA. The highly stable 
characteristics of cccDNA result in chronic infection and a poor rate of cure. 
This complex life cycle of HBV offers a variety of targets to develop antiviral 
agents. We provide here an update on the current knowledge of HBV biology and 
its life cycle, which may help to identify new antiviral targets.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2020.104925
PMID: 32866519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]