---
reference_id: "PMID:18329345"
title: "Incidence of DNA repair deficiency disorders in western Europe: Xeroderma pigmentosum, Cockayne syndrome and trichothiodystrophy."
authors:
- Kleijer WJ
- Laugel V
- Berneburg M
- Nardo T
- Fawcett H
- Gratchev A
- Jaspers NG
- Sarasin A
- Stefanini M
- Lehmann AR
journal: DNA Repair (Amst)
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.01.014
keywords:
- Cockayne Syndrome/epidemiology
- Emigrants and Immigrants
- Europe/epidemiology
- Humans
- Incidence
- Trichothiodystrophy Syndromes/epidemiology
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence of DNA repair deficiency disorders in western Europe: Xeroderma pigmentosum, Cockayne syndrome and trichothiodystrophy.
**Authors:** Kleijer WJ, Laugel V, Berneburg M, Nardo T, Fawcett H, Gratchev A, Jaspers NG, Sarasin A, Stefanini M, Lehmann AR
**Journal:** DNA Repair (Amst) (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.01.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.01.014)

## Content

1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2008 May 3;7(5):744-50. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.01.014. 
Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Incidence of DNA repair deficiency disorders in western Europe: Xeroderma 
pigmentosum, Cockayne syndrome and trichothiodystrophy.

Kleijer WJ(1), Laugel V, Berneburg M, Nardo T, Fawcett H, Gratchev A, Jaspers 
NG, Sarasin A, Stefanini M, Lehmann AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Laboratory diagnosis for DNA repair diseases has been performed in western 
Europe from the early seventies for xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and from the 
mid-eighties for Cockayne syndrome (CS) and trichothiodystrophy (TTD). The 
combined data from the DNA repair diagnostic centres in France, (West) Germany, 
Italy, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom have been investigated for three 
groups of diseases: XP (including XP-variant), CS (including XP/CS complex) and 
TTD. Incidences in western Europe were for the first time established at 2.3 per 
million livebirths for XP, 2.7 per million for CS and 1.2 per million for TTD. 
As immigrant populations were disproportionately represented in the patients' 
groups, incidences were also established for the autochthonic western European 
population at: 0.9 per million for XP, 1.8 per million for CS and 1.1 per 
million for TTD. Perhaps contrary to general conceptions, compared to XP the 
incidence of CS appears to be somewhat higher and the incidence of TTD to be 
quite similar in the native West-European population.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.01.014
PMID: 18329345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]