---
reference_id: "PMID:18820360"
title: Incidence of Haemophilus influenzae type b meningitis in India.
authors:
- Minz S
- Balraj V
- Lalitha MK
- Murali N
- Cherian T
- Manoharan G
- Kadirvan S
- Joseph A
- Steinhoff MC
journal: Indian J Med Res
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence of Haemophilus influenzae type b meningitis in India.
**Authors:** Minz S, Balraj V, Lalitha MK, Murali N, Cherian T, Manoharan G, Kadirvan S, Joseph A, Steinhoff MC
**Journal:** Indian J Med Res (2008)

## Content

1. Indian J Med Res. 2008 Jul;128(1):57-64.

Incidence of Haemophilus influenzae type b meningitis in India.

Minz S(1), Balraj V, Lalitha MK, Murali N, Cherian T, Manoharan G, Kadirvan S, 
Joseph A, Steinhoff MC.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Community Health, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.

Comment in
    Indian J Med Res. 2009 Feb;129(2):205; author reply 206-7.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Vaccine policy depends on locally relevant disease 
burden estimates. The incidence of Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) disease 
is not well characterized in the South Asian region, home to 30 per cent of the 
world's children. There are limited data from prospective population incidence 
studies of Hib in Asia, and no data available from India. We therefore carried 
out this study to assess the burden of Hib meningitis in India.
METHODS: A prospective surveillance study was carried out during 1997 and 1999 
in hospitals for cases of Hib meningitis from 5 administrative areas of an 
Indian district (Vellore, Tamil Nadu) with 56,153 children under 5 yr of age, 
over a 24 month period
RESULTS: Ninety seven cases of possible meningitis (> 10 WBC/microl in CSF) were 
reported, an annual incidence of 86 per 100,000 (95%CI 69 to 109) in 0-4 yr old 
children, and 357 per 100,000 in 0-11 month infants. Eighteen had proven 
bacterial meningitis, an annual incidence of 15.9 per 100,000. Eight CSF had Hib 
by culture or antigen testing, an annual incidence of 7.1 per 100,000 (95%CI 3.1 
to 14.0) in children 0-59 months. In infants 0-11 months of age, the incidence 
of Hib meningitis was 32 per 100,000 (95%CI 16 to 67) and in the 0-23 month 
group it was 19 (95%CI 8 to 37).
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: Our data are the first minimal estimate of the 
incidence of Hib meningitis for Indian children. The observed incidence data are 
similar to European reports before Hib vaccine use, suggest substantial disease 
before 24 months of age, and provide data useful for policy regarding Hib 
immunization.

PMID: 18820360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]