---
reference_id: "PMID:10932188"
title: "Mutations of PVRL1, encoding a cell-cell adhesion molecule/herpesvirus receptor, in cleft lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia."
authors:
- Suzuki K
- Hu D
- Bustos T
- Zlotogora J
- Richieri-Costa A
- Helms JA
- Spritz RA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/78119
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Cell Adhesion Molecules/genetics
- "Cleft Lip/genetics, pathology"
- "Cleft Palate/genetics, pathology"
- "DNA/chemistry, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics, pathology"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/metabolism"
- Frameshift Mutation
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Genes/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C3H"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Nectins
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of PVRL1, encoding a cell-cell adhesion molecule/herpesvirus receptor, in cleft lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Suzuki K, Hu D, Bustos T, Zlotogora J, Richieri-Costa A, Helms JA, Spritz RA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/78119](https://doi.org/10.1038/78119)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Aug;25(4):427-30. doi: 10.1038/78119.

Mutations of PVRL1, encoding a cell-cell adhesion molecule/herpesvirus receptor, 
in cleft lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia.

Suzuki K(1), Hu D, Bustos T, Zlotogora J, Richieri-Costa A, Helms JA, Spritz RA.

Author information:
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, University of Colorado Health Sciences 
Center, Denver, Colorado, USA.

Cleft lip, with or without cleft palate (CL/P), is one of the most common birth 
defects, occurring in 0.4 to 2.0 per 1,000 infants born alive. Approximately 70% 
of CL/P cases are non-syndromic (MIM 119530), but CL/P also occurs in many 
single-gene syndromes, each affecting a protein critical for orofacial 
development. Here we describe positional cloning of the gene responsible for an 
autosomal recessive CL/P-ectodermal dysplasia (ED) syndrome (CLPED1; previously 
ED4; ref. 2), which we identify as PVRL1, encoding nectin-1, an immunoglobulin 
(Ig)-related transmembrane cell-cell adhesion molecule that is part of the NAP 
cell adhesion system. Nectin-1 is also the principal cell surface receptor for 
alpha-herpesviruses (HveC; ref. 7), and the high frequency of CLPED1 on 
Margarita Island in the Caribbean Sea might result from resistance of 
heterozygotes to infection by these viruses.

DOI: 10.1038/78119
PMID: 10932188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]