---
reference_id: "PMID:29891070"
title: "Toxic-induced cerebellar syndrome: from the fetal period to the elderly."
authors:
- Manto M
- Perrotta G
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64189-2.00022-6
keywords:
- Anticonvulsants/adverse effects
- Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects
- Cerebellar Diseases/chemically induced
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Hazardous Substances/toxicity
- Humans
- Neurotoxicity Syndromes/complications
- Neurotoxins/toxicity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toxic-induced cerebellar syndrome: from the fetal period to the elderly.
**Authors:** Manto M, Perrotta G
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-64189-2.00022-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-64189-2.00022-6)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2018;155:333-352. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64189-2.00022-6.

Toxic-induced cerebellar syndrome: from the fetal period to the elderly.

Manto M(1), Perrotta G(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, CHU-Charleroi, Charleroi, Belgium; Neuroscience Service, 
Université de Mons, Mons, Belgium. Electronic address: mmanto@ulb.ac.be.
(2)Neurology Service, Hôpital Erasme, Brussels, Belgium.

The cerebellum is a brain region which is particularly susceptible to 
intoxication. Clinical presentation is heterogeneous. It is often considered 
that elderly patients and patients presenting pre-existing structural lesions of 
the posterior fossa are particularly at risk of developing a toxic-induced 
cerebellar syndrome (TOICS). However, TOICS may occur at any age, including in 
utero. Indeed, the cerebellum is highly vulnerable during neurodevelopment. 
Amongst cerebellotoxic agents, ethanol is the most commonly implicated. The 
vermis is a privileged target. Ethanol exerts toxic effects upon neurons, glia 
(especially astrocytes and oligodendrocytes), and myelin sheaths. Prenatal 
alcohol exposure causes teratogenic effects on the developing cerebellum, 
impeding neuronal migration and differentiation. In adults, cerebellar ataxia is 
a major feature of both acute and chronic ethanol intoxication. Wernicke 
encephalopathy is a medical emergency characterized by a triad of 
ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and impaired mental status. It requires the immediate 
administration of high doses of thiamine by the intravenous route. The following 
drugs may induce a permanent cerebellar syndrome: phenytoin, lithium salts, 
antineoplastics, and heroin. In addition to ethanol and drugs, environmental 
agents are also a source of TOICS. In particular, the cerebellum is susceptible 
to metal intoxication. The recently described deposits of gadolinium in 
cerebellar nuclei in patients who had received multiple intravenous 
administrations are a matter of concern on a worldwide scale but we still lack 
the demonstration of clinically relevant effects upon motor, oculomotor, or 
cognitive function. Because cerebellar symptoms may be subtle or immersed in a 
complex encephalopathy with combined involvement of the peripheral nervous 
system, the diagnosis of TOICS is often overlooked. The life-threatening risk of 
edema of the posterior fossa with compression of the brainstem should be kept in 
mind, including in cases of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome, and 
requires posterior fossa decompression when acute hydrocephalus occurs.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64189-2.00022-6
PMID: 29891070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]