---
reference_id: "PMID:37782551"
title: "Kinase fusion positive intra-osseous spindle cell tumors: A series of eight cases with review of the literature."
authors:
- Suurmeijer AJH
- Xu B
- Torrence D
- Dickson BC
- Antonescu CR
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/gcc.23205
keywords:
- Child
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- Neurofibrosarcoma
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Soft Tissue Neoplasms/genetics
- Fibrosarcoma/genetics
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Bone Neoplasms/genetics
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Myxoma
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- "Receptor, trkA/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kinase fusion positive intra-osseous spindle cell tumors: A series of eight cases with review of the literature.
**Authors:** Suurmeijer AJH, Xu B, Torrence D, Dickson BC, Antonescu CR
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.23205](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.23205)

## Content

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2024 Jan;63(1):e23205. doi: 10.1002/gcc.23205. Epub
2023 Oct 2.

Kinase fusion positive intra-osseous spindle cell tumors: A series of eight
cases with review of the literature.

Suurmeijer AJH(1), Xu B(2), Torrence D(3), Dickson BC(4), Antonescu CR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Northwell Health (Long Island Jewish Medical
Center), New Hyde Park, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto,
Canada.

Mesenchymal spindle cell tumors with kinase fusions, often presenting in
superficial or deep soft tissue locations, may rarely occur in bone. Herein, we
describe the clinicopathologic and molecular data of eight bone tumors
characterized by various kinase fusions from our files and incorporate the
findings with the previously reported seven cases, mainly as single case
reports. In the current series all but one of the patients were young children
or teenagers, with an age range from newborn to 59 years (mean 19 years). Most
tumors (n = 5) presented in the head and neck area (skull base, mastoid,
maxilla, and mandible), and remaining three in the tibia, pelvic bone, and chest
wall. The fusions included NTRK1 (n = 3), RET (n = 2), NTRK3 (n = 2), and BRAF
(n = 1). In the combined series (n = 15), most tumors (73%) occurred in children
and young adults (<30 years) and showed a predilection for jaw and skull bones
(40%), followed by long and small tubular bones (33%). The fusions spanned a
large spectrum of kinase genes, including in descending order NTRK3 (n = 6),
NTRK1 (n = 4), RET (n = 2), BRAF (n = 2), and RAF1 (n = 1). All fusions
confirmed by targeted RNA sequencing were in-frame and retained the kinase
domain within the fusion oncoprotein. Similar to the soft tissue counterparts,
most NTRK3-positive bone tumors in this series showed high-grade morphology
(5/6), whereas the majority of NTRK1 tumors were low-grade (3/4). Notably, all
four tumors presenting in the elderly were high-grade spindle cell sarcomas,
with adult fibrosarcoma (FS)-like, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
(MPNST)-like and MPNST phenotypes. Overall, 10 tumors had high-grade morphology,
ranging from infantile and adult-types FS, MPNST-like, and MPNST, whereas five
showed benign/low-grade histology (MPNST-like and myxoma-like).
Immunohistochemically (IHC), S100 and CD34 positivity was noted in 57% and 50%,
respectively, while co-expression of S100 and CD34 in 43% of cases. One-third of
tumors (4 high grade and the myxoma-like) were negative for both S100 and CD34.
IHC for Pan-TRK was positive in all eight NTRK-fusion positive tumors tested and
negative in two tumors with other kinase fusions. Clinical follow-up was too
limited to allow general conclusions.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.23205
PMCID: PMC11250992
PMID: 37782551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]