---
reference_id: "PMID:32733278"
title: Mitofusin 2 Dysfunction and Disease in Mice and Men.
authors:
- Dorn GW 2nd
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00782
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitofusin 2 Dysfunction and Disease in Mice and Men.
**Authors:** Dorn GW 2nd
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2020.00782](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2020.00782)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2020 Jul 9;11:782. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00782. eCollection 
2020.

Mitofusin 2 Dysfunction and Disease in Mice and Men.

Dorn GW 2nd(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Pharmacogenomics, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.

A causal relationship between Mitofusin (MFN) 2 gene mutations and the 
hereditary axonal neuropathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A (CMT2A) was 
described over 15 years ago. During the intervening period much has been learned 
about MFN2 functioning in mitochondrial fusion, calcium signaling, and quality 
control, and the consequences of these MFN2 activities on cell metabolism, 
fitness, and development. Nevertheless, the challenge of defining the central 
underlying mechanism(s) linking mitochondrial abnormalities to progressive 
dying-back of peripheral arm and leg nerves in CMT2A is largely unmet. Here, a 
different perspective of why, in humans, MFN2 dysfunction preferentially impacts 
peripheral nerves is provided based on recent insights into its role in 
determining whether individual mitochondria will be fusion-competent and 
retained within the cell, or are fusion-impaired, sequestered, and eliminated by 
mitophagy. Evidence for and against a regulatory role of mitofusins in 
mitochondrial transport is reviewed, nagging questions defined, and implications 
on mitochondrial fusion, quality control, and neuronal degeneration discussed. 
Finally, in the context of recently described mitofusin activating peptides and 
small molecules, an overview is provided of potential therapeutic applications 
for pharmacological enhancement of mitochondrial fusion and motility in CMT2A 
and other neurodegenerative conditions.

Copyright © 2020 Dorn.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00782
PMCID: PMC7363930
PMID: 32733278