---
reference_id: "PMID:20207296"
title: "[Epithelial tumours of the thymus]."
authors:
- Thomas PA
- Payan-Defais MJ
journal: Rev Pneumol Clin
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.pneumo.2009.12.004
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine/mortality, pathology, radiotherapy, surgery"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- "Myasthenia Gravis/pathology, surgery"
- Neoplasm Invasiveness/pathology
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Radiotherapy, Adjuvant"
- Survival Analysis
- "Thymoma/mortality, pathology, radiotherapy, surgery"
- Thymus Gland/pathology
- "Thymus Neoplasms/mortality, pathology, radiotherapy, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Epithelial tumours of the thymus].
**Authors:** Thomas PA, Payan-Defais MJ
**Journal:** Rev Pneumol Clin (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pneumo.2009.12.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneumo.2009.12.004)

## Content

1. Rev Pneumol Clin. 2010 Feb;66(1):41-51. doi: 10.1016/j.pneumo.2009.12.004.
Epub  2010 Feb 4.

[Epithelial tumours of the thymus].

[Article in French]

Thomas PA(1), Payan-Defais MJ.

Author information:
(1)Service de Chirurgie Thoracique, Hôpital Sainte-Marguerite, 270 Boulevard
Sainte-Marguerite, 13274 Marseille cedex 9, France. pathomas@ap-hm.fr

Epithelial tumours of the thymus include thymomas, thymic carcinomas and
neuro-endocrine tumours. Rare, they nevertheless represent 20% of all
mediastinal tumours and 50% of those located in the anterior mediastinum.
Thymomas, in particular, can be associated to auto-immune disorders, among which
predominates myasthenia gravis. Their clinical behaviour varies widely, from a
relative indolence to the potential of lymph node and/or systematic metastases.
However, even patients with an invasive disease may have a long clinical
history, explaining that a 10-year or 20-year survival from diagnosis does not
imply a definitive cure. In daily practice, both the clinical Masaoka's staging
system and the WHO histological classification condition the treatment
strategies and allow to anticipate the prognosis. The initial treatment, as well
as that of the recurrence, is based mainly on a complete resection.
Postoperative radiotherapy is systematically added to the treatment of invasive
tumours and/or to those with an aggressive histological subtype. Inoperable or
metastatic tumours require a cisplatine and anthracyclin-based chemotherapy,
followed by radical surgery and/or radiotherapy.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneumo.2009.12.004
PMID: 20207296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
