---
reference_id: "PMID:9108864"
title: Growth in diastrophic dysplasia.
authors:
- Mäkitie O
- Kaitila I
journal: J Pediatr
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(97)70250-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Birth Weight
- Body Height
- Body Weight
- Cephalometry
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Growth
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Osteochondrodysplasias/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth in diastrophic dysplasia.
**Authors:** Mäkitie O, Kaitila I
**Journal:** J Pediatr (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(97)70250-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(97)70250-6)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 1997 Apr;130(4):641-6. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(97)70250-6.

Growth in diastrophic dysplasia.

Mäkitie O(1), Kaitila I.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital, Helsinki University Hospital, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: To study the growth and its correlates in diastrophic dysplasia (DTD) 
and to construct standard growth curves for DTD.
METHODS: Growth data of 121 Finnish patients with DTD were collected. Percentile 
growth curves for height and relative weight were constructed by using 
interpolated values from individual curves. Pubertal growth, intrafamilial 
variability, and correlates of adult height were assessed.
RESULTS: The median adult height was 135.7 cm for the male and 129.0 cm for the 
female subjects. The growth failure was progressive partly because of absent or 
weak pubertal growth spurt. The severity of the growth failure varied greatly, 
even among siblings. The final height did not correlate with the midparental 
height but correlated well with the height at 1.0 and 5.0 years. The relative 
weight was normal in childhood but increased before puberty; 28% of the adults 
were overweight. Head circumference was normal.
CONCLUSIONS: DTD interferes profoundly with normal growth and results in 
progressive growth failure of varying severity. The growth charts should prove 
useful in following up an individual patient with DTD; they may be used to 
predict adult height and to evaluate growth-promoting therapies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(97)70250-6
PMID: 9108864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]