---
reference_id: "PMID:30765255"
title: "Respiratory dysfunction in myotonic dystrophy type 1: A systematic review."
authors:
- Hawkins AM
- Hawkins CL
- Abdul Razak K
- Khoo TK
- Tran K
- Jackson RV
journal: Neuromuscul Disord
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2018.12.002
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hypercapnia/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Myotonic Dystrophy/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Respiration Disorders/complications, physiopathology"
- Respiratory Muscles/physiopathology
- "Sleep Wake Disorders/genetics, physiopathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Respiratory dysfunction in myotonic dystrophy type 1: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Hawkins AM, Hawkins CL, Abdul Razak K, Khoo TK, Tran K, Jackson RV
**Journal:** Neuromuscul Disord (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nmd.2018.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nmd.2018.12.002)

## Content

1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2019 Mar;29(3):198-212. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2018.12.002.
Epub  2018 Dec 9.

Respiratory dysfunction in myotonic dystrophy type 1: A systematic review.

Hawkins AM(1), Hawkins CL(2), Abdul Razak K(3), Khoo TK(4), Tran K(5), Jackson
RV(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia;
Department of Medicine, Logan Hospital, Meadowbrook, Queensland, Australia.
Electronic address: a.hawkins@griffith.edu.au.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland,
Australia.
(3)School of Medicine, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia;
Department of Medicine, Logan Hospital, Meadowbrook, Queensland, Australia.
(4)School of Medicine, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia;
School of Medicine, University of Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.
(5)School of Medicine, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia;
School of Medicine, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland, Australia;
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Logan Hospital, Meadowbrook, Queensland,
Australia.

Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is one of the most common muscular dystrophies
in adults. This review summarises the current literature regarding the natural
history of respiratory dysfunction in DM1, the role of central respiratory drive
and peripheral respiratory muscle involvement and its significance in
respiratory function, and investigates the relationship between genetics (CTG
repeat length) and respiratory dysfunction. The review included all articles
that reported spirometry on 10 or more myotonic dystrophy patients. The final
review included 55 articles between 1964 and 2017. The major conclusions of this
review were (1) confirmation of the current consensus that respiratory
dysfunction, predominantly a restrictive ventilatory pattern, is common in
myotonic dystrophy and is associated with alveolar hypoventilation, chronic
hypercapnia, and sleep disturbance in the form of sleep apnoea and sleep related
disordered breathing; (2) contrary to commonly held belief, there is no
consensus in the literature regarding the relationship between CTG repeat length
and severity of respiratory dysfunction and a relationship has not been
established; (3) the natural history and time-course of respiratory functional
decline is very poorly understood in the current literature; (4) there is a
consensus that there is a significant involvement of central respiratory drive
in this alveolar hypoventilation however the current literature does not
identify the mechanism for this.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2018.12.002
PMID: 30765255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
