---
reference_id: "PMID:36635047"
title: Structure of SALL4 zinc finger domain reveals link between AT-rich DNA binding and Okihiro syndrome.
authors:
- Watson JA
- Pantier R
- Jayachandran U
- Chhatbar K
- Alexander-Howden B
- Kruusvee V
- Prendecki M
- Bird A
- Cook AG
journal: Life Sci Alliance
year: '2023'
doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201588
keywords:
- Humans
- "Duane Retraction Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Zinc Fingers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structure of SALL4 zinc finger domain reveals link between AT-rich DNA binding and Okihiro syndrome.
**Authors:** Watson JA, Pantier R, Jayachandran U, Chhatbar K, Alexander-Howden B, Kruusvee V, Prendecki M, Bird A, Cook AG
**Journal:** Life Sci Alliance (2023)
**DOI:** [10.26508/lsa.202201588](https://doi.org/10.26508/lsa.202201588)

## Content

1. Life Sci Alliance. 2023 Jan 12;6(3):e202201588. doi: 10.26508/lsa.202201588.
Print 2023 Mar.

Structure of SALL4 zinc finger domain reveals link between AT-rich DNA binding
and Okihiro syndrome.

Watson JA(1), Pantier R(1), Jayachandran U(1), Chhatbar K(1), Alexander-Howden
B(1), Kruusvee V(1), Prendecki M(1), Bird A(1), Cook AG(2).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, Max Born Crescent, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, Max Born Crescent, Edinburgh, UK
atlanta.cook@ed.ac.uk.

Spalt-like 4 (SALL4) maintains vertebrate embryonic stem cell identity and is
required for the development of multiple organs, including limbs. Mutations in
SALL4 are associated with Okihiro syndrome, and SALL4 is also a known target of
thalidomide. SALL4 protein has a distinct preference for AT-rich sequences,
recognised by a pair of zinc fingers at the C-terminus. However, unlike many
characterised zinc finger proteins, SALL4 shows flexible recognition with many
different combinations of AT-rich sequences being targeted. SALL4 interacts with
the NuRD corepressor complex which potentially mediates repression of AT-rich
genes. We present a crystal structure of SALL4 C-terminal zinc fingers with an
AT-rich DNA sequence, which shows that SALL4 uses small hydrophobic and polar
side chains to provide flexible recognition in the major groove. Missense
mutations reported in patients that lie within the C-terminal zinc fingers
reduced overall binding to DNA but not the preference for AT-rich sequences.
Furthermore, these mutations altered association of SALL4 with AT-rich genomic
sites, providing evidence that these mutations are likely pathogenic.

© 2023 Watson et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.202201588
PMCID: PMC9838217
PMID: 36635047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
