---
reference_id: "PMID:17335569"
title: Tumor necrosis factor alpha and adalimumab differentially regulate CD36 expression in human monocytes.
authors:
- Boyer JF
- Balard P
- Authier H
- Faucon B
- Bernad J
- Mazières B
- Davignon JL
- Cantagrel A
- Pipy B
- Constantin A
journal: Arthritis Res Ther
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/ar2133
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tumor necrosis factor alpha and adalimumab differentially regulate CD36 expression in human monocytes.
**Authors:** Boyer JF, Balard P, Authier H, Faucon B, Bernad J, Mazières B, Davignon JL, Cantagrel A, Pipy B, Constantin A
**Journal:** Arthritis Res Ther (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/ar2133](https://doi.org/10.1186/ar2133)

## Content

1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9(2):R22. doi: 10.1186/ar2133.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha and adalimumab differentially regulate CD36 
expression in human monocytes.

Boyer JF(1), Balard P, Authier H, Faucon B, Bernad J, Mazières B, Davignon JL, 
Cantagrel A, Pipy B, Constantin A.

Author information:
(1)EA2405, Université Paul Sabatier, IFR31, BP84225, 31432 Toulouse Cedex 4, 
France. keltiak@aol.com

In chronic inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, inflammation 
acts as an independent cardiovascular risk factor and the use of 
anti-inflammatory drugs, such as anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha 
(anti-TNFalpha), may decrease this risk. The phagocytosis of oxidized low 
density lipoproteins (LDLs) accumulated in the subendothelium by mononuclear 
cells influences atherosclerosis and depends on CD36 expression. We investigated 
the role of TNFalpha and adalimumab, a human anti-TNFalpha monoclonal antibody 
widely used in human pathology, in CD36 expression in human monocytes. Human 
monocytes were prepared by adherence from whole-blood buffy-coat fractions from 
healthy donors. CD36 expression was assessed by RT-PCR and flow cytometry, with 
various TNFalpha or adalimumab concentrations. Implication of peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)gamma in the regulation of CD36 expression 
was assessed using specific inhibitor or gel shift assays. The impact of redox 
signaling was investigated using quantification of reactive oxygen species, 
antioxidant and a NADPH oxidase inhibitor. The F(ab')2 fragment of adalimumab 
was isolated and its effect was analyzed. TNFalpha inhibits both CD36 membrane 
expression and mRNA expression. This inhibition involves a reduction in 
PPARgamma activation. In contrast, adalimumab increases both CD36 membrane 
expression and mRNA expression. This induction is independent of the Fc portion 
of adalimumab and involves redox signaling via NADPH oxidase activation. CD36 
expression on human monocytes is inhibited by TNFalpha and independently 
increased by adalimumab. These data highlight that pro-inflammatory cytokines 
and their specific neutralization influence the expression of cellular receptors 
implicated in atherosclerosis. Further studies are needed to investigate the 
clinical implications of these results in accelerated atherosclerosis observed 
in rheumatoid arthritis.

DOI: 10.1186/ar2133
PMCID: PMC1906797
PMID: 17335569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]