---
reference_id: "PMID:38479808"
title: "Machine learning-driven immunophenotypic stratification of mixed connective tissue disease, corroborating the clinical heterogeneity."
authors:
- Izuka S
- Komai T
- Itamiya T
- Ota M
- Nagafuchi Y
- Shoda H
- Matsuki K
- Yamamoto K
- Okamura T
- Fujio K
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keae158
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Machine learning-driven immunophenotypic stratification of mixed connective tissue disease, corroborating the clinical heterogeneity.
**Authors:** Izuka S, Komai T, Itamiya T, Ota M, Nagafuchi Y, Shoda H, Matsuki K, Yamamoto K, Okamura T, Fujio K
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keae158](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keae158)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2025 Mar 1;64(3):1409-1416. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keae158.

Machine learning-driven immunophenotypic stratification of mixed connective 
tissue disease, corroborating the clinical heterogeneity.

Izuka S(1), Komai T(1), Itamiya T(1)(2), Ota M(1)(2), Nagafuchi Y(1)(2), Shoda 
H(1), Matsuki K(3), Yamamoto K(4), Okamura T(1)(2), Fujio K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Functional Genomics and Immunological Diseases, Graduate School 
of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Research Division, Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Autoimmune Diseases, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical 
Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to stratify patients with MCTD, based 
on their immunophenotype.
METHODS: We analysed the immunophenotype and transcriptome of 24 immune cell 
subsets [from patients with MCTD, SLE, idiopathic inflammatory myopathy (IIM) 
and SSc] from our functional genome database, ImmuNexUT 
(https://www.immunexut.org/). MCTD patients were stratified by employing 
machine-learning models, including Random Forest, trained by immunophenotyping 
data from SLE, IIM and SSc patients. The transcriptomes were analysed with gene 
set variation analysis (GSVA), and the clinical features of the MCTD subgroups 
were compared.
RESULTS: This study included 215 patients, including 22 patients with MCTD. 
Machine-learning models, constructed to classify SLE, IIM and SSc patients, 
based on immunophenotyping, were applied to MCTD patients, resulting in 16 
patients being classified as having an SLEimmunophenotype and 6 as having a 
non-SLE immunophenotype. Among the MCTD patients, patients with the SLE 
immunophenotype had higher proportions of Th1 cells {2.85% [interquartile range 
(IQR) 1.54-3.91] vs 1.33% (IQR 0.99-1.74) P = 0.027} and plasmablasts [6.35% 
(IQR 4.17-17.49) vs 2.00% (IQR 1.20-2.80) P = 0.010]. Notably, the number of 
SLE-related symptoms was higher in patients with the SLE immunophenotype [2.0 
(IQR 1.0-2.0) vs 1.0 (IQR 1.0-1.0) P = 0.038]. Moreover, the GSVA scores of 
interferon-α and -γ responses were significantly higher in patients with the SLE 
immunophenotype in central memory CD8+ T cells, while hedgehog signalling was 
higher in patients with the non-SLE immunophenotype, in five-cell subsets.
CONCLUSION: This study describes the stratification of MCTD patients, based on 
immunophenotyping, suggesting the presence of distinct immunological processes 
behind the clinical subtypes of MCTD.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keae158
PMCID: PMC11879315
PMID: 38479808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]