---
reference_id: PMID:37151610
title: "Phytochemical profiling of Piper crocatum and its antifungal mechanism action as Lanosterol 14 alpha demethylase CYP51 inhibitor: a review."
authors:
- Siswina T
- Miranti Rustama M
- Sumiarsa D
- Kurnia D
journal: F1000Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.12688/f1000research.125645.3
keywords:
- Humans
- Antifungal Agents/pharmacology
- "Sterol 14-Demethylase/chemistry, metabolism"
- Lanosterol/chemistry
- Piper/metabolism
- "Fungal Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- Phytochemicals/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phytochemical profiling of Piper crocatum and its antifungal mechanism action as Lanosterol 14 alpha demethylase CYP51 inhibitor: a review.
**Authors:** Siswina T, Miranti Rustama M, Sumiarsa D, Kurnia D
**Journal:** F1000Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.12688/f1000research.125645.3](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.125645.3)

## Content

1. F1000Res. 2022 Sep 28;11:1115. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.125645.3.
eCollection  2022.

Phytochemical profiling of Piper crocatum and its antifungal mechanism action as 
Lanosterol 14 alpha demethylase CYP51 inhibitor: a review.

Siswina T(1)(2), Miranti Rustama M(3), Sumiarsa D(2), Kurnia D(2).

Author information:
(1)Midwifery, Poltekkes Kemenkes Pontianak, Pontianak, Kalimantan Barat, 78124, 
Indonesia.
(2)Chemistry, Padjadjaran University, Sumedang, Jawa Barat, 45363, Indonesia.
(3)Biology, Padjadjaran University, Sumedang, Jawa Barat, 45363, Indonesia.

Mycoses or fungal infections are a general health problem that often occurs in 
healthy and immunocompromised people in the community. The development of 
resistant strains in Fungi and the incidence of azole antibiotic resistance in 
the Asia Pacific which reached 83% become a critical problem nowadays. To 
control fungal infections, substances and extracts isolated from natural 
resources, especially in the form of plants as the main sources of drug 
molecules today, are needed. Especially from Piperaceae, which have long been 
used in India, China, and Korea to treat human ailments in traditional medicine. 
The purpose of this review is to describe the antifungal mechanism action from 
Piper crocatum and its phytochemical profiling against lanosterol 14a 
demethylase CYP51. The methods used to search databases from Google Scholar to 
find the appropriate databases using Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) Flow Diagram as a clinical information 
retrieval method. From 1.150.000 results searched by database, there is 73 final 
results article to review. The review shows that P. crocatum contains 
flavonoids, tannins, terpenes, saponins, polyphenols, eugenol, alkaloids, 
quinones, chavibetol acetate, glycosides, triterpenoids or steroids, 
hydroxychavikol, phenolics, glucosides, isoprenoids, and non-protein amino 
acids. Its antifungal mechanisms in fungal cells occur due to ergosterol, 
especially lanosterol 14a demethylase (CYP51) inhibition, which is one of the 
main target sites for antifungal activity because it functions to maintain the 
integrity and function of cell membranes in Candida. P. crocatum has an 
antifungal activity through its phytochemical profiling against fungal by 
inhibiting the lanosterol 14a demethylase, make damaging cell membranes, fungal 
growth inhibition, and fungal cell lysis.

Copyright: © 2023 Siswina T et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.125645.3
PMCID: PMC10157293
PMID: 37151610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.