---
reference_id: "PMID:34234691"
title: Cdan1 Is Essential for Primitive Erythropoiesis.
authors:
- Noy-Lotan S
- Dgany O
- Marcoux N
- Atkins A
- Kupfer GM
- Bosques L
- Gottschalk C
- Steinberg-Shemer O
- Motro B
- Tamary H
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.685242
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cdan1 Is Essential for Primitive Erythropoiesis.
**Authors:** Noy-Lotan S, Dgany O, Marcoux N, Atkins A, Kupfer GM, Bosques L, Gottschalk C, Steinberg-Shemer O, Motro B, Tamary H
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2021.685242](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2021.685242)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2021 Jun 21;12:685242. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.685242. 
eCollection 2021.

Cdan1 Is Essential for Primitive Erythropoiesis.

Noy-Lotan S(1)(2), Dgany O(1)(2), Marcoux N(1)(2), Atkins A(3), Kupfer GM(4), 
Bosques L(5), Gottschalk C(6), Steinberg-Shemer O(2)(7)(8), Motro B(9), Tamary 
H(1)(2)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pediatric Hematology Laboratory, Schneider Children's Medical 
Center of Israel, Petach Tikva, Israel.
(2)Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)The Institute for Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials, Bar-Ilan University, 
Ramt Gan, Israel.
(4)Department of Oncology and Pediatrics, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Georgetown University, Washington, DC, United States.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, Yale School of Management, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT, United States.
(6)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Immunology, and Rheumatology, University 
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(7)The Rina Zaizov Hematology-Oncology Division, Schneider Children's Medical 
Center of Israel, Petach Tikva, Israel.
(8)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(9)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, 
Ramat Gan, Israel.

Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I (CDA I) is an autosomal recessive 
disease characterized by moderate to severe macrocytic anemia and pathognomonic 
morphologic abnormalities of the erythroid precursors, including spongy 
heterochromatin. The disease is mainly caused by mutations in CDAN1 (encoding 
for Codanin-1). No patients with homozygous null type mutations have been 
described, and mouse null mutants die during early embryogenesis prior to the 
initiation of erythropoiesis. The cellular functions of Codanin-1 and the 
erythroid specificity of the phenotype remain elusive. To investigate the role 
of Codanin-1 in erythropoiesis, we crossed mice carrying the Cdan1 floxed allele 
(Cdan fl/fl ) with mice expressing Cre-recombinase under regulation of the 
erythropoietin receptor promoter (ErGFPcre). The resulting CdanΔEry transgenic 
embryos died at mid-gestation (E12.5-E13.5) from severe anemia, with very low 
numbers of circulating erythroblast. Transmission electron microscopy studies of 
primitive erythroblasts (E9.5) revealed the pathognomonic spongy 
heterochromatin. The morphology of CdanΔEry primitive erythroblasts demonstrated 
progressive development of dyserythropoiesis. Annexin V staining showed 
increases in both early and late-apoptotic erythroblasts compared to controls. 
Flow cytometry studies using the erythroid-specific cell-surface markers CD71 
and Ter119 demonstrated that CdanΔEry erythroid progenitors do not undergo the 
semi-synchronous maturation characteristic of primitive erythroblasts. Gene 
expression studies aimed to evaluate the effect of Cdan1 depletion on 
erythropoiesis revealed a delay of ζ to α globin switch compared to controls. We 
also found increased expression of Gata2, Pu.1, and Runx1, which are known to 
inhibit terminal erythroid differentiation. Consistent with this data, our 
zebrafish model showed increased gata2 expression upon cdan1 knockdown. In 
summary, we demonstrated for the first time that Cdan1 is required for primitive 
erythropoiesis, while providing two experimental models for studying the role of 
Codanin-1 in erythropoiesis and in the pathogenesis of CDA type I.

Copyright © 2021 Noy-Lotan, Dgany, Marcoux, Atkins, Kupfer, Bosques, Gottschalk, 
Steinberg-Shemer, Motro and Tamary.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.685242
PMCID: PMC8255688
PMID: 34234691

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.