---
reference_id: "PMID:34400805"
title: Rifamycin antibiotics and the mechanisms of their failure.
authors:
- Adams RA
- Leon G
- Miller NM
- Reyes SP
- Thantrong CH
- Thokkadam AM
- Lemma AS
- Sivaloganathan DM
- Wan X
- Brynildsen MP
journal: J Antibiot (Tokyo)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41429-021-00462-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rifamycin antibiotics and the mechanisms of their failure.
**Authors:** Adams RA, Leon G, Miller NM, Reyes SP, Thantrong CH, Thokkadam AM, Lemma AS, Sivaloganathan DM, Wan X, Brynildsen MP
**Journal:** J Antibiot (Tokyo) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41429-021-00462-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41429-021-00462-x)

## Content

1. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2021 Nov;74(11):786-798. doi: 10.1038/s41429-021-00462-x. 
Epub 2021 Aug 16.

Rifamycin antibiotics and the mechanisms of their failure.

Adams RA(#)(1), Leon G(#)(1), Miller NM(#)(1), Reyes SP(#)(1), Thantrong 
CH(#)(1), Thokkadam AM(#)(1), Lemma AS(1), Sivaloganathan DM(2), Wan X(1), 
Brynildsen MP(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ, USA.
(2)Program in Quantitative and Computational Biology, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ, USA. mbrynild@princeton.edu.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. 
mbrynild@princeton.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Rifamycins are a class of antibiotics that were first discovered in 1957 and are 
known for their use in treating tuberculosis (TB). Rifamycins exhibit 
bactericidal activity against many Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria by 
inhibiting RNA polymerase (RNAP); however, resistance is prevalent and the 
mechanisms range from primary target modification and antibiotic inactivation to 
cytoplasmic exclusion. Further, phenotypic resistance, in which only a 
subpopulation of bacteria grow in concentrations exceeding their minimum 
inhibitory concentration, and tolerance, which is characterized by reduced rates 
of bacterial cell death, have been identified as additional causes of rifamycin 
failure. Here we summarize current understanding and recent developments 
regarding this critical antibiotic class.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the Japan Antibiotics Research 
Association.

DOI: 10.1038/s41429-021-00462-x
PMID: 34400805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]