---
reference_id: "PMID:20038532"
title: H19 imprinting control region methylation requires an imprinted environment only in the male germ line.
authors:
- Gebert C
- Kunkel D
- Grinberg A
- Pfeifer K
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00575-09
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- CD3 Complex/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Artificial, Bacterial/genetics"
- CpG Islands
- DNA Methylation
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Female
- Fertilization
- Genomic Imprinting
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor II/genetics
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Oocytes
- Pregnancy
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- "RNA, Long Noncoding"
- "RNA, Untranslated/genetics"
- Spermatogenesis/genetics
- Spermatozoa/metabolism
- alpha-Fetoproteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# H19 imprinting control region methylation requires an imprinted environment only in the male germ line.
**Authors:** Gebert C, Kunkel D, Grinberg A, Pfeifer K
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00575-09](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00575-09)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar;30(5):1108-15. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00575-09. Epub 2009
Dec  28.

H19 imprinting control region methylation requires an imprinted environment only 
in the male germ line.

Gebert C(1), Kunkel D, Grinberg A, Pfeifer K.

Author information:
(1)Program of Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The 2.4-kb H19 imprinting control region (H19ICR) is required to establish 
parent-of-origin-specific epigenetic marks and expression patterns at the 
Igf2/H19 locus. H19ICR activity is regulated by DNA methylation. The ICR is 
methylated in sperm but not in oocytes, and this paternal chromosome-specific 
methylation is maintained throughout development. We recently showed that the 
H19ICR can work as an ICR even when inserted into the normally nonimprinted 
alpha fetoprotein locus. Paternal but not maternal copies of the ICR become 
methylated in somatic tissue. However, the ectopic ICR remains unmethylated in 
sperm. To extend these findings and investigate the mechanisms that lead to 
methylation of the H19ICR in the male germ line, we characterized novel mouse 
knock-in lines. Our data confirm that the 2.4-kb element is an autonomously 
acting ICR whose function is not dependent on germ line methylation. Ectopic 
ICRs become methylated in the male germ line, but the timing of methylation is 
influenced by the insertion site and by additional genetic information. Our 
results support the idea that DNA methylation is not the primary genomic imprint 
and that the H19ICR insertion is sufficient to transmit 
parent-of-origin-dependent DNA methylation patterns independent of its 
methylation status in sperm.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00575-09
PMCID: PMC2820884
PMID: 20038532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]