---
reference_id: "PMID:38317037"
title: Lymphoma and Other Lymph Node Pathologies Among Adult Patients with Lymphadenopathy in Abakaliki, Nigeria.
authors:
- Ugwu NI
- Iyare FE
- Ugwu CN
- Edegbe FO
- Ezeokoli EO
- Eni UE
- Ugwu GC
- Okparaoka SU
- Uzoigwe JC
- Omoruyi KA
- Otuu O
- Dilibe UC
journal: Niger J Clin Pract
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/njcp.njcp_450_23
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lymphoma and Other Lymph Node Pathologies Among Adult Patients with Lymphadenopathy in Abakaliki, Nigeria.
**Authors:** Ugwu NI, Iyare FE, Ugwu CN, Edegbe FO, Ezeokoli EO, Eni UE, Ugwu GC, Okparaoka SU, Uzoigwe JC, Omoruyi KA, Otuu O, Dilibe UC
**Journal:** Niger J Clin Pract (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/njcp.njcp_450_23](https://doi.org/10.4103/njcp.njcp_450_23)

## Content

1. Niger J Clin Pract. 2024 Jan 1;27(1):68-73. doi: 10.4103/njcp.njcp_450_23.
Epub  2024 Feb 5.

Lymphoma and Other Lymph Node Pathologies Among Adult Patients with 
Lymphadenopathy in Abakaliki, Nigeria.

Ugwu NI(1), Iyare FE(2), Ugwu CN(3), Edegbe FO(2), Ezeokoli EO(1), Eni UE(4), 
Ugwu GC(1), Okparaoka SU(2), Uzoigwe JC(2), Omoruyi KA(2), Otuu O(4), Dilibe 
UC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, Alex Ekwueme Federal University Teaching Hospital, 
Abakaliki, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Morbid Anatomy, Faculty of Basic Clinical Sciences, Ebonyi 
State University, Abakaliki, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Clinical Medicine, Ebonyi State 
University, Abakaliki, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Surgery, Alex Ekwueme Federal University Teaching Hospital, 
Abakaliki, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of Nigeria Teaching Hospital, Ituku Ozalla, 
Enugu, Nigeria.

INTRODUCTION: Lymphadenopathy is usually due to benign or malignant conditions. 
It can also be local or systemic in distribution and can involve peripheral or 
deep-seated lymph nodes. This study aimed to determine the prevalence of 
lymphoma and the distribution pattern of lymph node pathologies among adult 
patients who presented with lymphadenopathy and its relationship with age and 
sex.
METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted, and a record of all cases of 
lymphadenopathy with histological diagnosis over 5-year period (January 2017 to 
December 2021) was extracted from Departments of Anatomical Pathology of Alex 
Ekwueme Federal University Teaching Hospital, Abakaliki. The data generated were 
analyzed using Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) software, version 
26.
RESULTS: One hundred and ninety results were extracted with an age range of 18 
to 94 years and a mean age of 41 ± 16 years. They were made up of 75 (39.5%) 
males and 115 (60.5%) females, with a male-to-female ratio of 1:1.5. The 
prevalence of lymphoma was 50.0% (95/190). Thirty-five (18.4%) were Hodgkin's 
lymphoma (HL), while 60 (31.6%) were non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). Other 
pathologies manifested by cases of lymphadenopathy include metastatic tumor 
deposits (38 (20%)), reactive lymphoid hyperplasia (29 (15.3%)), and tuberculous 
lymphadenitis (18 (9.5%)). Others include sinus histiocytosis (4 (2.1%)), 
dermatopathic lymphadenitis (5 (2.6%)), and Castleman's disease (1 (0.5%)).
CONCLUSION: About half of all patients who presented with lymphadenopathy were 
lymphoma with a high prevalence of 50%, and the majority were NHL. Other major 
causes of lymphadenopathy were metastatic tumor deposits, reactive lymphoid 
hyperplasia, and tuberculous lymphadenitis. Any case of lymphadenopathy should 
be properly investigated early for effective management.

Copyright © 2024 Copyright: © 2024 Nigerian Journal of Clinical Practice.

DOI: 10.4103/njcp.njcp_450_23
PMID: 38317037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]