---
reference_id: "PMID:32960102"
title: "Thunderstorm asthma: an overview of mechanisms and management strategies."
authors:
- Thien F
- Davies JM
- Hew M
- Douglass JA
- "O'Hehir RE"
journal: Expert Rev Clin Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/1744666X.2021.1826310
keywords:
- Air Pollutants/immunology
- Allergens/immunology
- "Asthma/immunology, therapy"
- Climate Change
- "Desensitization, Immunologic/methods"
- Forecasting
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- Humans
- Patient Education as Topic
- Public Health
- Risk
- Weather
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thunderstorm asthma: an overview of mechanisms and management strategies.
**Authors:** Thien F, Davies JM, Hew M, Douglass JA, O'Hehir RE
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1744666X.2021.1826310](https://doi.org/10.1080/1744666X.2021.1826310)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2020 Oct;16(10):1005-1017. doi: 
10.1080/1744666X.2021.1826310. Epub 2020 Oct 12.

Thunderstorm asthma: an overview of mechanisms and management strategies.

Thien F(1)(2), Davies JM(3)(4), Hew M(2)(5), Douglass JA(6)(7), O'Hehir 
RE(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Eastern Health Clinical School, Box Hill Hospital , Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Monash University , Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Queensland University of Technology , Brisbane, Australia.
(4)Metro North Hospital and Health Service , Brisbane, Australia.
(5)Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology, Alfred Health , Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Royal Melbourne Hospital , Parkville, Australia.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne , Melbourne, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: Epidemic thunderstorm asthma (ETSA) is due to a complex 
interaction of environmental and individual susceptibility factors, with 
outbreaks reported globally over the last four decades. Australia has been 
particularly susceptible with nearly half of episodes reported internationally, 
culminating in the catastrophic Melbourne 2016 event.
AREAS COVERED: Reported ETSA episodes are reviewed for common environmental and 
meteorological risk factors. Allergen aerobiology interaction with thunderstorm 
activity and rapid weather condition changes is examined. Assessment of the 
clinical and immunological data highlights risk factors for ETSA presentation, 
hospital admission, and intensive care admission. Risk factors associated with 
ETSA deaths are evaluated. Public health strategies, as well as pharmacological 
and immunological management approaches to reduce individual susceptibility and 
prevent ETSA are discussed.
EXPERT OPINION: Improved understanding of the specific meteorological factors 
predisposing to the greatest risk of ETSA to improve forecasting is required. 
Better monitoring of aeroallergen levels in areas of greatest geographic risk, 
with further research into allergen aerobiology underpinning mechanisms of 
allergen exposure is needed. The role of climate change in increasing the risk 
of ETSA outbreaks requires further research. Public awareness and education are 
required to reduce exposure, and to improve uptake of pharmacological and 
immunological risk reduction and preventive strategies.

DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2021.1826310
PMID: 32960102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]