---
reference_id: "PMID:36926528"
title: "Ophthalmological Manifestations of Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome: Current Perspectives."
authors:
- Michels K
- Bohnsack BL
journal: Clin Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S379853
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ophthalmological Manifestations of Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome: Current Perspectives.
**Authors:** Michels K, Bohnsack BL
**Journal:** Clin Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2147/OPTH.S379853](https://doi.org/10.2147/OPTH.S379853)

## Content

1. Clin Ophthalmol. 2023 Mar 10;17:819-828. doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S379853.
eCollection  2023.

Ophthalmological Manifestations of Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome: Current 
Perspectives.

Michels K(1), Bohnsack BL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Division of Ophthalmology, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is a rare congenital disease that is primarily 
characterized by ocular anterior segment anomalies but is also associated with 
craniofacial, dental, cardiac, and neurologic abnormalities. Over half of cases 
are linked with autosomal dominant mutations in either FOXC1 or PITX2, which 
reflects the molecular role of these genes in regulating neural crest cell 
contributions to the eye, face, and heart. Within the eye, ARS is classically 
defined as the combination of posterior embryotoxon with iris bridging strands 
(Axenfeld anomaly) and iris hypoplasia causing corectopia and pseudopolycoria 
(Rieger anomaly). Glaucoma due to iridogoniodysgenesis is the main source of 
morbidity and is typically diagnosed during infancy or childhood in over half of 
affected individuals. Angle bypass surgery, such as glaucoma drainage devices 
and trabeculectomies, is often needed to obtain intraocular pressure control. A 
multi-disciplinary approach including glaucoma specialists and pediatric 
ophthalmologists produces optimal outcomes as vision is dependent on many 
factors including glaucoma, refractive error, amblyopia and strabismus. Further, 
since ophthalmologists often make the diagnosis, it is important to refer 
patients with ARS to other specialists including dentistry, cardiology, and 
neurology.

© 2023 Michels and Bohnsack.

DOI: 10.2147/OPTH.S379853
PMCID: PMC10013571
PMID: 36926528

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.