---
reference_id: "PMID:29247509"
title: Prevalence of skin disease in a population-based sample of adults from five European countries.
authors:
- Svensson A
- Ofenloch RF
- Bruze M
- Naldi L
- Cazzaniga S
- Elsner P
- Goncalo M
- Schuttelaar MA
- Diepgen TL
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.16248
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Dermatologists/statistics & numerical data"
- Europe/epidemiology
- Facilities and Services Utilization
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Sex Distribution
- "Skin Diseases/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of skin disease in a population-based sample of adults from five European countries.
**Authors:** Svensson A, Ofenloch RF, Bruze M, Naldi L, Cazzaniga S, Elsner P, Goncalo M, Schuttelaar MA, Diepgen TL
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.16248](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.16248)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2018 May;178(5):1111-1118. doi: 10.1111/bjd.16248. Epub 2018
Mar  30.

Prevalence of skin disease in a population-based sample of adults from five 
European countries.

Svensson A(1), Ofenloch RF(2), Bruze M(3), Naldi L(4), Cazzaniga S(4), Elsner 
P(5), Goncalo M(6), Schuttelaar MA(7), Diepgen TL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Lund University, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Social Medicine, Occupational and Environmental 
Dermatology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Occupational and Environmental Dermatology, Lund University, 
Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Azienda Ospedaliera papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, 
Centro Studi GISED - FROM Presidio Ospedaliero Matteo Rota, Via Garibaldi 13/15, 
24122, Bergamo, Italy.
(5)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Coimbra University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(7)Department of Dermatology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2018 May;178(5):991. doi: 10.1111/bjd.16417.

BACKGROUND: There is a lack of prevalence data on skin diseases in the general 
adult population; most studies have been carried out in small, national or 
consecutive clinical samples.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence of common skin disease in the general 
European population and to assess differences in the characteristics of 
treatment between countries.
METHODS: A random sample consisting of 12 377 participants aged 18-74 years was 
drawn from the general population of five European countries (Germany, Italy, 
the Netherlands, Portugal and Sweden). This was a cross-sectional study and all 
participants were interviewed using a standardized questionnaire that assessed 
the occurrence of 10 common skin diseases during lifetime, past year and past 
month. If a skin disease was reported, we additionally assessed who performed 
the diagnosis and treatment, and whether drugs had been prescribed.
RESULTS: The most common skin disease was warts (41·3%), followed by acne 
(19·2%) and contact dermatitis (15·0%). In general, women were more often 
affected by skin diseases compared with men; only skin cancer had a slightly 
higher prevalence in men. The prevalence of skin diseases in northern countries 
(Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden) was generally higher than in the southern 
countries (Italy and Portugal). In the Netherlands the treatment of skin 
diseases was less often performed by a dermatologist compared with the other 
countries.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence estimates reported in this study are derived from a 
representative sample of the general population. Data assessment was performed 
comprehensively across countries, thus country-specific prevalence estimates are 
comparable.

© 2017 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.16248
PMID: 29247509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]