---
reference_id: "PMID:25073867"
title: "Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: update on diagnosis and management."
authors:
- Ferro JM
- Canhão P
journal: Curr Cardiol Rep
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s11886-014-0523-2
keywords:
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- "Cerebral Hemorrhage/etiology, surgery"
- "Cerebral Infarction/etiology, therapy"
- "Decompression, Surgical/methods"
- Female
- Fibrinolytic Agents/therapeutic use
- Heparin/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications, Cardiovascular/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Seizures/drug therapy, etiology"
- "Sinus Thrombosis, Intracranial/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Thrombectomy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: update on diagnosis and management.
**Authors:** Ferro JM, Canhão P
**Journal:** Curr Cardiol Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11886-014-0523-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-014-0523-2)

## Content

1. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2014 Sep;16(9):523. doi: 10.1007/s11886-014-0523-2.

Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: update on diagnosis and management.

Ferro JM(1), Canhão P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de Santa Maria, 
Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, University of Lisbon, Av. Prof. Egas Moniz, 
1649-035, Lisbon, Portugal, jmferro@fm.ul.pt.

Cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) is less frequent than ischemic stroke or 
intracerebral haemorrhage. Its incidence is comparable to that of acute 
bacterial meningitis in adults. Because of the increased use of magnetic 
resonance imaging (MR) for investigating patients with acute and subacute 
headaches and new onset seizures, CVT are now being diagnosed with increasing 
frequency. CVT have a more varied clinical presentation than other stroke types 
as they rarely present as a stroke syndrome. Their most frequent presentations 
are isolated headache, intracranial hypertension syndrome, seizures, a focal 
lobar syndrome and encephalopathy. The confirmation of the diagnosis of CVT 
relies on the demonstration of thrombi in the cerebral veins and/or sinuses by 
MR/MR venography or veno CT. The more frequent risk factors for CVT are 
prothrombotic conditions, either genetic or acquired, oral contraceptives, 
puerperium and pregnancy, infection and malignancy. The prognosis of CVT is in 
general favourable, as only around 15% of the patients remain dependent or die. 
The main intervention in the acute is anticoagulation with either low molecular 
weight or unfractionated heparin. In patients in severe condition on admission 
or who deteriorate despite anticoagulation, local thrombolysis or thrombectomy 
is an option. Decompressive surgery is life-saving in patients with large venous 
infarcts or haemorrhage. After the acute phase patients remain anticoagulated 
for a variable period of time, depending on their inherent thrombotic risk. CVT 
patients may experience recurrent seizures. Prophylaxis with antiepileptics is 
recommended after the first seizures, in particular in those with hemispheric 
lesions. There are several ongoing multicentre registries sand trials which will 
improve evidence-based management of CVT in the near future.

DOI: 10.1007/s11886-014-0523-2
PMID: 25073867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]