---
reference_id: "PMID:23206528"
title: "Neurological and neuropsychological characteristics of occipital, occipito-temporal and occipito-parietal infarction."
authors:
- Kraft A
- Grimsen C
- Kehrer S
- Bahnemann M
- Spang K
- Prass M
- Irlbacher K
- Köhnlein M
- Lipfert A
- Brunner F
- Kastrup A
- Fahle M
- Brandt SA
journal: Cortex
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.10.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological and neuropsychological characteristics of occipital, occipito-temporal and occipito-parietal infarction.
**Authors:** Kraft A, Grimsen C, Kehrer S, Bahnemann M, Spang K, Prass M, Irlbacher K, Köhnlein M, Lipfert A, Brunner F, Kastrup A, Fahle M, Brandt SA
**Journal:** Cortex (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cortex.2012.10.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2012.10.004)

## Content

1. Cortex. 2014 Jul;56:38-50. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.10.004. Epub 2012 Oct
27.

Neurological and neuropsychological characteristics of occipital, 
occipito-temporal and occipito-parietal infarction.

Kraft A(1), Grimsen C(2), Kehrer S(3), Bahnemann M(3), Spang K(2), Prass M(2), 
Irlbacher K(3), Köhnlein M(3), Lipfert A(3), Brunner F(4), Kastrup A(4), Fahle 
M(5), Brandt SA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 
Electronic address: antje.kraft@charite.de.
(2)Department of Human Neurobiology, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Medical Hospital Gesundheit Nord, Klinikum Bremen Mitte, Bremen, Germany.
(5)Department of Human Neurobiology, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany; The 
Henry Wellcome Laboratories of Vision Sciences, City University London, London, 
UK.

Neuropsychological deficits after occipital infarction are most often described 
in case studies and only a small sample of studies has attempted to exactly 
correlate the anatomical localization of lesions with associated 
neuropsychological symptoms. The present study investigated a large number of 
patients (N = 128) in order to provide an overview of neurological and 
neuropsychological deficits after occipital, occipito-temporal and 
occipito-parietal infarction. A particular approach of the study was to define 
exact anatomical correlates of neuropsychological dysfunction by using 
voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping (VLSM) in 61 patients. In addition to a 
visual field defect and phosphenes, patients often reported anomia, difficulties 
in reading and memory deficits. Visual disorders, such as achromatopsia, 
akinetopsia or prosopagnosia, were rarely reported by the patients. Memory and 
visual disorders were diagnosed efficiently using simple clinical screening 
tests, such as the Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test for immediate recall, the 
Demtect and the Lang Stereo Test. Visual field defects, reading disorders and 
the perception of phosphenes were associated primarily with lesions of the 
calcarine sulcus. Anomia and memory deficits were related to lesions of the 
occipital inferior gyrus, the lingual gyrus and hippocampus, as well as to 
lesions of principal white matter tracts.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.10.004
PMID: 23206528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]