---
reference_id: "PMID:10022307"
title: Chronic effects of low level exposure to anticholinesterases--a mechanistic review.
authors:
- Ray DE
journal: Toxicol Lett
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0378-4274(98)00260-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic effects of low level exposure to anticholinesterases--a mechanistic review.
**Authors:** Ray DE
**Journal:** Toxicol Lett (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0378-4274(98)00260-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-4274(98)00260-4)

## Content

1. Toxicol Lett. 1998 Dec 28;102-103:527-33. doi: 10.1016/s0378-4274(98)00260-4.

Chronic effects of low level exposure to anticholinesterases--a mechanistic 
review.

Ray DE(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Toxicology Unit, Leicester, UK. der2@le.ac.uk

High dose exposure to anticholinesterases which results in symptomatic poisoning 
can have lasting consequences due to the trauma of intoxication, excitotoxicity, 
secondary hypoxic damage, and (for some agents) a delayed onset polyneuropathy 
(OPIDN). The potential effects of low level exposure are less well defined. The 
most reliable data comes from controlled clinical trials with specific agents. A 
single dose of sarin or repeated doses of metrifonate or mevinphos, have 
produced only transient adverse effects at doses causing substantial 
acetylcholinesterase inhibition. Other data comes from epidemiological surveys. 
These have often used more sensitive indices than the clinical studies, but are 
less reliable due to the difficulty of defining exposure and matching control 
and exposed populations. Subtle, mainly cognitive, differences between exposed 
and non-exposed populations are sometimes seen. Low level exposure can cause a 
reversible down-regulation of cholinergic systems, and a range of 
non-cholinesterase effects that are structure-specific, and do not always 
parallel acute toxicity. Novel protein targets sensitive to low level exposure 
to some organophosphates are known to exist in the brain, but their functional 
significance is not yet understood.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-4274(98)00260-4
PMID: 10022307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]