---
reference_id: "PMID:25073565"
title: Relation of burden of myocardial fibrosis to malignant ventricular arrhythmias and outcomes in Fabry disease.
authors:
- Krämer J
- Niemann M
- Störk S
- Frantz S
- Beer M
- Ertl G
- Wanner C
- Weidemann F
journal: Am J Cardiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.06.019
keywords:
- Adult
- Biomarkers/blood
- "Cardiomyopathies/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Collagen/blood
- Disease Progression
- "Electrocardiography, Ambulatory"
- "Fabry Disease/blood, complications, diagnosis"
- Female
- "Fibrosis/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Germany/epidemiology
- Humans
- "Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Cine"
- Male
- Myocardium/pathology
- Prospective Studies
- Survival Rate/trends
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relation of burden of myocardial fibrosis to malignant ventricular arrhythmias and outcomes in Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Krämer J, Niemann M, Störk S, Frantz S, Beer M, Ertl G, Wanner C, Weidemann F
**Journal:** Am J Cardiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.06.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.06.019)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiol. 2014 Sep 15;114(6):895-900. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.06.019.
Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Relation of burden of myocardial fibrosis to malignant ventricular arrhythmias
and outcomes in Fabry disease.

Krämer J(1), Niemann M(1), Störk S(1), Frantz S(1), Beer M(2), Ertl G(1), Wanner
C(1), Weidemann F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany;
Comprehensive Heart Failure Center, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Radiology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany;
Comprehensive Heart Failure Center, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
Electronic address: weidemann_f@ukw.de.

The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of myocardial fibrosis in
Fabry disease. Seventy-three patients with genetically confirmed Fabry disease
were followed for 4.8 ± 2.4 years. In accordance with current guidelines, 57
patients received enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) after study inclusion,
whereas 16 did not. At baseline and latest possible follow-up, myocardial
fibrosis was assessed noninvasively by cardiac magnetic resonance, and
biomarkers of collagen metabolism were determined. Holter electrocardiography
and clinical follow-up at yearly intervals were used to monitor malignant
ventricular arrhythmias (MVAs; nonsustained and sustained ventricular
tachycardia and sudden cardiac death). In total, 48 patients (66%) showed
fibrosis assessed by late enhancement (LE) at baseline, and 4 patients developed
new LE during follow-up, 2 of them despite ERT. The 2 patients receiving ERT
(1.4 ± 1.9% vs 2.5 ± 2.6%, p <0.001) and the patients not receiving ERT (0.5 ±
0.8% vs 0.7 ± 1.0%, p = 0.035) showed a progression of LE during follow-up. None
of the patients displayed reductions of LE during follow-up. Collagen biomarkers
were elevated in patients with and without LE but did not correlate with LE
amount. Thirteen LE-positive patients at the baseline examination had documented
MVAs (including 5 sudden cardiac deaths), whereas none of the patients without
LE had MVAs. The yearly increase in fibrosis was 0.9 ± 0.6% in patients with
MVAs and 0.2 ± 0.3% in patients without MVAs (p <0.001). Logistic multivariate
regression analysis revealed that the annual increase in fibrosis during
follow-up was the only independent predictor of MVAs. In conclusion, myocardial
fibrosis in Fabry disease is progressive, apparently not modified by ERT, and a
crucial outcome determinant.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.06.019
PMID: 25073565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
