---
reference_id: "PMID:38790056"
title: De novo variation in ARID1B gene causes Coffin-Siris syndrome 1 in a Chinese family with excessive early-onset high myopia.
authors:
- Huang X
- Li H
- Yang S
- Ma M
- Lian Y
- Wu X
- Qi X
- Wang X
- Rong W
- Sheng X
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-01904-9
keywords:
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Face/abnormalities
- Male
- Micrognathism/genetics
- Pedigree
- Female
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Myopia/genetics
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Neck/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adult
- Genetic Association Studies
- China
- Phenotype
- Exome Sequencing
- Mutation
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De novo variation in ARID1B gene causes Coffin-Siris syndrome 1 in a Chinese family with excessive early-onset high myopia.
**Authors:** Huang X, Li H, Yang S, Ma M, Lian Y, Wu X, Qi X, Wang X, Rong W, Sheng X
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12920-024-01904-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-024-01904-9)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2024 May 24;17(1):142. doi: 10.1186/s12920-024-01904-9.

De novo variation in ARID1B gene causes Coffin-Siris syndrome 1 in a Chinese 
family with excessive early-onset high myopia.

Huang X(#)(1), Li H(#)(1), Yang S(#)(2), Ma M(3), Lian Y(3), Wu X(3), Qi X(1), 
Wang X(1), Rong W(4), Sheng X(5).

Author information:
(1)Ningxia Eye Hospital, People's Hospital of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, 
Third Clinical Medical College of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, China.
(2)Chaoju Eye Hospital, Hohhot, China.
(3)Gansu Aier Ophthalmology and Optometry Hospital, Lanzhou, China.
(4)Ningxia Eye Hospital, People's Hospital of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, 
Third Clinical Medical College of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, China. 
rongweining426@126.com.
(5)Gansu Aier Ophthalmology and Optometry Hospital, Lanzhou, China. 
shengxunlun@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) is a rare autosomal dominant inheritance disorder 
characterized by distinctive facial features, hypoplasia of the distal phalanx 
or nail of the fifth and additional digits, developmental or cognitive delay of 
varying degree, hypotonia, hirsutism/hypertrichosis, sparse scalp hair and 
varying kind of congenital anomalies. CSS can easily be misdiagnosed as other 
syndromes or disorders with a similar clinical picture because of their genetic 
and phenotypic heterogeneity. We describde the genotype-phenotype correlation of 
one patient from a healthy Chinese family with a novel genotype underlying CSS, 
who was first diagnosed in the ophthalmology department as early-onset high 
myopia (eoHM). Comprehensive ophthalmic tests as well as other systemic 
examinations were performed on participants to confirm the phenotype. The 
genotype was identified using whole exome sequencing, and further verified the 
results among other family members by Sanger sequencing. Real-time quantitative 
PCR (RT-qPCR) technology was used to detect the relative mRNA expression levels 
of candidate genes between proband and normal family members. The pathogenicity 
of the identified variant was determined by The American College of Medical 
Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines. STRING protein-protein interactions 
(PPIs) network analysis was used to detect the interaction of candidate 
gene-related proteins with high myopia gene-related proteins. The patient had 
excessive eoHM, cone-rod dystrophy, coarse face, excessive hair growth on the 
face, sparse scalp hair, developmental delay, intellectual disability, moderate 
hearing loss, dental hypoplasia, patent foramen ovale, chronic non-atrophic 
gastritis, bilateral renal cysts, cisterna magna, and emotional outbursts with 
aggression. The genetic assessment revealed that the patient carries a de novo 
heterozygous frameshift insertion variant in the ARID1B c.3981dup 
(p.Glu1328ArgfsTer5), which are strongly associated with the typical clinical 
features of CSS patients. The test results of RT-qPCR showed that mRNA 
expression of the ARID1B gene in the proband was approximately 30% lower than 
that of the normal control in the family, suggesting that the variant had an 
impact on the gene function at the level of mRNA expression. The variant was 
pathogenic as assessed by ACMG guidelines. Analysis of protein interactions in 
the STRING online database revealed that the ARID1A protein interacts with the 
high myopia gene-related proteins FGFR3, ASXL1, ERBB3, and SOX4, whereas the 
ARID1A protein antagonizes the ARID1B protein. Therefore, in this paper, we are 
the first to report a de novo heterozygous frameshift insertion variant in the 
ARID1B gene causing CSS with excessive eoHM. Our study extends the genotypic and 
phenotypic spectrums for ARID1B-CSS and supplies evidence of significant 
association of eoHM with variant in ARID1B gene. As CSS has high genetic and 
phenotypic heterogeneity, our findings highlight the importance of molecular 
genetic testing and an interdisciplinary clinical diagnostic workup to avoid 
misdiagnosis as some disorders with similar manifestations of CSS.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-024-01904-9
PMCID: PMC11127418
PMID: 38790056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors declare no 
competing interests.