---
reference_id: "PMID:31553864"
title: "A neonatal pustule:Langerhans cell histiocytosis."
authors:
- McKenzie S
- Vecerek N
- Kang Y
- Knowles B
- Hogeling M
journal: Dermatol Online J
year: '2019'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A neonatal pustule:Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
**Authors:** McKenzie S, Vecerek N, Kang Y, Knowles B, Hogeling M
**Journal:** Dermatol Online J (2019)

## Content

1. Dermatol Online J. 2019 Aug 15;25(8):13030/qt6hr0w31v.

A neonatal pustule:Langerhans cell histiocytosis.

McKenzie S, Vecerek N, Kang Y, Knowles B, Hogeling M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatopathology, Department of Pathology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA. mhogeling@mednet.ucla.edu.

Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare, clinically heterogeneous disease 
that most commonly occurs in pediatric populations. Congenital self-limited LCH 
is a benign variant of LCH. It most commonly presents as a diffuse eruption and 
reports of single lesion cases are infrequent in the literature. Even in the 
case of congenital self-limited LCH, there is potential for future multisystem 
relapse, making long-term follow-up important. We present a case of single 
lesion self-limited LCH in a full-term male infant with interesting morphology. 
Physical examination revealed a painless, 6 millimeter, well-demarcated, papule 
encircled by erythema with central hemorrhage. An infectious workup was negative 
and a punch biopsy was obtained, which showed a dermal infiltrate of histiocytes 
consistent with a diagnosis of LCH. The lesion healed without intervention 
within three weeks. Our case highlights the need for dermatologists to consider 
LCH in the differential diagnosis for lesions of varying morphology in children, 
as proper identification is necessary to monitor for multisystem recurrence.

PMID: 31553864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]