---
reference_id: "PMID:36581896"
title: "Myositis in Germany: epidemiological insights over 15 years from 2005 to 2019."
authors:
- Pawlitzki M
- Acar L
- Masanneck L
- Willison A
- Regner-Nelke L
- Nelke C
- "L'hoest H"
- Marschall U
- Schmidt J
- Meuth SG
- Ruck T
journal: Neurol Res Pract
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s42466-022-00226-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myositis in Germany: epidemiological insights over 15 years from 2005 to 2019.
**Authors:** Pawlitzki M, Acar L, Masanneck L, Willison A, Regner-Nelke L, Nelke C, L'hoest H, Marschall U, Schmidt J, Meuth SG, Ruck T
**Journal:** Neurol Res Pract (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s42466-022-00226-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s42466-022-00226-4)

## Content

1. Neurol Res Pract. 2022 Dec 29;4(1):62. doi: 10.1186/s42466-022-00226-4.

Myositis in Germany: epidemiological insights over 15 years from 2005 to 2019.

Pawlitzki M(#)(1), Acar L(#)(2), Masanneck L(3)(4), Willison A(3), Regner-Nelke 
L(3), Nelke C(3), L'hoest H(2), Marschall U(2), Schmidt J(5)(6)(7), Meuth 
SG(#)(8), Ruck T(#)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Moorenstraße 
5, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany. marcguenter.pawlitzki@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.
(2)BARMER, Wuppertal, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Moorenstraße 
5, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Hasso-Plattner-Institut, Potsdam, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology and Pain Therapy, Immanuel Clinic Rüdersdorf, 
University Hospital of the Brandenburg Medical School - Theodor Fontane, 
Rüdersdorf Berlin, Germany.
(6)Faculty of Health Sciences Brandenburg, Brandenburg Medical School - Theodor 
Fontane, Rüdersdorf Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Neuromuscular Centre, University Medical Centre 
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(8)Department of Neurology, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Moorenstraße 
5, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany. meuth@uni-duesseldorf.de.
(9)Department of Neurology, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Moorenstraße 
5, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany. tobias.ruck@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The medical care of patients with myositis is a great challenge in 
clinical practice. This is due to the rarity of these disease, the complexity of 
diagnosis and management as well as the lack of systematic analyses.
OBJECTIVES: Therefore, the aim of this project was to obtain an overview of the 
current care of myositis patients in Germany and to evaluate epidemiological 
trends in recent years.
METHODS: In collaboration with BARMER Insurance, retrospective analysis of 
outpatient and inpatient data from an average of approximately 8.7 million 
insured patients between January 2005 and December 2019 was performed using 
ICD-10 codes for myositis for identification of relevant data. In addition, a 
comparative analysis was performed between myositis patients and an age-matched 
comparison group from other populations insured by BARMER.
RESULTS: 45,800 BARMER-insured individuals received a diagnosis of myositis 
during the observation period, with a relatively stable prevalence throughout. 
With regard to comorbidities, a significantly higher rate of cardiovascular 
disease as well as neoplasm was observed compared to the control group within 
the BARMER-insured population. In addition, myositis patients suffer more 
frequently from psychiatric disorders, such as depression and somatoform 
disorders. However, the ICD-10 catalogue only includes the specific coding of 
"dermatomyositis" and "polymyositis" and thus does not allow for a sufficient 
analysis of all idiopathic inflammatory myopathies subtypes.
CONCLUSION: The current data provide a comprehensive epidemiological analysis of 
myositis in Germany, highlighting the multimorbidity of myositis patients. This 
underlines the need for multidisciplinary management. However, the ICD-10 codes 
currently still in use do not allow for specific analysis of the subtypes of 
myositis. The upcoming ICD-11 coding may improve future analyses in this regard.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s42466-022-00226-4
PMCID: PMC9798556
PMID: 36581896

Conflict of interest statement: MP received research funding from Novartis and 
honoraria for lecturing from ArgenX, Biogen, Janssen and Merck. His research is 
founded by the German Multiple Sclerosis Society North Rhine-Westphalia (DMSG). 
LA no conflict of interest. LM received compensation for an educational 
internship at Biogen. AW no conflict of interest. LRN no conflict of interest. 
CN no conflict of interest. HL no conflict of interest. UM no conflict of 
interest. JS has received payments for advisory boards, speaker’s honoraria, 
travel expenses or research projects from Abcuro, Alnylam, Argenx, Biotest, CSL 
Behring, Euroimmun, Janssen, Kezar, LFB, Novartis, Octapharma and UCB. SGM 
received honoraria for lecturing and travel expenses for attending meetings from 
Almirall, Amicus Therapeutics Germany, Bayer Health Care, Biogen, Celgene, 
Diamed, Genzyme, MedDay Pharmaceuticals, Merck Serono, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, 
ONO Pharma, Roche, Sanofi-Aventis, Chugai Pharma, QuintilesIMS, and Teva. His 
research is funded by the German Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF), 
Bundesinstitut für Risikobewertung (BfR), Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), 
Else Kröner Fresenius Foundation, Gemeinsamer Bundesausschuss (G-BA), German 
Academic Exchange Service, Hertie Foundation, Interdisciplinary Center for 
Clinical Studies (IZKF) Muenster, German Foundation Neurology and by Alexion, 
Almirall, Amicus Therapeutics Germany, Biogen, Diamed, Fresenius Medical Care, 
Genzyme, HERZ Burgdorf, Merck Serono, Novartis, ONO Pharma, Roche, and Teva. TR 
reports grants from German Ministry of Education, Science, Research and 
Technology, grants and personal fees from Sanofi-Aventis and Alexion; personal 
fees from Biogen Idec, Roche and Teva; personal fees and nonfinancial support 
from Merck Serono, outside the submitted work.