---
reference_id: "PMID:41087666"
title: LAPTM5 exacerbates STING-mediated inflammation induced by LL-37 through stabilizing STING in rosacea.
authors:
- Huang W
- He H
- Wu H
- Wang Y
- Wang J
- Sun Y
- Wang H
- Yao S
- Zhu L
- Jiang Y
- Cai X
- Wu Y
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-025-08861-8
keywords:
- "Rosacea/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- "Membrane Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Animals
- Cathelicidins
- Humans
- Mice
- Inflammation/metabolism
- Antimicrobial Cationic Peptides
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Female
- Male
- Macrophages/metabolism
- STING Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LAPTM5 exacerbates STING-mediated inflammation induced by LL-37 through stabilizing STING in rosacea.
**Authors:** Huang W, He H, Wu H, Wang Y, Wang J, Sun Y, Wang H, Yao S, Zhu L, Jiang Y, Cai X, Wu Y
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-025-08861-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08861-8)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2025 Oct 14;8(1):1470. doi: 10.1038/s42003-025-08861-8.

LAPTM5 exacerbates STING-mediated inflammation induced by LL-37 through 
stabilizing STING in rosacea.

Huang W(1)(2), He H(3), Wu H(4), Wang Y(1)(2), Wang J(2)(5), Sun Y(2)(5), Wang 
H(2)(5), Yao S(6), Zhu L(4), Jiang Y(7), Cai X(#)(8), Wu Y(#)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China.
(2)National Joint Engineering Research Center for Theranostics of Immunological 
Skin Diseases, The First Hospital of China Medical University and Key Laboratory 
of Immunodermatology, Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education, Shenyang, 
China.
(3)Department of Medical Aesthetics, The Third People's Hospital of Chengdu, 
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China.
(4)Department of Dermatology, The Seventh People's Hospital of Shenyang, 
Shenyang, China.
(5)Department of Dermatology, The First Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, 
Shandong, China.
(7)Central Laboratory, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, 
China.
(8)Central Laboratory, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, 
China. xzcai@cmu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China. jlwuyan@126.com.
(10)National Joint Engineering Research Center for Theranostics of Immunological 
Skin Diseases, The First Hospital of China Medical University and Key Laboratory 
of Immunodermatology, Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education, Shenyang, 
China. jlwuyan@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory skin disorder linked to the antimicrobial 
peptide LL-37 and immune cells. STING, a key DNA-sensing adaptor, initiates 
innate immune responses, with excessive activation contributing to inflammation. 
This study investigates LAPTM5, a STING-interacting protein, and its role in 
rosacea. We observe elevated nuclear DNA fragmentation within the dermal lesions 
of rosacea patients and LL-37-induced rosacea-like mice. LAPTM5 and STING levels 
are upregulated in macrophages within rosacea lesions and LL-37-induced models, 
along with STING hyperactivation. LAPTM5 knockdown in macrophages reduces STING 
protein levels, signaling, and inflammatory responses under DMXAA and HT-DNA 
stimulation. LAPTM5 associates with STING and represses its K48- and K63-linked 
polyubiquitination, preventing proteasomal and lysosomal degradation, thereby 
maintaining STING stability at homeostasis and after activation. Both STING 
antagonist H-151 and LAPTM5 knockdown alleviate LL-37-induced rosacea-like 
phenotypes. These findings highlight LAPTM5 as a STING stabilizer, aggravating 
STING-driven inflammation in rosacea, offering insights for potential 
treatments.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-025-08861-8
PMCID: PMC12521404
PMID: 41087666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.