---
reference_id: "PMID:12427653"
title: Analysis of cardiovascular phenotype and genotype-phenotype correlation in individuals with a JAG1 mutation and/or Alagille syndrome.
authors:
- McElhinney DB
- Krantz ID
- Bason L
- Piccoli DA
- Emerick KM
- Spinner NB
- Goldmuntz E
journal: Circulation
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000037221.45902.69
keywords:
- "Alagille Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Calcium-Binding Proteins
- Child
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genotype
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Jagged-1 Protein
- Membrane Proteins
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Proteins/genetics
- Pulmonary Artery/abnormalities
- Serrate-Jagged Proteins
- "Tetralogy of Fallot/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of cardiovascular phenotype and genotype-phenotype correlation in individuals with a JAG1 mutation and/or Alagille syndrome.
**Authors:** McElhinney DB, Krantz ID, Bason L, Piccoli DA, Emerick KM, Spinner NB, Goldmuntz E
**Journal:** Circulation (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.cir.0000037221.45902.69](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.0000037221.45902.69)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2002 Nov 12;106(20):2567-74. doi: 
10.1161/01.cir.0000037221.45902.69.

Analysis of cardiovascular phenotype and genotype-phenotype correlation in 
individuals with a JAG1 mutation and/or Alagille syndrome.

McElhinney DB(1), Krantz ID, Bason L, Piccoli DA, Emerick KM, Spinner NB, 
Goldmuntz E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pa 19104-4318, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular anomalies are among the most common features of 
Alagille syndrome (AGS). Mutations of JAG1 are found in most individuals with 
AGS. This study was undertaken to determine the spectrum of cardiovascular 
phenotypes associated with a JAG1 mutation and/or AGS, investigate potential 
genotype-phenotype correlations, and begin to correlate clinical outcome with 
genetic pathogenesis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We reviewed the records of 200 individuals with a JAG1 
mutation or AGS. A total of 187 (94%) subjects had evidence of cardiovascular 
involvement. Cardiovascular anomalies were identified by imaging in 150 subjects 
(75%), and 37 (19%) had a peripheral pulmonary stenosis murmur with either a 
normal echocardiogram or no imaging study. Of the 150 subjects with anomalies 
confirmed by imaging, right-sided anomalies were present in 123 and left-sided 
anomalies in 22, with both in 12. Seventeen subjects had other anomalies. The 
most common abnormality was stenosis/hypoplasia of the branch pulmonary arteries 
(PAs), which was documented by imaging (n=111) or inferred from a peripheral 
pulmonary stenosis murmur (n=41) in 76% of subjects. Tetralogy of Fallot was 
present in 23 subjects and was accompanied by pulmonary atresia in 8. Branch PA 
phenotype differed between individuals with and without a JAG1 mutation. Among 
subjects with a JAG1 mutation, there was no correlation between the type or 
location of mutation and the frequency or type of cardiovascular anomaly.
CONCLUSIONS: More than 90% of individuals with a JAG1 mutation or AGS have 
cardiovascular anomalies, with branch PA stenosis the most common abnormality. 
Cardiovascular phenotype does not correlate with the type or location of JAG1 
mutation.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.0000037221.45902.69
PMID: 12427653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]