---
reference_id: "PMID:17452349"
title: INFO-RNA--a server for fast inverse RNA folding satisfying sequence constraints.
authors:
- Busch A
- Backofen R
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm218
content_type: abstract_only
---

# INFO-RNA--a server for fast inverse RNA folding satisfying sequence constraints.
**Authors:** Busch A, Backofen R
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkm218](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm218)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007 Jul;35(Web Server issue):W310-3. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gkm218. Epub 2007 Apr 22.

INFO-RNA--a server for fast inverse RNA folding satisfying sequence constraints.

Busch A(1), Backofen R.

Author information:
(1)Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Institute of Computer Science, 
Bioinformatics Group, Georges-Koehler-Allee 106, 79110 Freiburg, Germany. 
abusch@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

INFO-RNA is a new web server for designing RNA sequences that fold into a user 
given secondary structure. Furthermore, constraints on the sequence can be 
specified, e.g. one can restrict sequence positions to a fixed nucleotide or to 
a set of nucleotides. Moreover, the user can allow violations of the constraints 
at some positions, which can be advantageous in complicated cases. The INFO-RNA 
web server allows biologists to design RNA sequences in an automatic manner. It 
is clearly and intuitively arranged and easy to use. The procedure is fast, as 
most applications are completed within seconds and it proceeds better and faster 
than other existing tools. The INFO-RNA web server is freely available at 
http://www.bioinf.uni-freiburg.de/Software/INFO-RNA/

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm218
PMCID: PMC1933236
PMID: 17452349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]