---
reference_id: "PMID:37579849"
title: "Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in patients with a normal electrocardiogram: A view from the east side of the Atlantic Ocean."
authors:
- Dores H
- Toste A
- Cardim N
- Portuguese Registry of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
journal: Int J Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131260
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in patients with a normal electrocardiogram: A view from the east side of the Atlantic Ocean.
**Authors:** Dores H, Toste A, Cardim N, Portuguese Registry of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
**Journal:** Int J Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131260](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131260)

## Content

1. Int J Cardiol. 2023 Nov 1;390:131260. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131260. Epub 
2023 Aug 12.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in patients with a normal electrocardiogram: A view 
from the east side of the Atlantic Ocean.

Dores H(1), Toste A(2), Cardim N(3); Portuguese Registry of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy.

Author information:
(1)Hospital da Luz, Lisbon, Portugal; CHRC, NOVA Medical School, Lisbon, 
Portugal; NOVA Medical School, Lisbon, Portugal. Electronic address: 
hdores@hospitaldaluz.pt.
(2)Hospital da Luz, Lisbon, Portugal; NOVA Medical School, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)NOVA Medical School, Lisbon, Portugal; Hospital CUF Descobertas, Lisbon, 
Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Although the 12‑lead electrocardiogram (ECG) is abnormal in most 
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), some present normal ECG. This 
study aimed to analyse the baseline characteristics, clinical presentation and 
outcomes of HCM patients with normal ECG and to compare them with those with 
abnormal ECG.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Baseline characteristics, clinical presentation, data from 
complementary exams and clinical outcomes of 1070 consecutive patients included 
in the Portuguese Registry of HCM (Pro-HCM registry) were compared between two 
groups of patients: normal Vs. abnormal ECG. Among this population, 98 (9.2%) 
patients had normal ECG at presentation; they were significantly younger and had 
lower frequency of hypertension, symptoms at presentation, heart failure, 
angina, cardiac and non-cardiac diseases. ESC and AHA risk scores for Sudden 
Cardiac Death (SCD) were not significantly different between the two groups. 
Patients with normal ECG had higher prevalence of family history of SCD and 
lower degree of left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, LV systolic dysfunction, LV 
outflow tract obstruction and myocardial fibrosis. The combined endpoint of 
cardiac death, SCD, cardiac arrest, appropriate ICD shocks or evolution to 
systolic dysfunction, during a mean follow-up of 5 years was significantly less 
frequent in patients with normal ECG (2.1% Vs. 6.5%; p = 0.043).
CONCLUSIONS: A normal ECG is not a marker of an overall benign profile in HCM 
patients. Though a normal ECG at presentation is associated with a less severe 
phenotype and a lower probability of evolution to heart failure at 5-years, this 
finding did not show a protective effect in other clinical outcomes.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131260
PMID: 37579849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]