---
reference_id: "PMID:28871046"
title: "Loss of OCRL increases ciliary PI(4,5)P(2) in Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome."
authors:
- Prosseda PP
- Luo N
- Wang B
- Alvarado JA
- Hu Y
- Sun Y
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1242/jcs.200857
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Line
- Cilia/metabolism
- Hedgehog Proteins/physiology
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/genetics
- "Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-Diphosphate/metabolism"
- "Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/metabolism"
- Second Messenger Systems
- Smoothened Receptor/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of OCRL increases ciliary PI(4,5)P(2) in Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome.
**Authors:** Prosseda PP, Luo N, Wang B, Alvarado JA, Hu Y, Sun Y
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.200857](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.200857)

## Content

1. J Cell Sci. 2017 Oct 15;130(20):3447-3454. doi: 10.1242/jcs.200857. Epub 2017
Sep 4.

Loss of OCRL increases ciliary PI(4,5)P(2) in Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome.

Prosseda PP(1), Luo N(2), Wang B(1), Alvarado JA(1), Hu Y(1), Sun Y(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Stanford University, Department of Ophthalmology, 1651 Page Mill Road, Rm
2220, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.
(2)Eugene and Marilyn Glick Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(3)Stanford University, Department of Ophthalmology, 1651 Page Mill Road, Rm
2220, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA yangsun@stanford.edu.
(4)Palo Alto Veterans Administration, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

Lowe syndrome is a rare X-linked disorder characterized by bilateral congenital
cataracts and glaucoma, mental retardation, and proximal renal tubular
dysfunction. Mutations in OCRL, an inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase that
dephosphorylates PI(4,5)P2, cause Lowe syndrome. Previously we showed that OCRL
localizes to the primary cilium, which has a distinct membrane phospholipid
composition, but disruption of phosphoinositides in the ciliary membrane is
poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that cilia from Lowe syndrome patient
fibroblasts exhibit increased levels of PI(4,5)P2 and decreased levels of PI4P.
In particular, subcellular distribution of PI(4,5)P2 build-up was observed at
the transition zone. Accumulation of ciliary PI(4,5)P2 was pronounced in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from Lowe syndrome mouse model as well as
in Ocrl-null MEFs, which was reversed by reintroduction of OCRL. Similarly,
expression of wild-type OCRL reversed the elevated PI(4,5)P2 in Lowe patient
cells. Accumulation of sonic hedgehog protein in response to hedgehog agonist
was decreased in MEFs derived from a Lowe syndrome mouse model. Together, our
findings show for the first time an abnormality in ciliary phosphoinositides of
both human and mouse cell models of Lowe syndrome.

© 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.200857
PMCID: PMC5665444
PMID: 28871046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing or financial interests.
