---
reference_id: "PMID:29950498"
title: Intravenous immunoglobulin for severe thrombocytopenia in secondary dengue.
authors:
- Kumar V
- Gupta K
- Soneja M
- Biswas A
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2018-224542
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous immunoglobulin for severe thrombocytopenia in secondary dengue.
**Authors:** Kumar V, Gupta K, Soneja M, Biswas A
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2018-224542](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2018-224542)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2018 Jun 27;2018:bcr2018224542. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2018-224542.

Intravenous immunoglobulin for severe thrombocytopenia in secondary dengue.

Kumar V(1), Gupta K(1), Soneja M(1), Biswas A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

A 30-year-old woman with severe dengue presented on the sixth day of her illness 
with life-threatening thrombocytopenia, refractory to multiple platelet 
transfusions. Dengue IgM antibody and the non-structural-1 antigen tests as of 
day 3 were negative. The IgG antibody against the same was positive, suggesting 
a past episode of dengue. Since she had a history of menorrhagia prior to the 
current illness, a working diagnosis of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura was 
made, for which intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) was administered that led to a 
rapid rise in the platelet count with no adverse events. Subsequently, dengue 
IgM antibody repeated on day 6 came back positive, confirming dengue. This case 
report re-emphasises the potential use of IVIg in patients with severe 
thrombocytopenia in dengue.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2018. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2018-224542
PMCID: PMC6040507
PMID: 29950498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.