---
reference_id: "PMID:36268467"
title: "Clinical Features in Aromatic L-Amino Acid Decarboxylase (AADC) Deficiency: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Rizzi S
- Spagnoli C
- Frattini D
- Pisani F
- Fusco C
journal: Behav Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/2210555
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dopa Decarboxylase/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Amino Acids/therapeutic use
- Aromatic-L-Amino-Acid Decarboxylases/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Features in Aromatic L-Amino Acid Decarboxylase (AADC) Deficiency: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Rizzi S, Spagnoli C, Frattini D, Pisani F, Fusco C
**Journal:** Behav Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/2210555](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/2210555)

## Content

1. Behav Neurol. 2022 Oct 11;2022:2210555. doi: 10.1155/2022/2210555. eCollection
 2022.

Clinical Features in Aromatic L-Amino Acid Decarboxylase (AADC) Deficiency: A
Systematic Review.

Rizzi S(1), Spagnoli C(1), Frattini D(1), Pisani F(2), Fusco C(1).

Author information:
(1)Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Presidio
Ospedaliero Santa Maria Nuova, AUSL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia 42123,
Italy.
(2)Child Neurology Unit, University of Parma, 43100 Parma, Italy.

Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency is a rare congenital
autosomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by pathogenic homozygous or
compound heterozygous variants in the dopa decarboxylase (DDC) gene.
Adeno-associated viral vector-mediated gene transfer of the human AADC gene into
the putamina has become available. This systematic review on PubMed, Scopus
databases, and other sources is aimed at describing the AADC whole phenotypic
spectrum in order to facilitate its early diagnosis. Literature reviews,
original articles, retrospective and comparative studies, large case series,
case reports, and short communications were considered. A database was set up
using Microsoft Excel to collect clinical, molecular, biochemical, and
therapeutic data. By analysing 261 patients from 41 papers with molecular and/or
biochemical diagnosis of AADC deficiency for which individuality could be
determined with certainty, we found symptom onset to occur in the first 6 months
of life in 93% of cases. Hypotonia and developmental delay are cardinal signs,
reported as present in 73.9% and 72% of cases, respectively. Oculogyric crises
were seen in 67% of patients while hypokinesia in 42% and ptosis in 26%.
Dysautonomic features have been revealed in 53% and gastrointestinal symptoms in
19% of cases. With 37% and 30% of patients reported being affected by sleep and
behavioural disorders, it seems to be commoner than previously acknowledged.
Although reporting bias cannot be excluded, there is still a need for
comprehensive clinical descriptions of symptoms at onset and during follow-up.
In fact, our review suggests that most of the neurological and extraneurological
symptoms and signs reported, although quite frequent in this condition, are not
pathognomonic, and therefore, ADCC deficiency can remain an underdiscovered
disorder.

Copyright © 2022 Susanna Rizzi et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/2210555
PMCID: PMC9578880
PMID: 36268467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest to disclose.
