---
reference_id: "PMID:31243333"
title: Genomic and transcriptomic comparison of post-radiation versus sporadic sarcomas.
authors:
- Lesluyes T
- Baud J
- Pérot G
- Charon-Barra C
- You A
- Valo I
- Bazille C
- Mishellany F
- Leroux A
- Renard-Oldrini S
- Terrier P
- Le Cesne A
- Laé M
- Piperno-Neumann S
- Bonvalot S
- Neuville A
- Collin F
- Maingon P
- Coindre JM
- Chibon F
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41379-019-0300-2
keywords:
- Aged
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms, Radiation-Induced/genetics"
- "Sarcoma/etiology, genetics"
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic and transcriptomic comparison of post-radiation versus sporadic sarcomas.
**Authors:** Lesluyes T, Baud J, Pérot G, Charon-Barra C, You A, Valo I, Bazille C, Mishellany F, Leroux A, Renard-Oldrini S, Terrier P, Le Cesne A, Laé M, Piperno-Neumann S, Bonvalot S, Neuville A, Collin F, Maingon P, Coindre JM, Chibon F
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41379-019-0300-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41379-019-0300-2)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2019 Dec;32(12):1786-1794. doi: 10.1038/s41379-019-0300-2. Epub
2019  Jun 26.

Genomic and transcriptomic comparison of post-radiation versus sporadic
sarcomas.

Lesluyes T(1)(2)(3)(4), Baud J(1)(2), Pérot G(1)(5), Charon-Barra C(6), You
A(1)(7), Valo I(8), Bazille C(9), Mishellany F(10), Leroux A(11), Renard-Oldrini
S(12), Terrier P(13), Le Cesne A(14), Laé M(15)(16), Piperno-Neumann S(17),
Bonvalot S(18), Neuville A(5)(19), Collin F(6), Maingon P(20), Coindre JM(2)(5),
Chibon F(21)(22).

Author information:
(1)Inserm U1218, Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France.
(2)University of Bordeaux, F-33000, Bordeaux, France.
(3)Inserm UMR1037, Cancer Research Center of Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(4)Institut Claudius Regaud, IUCT-Oncopole, Toulouse, France.
(5)Department of Pathology, Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France.
(6)Department of Pathology, Centre Georges-François Leclerc, Dijon, France.
(7)University of Nantes, F-44000, Nantes, France.
(8)Department of Pathology, Institut de cancérologie de l'Ouest site Paul Papin,
Angers, France.
(9)Department of Pathology, University Hospital, Caen, France.
(10)Department of Pathology, Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(11)Department of Pathology, Centre Alexis Vautrin, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy,
France.
(12)Department of Radiation Therapy, Centre Alexis Vautrin,
Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France.
(13)Department of Pathology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(14)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(15)Department of Pathology, Institut Curie, Paris, France.
(16)Department of Pathology, Centre Henri Becquerel, Inserm U1245, UniRouen
Normandy University, Rouen, France.
(17)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Curie, Paris, France.
(18)Department of Surgery, Institut Curie, Paris, France.
(19)Contades Office of Pathological Anatomy and Cytology, Strasbourg, France.
(20)Department of Radiation Oncology, Hôpital La Pitié-Salpêtrière, Sorbonne
University, Paris, France.
(21)Inserm UMR1037, Cancer Research Center of Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
frederic.chibon@inserm.fr.
(22)Institut Claudius Regaud, IUCT-Oncopole, Toulouse, France.
frederic.chibon@inserm.fr.

Post-radiation sarcomas are rare secondary cancers arising from radiation
therapies. To date, few genetic specificities have been described for such
malignancies and the oncogenesis of sarcomas with complex genetics (both
sporadic and post-radiation) remains largely misunderstood. We performed genomic
and transcriptomic analyses on 77 post-radiation sarcomas using DNA-array and
RNA sequencing. Consequently, we were able to investigate changes in copy number
variations, transcriptome profiling, fusion gene expression, and mutational
landscapes. We compare these data to a reference cohort of 93 sporadic sarcomas.
At genomic level, similar chromosomal complexity was observed both in
post-radiation and sporadic sarcomas with complex genetics. We found more
frequent CDKN2A and CDKN2B (coding for p14/p16 and p15 proteins, respectively;
at 9p21.3) losses in post-radiation (71%) than in sporadic tumors (39%;
P = 6.92e-3). Among all detected fusion genes and punctual variations, few
specificities were observed between these groups and such alterations are not
able to drive a strong and specific oncogenesis. Recurrent MYC amplifications
(96%) and KDR variants (8%) were detected in post-radiation angiosarcomas, in
agreement with the literature. Transcriptomic analysis of such angiosarcomas
revealed two distinct groups harboring different genomic imbalances (in
particular gains of 17q24.2-17qter) with different clinical courses according to
patient's vital status. Differential gene expression analysis permitted to focus
on the immune response as a potential actor to tumor aggressiveness.
Histochemistry validated a lower inflammation and lower immune infiltrate at
tumor periphery for highly aggressive angiosarcomas. Our results provide new
genomic and transcriptomic information about post-radiation sarcomas. The
techniques we used (RNA-seq and DNA-arrays) did not highlight major differences
in sarcomas with complex genetics depending on the radiation context, revealing
similar patterns of transcriptomic profiles and chromosomal copy number
variations. Additional characterizations, particularly whole genome sequencing,
could measure changes in DNA following radiation therapy in such malignancies
and may precise their oncogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-019-0300-2
PMID: 31243333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
