---
reference_id: "PMID:38077370"
title: "The role of the interleukin-36 axis in generalized pustular psoriasis: a review of the mechanism of action of spesolimab."
authors:
- Hawkes JE
- Visvanathan S
- Krueger JG
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1292941
keywords:
- United States
- Adult
- Humans
- Psoriasis
- Interleukins/metabolism
- Skin
- "Skin Diseases, Vesiculobullous"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of the interleukin-36 axis in generalized pustular psoriasis: a review of the mechanism of action of spesolimab.
**Authors:** Hawkes JE, Visvanathan S, Krueger JG
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1292941](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1292941)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Nov 21;14:1292941. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1292941.
eCollection 2023.

The role of the interleukin-36 axis in generalized pustular psoriasis: a review
of the mechanism of action of spesolimab.

Hawkes JE(1), Visvanathan S(2), Krueger JG(3).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Skin Science and Research and Pacific Skin Institute, Sacramento,
CA, United States.
(2)Translational Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Ridgefield, CT, United States.
(3)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, The Rockefeller University, New
York, NY, United States.

Generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) is a rare, chronic, inflammatory skin
disorder characterized by recurrent flares associated with skin erythema,
desquamation, and widespread superficial sterile pustules, which may be severe
("lakes of pus"). Systemic symptoms are often present, including malaise, fever,
and skin pain. In GPP, innate immune responses are driven by abnormal activation
of the interleukin (IL)-36-chemokine-neutrophil axis and excessive neutrophil
infiltration. This review highlights the IL-36 pathway in the context of the
IL-1 superfamily and describes how unopposed IL-36 signaling can lead to the
development of GPP. Targeted inhibition of the IL-36 receptor (IL-36R) is an
attractive therapeutic strategy in the treatment of GPP, including flare
prevention and sustained disease control. Spesolimab is a first-in-class,
humanized, monoclonal antibody that binds specifically to the IL-36R and
antagonizes IL-36 signaling. Spesolimab was approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration in September 2022 to treat GPP flares in adults and was
subsequently approved for GPP flare treatment in other countries across the
world. Anti-IL-36R therapy, such as spesolimab, can mitigate flares and address
flare prevention in GPP, presumably through rebalancing IL-36 signaling and
modulating the pro-inflammatory response of the downstream effectors.

Copyright © 2023 Hawkes, Visvanathan and Krueger.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1292941
PMCID: PMC10703363
PMID: 38077370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JH serves on the medical board and scientific
advisory committee of the National Psoriasis Foundation, is a councilor for the
International Psoriasis Council, and has been a paid consultant for AbbVie,
Arcutis, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly and Company, Janssen, LEO,
Novartis, Pfizer, Regeneron-Sanofi, Sun Pharmaceutical, UCB, VisualDx, and
UpToDate. SV is an employee of Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc. JK has
received grants from and been an investigator for Boehringer Ingelheim; received
personal fees from AbbVie, Baxter, Biogen Idec, Delenex Therapeutics, Kineta,
Sanofi, Serono, and XenoPort; and received grants from Amgen, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Dermira, Innovaderm Research, Janssen, Kadmon, Kyowa Kirin, Eli Lilly,
Merck, Novartis, Parexel, and Pfizer.
