---
reference_id: "PMID:38962401"
title: "Estimating prevalence of classical homocystinuria in the United States using Optum's de-identified market clarity data."
authors:
- Jain M
- Shah M
- Thakker KM
- Rava A
- Block AP
- Ndiba-Markey C
- Pinto L
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimating prevalence of classical homocystinuria in the United States using Optum's de-identified market clarity data.
**Authors:** Jain M, Shah M, Thakker KM, Rava A, Block AP, Ndiba-Markey C, Pinto L
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101101](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101101)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2024 Jun 7;40:101101. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101101. 
eCollection 2024 Sep.

Estimating prevalence of classical homocystinuria in the United States using 
Optum's de-identified market clarity data.

Jain M(1), Shah M(2), Thakker KM(3), Rava A(4), Block AP(2), Ndiba-Markey C(4), 
Pinto L(2).

Author information:
(1)Kennedy Krieger Institute, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Travere Therapeutics, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Notting Hill Consulting LLC, Celebration, FL, USA.
(4)Genesis Research Group, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Prevalence estimates for classical homocystinuria 
(HCU) are variable and likely underestimated due to underdiagnosis. Claims data 
represent a strong but seldom used resource to analyze prevalence of HCU. The 
aim of this study was to estimate a prevalence range of HCU in the US utilizing 
a combination of diagnosis codes, total homocysteine levels, and clinical 
presentations indicative of HCU.
METHODS: This was a non-interventional retrospective cohort study, using Optum's 
de-identified Market Clarity Data, with a patient identification period from 
January 01, 2016, through September 30, 2021. An algorithm was developed to 
identify 2 cohorts of patients using broad and strict definitions of HCU. The 
index date was the date within the identification period on which the first 
criterion was met for the inclusion criteria. Baseline demographics, clinical 
characteristics, and complications were assessed and summarized using 
descriptive statistics. Crude and standardized prevalence estimates were 
calculated.
RESULTS: There were 3880 and 633 patients that met the relevant inclusion 
criteria for the broad and strict cohorts, respectively. The projected US 
prevalence of HCU was calculated to be 17,631 and 3466 based on the broad and 
strict definitions, respectively. The average annual standardized prevalence 
across 2016-2020 was 5.29 and 1.04 per 100,000 people for the broad and strict 
cohorts, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Prevalence estimates of HCU vary depending on databases or datasets 
used and identification criteria. Many patients with clinical presentations 
suggesting a diagnosis of HCU did not have an associated diagnosis, potentially 
indicating underdiagnosis or underreporting. Future research should study 
alternative methods, such as the identification algorithm in our analysis, to 
better diagnose and understand the true prevalence of HCU.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2024.101101
PMCID: PMC11219957
PMID: 38962401

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial 
interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing 
interests. Mahim Jain reports financial support was provided by Travere 
Therapeutics Inc. Kamlesh M. Thakker reports financial support was provided by 
Travere Therapeutics Inc. Mehul Shah reports a relationship with Travere 
Therapeutics Inc. that includes: employment and equity or stocks. Agness Pelts 
Block reports a relationship with Travere Therapeutics Inc. that includes: 
employment and equity or stocks. Lionel Pinto reports a relationship with 
Travere Therapeutics Inc. that includes: employment and equity or stocks. Andrew 
Rava and Colette Ndiba-Markey are employees of Genesis Research Group, which 
receives consulting fees from Travere Therapeutics, Inc. for this study and 
other related studies. If there are other authors, they declare that they have 
no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have 
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. M.J. has received 
consultancy fees from Travere Therapeutics, Inc. M.S. is an employee and 
stock/options holder (vested and unvested) of Travere Therapeutics, Inc. K.M.T 
has a consulting contract with Travere Therapeutics, Inc. and does not have any 
equity interest in Travere Therapeutics, Inc. A.R. is an employee of Genesis 
Research Group, which receives consulting fees from Travere Therapeutics, Inc. 
for this study and other related studies. A.P.B. is an employee and stockholder 
of Travere Therapeutics Inc. C.N.M. is an employee of Genesis Research Group, 
which receives consulting fees from Travere Therapeutics, Inc. for this study 
and other related studies. L.P. is a former employee and stock/options holder 
(vested and unvested) of Travere Therapeutics, Inc.