---
reference_id: "PMID:9827875"
title: Hemolytic crisis in G6PD-deficient individuals in the occupational setting.
authors:
- Djerassi L
journal: Int Arch Occup Environ Health
year: '1998'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemolytic crisis in G6PD-deficient individuals in the occupational setting.
**Authors:** Djerassi L
**Journal:** Int Arch Occup Environ Health (1998)

## Content

1. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 1998 Sep;71 Suppl:S26-8.

Hemolytic crisis in G6PD-deficient individuals in the occupational setting.

Djerassi L(1).

Author information:
(1)Shemer Institute, Bnei Zion Hospital Haifa, Israel. haia@inter.net.il

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency affects an estimated 400 
million people. Most of the individuals affected live in Africa, the Middle East 
and Southeast Asia, or are African-Americans. The ethnic distribution of 
G6PD-deficiency is extremely variable in Israel--where the Jewish population has 
been repatriated from more than 60 different countries--its prevalence being 
from 0% to 58%. Five cases of hemolytic episodes arising from the loading of 
trinitrotoluene (TNT) were detected. Hemoglobin levels dropped between 4 and 
10.2 g/dl. Reticulocytosis reached 4%-26.2% of red blood cells, while bilirubin 
levels rose to a peak of 5.1 mg/dl. Methemoglobin was 1.5%-8.6% and 
sulfmethemoglobin 0.9%-4.93% of total hemoglobin. Urinary urobilinogen was 
increased in all. All five workers showed absolute G6PD deficiency. In one 
worker a urinary metabolite of TNT 2-6 dinitromono amino toluene, was detected.

PMID: 9827875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]