---
reference_id: "PMID:36851773"
title: Genetic Susceptibility to Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis Virus Infection.
authors:
- Yang TH
- Chan C
- Yang PJ
- Huang YH
- Lee MH
journal: Viruses
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/v15020559
keywords:
- Humans
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/genetics"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Liver Neoplasms/genetics
- "Hepatitis B, Chronic/complications, genetics"
- Hepatitis Viruses
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Susceptibility to Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis Virus Infection.
**Authors:** Yang TH, Chan C, Yang PJ, Huang YH, Lee MH
**Journal:** Viruses (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v15020559](https://doi.org/10.3390/v15020559)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2023 Feb 17;15(2):559. doi: 10.3390/v15020559.

Genetic Susceptibility to Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Patients with Chronic
Hepatitis Virus Infection.

Yang TH(1), Chan C(1), Yang PJ(1), Huang YH(1), Lee MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, 155
Li-Nong Street, Section Peitou, Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of cancer-related
deaths globally. The risk factors for HCC include chronic hepatitis B and C
virus infections, excessive alcohol consumption, obesity, metabolic disease, and
aflatoxin exposure. In addition to these viral and environmental risk factors,
individual genetic predisposition is a major determinant of HCC risk. Familial
clustering of HCC has been observed, and a hereditary factor likely contributes
to the risk of HCC development. The familial aggregation may depend on a shared
environment and genetic background as well as the interactions of environmental
and genetic factors. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) are one of the most
practical tools for mapping the patterns of inheritance for the most common form
of genomic variation, single nucleotide polymorphisms. This approach is
practical for investigating genetic variants across the human genome, which is
affected by thousands of common genetic variants that do not follow Mendelian
inheritance. This review article summarizes the academic knowledge of
GWAS-identified genetic loci and their association with HCC. We summarize the
GWASs in accordance with various chronic hepatitis virus infection statuses.
This genetic profiling could be used to identify candidate biomarkers to refine
HCC screening and management by enabling individual risk-based personalization
and stratification. A more comprehensive understanding of the genetic mechanisms
underlying individual predisposition to HCC may lead to improvements in the
prevention and early diagnosis of HCC and the development of effective treatment
strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/v15020559
PMCID: PMC9964813
PMID: 36851773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
