---
reference_id: "PMID:20663977"
title: "Antibodies to Kv1 potassium channel-complex proteins leucine-rich, glioma inactivated 1 protein and contactin-associated protein-2 in limbic encephalitis, Morvan's syndrome and acquired neuromyotonia."
authors:
- Irani SR
- Alexander S
- Waters P
- Kleopa KA
- Pettingill P
- Zuliani L
- Peles E
- Buckley C
- Lang B
- Vincent A
journal: Brain
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awq213
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antibodies/blood, pharmacology"
- Antibody Specificity/immunology
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- Elapid Venoms/pharmacokinetics
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Green Fluorescent Proteins/genetics
- "Hippocampus/drug effects, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunoprecipitation/methods
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Iodine Isotopes/pharmacokinetics
- "Isaacs Syndrome/blood, drug therapy, immunology"
- "Limbic Encephalitis/blood, drug therapy, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- "Membrane Potentials/drug effects, genetics"
- Membrane Proteins/immunology
- Middle Aged
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/immunology
- "Neurons/drug effects, metabolism, physiology"
- Patch-Clamp Techniques/methods
- "Protein Binding/drug effects, physiology"
- Proteins
- Severity of Illness Index
- Shaker Superfamily of Potassium Channels/immunology
- "Syringomyelia/blood, drug therapy, immunology"
- Transfection/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antibodies to Kv1 potassium channel-complex proteins leucine-rich, glioma inactivated 1 protein and contactin-associated protein-2 in limbic encephalitis, Morvan's syndrome and acquired neuromyotonia.
**Authors:** Irani SR, Alexander S, Waters P, Kleopa KA, Pettingill P, Zuliani L, Peles E, Buckley C, Lang B, Vincent A
**Journal:** Brain (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awq213](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awq213)

## Content

1. Brain. 2010 Sep;133(9):2734-48. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq213. Epub 2010 Jul 27.

Antibodies to Kv1 potassium channel-complex proteins leucine-rich, glioma 
inactivated 1 protein and contactin-associated protein-2 in limbic encephalitis, 
Morvan's syndrome and acquired neuromyotonia.

Irani SR(1), Alexander S, Waters P, Kleopa KA, Pettingill P, Zuliani L, Peles E, 
Buckley C, Lang B, Vincent A.

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Group, Department of Clinical Neurology, University of Oxford, 
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Antibodies that immunoprecipitate (125)I-alpha-dendrotoxin-labelled 
voltage-gated potassium channels extracted from mammalian brain tissue have been 
identified in patients with neuromyotonia, Morvan's syndrome, limbic 
encephalitis and a few cases of adult-onset epilepsy. These conditions often 
improve following immunomodulatory therapies. However, the proportions of the 
different syndromes, the numbers with associated tumours and the relationships 
with potassium channel subunit antibody specificities have been unclear. We 
documented the clinical phenotype and tumour associations in 96 potassium 
channel antibody positive patients (titres >400 pM). Five had thymomas and one 
had an endometrial adenocarcinoma. To define the antibody specificities, we 
looked for binding of serum antibodies and their effects on potassium channel 
currents using human embryonic kidney cells expressing the potassium channel 
subunits. Surprisingly, only three of the patients had antibodies directed 
against the potassium channel subunits. By contrast, we found antibodies to 
three proteins that are complexed with (125)I-alpha-dendrotoxin-labelled 
potassium channels in brain extracts: (i) contactin-associated protein-2 that is 
localized at the juxtaparanodes in myelinated axons; (ii) leucine-rich, glioma 
inactivated 1 protein that is most strongly expressed in the hippocampus; and 
(iii) Tag-1/contactin-2 that associates with contactin-associated protein-2. 
Antibodies to Kv1 subunits were found in three sera, to contactin-associated 
protein-2 in 19 sera, to leucine-rich, glioma inactivated 1 protein in 55 sera 
and to contactin-2 in five sera, four of which were also positive for the other 
antibodies. The remaining 18 sera were negative for potassium channel subunits 
and associated proteins by the methods employed. Of the 19 patients with 
contactin-associated protein-antibody-2, 10 had neuromyotonia or Morvan's 
syndrome, compared with only 3 of the 55 leucine-rich, glioma inactivated 1 
protein-antibody positive patients (P < 0.0001), who predominantly had limbic 
encephalitis. The responses to immunomodulatory therapies, defined by changes in 
modified Rankin scores, were good except in the patients with tumours, who all 
had contactin-associated-2 protein antibodies. This study confirms that the 
majority of patients with high potassium channel antibodies have limbic 
encephalitis without tumours. The identification of leucine-rich, glioma 
inactivated 1 protein and contactin-associated protein-2 as the major targets of 
potassium channel antibodies, and their associations with different clinical 
features, begins to explain the diversity of these syndromes; furthermore, 
detection of contactin-associated protein-2 antibodies should help identify the 
risk of an underlying tumour and a poor prognosis in future patients.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq213
PMCID: PMC2929337
PMID: 20663977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]