---
reference_id: "PMID:34891223"
title: Betibeglogene Autotemcel Gene Therapy for Non-β(0)/β(0) Genotype β-Thalassemia.
authors:
- Locatelli F
- Thompson AA
- Kwiatkowski JL
- Porter JB
- Thrasher AJ
- Hongeng S
- Sauer MG
- Thuret I
- Lal A
- Algeri M
- Schneiderman J
- Olson TS
- Carpenter B
- Amrolia PJ
- Anurathapan U
- Schambach A
- Chabannon C
- Schmidt M
- Labik I
- Elliot H
- Guo R
- Asmal M
- Colvin RA
- Walters MC
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2113206
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Betibeglogene Autotemcel Gene Therapy for Non-β(0)/β(0) Genotype β-Thalassemia.
**Authors:** Locatelli F, Thompson AA, Kwiatkowski JL, Porter JB, Thrasher AJ, Hongeng S, Sauer MG, Thuret I, Lal A, Algeri M, Schneiderman J, Olson TS, Carpenter B, Amrolia PJ, Anurathapan U, Schambach A, Chabannon C, Schmidt M, Labik I, Elliot H, Guo R, Asmal M, Colvin RA, Walters MC
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2113206](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2113206)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2022 Feb 3;386(5):415-427. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2113206. Epub 2021
 Dec 11.

Betibeglogene Autotemcel Gene Therapy for Non-β(0)/β(0) Genotype β-Thalassemia.

Locatelli F(1), Thompson AA(1), Kwiatkowski JL(1), Porter JB(1), Thrasher AJ(1), 
Hongeng S(1), Sauer MG(1), Thuret I(1), Lal A(1), Algeri M(1), Schneiderman 
J(1), Olson TS(1), Carpenter B(1), Amrolia PJ(1), Anurathapan U(1), Schambach 
A(1), Chabannon C(1), Schmidt M(1), Labik I(1), Elliot H(1), Guo R(1), Asmal 
M(1), Colvin RA(1), Walters MC(1).

Author information:
(1)From IRCCS Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Sapienza, University of Rome, 
Rome (F.L., M. Algeri); Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, 
Northwestern University, Chicago (A.A.T., J.S.); Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia and Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia (J.L.K., T.S.O.); University College London Hospital (J.B.P., B.C.) 
and University College London Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health and 
Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust (A.J.T., P.J.A.) - all in London; 
Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand (S.H., U.A.); the 
Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation in 
Children (M.G.S.) and the Institute of Experimental Hematology (A.S.), Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, and GeneWerk, Heidelberg (M.S., I.L.) - both in 
Germany; Hôpital de la Timone (I.T.) and Institut Paoli-Calmettes Comprehensive 
Cancer Center (C.C.) - both in Marseille, France; the University of California, 
San Francisco, Benioff Children's Hospital, Oakland (A.L., M.C.W.); and the 
Division of Hematology-Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston (A.S.), and Bluebird Bio, Cambridge (H.E., R.G., M. Asmal, 
R.A.C.) - all in Massachusetts.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Feb 3;386(5):488-490. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2118580.

BACKGROUND: Betibeglogene autotemcel (beti-cel) gene therapy for 
transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia contains autologous CD34+ hematopoietic stem 
cells and progenitor cells transduced with the BB305 lentiviral vector encoding 
the β-globin (βA-T87Q) gene.
METHODS: In this open-label, phase 3 study, we evaluated the efficacy and safety 
of beti-cel in adult and pediatric patients with transfusion-dependent 
β-thalassemia and a non-β0/β0 genotype. Patients underwent myeloablation with 
busulfan (with doses adjusted on the basis of pharmacokinetic analysis) and 
received beti-cel intravenously. The primary end point was transfusion 
independence (i.e., a weighted average hemoglobin level of ≥9 g per deciliter 
without red-cell transfusions for ≥12 months).
RESULTS: A total of 23 patients were enrolled and received treatment, with a 
median follow-up of 29.5 months (range, 13.0 to 48.2). Transfusion independence 
occurred in 20 of 22 patients who could be evaluated (91%), including 6 of 7 
patients (86%) who were younger than 12 years of age. The average hemoglobin 
level during transfusion independence was 11.7 g per deciliter (range, 9.5 to 
12.8). Twelve months after beti-cel infusion, the median level of gene 
therapy-derived adult hemoglobin (HbA) with a T87Q amino acid substitution 
(HbAT87Q) was 8.7 g per deciliter (range, 5.2 to 10.6) in patients who had 
transfusion independence. The safety profile of beti-cel was consistent with 
that of busulfan-based myeloablation. Four patients had at least one adverse 
event that was considered by the investigators to be related or possibly related 
to beti-cel; all events were nonserious except for thrombocytopenia (in 1 
patient). No cases of cancer were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with beti-cel resulted in a sustained HbAT87Q level and a 
total hemoglobin level that was high enough to enable transfusion independence 
in most patients with a non-β0/β0 genotype, including those younger than 12 
years of age. (Funded by Bluebird Bio; HGB-207 ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT02906202.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2113206
PMID: 34891223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]