---
reference_id: "PMID:28603940"
title: "Outcome of prenatally diagnosed fetal heterotaxy: systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Buca DIP
- Khalil A
- Rizzo G
- Familiari A
- Di Giovanni S
- Liberati M
- Murgano D
- Ricciardulli A
- Fanfani F
- Scambia G
- "D'Antonio F"
journal: Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/uog.17546
keywords:
- Female
- "Heart Septal Defects, Ventricular/diagnostic imaging, mortality, surgery"
- "Heterotaxy Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, mortality, surgery"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Perinatal Death
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
- Vascular Surgical Procedures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcome of prenatally diagnosed fetal heterotaxy: systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Buca DIP, Khalil A, Rizzo G, Familiari A, Di Giovanni S, Liberati M, Murgano D, Ricciardulli A, Fanfani F, Scambia G, D'Antonio F
**Journal:** Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/uog.17546](https://doi.org/10.1002/uog.17546)

## Content

1. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2018 Mar;51(3):323-330. doi: 10.1002/uog.17546.

Outcome of prenatally diagnosed fetal heterotaxy: systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Buca DIP(1), Khalil A(2), Rizzo G(3), Familiari A(4), Di Giovanni S(1), Liberati
M(1), Murgano D(1), Ricciardulli A(1), Fanfani F(1), Scambia G(4), D'Antonio
F(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, SS. Annunziata Hospital, G.
D'Annunzio University of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
(2)St George's, University of London & St George's University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research Institute, London, UK.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Università di Roma Tor Vergata,
Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Catholic University of the Sacred
Heart, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT - The Arctic
University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Hospital of Northern
Norway, Tromsø, Norway.

OBJECTIVES: The main aim of this systematic review was to evaluate the
prevalence and type of associated anomalies in fetuses with heterotaxy diagnosed
prenatally on ultrasound; the perinatal outcome of these fetuses was also
studied.
METHODS: An electronic search of MEDLINE, EMBASE and CINAHL databases was
performed. Only studies reporting the prenatal diagnosis of isomerism were
included. Outcomes observed included associated cardiac and extracardiac
anomalies, fetal arrhythmia, abnormal karyotype, type of surgical repair and
perinatal mortality. The analysis was stratified according to the type of
heterotaxy syndrome (left (LAI) or right (RAI) atrial isomerism). Meta-analyses
of proportions were used to combine data. Quality assessment of the included
studies was performed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for cohort studies.
RESULTS: Sixteen studies (647 fetuses) were included in the analysis.
Atrioventricular septal defect was the most common associated major cardiac
anomaly found both in fetuses with LAI (pooled proportion (PP), 59.3% (95% CI,
44.0-73.7%)), with obstructive lesions of the right outflow tract occurring in
35.5% of these cases, and in fetuses with RAI (PP, 72.9% (95% CI, 60.4-83.7%)).
Fetal arrhythmias occurred in 36.7% (95% CI, 26.9-47.2%) of cases with LAI and
were mainly represented by complete atrioventricular block, while this finding
was uncommon in cases with RAI (PP, 1.3% (95% CI, 0.2-3.2%)). Abnormal stomach
and liver position were found, respectively, in 59.4% (95% CI, 38.1-79.0%) and
32.5% (95% CI, 11.9-57.6%) of cases with LAI, and in 54.5% (95% CI, 38.5-70.1%)
and 45.9% (95% CI, 11.3-83.0%) of cases with RAI, while intestinal malrotation
was detected in 14.2% (95% CI, 2.5-33.1%) of LAI and 27.1% (95% CI, 7.9-52.0%)
of RAI cases. Hydrops developed in 11.8% (95% CI, 2.9-25.6%) of fetuses
diagnosed prenatally with LAI. Biventricular repair was accomplished in 78.2%
(95% CI, 64.3-89.4%) of cases with LAI, while univentricular repair or
palliation was needed in 17.0% (95% CI, 9.7-25.9%); death during or after
surgery occurred in 26.8% (95% CI, 4.6-58.7%) of LAI cases. Most children with
RAI had univentricular repair and 27.8% (95% CI, 15.5-42.1%) died during or
after surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Fetal heterotaxy is associated with a high prevalence of cardiac
and extracardiac anomalies. Approximately one quarter of fetuses with heterotaxy
died during or after surgery. Abnormal heart rhythm, especially heart block, is
common in fetuses with LAI, while this finding is uncommon in RAI. Biventricular
repair was common in LAI while univentricular repair was required in the
majority of children affected by RAI. Copyright © 2017 ISUOG. Published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Copyright © 2017 ISUOG. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/uog.17546
PMID: 28603940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
