---
reference_id: "PMID:39006040"
title: "Phenotypic and Molecular Spectrum of Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase Deficiency: An Analytical Study of a Case Series and a Scoping Review of 53 Cases of Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase."
authors:
- Alyazidi AS
- Muthaffar OY
- Shawli MK
- Ahmed RA
- Aljefri YF
- Baaishrah LS
- Jambi AT
- Alotibi FA
journal: J Microsc Ultrastruct
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/jmau.jmau_16_22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic and Molecular Spectrum of Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase Deficiency: An Analytical Study of a Case Series and a Scoping Review of 53 Cases of Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase.
**Authors:** Alyazidi AS, Muthaffar OY, Shawli MK, Ahmed RA, Aljefri YF, Baaishrah LS, Jambi AT, Alotibi FA
**Journal:** J Microsc Ultrastruct (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/jmau.jmau_16_22](https://doi.org/10.4103/jmau.jmau_16_22)

## Content

1. J Microsc Ultrastruct. 2022 Dec 1;12(2):81-90. doi: 10.4103/jmau.jmau_16_22. 
eCollection 2024 Apr-Jun.

Phenotypic and Molecular Spectrum of Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase 
Deficiency: An Analytical Study of a Case Series and a Scoping Review of 53 
Cases of Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase.

Alyazidi AS(1), Muthaffar OY(2), Shawli MK(1), Ahmed RA(1), Aljefri YF(1), 
Baaishrah LS(3), Jambi AT(1), Alotibi FA(1).

Author information:
(1)Undergraduate Student, Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Undergraduate Student, Faculty of Pharmacy, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency (GAMT) is an autosomal 
recessive inborn error of metabolism. A condition that results from a pathogenic 
variant in the GAMT gene that maps to 19p13.3. The prevalence can be estimated 
to be up to 1:2,640,000 cases; countries such as Saudi Arabia could have a 
higher prevalence due to high consanguinity rates. The clinical manifestations 
that a patient could obtain are broad and start to manifest in the patients' 
early childhood years.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A thorough review of case reports in January 2022 was 
conducted. The retrieved literature was screened for demographic data. Patients 
of all ages were included. Qualitative variables were described as number and 
percentage (%), and quantitative data were described by the mean and standard 
deviation. In bivariate data, Chi-square test (χ2) was used and t-test for 
nonparametric variables.
RESULTS: Gender distribution was 53% of males and 47% females. Reported age 
ranged from 8 to 31 months. At the age of onset, 50% of the cases were infants, 
28% were toddlers, and 15% were children, concluding that 79% of the reported 
cases developed symptoms before 5 years old. 68% of the cases developed 
generalized seizures throughout their life. 84% of the cases expressed a form of 
developmental delay. 43% of the cases had intellectual disabilities and mental 
retardation that affected their learning process; most cases required special 
care. 23% of the affected cases were of consanguineous marriages, and 7% had 
affected relatives.
CONCLUSION: We described four novel case reports, the first to be reported in 
Saudi Arabia. Seizure was a leading finding in the majority of the cases. 
Developmental delay was broadly observed. Intellectual delay and language 
impairments are primary hallmarks. Further understanding and early diagnosis are 
recommended. Premarital testing of neurogenetic diseases using whole-exome 
sequencing is probably a future direction, especially in populations with high 
consanguinity rates.

Copyright: © 2022 Journal of Microscopy and Ultrastructure.

DOI: 10.4103/jmau.jmau_16_22
PMCID: PMC11245129
PMID: 39006040

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.