---
reference_id: "PMID:35306248"
title: "Experiences of living with Lynch Syndrome: A reflexive thematic analysis."
authors:
- Warner NZ
- Gleeson C
- Fahey P
- Horgan R
- Groarke A
journal: Eur J Oncol Nurs
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejon.2022.102117
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Experiences of living with Lynch Syndrome: A reflexive thematic analysis.
**Authors:** Warner NZ, Gleeson C, Fahey P, Horgan R, Groarke A
**Journal:** Eur J Oncol Nurs (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejon.2022.102117](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejon.2022.102117)

## Content

1. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2022 Jun;58:102117. doi: 10.1016/j.ejon.2022.102117. Epub
2022  Mar 4.

Experiences of living with Lynch Syndrome: A reflexive thematic analysis.

Warner NZ(1), Gleeson C(2), Fahey P(3), Horgan R(3), Groarke A(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland. 
Electronic address: niki.warner6@gmail.com.
(2)School of Psychology, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(3)Lynch Syndrome Ireland, Ireland.

PURPOSE: Lynch Syndrome is one of the most common hereditary cancer syndromes, 
arising from DNA mismatch repair. Lynch Syndrome carriers are at increased 
lifetime risk of developing certain cancers, such as colorectal and endometrial. 
This increased risk can result in adverse psychological outcomes. The present 
qualitative study explores the experiences of individuals with Lynch Syndrome 
when accessing and managing healthcare in the period after learning of their 
Lynch Syndrome status.
METHODS: Twelve interviews were conducted with Lynch Syndrome carriers in 
Ireland, with recruitment occurring predominantly online through closed social 
media platforms. This was coordinated by Lynch Syndrome Ireland, a patient 
representative group. Reflexive thematic analysis was used to analyse the data. 
There was significant Public and Patient Involvement in this study, with the 
committee members (N = 2) of Lynch Syndrome Ireland acting on the panel. The 
involvement of the PPI panel began from initial project idea conception and 
continued throughout the study.
RESULTS: Lynch Syndrome carriers highlighted the lack of adequate information 
from medical professionals regarding their diagnosis. Furthermore, participants 
spoke of the significant lack of knowledge amongst medical professionals about 
Lynch Syndrome. A theme depicting guilt was also noted regarding passing Lynch 
Syndrome to their children, and the worry experienced when children underwent 
genetic testing.
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlighted the experiences of having a Lynch Syndrome 
diagnosis and demonstrates a need for further psychological and medical support 
for the Lynch Syndrome community, including a clear need for improvements in 
genetic cancer services in this field.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejon.2022.102117
PMID: 35306248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]