---
reference_id: "PMID:12587656"
title: Dengue fever in the Western Hemisphere.
authors:
- Castleberry JS
- Mahon CR
journal: Clin Lab Sci
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue fever in the Western Hemisphere.
**Authors:** Castleberry JS, Mahon CR
**Journal:** Clin Lab Sci (2003)

## Content

1. Clin Lab Sci. 2003 Winter;16(1):34-8.

Dengue fever in the Western Hemisphere.

Castleberry JS(1), Mahon CR.

Author information:
(1)University of Texas, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Dengue virus, an arthropod-borne viral agent, causes two distinct diseases: 
classic dengue fever (DF) and dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF). There are four 
dengue virus serotypes: DEN-1, DEN-2, DEN-3, and DEN-4. Although infection with 
dengue stimulates immunologic response to a serotype, there is no cross-immunity 
conferred. Hence, a person can potentially be infected with each serotype during 
his or her lifetime. An infected female Aedes mosquito transmits the virus from 
person to person while feeding. The disease, now endemic in more than 100 
countries in Africa, the Americas, the Eastern Mediterranean, Southeast Asia, 
and Western Pacific, is spreading to new areas and causing explosive outbreaks. 
Because of the major impact on lives and local economies epidemics produce, 
rapid detection of dengue infection has become an important public health 
research issue. Recently developed serological procedures to detect dengue 
infections have shown great potential for field use.

PMID: 12587656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]