---
reference_id: "PMID:1920838"
title: "[Clinical and cytological features of acute myelogenous leukemia with 8; 21 chromosome translocation]."
authors:
- Harada H
- Nasu K
- Harada Y
- Niki Y
- Tomono N
- Akasaka K
- Hoshizaki H
- Edamura S
- Kawamura Y
- Ito Y
journal: Rinsho Ketsueki
year: '1991'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Bone Marrow/pathology
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 21"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 8"
- Female
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neutrophils/pathology
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Clinical and cytological features of acute myelogenous leukemia with 8; 21 chromosome translocation].
**Authors:** Harada H, Nasu K, Harada Y, Niki Y, Tomono N, Akasaka K, Hoshizaki H, Edamura S, Kawamura Y, Ito Y
**Journal:** Rinsho Ketsueki (1991)

## Content

1. Rinsho Ketsueki. 1991 Jul;32(7):751-7.

[Clinical and cytological features of acute myelogenous leukemia with 8; 21 
chromosome translocation].

[Article in Japanese]

Harada H(1), Nasu K, Harada Y, Niki Y, Tomono N, Akasaka K, Hoshizaki H, Edamura 
S, Kawamura Y, Ito Y, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka Red Cross Hospital.

Eight cases of acute myelogenous leukemia with (8; 21) translocation were 
reported. As recently reported, they showed following features: M2 morphology in 
FAB classification (all 8 patients), abnormal granulocyte maturation, i.e. large 
granules and pseudo Pelger-Huet forms (5), Auer rods (8), occasional 
eosinophilia (2), frequent loss of one sex chromosome (5), the low neutrophil 
alkaline phosphatase activity (5), and tumor formation (one). Both CD13 and CD33 
antigens were expressed on smaller number of leukemic cells than the other AML 
(M2) cells, whereas CD34 and HLA-DR antigens were expressed on higher number of 
cells. Interestingly CD19 antigen was detected on a small to large population of 
tumor cells from four out of six patients. Despite the high remission rate, many 
of them relapsed within one year. More intensive postinduction and maintenance 
therapy should be considered for those patients.

PMID: 1920838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]