---
reference_id: "PMID:25049390"
title: Next-generation sequencing identifies rare variants associated with Noonan syndrome.
authors:
- Chen PC
- Yin J
- Yu HW
- Yuan T
- Fernandez M
- Yung CK
- Trinh QM
- Peltekova VD
- Reid JG
- Tworog-Dube E
- Morgan MB
- Muzny DM
- Stein L
- McPherson JD
- Roberts AE
- Gibbs RA
- Neel BG
- Kucherlapati R
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1324128111
keywords:
- Alleles
- Genetic Association Studies
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing/methods
- Humans
- MAP Kinase Kinase 1/genetics
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Neurofibromin 1/genetics
- Noonan Syndrome/genetics
- "ras Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Next-generation sequencing identifies rare variants associated with Noonan syndrome.
**Authors:** Chen PC, Yin J, Yu HW, Yuan T, Fernandez M, Yung CK, Trinh QM, Peltekova VD, Reid JG, Tworog-Dube E, Morgan MB, Muzny DM, Stein L, McPherson JD, Roberts AE, Gibbs RA, Neel BG, Kucherlapati R
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1324128111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1324128111)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 5;111(31):11473-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1324128111. Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Next-generation sequencing identifies rare variants associated with Noonan
syndrome.

Chen PC(1), Yin J(2), Yu HW(3), Yuan T(4), Fernandez M(2), Yung CK(5), Trinh
QM(5), Peltekova VD(5), Reid JG(6), Tworog-Dube E(4), Morgan MB(6), Muzny DM(6),
Stein L(5), McPherson JD(5), Roberts AE(7), Gibbs RA(6), Neel BG(8),
Kucherlapati R(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115;Department
of Medicine, Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA
02115;Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70457, Taiwan;
(2)Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network, and Department of
Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1L7;
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70457, Taiwan;
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA 02115;
(5)Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 0A3;
(6)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030; and.
(7)Department of Cardiology and Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine,
Boston Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115.
(8)Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network, and Department of
Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1L7;
bneel@uhnresearch.ca rkucherlapati@partners.org.
(9)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115;Department
of Medicine, Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA
02115; bneel@uhnresearch.ca rkucherlapati@partners.org.

Noonan syndrome (NS) is a relatively common genetic disorder, characterized by
typical facies, short stature, developmental delay, and cardiac abnormalities.
Known causative genes account for 70-80% of clinically diagnosed NS patients,
but the genetic basis for the remaining 20-30% of cases is unknown. We performed
next-generation sequencing on germ-line DNA from 27 NS patients lacking a
mutation in the known NS genes. We identified gain-of-function alleles in
Ras-like without CAAX 1 (RIT1) and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1
(MAP2K1) and previously unseen loss-of-function variants in RAS p21 protein
activator 2 (RASA2) that are likely to cause NS in these patients. Expression of
the mutant RASA2, MAP2K1, or RIT1 alleles in heterologous cells increased
RAS-ERK pathway activation, supporting a causative role in NS pathogenesis. Two
patients had more than one disease-associated variant. Moreover, the diagnosis
of an individual initially thought to have NS was revised to neurofibromatosis
type 1 based on an NF1 nonsense mutation detected in this patient. Another
patient harbored a missense mutation in NF1 that resulted in decreased protein
stability and impaired ability to suppress RAS-ERK activation; however, this
patient continues to exhibit a NS-like phenotype. In addition, a nonsense
mutation in RPS6KA3 was found in one patient initially diagnosed with NS whose
diagnosis was later revised to Coffin-Lowry syndrome. Finally, we identified
other potential candidates for new NS genes, as well as potential carrier
alleles for unrelated syndromes. Taken together, our data suggest that
next-generation sequencing can provide a useful adjunct to RASopathy diagnosis
and emphasize that the standard clinical categories for RASopathies might not be
adequate to describe all patients.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1324128111
PMCID: PMC4128129
PMID: 25049390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
