---
reference_id: "PMID:36684194"
title: "Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: A review."
authors:
- Sun L
- Li C
- Gao S
journal: Front Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.1015884
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: A review.
**Authors:** Sun L, Li C, Gao S
**Journal:** Front Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fsurg.2022.1015884](https://doi.org/10.3389/fsurg.2022.1015884)

## Content

1. Front Surg. 2023 Jan 6;9:1015884. doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.1015884. eCollection
 2022.

Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: A review.

Sun L(1), Li C(1), Gao S(1).

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Colorectal and Anal Surgery, China-Japan Union Hospital,
Changchun, China.

Diffuse malignant peritoneal mesothelioma (DMPM) is an unusual and
life-threatening locally invasive tumor. The morbidity and mortality of the
disease are associated with progressive local effects in the abdominal cavity,
such as abdominal distention, painful sensations, and early saturation with
reduced oral intake, which eventually lead to intestinal obstruction and
cachexia. Computed tomography (CT) has been widely used as a first-line
diagnostic tool for DMPM. In addition, the most sensitive immunohistochemical
markers of DMPM include WT 1, D2-40, and calmodulin. This paradigm has altered
with the advancements in the immunohistochemical analysis of BRCA1-Associated
Protein 1 (BAP1) the lack of BAP1 expression shows the diagnosis of malignancy.
DMPM is resistant to conventional chemotherapies. Therefore, the gold standard
for the treatment of DMPM is the combination of cytoreductive surgery (CRS) and
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC). The overexpression of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT serine/threonine kinase 1
(AKT)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway drives the
malignant phenotype of DMPM, thereby showing promising potential for the
treatment of DMPM. The coordinated activities among multiple RTKs are directly
involved in the biological processes of DMPM, suggesting that the combined
inhibition of the PI3K and mTOR signaling pathways might be an effective
measure. This treatment strategy can be easily implemented in clinical practice.
However, the combined inhibition of ERBB1(HER1)/ERBB2 (HER2) and ERBB3 (HER3)
requires further investigations. Thus, based on these, the discovery of novel
targeted therapies might be crucial to improving the prognosis of DMPM patients.

© 2023 Sun, Li and Gao.

DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.1015884
PMCID: PMC9852335
PMID: 36684194

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
