---
reference_id: "PMID:37156689"
title: The association of BRAF V600E gene mutation with proliferative activity and histopathological characteristics of congenital melanocytic nevi in children.
authors:
- Chen J
- Zhang G
- Liu X
- Tu P
journal: An Bras Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.abd.2022.01.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The association of BRAF V600E gene mutation with proliferative activity and histopathological characteristics of congenital melanocytic nevi in children.
**Authors:** Chen J, Zhang G, Liu X, Tu P
**Journal:** An Bras Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.abd.2022.01.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abd.2022.01.016)

## Content

1. An Bras Dermatol. 2023 Jul-Aug;98(4):498-505. doi: 10.1016/j.abd.2022.01.016. 
Epub 2023 May 6.

The association of BRAF V600E gene mutation with proliferative activity and 
histopathological characteristics of congenital melanocytic nevi in children.

Chen J(1), Zhang G(2), Liu X(2), Tu P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Peking University First Hospital, 
Beijing, China; Department of Dermatology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to 
Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Capital 
Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Peking University First Hospital, 
Beijing, China. Electronic address: tup0207@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: A lot of congenital melanocytic nevi (CMN) carry the somatic 
mutation in the oncogene BRAF V600E. But the detailed histopathologic 
characteristics and the proliferative activity of CMN with BRAF V600E gene 
mutation have not been systematically documented.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the proliferative activity and histopathological features 
correlating them with BRAF V600E gene mutation status in CMN.
METHODS: CMN were retrospectively identified from the laboratory reporting 
system. Mutations were determined by Sanger sequencing. The CMN were divided 
into a mutant group and control group according to whether there was BRAF gene 
mutation and were strictly matched according to gender, age, nevus size, and 
location. Histopathological analysis, analysis of Ki67 expression by 
immunohistochemistry and laser confocal fluorescence microscopy were performed.
RESULTS: The differences in Ki67 index, the depth of nevus cell involvement and 
the number of nevus cell nests between the mutant group and the control group 
was statistically significant, with p-values of 0.041, 0.002 and 0.007, 
respectively. Compared with BRAF V600E negative nevi, BRAF V600E positive nevi 
often exhibited predominantly nested intraepidermal melanocytes, and larger 
junctional nests, but the difference in this data sets were not statistically 
significant. The number of nests (p = 0.001) was positively correlated with the 
proportion of Ki67 positive cells.
STUDY LIMITATIONS: A small sample of patients were included and there was no 
follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: BRAF V600E gene mutations were associated with high proliferative 
activity and distinct histopathological features in congenital melanocytic nevi.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier España, S.L.U.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abd.2022.01.016
PMCID: PMC10334326
PMID: 37156689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]