---
reference_id: "PMID:14769702"
title: Ezetimibe effectively reduces plasma plant sterols in patients with sitosterolemia.
authors:
- Salen G
- von Bergmann K
- Lütjohann D
- Kwiterovich P
- Kane J
- Patel SB
- Musliner T
- Stein P
- Musser B
- Multicenter Sitosterolemia Study Group
journal: Circulation
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000116766.31036.03
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily G, Member 5"
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily G, Member 8"
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Anticholesteremic Agents/therapeutic use
- Apolipoproteins B/blood
- "Arteriosclerosis/genetics, prevention & control"
- Azetidines/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Cholesterol/analogs & derivatives, blood"
- "Cholesterol, Dietary/pharmacokinetics"
- Double-Blind Method
- Ezetimibe
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Intestinal Absorption/drug effects
- "Lipid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, complications, drug therapy"
- "Lipoproteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phytosterols/pharmacokinetics
- "Sitosterols/blood, pharmacokinetics"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ezetimibe effectively reduces plasma plant sterols in patients with sitosterolemia.
**Authors:** Salen G, von Bergmann K, Lütjohann D, Kwiterovich P, Kane J, Patel SB, Musliner T, Stein P, Musser B, Multicenter Sitosterolemia Study Group
**Journal:** Circulation (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.CIR.0000116766.31036.03](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.0000116766.31036.03)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2004 Mar 2;109(8):966-71. doi:
10.1161/01.CIR.0000116766.31036.03.  Epub 2004 Feb 9.

Ezetimibe effectively reduces plasma plant sterols in patients with
sitosterolemia.

Salen G(1), von Bergmann K, Lütjohann D, Kwiterovich P, Kane J, Patel SB,
Musliner T, Stein P, Musser B; Multicenter Sitosterolemia Study Group.

Author information:
(1)UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA. SalenGe@UMDNJ.edu

BACKGROUND: Sitosterolemia is a recessively inherited disorder that results from
mutations in either ABCG5 or G8 proteins, with hyperabsorption of dietary
sterols and decreased hepatic excretion of plant sterols and cholesterol. As a
consequence of markedly elevated plasma and tissue sitosterol and campesterol
levels, premature atherosclerosis develops.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this multicenter, double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled study, we examined whether treatment with ezetimibe, an
inhibitor of cholesterol absorption, reduces plant sterol levels in patients
with sitosterolemia. After a 3-week placebo run-in, 37 patients were randomized
to receive placebo (n=7) or ezetimibe 10 mg/d (n=30) for 8 weeks. Sitosterol
concentrations decreased by 21% (P<0.001) in patients treated with ezetimibe
compared with a nonsignificant 4% rise in those on placebo (between-group
P<0.001). The reduction in sitosterol from baseline was progressive, with
further decline observed at each subsequent biweekly visit. Campesterol also
progressively declined, with a mean decrease after 8 weeks of 24% with ezetimibe
and a mean increase of 3% with placebo treatment (between-group P<0.001).
Reductions in plant sterol concentrations were similar irrespective of whether
patients were undergoing concomitant treatment with resin or statin. Reductions
in total sterols and apolipoprotein B were also observed. Ezetimibe was well
tolerated, with no serious treatment-related adverse events or discontinuations
due to adverse events being reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Ezetimibe produced significant and progressive reductions in plasma
plant sterol concentrations in patients with sitosterolemia, consistent with the
hypothesis that ezetimibe inhibits the intestinal absorption of plant sterols as
well as cholesterol, leading to reductions in plasma concentrations.

DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000116766.31036.03
PMCID: PMC1237008
PMID: 14769702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
