---
reference_id: "PMID:41258893"
title: The Mac1 ADP-ribosylhydrolase is a therapeutic target for SARS-CoV-2.
authors:
- Suryawanshi RK
- Jaishankar P
- Correy GJ
- Rachman MM
- "O'Leary PC"
- Taha TY
- Matsui Y
- Zapatero-Belinchón FJ
- McCavitt-Malvido M
- Doruk YU
- Stevens MGV
- Diolaiti ME
- Jogalekar MP
- Chen H
- Richards AL
- Kongpracha P
- Bali S
- Montano M
- Rosecrans J
- Matthay M
- Togo T
- Gonciarz RL
- Gopalkrishnan S
- Neitz RJ
- Krogan NJ
- Swaney DL
- Shoichet BK
- Ott M
- Renslo AR
- Ashworth A
- Fraser JS
journal: Elife
year: '2025'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.103484
keywords:
- Humans
- SARS-CoV-2/drug effects
- Animals
- "Antiviral Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Virus Replication/drug effects
- COVID-19 Drug Treatment
- COVID-19/virology
- Mice
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Immunity, Innate/drug effects"
- "Macrophages/drug effects, virology"
- "N-Glycosyl Hydrolases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Mac1 ADP-ribosylhydrolase is a therapeutic target for SARS-CoV-2.
**Authors:** Suryawanshi RK, Jaishankar P, Correy GJ, Rachman MM, O'Leary PC, Taha TY, Matsui Y, Zapatero-Belinchón FJ, McCavitt-Malvido M, Doruk YU, Stevens MGV, Diolaiti ME, Jogalekar MP, Chen H, Richards AL, Kongpracha P, Bali S, Montano M, Rosecrans J, Matthay M, Togo T, Gonciarz RL, Gopalkrishnan S, Neitz RJ, Krogan NJ, Swaney DL, Shoichet BK, Ott M, Renslo AR, Ashworth A, Fraser JS
**Journal:** Elife (2025)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.103484](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103484)

## Content

1. Elife. 2025 Nov 19;14:RP103484. doi: 10.7554/eLife.103484.

The Mac1 ADP-ribosylhydrolase is a therapeutic target for SARS-CoV-2.

Suryawanshi RK(#)(1), Jaishankar P(#)(2), Correy GJ(#)(3), Rachman MM(#)(2),
O'Leary PC(#)(4), Taha TY(#)(1)(5), Matsui Y(#)(1), Zapatero-Belinchón FJ(1),
McCavitt-Malvido M(1), Doruk YU(4), Stevens MGV(4), Diolaiti ME(4), Jogalekar
MP(4), Chen H(4), Richards AL(5)(6)(7), Kongpracha P(5)(6)(7), Bali S(3),
Montano M(1), Rosecrans J(1), Matthay M(7), Togo T(2), Gonciarz RL(2),
Gopalkrishnan S(5), Neitz RJ(2)(8), Krogan NJ(3)(5)(7), Swaney DL(5)(6)(7),
Shoichet BK(2), Ott M(1)(9)(10), Renslo AR(2), Ashworth A(4), Fraser JS(3).

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology, Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, United
States.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(3)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(4)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(5)Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(6)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(7)Data Science and Biotechnology Institute, Gladstone Institutes, San
Francisco, United States.
(8)Small Molecule Discovery Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, United States.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, United States.
(10)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub- San Francisco, San Francisco, San Francisco, United
States.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2025 Oct 06:2024.08.08.606661. doi: 10.1101/2024.08.08.606661.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) continues to pose a
threat to public health. Current therapeutics remain limited to direct-acting
antivirals that lack distinct mechanisms of action and are already showing signs
of viral resistance. The virus encodes an ADP-ribosylhydrolase macrodomain
(Mac1) that plays an important role in the coronaviral life cycle by suppressing
host innate immune responses. Genetic inactivation of Mac1 abrogates viral
replication in vivo by potentiating host innate immune responses. However, it is
unknown whether this can be achieved by pharmacologic inhibition and can
therefore be exploited therapeutically. Here, we report a potent and selective
lead small molecule, AVI-4206, that is effective in an in vivo model of
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Standard cellular models indicate that AVI-4206 has high
target engagement and can weakly inhibit viral replication in a gamma
interferon- and Mac1 catalytic activity-dependent manner. However, a stronger
antiviral effect for AVI-4206 is observed in human airway organoids and
peripheral blood monocyte-derived macrophages. In an animal model of severe
SARS-CoV-2 infection, AVI-4206 reduces viral replication, potentiates innate
immune responses, and leads to a survival benefit. Our results provide
pharmacological proof of concept that Mac1 is a valid therapeutic target via a
novel immune-restoring mechanism that could potentially synergize with existing
therapies targeting distinct, essential aspects of the coronaviral life cycle.
This approach could be more widely used to target other viral macrodomains to
develop antiviral therapeutics beyond COVID-19.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.103484
PMCID: PMC12629595
PMID: 41258893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RS, PJ, GC, MR, PO, TT, FZ, MD, MM, TT, RG
listed as an inventor on a patent application (Mac1 Inhibitors and Uses Thereof
U.S. Provisional Application No. 63/631,958 filed April 9, 2024) describing
small molecule macrodomain inhibitors, which includes compounds described
herein, YM, MM, YD, MS, MJ, HC, AR, PK, SB, JR, MM, SG, RN, DS No competing
interests declared, NK The Krogan laboratory has received research support from
Vir Biotechnology, F Hoffmann-La Roche and Rezo Therapeutics. NJK has a
financially compensated consulting agreement with Maze Therapeutics. He is on
the Board of Directors and is President of Rezo Therapeutics and is a
shareholder in Tenaya Therapeutics, Maze Therapeutics, Rezo Therapeutics, and
GEn1E Lifesciences. He is also listed as an inventor on a patent application
(Mac1 Inhibitors and Uses Thereof U.S. Provisional Application No. 63/631,958
filed April 9, 2024) describing small molecule macrodomain inhibitors, which
includes compounds described herein, BS co-founder of BlueDolphin LLC, Epiodyne
Inc, and Deep Apple Therapeutics, Inc, and serves on the SRB of Genentech, the
SAB of Schrodinger LLC, and the SAB of Vilya Therapeutics. Also listed as an
inventor on a patent application (Mac1 Inhibitors and Uses Thereof U.S.
Provisional Application No. 63/631,958 filed April 9, 2024) describing small
molecule macrodomain inhibitors, which includes compounds described herein, MO
cofounder of Directbio and board member of InVisishield. TYT and MO are listed
as inventors on a patent application (Rapid generation of infectious clones
US-2024/0209381-A1) filed by the Gladstone Institutes that covers the use of
pGLUE to generate SARS-CoV-2 infectious clones and replicons. Also listed as an
inventor on a patent application (Mac1 Inhibitors and Uses Thereof U.S.
Provisional Application No. 63/631,958 filed April 9, 2024) describing small
molecule macrodomain inhibitors, which includes compounds described herein, AR
co-founder of TheRas, Elgia Therapeutics, and Tatara Therapeutics, and receives
sponsored research support from Merck, Sharp and Dohme. Listed as an inventor on
a patent application (Mac1 Inhibitors and Uses Thereof U.S. Provisional
Application No. 63/631,958 filed April 9, 2024) describing small molecule
macrodomain inhibitors, which includes compounds described herein, AA co-founder
of Tango Therapeutics, Azkarra Therapeutics and Kytarro; a member of the board
of Cytomx, Ovibio Corporation, Cambridge Science Corporation; a member of the
scientific advisory board of Genentech, GLAdiator, Circle, Bluestar/Clearnote
Health, Earli, Ambagon, Phoenix Molecular Designs, Yingli/280Bio, Trial Library,
ORIC and HAP10; a consultant for ProLynx, Next RNA and Novartis; receives
research support from SPARC; and holds patents on the use of PARP inhibitors
held jointly with AstraZeneca from which he has benefited financially (and may
do so in the future); listed as an inventor on a patent application (Mac1
Inhibitors and Uses Thereof U.S. Provisional Application No. 63/631,958 filed
April 9, 2024) describing small molecule macrodomain inhibitors, which includes
compounds described herein, JF consultant to, shareholder of, and receives
sponsored research support from Relay Therapeutics, and is listed as an inventor
on a patent application (Mac1 Inhibitors and Uses Thereof U.S. Provisional
Application No. 63/631,958 filed April 9, 2024) describing small molecule
macrodomain inhibitors, which includes compounds described herein
