---
reference_id: "PMID:30846476"
title: "Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease: the GOLD science committee report 2019."
authors:
- Singh D
- Agusti A
- Anzueto A
- Barnes PJ
- Bourbeau J
- Celli BR
- Criner GJ
- Frith P
- Halpin DMG
- Han M
- López Varela MV
- Martinez F
- Montes de Oca M
- Papi A
- Pavord ID
- Roche N
- Sin DD
- Stockley R
- Vestbo J
- Wedzicha JA
- Vogelmeier C
journal: Eur Respir J
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1183/13993003.00164-2019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease: the GOLD science committee report 2019.
**Authors:** Singh D, Agusti A, Anzueto A, Barnes PJ, Bourbeau J, Celli BR, Criner GJ, Frith P, Halpin DMG, Han M, López Varela MV, Martinez F, Montes de Oca M, Papi A, Pavord ID, Roche N, Sin DD, Stockley R, Vestbo J, Wedzicha JA, Vogelmeier C
**Journal:** Eur Respir J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1183/13993003.00164-2019](https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00164-2019)

## Content

1. Eur Respir J. 2019 May 18;53(5):1900164. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00164-2019.
Print  2019 May.

Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of Chronic 
Obstructive Lung Disease: the GOLD science committee report 2019.

Singh D(1), Agusti A(2), Anzueto A(3), Barnes PJ(4), Bourbeau J(5), Celli BR(6), 
Criner GJ(7), Frith P(8), Halpin DMG(9), Han M(10), López Varela MV(11), 
Martinez F(12), Montes de Oca M(13), Papi A(14), Pavord ID(15), Roche N(16), Sin 
DD(17), Stockley R(18), Vestbo J(19), Wedzicha JA(4), Vogelmeier C(20).

Author information:
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester, UK dsingh@meu.org.uk.
(2)Hospital Clínic, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERES, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(4)National Heart and Lung Institute, London, UK.
(5)McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(6)Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)Flinders University College of Medicine and Public Health, Adelaide, 
Australia.
(9)Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, UK.
(10)University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(11)Universidad de la República Montevideo, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(12)New York-Presbyterian Hospital, Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY, 
USA.
(13)Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(14)Cardiorespiratory and Internal Medicine Unit, Dept of Medical Sciences, 
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(15)Respiratory Medicine Unit, Oxford Respiratory NIHR BRC, Nuffield Dept of 
Medicine, Oxford, UK.
(16)Hôpital Cochin (AP-HP), University Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(17)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(18)University Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(19)University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(20)Dept of Medicine, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University Medical 
Center Giessen and Marburg, Philipps University Marburg, Member of the German 
Center for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany.

Precision medicine is a patient-specific approach that integrates all relevant 
clinical, genetic and biological information in order to optimise the 
therapeutic benefit relative to the possibility of side-effects for each 
individual. Recent clinical trials have shown that higher blood eosinophil 
counts are associated with a greater efficacy of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs) 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients. Blood eosinophil 
counts are a biomarker with potential to be used in clinical practice, to help 
target ICS treatment with more precision in COPD patients with a history of 
exacerbations despite appropriate bronchodilator treatment.The Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2017 pharmacological treatment 
algorithms, based on the ABCD assessment, can be applied relatively easily to 
treatment-naive individuals at initial presentation. However, their use is more 
problematic during follow-up in patients who are already on maintenance 
treatment. There is a need for a different system to guide COPD pharmacological 
management during follow-up.Recent large randomised controlled trials have 
provided important new information concerning the therapeutic effects of ICSs 
and long-acting bronchodilators on exacerbations. The new evidence regarding 
blood eosinophils and inhaled treatments, and the need to distinguish between 
initial and follow-up pharmacological management, led to changes in the GOLD 
pharmacological treatment recommendations. This article explains the evidence 
and rationale for the GOLD 2019 pharmacological treatment recommendations.

Copyright ©ERS 2019.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00164-2019
PMID: 30846476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: D. Singh reports grants 
and personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Chiesi, Glenmark, Menarini, Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Pulmatrix, Therevance 
and Verona, personal fees from Cipla, Genentech and Peptinnovate, outside the 
submitted work. Conflict of interest: A. Agusti reports personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Chiesi and Nuvaira, grants and personal fees from Menarini and 
GlaxoSmithKline, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: A. Anzueto 
reports grants and personal fees for consultancy from GlaxoSmithKline, personal 
fees for consultancy from AstraZeneca, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim and 
Sunovion Pharmaceutical, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: P.J. 
Barnes reports grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca and Boehringer 
Ingelheim, personal fees from Pieris, Novartis and Teva, outside the submitted 
work. Conflict of interest: J. Bourbeau reports grants from CIHR, Canadian 
Respiratory Research Network (CRRN), Foundation of the MUHC and Aerocrine, 
personal fees for consultancy and lecturing from the Canadian Thoracic Society 
and CHEST, grants and personal fees for advisory work and lecturing from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Grifols, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and 
Trudell, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: B.R. Celli reports 
grants and research support from AstraZeneca, personal fees for consulting and 
scientific committee membership from GlaxoSmithKline, personal fees for 
consulting from Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Sanofi-Aventis and Menarini, 
outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: G.J. Criner reports grants and 
personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, Mereo, 
AstraZeneca, Pulmonx, Pneumrx, Olympus, Broncus, Lungpacer, Nuvaira, ResMed, 
Respironics and Patara, personal fees from Verona, BTG, EOLO and NGM, grants 
from Alung, Fisher Paykel and Galapagos, outside the submitted work. Conflict of 
interest: P. Frith reports non-financial support to attend a scientific 
committee meeting from Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 
(GOLD), during the conduct of the study; personal fees for advisory board 
membership from AstraZeneca, personal fees and non-financial support for 
advisory board work, chairing independent conference organising committees and 
lecturing from Boehringer Ingelheim and Novartis, non-financial support for 
attending educational meetings from GlaxoSmithKline, non-financial support for 
attending committee and board meetings from Lung Foundation Australia (LFA), 
personal fees and non-financial support for advisory board work from CSL 
Behring, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: D.M.G. Halpin reports 
personal fees and non-financial support from Boehringer Ingelheim and Novartis, 
personal fees from AstraZeneca, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline and Pfizer, outside the 
submitted work. Conflict of interest: M. Han reports personal fees from 
GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim and AstraZeneca, research support from 
Novartis and Sunovion, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: M.V. 
López Varela has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: F. Martinez reports 
personal fees for organising CME programmes and non-financial support for travel 
from the American College of Chest Physicians, Continuing Education, Inova 
Fairfax Health System, MD Magazine, Miller Communications, National Association 
for Continuing Education, PeerView Communications, Prime Communications, Puerto 
Rican Respiratory Society, Potomac, University of Alabama Birmingham, Physicians 
Education Resource and Canadian Respiratory Network, personal fees for advisory 
board and steering committee work, and lecturing, and non-financial support for 
travel from AstraZeneca, personal fees for advisory board and data safety and 
monitoring board work, and lecturing, non-financial support for travel from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, non-financial support for advisory board work from 
ProterrixBio, personal fees for organising CME programmes from Columbia 
University Integritas, Methodist Hospital Brooklyn, New York University, 
UpToDate, WebMD/MedScape, Western Connecticut Health Network, Academic CME, 
PlatformIQ, Rockpointe, Rare Disease Healthcare Communications and France 
Foundation, personal fees for advisory board work and non-financial support for 
travel from ConCert, Roche, Sunovion, Theravance and Teva, personal fees for 
advisory board and data safety and monitoring board work and non-financial 
support for travel from Genentech, personal fees for advisory board, steering 
committee and data safety and monitoring board work, and lecturing, and 
non-financial support for travel from GlaxoSmithKline, personal fees for 
advisory board work and lecturing, and non-financial support for travel from 
Novartis and Chiesi, personal fees for advisory board and steering committee 
work, and non-financial support for travel from Pearl Pharmaceuticals, personal 
fees for teleconference involvement from Unity, non-financial support for 
steering committee work from Afferent/Merck, Gilead, Veracyte, Prometic, Bayer 
and ProMedior, non-financial support for teleconferencing and steering committee 
work from Nitto, personal fees for consultancy and steering committee work from 
Patara, non-financial support for data safety and monitoring board work and 
steering committee from Biogen, personal fees for advisory board work and 
support for meeting attendance from Zambon, personal fees for editorial board 
work from the American Thoracic Society, grants from NIH (IPF UO1, COPD 
UO1/RO1), and non-financial support for consultancy from Bridge Biotherapeutics, 
outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: M. Montes de Oca has nothing 
to disclose. Conflict of interest: A. Papi reports grants, personal fees for 
board membership, consultancy, lecturing and travel reimbursement from Chiesi, 
AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Mundipharma and Teva, 
grants, personal fees for lecturing and travel reimbursement from Menarini, 
personal fees for lecturing and travel reimbursement from Novartis, Zambon and 
Sanofi, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: I.D. Pavord reports 
personal fees for lecturing, advisory board work and travel expenses from 
AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim and Teva, grants and personal 
fees for lecturing, advisory board work and travel expenses from Chiesi, 
personal fees for advisory board work from Sanofi/Regeneron, Merck, Novartis, 
Knopp and Roche/Genentech, personal fees for lecturing from Circassia and 
Mundipharma, grants and personal fees for advisory board work from Afferent, 
outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: N. Roche reports grants and 
personal fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and Pfizer, personal fees from 
Teva, GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Mundipharma, Sanofi, Sandoz, 3M and 
Zambon, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: D.D. Sin reports 
grants from Merck, personal fees for advisory meetings from Sanofi-Aventis and 
Regeneron, grants and personal fees for lecturing and advisory board work from 
Boehringer Ingelheim and AstraZeneca, personal fees for lecturing and advisory 
board work from Novartis, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: 
R. Stockley reports personal fees for advisory board membership and lecturing 
from AstraZeneca, personal fees for advisory board membership from MedImmune, 
Almirall, Kamada, Baxter, Chiesi and Polyphor, personal fees for lecturing from 
Nycomed, Takeda and GlaxoSmithKline, personal fees for advisory board 
membership, lecturing and travel to meetings from Boehringer Ingelheim, grants 
and personal fees for advisory board membership, lecturing and travel to 
meetings from CSL Behring, outside the submitted work. Conflict of interest: 
J. Vestbo reports personal fees for consultancy and lecturing from 
GlaxoSmithKline, Chiesi Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and 
AstraZeneca, grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, outside the submitted work. 
Conflict of interest: J.A. Wedzicha reports grants and travel expenses from 
GlaxoSmithKline, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis and AstraZeneca, and grants from 
Johnson and Johnson, and Chiesi, outside the submitted work. Conflict of 
interest: C. Vogelmeier reports personal fees from Almirall, Cipla, 
Berlin-Chemie/Menarini, CSL Behring and Teva, grants and personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, 
Mundipharma, Novartis and Takeda, grants from German Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research (BMBF) Competence Network Asthma and COPD (ASCONET), 
Bayer Schering Pharma AG, MSD and Pfizer, outside the submitted work.