---
reference_id: "PMID:29540715"
title: Mutant Best1 Expression and Impaired Phagocytosis in an iPSC Model of Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy.
authors:
- Marmorstein AD
- Johnson AA
- Bachman LA
- Andrews-Pfannkoch C
- Knudsen T
- Gilles BJ
- Hill M
- Gandhi JK
- Marmorstein LY
- Pulido JS
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-21651-z
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alleles
- "Bestrophins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Line
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Gene Expression
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Phagocytosis/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/cytology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant Best1 Expression and Impaired Phagocytosis in an iPSC Model of Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy.
**Authors:** Marmorstein AD, Johnson AA, Bachman LA, Andrews-Pfannkoch C, Knudsen T, Gilles BJ, Hill M, Gandhi JK, Marmorstein LY, Pulido JS
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-018-21651-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-21651-z)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2018 Mar 14;8(1):4487. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-21651-z.

Mutant Best1 Expression and Impaired Phagocytosis in an iPSC Model of Autosomal
Recessive Bestrophinopathy.

Marmorstein AD(1), Johnson AA(2), Bachman LA(2), Andrews-Pfannkoch C(2), Knudsen
T(2), Gilles BJ(2), Hill M(2), Gandhi JK(2), Marmorstein LY(2), Pulido JS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN,
55905, USA. Marmorstein.Alan@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN,
55905, USA.

Autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB) is caused by mutations in the gene
BEST1 which encodes bestrophin 1 (Best1), an anion channel expressed in retinal
pigment epithelial (RPE) cells. It has been hypothesized that ARB represents the
human null phenotype for BEST1 and that this occurs due to nonsense mediated
decay (NMD). To test this hypothesis, we generated induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) from a patient with ARB and her parents. After differentiation to
retinal pigment epithelial (iPSC-RPE) cells, both BEST1 mRNA and Best1 protein
expression were compared to controls. BEST1 mRNA expression levels, determined
by quantitative PCR, were similar in ARB iPSC-RPE, parental cells, and
genetically unrelated controls. Western blotting revealed that CRALBP and RPE65
were expressed within the range delineated by unrelated controls in iPSC-RPE
from the ARB donor and her parents. Best1 protein was detected in different
clones of ARB iPSC-RPE, but at reduced levels compared to all controls. When
tested for the ability to phagocytose photoreceptor outer segments, ARB iPSC-RPE
exhibited impaired internalization. These data suggest that impaired
phagocytosis is a trait common to the bestrophinopathies. Furthermore, ARB is
not universally the result of NMD and ARB, in this patient, is not due to the
absence of Best1.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-21651-z
PMCID: PMC5852082
PMID: 29540715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Alan D. Marmorstein, Lihua Y. Marmorstein, and
Jose S. Pulido share an ownership interest in LAgen Laboratories LLC (Rochester,
Minnesota, USA), a distributor of iPSCs and a provider of iPSC differentiation
services. The other authors declare no competing financial interests.
