---
reference_id: "PMID:40036700"
title: The Integrated Pulmonary Immune Response to Pneumonia.
authors:
- Traber KE
- Mizgerd JP
journal: Annu Rev Immunol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-082323-031642
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Integrated Pulmonary Immune Response to Pneumonia.
**Authors:** Traber KE, Mizgerd JP
**Journal:** Annu Rev Immunol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-immunol-082323-031642](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-immunol-082323-031642)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Immunol. 2025 Apr;43(1):545-569. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-immunol-082323-031642. Epub 2025 Mar 4.

The Integrated Pulmonary Immune Response to Pneumonia.

Traber KE(1), Mizgerd JP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Center and Department of Medicine, Boston University Chobanian & 
Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; email: 
jmizgerd@bu.edu.
(2)Department of Virology, Immunology, and Microbiology and Department of 
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Boston University Chobanian & Avedisian School of 
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Pneumonia is an acute respiratory infection of the lower respiratory tract. The 
effectiveness of the host immune response determines the severity of infection, 
or whether pneumonia occurs at all. The lungs house both innate and adaptive 
immune systems, which integrate their activities to provide host defense that 
eliminates microbes and prevents lower respiratory infection from becoming 
severe. Professional immune cells in the lung, like macrophages and lymphocytes, 
work with lung constituents, like epithelial cells and fibroblasts, to optimize 
antimicrobial defense. The dynamics of the immune response during infection and 
the immune components contributing to defense are influenced by prior 
experiences with respiratory pathogens, remodeling lung immunity in ways that 
improve responses against subsequent infections. This review covers how innate 
and adaptive immune activities coordinate inside the lung to provide integrated 
and effective immune resistance against respiratory pathogens.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-082323-031642
PMID: 40036700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]