---
reference_id: "PMID:23111414"
title: Determinants of fatigue in Crohn's disease patients.
authors:
- Vogelaar L
- van't Spijker A
- van Tilburg AJ
- Kuipers EJ
- Timman R
- van der Woude CJ
journal: Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/MEG.0b013e32835aba83
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Determinants of fatigue in Crohn's disease patients.
**Authors:** Vogelaar L, van't Spijker A, van Tilburg AJ, Kuipers EJ, Timman R, van der Woude CJ
**Journal:** Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MEG.0b013e32835aba83](https://doi.org/10.1097/MEG.0b013e32835aba83)

## Content

1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Feb;25(2):246-51. doi: 
10.1097/MEG.0b013e32835aba83.

Determinants of fatigue in Crohn's disease patients.

Vogelaar L(1), van't Spijker A, van Tilburg AJ, Kuipers EJ, Timman R, van der 
Woude CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands. l.vogelaar@erasmusmc.nl

OBJECTIVE: Crohn's disease (CD) is often associated with severe fatigue. Little 
is known about patients who may be at the highest risk for fatigue. Therefore, 
we assessed the disease phenotype and factors related to fatigue in the presence 
of CD in two different populations.
METHODS: Patients presenting at the clinic of a referral hospital and a general 
hospital were included in the study. They completed questionnaires including the 
Checklist Individual Strength, the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, a 
questionnaire on disease activity, and one on medication use. The Montreal 
classification and sociodemographics were obtained from medical records. 
Hemoglobin and C-reactive protein levels were measured at baseline.
RESULTS: In total, 425 patients were included (276 women, mean age: 42 years). 
Compared with patients from the general hospital, patients at the referral 
hospital had worse disease activity, worse disease behavior, more bowel 
resections, and a higher percentage of side-effects to medication and use of 
anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF). The prevalence of fatigue was significantly 
higher in the referral patients compared with the general patients (65.7 vs. 
52.5%, respectively; P=0.01). Similar results were found in patients in 
remission (53.3 vs. 40.5%; P=0.061). Factors related to fatigue were the use of 
anti-TNF at baseline, side-effects to 5-aminosalicylic acid, disease activity, 
female sex, and shorter disease duration. Furthermore, we found improvement in 
fatigue and a trend toward lower disease activity after 1 year of anti-TNF use.
CONCLUSION: A high percentage of CD patients suffer from fatigue. As a more 
aggressive phenotype seems to be associated with more severe fatigue and 
patients in remission still suffer from fatigue, a multidimensional approach for 
fatigue is warranted in these patients.

DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0b013e32835aba83
PMID: 23111414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]