---
reference_id: "PMID:32283213"
title: Design and in vitro characterization of multistage silicon-PLGA budesonide particles for inflammatory bowel disease.
authors:
- Leonard F
- Srinivasan S
- Liu X
- Collnot EM
- Ferrari M
- Lehr CM
- Godin B
journal: Eur J Pharm Biopharm
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.03.020
keywords:
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents/chemistry, pharmacology"
- "Budesonide/chemistry, pharmacology"
- Caco-2 Cells
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Delayed-Action Preparations/chemistry, pharmacology"
- Drug Carriers/chemistry
- Drug Delivery Systems/methods
- Drug Liberation/physiology
- Humans
- Hydrogen-Ion Concentration
- Inflammation/drug therapy
- Inflammatory Bowel Diseases/drug therapy
- Intestinal Mucosa/metabolism
- Nanoparticles/chemistry
- Particle Size
- Polylactic Acid-Polyglycolic Acid Copolymer/chemistry
- Silicon/chemistry
- Solubility
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Design and in vitro characterization of multistage silicon-PLGA budesonide particles for inflammatory bowel disease.
**Authors:** Leonard F, Srinivasan S, Liu X, Collnot EM, Ferrari M, Lehr CM, Godin B
**Journal:** Eur J Pharm Biopharm (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.03.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.03.020)

## Content

1. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2020 Jun;151:61-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.03.020.
Epub  2020 Apr 10.

Design and in vitro characterization of multistage silicon-PLGA budesonide 
particles for inflammatory bowel disease.

Leonard F(1), Srinivasan S(2), Liu X(2), Collnot EM(3), Ferrari M(2), Lehr 
CM(4), Godin B(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, 
TX, USA. Electronic address: fleonard@houstonmethodist.org.
(2)Department of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, 
TX, USA.
(3)Drug Delivery (DDEL), Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research 
Saarland (HIPS), Saarbrücken, Germany.
(4)Pharmacy Department, Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany; Drug 
Delivery (DDEL), Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland 
(HIPS), Saarbrücken, Germany.
(5)Department of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, 
TX, USA. Electronic address: bgodin@houstonmethodist.org.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) affects a confined area of the intestine and, 
therefore, administration of drugs via oral route is preferable. However, 
obstacles such as changes in the pH along gastrointestinal tract (GIT), 
enzymatic activity, and intraluminal pressure may cause low drug availability in 
the target tissue when delivered orally. Previous studies have pointed out the 
benefits of using micron-sized particles for targeting inflamed intestinal 
mucosa and nanoparticles for delivery of anti-inflammatory agents to the 
affected epithelial cells. We hypothesized that by combining the benefits of 
micro- and nano- particles, we could create a more efficient delivery system for 
budesonide, a glucocorticosteroid commonly used for anti-inflammatory IBD 
therapy. The aim of this study was to develop a novel multistage system for oral 
delivery designed to increase concentrations budesonidein the inflamed 
intestinal tissue. The multistage system consists of Stage 1 mesoporous silicon 
microparticles (S1MP) loaded with stage 2 poly-lactic-glycolic acid (PLGA) 
budesonide-encapsulating nanoparticles (BNP). BNP were efficiently loaded into 
S1MP (loading efficiency of 45.9 ± 14.8%) due to the large pore volume and high 
surface area of S1MP and exhibited controlled release profiles with enhanced 
drug dissolution rate in biologically relevant pHs. Due to the robustness in 
acidic pH and their geometry, S1MP protected the loaded budesonide in the acidic 
(gastric) pH with only 20% release. This allowed for the prolonged release of 
the BNP in the higher pH conditions (intestinal pH). The sustained release of 
BNP could facilitate accumulation in the inflamed tissue, enabling BNP to 
penetrate inflamed mucosa and release active budesonide to the target site. The 
multistage systems of S1MP and BNP were further evaluated in three-dimensional 
(3D) in vitro model of IBD and were found to (1) increase accumulation of BNP in 
the inflamed areas, (2) restore the barrier function of Caco-2 inflamed 
monolayer, and (3) significantly reduce pro-inflammatory cytokine release almost 
to the level of the healthy control.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.03.020
PMID: 32283213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]