---
reference_id: "PMID:30305948"
title: Hemodynamic assessment of atrial septal defects.
authors:
- Torres AJ
journal: J Thorac Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.21037/jtd.2018.02.17
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemodynamic assessment of atrial septal defects.
**Authors:** Torres AJ
**Journal:** J Thorac Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.21037/jtd.2018.02.17](https://doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2018.02.17)

## Content

1. J Thorac Dis. 2018 Sep;10(Suppl 24):S2882-S2889. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2018.02.17.

Hemodynamic assessment of atrial septal defects.

Torres AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Children's Hospital of New 
York-Presbyterian, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.

Atrial septal defect (ASD) is one of the most common congenital cardiac 
anomalies. ASD can present as an isolated lesion in an otherwise normal heart or 
in association with other congenital heart conditions. Regardless of the type of 
ASD, the direction and degree of shunting across the communication is mainly 
determined by the difference in compliance between the right and left ventricle. 
Hemodynamics in children is characterized by left-to-right shunting, dilated 
right heart structures and normal pulmonary artery pressures (PAP). Patients 
diagnosed at adult age often present with complications related to long-standing 
volume overload such as pulmonary artery hypertension and right and left 
ventricular dysfunction. Diagnostic catheterization is usually not indicated 
unless there is suggestion of pulmonary hypertension on echocardiography. In 
older patients and/or in those with ventricular dysfunction, measurement of left 
heart pressures during temporary balloon occlusion is recommended prior to 
device closure as it may not be tolerated. In ASD associated with other 
congenital malformations, shunting degree and direction will depend upon 
underlying condition. Restrictive ASD can result in significant hemodynamic 
compromise in neonates with conditions such as hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
(HLHS) and transposition of the great arteries (TGA). In most cases, 
hemodynamics can be estimated with echocardiography only.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2018.02.17
PMCID: PMC6174148
PMID: 30305948

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The author has no 
conflicts of interest to declare.