---
reference_id: "PMID:25658487"
title: Serpin treatment suppresses inflammatory vascular lesions in temporal artery implants (TAI) from patients with giant cell arteritis.
authors:
- Chen H
- Zheng D
- Ambadapadi S
- Davids J
- Ryden S
- Samy H
- Bartee M
- Sobel E
- Dai E
- Liu L
- Macaulay C
- Yachnis A
- Weyand C
- Thoburn R
- Lucas A
journal: PLoS One
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115482
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- Heterografts
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- Serpins/pharmacology
- "Takayasu Arteritis/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- "Temporal Arteries/metabolism, pathology, transplantation"
- Viral Proteins/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serpin treatment suppresses inflammatory vascular lesions in temporal artery implants (TAI) from patients with giant cell arteritis.
**Authors:** Chen H, Zheng D, Ambadapadi S, Davids J, Ryden S, Samy H, Bartee M, Sobel E, Dai E, Liu L, Macaulay C, Yachnis A, Weyand C, Thoburn R, Lucas A
**Journal:** PLoS One (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0115482](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0115482)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0115482. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115482.
eCollection 2015.

Serpin treatment suppresses inflammatory vascular lesions in temporal artery
implants (TAI) from patients with giant cell arteritis.

Chen H(1), Zheng D(1), Ambadapadi S(2), Davids J(2), Ryden S(2), Samy H(3),
Bartee M(2), Sobel E(2), Dai E(2), Liu L(2), Macaulay C(4), Yachnis A(5), Weyand
C(6), Thoburn R(2), Lucas A(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United
States of America; Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, University
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United
States of America.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida,
United States of America.
(4)Viron Therapeutics, London, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United
States of America.
(6)Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United
States of America; Department of Ophthalmology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, United States of America; Viron Therapeutics, London,
Ontario, Canada.

Giant cell arteritis (GCA) and Takayasu's disease are inflammatory vasculitic
syndromes (IVS) causing sudden blindness and widespread arterial obstruction and
aneurysm formation. Glucocorticoids and aspirin are mainstays of treatment,
predominantly targeting T cells. Serp-1, a Myxomavirus-derived serpin, blocks
macrophage and T cells in a wide range of animal models. Serp-1 also reduced
markers of myocardial injury in a Phase IIa clinical trial for unstable coronary
disease. In recent work, we detected improved survival and decreased arterial
inflammation in a mouse Herpesvirus model of IVS. Here we examine Serp-1
treatment of human temporal artery (TA) biopsies from patients with suspected TA
GCA arteritis after implant (TAI) into the aorta of immunodeficient SCID (severe
combined immunodeficiency) mice. TAI positive for arteritis (GCApos) had
significantly increased inflammation and plaque when compared to negative TAI
(GCAneg). Serp-1 significantly reduced intimal inflammation and CD11b+ cell
infiltrates in TAI, with reduced splenocyte Th1, Th17, and Treg. Splenocytes
from mice with GCApos grafts had increased gene expression for interleukin-1
beta (IL-1β), IL-17, and CD25 and decreased Factor II. Serp-1 decreased IL-1β
expression. In conclusion, GCApos TAI xenografts in mice provide a viable
disease model and have increased intimal inflammation as expected and Serp-1
significantly reduces vascular inflammatory lesions with reduced IL-1β.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115482
PMCID: PMC4319900
PMID: 25658487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Lucas is a co-founding
scientist and advisor for Viron Therapeutics, Inc, London, ON, Canada. Viron
supplied purified Serp-1 protein for these studies but does not otherwise fund
this research. This does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies
on sharing data and materials.
