---
reference_id: "PMID:28187808"
title: Diagnosis and management of acute encephalitis.
authors:
- Halperin JJ
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63600-3.00018-0
keywords:
- "Encephalitis/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Diagnosis and management of acute encephalitis.
**Authors:** Halperin JJ
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-63600-3.00018-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63600-3.00018-0)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2017;140:337-347. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63600-3.00018-0.

Diagnosis and management of acute encephalitis.

Halperin JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Overlook Medical Center, Summit, NJ; Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
john.halperin@atlantichealth.org.

Encephalitis is typically viral (approximately half of diagnosed cases) or 
autoimmune (about a quarter) with the remainder remaining undiagnosable at this 
time. All require general supportive care but only a minority requires intensive 
care admission - in these intubation, to protect the airway or to treat status 
epilepticus with anesthetic drugs, may be needed. In some dysautonomia with wide 
blood pressure fluctuations is the principal concern. Remarkably, in addition to 
supportive care, specific treatment options are available for the majority - 
immune-modulating therapy for those with autoimmune disorders, antiviral therapy 
for herpes simplex 1 and 2, and varicella-zoster encephalitis. Flavivirus 
infections (West Nile, Japanese encephalitis, tick-borne encephalitis) remain 
the most common other identified cause of encephalitis but no specific 
intervention is available. Overall long-term outcomes are favorable in the 
majority of patients with encephalitis, a proportion that hopefully will improve 
with further advances in diagnostic technology and therapeutic interventions.

© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63600-3.00018-0
PMID: 28187808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]