---
reference_id: "PMID:36965289"
title: "Liver transplantation recovers hepatic N-glycosylation with persistent IgG glycosylation abnormalities: Three-year follow-up in a patient with phosphomannomutase-2-congenital disorder of glycosylation."
authors:
- Tahata S
- Weckwerth J
- Ligezka A
- He M
- Lee HE
- Heimbach J
- Ibrahim SH
- Kozicz T
- Furuya K
- Morava E
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107559
keywords:
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/complications, genetics"
- "Phosphotransferases (Phosphomutases)/genetics, deficiency"
- Humans
- Follow-Up Studies
- Liver/metabolism
- Liver Transplantation
- Glycosylation
- "Child, Preschool"
- Immunoglobulin G
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver transplantation recovers hepatic N-glycosylation with persistent IgG glycosylation abnormalities: Three-year follow-up in a patient with phosphomannomutase-2-congenital disorder of glycosylation.
**Authors:** Tahata S, Weckwerth J, Ligezka A, He M, Lee HE, Heimbach J, Ibrahim SH, Kozicz T, Furuya K, Morava E
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107559](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107559)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2023 Apr;138(4):107559. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107559.
Epub  2023 Mar 17.

Liver transplantation recovers hepatic N-glycosylation with persistent IgG
glycosylation abnormalities: Three-year follow-up in a patient with
phosphomannomutase-2-congenital disorder of glycosylation.

Tahata S(1), Weckwerth J(2), Ligezka A(3), He M(4), Lee HE(5), Heimbach J(6),
Ibrahim SH(2), Kozicz T(7), Furuya K(8), Morava E(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of
America; Division of Medical Genetics, Stanford University, CA, United States of
America.
(2)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, United States of America.
(3)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of
America.
(4)Metabolic and Advanced Diagnostics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, United States of America.
(5)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of
America.
(6)Division of Transplant Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of
America.
(7)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of
America; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, United States of America.
(8)Pediatric Liver Transplant Program, University of Wisconsin Health, Madison,
WI, United States of America.
(9)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States of
America; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, United States of America. Electronic address:
morava-kozicz.eva@mayo.edu.

Phosphomannomutase-2-congenital disorder of glycosylation (PMM2-CDG) is the most
common CDG and presents with highly variable features ranging from isolated
neurologic involvement to severe multi-organ dysfunction. Liver abnormalities
occur in in almost all patients and frequently include hepatomegaly and elevated
aminotransferases, although only a minority of patients develop progressive
hepatic fibrosis and liver failure. No curative therapies are currently
available for PMM2-CDG, although investigation into several novel therapies is
ongoing. We report the first successful liver transplantation in a 4-year-old
patient with PMM2-CDG. Over a 3-year follow-up period, she demonstrated improved
growth and neurocognitive development and complete normalization of liver
enzymes, coagulation parameters, and carbohydrate-deficient transferrin profile,
but persistently abnormal IgG glycosylation and recurrent upper airway
infections that did not require hospitalization. Liver transplant should be
considered as a treatment option for PMM2-CDG patients with end-stage liver
disease, however these patients may be at increased risk for recurrent bacterial
infections post-transplant.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2023.107559
PMCID: PMC10164344
PMID: 36965289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
Shawn Tahata, MD, Jody Weckwerth, PA-C, Anna Ligezka, Miao He, PhD, Hee Eun Lee,
MD, PhD6 Julie Heimbach, MD, Samar H Ibrahim, M.B.Ch.B, Tamas Kozicz, MD PhD,
Katryn Furuya, MD, Eva Morava, MD, PhD have no conflicts of interest to declare.
