---
reference_id: "PMID:23023332"
title: Mutations in the TGF-β repressor SKI cause Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome with aortic aneurysm.
authors:
- Doyle AJ
- Doyle JJ
- Bessling SL
- Maragh S
- Lindsay ME
- Schepers D
- Gillis E
- Mortier G
- Homfray T
- Sauls K
- Norris RA
- Huso ND
- Leahy D
- Mohr DW
- Caulfield MJ
- Scott AF
- Destrée A
- Hennekam RC
- Arn PH
- Curry CJ
- Van Laer L
- McCallion AS
- Loeys BL
- Dietz HC
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2421
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the TGF-β repressor SKI cause Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome with aortic aneurysm.
**Authors:** Doyle AJ, Doyle JJ, Bessling SL, Maragh S, Lindsay ME, Schepers D, Gillis E, Mortier G, Homfray T, Sauls K, Norris RA, Huso ND, Leahy D, Mohr DW, Caulfield MJ, Scott AF, Destrée A, Hennekam RC, Arn PH, Curry CJ, Van Laer L, McCallion AS, Loeys BL, Dietz HC
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2421](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2421)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2012 Nov;44(11):1249-54. doi: 10.1038/ng.2421. Epub 2012 Sep 30.

Mutations in the TGF-β repressor SKI cause Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome with 
aortic aneurysm.

Doyle AJ(1), Doyle JJ, Bessling SL, Maragh S, Lindsay ME, Schepers D, Gillis E, 
Mortier G, Homfray T, Sauls K, Norris RA, Huso ND, Leahy D, Mohr DW, Caulfield 
MJ, Scott AF, Destrée A, Hennekam RC, Arn PH, Curry CJ, Van Laer L, McCallion 
AS, Loeys BL, Dietz HC.

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2013 Apr;83(4):318-9. doi: 10.1111/cge.12102.

Elevated transforming growth factor (TGF)-β signaling has been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of syndromic presentations of aortic aneurysm, including Marfan 
syndrome (MFS) and Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS). However, the location and 
character of many of the causal mutations in LDS intuitively imply diminished 
TGF-β signaling. Taken together, these data have engendered controversy 
regarding the specific role of TGF-β in disease pathogenesis. 
Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS) has considerable phenotypic overlap with MFS 
and LDS, including aortic aneurysm. We identified causative variation in ten 
individuals with SGS in the proto-oncogene SKI, a known repressor of TGF-β 
activity. Cultured dermal fibroblasts from affected individuals showed enhanced 
activation of TGF-β signaling cascades and higher expression of TGF-β-responsive 
genes relative to control cells. Morpholino-induced silencing of SKI paralogs in 
zebrafish recapitulated abnormalities seen in humans with SGS. These data 
support the conclusions that increased TGF-β signaling is the mechanism 
underlying SGS and that high signaling contributes to multiple syndromic 
presentations of aortic aneurysm.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2421
PMCID: PMC3545695
PMID: 23023332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]