---
reference_id: "PMID:34380029"
title: ADAR1 interaction with Z-RNA promotes editing of endogenous double-stranded RNA and prevents MDA5-dependent immune activation.
authors:
- de Reuver R
- Dierick E
- Wiernicki B
- Staes K
- Seys L
- De Meester E
- Muyldermans T
- Botzki A
- Lambrecht BN
- Van Nieuwerburgh F
- Vandenabeele P
- Maelfait J
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109500
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism"
- "Adenosine Deaminase/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Cell Line
- HEK293 Cells
- Hematopoiesis
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Immunity
- Inflammation/pathology
- Interferon Type I/metabolism
- "Interferon-Induced Helicase, IFIH1/metabolism"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Mutation/genetics
- Protein Binding
- RNA Editing/genetics
- "RNA, Double-Stranded/metabolism"
- "RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Short Interspersed Nucleotide Elements/genetics
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADAR1 interaction with Z-RNA promotes editing of endogenous double-stranded RNA and prevents MDA5-dependent immune activation.
**Authors:** de Reuver R, Dierick E, Wiernicki B, Staes K, Seys L, De Meester E, Muyldermans T, Botzki A, Lambrecht BN, Van Nieuwerburgh F, Vandenabeele P, Maelfait J
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109500](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109500)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2021 Aug 10;36(6):109500. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109500.

ADAR1 interaction with Z-RNA promotes editing of endogenous double-stranded RNA
and prevents MDA5-dependent immune activation.

de Reuver R(1), Dierick E(1), Wiernicki B(1), Staes K(1), Seys L(2), De Meester
E(3), Muyldermans T(4), Botzki A(4), Lambrecht BN(5), Van Nieuwerburgh F(6),
Vandenabeele P(1), Maelfait J(7).

Author information:
(1)VIB-UGent Center for Inflammation Research, 9052 Ghent, Belgium; Department
of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.
(2)VIB-UGent Center for Inflammation Research, 9052 Ghent, Belgium; Department
of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium.
(4)VIB Bioinformatics Core, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.
(5)VIB-UGent Center for Inflammation Research, 9052 Ghent, Belgium; Department
of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium;
Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam,
3015 GJ Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)NXTGNT, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ghent University,
Ottergemsesteenweg 460, 9000 Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ghent University,
Ottergemsesteenweg 460, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(7)VIB-UGent Center for Inflammation Research, 9052 Ghent, Belgium; Department
of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.
Electronic address: jonathan.maelfait@irc.vib-ugent.be.

Loss of function of adenosine deaminase acting on double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-1
(ADAR1) causes the severe autoinflammatory disease Aicardi-Goutières syndrome
(AGS). ADAR1 converts adenosines into inosines within dsRNA. This process called
A-to-I editing masks self-dsRNA from detection by the antiviral dsRNA sensor
MDA5. ADAR1 binds to dsRNA in both the canonical A-form and the poorly defined Z
conformation (Z-RNA). Mutations in the Z-RNA-binding Zα domain of ADAR1 are
common in patients with AGS. How loss of ADAR1/Z-RNA interaction contributes to
disease development is unknown. We demonstrate that abrogated binding of ADAR1
to Z-RNA leads to reduced A-to-I editing of dsRNA structures formed by base
pairing of inversely oriented short interspersed nuclear elements. Preventing
ADAR1 binding to Z-RNA triggers an MDA5/MAVS-mediated type I interferon response
and leads to the development of lethal autoinflammation in mice. This shows that
the interaction between ADAR1 and Z-RNA restricts sensing of self-dsRNA and
prevents AGS development.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109500
PMID: 34380029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
