---
reference_id: "PMID:24722325"
title: "Relapsing and progressive forms of multiple sclerosis: insights from pathology."
authors:
- Dutta R
- Trapp BD
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000094
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relapsing and progressive forms of multiple sclerosis: insights from pathology.
**Authors:** Dutta R, Trapp BD
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WCO.0000000000000094](https://doi.org/10.1097/WCO.0000000000000094)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2014 Jun;27(3):271-8. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000094.

Relapsing and progressive forms of multiple sclerosis: insights from pathology.

Dutta R(1), Trapp BD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The predominant clinical disease course of multiple sclerosis 
starts with reversible episodes of neurological disability, which transforms 
into progressive neurological decline. This review provides insight into the 
pathological differences during relapsing and progressive phases of multiple 
sclerosis.
RECENT FINDINGS: The clinical course of multiple sclerosis is variable, and the 
disease can be classified into relapsing and progressive phases. Pathological 
studies have been successful in distinguishing between these two forms of the 
disease and correlate with the clinical findings in terms of cellular responses, 
the inflammatory environment, and the location of lesions.
SUMMARY: Available therapies for multiple sclerosis patients, while effective 
during the relapsing phase, have little benefit for progressive multiple 
sclerosis patients. Development of therapies to benefit progressive multiple 
sclerosis patients will require a better understanding of the pathogenesis of 
progressive multiple sclerosis. This review discusses and compares the 
pathological findings in relapsing and progressive multiple sclerosis patients.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000094
PMCID: PMC4132635
PMID: 24722325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None