---
reference_id: "PMID:20301656"
title: Adenosine Deaminase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Hershfield M
- Tarrant T
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenosine Deaminase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Hershfield M, Tarrant T

## Content

1. Adenosine Deaminase Deficiency.

Hershfield M(1), Tarrant T(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2006 Oct 3 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Medicine and Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, North Carolina
(2)Associate Professor of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
North Carolina

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency is a systemic 
purine metabolic disorder that primarily affects lymphocyte development, 
viability, and function. The ADA deficiency phenotypic spectrum includes typical 
early-onset severe combined immunodeficiency (ADA-SCID), diagnosed in infancy 
(about 80% of individuals), and less severe "delayed" or "late-onset" combined 
immunodeficiency (ADA-CID), diagnosed in older children and adults (15%-20% of 
individuals). Some healthy individuals who are deficient in red blood cell ADA 
(termed "partial ADA deficiency") have been discovered by screening populations 
or relatives of individuals with ADA-SCID. Newborn screening (NBS) for SCID uses 
extracts from Guthrie card dried blood spots to measure T-cell receptor excision 
circle (TREC) DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Screening specific for ADA 
deficiency can also be performed by detection of elevated levels of adenosine 
(Ado) and deoxyadenosine (dAdo) by tandem mass spectrometry (TMS). Both 
techniques can identify ADA-SCID before affected infants become symptomatic. 
Untreated ADA-SCID presents as life-threatening opportunistic illnesses in the 
first weeks to months of life with poor linear growth and weight gain secondary 
to persistent diarrhea, extensive dermatitis, and recurrent pneumonia. Skeletal 
abnormalities affecting ribs and vertebra, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, 
hemolytic anemia, neurologic abnormalities, and transaminitis may also suggest 
untreated ADA-SCID. Characteristic immune abnormalities are lymphocytopenia (low 
numbers of T, B, and NK cells) combined with the absence of both humoral and 
cellular immune function. If immune function is not restored with enzyme 
replacement therapy (ERT), gene therapy, or hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT), children with ADA-SCID rarely survive beyond age one to 
two years. NBS for SCID does not identify individuals with the ADA-CID phenotype 
whose TREC numbers are above the threshold values of most screening 
laboratories. However, ADA-CID is identified by TMS NBS since the ADA substrates 
Ado and dAdo are increased. As TMS NBS for Ado/dAdo is not yet widely performed, 
individuals with ADA-CID are more often clinically diagnosed between ages one 
and ten years ("delayed" onset), or less often in the second to fourth decades 
("late"/"adult" onset). Because the immunologic abnormalities are less 
pronounced than those of ADA-SCID, infections in ADA-CID may not be 
life-threatening and include recurrent otitis media, sinusitis, upper 
respiratory infections, and human papilloma viral infections. Untreated 
individuals with ADA-CID can develop over time chronic pulmonary disease, 
autoimmunity, atopic disease with elevated immunoglobulin E, and malignancy.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ADA deficiency is established in a proband 
with suggestive findings either by biochemical testing showing <1% of ADA 
catalytic activity in red blood cells or in extracts of dried blood spots (valid 
in untransfused individuals), or by molecular genetic testing identifying 
biallelic pathogenic variants in ADA. Frequently, both types of testing are 
performed.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Newborns with an abnormal NBS result 
suggestive of ADA-SCID (by either method) require immediate protection from risk 
factors for infection and referral for a subspecialty immunology evaluation at a 
center with expertise in both diagnosis of SCID and its genetic causes and SCID 
treatment protocols. Symptomatic treatment involves treatment of infections and 
use of immunoglobulin infusions and antibiotics, particularly prophylaxis 
against Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (formerly Pneumocystis carinii) and 
fungal infections. Prophylaxis against viral infections depends upon exposure 
and requires frequent surveillance via viral PCR-based testing, with appropriate 
targeted virus-specific therapy if present. Targeted therapies: Correcting the 
ADA deficiency either systemically or selectively in lymphoid cells employs one 
of three options: (1) enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) by intramuscular 
administration of PEGylated ADA, (2) allogeneic HSCT, or (3) autologous 
hematopoietic stem cell ADA gene therapy (HSC-GT) – the latter two are curative. 
Often, ERT is initiated first to rapidly correct the metabolic defect and to 
protect against serious infections as well as neurologic/behavioral 
abnormalities. It is discontinued at the time HSCT or HSC-GT is performed. 
Surveillance: The following evaluations are recommended to monitor existing and 
emerging clinical manifestations and the response to targeted treatment and 
supportive care: (1) absolute lymphocyte subset counts (T, B, NK cells), 
quantitative serum immunoglobulin levels, and various in vitro tests of cellular 
and humoral immune function; (2) total red blood cell deoxyadenosine nucleotides 
(dAXP) and, if on ERT, plasma ADA activity; and (3) screening for Epstein-Bar 
virus (EBV)-related lymphoma or other lymphomas after age three years, 
particularly when lymphocyte counts are declining while on prolonged ERT. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: To ensure the safety of the infant/older 
individual with ADA deficiency while treatment to achieve immunocompetence is 
pending, parents and other care providers need to avoid the following risks of 
infection: (1) breastfeeding and breast milk until maternal CMV status is 
established by CMV serologies; (2) exposure to young children, sick contacts, 
individuals with cold sores, crowded enclosed spaces, and sources of aerosolized 
fungal spores such as areas of construction or soil manipulation; (3) live viral 
vaccines for the affected infant as well as household contacts; and (4) 
transfusion of non-irradiated blood products. Medications to avoid include 
adenine arabinoside, a substrate for ADA, as an antiviral agent and/or as 
chemotherapy of malignancies; and pentostatin, a potent ADA inhibitor used to 
treat some lymphoid malignancies, which would be ineffective in persons with ADA 
deficiency and would interfere with PEGylated ADA. Evaluation of relatives at 
risk: In an at-risk fetus, when the ADA pathogenic variants causing ADA-SCID in 
the family are known, prenatal genetic testing may be performed to help prepare 
for optimal management of an affected infant at birth (i.e., identification of a 
center with expertise in SCID treatment protocols that can help initiate ERT and 
the search for an HSCT donor and explain ways to ensure the safety of the infant 
while awaiting HSCT). If prenatal testing has not been performed, an at-risk 
newborn clinically suspected of SCID should immediately be placed in an 
appropriate environment to reduce the risk of infection, and the following 
testing should be performed before administration of a blood transfusion to 
allow earliest possible diagnosis and initiation of treatment: identification of 
the ADA pathogenic variants and measurement of ADA catalytic activity and level 
of dAXP in red blood cells. Therapies under investigation: Various approaches to 
HSC-GT are under investigation.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ADA deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an ADA pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance 
of inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic variants. An individual who 
inherits two pathogenic ADA variants will have either ADA-SCID or a delayed or 
late-onset ADA-CID phenotype that correlates with the least severe ADA 
pathogenic variant inherited. Once the ADA pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk relatives 
and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301656