---
reference_id: "PMID:33127760"
title: CHD7 regulates cardiovascular development through ATP-dependent and -independent activities.
authors:
- Yan S
- Thienthanasit R
- Chen D
- Engelen E
- Brühl J
- Crossman DK
- Kesterson R
- Wang Q
- Bouazoune K
- Jiao K
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2005222117
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphate/metabolism
- Alleles
- Animals
- CHARGE Syndrome/genetics
- Chromatin Assembly and Disassembly/genetics
- DNA Helicases/metabolism
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/genetics"
- Heart/embryology
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Neural Crest/embryology, metabolism"
- Organogenesis/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHD7 regulates cardiovascular development through ATP-dependent and -independent activities.
**Authors:** Yan S, Thienthanasit R, Chen D, Engelen E, Brühl J, Crossman DK, Kesterson R, Wang Q, Bouazoune K, Jiao K
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2005222117](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2005222117)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Nov 17;117(46):28847-28858. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2005222117. Epub 2020 Oct 30.

CHD7 regulates cardiovascular development through ATP-dependent and -independent 
activities.

Yan S(1), Thienthanasit R(1), Chen D(2), Engelen E(3), Brühl J(3), Crossman 
DK(1), Kesterson R(1), Wang Q(4), Bouazoune K(5), Jiao K(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 
35294.
(2)Division of Preventive Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294.
(3)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Biomedizinisches 
Forschungszentrum, Philipps-Universität Marburg, 35043 Marburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294.
(5)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Biomedizinisches 
Forschungszentrum, Philipps-Universität Marburg, 35043 Marburg, Germany; 
bouazoune@imt.uni-marburg.de kjiao@uab.edu.
(6)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 
35294; bouazoune@imt.uni-marburg.de kjiao@uab.edu.

CHD7 encodes an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling factor. Mutation of this gene 
causes multiple developmental disorders, including CHARGE (Coloboma of the eye, 
Heart defects, Atresia of the choanae, Retardation of growth/development, 
Genital abnormalities, and Ear anomalies) syndrome, in which conotruncal 
anomalies are the most prevalent form of heart defects. How CHD7 regulates 
conotruncal development remains unclear. In this study, we establish that 
deletion of Chd7 in neural crest cells (NCCs) causes severe conotruncal defects 
and perinatal lethality, thus providing mouse genetic evidence demonstrating 
that CHD7 cell-autonomously regulates cardiac NCC development, thereby 
clarifying a long-standing controversy in the literature. Using transcriptomic 
analyses, we show that CHD7 fine-tunes the expression of a gene network that is 
critical for cardiac NCC development. To gain further molecular insights into 
gene regulation by CHD7, we performed a protein-protein interaction screen by 
incubating recombinant CHD7 on a protein array. We find that CHD7 directly 
interacts with several developmental disorder-mutated proteins including WDR5, a 
core component of H3K4 methyltransferase complexes. This direct interaction 
suggested that CHD7 may recruit histone-modifying enzymes to target loci 
independently of its remodeling functions. We therefore generated a mouse model 
that harbors an ATPase-deficient allele and demonstrates that mutant CHD7 
retains the ability to recruit H3K4 methyltransferase activity to its targets. 
Thus, our data uncover that CHD7 regulates cardiovascular development through 
ATP-dependent and -independent activities, shedding light on the etiology of 
CHD7-related congenital disorders. Importantly, our data also imply that 
patients carrying a premature stop codon versus missense mutations will likely 
display different molecular alterations; these patients might therefore require 
personalized therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2005222117
PMCID: PMC7682373
PMID: 33127760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.