---
reference_id: "PMID:14755409"
title: Radiographic and genetic diagnosis of sporadic hypochondroplasia early in the neonatal period.
authors:
- Kataoka S
- Sawai H
- Yamada H
- Kanazawa N
- Koyama K
- Nishimura G
- Morikawa M
- Sakuragi N
- Minakami H
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/pd.746
keywords:
- Adult
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Genetic Testing
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, embryology, genetics"
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Trimester, Third"
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Radiography
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiographic and genetic diagnosis of sporadic hypochondroplasia early in the neonatal period.
**Authors:** Kataoka S, Sawai H, Yamada H, Kanazawa N, Koyama K, Nishimura G, Morikawa M, Sakuragi N, Minakami H
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.746](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.746)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 2004 Jan;24(1):45-9. doi: 10.1002/pd.746.

Radiographic and genetic diagnosis of sporadic hypochondroplasia early in the 
neonatal period.

Kataoka S(1), Sawai H, Yamada H, Kanazawa N, Koyama K, Nishimura G, Morikawa M, 
Sakuragi N, Minakami H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hokkaido University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

Hypochondroplasia is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia expressing 
postnatal onset of short stature with mild rhizomelic shortening of the limbs. 
This manifestation leads to restricted prenatal diagnosis of the disorder. We 
report here on a sporadic case of a hypochondroplastic baby, whose prenatal 
sonographic measurements were serially recorded from 19 weeks of gestation. Mild 
shortening of the limbs became manifest after 26 weeks of gestation. Biparietal 
diameter was within the normal range throughout gestation. Both parents were of 
average stature. A tentative diagnosis of a nonlethal short-limb skeletal 
dysplasia was made. At birth, the clinical manifestations of the neonate were 
not characteristic, but the radiographic features raised the possibility of 
hypochondroplasia. Molecular analyses revealed a C to G mutation at nucleotide 
1659 of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene, a common mutation 
in hypochondroplasia.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.746
PMID: 14755409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]