---
reference_id: "PMID:11941369"
title: "Mutations in ALMS1 cause obesity, type 2 diabetes and neurosensory degeneration in Alström syndrome."
authors:
- Collin GB
- Marshall JD
- Ikeda A
- So WV
- Russell-Eggitt I
- Maffei P
- Beck S
- Boerkoel CF
- Sicolo N
- Martin M
- Nishina PM
- Naggert JK
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/ng867
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Child
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/genetics"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Nerve Degeneration/genetics
- "Neurosecretory Systems/pathology, physiopathology"
- Obesity/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in ALMS1 cause obesity, type 2 diabetes and neurosensory degeneration in Alström syndrome.
**Authors:** Collin GB, Marshall JD, Ikeda A, So WV, Russell-Eggitt I, Maffei P, Beck S, Boerkoel CF, Sicolo N, Martin M, Nishina PM, Naggert JK
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng867](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng867)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2002 May;31(1):74-8. doi: 10.1038/ng867. Epub 2002 Apr 8.

Mutations in ALMS1 cause obesity, type 2 diabetes and neurosensory degeneration
in Alström syndrome.

Collin GB(1), Marshall JD, Ikeda A, So WV, Russell-Eggitt I, Maffei P, Beck S,
Boerkoel CF, Sicolo N, Martin M, Nishina PM, Naggert JK.

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609, USA.

Alström syndrome is a homogeneous autosomal recessive disorder that is
characterized by childhood obesity associated with hyperinsulinemia, chronic
hyperglycemia and neurosensory deficits. The gene involved in Alström syndrome
probably interacts with genetic modifiers, as subsets of affected individuals
present with additional features such as dilated cardiomyopathy, hepatic
dysfunction, hypothyroidism, male hypogonadism, short stature and mild to
moderate developmental delay, and with secondary complications normally
associated with type 2 diabetes, such as hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis. Our
detection of an uncharacterized transcript, KIAA0328, led us to identify the
gene ALMS1, which contains sequence variations, including four frameshift
mutations and two nonsense mutations, that segregate with Alström syndrome in
six unrelated families. ALMS1 is ubiquitously expressed at low levels and does
not share significant sequence homology with other genes reported so far. The
identification of ALMS1 provides an entry point into a new pathway leading
toward the understanding of both Alström syndrome and the common diseases that
characterize it.

DOI: 10.1038/ng867
PMID: 11941369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
