---
reference_id: "PMID:30763942"
title: "Whipple's Disease: A Case Report."
authors:
- Kutlu O
- Erhan SŞ
- Gökden Y
- Kandemir Ö
- Tükek T
journal: Med Princ Pract
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000498909
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple's Disease: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Kutlu O, Erhan SŞ, Gökden Y, Kandemir Ö, Tükek T
**Journal:** Med Princ Pract (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000498909](https://doi.org/10.1159/000498909)

## Content

1. Med Princ Pract. 2020;29(1):90-93. doi: 10.1159/000498909. Epub 2019 Feb 14.

Whipple's Disease: A Case Report.

Kutlu O(1), Erhan SŞ(2), Gökden Y(3), Kandemir Ö(3), Tükek T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Okmeydanı Education and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey, orkidekutlu@windowslive.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Okmeydanı Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Okmeydanı Education and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Istanbul University Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Whipple's disease is a very rare systemic infectious disease with an 
annual incidence of 3 in one million, which may be fatal if not diagnosed and 
treated appropriately.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND INTERVENTION: Herein we describe a 49-year-old patient 
admitted to the hospital with symptoms of severe malabsorption and diagnosed 
with Whipple's disease. The diagnosis was based on the histopathological 
findings of small intestine biopsies and PCR analysis.
CONCLUSION: Whipple's disease should be kept in mind while dealing with patients 
with severe malabsorption, even in the absence of accompanying features of the 
disease.

© 2019 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000498909
PMCID: PMC7024871
PMID: 30763942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Kutlu has nothing to disclose.