---
reference_id: "PMID:26231459"
title: "Estimations of worldwide prevalence of chronic hepatitis B virus infection: a systematic review of data published between 1965 and 2013."
authors:
- Schweitzer A
- Horn J
- Mikolajczyk RT
- Krause G
- Ott JJ
journal: Lancet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)61412-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimations of worldwide prevalence of chronic hepatitis B virus infection: a systematic review of data published between 1965 and 2013.
**Authors:** Schweitzer A, Horn J, Mikolajczyk RT, Krause G, Ott JJ
**Journal:** Lancet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(15)61412-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)61412-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2015 Oct 17;386(10003):1546-55. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)61412-X.
Epub  2015 Jul 28.

Estimations of worldwide prevalence of chronic hepatitis B virus infection: a 
systematic review of data published between 1965 and 2013.

Schweitzer A(1), Horn J(2), Mikolajczyk RT(3), Krause G(4), Ott JJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany; PhD Programme 'Epidemiology' Braunschweig-Hannover, 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany; PhD Programme 'Epidemiology' Braunschweig-Hannover, 
Braunschweig, Germany; Research Group Epidemiological and Statistical Methods, 
Helmholtz Center for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany; Research Group Epidemiological and Statistical Methods, 
Helmholtz Center for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany; Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany; Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany; Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Electronic 
address: Joerdis.Ott@helmholtz-hzi.de.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2015 Oct 17;386(10003):1515-7. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)61116-3.

BACKGROUND: The quantification of the burden of disease attributable to 
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection and the adaptation of prevention and control 
measures requires knowledge on its prevalence in the general population. For 
most countries such data are not routinely available. We estimated the national, 
regional, and global prevalence of chronic HBV infection.
METHODS: For this systematic review and pooled analysis, we searched for data on 
prevalence of chronic HBV infection published between Jan 1, 1965, and Oct 23, 
2013, in the databases Medline, Embase, CAB Abstracts (Global health), Popline, 
and Web of Science. We included studies reporting the hepatitis B surface 
antigen (HBsAg) serological marker of chronic HBV infection in non-high-risk 
groups and extracted data into a customised database. For each country, we 
calculated HBsAg prevalence estimates and 95% CIs weighted by study size. We 
extrapolated prevalence estimates to population sizes in 2010 to obtain the 
number of individuals with chronic HBV infection.
FINDINGS: Of the 17,029 records screened, 1800 report on the prevalence of HBsAg 
covering 161 countries were included. HBsAg seroprevalence was 3·61% (95% CI 
3·61-3·61) worldwide with highest endemicity in countries of the African region 
(total 8·83%, 8·82-8·83) and Western Pacific region (total 5·26%, 5·26-5·26). 
Within WHO regions, prevalence ranged from 0·20% (0·19-0·21; Mexico) to 13·55% 
(9·00-19·89; Haiti) in the Americas, to 0·48% (0·12-1·90; the Seychelles) to 
22·38% (20·10-24·83; South Sudan) in the African region. We estimated that in 
2010, globally, about 248 million individuals were HBsAg positive.
INTERPRETATION: This first global assessment of country-level population 
prevalence of chronic HBV infection found a wide variation between countries and 
highlights the need for continued prevention and control strategies and the 
collection of reliable epidemiologic data using standardised methodology.
FUNDING: World Health Organization.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)61412-X
PMID: 26231459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]