---
reference_id: "PMID:25479458"
title: Atypical manifestation of LRBA deficiency with predominant IBD-like phenotype.
authors:
- Serwas NK
- Kansu A
- Santos-Valente E
- Kuloğlu Z
- Demir A
- Yaman A
- Gamez Diaz LY
- Artan R
- Sayar E
- Ensari A
- Grimbacher B
- Boztug K
journal: Inflamm Bowel Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000266
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, metabolism"
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Immunoenzyme Techniques
- Infant
- "Inflammatory Bowel Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical manifestation of LRBA deficiency with predominant IBD-like phenotype.
**Authors:** Serwas NK, Kansu A, Santos-Valente E, Kuloğlu Z, Demir A, Yaman A, Gamez Diaz LY, Artan R, Sayar E, Ensari A, Grimbacher B, Boztug K
**Journal:** Inflamm Bowel Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MIB.0000000000000266](https://doi.org/10.1097/MIB.0000000000000266)

## Content

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2015 Jan;21(1):40-7. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000266.

Atypical manifestation of LRBA deficiency with predominant IBD-like phenotype.

Serwas NK(1), Kansu A, Santos-Valente E, Kuloğlu Z, Demir A, Yaman A, Gamez Diaz
LY, Artan R, Sayar E, Ensari A, Grimbacher B, Boztug K.

Author information:
(1)*CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Vienna, Austria; †Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Ankara
University, Ankara, Turkey; ‡Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University
Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; §Department of Pediatric
Gastroenterology, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey; ‖Konya Training and
Research Hospital, Konya, Turkey; ¶Department of Pathology, Ankara University,
Ankara, Turkey; and **Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) denote a heterogeneous group of
disorders associated with an imbalance of gut microbiome and the immune system.
Importance of the immune system in the gut is endorsed by the presence of
IBD-like symptoms in several primary immunodeficiencies. A fraction of
early-onset IBDs presenting with more severe disease course and incomplete
response to conventional treatment is assumed to be inherited in a Mendelian
fashion, as exemplified by the recent discovery of interleukin (IL)-10
(receptor) deficiency.
METHODS: We analyzed a patient born to consanguineous parents suffering from
severe intestinal manifestations since 6 months of age and later diagnosed as
IBD. Eventually, she developed autoimmune manifestations including thyroiditis
and type I diabetes at the age of 6 and 9 years, respectively. Combined
single-nucleotide polymorphism array-based homozygosity mapping and exome
sequencing was performed to identify the underlying genetic defect. Protein
structural predictions were calculated using I-TASSER. Immunoblot was performed
to assess protein expression. Flow cytometric analysis was applied to
investigate B-cell subpopulations.
RESULTS: We identified a homozygous missense mutation (p.Ile2824Pro) in
lipopolysaccharide-responsive and beige-like anchor (LRBA) affecting the
C-terminal WD40 domain of the protein. In contrast to previously published
LRBA-deficient patients, the mutant protein was expressed at similar levels to
healthy controls. Immunophenotyping of the index patient revealed normal B-cell
subpopulations except increased CD21 B cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a patient with a novel missense mutation in LRBA who
presented with IBD-like symptoms at early age, illustrating that LRBA deficiency
should be considered in the differential diagnosis for IBD(-like) disease even
in the absence of overt immunodeficiency.

DOI: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000266
PMID: 25479458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
