---
reference_id: "PMID:29869359"
title: "Transplantation for infantile nephronophthisis with loss-of-function mutation in NPHP3: Lesson from a case."
authors:
- Zhang H
- Luo J
- Liu L
- Li J
- Fu Q
- Chen W
- Yang S
- Shang W
- Wang H
- Deng R
- Sun L
- Zhu X
- Wang C
journal: Pediatr Transplant
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/petr.13233
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transplantation for infantile nephronophthisis with loss-of-function mutation in NPHP3: Lesson from a case.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Luo J, Liu L, Li J, Fu Q, Chen W, Yang S, Shang W, Wang H, Deng R, Sun L, Zhu X, Wang C
**Journal:** Pediatr Transplant (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/petr.13233](https://doi.org/10.1111/petr.13233)

## Content

1. Pediatr Transplant. 2018 Jun 4:e13233. doi: 10.1111/petr.13233. Online ahead
of  print.

Transplantation for infantile nephronophthisis with loss-of-function mutation in 
NPHP3: Lesson from a case.

Zhang H(1), Luo J(2), Liu L(1), Li J(1), Fu Q(1), Chen W(3), Yang S(3), Shang 
W(4), Wang H(1), Deng R(1), Sun L(5), Zhu X(1), Wang C(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Organ Transplant Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Kidney Transplantation, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(6)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory on Organ Donation and Transplant 
Immunology, Guangzhou, China.

The choice of KT only or CLKT for infantile NPHP with mild liver fibrosis is 
understudied. A 5-year-old girl was transferred to our center for KT due to 
ESRD. Her primary disease was infantile NPHP with compound heterozygous NPHP3 
mutations: c.458A>C(p.Q153P)/missense mutation and c.2032A>T(p. K678X)/nonsense 
mutation. The patient had elevated liver enzymes and biopsy-proven liver 
fibrosis. As liver synthesis was acceptable, only KT was performed. However, 
liver fibrosis progressed at 1.5 years after transplantation, manifested with 
portal hypertension and hypersplenism. Common causes for portal hypertension 
were excluded, and the progression was attributed to NPHP. AMR attacked 
allograft at about 2 years post-transplant. To solve both the liver and the 
kidney problems, CLKT was performed. Her liver and kidney function recovered 
initially, but she unfortunately died of pneumonia and subsequent intracranial 
hemorrhage two weeks later. Nonsense mutation in NPHP3 gene may be correlated 
with rapid progression of liver disease in infantile NPHP. More studies are 
required to determine the role of CLKT in these cases; however, combined 
transplantation may improve long-term graft and patient survival.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/petr.13233
PMID: 29869359