---
reference_id: "PMID:35962613"
title: Loss of mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation protein short-chain Enoyl-CoA hydratase disrupts oxidative phosphorylation protein complex stability and function.
authors:
- Burgin H
- Sharpe AJ
- Nie S
- Ziemann M
- Crameri JJ
- Stojanovski D
- Pitt J
- Ohtake A
- Murayama K
- McKenzie M
journal: FEBS J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/febs.16595
keywords:
- Humans
- Oxidative Phosphorylation
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Proteomics
- "Enoyl-CoA Hydratase/genetics, metabolism"
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Loss of mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation protein short-chain Enoyl-CoA hydratase disrupts oxidative phosphorylation protein complex stability and function.
**Authors:** Burgin H, Sharpe AJ, Nie S, Ziemann M, Crameri JJ, Stojanovski D, Pitt J, Ohtake A, Murayama K, McKenzie M
**Journal:** FEBS J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.16595](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.16595)

## Content

1. FEBS J. 2023 Jan;290(1):225-246. doi: 10.1111/febs.16595. Epub 2022 Aug 24.

Loss of mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation protein short-chain Enoyl-CoA 
hydratase disrupts oxidative phosphorylation protein complex stability and 
function.

Burgin H(1), Sharpe AJ(2), Nie S(3), Ziemann M(1), Crameri JJ(4), Stojanovski 
D(4), Pitt J(5), Ohtake A(6)(7), Murayama K(8), McKenzie M(1)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, Engineering 
and Built Environment, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine 
Discovery Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Melbourne Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, Bio21 Molecular Science 
and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch 
Childrens Research Institute, The University of Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Department of Pediatrics & Clinical Genomics, Faculty of Medicine, Saitama 
Medical University, Japan.
(7)Centre for Intractable Diseases, Saitama Medical University Hospital, Japan.
(8)Department of Metabolism, Chiba Children's Hospital, Japan.
(9)Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of 
Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia.
(10)Department of Molecular and Translational Science, Monash University, 
Melbourne, Australia.

Short-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase 1 (ECHS1) is involved in the second step of 
mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation (FAO), catalysing the hydration of 
short-chain enoyl-CoA esters to short-chain 3-hyroxyl-CoA esters. Genetic 
deficiency in ECHS1 (ECHS1D) is associated with a specific subset of Leigh 
Syndrome, a disease typically caused by defects in oxidative phosphorylation 
(OXPHOS). Here, we examined the molecular pathogenesis of ECHS1D using a 
CRISPR/Cas9 edited human cell 'knockout' model and fibroblasts from ECHS1D 
patients. Transcriptome analysis of ECHS1 'knockout' cells showed reductions in 
key mitochondrial pathways, including the tricarboxylic acid cycle, 
receptor-mediated mitophagy and nucleotide biosynthesis. Subsequent proteomic 
analyses confirmed these reductions and revealed additional defects in 
mitochondrial oxidoreductase activity and fatty acid β-oxidation. Functional 
analysis of ECHS1 'knockout' cells showed reduced mitochondrial oxygen 
consumption rates when metabolising glucose or OXPHOS complex I-linked 
substrates, as well as decreased complex I and complex IV enzyme activities. 
ECHS1 'knockout' cells also exhibited decreased OXPHOS protein complex 
steady-state levels (complex I, complex III2 , complex IV, complex V and 
supercomplexes CIII2 /CIV and CI/CIII2 /CIV), which were associated with a 
defect in complex I assembly. Patient fibroblasts exhibit varied reduction of 
mature OXPHOS complex steady-state levels, with defects detected in CIII2 , CIV, 
CV and the CI/CIII2 /CIV supercomplex. Overall, these findings highlight the 
contribution of defective OXPHOS function, in particular complex I deficiency, 
to the molecular pathogenesis of ECHS1D.

© 2022 The Authors. The FEBS Journal published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.16595
PMCID: PMC10087869
PMID: 35962613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.