---
reference_id: "PMID:26774771"
title: "Quantifying nitrogen leaching response to fertilizer additions in China's cropland."
authors:
- Gao S
- Xu P
- Zhou F
- Yang H
- Zheng C
- Cao W
- Tao S
- Piao S
- Zhao Y
- Ji X
- Shang Z
- Chen M
journal: Environ Pollut
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2016.01.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantifying nitrogen leaching response to fertilizer additions in China's cropland.
**Authors:** Gao S, Xu P, Zhou F, Yang H, Zheng C, Cao W, Tao S, Piao S, Zhao Y, Ji X, Shang Z, Chen M
**Journal:** Environ Pollut (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envpol.2016.01.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.01.010)

## Content

1. Environ Pollut. 2016 Apr;211:241-51. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2016.01.010. Epub 
2016 Jan 14.

Quantifying nitrogen leaching response to fertilizer additions in China's 
cropland.

Gao S(1), Xu P(2), Zhou F(3), Yang H(1), Zheng C(4), Cao W(5), Tao S(1), Piao 
S(1), Zhao Y(6), Ji X(7), Shang Z(1), Chen M(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Integrated Watershed Management, Sino-France Institute of Earth 
Systems Science, Laboratory for Earth Surface Processes, College of Urban and 
Environmental Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, PR China.
(2)School of Environment and Energy, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, 
Shenzhen, 518055, PR China.
(3)Institute of Integrated Watershed Management, Sino-France Institute of Earth 
Systems Science, Laboratory for Earth Surface Processes, College of Urban and 
Environmental Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, PR China. Electronic 
address: zhouf@pku.edu.cn.
(4)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, South University of Science 
and Technology of China, Shenzhen, 518055, PR China.
(5)Laboratory of Land Surface Pattern and Simulation, Institute of Geographic 
Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
100101, PR China.
(6)Department of Water Environmental Planning, Chinese Academy for Environmental 
Planning, Beijing, 100012, PR China.
(7)State Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Quality Control in 
Environmental Monitoring, China National Environmental Monitoring Center, 
Beijing, 100012, PR China.
(8)Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development in Agriculture, Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, PR China; International 
Institute for Applied System Analysis, Laxenburg, A-2361, Austria. Electronic 
address: chenminpeng@caas.cn.

Agricultural soils account for more than 50% of nitrogen leaching (LN) to 
groundwater in China. When excess levels of nitrogen accumulate in groundwater, 
it poses a risk of adverse health effects. Despite this recognition, estimation 
of LN from cropland soils in a broad spatial scale is still quite uncertain in 
China. The uncertainty of LN primarily stems from the shape of nitrogen leaching 
response to fertilizer additions (N rate) and the role of environmental 
conditions. On the basis of 453 site-years at 51 sites across China, we explored 
the nonlinearity and variability of the response of LN to N rate and developed 
an empirical statistical model to determine how environmental factors regulate 
the rate of N leaching (LR). The result shows that LN-N rate relationship is 
convex for most crop types, and varies by local hydro-climates and soil organic 
carbon. Variability of air temperature explains a half (∼ 52%) of the spatial 
variation of LR. The results of model calibration and validation indicate that 
incorporating this empirical knowledge into a predictive model could accurately 
capture the variation in leaching and produce a reasonable upscaling from site 
to country. The fertilizer-induced LN in 2008 for China's cropland were 0.88 ± 
0.23 TgN (1σ), significantly lower than the linear or uniform model, as assumed 
by Food and Agriculture Organization and MITERRA-EUROPE models. These results 
also imply that future policy to reduce N leaching from cropland needs to 
consider environmental variability rather than solely attempt to reduce N rate.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2016.01.010
PMID: 26774771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]