---
reference_id: "PMID:36434153"
title: Lynch syndrome, molecular mechanisms and variant classification.
authors:
- Abildgaard AB
- Nielsen SV
- Bernstein I
- Stein A
- Lindorff-Larsen K
- Hartmann-Petersen R
journal: Br J Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41416-022-02059-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lynch syndrome, molecular mechanisms and variant classification.
**Authors:** Abildgaard AB, Nielsen SV, Bernstein I, Stein A, Lindorff-Larsen K, Hartmann-Petersen R
**Journal:** Br J Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41416-022-02059-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-022-02059-z)

## Content

1. Br J Cancer. 2023 Mar;128(5):726-734. doi: 10.1038/s41416-022-02059-z. Epub
2022  Nov 24.

Lynch syndrome, molecular mechanisms and variant classification.

Abildgaard AB(1), Nielsen SV(2), Bernstein I(3)(4), Stein A(1), Lindorff-Larsen 
K(5), Hartmann-Petersen R(6).

Author information:
(1)The Linderstrøm-Lang Centre for Protein Science, Department of Biology, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)The Linderstrøm-Lang Centre for Protein Science, Department of Biology, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. svnielsen@bio.ku.dk.
(3)Department of Surgical Gastroenterology, Aalborg University Hospital, 
Aalborg, Denmark.
(4)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg 
University, Aalborg, Denmark.
(5)The Linderstrøm-Lang Centre for Protein Science, Department of Biology, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. lindorff@bio.ku.dk.
(6)The Linderstrøm-Lang Centre for Protein Science, Department of Biology, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. rhpetersen@bio.ku.dk.

Patients with the heritable cancer disease, Lynch syndrome, carry germline 
variants in the MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 genes, encoding the central components 
of the DNA mismatch repair system. Loss-of-function variants disrupt the DNA 
mismatch repair system and give rise to a detrimental increase in the cellular 
mutational burden and cancer development. The treatment prospects for Lynch 
syndrome rely heavily on early diagnosis; however, accurate diagnosis is 
inextricably linked to correct clinical interpretation of individual variants. 
Protein variant classification traditionally relies on cumulative information 
from occurrence in patients, as well as experimental testing of the individual 
variants. The complexity of variant classification is due to (1) that variants 
of unknown significance are rare in the population and phenotypic information on 
the specific variants is missing, and (2) that individual variant testing is 
challenging, costly and slow. Here, we summarise recent developments in 
high-throughput technologies and computational prediction tools for the 
assessment of variants of unknown significance in Lynch syndrome. These 
approaches may vastly increase the number of interpretable variants and could 
also provide important mechanistic insights into the disease. These insights may 
in turn pave the road towards developing personalised treatment approaches for 
Lynch syndrome.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-022-02059-z
PMCID: PMC9978028
PMID: 36434153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.