---
reference_id: "PMID:38610646"
title: "Fibrosis in Chronic Kidney Disease: Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Targets."
authors:
- Reiss AB
- Jacob B
- Zubair A
- Srivastava A
- Johnson M
- De Leon J
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13071881
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibrosis in Chronic Kidney Disease: Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Targets.
**Authors:** Reiss AB, Jacob B, Zubair A, Srivastava A, Johnson M, De Leon J
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13071881](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13071881)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Mar 25;13(7):1881. doi: 10.3390/jcm13071881.

Fibrosis in Chronic Kidney Disease: Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Targets.

Reiss AB(1), Jacob B(1), Zubair A(1), Srivastava A(1), Johnson M(1), De Leon 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Biomedical Research Institute, NYU Grossman Long 
Island School of Medicine, Mineola, NY 11501, USA.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a slowly progressive condition characterized by 
decreased kidney function, tubular injury, oxidative stress, and inflammation. 
CKD is a leading global health burden that is asymptomatic in early stages but 
can ultimately cause kidney failure. Its etiology is complex and involves 
dysregulated signaling pathways that lead to fibrosis. Transforming growth 
factor (TGF)-β is a central mediator in promoting transdifferentiation of 
polarized renal tubular epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells, resulting in 
irreversible kidney injury. While current therapies are limited, the search for 
more effective diagnostic and treatment modalities is intensive. Although biopsy 
with histology is the most accurate method of diagnosis and staging, imaging 
techniques such as diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging and shear wave 
elastography ultrasound are less invasive ways to stage fibrosis. Current 
therapies such as renin-angiotensin blockers, mineralocorticoid receptor 
antagonists, and sodium/glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors aim to delay 
progression. Newer antifibrotic agents that suppress the downstream inflammatory 
mediators involved in the fibrotic process are in clinical trials, and potential 
therapeutic targets that interfere with TGF-β signaling are being explored. 
Small interfering RNAs and stem cell-based therapeutics are also being 
evaluated. Further research and clinical studies are necessary in order to avoid 
dialysis and kidney transplantation.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13071881
PMCID: PMC11012936
PMID: 38610646

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.