---
reference_id: "PMID:32876064"
title: Crystal structures of human ENPP1 in apo and bound forms.
authors:
- Dennis ML
- Newman J
- Dolezal O
- Hattarki M
- Surjadi RN
- Nuttall SD
- Pham T
- Nebl T
- Camerino M
- Khoo PS
- Monahan BJ
- Peat TS
journal: Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1107/S2059798320010505
keywords:
- Enzyme Inhibitors/chemistry
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/agonists
- Neoplasms/enzymology
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/chemistry
- Protein Binding
- Protein Conformation
- Pyrophosphatases/chemistry
- STING Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crystal structures of human ENPP1 in apo and bound forms.
**Authors:** Dennis ML, Newman J, Dolezal O, Hattarki M, Surjadi RN, Nuttall SD, Pham T, Nebl T, Camerino M, Khoo PS, Monahan BJ, Peat TS
**Journal:** Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1107/S2059798320010505](https://doi.org/10.1107/S2059798320010505)

## Content

1. Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol. 2020 Sep 1;76(Pt 9):889-898. doi:
10.1107/S2059798320010505. Epub 2020 Aug 17.

Crystal structures of human ENPP1 in apo and bound forms.

Dennis ML(1), Newman J(1), Dolezal O(1), Hattarki M(1), Surjadi RN(1), Nuttall
SD(1), Pham T(1), Nebl T(1), Camerino M(2), Khoo PS(2), Monahan BJ(2), Peat
TS(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Manufacturing Program, CSIRO, 343 Royal Parade, Parkville, VIC
3052, Australia.
(2)Cancer Therapeutics CRC, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.

Cancer is one of the leading causes of mortality in humans, and recent work has
focused on the area of immuno-oncology, in which the immune system is used to
specifically target cancerous cells. Ectonucleotide
pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1) is an emerging therapeutic target in
human cancers owing to its role in degrading cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP), an agonist
of the stimulator of interferon genes (STING). The available structures of ENPP1
are of the mouse enzyme, and no structures are available with anything other
than native nucleotides. Here, the first X-ray crystal structures of the human
ENPP1 enzyme in an apo form, with bound nucleotides and with two known
inhibitors are presented. The availability of these structures and a robust
crystallization system will allow the development of structure-based drug-design
campaigns against this attractive cancer therapeutic target.

open access.

DOI: 10.1107/S2059798320010505
PMCID: PMC7466750
PMID: 32876064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
