---
reference_id: "PMID:32250540"
title: Fatal hyperkeratosis syndrome in four siblings due to dolichol kinase deficiency.
authors:
- Hall BD
- Stevenson RE
- Jones JR
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61574
keywords:
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/deficiency, genetics"
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatal hyperkeratosis syndrome in four siblings due to dolichol kinase deficiency.
**Authors:** Hall BD, Stevenson RE, Jones JR
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61574](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61574)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2020 Jun;182(6):1421-1425. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61574. Epub 
2020 Apr 6.

Fatal hyperkeratosis syndrome in four siblings due to dolichol kinase 
deficiency.

Hall BD(1), Stevenson RE(1), Jones JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina, USA.

A diagnostic journey began in 1966 when a male was born with a lethal 
hyperkeratosis of undetermined etiology, only to be followed by three additional 
siblings with the same unknown disorder. All four siblings had unique 
circumferential skin constrictions on all of their digits. They died within 
5 days after birth with no diagnosis or etiology established. The first author 
(BDH) maintained notes, partial medical records, photographs, and comments about 
one autopsy report. This information was regularly revisited in the hope of 
finding a literature match, but no etiological diagnosis was forthcoming. 
However, in 2017, Rush et al. reported two siblings with similar phenotype in 
whom they found dolichol kinase deficiency (DOLK). Ultimately, our family was 
relocated and DNA isolated from the pathology slides of the third affected 
infant showed compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the DOLK gene. The 
variants were in trans, with different missense variants from the mother and 
father. This 52-year diagnostic pursuit, culminated in an answer that gave the 
family an explanation for their losses.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61574
PMID: 32250540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]