---
reference_id: "PMID:20732827"
title: Glutaric aciduria type 1 in South Africa-high incidence of glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in black South Africans.
authors:
- van der Watt G
- Owen EP
- Berman P
- Meldau S
- Watermeyer N
- Olpin SE
- Manning NJ
- Baumgarten I
- Leisegang F
- Henderson H
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.07.018
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/epidemiology, genetics"
- Black People/genetics
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Glutaryl-CoA Dehydrogenase/deficiency, genetics"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- South Africa/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glutaric aciduria type 1 in South Africa-high incidence of glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in black South Africans.
**Authors:** van der Watt G, Owen EP, Berman P, Meldau S, Watermeyer N, Olpin SE, Manning NJ, Baumgarten I, Leisegang F, Henderson H
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.07.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.07.018)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2010 Oct-Nov;101(2-3):178-82. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.07.018.  Epub 2010 Aug 3.

Glutaric aciduria type 1 in South Africa-high incidence of glutaryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency in black South Africans.

van der Watt G(1), Owen EP, Berman P, Meldau S, Watermeyer N, Olpin SE, Manning 
NJ, Baumgarten I, Leisegang F, Henderson H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Chemical Pathology, Groote Schuur and Red Cross Children's 
Hospitals, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. 
george.vanderwatt@uct.ac.za

Glutaric Aciduria type 1 (GA 1) is an inherited disorder of lysine and 
tryptophan catabolism that typically manifests in infants with acute cerebral 
injury associated with intercurrent illness. We investigated the clinical, 
biochemical and molecular features in 14 known GA 1 patients in South Africa, 
most of whom were recently confirmed following the implementation of sensitive 
urine organic acid screening at our laboratory. Age at diagnosis ranged from 
3days to 5years and poor clinical outcome reflected the delay in diagnosis in 
all but one patient. Twelve patients were unrelated black South Africans of whom 
all those tested (n=11) were found homozygous for the same A293T mutation in the 
glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH) gene. Excretion of 3-hydroxyglutarate (3-OHGA) 
was >30.1μmol/mmol creatinine (reference range <2.5) in all cases but glutarate 
excretion varied with 5 patients considered low excretors (glutarate 
<50μmol/mmol creatinine). Fibroblast GCDH activity was very low or absent in all 
of five cases tested. Heterozygosity for the A293T mutation was found 1 in 36 
(95% CI; 1/54 - 1/24) unrelated black South African newborns (n=750) giving a 
predicted prevalence rate for GA 1 of 1 in 5184 (95% CI; 1/11664 - 1/2304) in 
this population. GA 1 is a treatable but often missed inherited disorder with a 
previously unrecognised high carrier frequency of a single mutation in the South 
African black population.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.07.018
PMID: 20732827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]