---
reference_id: "PMID:38836810"
title: Coxsackievirus A10 impairs nail regeneration and induces onychomadesis by mimicking DKK1 to attenuate Wnt signaling.
authors:
- Cui Y
- Shi Q
- Song P
- Tong J
- Cheng Z
- Zhang H
- Wang X
- Zheng Y
- Wu Y
- Wan M
- Li S
- Zhao X
- Tong Z
- Yu Z
- Gao S
- Chen YG
- Gao GF
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20231512
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- beta Catenin/metabolism
- Cell Differentiation/drug effects
- "Coxsackievirus Infections/complications, metabolism"
- Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 beta/metabolism
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/virology, metabolism, pathology, complications"
- "Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-6/metabolism, genetics"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Nail Diseases/metabolism, virology, pathology"
- "Nails/metabolism, pathology"
- Phosphorylation/drug effects
- Pyridines/pharmacology
- Pyrimidines
- Wnt Signaling Pathway/drug effects
- "Enterovirus/metabolism, pathogenicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coxsackievirus A10 impairs nail regeneration and induces onychomadesis by mimicking DKK1 to attenuate Wnt signaling.
**Authors:** Cui Y, Shi Q, Song P, Tong J, Cheng Z, Zhang H, Wang X, Zheng Y, Wu Y, Wan M, Li S, Zhao X, Tong Z, Yu Z, Gao S, Chen YG, Gao GF
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20231512](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20231512)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2024 Aug 5;221(8):e20231512. doi: 10.1084/jem.20231512. Epub 2024
Jun  5.

Coxsackievirus A10 impairs nail regeneration and induces onychomadesis by 
mimicking DKK1 to attenuate Wnt signaling.

Cui Y(#)(1)(2), Shi Q(#)(2), Song P(1), Tong J(3), Cheng Z(3), Zhang H(1), Wang 
X(2), Zheng Y(1), Wu Y(1), Wan M(4), Li S(1), Zhao X(1), Tong Z(1), Yu Z(5), Gao 
S(3)(6), Chen YG(2), Gao GF(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogen Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing, China.
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life 
Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University , Beijing, China.
(3)Shanxi Academy of Advanced Research and Innovation , Taiyuan, China.
(4)Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Nutrition and Health, State Key Laboratories for 
Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing, China.
(6)Zhongda Hospital, School of Life Sciences and Technology, Advanced Institute 
for Life and Health, Southeast University , Nanjing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Coxsackievirus A10 (CV-A10) infection, a prominent cause of childhood 
hand-foot-and-mouth disease (HFMD), frequently manifests with the intriguing 
phenomenon of onychomadesis, characterized by nail shedding. However, the 
underlying mechanism is elusive. Here, we found that CV-A10 infection in mice 
could suppress Wnt/β-catenin signaling by restraining LDL receptor-related 
protein 6 (LRP6) phosphorylation and β-catenin accumulation and lead to 
onychomadesis. Mechanistically, CV-A10 mimics Dickkopf-related protein 1 (DKK1) 
to interact with Kringle-containing transmembrane protein 1 (KRM1), the CV-A10 
cellular receptor. We further found that Wnt agonist (GSK3β inhibitor) CHIR99021 
can restore nail stem cell differentiation and protect against nail shedding. 
These findings provide novel insights into the pathogenesis of CV-A10 and 
related viruses in onychomadesis and guide prognosis assessment and clinical 
treatment of the disease.

© 2024 Cui et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20231512
PMCID: PMC11153773
PMID: 38836810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors declare no competing 
interests exist.