---
reference_id: "PMID:17657824"
title: "The importance of mutation detection in Marfan syndrome and Marfan-related disorders: report of 193 FBN1 mutations."
authors:
- Comeglio P
- Johnson P
- Arno G
- Brice G
- Evans A
- Aragon-Martin J
- da Silva FP
- Kiotsekoglou A
- Child A
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1002/humu.9505
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The importance of mutation detection in Marfan syndrome and Marfan-related disorders: report of 193 FBN1 mutations.
**Authors:** Comeglio P, Johnson P, Arno G, Brice G, Evans A, Aragon-Martin J, da Silva FP, Kiotsekoglou A, Child A
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.9505](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.9505)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2007 Sep;28(9):928. doi: 10.1002/humu.9505.

The importance of mutation detection in Marfan syndrome and Marfan-related 
disorders: report of 193 FBN1 mutations.

Comeglio P(1), Johnson P, Arno G, Brice G, Evans A, Aragon-Martin J, da Silva 
FP, Kiotsekoglou A, Child A.

Author information:
(1)St. George's University, London, United Kingdom.

Mutations in the FBN1 gene have been characterised in patients affected by 
Marfan syndrome and Marfan-related disorders. Starting with genomic DNA, we 
analysed the FBN1 gene using PCR, SSCP and/or dHPLC analysis, and automatic 
sequencing of abnormal bands/peaks, in a consecutive series of 508 patients, of 
which 22 were children less than 5 years old. Our results are comparable with 
those reported by other groups. In this study we observed 193 mutations, 126 of 
which previously unreported. A total of 331 relatives (including 51 infants) of 
120 probands for whom a family mutation had been identified here or elsewhere, 
were tested for the presence of that particular mutation. In addition, 4 
prenatal tests were carried out. The identification of a mutation allows for 
early diagnosis, prognosis, genetic counselling, preventive management of 
carriers and reassurance for unaffected relatives. The importance of knowing in 
advance the location of the putative family mutation is highlighted by its 
straightforward application to prenatal and postnatal screening.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.9505
PMID: 17657824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]