---
reference_id: "PMID:36433836"
title: "Role of chemical exposure in the incidence of vitiligo: a case-control study in Tunisia."
authors:
- Rmadi N
- Kotti N
- Bahloul E
- Dhouib F
- Sellami I
- Sellami K
- Jmal Hammami K
- Masmoudi ML
- Turki H
- Hajjaji M
journal: Libyan J Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/19932820.2022.2132628
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of chemical exposure in the incidence of vitiligo: a case-control study in Tunisia.
**Authors:** Rmadi N, Kotti N, Bahloul E, Dhouib F, Sellami I, Sellami K, Jmal Hammami K, Masmoudi ML, Turki H, Hajjaji M
**Journal:** Libyan J Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19932820.2022.2132628](https://doi.org/10.1080/19932820.2022.2132628)

## Content

1. Libyan J Med. 2023 Dec;18(1):2132628. doi: 10.1080/19932820.2022.2132628.

Role of chemical exposure in the incidence of vitiligo: a case-control study in 
Tunisia.

Rmadi N(1), Kotti N(1), Bahloul E(2), Dhouib F(1), Sellami I(1), Sellami K(2), 
Jmal Hammami K(1), Masmoudi ML(1), Turki H(2), Hajjaji M(1).

Author information:
(1)Occupational Department and Health Disease Hedi Chaker University Hospital, 
University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.
(2)Dermatology Department, Hedi Chaker University Hospital, University of Sfax, 
Tunisia.

Vitiligo is a multifactorial dermatosis with many etiological hypotheses that 
have been suggested for its occurrence. To our knowledge, few epidemiological 
studies are available on vitiligo induction factors and particularly on the role 
of exposure to chemicals in the onset of the disease has been found. Therefore, 
there is need to investigate the relationship between vitiligo and chemical 
exposures in order to understand this mysterious disease. We conducted a 
case-control study of patients with vitiligo whose diagnosis was made by a 
specialist in dermatology. The total study period was of 6 months extending from 
1 July to 31 December 2019. The minimum sample size was determined as 46 cases 
and 92 controls. The control group was gender, age, and professional status 
matched to the vitiligo group. In the binary logistic regression model, 
household chemicals/colored toothpaste use, a history of a repeated antibiotic 
use, and an occupational exposure to phenol/catechol derivatives were 
significantly associated with vitiligo (three to fourfold increase). Our results 
suggest that chemical factors play a key role in the occurrence of vitiligo. 
Therefore, prevention of this dermatosis requires the identification of exposure 
to the incriminated chemicals in any patient followed for vitiligo. The earlier 
the diagnosis of 'chemical' or chemically aggravated vitiligo, the better the 
prognosis for this disease.

DOI: 10.1080/19932820.2022.2132628
PMCID: PMC9707374
PMID: 36433836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).