---
reference_id: "PMID:17417937"
title: Trinucleotide repeat disorders.
authors:
- Orr HT
- Zoghbi HY
journal: Annu Rev Neurosci
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113042
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Fragile X Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- "Heredodegenerative Disorders, Nervous System/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Huntington Disease/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Peptides/genetics, metabolism"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trinucleotide repeat disorders.
**Authors:** Orr HT, Zoghbi HY
**Journal:** Annu Rev Neurosci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113042](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113042)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2007;30:575-621. doi:
10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113042.

Trinucleotide repeat disorders.

Orr HT(1), Zoghbi HY.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. orrxx002@umn.edu

The discovery that expansion of unstable repeats can cause a variety of 
neurological disorders has changed the landscape of disease-oriented research 
for several forms of mental retardation, Huntington disease, inherited ataxias, 
and muscular dystrophy. The dynamic nature of these mutations provided an 
explanation for the variable phenotype expressivity within a family. Beyond 
diagnosis and genetic counseling, the benefits from studying these disorders 
have been noted in both neurobiology and cell biology. Examples include insight 
about the role of translational control in synaptic plasticity, the role of RNA 
processing in the integrity of muscle and neuronal function, the importance of 
Fe-S-containing enzymes for cellular energy, and the dramatic effects of 
altering protein conformations on neuronal function and survival. It is exciting 
that within a span of 15 years, pathogenesis studies of this class of disorders 
are beginning to reveal pathways that are potential therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113042
PMID: 17417937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]