---
reference_id: "PMID:37977846"
title: A novel mutation in RNF216 gene in an Indian case with Gordon Holmes syndrome.
authors:
- Bal Kallupurakkal A
- Verma R
- Chakraborty R
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2023-256994
keywords:
- Male
- Ataxia/genetics
- Humans
- Spinocerebellar Degenerations
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Adult
- Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone/deficiency
- Mutation
- "Hypogonadism/diagnosis, genetics"
- Ubiquitin-Specific Proteases/genetics
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation in RNF216 gene in an Indian case with Gordon Holmes syndrome.
**Authors:** Bal Kallupurakkal A, Verma R, Chakraborty R
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2023-256994](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2023-256994)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2023 Nov 17;16(11):e256994. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2023-256994.

A novel mutation in RNF216 gene in an Indian case with Gordon Holmes syndrome.

Bal Kallupurakkal A(1), Verma R(2), Chakraborty R(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurology, King George Medical University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Neurology, King George Medical University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India 
drrajeshverma32@yahoo.com.

Early-onset cerebellar ataxia has a broad range of challenging differential 
diagnoses. Identification of hypogonadism can assist in narrowing down 
differential diagnosis in the presentation of progressive ataxia. Gordon Holmes 
syndrome as described by Sir Gordon Holmes in 1908 consists of ataxia with 
hypogonadism. It is due to mutation in RNF216 and OTUD4 genes which encode for 
enzymes in the ubiquitin-proteasome system. In this case report, we describe a 
30-year-old male presenting with insidious-onset progressive ataxia with 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, cataract, pan-cerebellar atrophy with bilateral 
cerebral white matter hyperintensities and a positive homozygous mutation for 
RNF216 making the diagnosis of Gordon Holmes syndrome. The presence of 
hypogonadism in a patient with ataxia should alert the clinician to look for 
such a diagnosis.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2023-256994
PMCID: PMC10660149
PMID: 37977846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.