---
reference_id: "PMID:36585034"
title: Co-segregation analysis and functional trial in vivo of candidate genes for monogenic diabetes.
authors:
- Stankute I
- Kazlauskiene M
- Blouin JL
- Schwitzgebel VM
- Verkauskiene R
journal: BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/bmjdrc-2022-003038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Co-segregation analysis and functional trial in vivo of candidate genes for monogenic diabetes.
**Authors:** Stankute I, Kazlauskiene M, Blouin JL, Schwitzgebel VM, Verkauskiene R
**Journal:** BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjdrc-2022-003038](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjdrc-2022-003038)

## Content

1. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care. 2022 Dec;10(6):e003038. doi: 
10.1136/bmjdrc-2022-003038.

Co-segregation analysis and functional trial in vivo of candidate genes for 
monogenic diabetes.

Stankute I(1), Kazlauskiene M(2), Blouin JL(3)(4), Schwitzgebel VM(5)(6), 
Verkauskiene R(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Endocrinology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, 
Lithuania ingridutes@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Endocrinology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, 
Lithuania.
(3)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Diagnostics, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(5)Pediatric Endocrine and Diabetes Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Gynecology 
and Obstetrics, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Diabetes Center of the Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to perform familial co-segregation 
analysis and functional trial in vivo during mixed meal tolerance test (MMTT) of 
novel variants in diabetes candidate genes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: It is a continuation of the project "Genetic 
diabetes in Lithuania" with the cohort of 1209 patients with diabetes. Prior 
screening for autoimmune markers confirmed type 1 diabetes (T1D) diagnosis in 
88.1% (n=1065) of patients, and targeted next-generation sequencing identified 
3.5% (n=42) pathogenic variants in MODY genes. Subsequently, 102 patients were 
classified as having diabetes of unknown etiology. 12/102 were found to have 
novel variants in potential diabetes genes (RFX2, RREB1, SLC5A1 (3 patients with 
variants in this gene), GCKR, MC4R, CASP10, TMPRSS6, HGFAC, DACH1, ZBED3). 
Co-segregation analysis and MMTT were carried out in order to study beta-cell 
function in subjects with specific variants.
RESULTS: MMTT analysis showed that probands with variants in MC4R, CASP10, 
TMPRSS6, HGFAC, and SLC5A1 (c.1415T>C) had sufficient residual beta-cell 
function with stimulated C-peptide (CP) >200 pmol/L. Seven individuals with 
variants in RFX2, RREB1, GCKR, DACH1, ZBED3 and SLC5A1 (c.1415T>C, and c.932A>T) 
presented with complete beta-cell failure. No statistical differences were found 
between patients with sufficient CP production and those with complete beta-cell 
failure when comparing age at the onset and duration of diabetes. Nineteen 
family members were included in co-segregation analysis; no diabetes cases were 
reported among them. Only in patient with the variant c.1894G>A in RFX2 gene, 
none of the family members were affected by proband's variant.
CONCLUSIONS: Functional beta-cell study in vivo allowed to select five most 
probable genes for monogenic diabetes. Familial co-segregation analysis showed 
that novel variant in RFX2 gene could be a possible cause of diabetes. Future 
functional analysis in vitro is necessary to support or rule out the genetic 
background as a cause of diabetes.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjdrc-2022-003038
PMCID: PMC9809257
PMID: 36585034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.