---
reference_id: "PMID:28613708"
title: Clostridioides difficile infection.
authors:
- Mada PK
- Alam MU
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clostridioides difficile infection.
**Authors:** Mada PK, Alam MU

## Content

1. Clostridioides difficile infection.

Mada PK(1), Alam MU(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2024 Apr 10.

Author information:
(1)Louisiana State University Shreveport
(2)Louisiana State University HSC

Clostridioides difficile, formerly Clostridium difficile, is a gram-positive and 
spore-forming bacterium. This obligate anaerobic bacillus is recognized for its 
ability to produce toxins and is the leading cause of antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea worldwide. C difficile infections can range from an asymptomatic 
carrier to diarrhea, progressing to severe conditions such as pseudomembranous 
colitis and toxic megacolon with septic shock, often resulting in a high 
mortality rate. Although traditionally considered a primary 
healthcare-associated infection, an increasing incidence of community-acquired C 
difficile infections also exists. The emergence of a newer hypervirulent strain, 
the North American pulsed-field gel electrophoresis type 1 (NAP1), has been 
attributed to increased incidence and severity of C difficile infections over 
the last 2 decades. C difficile can colonize the intestines of healthy people 
without causing infection and survive on surfaces in the hospital and soil for 
extended periods. Contaminated surfaces and medical equipment in healthcare 
facilities can become reservoirs for C difficile spores, potentially 
transmitting to patients if proper cleaning protocols are not routinely 
implemented. The most significant risk factor for C difficile infection is 
broad-spectrum antibiotics. Patients can be colonized with C difficile without 
symptoms, but antibiotic use disturbs the balance of gut flora, enabling C 
difficile overgrowth and infection. Additional risk factors for C difficile 
infection include proton pump inhibitors, advanced age, immunosuppression, 
underlying health conditions, prior C difficile infection, recent 
hospitalization, prolonged hospital stays, inadequate infection control, and 
suboptimal antibiotic stewardship in healthcare settings, facilitating C 
difficile transmission among patients. While C difficile infection is primarily 
associated with healthcare settings, a growing recognition of community-acquired 
cases exists, particularly among younger and healthier individuals with minimal 
recent healthcare exposure. The emergence of genome sequencing has revealed that 
reservoirs for C difficile exist within healthcare systems, environment, food, 
soil, and animals, comprising a "One Health" continuum. Managing C difficile 
infections remains challenging due to its increasing global burden, emergence in 
community settings, complexities in handling severe and recurrent cases, and 
rising morbidity and mortality rates. Understanding the epidemiology of C 
difficile infection is crucial for implementing effective prevention and control 
measures in healthcare settings and the community. These strategies include 
prudent antibiotic use, hand hygiene practices, environmental cleaning, and 
early detection and management of cases.     

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 28613708

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Pradeep Kumar Mada declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Mohammed 
Alam declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.