---
reference_id: "PMID:22632369"
title: Treatment of mild, moderate-to-severe and very severe Graves' orbitopathy.
authors:
- Marcocci C
- Marinò M
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2011.11.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of mild, moderate-to-severe and very severe Graves' orbitopathy.
**Authors:** Marcocci C, Marinò M
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2011.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2011.11.005)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jun;26(3):325-37. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2011.11.005.

Treatment of mild, moderate-to-severe and very severe Graves' orbitopathy.

Marcocci C(1), Marinò M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, 56127 Pisa, 
Italy. Claudio.marcocci@med.unipi.it

Treatment of Graves' orbitopathy (GO) is better performed through a 
multidisciplinary approach. Euthyroidism should be promptly restored. 
Antithyroid drug and thyroidectomy are not disease-modifying treatments, whereas 
radioiodine may be associated with worsening of GO. This risk is eliminated by 
glucocorticoid prophylaxis. Treatments for GO differ depending on its severity 
and activity. Mild forms should be treated with local measures. In addition a 
course of selenium may be beneficial. Glucocorticoids (oral or intravenous) 
represent the main treatment of moderate-to-severe GO, the intravenous route 
being more effective. Weekly pulses of methylprednisolone are used and the 
cumulative dose should not exceed 8 g. Severe adverse events have been reported, 
particularly with higher doses. Orbital radiotherapy can be used either alone or 
associated with glucocorticoids. In very severe sight-threatening GO high dose 
intravenous glucocorticoid should be the initial treatment, orbital 
decompression being considered in nonresponding patients. Rehabilitative surgery 
should be deferred until GO becomes inactive.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2011.11.005
PMID: 22632369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]