---
reference_id: "PMID:34622992"
title: Dissecting the Phenotype and Genotype of PLA2G6-Related Parkinsonism.
authors:
- Magrinelli F
- Mehta S
- Di Lazzaro G
- Latorre A
- Edwards MJ
- Balint B
- Basu P
- Kobylecki C
- Groppa S
- Hegde A
- Mulroy E
- Estevez-Fraga C
- Arora A
- Kumar H
- Schneider SA
- Lewis PA
- Jaunmuktane Z
- Revesz T
- Gandhi S
- Wood NW
- Hardy JA
- Tinazzi M
- Lal V
- Houlden H
- Bhatia KP
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mds.28807
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Atrophy
- Dystonia/genetics
- Genotype
- Group VI Phospholipases A2/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Parkinsonian Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dissecting the Phenotype and Genotype of PLA2G6-Related Parkinsonism.
**Authors:** Magrinelli F, Mehta S, Di Lazzaro G, Latorre A, Edwards MJ, Balint B, Basu P, Kobylecki C, Groppa S, Hegde A, Mulroy E, Estevez-Fraga C, Arora A, Kumar H, Schneider SA, Lewis PA, Jaunmuktane Z, Revesz T, Gandhi S, Wood NW, Hardy JA, Tinazzi M, Lal V, Houlden H, Bhatia KP
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.28807](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28807)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2022 Jan;37(1):148-161. doi: 10.1002/mds.28807. Epub 2021 Oct 8.

Dissecting the Phenotype and Genotype of PLA2G6-Related Parkinsonism.

Magrinelli F(1)(2), Mehta S(3), Di Lazzaro G(1)(4), Latorre A(1), Edwards MJ(5),
Balint B(1)(6), Basu P(7), Kobylecki C(8), Groppa S(9), Hegde A(10), Mulroy
E(1), Estevez-Fraga C(11), Arora A(10), Kumar H(7), Schneider SA(12), Lewis
PA(11)(13), Jaunmuktane Z(1), Revesz T(14), Gandhi S(1), Wood NW(1), Hardy
JA(11), Tinazzi M(2), Lal V(3), Houlden H(14), Bhatia KP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences, UCL Queen Square Institute
of Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, India.
(4)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(5)Motor Control and Movement Disorders Group, Institute of Molecular and
Clinical Sciences, St George's University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurosciences, Kolkata, India.
(8)Department of Neurology, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester
Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.
(9)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center of the
Johannes-Gutenberg-University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(10)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Jaslok Hospital and Research Centre,
Mumbai, India.
(11)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(12)Department of Neurology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Munich,
Germany.
(13)Royal Veterinary College, University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(14)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2022 Mar;37(3):657-658. doi: 10.1002/mds.28950.
    Mov Disord. 2022 Mar;37(3):658-662. doi: 10.1002/mds.28955.

BACKGROUND: Complex parkinsonism is the commonest phenotype in late-onset
PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to deeply characterize phenogenotypically
PLA2G6-related parkinsonism in the largest cohort ever reported.
METHODS: We report 14 new cases of PLA2G6-related parkinsonism and perform a
systematic literature review.
RESULTS: PLA2G6-related parkinsonism shows a fairly distinct phenotype based on
86 cases from 68 pedigrees. Young onset (median age, 23.0 years) with
parkinsonism/dystonia, gait/balance, and/or psychiatric/cognitive symptoms were
common presenting features. Dystonia occurred in 69.4%, pyramidal signs in
77.2%, myoclonus in 65.2%, and cerebellar signs in 44.6% of cases. Early bladder
overactivity was present in 71.9% of cases. Cognitive impairment affected 76.1%
of cases and psychiatric features 87.1%, the latter being an isolated presenting
feature in 20.1%. Parkinsonism was levodopa responsive but complicated by early,
often severe dyskinesias. Five patients benefited from deep brain stimulation.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging findings included cerebral (49.3%) and/or
cerebellar (43.2%) atrophy, but mineralization was evident in only 28.1%.
Presynaptic dopaminergic terminal imaging was abnormal in all where performed.
Fifty-four PLA2G6 mutations have hitherto been associated with parkinsonism,
including four new variants reported in this article. These are mainly
nontruncating, which may explain the phenotypic heterogeneity of childhood- and
late-onset PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration. In five deceased patients,
median disease duration was 13.0 years. Brain pathology in three cases showed
mixed Lewy and tau pathology.
CONCLUSIONS: Biallelic PLA2G6 mutations cause early-onset parkinsonism
associated with dystonia, pyramidal and cerebellar signs, myoclonus, and
cognitive impairment. Early psychiatric manifestations and bladder overactivity
are common. Cerebro/cerebellar atrophy are frequent magnetic resonance imaging
features, whereas brain iron deposition is not. Early, severe dyskinesias are a
tell-tale sign. © 2021 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder
Society.

© 2021 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on
behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.28807
PMID: 34622992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
