---
reference_id: "PMID:38672604"
title: "What Have We Learned about the Prevention of NMSC from Albino Patients from Malawi? Secondary Prevention Maintained over Time."
authors:
- Tomás-Velázquez A
- Moreno-Artero E
- Romero J
- Escalonilla P
- Medina I
- Petiti GH
- Redondo P
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16081522
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What Have We Learned about the Prevention of NMSC from Albino Patients from Malawi? Secondary Prevention Maintained over Time.
**Authors:** Tomás-Velázquez A, Moreno-Artero E, Romero J, Escalonilla P, Medina I, Petiti GH, Redondo P
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16081522](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16081522)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Apr 16;16(8):1522. doi: 10.3390/cancers16081522.

What Have We Learned about the Prevention of NMSC from Albino Patients from
Malawi? Secondary Prevention Maintained over Time.

Tomás-Velázquez A(1), Moreno-Artero E(2), Romero J(3), Escalonilla P(4), Medina
I(3), Petiti GH(5), Redondo P(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Department, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, 28027 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Dermatology Department, Hospital Universitario Galdakao, 48960 Galdakao,
Spain.
(3)Romero y Medina Dermatology Clinic, 29640 Fuengirola, Spain.
(4)Dermatology Department, Complejo Asistencial de Ávila, 05071 Ávila, Spain.
(5)Dermatology Department, Consorci Sanitari Integral, Hospital Dos de Mayo,
08025 Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: We have conducted cooperative campaigns focusing on albino patients
in a rural area of Malawi. What have we learned?
METHODS: Three surgical campaigns were performed in Nkhotakota district
(2019-2023). Albino clinical and tumor characteristics were collected.
RESULTS: Between 22 and 75 albinos were evaluated in each campaign (mean age <
28 years old). Most patients did not use sunscreen in a way that provided
optimal photoprotection. Regarding tumors, the proportion of basal and squamous
cell carcinomas ranged from 1:1 to almost 2:1. Of 156 albino patients, 34
attended more than once. However, of the 19 patients with 30 tumors operated on
in 2021, only seven were assessed the following year (12 were lost to
follow-up). At least 14 albinos with locally advanced tumors were evaluated.
CONCLUSIONS: Distributing photoprotective clothing could be more efficient or
perhaps an earlier measure of sunscreen in rural Africa as it does not require
permanent repositioning. Very-high-risk patients (previous interventions with
positive margins or high-risk tumors, intense actinic damage, and new tumors
constantly appearing, especially those presenting SCCs) require close follow-up
and treatment and represent our main target. Secondary prevention with Malawian
collaboration and the use of teledermatology is essential for patient tracking,
as they are able to offer curative treatments.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16081522
PMCID: PMC11048476
PMID: 38672604

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
