---
reference_id: "PMID:21060335"
title: Scientific understanding and clinical management of Dupuytren disease.
authors:
- Shih B
- Bayat A
journal: Nat Rev Rheumatol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2010.180
keywords:
- Alcohol Drinking/adverse effects
- "Dupuytren Contracture/epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Fasciotomy
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Microbial Collagenase/therapeutic use
- Risk Factors
- Smoking/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Scientific understanding and clinical management of Dupuytren disease.
**Authors:** Shih B, Bayat A
**Journal:** Nat Rev Rheumatol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrrheum.2010.180](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrrheum.2010.180)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Dec;6(12):715-26. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2010.180. Epub 
2010 Nov 9.

Scientific understanding and clinical management of Dupuytren disease.

Shih B(1), Bayat A.

Author information:
(1)Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery Research, School of Translational Medicine, 
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester Interdisciplinary 
Biocentre, University of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester M1 7ND, UK.

Dupuytren disease (DD) is a fibroproliferative disorder of unknown etiology that 
often results in shortening and thickening of the palmar fascia, leading to 
permanent and irreversible flexion contracture of the digits. This Review 
provides a detailed update of the scientific understanding of DD and its 
clinical management, with perspectives on emerging research and therapy. 
Established risk factors include genetic predisposition and ethnicity, as well 
as sex and age. Several environmental risk factors (some considered 
controversial) include smoking, alcohol intake, trauma, diabetes, epilepsy and 
use of anticonvulsant drugs, and exposure to vibration. DD has been variously 
attributed to the presence of oxygen free radicals, trauma to the palmar fascia, 
or aberrant immune responses with altered antigen presentation, or to 
interactions between these proposed mechanisms. The presence of immune cells and 
related phenomena in DD-affected tissue suggests that DD is possibly 
immune-related. Mechanically, digital contracture is caused by myofibroblasts in 
the DD palmar fascia; however, the exact origin of this cell type remains 
unknown. The mainstay of treatment is surgical release or excision of the 
affected palmodigital tissue, but symptoms often recur. Nonsurgical correction 
of DD contractures can be achieved by Clostridium histolyticum collagenase 
injection, although the long-term safety and recurrence rate of this procedure 
requires further assessment.

DOI: 10.1038/nrrheum.2010.180
PMID: 21060335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]