---
reference_id: "PMID:12524598"
title: Evaluation of complex inheritance involving the most common Bardet-Biedl syndrome locus (BBS1).
authors:
- Mykytyn K
- Nishimura DY
- Searby CC
- Beck G
- Bugge K
- Haines HL
- Cornier AS
- Cox GF
- Fulton AB
- Carmi R
- Iannaccone A
- Jacobson SG
- Weleber RG
- Wright AF
- Riise R
- Hennekam RC
- Lüleci G
- Berker-Karauzum S
- Biesecker LG
- Stone EM
- Sheffield VC
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1086/346172
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of complex inheritance involving the most common Bardet-Biedl syndrome locus (BBS1).
**Authors:** Mykytyn K, Nishimura DY, Searby CC, Beck G, Bugge K, Haines HL, Cornier AS, Cox GF, Fulton AB, Carmi R, Iannaccone A, Jacobson SG, Weleber RG, Wright AF, Riise R, Hennekam RC, Lüleci G, Berker-Karauzum S, Biesecker LG, Stone EM, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1086/346172](https://doi.org/10.1086/346172)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Feb;72(2):429-37. doi: 10.1086/346172. Epub 2003 Jan 10.

Evaluation of complex inheritance involving the most common Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome locus (BBS1).

Mykytyn K(1), Nishimura DY, Searby CC, Beck G, Bugge K, Haines HL, Cornier AS, 
Cox GF, Fulton AB, Carmi R, Iannaccone A, Jacobson SG, Weleber RG, Wright AF, 
Riise R, Hennekam RC, Lüleci G, Berker-Karauzum S, Biesecker LG, Stone EM, 
Sheffield VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, and Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetic disorder with the primary features of 
obesity, pigmentary retinopathy, polydactyly, renal malformations, mental 
retardation, and hypogenitalism. Patients with BBS are also at increased risk 
for diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and congenital heart disease. BBS is known 
to map to at least six loci: 11q13 (BBS1), 16q21 (BBS2), 3p13-p12 (BBS3), 
15q22.3-q23 (BBS4), 2q31 (BBS5), and 20p12 (BBS6). Although these loci were all 
mapped on the basis of an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance, it has 
recently been suggested-on the basis of mutation analysis of the identified 
BBS2, BBS4, and BBS6 genes-that BBS displays a complex mode of inheritance in 
which, in some families, three mutations at two loci are necessary to manifest 
the disease phenotype. We recently identified BBS1, the gene most commonly 
involved in Bardet-Biedl syndrome. The identification of this gene allows for 
further evaluation of complex inheritance. In the present study we evaluate the 
involvement of the BBS1 gene in a cohort of 129 probands with BBS and report 10 
novel BBS1 mutations. We demonstrate that a common BBS1 missense mutation 
accounts for approximately 80% of all BBS1 mutations and is found on a similar 
genetic background across populations. We show that the BBS1 gene is highly 
conserved between mice and humans. Finally, we demonstrate that BBS1 is 
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and is rarely, if ever, involved in 
complex inheritance.

DOI: 10.1086/346172
PMCID: PMC379234
PMID: 12524598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]