---
reference_id: "PMID:34858429"
title: "Pathogenesis of IgA Vasculitis: An Up-To-Date Review."
authors:
- Song Y
- Huang X
- Yu G
- Qiao J
- Cheng J
- Wu J
- Chen J
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.771619
keywords:
- Animals
- Environment
- Humans
- "IgA Vasculitis/etiology, genetics, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of IgA Vasculitis: An Up-To-Date Review.
**Authors:** Song Y, Huang X, Yu G, Qiao J, Cheng J, Wu J, Chen J
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.771619](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.771619)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 9;12:771619. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.771619.
eCollection  2021.

Pathogenesis of IgA Vasculitis: An Up-To-Date Review.

Song Y(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Huang X(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Yu G(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Qiao J(6), 
Cheng J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Wu J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Chen J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Kidney Disease Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Kidney Disease Prevention and Control Technology, Hangzhou, 
China.
(3)National Key Clinical Department of Kidney Diseases, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Institute of Nephrology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(5)The Third Grade Laboratory Under the National State, Administration of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(6)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Immunoglobin A (IgA) vasculitis (IgAV), formerly called the Henoch-Schönlein 
purpura (HSP), is a small vessel vasculitis, characterized by IgA1-dominant 
immune deposition at diseased vessel walls. IgAV is the most common form of 
vasculitis in children; typical symptoms include palpable purpura, arthritis or 
arthralgia, abdominal pain, and hematuria or proteinuria. Galactose-deficient 
IgA1 is detected in the tissues of the kidney and skin in patients with IgAV; it 
forms immune complexes leading to subsequent immune reactions and injuries. This 
report provides the recent advances in the understanding of environmental 
factors, genetics, abnormal innate and acquired immunity, and the role of 
galactose-deficient IgA1 immunocomplexes in the pathogenesis of IgAV.

Copyright © 2021 Song, Huang, Yu, Qiao, Cheng, Wu and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.771619
PMCID: PMC8630619
PMID: 34858429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.