---
reference_id: "PMID:35596788"
title: "Fanconi anemia: current insights regarding epidemiology, cancer, and DNA repair."
authors:
- Peake JD
- Noguchi E
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-022-02462-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fanconi anemia: current insights regarding epidemiology, cancer, and DNA repair.
**Authors:** Peake JD, Noguchi E
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-022-02462-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-022-02462-9)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2022 Dec;141(12):1811-1836. doi: 10.1007/s00439-022-02462-9. Epub 
2022 May 21.

Fanconi anemia: current insights regarding epidemiology, cancer, and DNA repair.

Peake JD(1), Noguchi E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College 
of Medicine, 245 N. 15th Street, Philadelphia, PA, 19102, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College 
of Medicine, 245 N. 15th Street, Philadelphia, PA, 19102, USA. en34@drexel.edu.

Fanconi anemia is a genetic disorder that is characterized by bone marrow 
failure, as well as a predisposition to malignancies including leukemia and 
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). At least 22 genes are associated with Fanconi 
anemia, constituting the Fanconi anemia DNA repair pathway. This pathway 
coordinates multiple processes and proteins to facilitate the repair of DNA 
adducts including interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) that are generated by 
environmental carcinogens, chemotherapeutic crosslinkers, and metabolic products 
of alcohol. ICLs can interfere with DNA transactions, including replication and 
transcription. If not properly removed and repaired, ICLs cause DNA breaks and 
lead to genomic instability, a hallmark of cancer. In this review, we will 
discuss the genetic and phenotypic characteristics of Fanconi anemia, the 
epidemiology of the disease, and associated cancer risk. The sources of ICLs and 
the role of ICL-inducing chemotherapeutic agents will also be discussed. 
Finally, we will review the detailed mechanisms of ICL repair via the Fanconi 
anemia DNA repair pathway, highlighting critical regulatory processes. Together, 
the information in this review will underscore important contributions to 
Fanconi anemia research in the past two decades.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-022-02462-9
PMID: 35596788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]