---
reference_id: "PMID:29452342"
title: Neurofilament light chain and oligoclonal bands are prognostic biomarkers in radiologically isolated syndrome.
authors:
- Matute-Blanch C
- Villar LM
- Álvarez-Cermeño JC
- Rejdak K
- Evdoshenko E
- Makshakov G
- Nazarov V
- Lapin S
- Midaglia L
- Vidal-Jordana A
- Drulovic J
- García-Merino A
- Sánchez-López AJ
- Havrdova E
- Saiz A
- Llufriu S
- Alvarez-Lafuente R
- Schroeder I
- Zettl UK
- Galimberti D
- Ramió-Torrentà L
- Robles R
- Quintana E
- Hegen H
- Deisenhammer F
- Río J
- Tintoré M
- Sánchez A
- Montalban X
- Comabella M
journal: Brain
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awy021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurofilament light chain and oligoclonal bands are prognostic biomarkers in radiologically isolated syndrome.
**Authors:** Matute-Blanch C, Villar LM, Álvarez-Cermeño JC, Rejdak K, Evdoshenko E, Makshakov G, Nazarov V, Lapin S, Midaglia L, Vidal-Jordana A, Drulovic J, García-Merino A, Sánchez-López AJ, Havrdova E, Saiz A, Llufriu S, Alvarez-Lafuente R, Schroeder I, Zettl UK, Galimberti D, Ramió-Torrentà L, Robles R, Quintana E, Hegen H, Deisenhammer F, Río J, Tintoré M, Sánchez A, Montalban X, Comabella M
**Journal:** Brain (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awy021](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awy021)

## Content

1. Brain. 2018 Apr 1;141(4):1085-1093. doi: 10.1093/brain/awy021.

Neurofilament light chain and oligoclonal bands are prognostic biomarkers in 
radiologically isolated syndrome.

Matute-Blanch C(1), Villar LM(2), Álvarez-Cermeño JC(2), Rejdak K(3), Evdoshenko 
E(4)(5), Makshakov G(4)(5), Nazarov V(5), Lapin S(5), Midaglia L(1), 
Vidal-Jordana A(1), Drulovic J(6), García-Merino A(7), Sánchez-López AJ(7), 
Havrdova E(8), Saiz A(9), Llufriu S(9), Alvarez-Lafuente R(10), Schroeder I(11), 
Zettl UK(11), Galimberti D(12), Ramió-Torrentà L(13), Robles R(13), Quintana 
E(13), Hegen H(14), Deisenhammer F(14), Río J(1), Tintoré M(1), Sánchez 
A(15)(16), Montalban X(1), Comabella M(1).

Author information:
(1)Servei de Neurologia-Neuroimmunologia, Centre d'Esclerosi Múltiple de 
Catalunya (Cemcat), Institut de Recerca Vall d'Hebron (VHIR), Hospital 
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Departments of Neurology and Immunology, Hospital Universitario Ramón y 
Cajal, Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigacion Sanitaria, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(4)MS Center (City Clinical Hospital 31), Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(5)First Pavlov Saint-Petersburg State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russia.
(6)Neurology Clinic, Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(7)Neuroimmunology Unit, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Neurology, Charles University in Prague, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.
(9)Center of Neuroimmunology, Service of Neurology, Hospital Clinic and Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Servicio de Neurología, Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC), Madrid, Spain.
(11)Department of Neurology, Neuroimmunological Section, University of Rostock, 
Rostock, Germany.
(12)University of Milan, Fondazione Ca' Granda, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico, 
Milan, Italy.
(13)Unitat de Neuroimmunologia i Esclerosi Múltiple, Servei de Neurologia, 
Hospital Universitari Dr. Josep Trueta, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de 
Girona (IDIBGI), Girona, Spain.
(14)Medical University of Innsbruck, Department of Neurology, Innsbruck, 
Austria.
(15)Unitat d'Estadística i Bioinformàtica, VHIR, Hospital Universitari Vall 
d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(16)Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics Department, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.

The prognostic role of cerebrospinal fluid molecular biomarkers determined in 
early pathogenic stages of multiple sclerosis has yet to be defined. In the 
present study, we aimed to investigate the prognostic value of chitinase 3 like 
1 (CHI3L1), neurofilament light chain, and oligoclonal bands for conversion to 
clinically isolated syndrome and to multiple sclerosis in 75 patients with 
radiologically isolated syndrome. Cerebrospinal fluid levels of CHI3L1 and 
neurofilament light chain were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. 
Uni- and multivariable Cox regression models including as covariates age at 
diagnosis of radiologically isolated syndrome, number of brain lesions, sex and 
treatment were used to investigate associations between cerebrospinal fluid 
CHI3L1 and neurofilament light chain levels and time to conversion to clinically 
isolated syndrome and multiple sclerosis. Neurofilament light chain levels and 
oligoclonal bands were independent risk factors for the development of 
clinically isolated syndrome (hazard ratio = 1.02, P = 0.019, and hazard ratio = 
14.7, P = 0.012, respectively) and multiple sclerosis (hazard ratio = 1.03, P = 
0.003, and hazard ratio = 8.9, P = 0.046, respectively). The best cut-off to 
classify cerebrospinal fluid neurofilament light chain levels into high and low 
was 619 ng/l, and high neurofilament light chain levels were associated with a 
trend to shorter time to clinically isolated syndrome (P = 0.079) and 
significant shorter time to multiple sclerosis (P = 0.017). Similarly, patients 
with radiologically isolated syndrome presenting positive oligoclonal bands 
converted faster to clinically isolated syndrome and multiple sclerosis (P = 
0.005 and P = 0.008, respectively). The effects of high neurofilament light 
chain levels shortening time to clinically isolated syndrome and multiple 
sclerosis were more pronounced in radiologically isolated syndrome patients with 
≥37 years compared to younger patients. Cerebrospinal fluid CHI3L1 levels did 
not influence conversion to clinically isolated syndrome and multiple sclerosis 
in radiologically isolated syndrome patients. Overall, these findings suggest 
that cerebrospinal neurofilament light chain levels and oligoclonal bands are 
independent predictors of clinical conversion in patients with radiologically 
isolated syndrome. The association with a faster development of multiple 
sclerosis reinforces the importance of cerebrospinal fluid analysis in patients 
with radiologically isolated syndrome.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awy021
PMID: 29452342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]