---
reference_id: "PMID:41723775"
title: Economic Burden of Hidradenitis Suppurativa in Spain.
authors:
- Vilarrasa E
- Borrás-Blasco J
- Lobo-Benito S
- Loro-Pérez M
- Garcia Núñez-García M
- Oliva-Moreno J
- Palacios-Martínez D
- Rubial-Bernárdez F
- Ivanova-Markova Y
- Daheron M
- Bellas J
- Martorell A
journal: Dermatol Ther (Heidelb)
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1007/s13555-026-01669-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Economic Burden of Hidradenitis Suppurativa in Spain.
**Authors:** Vilarrasa E, Borrás-Blasco J, Lobo-Benito S, Loro-Pérez M, Garcia Núñez-García M, Oliva-Moreno J, Palacios-Martínez D, Rubial-Bernárdez F, Ivanova-Markova Y, Daheron M, Bellas J, Martorell A
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (Heidelb) (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13555-026-01669-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13555-026-01669-2)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2026 Feb 22. doi: 10.1007/s13555-026-01669-2. Online 
ahead of print.

Economic Burden of Hidradenitis Suppurativa in Spain.

Vilarrasa E(1)(2), Borrás-Blasco J(3), Lobo-Benito S(4), Loro-Pérez M(5), Garcia 
Núñez-García M(6), Oliva-Moreno J(7)(8)(9), Palacios-Martínez D(10), 
Rubial-Bernárdez F(11), Ivanova-Markova Y(12), Daheron M(12), Bellas J(13), 
Martorell A(14).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Farmacy, Hospital Sagunto, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Association of Suppurative Hidrosadenitis Patients, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Psychology, University Hospital Puerta de Hierro, Majadahonda, Spain.
(6)Nursing, University Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(7)University of Castilla-La Mancha, Toledo, Spain.
(8)CIBERFES; ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
(9)IDISCAM, Toledo, Spain.
(10)Spanish Society of Primary Care Physicians, Madrid, Spain.
(11)Director, Marqués de Valdecilla University Hospital, Santander, Spain.
(12)Weber, Madrid, Spain.
(13)UCB, Madrid, Spain.
(14)Dermatology, Hospital of Manises, Valencia, Spain. 
martorelldermatologia@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a highly disabling chronic 
inflammatory disorder affecting up to 1% of the Spanish population. It is a 
complex disease that requires significant resources and imposes a considerable 
economic burden. The aim of this study was to assess the economic burden of 
diagnosed HS in Spain both at patient and population level.
METHODS: The study was conducted from a societal perspective using a bottom-up, 
prevalence-based approach. We evaluated publicly financed direct healthcare 
costs (consultations, diagnostic tests, inpatient admissions, surgery, 
comorbidities, treatment), direct nonhealthcare costs (formal and informal care, 
out-of-pocket expenses), and indirect costs (absenteeism and productivity loss) 
incurred by patients diagnosed with HS. A sensitivity analysis was conducted to 
test the uncertainty of the model.
RESULTS: The mean annual cost of treating all severities of patients with HS in 
Spain was €39,535.10. The largest cost components across all categories were 
informal care (46.05%), treatment (18.24%), out-of-pocket expenses (12.76%), 
loss of work productivity (10.82%), and surgery (5.62%). Moderate and severe 
patients cost 64.05% (€34,221.92) and 170.53% (€56,432.77) more than mild 
patients (€20,860.35), respectively. Assuming a prevalence of 1% and a 
diagnostic rate of 10%, the total economic burden of diagnosed HS in Spain was 
estimated at €1587 million.
CONCLUSIONS: HS has a significant economic impact on patients, their families, 
the healthcare system, and wider society. This is particularly evident among 
patients with moderate-to-severe HS. To reduce the economic burden and improve 
quality of life, efforts should be made to prevent the disease from progressing 
and to ensure that patients remain in the milder stages.

© 2026. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13555-026-01669-2
PMID: 41723775

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflicts of Interest: Yoana 
Ivanova Markova and Mathilde Daheron are employed by Weber España, a company 
that received funding from UCB to conduct this study. Javier Bellas is an 
employee of UCB. Eva Vilarrasa, Joaquín Borrás Blasco, Silvia Lobo Benito, Marta 
Loro Pérez, Marta García Núñez-García, Juan Oliva Moreno, David Palacios 
Martínez, Félix Rubial Bernárdez, and Antonio Martorell received fees from UCB 
for their expert advice during study conduction. Eva Vilarrasa has received 
funding and/or honoraria for educational activities, consultancy, advisory 
roles, or speaking engagements from Abbvie, Aceleryn, Almirall, Amgen, Bayer, 
Biofrontera, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, Galderma, 
Gebro, Incyte, Isdin, Johnson and Johnson, Leo Pharma, Lilly, Merck-Serono, 
MoonLake, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Sandoz, Sanofi, and UCB. She has also 
worked as a consultant, investigator, or collaborator with the following 
companies and startups: iDermApp, Mediktor, DermUS, Biomi, and Barcelona Health 
Hub. Eva Vilarrasa is an Editorial Board member of Dermatology and Therapy. Eva 
Vilarrasa was not involved in the selection of peer reviewers for the manuscript 
nor any of the subsequent editorial decisions. Joaquín Borrás Blasco has 
received funding and/or honoraria for educational activities, consultancy, 
research, or speaking engagements at events of medical and scientific interest 
from Boehringer Ingelheim, Johnson and Johnson, Pfizer, Sanofi, and UCB. Antonio 
Martorell has received honoraria and/or travel grants and/or has served as a 
member of advisory committees for Abbvie, Aceleryn, Almirall, Amgen, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, Incyte, Johnson and Johnson, Leo 
Pharma, MoonLake, Novartis, Pfizer, Sandoz, Sanofi, UCB, and Legit Health. He 
has also served as a principal investigator in clinical trials sponsored by 
Abbvie, Aceleryn, Almirall, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Celgene, Incyte, Johnson and Johnson, Leo Pharma, MoonLake, Novartis, Pfizer, 
MSD, Takeda, Sanofi, UCB, and MSD. Marta Loro Pérez has received financial 
support for collaborative research projects or and/or consultancy honoraria from 
Janssen-Cilag, Pzfizer, Novartis, Abbvie and UCB. Juan Oliva Moreno, Silvia Lobo 
Benito, Marta García Núñez-García, David Palacios Martínez and Félix Rubial 
Bernárdez do not declare any conflicts of interest. Ethical Approval: No ethical 
approval was required for this study, as the data were obtained from previously 
approved studies/registries. Data sourced from the AvanceHS survey were analyzed 
in anonymized form.