---
reference_id: "PMID:35704252"
title: Impact of Pruritus on Quality of Life and Current Treatment Patterns in Patients with Primary Biliary Cholangitis.
authors:
- Mayo MJ
- Carey E
- Smith HT
- Mospan AR
- McLaughlin M
- Thompson A
- Morris HL
- Sandefur R
- Kim WR
- Bowlus C
- TARGET-PBC Investigators
- Levy C
journal: Dig Dis Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10620-022-07581-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Pruritus on Quality of Life and Current Treatment Patterns in Patients with Primary Biliary Cholangitis.
**Authors:** Mayo MJ, Carey E, Smith HT, Mospan AR, McLaughlin M, Thompson A, Morris HL, Sandefur R, Kim WR, Bowlus C, TARGET-PBC Investigators, Levy C
**Journal:** Dig Dis Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10620-022-07581-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620-022-07581-x)

## Content

1. Dig Dis Sci. 2023 Mar;68(3):995-1005. doi: 10.1007/s10620-022-07581-x. Epub
2022  Jun 15.

Impact of Pruritus on Quality of Life and Current Treatment Patterns in Patients 
with Primary Biliary Cholangitis.

Mayo MJ(1), Carey E(2), Smith HT(3), Mospan AR(4), McLaughlin M(5), Thompson 
A(6), Morris HL(4), Sandefur R(4), Kim WR(7), Bowlus C(8); TARGET-PBC 
Investigators; Levy C(9).

Collaborators: Ankoma-Sey V, Bernstein D, Borg B, Bowlus C, Brown R, Carey E, 
Clark V, Darling J, Dranoff J, Elbeshbeshy H, Forman L, Goel A, Hanje J, 
Harrison S, Janardhan S, Jesudoss R, Kim D, King L, Landis C, Levy C, Lok A, 
Lucey M, Luketic V, Manch R, Mark W, Mayo M, Mena E, Modi A, Reddy G, Reddy KR, 
Rochling F, Rojter S, Rubin R, Russo M, Shiffman M, Silveira M, Stanca C, 
Thuluvath P, Verna E, Weiss LM.

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, Middlesex, UK.
(4)Target RWE, Durham, NC, USA.
(5)GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA, USA.
(6)GlaxoSmithKline, RTP, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(7)Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(8)University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(9)University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA. CLevy@Med.Miami.edu.

Erratum in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2023 Oct;68(10):4064-4065. doi: 10.1007/s10620-023-08050-9.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Patients with primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) often 
suffer with pruritus. We describe the impact of pruritus on quality of life and 
how it is managed in a real-world cohort.
METHODS: TARGET-PBC is a longitudinal observational cohort of patients with PBC 
across the USA. Data include information from medical records for three years 
prior to the date of consent up to 5 years of follow-up. Enrolled patients were 
asked to complete patient-reported outcome surveys: PBC-40, 5-D itch, and the 
PROMIS fatigue survey. Kruskal-Wallis tests were used to compare differences in 
symptoms between groups.
RESULTS: A total of 211 patients with completed PRO surveys were included in the 
current study. PRO respondents were compared with non-respondents in the 
TARGET-PBC population and were broadly similar. Pruritus was reported in 170 
patients (81%), with those reporting clinically significant pruritus (30%) 
scoring worse across each domain of the PBC-40 and 5-D itch, more frequently 
having cirrhosis, and having significantly greater levels of fatigue. Patients 
reporting clinically significant pruritus were more likely to receive treatment, 
but 33% had never received treatment (no itch = 43.9%, mild itch = 38.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of pruritus was high in this population, and those 
reporting clinically significant pruritus had a higher likelihood of having 
advanced disease and worse quality of life. However, this study found that 
pruritus in PBC is under-treated. This may be due in part to ineffectiveness of 
current treatments, poor tolerance, or the lack of FDA-approved medications for 
pruritus.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-022-07581-x
PMCID: PMC10406656
PMID: 35704252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MJM has research funding from TARGET 
PharmaSolutions, GlaxoSmithKline, Intercept Pharmaceuticals, CymaBay 
Pharmaceuticals, Genfit, Mirum, and Mallinckrodt; and consultation fees from 
TARGET PharmaSolutions, GlaxoSmithKline, CymaBay Pharmaceuticals, and 
Mallinckrodt. EC and WRK have no conflicts to report. HS and MM are employees of 
GlaxoSmithKline and hold stocks/shares in the company. AT was an employee of GSK 
at the time of the study and holds stocks/shares in the company. ARM, HLM, and 
RS are Target RWE employees. CB has research funding from Gilead Biosciences, 
Intercept Pharmaceuticals, CymaBay Pharmaceuticals, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, 
GlaxoSmithKline, BristolMyerSquibb, TARGET Pharmasolutions, Novartis, BiomX, 
Mirum, Genfit, Pliant, Cara Therapeutics, and Boston Scientific. CL has research 
funding from Gilead, Intercept, CymaBay, Genfit, GSK, Novartis, High Tide, 
Zydus, Cara Therapeutics, Mirum, Pliant, and Target PharmaSolutions; 
consultation fees from CymaBay, Genfit, GSK, Pliant, Mirum, Cara Therapeutics, 
Escient, Teva, Calliditas, and Intercept; royalties from Up-to-date; and is the 
Associate Editor for Hepatology, Member of the ABIM Test and Policy committee 
for transplant hepatology.