---
reference_id: "PMID:33440869"
title: Targeting Abnormal Hematopoietic Stem Cells in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia and Philadelphia Chromosome-Negative Classical Myeloproliferative Neoplasms.
authors:
- Yung Y
- Lee E
- Chu HT
- Yip PK
- Gill H
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms22020659
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting Abnormal Hematopoietic Stem Cells in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia and Philadelphia Chromosome-Negative Classical Myeloproliferative Neoplasms.
**Authors:** Yung Y, Lee E, Chu HT, Yip PK, Gill H
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22020659](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22020659)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jan 11;22(2):659. doi: 10.3390/ijms22020659.

Targeting Abnormal Hematopoietic Stem Cells in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia and 
Philadelphia Chromosome-Negative Classical Myeloproliferative Neoplasms.

Yung Y(1), Lee E(1), Chu HT(1), Yip PK(1), Gill H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Haematology, Medical Oncology and Haemopoietic Stem Cell 
transplantation, Department of Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are unique hematopoietic stem cell disorders 
sharing mutations that constitutively activate the signal-transduction pathways 
involved in haematopoiesis. They are characterized by stem cell-derived clonal 
myeloproliferation. The key MPNs comprise chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), 
polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia (ET), and primary 
myelofibrosis (PMF). CML is defined by the presence of the Philadelphia (Ph) 
chromosome and BCR-ABL1 fusion gene. Despite effective cytoreductive agents and 
targeted therapy, complete CML/MPN stem cell eradication is rarely achieved. In 
this review article, we discuss the novel agents and combination therapy that 
can potentially abnormal hematopoietic stem cells in CML and MPNs and the 
CML/MPN stem cell-sustaining bone marrow microenvironment.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22020659
PMCID: PMC7827471
PMID: 33440869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.