---
reference_id: "PMID:35117540"
title: Effects of different treatments and other factors on the prognosis of patients with ewing sarcoma.
authors:
- Hua K
- Hu Y
journal: Transl Cancer Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.21037/tcr.2020.02.08
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of different treatments and other factors on the prognosis of patients with ewing sarcoma.
**Authors:** Hua K, Hu Y
**Journal:** Transl Cancer Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.21037/tcr.2020.02.08](https://doi.org/10.21037/tcr.2020.02.08)

## Content

1. Transl Cancer Res. 2020 Mar;9(3):1931-1946. doi: 10.21037/tcr.2020.02.08.

Effects of different treatments and other factors on the prognosis of patients 
with ewing sarcoma.

Hua K(1), Hu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Oncology, Tianjin Hospital, Tianjin 300211, China.

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma is a small round cell tumor of bone or soft tissue 
originating from the neuroectoderm. Aggressive and highly malignant are the main 
pathological features of the tumor. Studying the effects of different treatments 
and other factors on prognosis will help us to understand the disease more 
deeply and find a way to actively deal with it.
METHODS: Through the search of the National Cancer Institute database, ewing 
sarcoma patients registered between January 1, 2004 and December 31, 2015 were 
selected as research goals. Summarize the basic information of patients included 
in the study, including demographics, tumor pathology and treatment. 
Kaplan-Meier survival curves and log-rank test were used to analyze the overall 
survival (OS) and ewing sarcoma-specific survival (ESSS) of each prognostic 
factor and categorical variable. Multivariate Cox regression analysis was used 
to analyze all-cause mortality (ACM) and ewing sarcoma-specific mortality (ESSM) 
for each prognostic factor and categorical variable.
RESULTS: A total of 837 ewing sarcoma patients were included in this article. 
Patients receiving chemotherapy (CT), radiotherapy (RT) or surgery were 804 
(96.1%), 414 (49.5%), and 524 (62.6%). The mean age and median age of 837 
patients were 19.92 and 16 years, respectively. The mortality rate gradually 
increased with the increase of the age at diagnosis (ACM: 50.6% vs. 45.3% vs. 
25.7%, P<0.001; ESSM: 44.0% vs. 43.0% vs. 25.1%, P<0.001). Married patients' 
mortality was significantly higher than unmarried patients (ACM: 53.2% vs. 
31.2%, P<0.001; ESSM: 29.8% vs. 48.5%, P<0.001). CT combined surgery achieved 
the highest OS and ESSS. Observing clinical pathology data, the primary site of 
the tumor located in pelvic bones, sacrum coccyx and associated joints, which 
had the highest mortality (ACM: 45.3%; ESSM: 43.9%). The mortality of tumors 
classified as American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) III-IV stage was 
significantly higher than that of AJCC IIA and AJCC IIB stage, and the mortality 
increased with the higher AJCC stage (ACM: 53.0% vs. 31.3% vs. 21.0%, P<0.001; 
ESSM: 51.2% vs. 30.1% vs. 18.6%, P<0.001). The mortality of T2-T3 stage was 
significantly higher than that of T0-T1 stage (ACM: 40.7% vs. 27.0%, P<0.001; 
ESSM: 39.1% vs. 24.8%, P<0.001). N1 stage was significantly higher than N0 (ACM: 
49.2% vs. 32.8%, P=0.008; ESSM: 49.2% vs. 30.7%, P=0.002). M1 stage was 
significantly higher than M0 stage (ACM: 56.8% vs. 25.5%, P<0.001; ESSM: 55.2% 
vs. 23.5%, P<0.001). Compared with other treatments, patients who received CT 
and surgery had the lowest ACM (21.7%) and ESSM (20.9%), and the mean survival 
(59.90±39.24 months) and median survival (53 months) were the longest.
CONCLUSIONS: From the demographic and tumor pathology data, the older patients 
at the age of diagnosis, married, the primary sites in the pelvic bones, sacrum 
coccyx and associated joints, American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) III-IV, 
T2-T3, N1 and M1 stage tumors are all prompted to patients' poor prognosis. 
Compared with CT, CT and RT, or CT and RT and surgery, ewing sarcoma patients 
receiving CT combined with surgery have the longest median survival, the lowest 
mortality, and the best prognosis.

2020 Translational Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tcr.2020.02.08
PMCID: PMC8798216
PMID: 35117540

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: Both authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tcr.2020.02.08). The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.