---
reference_id: "PMID:14671196"
title: "Elevated serum level of anti-mullerian hormone in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome: relationship to the ovarian follicle excess and to the follicular arrest."
authors:
- Pigny P
- Merlen E
- Robert Y
- Cortet-Rudelli C
- Decanter C
- Jonard S
- Dewailly D
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2003-030727
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated serum level of anti-mullerian hormone in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome: relationship to the ovarian follicle excess and to the follicular arrest.
**Authors:** Pigny P, Merlen E, Robert Y, Cortet-Rudelli C, Decanter C, Jonard S, Dewailly D
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2003-030727](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2003-030727)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Dec;88(12):5957-62. doi: 10.1210/jc.2003-030727.

Elevated serum level of anti-mullerian hormone in patients with polycystic ovary 
syndrome: relationship to the ovarian follicle excess and to the follicular 
arrest.

Pigny P(1), Merlen E, Robert Y, Cortet-Rudelli C, Decanter C, Jonard S, Dewailly 
D.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Clinique Marc Linquette, Hôpital Jeanne de 
Flandre, Lille, France.

The serum level of anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH), a product from granulosa cells 
involved in follicle growth, has been shown to correlate tightly with the small 
antral follicle number (FN) at ultrasonography (U/S) in women who do not have 
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Because PCOS is associated with a 2- to 3-fold 
increase in growing FN, we investigated whether an increased AMH serum level 
correlates to other hormonal and/or U/S features of PCOS. Serum AMH has been 
assayed in 104 women (59 symptomatic PCOS, 45 controls) between d 2 and 7 after 
the last either spontaneous or progestin-induced (in PCOS) menstrual period. 
Mean serum AMH level was markedly increased in the PCOS group (47.1 +/- 22.9 vs. 
20.8 +/- 11.6 pmol/liter in controls; P < 0.0001), an increase in the same order 
of magnitude as the one of the FN in the 2- to 5-mm range at U/S (12.8 +/- 8.3 
vs. 4.8 +/- 1.9; P < 0.0001, respectively). The ratio AMH/FN was similar between 
the two groups (4.8 +/- 3.4 vs. 4.8 +/- 2.9; P = 0.55). By simple regression, 
both in PCOS and controls, the AMH level was positively related to the 2- to 
5-mm FN at U/S (P < 0.0001 and P < 0.03, respectively), but not to the 6- to 
9-mm FN, and was negatively correlated to the serum FSH level (P < 0.02 and P < 
0.04, respectively). AMH was also positively related to the serum testosterone 
and androstenedione levels, in PCOS exclusively (P < 0.0005 and <0.002, 
respectively). No relationship was found between AMH and age, serum estradiol, 
inhibin B, and LH levels in both groups. After multiple regression only the 2- 
to 5-mm FN remained significantly related to AMH in PCOS whereas testosterone, 
androstenedione, and FSH were no longer. In conclusion, the assay of the serum 
AMH may represent an important breakthrough in the diagnosis and in the 
understanding of PCOS. Our data suggest that the increase of AMH serum level in 
PCOS is the consequence of the androgen-induced excess in small antral FN and 
that each follicle produces a normal amount of AMH. We hypothesize that an 
increased AMH tone within the cohort could be involved in the follicular arrest 
of PCOS, by interacting negatively with FSH at the time of selection.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2003-030727
PMID: 14671196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]