---
reference_id: "PMID:37623440"
title: "Study of Angiogenic, Pro-Apoptotic, and Pro-Inflammatory Factors in Congenital and Acquired Cholesteatomas."
journal: J Pers Med
year: "2023"
doi: 10.3390/jpm13081189
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Study of Angiogenic, Pro-Apoptotic, and Pro-Inflammatory Factors in Congenital and Acquired Cholesteatomas.

## Content

Objectives: Despite recent advances in biomolecular research that have improved
our knowledge of cholesteatoma pathogenesis, the reasons behind its highly
variable clinical course are still not clarified. It has been proposed that
biological signaling between peri-matrix and matrix cells could play a critical
role in disease homeostasis. The aim of our study was to analyze the expression
of inflammatory (IL-1β), hyper-proliferative (STAT-3, TGF-β), and angiogenic
(VEGF-C, PDGFr) factors in congenital and acquired cholesteatomas.

Methods: We performed an experimental study on 37 patients who were diagnosed
with cholesteatoma between 2020 and 2021 in our institution. All patients
underwent clinical, audiologic, and radiologic assessments. Skin and
cholesteatoma samples were analyzed through histopathological, western blot, and
immunohistochemical evaluations.

Results: Expression of angiogenic, inflammatory, and proliferative biomarkers is
significantly increased in acquired cholesteatomas in children as compared to
congenital and acquired forms in adults, in accordance with the higher stage of
disease shown by imaging, surgical, and histological features.

Conclusion: Our data suggest that pathways already supposed to be involved in the
pathogenesis of cholesteatomas could be differently activated in more destructive
forms, typically found in children. The identification of potential biomarkers of
cholesteatoma aggressiveness could lead to more personalized management.
