---
reference_id: "PMID:25686613"
title: "Primary familial brain calcification: update on molecular genetics."
authors:
- Taglia I
- Bonifati V
- Mignarri A
- Dotti MT
- Federico A
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-015-2110-8
keywords:
- "Brain Diseases/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- "Calcinosis/genetics, pathology"
- Cytokines/genetics
- Family Health
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Receptor, Platelet-Derived Growth Factor beta/genetics"
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type III/genetics"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Ubiquitins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary familial brain calcification: update on molecular genetics.
**Authors:** Taglia I, Bonifati V, Mignarri A, Dotti MT, Federico A
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-015-2110-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-015-2110-8)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2015 May;36(5):787-94. doi: 10.1007/s10072-015-2110-8. Epub 2015
Feb  17.

Primary familial brain calcification: update on molecular genetics.

Taglia I(1), Bonifati V, Mignarri A, Dotti MT, Federico A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neurosciences, University of Siena, 
53100, Siena, Italy, ilaria.taglia@gmail.com.

Primary familial brain calcification is a neuropsychiatric disorder with calcium 
deposits in the brain, especially in basal ganglia, cerebellum and subcortical 
white matter. The disease is characterized by a clinical heterogeneity, with a 
various combination of symptoms that include movement disorders and psychiatric 
disturbances; asymptomatic patients have been also reported. To date, three 
causative genes have been found: SLC20A2, PDGFRB and PDGFB. SLC20A2 gene codes 
for the 'sodium-dependent phosphate transporter 2' (PiT-2), a cell membrane 
transporters of inorganic phosphate, involved in Pi uptake by cells and 
maintenance of Pi body levels. Over 40 pathogenic variants of SLC20A2 have been 
reported, affecting the regulation of Pi homeostasis. It was hypothesized that 
SLC20A2 mutations cause brain calcification most likely through 
haploinsufficiency. PDGFRB encodes for the platelet-derived growth factor 
receptor-β (PDGFRβ), a cell-surface tyrosine-kinase (RTK) receptor that 
regulates cell proliferation, migration, survival and differentiation. PDGFB 
encodes for the 'platelet-derived growth factor beta' (PDGFβ), the ligand of 
PDGFRβ. The loss of function of PDGFRβ and PDGFβ could lead to the impairment of 
the pericytes function and blood brain barrier integrity, causing vascular and 
perivascular calcium accumulation. SLC20A2 accounts for about 40 % of familial 
form and 14 % of sporadic cases, while PDGFRB and PDGFB mutations are likely 
rare. However, approximately 50 % of patients are not genetically defined and 
there should be at least another causative gene.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-015-2110-8
PMID: 25686613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]