---
reference_id: "PMID:33830467"
title: Assessment and Management of Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM) in the Pediatric Patient.
authors:
- Wang CX
journal: Paediatr Drugs
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s40272-021-00441-7
keywords:
- Child
- "Encephalomyelitis, Acute Disseminated/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment and Management of Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM) in the Pediatric Patient.
**Authors:** Wang CX
**Journal:** Paediatr Drugs (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40272-021-00441-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40272-021-00441-7)

## Content

1. Paediatr Drugs. 2021 May;23(3):213-221. doi: 10.1007/s40272-021-00441-7. Epub 
2021 Apr 8.

Assessment and Management of Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM) in the 
Pediatric Patient.

Wang CX(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical School, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. 
cynthia.wang@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, 
5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA. cynthia.wang@utsouthwestern.edu.

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is an inflammatory demyelinating 
disease of the central nervous system that typically presents in childhood and 
is associated with encephalopathy and multifocal brain lesions. Although ADEM is 
thought to be a post-infectious disorder, the etiology is still poorly 
understood. ADEM is often a monophasic disorder, in contrast to other 
demyelinating disorders such as multiple sclerosis and neuromyelitis optica 
spectrum disorder. With increasing awareness, understanding, and testing for 
myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies, this disease is now known to be 
a cause of pediatric ADEM and also has the potential to be relapsing. Diagnostic 
evaluation for ADEM involves neuroimaging and laboratory studies to exclude 
potential infectious, inflammatory, neoplastic, and genetic mimics of ADEM. 
Acute treatment modalities include high-dose intravenous corticosteroids, 
therapeutic plasma exchange, and intravenous immunoglobulin. Long-term outcomes 
for ADEM are generally favorable, but some children have significant morbidity 
related to the severity of acute illness and/or manifest ongoing neurocognitive 
sequelae. Further research related to the optimal management of pediatric ADEM 
and its impact on prognosis is needed. This review summarizes the current 
knowledge of the pathogenesis, epidemiology, clinical features, diagnostic 
evaluation, treatment approaches, and outcomes in pediatric ADEM.

DOI: 10.1007/s40272-021-00441-7
PMCID: PMC8026386
PMID: 33830467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Cynthia X. Wang has no conflicts of interest 
that are directly relevant to the content of this article.