---
reference_id: "PMID:31235029"
title: "Periodontal disease and hemolysis in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: Is there a nexus?"
authors:
- Singh N
- Uppoor A
- Rajendran V
- Naik DG
journal: J Oral Biosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.job.2019.03.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Periodontal disease and hemolysis in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: Is there a nexus?
**Authors:** Singh N, Uppoor A, Rajendran V, Naik DG
**Journal:** J Oral Biosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.job.2019.03.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.job.2019.03.001)

## Content

1. J Oral Biosci. 2019 Jun;61(2):129-133. doi: 10.1016/j.job.2019.03.001. Epub
2019  Mar 22.

Periodontal disease and hemolysis in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency: Is there a nexus?

Singh N(1), Uppoor A(2), Rajendran V(3), Naik DG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontology, Maharana Pratap Dental College & Hospital, 
Kanpur, India. Electronic address: dr.neeleshsingh45@icloud.com.
(2)Department of Periodontology, Manipal College of Dental Sciences, Mangalore, 
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka 576104, India. 
Electronic address: ashita.uppoor@manipal.edu.
(3)Department of Periodontology, Manipal College of Dental Sciences, Mangalore, 
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka 576104, India. 
Electronic address: valliveronika11@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Periodontology, Manipal College of Dental Sciences, Mangalore, 
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka 576104, India. 
Electronic address: dilip.naik@manipal.edu.

BACKGROUND: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is an 
erythrocyte enzyme defect that amplifies the susceptibility of erythrocytes to 
oxidative stress due to excessive levels of reactive oxygen species. 
Consequently, erythrocyte destruction and hemolysis occur.
HIGHLIGHT: The possible mechanism of oxidative stress-mediated destruction of 
erythrocytes in G6PD deficient individuals induced by periodontal infection is 
highlighted.
CONCLUSION: Periodontal diseases feature systemic loading of reactive oxygen 
species, and they may increase the risk of hemolysis in individuals with G6PD 
deficiency.

Copyright © 2019 Japanese Association for Oral Biology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.job.2019.03.001
PMID: 31235029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]