---
reference_id: "PMID:40419993"
title: "The Eating Disorders Genetics Initiative 2 (EDGI2): study protocol."
authors:
- Berthold N
- MacDermod CM
- Thornton LM
- Parker R
- Morales SAC
- Hog L
- Kennedy HL
- Guintivano J
- Sullivan PF
- Crowley JJ
- Johnson JS
- Birgegård A
- Fundín BT
- Frans E
- Xu J
- Ngāti Pūkenga MP
- Miller AL
- Aguilar MV
- Barakat S
- Abdulkadir M
- White JP
- Larsen JT
- Trujillo E
- Winterman B
- Zhang R
- Lawson R
- Wonderlich S
- Wonderlich J
- Schaefer LM
- Mehler PS
- Oakes J
- Foster M
- Gaudiani J
- Vacuán ETC
- Compte EJ
- Petersen LV
- Yilmaz Z
- Micali N
- Jordan J
- Kennedy MA
- Maguire S
- Huckins LM
- Lu Y
- Dinkler L
- Martin NG
- Bulik CM
journal: BMC Psychiatry
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12888-025-06777-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Australia
- Case-Control Studies
- Feeding and Eating Disorders/genetics
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Genotype
- New Zealand
- Phenotype
- Research Design
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Eating Disorders Genetics Initiative 2 (EDGI2): study protocol.
**Authors:** Berthold N, MacDermod CM, Thornton LM, Parker R, Morales SAC, Hog L, Kennedy HL, Guintivano J, Sullivan PF, Crowley JJ, Johnson JS, Birgegård A, Fundín BT, Frans E, Xu J, Ngāti Pūkenga MP, Miller AL, Aguilar MV, Barakat S, Abdulkadir M, White JP, Larsen JT, Trujillo E, Winterman B, Zhang R, Lawson R, Wonderlich S, Wonderlich J, Schaefer LM, Mehler PS, Oakes J, Foster M, Gaudiani J, Vacuán ETC, Compte EJ, Petersen LV, Yilmaz Z, Micali N, Jordan J, Kennedy MA, Maguire S, Huckins LM, Lu Y, Dinkler L, Martin NG, Bulik CM
**Journal:** BMC Psychiatry (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12888-025-06777-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-025-06777-5)

## Content

1. BMC Psychiatry. 2025 May 26;25(1):532. doi: 10.1186/s12888-025-06777-5.

The Eating Disorders Genetics Initiative 2 (EDGI2): study protocol.

Berthold N(#)(1)(2)(3), MacDermod CM(#)(1), Thornton LM(1), Parker R(4), Morales
SAC(5)(6), Hog L(7), Kennedy HL(8), Guintivano J(1), Sullivan PF(1)(7), Crowley
JJ(7)(9), Johnson JS(1), Birgegård A(7), Fundín BT(7), Frans E(7), Xu J(10),
Ngāti Pūkenga MP(8), Miller AL(8), Aguilar MV(1), Barakat S(11), Abdulkadir
M(12), White JP(1)(13), Larsen JT(12), Trujillo E(5), Winterman B(5), Zhang
R(7), Lawson R(14), Wonderlich S(15)(16), Wonderlich J(15), Schaefer LM(15),
Mehler PS(17), Oakes J(17), Foster M(17), Gaudiani J(18), Vacuán ETC(#)(5)(6),
Compte EJ(#)(5)(19), Petersen LV(#)(12), Yilmaz Z(#)(1)(12)(20), Micali
N(#)(21)(22), Jordan J(#)(23)(24), Kennedy MA(#)(6), Maguire S(#)(11)(25),
Huckins LM(#)(10), Lu Y(#)(7), Dinkler L(#)(7), Martin NG(#)(4), Bulik
CM(#)(26)(27)(28).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, #7160,
101 Manning Drive, Chapel Hill, CBNC, 27599 - 7160, USA.
(2)School of Human Sciences, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, 6009,
Australia.
(3)Perron Research Institute, Nedlands, WA, 6009, Australia.
(4)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Royal Brisbane Hospital, Locked
Bag 2000, Brisbane, QLD, 4029, Australia.
(5)Research Department, Comenzar de Nuevo, Monterrey, Mexico.
(6)Tecnologico de Monterrey, Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud - ,
Monterrey, Mexico.
(7)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Department of Pathology and Biomedical Science, University of Otago,
Christchurch, New Zealand.
(9)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, 27599, USA.
(10)Division of Molecular Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, Yale University,
New Haven, CT, USA.
(11)Insideout Institute for Eating Disorders, The University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia.
(12)Department of Public Health, National Centre for Register-Based Research,
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(13)Department of Psychology, University of Albany, State University of New
York, Albany, NY, USA.
(14)South Island Eating Disorders Service, Health NZ Te Whatu Ora, Christchurch,
New Zealand.
(15)Center for Biobehavioral Research, Sanford Health, Fargo, ND, USA.
(16)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, University of North Dakota
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Fargo, ND, USA.
(17)ACUTE Center for Eating Disorders and Severe Malnutrition, Denver Health and
Hospital Authority, Denver, CO, USA.
(18)Gaudiani Clinic, Denver, CO, USA.
(19)Eating Behavior Research Center, School of Psychology, Universidad Adolfo
Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile.
(20)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(21)Center for Eating and Feeding Disorders Research, Mental Health Services of
the Capital Region of Denmark, Psychiatric Centre Ballerup, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(22)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, UK.
(23)Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch, New
Zealand.
(24)Health NZ - Te Whatu Ora, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(25)Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(26)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
#7160, 101 Manning Drive, Chapel Hill, CBNC, 27599 - 7160, USA.
cynthia_bulik@med.unc.edu.
(27)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
171 77, Stockholm, Sweden. cynthia_bulik@med.unc.edu.
(28)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, 27599, USA. cynthia_bulik@med.unc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The Eating Disorders Genetics Initiative 2 (EDGI2) is designed to
explore the role of genes and environment in anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa,
binge-eating disorder, and avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID)
with a focus on broad population representation and severe and/or longstanding
illness.
METHODS: A total of 20,000 new participants (18,700 cases and 1,300 controls)
will be ascertained from the United States (US), Mexico (MX), Australia (AU),
Aotearoa New Zealand (NZ), Sweden (SE), and Denmark (DK). Comprehensive
phenotyping and genotyping will be performed for participants in US, MX, AU, NZ,
and SE using the EDGI2 questionnaire battery and participant saliva samples. In
DK, case identification and genotyping will be through the National Patient
Register and bloodspots archived near birth. Case-control and case-case
genome-wide association studies will be conducted within EDGI2 and enhanced via
meta-analysis with external data from the Eating Disorders Working Group of the
Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC-ED). Additional analyses will explore
genetic correlations between eating disorders (EDs) and other psychiatric and
metabolic traits, calculate polygenic risk scores (PRS), and leverage functional
biology to evaluate clinical outcomes. Moreover, analyzing PRS for patient
stratification and linking identified risk loci to clinically relevant
phenotypes highlight the potential of EDGI2 for clinical translation.
DISCUSSION: EDGI2 is a global expansion of the EDGI study to increase sample
size, increase participant representation across multiple ancestral backgrounds,
and to include ARFID. ED genetics research has historically lagged behind other
psychiatric disorders, and EDGI2 is designed to rapidly advance the study of the
genetics of the major EDs. Exploring EDs at both the diagnostic level and the
symptom level will provide an unprecedented look at the genetic architecture
underlying EDs.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: EDGI2 is a registered clinical trial: clinicaltrials.gov
NCT06594913. https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06594913 (posted September 19,
2024).

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-025-06777-5
PMCID: PMC12105188
PMID: 40419993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approvals and consent to
participate: This study is being conducted in accordance with the Helsinki
Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008. Ethical approval for EDGI2 study was
obtained by the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Biomedical
Institutional Review Board (IRB) (Protocol #23–2887); Research Ethics Committee
of the School of Medicine of the Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher
Studies (folio: P000552-EDGI-MX- 2021-CEIC-CR009; QIMR Berghofer Human Research
Ethics Committee (QIMRB-HREC approval P3550), New Zealand Health and Disability
Ethics Committees (Ethics Reference: HDEC20/CEN/1/HDEC20/CEN/1_ 2024 AM 9136),
the Swedish Ethical Review Authority (DNR: 2023–00254 - 02), and Danish
Scientific Ethics Committee, the Danish Health Data Authority, the Danish data
protection agency and the Danish Neonatal Screening Biobank Steering Committee.
All participants from US, MX, NZ, AU, and SE will provide informed consent prior
to engaging in any study-related activities. The electronic consent process was
approved by the ethical committees. Consent for publication: Not applicable.
Competing interests: CM Bulik receives royalties from Pearson Education, Inc. PF
Sullivan reports Neumora Therapeutics (advisory committee, shareholder). L
Dinkler received personal fees from Baxter Medical AB and Fresenius Kabi AB. All
other authors report no financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.
