---
reference_id: "PMID:15752182"
title: Borreliacidal activity of saliva of the tick Amblyomma americanum.
authors:
- Ledin KE
- Zeidner NS
- Ribeiro JM
- Biggerstaff BJ
- Dolan MC
- Dietrich G
- Vredevoe L
- Piesman J
journal: Med Vet Entomol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1111/j.0269-283X.2005.00546.x
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arachnid Vectors/chemistry, physiology"
- Borrelia burgdorferi/physiology
- Female
- "Ixodidae/chemistry, physiology"
- Pilocarpine/analysis
- Rabbits
- "Saliva/chemistry, physiology"
- Species Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Borreliacidal activity of saliva of the tick Amblyomma americanum.
**Authors:** Ledin KE, Zeidner NS, Ribeiro JM, Biggerstaff BJ, Dolan MC, Dietrich G, Vredevoe L, Piesman J
**Journal:** Med Vet Entomol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.0269-283X.2005.00546.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0269-283X.2005.00546.x)

## Content

1. Med Vet Entomol. 2005 Mar;19(1):90-5. doi: 10.1111/j.0269-283X.2005.00546.x.

Borreliacidal activity of saliva of the tick Amblyomma americanum.

Ledin KE(1), Zeidner NS, Ribeiro JM, Biggerstaff BJ, Dolan MC, Dietrich G, 
Vredevoe L, Piesman J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases, National Center for Infectious 
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, CO 80522, 
USA.

Amblyomma americanum (Linneaus) (Acari: Ixodidae), an important tick vector of 
human and animal disease, is not a competent vector of the bacterial agent of 
Lyme disease, Borrelia burgdorferi, although its range overlaps the geographical 
distribution of Lyme disease within the United States. A possible mechanism that 
could prevent acquisition of B. burgdorferi spirochetes from infected hosts is 
the toxic effect of A. americanum saliva on B. burgdorferi. The data presented 
here indicate that after 24 and 48 h of exposure to A. americanum saliva, 
significantly fewer B. burgdorferi were alive compared to treatment controls as 
assessed by spirochete motility under dark-field microscopy and resistance to 
the dead stain, propidium iodide. After 48 h, fewer than 13% of saliva-exposed 
B. burgdorferi were alive. In contrast, significantly more B. burgdorferi 
exposed to Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) saliva survived after 24 or 48 h 
compared to A. americanum saliva or treatment controls.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0269-283X.2005.00546.x
PMID: 15752182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]