---
reference_id: "PMID:22814368"
title: Menstrual cycle effects on amygdala reactivity to emotional stimulation in premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
authors:
- Gingnell M
- Morell A
- Bannbers E
- Wikström J
- Sundström Poromaa I
journal: Horm Behav
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.07.005
keywords:
- Adult
- "Amygdala/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, physiology"
- "Anxiety/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, psychology"
- "Depression/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, psychology"
- Emotions/physiology
- Female
- "Habituation, Psychophysiologic/physiology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Menstrual Cycle/physiology, psychology"
- Photic Stimulation
- "Premenstrual Syndrome/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, psychology"
- Radiography
- Reaction Time/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Menstrual cycle effects on amygdala reactivity to emotional stimulation in premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
**Authors:** Gingnell M, Morell A, Bannbers E, Wikström J, Sundström Poromaa I
**Journal:** Horm Behav (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.07.005)

## Content

1. Horm Behav. 2012 Sep;62(4):400-6. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.07.005. Epub 2012 
Jul 17.

Menstrual cycle effects on amygdala reactivity to emotional stimulation in 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder.

Gingnell M(1), Morell A, Bannbers E, Wikström J, Sundström Poromaa I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden. malin.gingnell@kbh.uu.se

Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) with luteal phase related anxiety and 
mood swings compromise quality of life in around 4% of reproductive women. While 
anxiety is related to amygdala function, prior studies on amygdala reactivity 
both in healthy controls and women with PMDD are inconsistent with respect to 
menstrual cycle effects. Here women with PMDD and healthy controls were exposed 
to emotional faces during the mid-follicular and late luteal phase, and mean 
blood-oxygen-level dependence (BOLD) signal changes in the amygdala were 
determined with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Women with PMDD 
had enhanced bilateral amygdala reactivity in the follicular phase in comparison 
with healthy controls, but there was no difference between groups during the 
luteal phase. In contrast, healthy controls displayed higher left amygdala 
reactivity in the luteal than in their follicular phase. However, among women 
with PMDD follicular phase progesterone serum concentrations were positively 
correlated with bilateral amygdala reactivity while depression scores were 
positively correlated with right amygdala reactivity in the luteal phase. In 
addition, women with PMDD and high scores on trait anxiety had increased right 
amygdala reactivity in the luteal as compared to the follicular phase. Finally, 
amygdala reactivity was more prone to habituation in women with PMDD, as they 
had enhanced amygdala reactivity in comparison with controls at the first, but 
not the second scanning session. Thus, while the study failed to indicate 
increased luteal phase amygdala reactivity in women with PMDD, our findings 
suggest that anxiety proneness and progesterone levels modulate menstrual cycle 
related amygdala reactivity in women with PMDD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.07.005
PMID: 22814368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]