---
reference_id: "PMID:28079116"
title: "Katanin p80, NuMA and cytoplasmic dynein cooperate to control microtubule dynamics."
authors:
- Jin M
- Pomp O
- Shinoda T
- Toba S
- Torisawa T
- Furuta K
- Oiwa K
- Yasunaga T
- Kitagawa D
- Matsumura S
- Miyata T
- Tan TT
- Reversade B
- Hirotsune S
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/srep39902
keywords:
- "Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Dyneins/metabolism
- Fibroblasts/physiology
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/physiology
- "Katanin/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- Microtubules/metabolism
- Mitosis/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- "Nervous System Malformations/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurogenesis/genetics
- Neurons/physiology
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Katanin p80, NuMA and cytoplasmic dynein cooperate to control microtubule dynamics.
**Authors:** Jin M, Pomp O, Shinoda T, Toba S, Torisawa T, Furuta K, Oiwa K, Yasunaga T, Kitagawa D, Matsumura S, Miyata T, Tan TT, Reversade B, Hirotsune S
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/srep39902](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep39902)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 12;7:39902. doi: 10.1038/srep39902.

Katanin p80, NuMA and cytoplasmic dynein cooperate to control microtubule
dynamics.

Jin M(1), Pomp O(2), Shinoda T(3), Toba S(1), Torisawa T(4)(5), Furuta K(4)(5),
Oiwa K(4)(5)(6), Yasunaga T(7)(8)(9), Kitagawa D(10), Matsumura S(11), Miyata
T(3), Tan TT(2), Reversade B(2)(12)(13), Hirotsune S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Disease Research, Osaka City University, Graduate
School of Medicine, Asahi-machi 1-4-3, Abeno, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.
(2)Institute of Medical Biology, Human Genetics and Embryology Laboratory,
Singapore.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, 65 Tsurumai, Showa, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.
(4)Advanced ICT Research Institute, National Institute of Information and
Communications Technology, Kobe, Hyogo 651-2492, Japan.
(5)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076,
Japan.
(6)Graduate School of Life Science, University of Hyogo, Harima Science Park
City, Hyogo 678-1297, Japan.
(7)Department of Bioscience and Bioinformatics, Faculty of Computer Science and
Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Kawazu 680-4, Iizuka,
Fukuoka 820-850, Japan.
(8)JST-SENTAN, 4-1-8, Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan.
(9)JST-CREST, 4-1-8, Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan.
(10)Division of Centrosome Biology, Department of Molecular Genetics, National
Institute of Genetics, 1111 Yata, Mishima, Shizuoka, 411-8540, Japan.
(11)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan.
(12)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, A*STAR, Singapore 138648,
Singapore.
(13)Department of Paediatrics, National University of Singapore, Singapore
119260, Singapore.

Human mutations in KATNB1 (p80) cause severe congenital cortical malformations,
which encompass the clinical features of both microcephaly and lissencephaly.
Although p80 plays critical roles during brain development, the underlying
mechanisms remain predominately unknown. Here, we demonstrate that p80 regulates
microtubule (MT) remodeling in combination with NuMA (nuclear mitotic apparatus
protein) and cytoplasmic dynein. We show that p80 shuttles between the nucleus
and spindle pole in synchrony with the cell cycle. Interestingly, this striking
feature is shared with NuMA. Importantly, p80 is essential for aster formation
and maintenance in vitro. siRNA-mediated depletion of p80 and/or NuMA induced
abnormal mitotic phenotypes in cultured mouse embryonic fibroblasts and aberrant
neurogenesis and neuronal migration in the mouse embryonic brain. Importantly,
these results were confirmed in p80-mutant harboring patient-derived induced
pluripotent stem cells and brain organoids. Taken together, our findings provide
valuable insights into the pathogenesis of severe microlissencephaly, in which
p80 and NuMA delineate a common pathway for neurogenesis and neuronal migration
via MT organization at the centrosome/spindle pole.

DOI: 10.1038/srep39902
PMCID: PMC5228124
PMID: 28079116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
