---
reference_id: "PMID:26465681"
title: Ebola RNA Persistence in Semen of Ebola Virus Disease Survivors - Final Report.
authors:
- Deen GF
- Broutet N
- Xu W
- Knust B
- Sesay FR
- McDonald SLR
- Ervin E
- Marrinan JE
- Gaillard P
- Habib N
- Liu H
- Liu W
- Thorson AE
- Yamba F
- Massaquoi TA
- James F
- Ariyarajah A
- Ross C
- Bernstein K
- Coursier A
- Klena J
- Carino M
- Wurie AH
- Zhang Y
- Dumbuya MS
- Abad N
- Idriss B
- Wi T
- Bennett SD
- Davies T
- Ebrahim FK
- Meites E
- Naidoo D
- Smith SJ
- Ongpin P
- Malik T
- Banerjee A
- Erickson BR
- Liu Y
- Liu Y
- Xu K
- Brault A
- Durski KN
- Winter J
- Sealy T
- Nichol ST
- Lamunu M
- Bangura J
- Landoulsi S
- Jambai A
- Morgan O
- Wu G
- Liang M
- Su Q
- Lan Y
- Hao Y
- Formenty P
- Ströher U
- Sahr F
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1511410
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola RNA Persistence in Semen of Ebola Virus Disease Survivors - Final Report.
**Authors:** Deen GF, Broutet N, Xu W, Knust B, Sesay FR, McDonald SLR, Ervin E, Marrinan JE, Gaillard P, Habib N, Liu H, Liu W, Thorson AE, Yamba F, Massaquoi TA, James F, Ariyarajah A, Ross C, Bernstein K, Coursier A, Klena J, Carino M, Wurie AH, Zhang Y, Dumbuya MS, Abad N, Idriss B, Wi T, Bennett SD, Davies T, Ebrahim FK, Meites E, Naidoo D, Smith SJ, Ongpin P, Malik T, Banerjee A, Erickson BR, Liu Y, Liu Y, Xu K, Brault A, Durski KN, Winter J, Sealy T, Nichol ST, Lamunu M, Bangura J, Landoulsi S, Jambai A, Morgan O, Wu G, Liang M, Su Q, Lan Y, Hao Y, Formenty P, Ströher U, Sahr F
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1511410](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1511410)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2017 Oct 12;377(15):1428-1437. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1511410. Epub 
2015 Oct 14.

Ebola RNA Persistence in Semen of Ebola Virus Disease Survivors - Final Report.

Deen GF(1), Broutet N(1), Xu W(1), Knust B(1), Sesay FR(1), McDonald SLR(1), 
Ervin E(1), Marrinan JE(1), Gaillard P(1), Habib N(1), Liu H(1), Liu W(1), 
Thorson AE(1), Yamba F(1), Massaquoi TA(1), James F(1), Ariyarajah A(1), Ross 
C(1), Bernstein K(1), Coursier A(1), Klena J(1), Carino M(1), Wurie AH(1), Zhang 
Y(1), Dumbuya MS(1), Abad N(1), Idriss B(1), Wi T(1), Bennett SD(1), Davies 
T(1), Ebrahim FK(1), Meites E(1), Naidoo D(1), Smith SJ(1), Ongpin P(1), Malik 
T(1), Banerjee A(1), Erickson BR(1), Liu Y(1), Liu Y(1), Xu K(1), Brault A(1), 
Durski KN(1), Winter J(1), Sealy T(1), Nichol ST(1), Lamunu M(1), Bangura J(1), 
Landoulsi S(1), Jambai A(1), Morgan O(1), Wu G(1), Liang M(1), Su Q(1), Lan 
Y(1), Hao Y(1), Formenty P(1), Ströher U(1), Sahr F(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Sierra Leone Ministry of Health and Sanitation (G.F.D., F.Y., F.J., 
A.H.W., S.J.S., J.B., A.J.), the Sierra Leone Ministry of Defense (F.R.S., 
T.A.M., M.S.D., B.I., F.S.), and the Sierra Leone Ministry of Social Welfare, 
Gender, and Children's Affairs (T.D.) - all in Freetown, Sierra Leone; World 
Health Organization (N.B., S.L.R.M., J.E.M., P.G., N.H., A.E.T., A.A., A.C., 
M.C., T.W., F.K.E., D.N., A. Banerjee, K.N.D., M. Lamunu, S.L., P.F.) and the 
Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS (P.O.), Geneva; Chinese Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention (W.X., H.L., W.L., Y.Z., Yongjian Liu, Yang Liu, 
K.X., G.W., M. Liang, Q.S., Y.H.) and Beijing Institute of Microbiology and 
Epidemiology (Y. Lan), Beijing; and the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta (B.K., E.E., C.R., K.B., J.K., N.A., S.D.B., E.M., T.M., 
B.R.E., A. Brault, J.W., T.S., S.T.N., O.M., U.S.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2017 Oct 12;377(15):1482-1484. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1712330.

BACKGROUND: Ebola virus has been detected in the semen of men after their 
recovery from Ebola virus disease (EVD). We report the presence of Ebola virus 
RNA in semen in a cohort of survivors of EVD in Sierra Leone.
METHODS: We enrolled a convenience sample of 220 adult male survivors of EVD in 
Sierra Leone, at various times after discharge from an Ebola treatment unit 
(ETU), in two phases (100 participants were in phase 1, and 120 in phase 2). 
Semen specimens obtained at baseline were tested by means of a quantitative 
reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-PCR) assay with the use of 
the target sequences of NP and VP40 (in phase 1) or NP and GP (in phase 2). This 
study did not evaluate directly the risk of sexual transmission of EVD.
RESULTS: Of 210 participants who provided an initial semen specimen for 
analysis, 57 (27%) had positive results on quantitative RT-PCR. Ebola virus RNA 
was detected in the semen of all 7 men with a specimen obtained within 3 months 
after ETU discharge, in 26 of 42 (62%) with a specimen obtained at 4 to 6 
months, in 15 of 60 (25%) with a specimen obtained at 7 to 9 months, in 4 of 26 
(15%) with a specimen obtained at 10 to 12 months, in 4 of 38 (11%) with a 
specimen obtained at 13 to 15 months, in 1 of 25 (4%) with a specimen obtained 
at 16 to 18 months, and in no men with a specimen obtained at 19 months or 
later. Among the 46 participants with a positive result in phase 1, the median 
baseline cycle-threshold values (higher values indicate lower RNA values) for 
the NP and VP40 targets were lower within 3 months after ETU discharge (32.4 and 
31.3, respectively; in 7 men) than at 4 to 6 months (34.3 and 33.1; in 25), at 7 
to 9 months (37.4 and 36.6; in 13), and at 10 to 12 months (37.7 and 36.9; in 
1). In phase 2, a total of 11 participants had positive results for NP and GP 
targets (samples obtained at 4.1 to 15.7 months after ETU discharge); 
cycle-threshold values ranged from 32.7 to 38.0 for NP and from 31.1 to 37.7 for 
GP.
CONCLUSIONS: These data showed the long-term presence of Ebola virus RNA in 
semen and declining persistence with increasing time after ETU discharge. 
(Funded by the World Health Organization and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1511410
PMCID: PMC5798881
PMID: 26465681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]