---
reference_id: "PMID:39834885"
title: "A rare case of acrodysostosis type 2 with PDE4D mutation in a young female: a case report."
authors:
- Hameed MS
- Maheen M
- Sadiq SM
- Farooq U
- Rehman A
- Ihtesham A
- Khan I
- Maqbool S
- Iqbal J
journal: Oxf Med Case Reports
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/omcr/omae169
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare case of acrodysostosis type 2 with PDE4D mutation in a young female: a case report.
**Authors:** Hameed MS, Maheen M, Sadiq SM, Farooq U, Rehman A, Ihtesham A, Khan I, Maqbool S, Iqbal J
**Journal:** Oxf Med Case Reports (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/omcr/omae169](https://doi.org/10.1093/omcr/omae169)

## Content

1. Oxf Med Case Reports. 2025 Jan 18;2025(1):omae169. doi: 10.1093/omcr/omae169. 
eCollection 2025 Jan.

A rare case of acrodysostosis type 2 with PDE4D mutation in a young female: a 
case report.

Hameed MS(1), Maheen M(1), Sadiq SM(2), Farooq U(1), Rehman A(1), Ihtesham A(1), 
Khan I(3), Maqbool S(1), Iqbal J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Rawalpindi Medical University, Tipu Road, Chamanzar 
Colony, Rawalpindi 46000, Punjab, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Medicine, Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Medical University, 
Sector G-8/3, Ravi Road, Islamabad 44000, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Medicine, PGY2 NYCH+H/Woodhull Brooklyn Network, 760 Broadway, 
Brooklyn, NY 11206, United States.
(4)Nursing Department Communicable Diseases Center, Hammad Medical Corporation, 
Doha 3050, Qatar.

Acrodysostosis (ADO) is a rare form of peripheral dysostosis characterized by 
skeletal malformations, growth delays, short stature, and distinctive facial 
features caused by in part by underdeveloped (hypoplasia) of facial bones. 
Skeletal dysplasia is specific and includes disproportional short stature with 
short extremities and brachydactyly, multiple cone-shaped epiphyses, scoliosis 
or kyphosis with spinal stenosis, and advanced bone maturation. Herein, we are 
highlighting a case that presented with clinical features such as brachydactyly, 
delayed milestone, growth delay, muscle weakness and nasal hypoplasia. Patient 
genetic testing was in line with the diagnosis of acrodysostosis. The 
clinic-radiological correlation was also suggestive of the rare diagnosis of 
ADO.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/omcr/omae169
PMCID: PMC11742178
PMID: 39834885

Conflict of interest statement: All authors do not have any conflict of interest 
to disclose.