---
reference_id: "PMID:32402064"
title: "Familial primary ovarian insufficiency associated with an SYCE1 point mutation: defective meiosis elucidated in humanized mice."
authors:
- Hernández-López D
- Geisinger A
- Trovero MF
- Santiñaque FF
- Brauer M
- Folle GA
- Benavente R
- Rodríguez-Casuriaga R
journal: Mol Hum Reprod
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaaa032
keywords:
- Animals
- "Chromosome Pairing/genetics, physiology"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Meiosis/genetics, physiology"
- Mice
- Mutation/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Point Mutation/genetics
- Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial primary ovarian insufficiency associated with an SYCE1 point mutation: defective meiosis elucidated in humanized mice.
**Authors:** Hernández-López D, Geisinger A, Trovero MF, Santiñaque FF, Brauer M, Folle GA, Benavente R, Rodríguez-Casuriaga R
**Journal:** Mol Hum Reprod (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/molehr/gaaa032](https://doi.org/10.1093/molehr/gaaa032)

## Content

1. Mol Hum Reprod. 2020 Jul 1;26(7):485-497. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaaa032.

Familial primary ovarian insufficiency associated with an SYCE1 point mutation: 
defective meiosis elucidated in humanized mice.

Hernández-López D(1), Geisinger A(1)(2), Trovero MF(3), Santiñaque FF(4), Brauer 
M(5), Folle GA(3)(4), Benavente R(6), Rodríguez-Casuriaga R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas 
Clemente Estable (IIBCE), 11600 Montevideo, Uruguay.
(2)Biochemistry-Molecular Biology, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de la 
República (UdelaR), 11400 Montevideo, Uruguay.
(3)Department of Genetics, IIBCE, 11600 Montevideo, Uruguay.
(4)Flow Cytometry and Cell Sorting Core, IIBCE, 11600 Montevideo, Uruguay.
(5)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Department of Experimental Neuropharmacology, 
IIBCE, 11600 Montevideo, Uruguay.
(6)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Biocenter, University of 
Würzburg, D-97074 Würzburg, Germany.

More than 50% of cases of primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) and nonobstructive 
azoospermia in humans are classified as idiopathic infertility. Meiotic defects 
may relate to at least some of these cases. Mutations in genes coding for 
synaptonemal complex (SC) components have been identified in humans, and 
hypothesized to be causative for the observed infertile phenotype. Mutation 
SYCE1 c.721C>T (former c.613C>T)-a familial mutation reported in two sisters 
with primary amenorrhea-was the first such mutation found in an SC central 
element component-coding gene. Most fundamental mammalian oogenesis events occur 
during the embryonic phase, and eventual defects are identified many years 
later, thus leaving few possibilities to study the condition's etiology and 
pathogenesis. Aiming to validate an approach to circumvent this difficulty, we 
have used the CRISPR/Cas9 technology to generate a mouse model with an SYCE1 
c.721C>T equivalent genome alteration. We hereby present the characterization of 
the homozygous mutant mice phenotype, compared to their wild type and 
heterozygous littermates. Our results strongly support a causative role of this 
mutation for the POI phenotype in human patients, and the mechanisms involved 
would relate to defects in homologous chromosome synapsis. No SYCE1 protein was 
detected in homozygous mutants and Syce1 transcript level was highly diminished, 
suggesting transcript degradation as the basis of the infertility mechanism. 
This is the first report on the generation of a humanized mouse model line for 
the study of an infertility-related human mutation in an SC component-coding 
gene, thus representing a proof of principle.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molehr/gaaa032
PMID: 32402064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]