---
reference_id: "PMID:38749434"
title: Identification of the extracellular membrane protein ENPP3 as a major cGAMP hydrolase and innate immune checkpoint.
authors:
- Mardjuki R
- Wang S
- Carozza J
- Zirak B
- Subramanyam V
- Abhiraman G
- Lyu X
- Goodarzi H
- Li L
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114209
keywords:
- Animals
- "Nucleotides, Cyclic/metabolism"
- "Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/metabolism, genetics"
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Mice
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- "Pyrophosphatases/metabolism, genetics"
- Humans
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Hydrolysis
- "Neoplasms/immunology, metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- Signal Transduction
- STING Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of the extracellular membrane protein ENPP3 as a major cGAMP hydrolase and innate immune checkpoint.
**Authors:** Mardjuki R, Wang S, Carozza J, Zirak B, Subramanyam V, Abhiraman G, Lyu X, Goodarzi H, Li L
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114209](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114209)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2024 May 28;43(5):114209. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114209. Epub
2024  May 14.

Identification of the extracellular membrane protein ENPP3 as a major cGAMP
hydrolase and innate immune checkpoint.

Mardjuki R(1), Wang S(2), Carozza J(3), Zirak B(4), Subramanyam V(4), Abhiraman
G(5), Lyu X(6), Goodarzi H(4), Li L(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA;
ChEM-H Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Arc Institute,
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA; Department of Chemistry, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA;
ChEM-H Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Arc Institute,
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.
(3)Arc Institute, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.
(4)Arc Institute, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA; Department of Urology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Department of Biophysics & Biochemistry, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Baker Computational
Health Science Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(6)ChEM-H Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Department of
Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA;
ChEM-H Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Arc Institute,
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. Electronic address: lingyin@arcinstitute.org.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jan 13:2024.01.12.575449. doi: 10.1101/2024.01.12.575449.

2'3'-Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (GMP)-AMP (cGAMP) is a second messenger
synthesized upon detection of cytosolic double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and passed
between cells to facilitate downstream immune signaling. Ectonucleotide
pyrophosphatase phosphodiesterase I (ENPP1), an extracellular enzyme, was the
only metazoan hydrolase known to regulate cGAMP levels to dampen anti-cancer
immunity. Here, we uncover ENPP3 as the second and likely the only other
metazoan cGAMP hydrolase under homeostatic conditions. ENPP3 has a tissue
expression pattern distinct from ENPP1's and accounts for all cGAMP hydrolysis
activity in ENPP1-deficient mice. Importantly, we also show that, as with ENPP1,
selectively abolishing ENPP3's cGAMP hydrolysis activity results in diminished
cancer growth and metastasis of certain tumor types in a stimulator of
interferon genes (STING)-dependent manner. Both ENPP1 and ENPP3 are
extracellular enzymes, suggesting the dominant role that extracellular cGAMP
must play as a mediator of cell-cell innate immune communication. Our work
demonstrates that ENPP1 and ENPP3 non-redundantly dampen extracellular
cGAMP-STING signaling, pointing to ENPP3 as a target for cancer immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114209
PMID: 38749434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests L.L. and J.C. have
filed patents on ENPP1 inhibitors (PCT/US2020/015968 and PCT/US2018/050018) that
are licensed to Angarus Therapeutics. L.L. is a co-founder of Angarus
Therapeutics.
