---
reference_id: "PMID:35409627"
title: Environmental Substances Associated with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease-A Scoping Review.
authors:
- Elonheimo HM
- Mattila T
- Andersen HR
- Bocca B
- Ruggieri F
- Haverinen E
- Tolonen H
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph19073945
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental Substances Associated with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease-A Scoping Review.
**Authors:** Elonheimo HM, Mattila T, Andersen HR, Bocca B, Ruggieri F, Haverinen E, Tolonen H
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph19073945](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19073945)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Mar 25;19(7):3945. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph19073945.

Environmental Substances Associated with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease-A 
Scoping Review.

Elonheimo HM(1), Mattila T(1)(2), Andersen HR(3), Bocca B(4), Ruggieri F(4), 
Haverinen E(1), Tolonen H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Welfare, Finnish Institute for Health and 
Welfare (THL), 00271 Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Heart and Lung Center, Helsinki University 
Hospital and University of Helsinki, 00029 Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Clinical Pharmacology, Pharmacy and Environmental Medicine, Department of 
Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5000 Odense, Denmark.
(4)Department of Environment and Health, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 
Rome, Italy.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a slowly developing 
non-communicable disease (NCD), causing non-reversible obstruction and leading 
to marked morbidity and mortality. Besides traditional risk factors such as 
smoking, some environmental substances can augment the risk of COPD. The 
European Human Biomonitoring Initiative (HBM4EU) is a program evaluating 
citizens' exposure to various environmental substances and their possible health 
impacts. Within the HBM4EU, eighteen priority substances or substance groups 
were chosen. In this scoping review, seven of these substances or substance 
groups are reported to have an association or a possible association with COPD. 
Main exposure routes, vulnerable and high-exposure risk groups, and matrices 
where these substances are measured are described. Pesticides in general and 
especially organophosphate and carbamate insecticides, and some herbicides, lead 
(Pb), and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) showed an association, and 
cadmium (Cd), chromium (Cr and CrVI), arsenic (As), and diisocyanates, a 
possible association with COPD and/or decreased lung function. Due to long 
latency in COPD's disease process, the role of chemical exposure as a risk 
factor for COPD is probably underestimated. More research is needed to support 
evidence-based conclusions. Generally, chemical exposure is a growing issue of 
concern, and prompt action is needed to safeguard public health.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph19073945
PMCID: PMC8997594
PMID: 35409627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.