---
reference_id: "PMID:22670904"
title: Inhibiting the hedgehog pathway in patients with the basal-cell nevus syndrome.
authors:
- Tang JY
- Mackay-Wiggan JM
- Aszterbaum M
- Yauch RL
- Lindgren J
- Chang K
- Coppola C
- Chanana AM
- Marji J
- Bickers DR
- Epstein EH Jr
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1113538
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibiting the hedgehog pathway in patients with the basal-cell nevus syndrome.
**Authors:** Tang JY, Mackay-Wiggan JM, Aszterbaum M, Yauch RL, Lindgren J, Chang K, Coppola C, Chanana AM, Marji J, Bickers DR, Epstein EH Jr
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1113538](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1113538)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2012 Jun 7;366(23):2180-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1113538.

Inhibiting the hedgehog pathway in patients with the basal-cell nevus syndrome.

Tang JY(1), Mackay-Wiggan JM, Aszterbaum M, Yauch RL, Lindgren J, Chang K, 
Coppola C, Chanana AM, Marji J, Bickers DR, Epstein EH Jr.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, California 94609, 
USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Jun 7;366(23):2225-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1202170.
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Sep 6;367(10):970; author reply 970-1. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1208003.

BACKGROUND: Dysregulated hedgehog signaling is the pivotal molecular abnormality 
underlying basal-cell carcinomas. Vismodegib is a new orally administered 
hedgehog-pathway inhibitor that produces objective responses in locally advanced 
and metastatic basal-cell carcinomas.
METHODS: We tested the anti-basal-cell carcinoma efficacy of vismodegib in a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in patients with the 
basal-cell nevus syndrome at three clinical centers from September 2009 through 
January 2011. The primary end point was reduction in the incidence of new 
basal-cell carcinomas that were eligible for surgical resection (surgically 
eligible) with vismodegib versus placebo after 3 months; secondary end points 
included reduction in the size of existing basal-cell carcinomas.
RESULTS: In 41 patients followed for a mean of 8 months (range, 1 to 15) after 
enrollment, the per-patient rate of new surgically eligible basal-cell 
carcinomas was lower with vismodegib than with placebo (2 vs. 29 cases per group 
per year, P<0.001), as was the size (percent change from baseline in the sum of 
the longest diameter) of existing clinically significant basal-cell carcinomas 
(-65% vs. -11%, P=0.003). In some patients, all basal-cell carcinomas clinically 
regressed. No tumors progressed during treatment with vismodegib. Patients 
receiving vismodegib routinely had grade 1 or 2 adverse events of loss of taste, 
muscle cramps, hair loss, and weight loss. Overall, 54% of patients (14 of 26) 
receiving vismodegib discontinued drug treatment owing to adverse events. At 1 
month, vismodegib use had reduced the hedgehog target-gene expression by 
basal-cell carcinoma by 90% (P<0.001) and diminished tumor-cell proliferation, 
but apoptosis was not affected. No residual basal-cell carcinoma was detectable 
in 83% of biopsy samples taken from sites of clinically regressed basal-cell 
carcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Vismodegib reduces the basal-cell carcinoma tumor burden and blocks 
growth of new basal-cell carcinomas in patients with the basal-cell nevus 
syndrome. The adverse events associated with treatment led to discontinuation in 
over half of treated patients. (Funded by Genentech and others; 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00957229.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1113538
PMCID: PMC4362529
PMID: 22670904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]