---
reference_id: "PMID:34545312"
title: A Unique Case of Mantle Cell Lymphoma Masquerading as a Cecal Mass.
authors:
- Herrera-Gonzalez S
- Shamoon D
- Shen T
- Badin S
- Bains Y
journal: Case Rep Gastrointest Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1155/2021/5581043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Unique Case of Mantle Cell Lymphoma Masquerading as a Cecal Mass.
**Authors:** Herrera-Gonzalez S, Shamoon D, Shen T, Badin S, Bains Y
**Journal:** Case Rep Gastrointest Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2021/5581043](https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5581043)

## Content

1. Case Rep Gastrointest Med. 2021 Sep 10;2021:5581043. doi:
10.1155/2021/5581043.  eCollection 2021.

A Unique Case of Mantle Cell Lymphoma Masquerading as a Cecal Mass.

Herrera-Gonzalez S(1), Shamoon D(2), Shen T(3), Badin S(4), Bains Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Jersey City Medical Center, 355 Grand St, 
Jersey City, NJ 07002, USA.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, St Michael's Medical Center, 111 Central Ave, 
Newark, NJ 07102, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Jersey City Medical Center, 355 Grand St, Jersey 
City, NJ 07002, USA.
(4)Department of Oncology, Jersey City Medical Center, 355 Grand St, Jersey 
City, NJ 07002, USA.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), a type of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, is a rare 
and aggressive disease with a poor prognosis due to its advanced presentation at 
diagnosis. It is characterized by a translocation in the Bcl-1 gene, which 
results in overexpression of cyclin D1. MCL is frequently seen in the form of 
multiple lymphomatous polyposis (MLP) in which innumerable polyps are observed 
in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. In rare instances, MCL presents a single 
mass. The most common presentation involves male patients in their sixties, with 
generalized lymphadenopathy, extranodal involvement, and B symptoms (night 
sweats, fever, and weight loss). Endoscopic findings of MLP include cerebroid 
folding of the gastric mucosa and innumerable polyps extending from the duodenum 
to the large intestine and are reported in approximately 9% of all GI lymphomas. 
Less commonly, only 2-4% of GI malignancies present as a primary GI MCL as a 
single mass, usually in the stomach and ileocecal region in the intestine. 
Radiologic findings include lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, multiple polyposis, 
or wall thickening with ulceration or mass formation. In most instances, 
advanced disease is found at diagnosis, for which 5-year survival ranges only 
from 26 to 46%, even when appropriate treatment is initiated. High mitotic rate, 
or Ki-67 index, is of prognostic value and is associated with poor prognosis. 
Treatment involves conventional chemo-immunotherapy consisting of R CHOP 
(rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) or RB 
(rituximab and bendamustine), with the latter being better tolerated and 
associated with longer progression-free survival. Surgical resection is usually 
limited to patients in which complications are seen such as bleeding, 
perforation, or bowel obstruction. We present a unique case of a 70-year-old 
male with nonbilious, nonbloody emesis, and symptomatic anemia who was found to 
have a cecal mass consistent with MCL.

Copyright © 2021 Sarahi Herrera-Gonzalez et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5581043
PMCID: PMC8449714
PMID: 34545312

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest regarding the publication of this article.