---
reference_id: "PMID:33200362"
title: Prevention of Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Liver Cancer.
authors:
- Chang MH
journal: Recent Results Cancer Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-57362-1_4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Liver Cancer.
**Authors:** Chang MH
**Journal:** Recent Results Cancer Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-57362-1_4](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-57362-1_4)

## Content

1. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2021;217:71-90. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-57362-1_4.

Prevention of Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Liver Cancer.

Chang MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan. changmh@ntu.edu.tw.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the five leading causes of cancer death 
in human. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is the most common etiologic agent of HCC in 
the world. Prevention is the best way to control cancer. There are three levels 
of liver cancer prevention, i.e., primary prevention by HBV vaccination 
targeting the general population starting from birth dose, secondary prevention 
by antiviral agent for high-risk subjects with chronic HBV infection, and 
tertiary prevention by antiviral agent to prevent recurrence for patients who 
have been successfully treated for liver cancer. Primary prevention by hepatitis 
B vaccination is most cost effective, the cancer preventive efficacy support it 
as the first successful example of cancer preventive vaccine in human. Addition 
of hepatitis B immunoglobulin immediately after birth and antiviral agent during 
the third trimester of pregnancy to block mother-to-infant transmission of HBV 
are existing or possible emerging strategies to enhance the prevention efficacy 
of HBV infection and its related liver cancer. Secondary prevention with current 
antiviral agents may reduce the risk or delay the onset of HCC development, but 
could not eradicate HBV infection and HCC. Better antiviral therapeutic agents 
are needed for better secondary prevention.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-57362-1_4
PMID: 33200362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]