---
reference_id: "PMID:30792480"
title: "Pre-eclampsia: pathogenesis, novel diagnostics and therapies."
authors:
- Phipps EA
- Thadhani R
- Benzing T
- Karumanchi SA
journal: Nat Rev Nephrol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41581-019-0119-6
keywords:
- Angiogenesis Inhibitors/metabolism
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Female
- Humans
- Placenta/metabolism
- "Pre-Eclampsia/diagnosis, etiology, metabolism, therapy"
- Pregnancy
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pre-eclampsia: pathogenesis, novel diagnostics and therapies.
**Authors:** Phipps EA, Thadhani R, Benzing T, Karumanchi SA
**Journal:** Nat Rev Nephrol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41581-019-0119-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41581-019-0119-6)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2019 May;15(5):275-289. doi: 10.1038/s41581-019-0119-6.

Pre-eclampsia: pathogenesis, novel diagnostics and therapies.

Phipps EA(1)(2), Thadhani R(2)(3), Benzing T(4), Karumanchi SA(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Nephrology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Departments of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(5)Departments of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA. SAnanth.Karumanchi@csmc.edu.
(6)Nephrology Division, Departments of Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. SAnanth.Karumanchi@csmc.edu.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2019 Jun;15(6):386. doi: 10.1038/s41581-019-0156-1.

Pre-eclampsia is a complication of pregnancy that is associated with substantial 
maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. The disease presents with new-onset 
hypertension and often proteinuria in the mother, which can progress to 
multi-organ dysfunction, including hepatic, renal and cerebral disease, if the 
fetus and placenta are not delivered. Maternal endothelial dysfunction due to 
circulating factors of fetal origin from the placenta is a hallmark of 
pre-eclampsia. Risk factors for the disease include maternal comorbidities, such 
as chronic kidney disease, hypertension and obesity; a family history of 
pre-eclampsia, nulliparity or multiple pregnancies; and previous pre-eclampsia 
or intrauterine fetal growth restriction. In the past decade, the discovery and 
characterization of novel antiangiogenic pathways have been particularly 
impactful both in increasing understanding of the disease pathophysiology and in 
directing predictive and therapeutic efforts. In this Review, we discuss the 
pathogenic role of antiangiogenic proteins released by the placenta in the 
development of pre-eclampsia and review novel therapeutic strategies directed at 
restoring the angiogenic imbalance observed during pre-eclampsia. We also 
highlight other notable advances in the field, including the identification of 
long-term maternal and fetal risks conferred by pre-eclampsia.

DOI: 10.1038/s41581-019-0119-6
PMCID: PMC6472952
PMID: 30792480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]