---
reference_id: "PMID:25016402"
title: Aldosterone and volume management in hypertensive heart disease.
authors:
- Sica DA
journal: Semin Nephrol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2014.04.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aldosterone and volume management in hypertensive heart disease.
**Authors:** Sica DA
**Journal:** Semin Nephrol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semnephrol.2014.04.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semnephrol.2014.04.007)

## Content

1. Semin Nephrol. 2014 May;34(3):323-32. doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2014.04.007. 
Epub 2014 Apr 18.

Aldosterone and volume management in hypertensive heart disease.

Sica DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, Department of Clinical Pharmacology 
and Hypertension, Division of Nephrology, Virginia Commonwealth University 
Health System, Richmond, VA. Electronic address: dsica@mcvh-vcu.edu.

Aldosterone-receptor antagonists dose-dependently reduce both the epithelial and 
nonepithelial actions of aldosterone. These compounds are used commonly in the 
treatment of hypertension, with or without aldosteronism, and in the 
volume-overload periods of various forms of heart failure, cirrhosis, and renal 
failure. In this regard, the relevant site of action for these compounds is 
compartmentalized to the distal nephron. The cardiac benefits of 
aldosterone-receptor blockade now are sufficiently well established to warrant 
routine use of these compounds for their survival benefits in moderate to 
advanced stages of heart failure. Aldosterone-receptor antagonists 
spironolactone and eplerenone commonly are used in the treatment of resistant 
forms of hypertension. Spironolactone, but not eplerenone, is a commonly used 
add-on diuretic that provides incremental benefit for salt-and-water excretion 
in excess of what may be seen with a loop diuretic given together with a 
thiazide-type diuretic. The dose-response relationship for natriuresis with 
spironolactone has not been explored completely as to its combination therapy 
responses. The quite high doses of spironolactone used in patients with 
cirrhosis and ascites would infer that the overall treatment effect with this 
compound exceeds simple receptor blockade and may include a nervous system 
effect that operationally reduces renal sympathetic nerve traffic. The adverse 
electrolyte and renal function side effects with aldosterone-receptor 
antagonists are not uncommon in at-risk patients, such as those with chronic 
kidney disease, and require that dosing be mindful of the tendency of these 
drugs to importantly increase serum potassium levels.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2014.04.007
PMID: 25016402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]