---
reference_id: "PMID:39087407"
title: Epidemiologic changes in thyroid disease.
authors:
- Acosta GJ
- Singh Ospina N
- Brito JP
journal: Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000877
keywords:
- Humans
- Thyroid Diseases/epidemiology
- Risk Factors
- Prevalence
- Incidence
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/epidemiology, etiology, diagnosis"
- Female
- "Obesity/epidemiology, complications"
- Hypothyroidism/epidemiology
- Hyperthyroidism/epidemiology
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiologic changes in thyroid disease.
**Authors:** Acosta GJ, Singh Ospina N, Brito JP
**Journal:** Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MED.0000000000000877](https://doi.org/10.1097/MED.0000000000000877)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2024 Oct 1;31(5):184-190. doi:
10.1097/MED.0000000000000877. Epub 2024 Aug 1.

Epidemiologic changes in thyroid disease.

Acosta GJ(1), Singh Ospina N(1), Brito JP(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida.
(2)Knowledge and Evaluation Research Unit, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes,
Metabolism and Nutrition, Department of Medicine.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism and Nutrition, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To analyze the evolving epidemiologic trends in thyroid
disease, focusing on risk factors, underlying drivers of these changes, and
their implications on clinical practice and research priorities.
RECENT FINDINGS: Thyroid disease remains one of the most prevalent groups of
disorders globally, and the shift in its frequency and distribution is
multifactorial. The prevalence of hypothyroidism increases with age, although
normal thyrotropin ranges appear to be age-dependent, raising concern for
potentially inappropriate levothyroxine use. Hyperthyroidism and Graves' disease
continue to be predominant in reproductive-age women but exhibit a milder
phenotype at diagnosis. Thyroid nodules are increasingly found in asymptomatic
patients, likely from more widespread use of neck and chest imaging. Thyroid
cancer incidence has risen exponentially over the years, mostly driven by
overdiagnosis of low-risk tumors; however, a small rise in incidence of higher
risk tumors has been noted. Obesity appears to be a risk factor for thyroid
cancer occurrence and more aggressive forms of the disease.
SUMMARY: Understanding epidemiologic trends in thyroid disease is crucial for
guiding clinical practice and research efforts, aiming to optimize patient
outcomes while preventing unnecessary and potentially harmful interventions.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000877
PMID: 39087407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
