---
reference_id: "PMID:37859990"
title: "Case Report: Papillary thyroid carcinoma in Goltz-Gorlin syndrome."
authors:
- Costanza F
- Papi G
- Corrado S
- Pontecorvi A
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1243540
keywords:
- Female
- Adolescent
- Child
- Humans
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/surgery, drug therapy"
- "Focal Dermal Hypoplasia/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Iodine Radioisotopes/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/surgery, drug therapy"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/complications, surgery, pathology"
- Acyltransferases
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Papillary thyroid carcinoma in Goltz-Gorlin syndrome.
**Authors:** Costanza F, Papi G, Corrado S, Pontecorvi A
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1243540](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1243540)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Oct 4;14:1243540. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1243540. eCollection 2023.

Case Report: Papillary thyroid carcinoma in Goltz-Gorlin syndrome.

Costanza F(1), Papi G(1)(2), Corrado S(3), Pontecorvi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine Unit, Catholic University of 
the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(2)Endocrinology Unit, Azienda USL Modena, Modena, Italy.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Modena and 
Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.

Goltz-Gorlin syndrome (GGS), also known as focal dermal hypoplasia, is a rare 
X-linked disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the PORCN gene and 
characterized by several abnormalities, including skin and limb defects, 
papillomas in multiple organs, ocular malformations, and mild facial 
dysmorphism. To date, only approximately 300 cases have been described in the 
literature. A 16-year-old female patient, born with multiple congenital 
dysmorphisms consistent with GGS and confirmed by genetic exam, was referred to 
our outpatient clinic for the workup of a thyroid nodule. A thyroid ultrasound 
showed a bilateral nodular disease with a 17-mm large hypoechoic nodule in the 
right lobe. Cytological exam of fine needle aspiration biopsy was suspicious for 
malignancy. Thus, she underwent total thyroidectomy plus lymphadenectomy of the 
right central compartment. A histological exam disclosed a papillary thyroid 
carcinoma (PTC) with lymph node micrometastases. Radioiodine (131-Iodine) 
therapy was performed. At 3- and 6-month follow-up, the patient did not present 
either ultrasound or laboratory PTC recurrence. To our knowledge, we report the 
first case of PTC in a patient with GGS. Since thyroid cancer is rare among 
children and adolescents, we hypothesize that the PORCN pathogenic variant could 
be responsible for tumor susceptibility. We also provide an overview of the 
clinical findings on GGS patients already reported and discuss the possible 
pathogenetic mechanism that may underlie this rare condition, including the role 
of PORCN in tumor susceptibility.

Copyright © 2023 Costanza, Papi, Corrado and Pontecorvi.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1243540
PMCID: PMC10582693
PMID: 37859990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.