---
reference_id: "PMID:9811312"
title: Oral cancer risk in relation to sexual history and evidence of human papillomavirus infection.
authors:
- Schwartz SM
- Daling JR
- Doody DR
- Wipf GC
- Carter JJ
- Madeleine MM
- Mao EJ
- Fitzgibbons ED
- Huang S
- Beckmann AM
- McDougall JK
- Galloway DA
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/90.21.1626
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral cancer risk in relation to sexual history and evidence of human papillomavirus infection.
**Authors:** Schwartz SM, Daling JR, Doody DR, Wipf GC, Carter JJ, Madeleine MM, Mao EJ, Fitzgibbons ED, Huang S, Beckmann AM, McDougall JK, Galloway DA
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/90.21.1626](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/90.21.1626)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998 Nov 4;90(21):1626-36. doi: 10.1093/jnci/90.21.1626.

Oral cancer risk in relation to sexual history and evidence of human 
papillomavirus infection.

Schwartz SM(1), Daling JR, Doody DR, Wipf GC, Carter JJ, Madeleine MM, Mao EJ, 
Fitzgibbons ED, Huang S, Beckmann AM, McDougall JK, Galloway DA.

Author information:
(1)Program in Epidemiology, Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998 Nov 4;90(21):1585-6. doi: 10.1093/jnci/90.21.1585.

BACKGROUND: Experimental models and analyses of human tumors suggest that 
oncogenic, sexually transmittable human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are etiologic 
factors in the development of oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). We conducted a 
population-based, case-control study to determine whether the risk of this 
cancer is related to HPV infection and sexual history factors.
METHODS: Case subjects (n = 284) were 18-65-year-old residents of three counties 
in western Washington State who were newly diagnosed with oral SCC from 1990 
through 1995. Control subjects (n = 477) similar in age and sex were selected 
from the general population. Serum samples were tested for HPV type 16 capsid 
antibodies. Exfoliated oral tissue collected from case and control subjects and 
tumor tissue from case subjects were tested for HPV DNA. Odds ratios (ORs) were 
calculated after adjusting for age, sex, cigarette smoking, and alcohol 
consumption.
RESULTS: Among males only, oral SCC risk increased with self-reported decreasing 
age at first intercourse, increasing number of sex partners, and a history of 
genital warts. Approximately 26% of the tumors in case subjects contained HPV 
DNA; 16.5% of the tumors contained HPV type 16 DNA. The prevalence of oncogenic 
HPV types in exfoliated oral tissue was similar in case and control subjects. 
The ORs for HPV type 16 capsid seropositivity were 2.3 (95% confidence interval 
[CI] = 1.6-3.3) for all oral SCCs and 6.8 (95% CI = 3.0-15.2) for oral SCCs 
containing HPV type 16 DNA. The joint association of cigarette smoking and HPV 
type 16 capsid seropositivity with oral SCC (OR = 8.5; 95% CI = 5.1-14.4) was 
stronger than predicted from the sum of individual associations with current 
smoking (OR = 3.2; 95% CI = 2.0-5.2) and seropositivity (OR = 1.7; 95% CI = 
1.1-2.6).
CONCLUSIONS: HPV type 16 infection may contribute to the development of a small 
proportion of oral SCCs in this population, most likely in combination with 
cigarette smoking.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/90.21.1626
PMID: 9811312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]