---
reference_id: "PMID:31101981"
title: "Sarcoidosis and Work Participation: The Need to Develop a Disease-Specific Core Set for Assessment of Work Ability."
authors:
- Hendriks CMR
- Saketkoo LA
- Elfferich MDP
- De Vries J
- Wijnen PAHM
- Drent M
journal: Lung
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00408-019-00234-3
keywords:
- Absenteeism
- Adult
- Cost of Illness
- Female
- Health Status
- Health Surveys
- Humans
- Job Description
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Netherlands
- Predictive Value of Tests
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/complications, diagnosis, physiopathology, psychology"
- Sick Leave
- Work Capacity Evaluation
- Workload
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcoidosis and Work Participation: The Need to Develop a Disease-Specific Core Set for Assessment of Work Ability.
**Authors:** Hendriks CMR, Saketkoo LA, Elfferich MDP, De Vries J, Wijnen PAHM, Drent M
**Journal:** Lung (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00408-019-00234-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00408-019-00234-3)

## Content

1. Lung. 2019 Aug;197(4):407-413. doi: 10.1007/s00408-019-00234-3. Epub 2019 May
17.

Sarcoidosis and Work Participation: The Need to Develop a Disease-Specific Core
Set for Assessment of Work Ability.

Hendriks CMR(1)(2)(3), Saketkoo LA(4)(5)(6), Elfferich MDP(1), De Vries
J(1)(7)(8), Wijnen PAHM(1)(9), Drent M(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)ILD Care Foundation Research Team, Ede, The Netherlands.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)ILD Center of Excellence, Department of Pulmonology, St. Antonius Hospital,
Koekoekslaan 1, 3435 CM, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(4)Divisions of Pulmonary Medicine and Rheumatology, Tulane University School of
Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(5)New Orleans Scleroderma & Sarcoidosis Patient Care & Research Center, New
Orleans, LA, USA.
(6)UMC Comprehensive Pulmonary Hypertension Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(7)Department of Medical Psychology, ETZ (Elisabeth-TweeSteden Hospital)
Tilburg, Tilburg, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Medical and Clinical Psychology, Tilburg University, Tilburg,
The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Central Diagnostic Laboratory, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(10)ILD Care Foundation Research Team, Ede, The Netherlands.
m.drent@antoniusziekenhuis.nl.
(11)ILD Center of Excellence, Department of Pulmonology, St. Antonius Hospital,
Koekoekslaan 1, 3435 CM, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
m.drent@antoniusziekenhuis.nl.
(12)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Health, Medicine and
Life Science, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
m.drent@antoniusziekenhuis.nl.

OBJECTIVE: Sarcoidosis, an inflammatory multi-organ disease with a wide variety
of clinical manifestations, affecting people of working age. Patients suffer
from a broad spectrum of physical symptoms of varying severity that impact
function including cognitive impairment and disabling fatigue. The Dutch
Sarcoidosis Society identified a knowledge gap in various facets related to work
ability. The aim of this study was to assess sarcoidosis patients' perceived
problems related to work performance, employer, and disability evaluations.
METHODS: A cross-sectional web-based anonymous survey was conducted among Dutch
sarcoidosis patients recruited through sarcoidosis patient societies and
outpatient sarcoidosis clinics. This investigation queried work performance,
employer support, and disability evaluations.
RESULTS: The study sample included 755 patients of whom 43% (n = 328) had
undergone disability evaluation and were significantly more likely to experience
extrapulmonary symptoms, severe fatigue, reduced exercise capacity along with
memory problems and concentration problems with higher mean FAS and
SFNSL-scores. Of these 328, 37% (n = 121) perceived they had not been listened
to or taken seriously at assessments, and 38% (n = 124) disagreed with the
outcome of disability assessments by benefits authorities; 75% (n = 93) appealed
or requested re-assessment.
DISCUSSION: A better understanding of sarcoidosis-related impact on work ability
and quantification of disease burden is needed. Education for medical examiners
and employers on sarcoidosis may improve quality of assessments and work
accommodations. Development of guidelines for benefit authorities, which
consider the broad impact of sarcoidosis beyond that of reduced pulmonary
function, including extra-pulmonary assessment like fatigue, cognitive
difficulties, as well as other organ involvement are needed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-019-00234-3
PMCID: PMC6647075
PMID: 31101981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
