---
reference_id: "PMID:33044188"
title: "The Neuropsychiatry of Huntington Disease-Like 2: A Comparison with Huntington's Disease."
authors:
- Ferreira-Correia A
- Krause A
- Anderson DG
journal: J Huntingtons Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3233/JHD-200422
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Aggression/psychology
- Apathy
- Black People
- "Chorea/physiopathology, psychology"
- "Cognition Disorders/physiopathology, psychology"
- "Dementia/physiopathology, psychology"
- Depression/psychology
- Female
- Functional Status
- "Heredodegenerative Disorders, Nervous System/physiopathology, psychology"
- Humans
- "Huntington Disease/physiopathology, psychology"
- Irritable Mood
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Sleep Wake Disorders/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Neuropsychiatry of Huntington Disease-Like 2: A Comparison with Huntington's Disease.
**Authors:** Ferreira-Correia A, Krause A, Anderson DG
**Journal:** J Huntingtons Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JHD-200422](https://doi.org/10.3233/JHD-200422)

## Content

1. J Huntingtons Dis. 2020;9(4):325-334. doi: 10.3233/JHD-200422.

The Neuropsychiatry of Huntington Disease-Like 2: A Comparison with Huntington's
Disease.

Ferreira-Correia A(1), Krause A(2), Anderson DG(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, School of Human and Community Development,
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Service and School of
Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa.
(3)University of the Witwatersrand Donald Gordon Medical Centre, Neurology,
Johannesburg, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Huntington Disease-Like 2 (HDL2) is a rare autosomal dominant
disorder caused by an abnormal CAG/CTG triplet repeat expansion on chromosome
16q24. The symptoms of progressive decline in motor, cognitive and psychiatric
functioning are similar to those of Huntington's disease (HD). The psychiatric
features of the HDL2 have been poorly characterized.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the neuropsychiatric features of HDL2 and compare them
with those of HD.
METHODS: A blinded cross-sectional design was used to compare the behavioural
component of the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale (UHDRS) in
participants with HDL2 (n = 15) and HD (n = 13) with African ancestry.
RESULTS: HDL2 patients presented with psychiatric symptoms involving mood
disturbances and behavioural changes that were not significantly different from
those in the HD group. Duration of disease and motor performance correlated
(p < 0.001) with the Functional Capacity score and the Independence score of the
UHDRS. HD patients reported movement dysfunction as the first symptom more
frequently than HDL2 Patients (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The psychiatric phenotype of HDL2 is similar to that of HD and
linked to motor decline and disease duration. Psychiatric symptoms seem more
severe for HDL2 patients in the early stages of the disease.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-200422
PMID: 33044188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
