---
reference_id: "PMID:36645654"
title: "Intravenous immunoglobulin in chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP): mechanisms of action and clinical and genetic considerations."
authors:
- Dalakas MC
- Latov N
- Kuitwaard K
journal: Expert Rev Neurother
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/14737175.2022.2169134
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous immunoglobulin in chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP): mechanisms of action and clinical and genetic considerations.
**Authors:** Dalakas MC, Latov N, Kuitwaard K
**Journal:** Expert Rev Neurother (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737175.2022.2169134](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737175.2022.2169134)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Neurother. 2022 Nov-Dec;22(11-12):953-962. doi: 
10.1080/14737175.2022.2169134. Epub 2023 Jan 23.

Intravenous immunoglobulin in chronic inflammatory demyelinating 
polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP): mechanisms of action and clinical and genetic 
considerations.

Dalakas MC(1), Latov N(2), Kuitwaard K(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson Neuroimmunology Unit, Philadelphia, 
PA and National and Department of Pathophysiology, Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Greece.
(2)Neuroimmunology Unit, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology, Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP) 
is an autoimmune peripheral nerve disorder that is characterized by subacute 
onset, progressive or relapsing weakness, and sensory deficits. Proven 
treatments include intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), corticosteroids, and 
plasma exchange. This review focuses on the mechanisms of action, 
pharmacodynamics, genetic variations, and disease characteristics that can 
affect the efficacy of IVIg.
AREAS COVERED: The proposed mechanisms of action of IVIg that can mediate its 
therapeutic effects are reviewed. These include anti-idiotypic interactions, 
inhibition of neonatal Fc receptors (FcRn), anti-complement activity, 
upregulation of inhibitory FcγRIIB receptors, and downregulation of macrophage 
activation or co-stimulatory and adhesion molecules. Clinical and genetic 
factors that can affect the therapeutic response include misdiagnosis, degree of 
axonal damage, pharmacokinetic variability, and genetic variations.
EXPERT OPINION: The mechanisms of action of IVIg in CIDP and their relative 
contribution to its efficacy are subject of ongoing investigation. Studies in 
other autoimmune neurological conditions, in addition, highlight the role of key 
immunopathological pathways and factors that are likely to be affected. Further 
investigation into the pathogenesis of CIDP and the mechanisms of action of IVIg 
may lead to the development of improved diagnostics, better utilization of IVIg, 
and more targeted and effective therapies.

DOI: 10.1080/14737175.2022.2169134
PMID: 36645654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]