---
reference_id: "PMID:35436276"
title: Manifestations of renal involvement in sarcoidosis - case series.
authors:
- Kotwica-Strzałek E
- Janicki P
- Dociak I
- Niemczyk S
journal: Pol Merkur Lekarski
year: '2022'
keywords:
- Granuloma/diagnosis
- Humans
- Kidney/pathology
- "Nephritis, Interstitial/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Nephrolithiasis
- "Sarcoidosis/complications, diagnosis, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Manifestations of renal involvement in sarcoidosis - case series.
**Authors:** Kotwica-Strzałek E, Janicki P, Dociak I, Niemczyk S
**Journal:** Pol Merkur Lekarski (2022)

## Content

1. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2022 Apr 19;50(296):124-127.

Manifestations of renal involvement in sarcoidosis - case series.

Kotwica-Strzałek E(1), Janicki P(2), Dociak I(2), Niemczyk S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Diseases, Nephrology and Dialysotherapy, Military 
Institute of Medicine, Warsaw, Poland; Department of Descriptive and Clinical 
Anatomy, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Internal Diseases, Nephrology and Dialysotherapy, Military 
Institute of Medicine, Warsaw, Poland.

Renal involvement is observed in 30% of sarcoidosis cases, but the exact 
occurrence is unknown, and the current numbers are estimated to be 
underestimated. The most common manifestation of renal sarcoidosis is 
interstitial nephritis, but other presentations are also possible, with specific 
histopathological and laboratory findings. Glomerulopathies, nephrocalcinosis 
and nephrolithiasis are among the most commonly seen types of renal involvement.
CASE REPORTS: We would like to show a case series describing four patients with 
varying renal manifestations of sarcoidosis: membranous nephropathy, 
granulomatous interstitial nephritis, IgA nephropathy and chronic kidney 
disease. The diagnosis of sarcoidosis can precede, present simultaneously with 
or follow the onset of renal manifestations. Our patients also showcase varying 
clinical pictures of renal sarcoidosis with different changes in renal 
parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: The involvement of kidneys in sarcoidosis is multifaceted and may 
pose a diagnostic difficulty, and a diagnostic kidney biopsy is often needed. 
Chronic sarcoidosis patients should undergo regular screening for renal 
involvement to introduce proper management quickly and effectively.

© 2022 MEDPRESS.

PMID: 35436276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]