---
reference_id: "PMID:31266445"
title: Exploring the druggable space around the Fanconi anemia pathway using machine learning and mechanistic models.
authors:
- Esteban-Medina M
- Peña-Chilet M
- Loucera C
- Dopazo J
journal: BMC Bioinformatics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12859-019-2969-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring the druggable space around the Fanconi anemia pathway using machine learning and mechanistic models.
**Authors:** Esteban-Medina M, Peña-Chilet M, Loucera C, Dopazo J
**Journal:** BMC Bioinformatics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12859-019-2969-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-019-2969-0)

## Content

1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2019 Jul 2;20(1):370. doi: 10.1186/s12859-019-2969-0.

Exploring the druggable space around the Fanconi anemia pathway using machine 
learning and mechanistic models.

Esteban-Medina M(1), Peña-Chilet M(1)(2), Loucera C(1), Dopazo J(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Bioinformatics Area. Fundación Progreso y Salud (FPS). CDCA, 
Hospital Virgen del Rocio, 41013, Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Bioinformatics in Rare Diseases (BiER). Centro de Investigación Biomédica en 
Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), FPS, Hospital Virgen del Rocío, 41013, 
Sevilla, Spain.
(3)Clinical Bioinformatics Area. Fundación Progreso y Salud (FPS). CDCA, 
Hospital Virgen del Rocio, 41013, Sevilla, Spain. 
joaquin.dopazo@juntadeandalucia.es.
(4)Bioinformatics in Rare Diseases (BiER). Centro de Investigación Biomédica en 
Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), FPS, Hospital Virgen del Rocío, 41013, 
Sevilla, Spain. joaquin.dopazo@juntadeandalucia.es.
(5)INB-ELIXIR-es, FPS, Hospital Virgen del Rocío, 42013, Sevilla, Spain. 
joaquin.dopazo@juntadeandalucia.es.

BACKGROUND: In spite of the abundance of genomic data, predictive models that 
describe phenotypes as a function of gene expression or mutations are difficult 
to obtain because they are affected by the curse of dimensionality, given the 
disbalance between samples and candidate genes. And this is especially dramatic 
in scenarios in which the availability of samples is difficult, such as the case 
of rare diseases.
RESULTS: The application of multi-output regression machine learning 
methodologies to predict the potential effect of external proteins over the 
signaling circuits that trigger Fanconi anemia related cell functionalities, 
inferred with a mechanistic model, allowed us to detect over 20 potential 
therapeutic targets.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of artificial intelligence methods for the prediction of 
potentially causal relationships between proteins of interest and cell 
activities related with disease-related phenotypes opens promising avenues for 
the systematic search of new targets in rare diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-019-2969-0
PMCID: PMC6604281
PMID: 31266445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.