---
reference_id: "PMID:36694222"
title: "A model for predicting both breast cancer risk and non-breast cancer death among women > 55 years old."
authors:
- Schonberg MA
- Wolfson EA
- Eliassen AH
- Bertrand KA
- Shvetsov YB
- Rosner BA
- Palmer JR
- Ngo LH
journal: Breast Cancer Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13058-023-01605-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A model for predicting both breast cancer risk and non-breast cancer death among women > 55 years old.
**Authors:** Schonberg MA, Wolfson EA, Eliassen AH, Bertrand KA, Shvetsov YB, Rosner BA, Palmer JR, Ngo LH
**Journal:** Breast Cancer Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13058-023-01605-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13058-023-01605-8)

## Content

1. Breast Cancer Res. 2023 Jan 24;25(1):8. doi: 10.1186/s13058-023-01605-8.

A model for predicting both breast cancer risk and non-breast cancer death among 
women > 55 years old.

Schonberg MA(#)(1), Wolfson EA(#)(2), Eliassen AH(3)(4), Bertrand KA(5), 
Shvetsov YB(6), Rosner BA(3)(4), Palmer JR(#)(5), Ngo LH(#)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Medicine and Primary Care, Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. 
mschonbe@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(2)Division of General Medicine and Primary Care, Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Slone Epidemiology Center, Boston University, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)University of Hawaii Cancer Center, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Manoa, HI, 
USA.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Guidelines recommend shared decision making (SDM) for mammography 
screening for women ≥ 75 and not screening women with < 10-year life expectancy. 
High-quality SDM requires consideration of women's breast cancer (BC) risk, life 
expectancy, and values but is hard to implement because no models simultaneously 
estimate older women's individualized BC risk and life expectancy.
METHODS: Using competing risk regression and data from 83,330 women > 55 years 
who completed the 2004 Nurses' Health Study (NHS) questionnaire, we developed 
(in 2/3 of the cohort, n = 55,533) a model to predict 10-year non-breast cancer 
(BC) death. We considered 60 mortality risk factors and used best-subsets 
regression, the Akaike information criterion, and c-index, to identify the 
best-fitting model. We examined model performance in the remaining 1/3 of the 
NHS cohort (n = 27,777) and among 17,380 Black Women's Health Study (BWHS) 
participants, ≥ 55 years, who completed the 2009 questionnaire. We then included 
the identified mortality predictors in a previously developed competing risk BC 
prediction model and examined model performance for predicting BC risk.
RESULTS: Mean age of NHS development cohort participants was 70.1 years (± 7.0); 
over 10 years, 3.1% developed BC, 0.3% died of BC, and 20.1% died of other 
causes; NHS validation cohort participants were similar. BWHS participants were 
younger (mean age 63.7 years [± 6.7]); over 10-years 3.1% developed BC, 0.4% 
died of BC, and 11.1% died of other causes. The final non-BC death prediction 
model included 21 variables (age; body mass index [BMI]; physical function [3 
measures]; comorbidities [12]; alcohol; smoking; age at menopause; and 
mammography use). The final BC prediction model included age, BMI, alcohol and 
hormone use, family history, age at menopause, age at first birth/parity, and 
breast biopsy history. When risk factor regression coefficients were applied in 
the validation cohorts, the c-index for predicting 10-year non-BC death was 
0.790 (0.784-0.796) in NHS and 0.768 (0.757-0.780) in BWHS; for predicting 
5-year BC risk, the c-index was 0.612 (0.538-0.641) in NHS and 0.573 
(0.536-0.611) in BWHS.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed and validated a novel competing-risk model that 
predicts 10-year non-BC death and 5-year BC risk. Model risk estimates may help 
inform SDM around mammography screening.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-023-01605-8
PMCID: PMC9872276
PMID: 36694222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose.