---
reference_id: "PMID:31301034"
title: "Comparing the Effectiveness of Blood Flow Restriction and Traditional Heavy Load Resistance Training in the Post-Surgery Rehabilitation of Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction Patients: A UK National Health Service Randomised Controlled Trial."
authors:
- Hughes L
- Rosenblatt B
- Haddad F
- Gissane C
- McCarthy D
- Clarke T
- Ferris G
- Dawes J
- Paton B
- Patterson SD
journal: Sports Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s40279-019-01137-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparing the Effectiveness of Blood Flow Restriction and Traditional Heavy Load Resistance Training in the Post-Surgery Rehabilitation of Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction Patients: A UK National Health Service Randomised Controlled Trial.
**Authors:** Hughes L, Rosenblatt B, Haddad F, Gissane C, McCarthy D, Clarke T, Ferris G, Dawes J, Paton B, Patterson SD
**Journal:** Sports Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40279-019-01137-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-019-01137-2)

## Content

1. Sports Med. 2019 Nov;49(11):1787-1805. doi: 10.1007/s40279-019-01137-2.

Comparing the Effectiveness of Blood Flow Restriction and Traditional Heavy Load 
Resistance Training in the Post-Surgery Rehabilitation of Anterior Cruciate 
Ligament Reconstruction Patients: A UK National Health Service Randomised 
Controlled Trial.

Hughes L(1)(2), Rosenblatt B(3), Haddad F(2), Gissane C(1), McCarthy D(4), 
Clarke T(4), Ferris G(4), Dawes J(4), Paton B(5), Patterson SD(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Sport, Health and Applied Science, St Mary's University, London, 
TW1 4SX, UK.
(2)Institute of Sport, Exercise and Health, 170 Tottenham Court Road, London, 
UK.
(3)The Football Association, St. George's Park, Burton-Upon-Trent, UK.
(4)University College London, Bloomsbury, London, UK.
(5)Institute of Sport, Exercise and Health, 170 Tottenham Court Road, London, 
UK. bruce.paton@nhs.net.
(6)School of Sport, Health and Applied Science, St Mary's University, London, 
TW1 4SX, UK. stephen.patterson@stmarys.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: We implemented a blood flow restriction resistance training (BFR-RT) 
intervention during an 8-week rehabilitation programme in anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction (ACLR) patients within a National Health Service 
setting.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness of BFR-RT and standard-care traditional 
heavy-load resistance training (HL-RT) at improving skeletal muscle hypertrophy 
and strength, physical function, pain and effusion in ACLR patients following 
surgery.
METHODS: 28 patients scheduled for unilateral ACLR surgery with hamstring 
autograft were recruited for this parallel-group, two-arm, single-assessor 
blinded, randomised clinical trial following appropriate power analysis. 
Following surgery, a criteria-driven approach to rehabilitation was utilised and 
participants were block randomised to either HL-RT at 70% repetition maximum 
(1RM) (n = 14) or BFR-RT (n = 14) at 30% 1RM. Participants completed 8 weeks of 
biweekly unilateral leg press training on both limbs, totalling 16 sessions, 
alongside standard hospital rehabilitation. Resistance exercise protocols were 
designed consistent with standard recommended protocols for each type of 
exercise. Scaled maximal isotonic strength (10RM), muscle morphology of the 
vastus lateralis of the injured limb, self-reported function, Y-balance test 
performance and knee joint pain, effusion and range of motion (ROM) were 
assessed at pre-surgery, post-surgery, mid-training and post-training. Knee 
joint laxity and scaled maximal isokinetic knee extension and flexion strength 
at 60°/s, 150°/s and 300°/s were measured at pre-surgery and post-training.
RESULTS: Four participants were lost, with 24 participants completing the study 
(12 per group). There were no adverse events or differences between groups for 
any baseline anthropometric variable or pre- to post-surgery change in any 
outcome measure. Scaled 10RM strength significantly increased in the injured 
limb (104 ± 30% and 106 ± 43%) and non-injured limb (33 ± 13% and 39 ± 17%) with 
BFR-RT and HL-RT, respectively, with no group differences. Significant increases 
in knee extension and flexion peak torque were observed at all speeds in the 
non-injured limb with no group differences. Significantly greater attenuation of 
knee extensor peak torque loss at 150°/s and 300°/s and knee flexor torque loss 
at all speeds was observed with BFR-RT. No group differences in knee extensor 
peak torque loss were found at 60°/s. Significant and comparable increases in 
muscle thickness (5.8 ± 0.2% and 6.7 ± 0.3%) and pennation angle (4.1 ± 0.3% and 
3.4 ± 0.1%) were observed with BFR-RT and HL-RT, respectively, with no group 
differences. No significant changes in fascicle length were observed. 
Significantly greater and clinically important increases in several measures of 
self-reported function (50-218 ± 48% vs. 35-152 ± 56%), Y-balance performance 
(18-59 ± 22% vs. 18-33 ± 19%), ROM (78 ± 22% vs. 48 ± 13%) and reductions in 
knee joint pain (67 ± 15% vs. 39 ± 12%) and effusion (6 ± 2% vs. 2 ± 2%) were 
observed with BFR-RT compared to HL-RT, respectively.
CONCLUSION: BFR-RT can improve skeletal muscle hypertrophy and strength to a 
similar extent to HL-RT with a greater reduction in knee joint pain and 
effusion, leading to greater overall improvements in physical function. 
Therefore, BFR-RT may be more appropriate for early rehabilitation in ACLR 
patient populations within the National Health Service.

DOI: 10.1007/s40279-019-01137-2
PMID: 31301034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]