---
reference_id: "PMID:31587766"
title: Management of Postsurgical Empty Nose Syndrome.
authors:
- Talmadge J
- Nayak JV
- Yao W
- Citardi MJ
journal: Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.fsc.2019.07.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Postsurgical Empty Nose Syndrome.
**Authors:** Talmadge J, Nayak JV, Yao W, Citardi MJ
**Journal:** Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fsc.2019.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fsc.2019.07.005)

## Content

1. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am. 2019 Nov;27(4):465-475. doi: 
10.1016/j.fsc.2019.07.005.

Management of Postsurgical Empty Nose Syndrome.

Talmadge J(1), Nayak JV(2), Yao W(1), Citardi MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 3400 Market Lane, 
Kenosha, WI 53144, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 801 
Welch Road, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Otorrhinolaryngology, The University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, McGovern Medical School, 6431 Fannin Street, MSB 5.036, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: martin.j.citardi@uth.tmc.edu.

Empty nose syndrome (ENS) is a controversial condition associated with 
disruption of nasal airflow caused by excessive loss of turbinate tissue. ENS 
arises after total or near-total inferior turbinate resection. Patients present 
with intense fixation on the perception of nasal obstruction. Diagnostic tools 
to assess for empty nose syndrome include a validated patient questionnaire and 
the office cotton test. Treatment involves topical moisturization, 
behavioral/psychiatric assessment/treatment, and surgical reconstruction. 
Current data show promising long-term efficacy after surgical intervention. 
Postprocedural ENS is best prevented by minimizing inferior and middle turbinate 
tissue loss.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsc.2019.07.005
PMID: 31587766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]