---
reference_id: "PMID:22708041"
title: Clinical aspects of uncomplicated and severe malaria.
authors:
- Bartoloni A
- Zammarchi L
journal: Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2012.026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical aspects of uncomplicated and severe malaria.
**Authors:** Bartoloni A, Zammarchi L
**Journal:** Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.4084/MJHID.2012.026](https://doi.org/10.4084/MJHID.2012.026)

## Content

1. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2012;4(1):e2012026. doi:
10.4084/MJHID.2012.026.  Epub 2012 May 4.

Clinical aspects of uncomplicated and severe malaria.

Bartoloni A(1), Zammarchi L.

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Unit. Department of Critical Care Medicine and Surgery, 
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

The first symptoms of malaria, common to all the different malaria species, are 
nonspecific and mimic a flu-like syndrome. Although fever represents the 
cardinal feature, clinical findings in malaria are extremely diverse and may 
range in severity from mild headache to serious complications leading to death, 
particularly in falciparum malaria. As the progression to these complications 
can be rapid, any malaria patient must be assessed and treated rapidly, and 
frequent observations are needed to look for early signs of systemic 
complications.In fact, severe malaria is a life threatening but treatable 
disease. The protean and nonspecific clinical findings occurring in malaria 
(fever, malaise, headache, myalgias, jaundice and sometimes gastrointestinal 
symptoms of nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea) may lead physicians who see malaria 
infrequently to a wrong diagnosis, such as influenza (particularly during the 
seasonal epidemic flu), dengue, gastroenteritis, typhoid fever, viral hepatitis, 
encephalitis. Physicians should be aware that malaria is not a clinical 
diagnosis but must be diagnosed, or excluded, by performing microscopic 
examination of blood films. Prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment are then 
crucial to prevent morbidity and fatal outcomes. Although Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria is the major cause of severe malaria and death, increasing evidence has 
recently emerged that Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium knowlesi can also be 
severe and even fatal.

DOI: 10.4084/MJHID.2012.026
PMCID: PMC3375727
PMID: 22708041