---
reference_id: "PMID:40064807"
title: A novel homozygous frameshift mutation in MCM8 causes primary gonadal dysgenesis in both genders.
authors:
- Dong J
- Zou Z
- Wang W
- Chen L
- Ma R
- Ge X
- Jing J
- Ma J
- Yao B
journal: J Assist Reprod Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s10815-025-03443-3
keywords:
- Humans
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- Female
- Male
- Homozygote
- Pedigree
- HEK293 Cells
- Minichromosome Maintenance Proteins/genetics
- "Azoospermia/genetics, pathology"
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis/genetics, pathology"
- Adult
- Testis/pathology
- Consanguinity
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics, pathology"
- "Sertoli Cell-Only Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel homozygous frameshift mutation in MCM8 causes primary gonadal dysgenesis in both genders.
**Authors:** Dong J, Zou Z, Wang W, Chen L, Ma R, Ge X, Jing J, Ma J, Yao B
**Journal:** J Assist Reprod Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10815-025-03443-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-025-03443-3)

## Content

1. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2025 Apr;42(4):1197-1204. doi: 
10.1007/s10815-025-03443-3. Epub 2025 Mar 10.

A novel homozygous frameshift mutation in MCM8 causes primary gonadal dysgenesis 
in both genders.

Dong J(#)(1), Zou Z(#)(1)(2), Wang W(#)(3), Chen L(1)(4), Ma R(1)(4), Ge 
X(1)(4), Jing J(1)(4), Ma J(5)(6), Yao B(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of 
Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210002, Jiangsu, China.
(2)The First School of Clinical Medicine, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, 510515, Guangdong, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health, Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, 211166, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Jinling Clinical Medical College, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210002, Jiangsu, China.
(5)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of 
Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210002, Jiangsu, China. 
majinzhao07@163.com.
(6)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Jinling Clinical Medical College, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210002, Jiangsu, China. 
majinzhao07@163.com.
(7)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of 
Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210002, Jiangsu, China. 
yaobing@nju.edu.cn.
(8)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Jinling Clinical Medical College, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210002, Jiangsu, China. yaobing@nju.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: We aimed to demonstrate the genetic factors of primary gonadal 
dysgenesis in a consanguineous family characterized by underdeveloped testes and 
non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) in a male and primary amenorrhoea and primary 
ovarian insufficiency (POI) in a female.
METHODS: DNA was extracted from the male proband with infertility from the 
consanguineous family for whole-exome sequencing and bioinformatics analysis to 
screen for potential pathogenic genes and mutations. Sanger sequencing was used 
for further validation of his family pedigree. The effects of the identified 
novel mutation were evaluated in the male testes tissue by immunohistochemistry 
and in HEK293T cells by Western blot.
RESULTS: A homozygous frameshift mutation c.998delG (p. Gly333Glufs*50) in MCM8 
was identified in the two siblings. The testes tissue sections in the male 
showed a Sertoli cell-only syndrome (SCOS). Functional analysis in vitro 
suggested that the mutation results in a truncated protein of MCM8 in HEK293T 
cells, and immunohistochemistry in vivo showed decreased expression of MCM8 
protein.
CONCLUSION: We identified a novel homozygous frameshift mutation of MCM8 in two 
siblings diagnosed with primary gonadal dysgenesis from a consanguineous family. 
Functional analysis confirmed the pathogenicity of this mutation. Our study not 
only further reveals the essential role of MCM8 in human gonadal development, 
but also expands the mutational spectrum of MCM8 involved in male NOA and female 
POI and provides a new molecular marker for genetic counseling of infertility.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10815-025-03443-3
PMCID: PMC12055739
PMID: 40064807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval and consent to 
participate: Our study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical 
College of Ethics Committees of the hospital (2018NZK-005–02). All blood samples 
were donated for the investigation after informed consent. Conflict of interest: 
The authors declare no competing interests.