---
reference_id: "PMID:38105122"
title: "Whipple's disease: A rare disease that can be spotted by many doctors."
authors:
- Cappellini A
- Minerba P
- Maimaris S
- Biagi F
journal: Eur J Intern Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2023.12.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple's disease: A rare disease that can be spotted by many doctors.
**Authors:** Cappellini A, Minerba P, Maimaris S, Biagi F
**Journal:** Eur J Intern Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejim.2023.12.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2023.12.009)

## Content

1. Eur J Intern Med. 2024 Mar;121:25-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2023.12.009. Epub
2023  Dec 16.

Whipple's disease: A rare disease that can be spotted by many doctors.

Cappellini A(1), Minerba P(1), Maimaris S(1), Biagi F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Pavia, Italy; 
Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri IRCCS, Gastroenterology Unit of Pavia 
Institute, Italy. Electronic address: federico.biagi@unipv.it.

Whipple's disease, an extremely rare, chronic infection caused by Tropheryma 
whipplei, an actinobacterium ubiquitously present in the environment, is a 
multisystemic condition that can affect several organs. Therefore, Whipple's 
disease should always be considered by physicians working across various 
branches of medicine, including internal medicine, rheumatology, infectious 
diseases, gastroenterology, haematology, and neurology. Initially, Whipple's 
disease is challenging to diagnose due to both its rarity and non-specific 
clinical features, almost indistinguishable from rheumatological conditions. A 
few years later, the onset of gastrointestinal symptoms increases the 
specificity of its clinical picture and helps in reaching the correct diagnosis. 
Diagnosis is typically made by finding PAS-positive macrophages in the lamina 
propria at duodenal biopsy. PCR for Tropheryma whipplei is nowadays also 
increasingly available, and represents an undeniable help in diagnosing this 
condition. However, it may also be misleading as false positives can occur. If 
not promptly recognized and treated, central nervous system involvement may 
develop, which can be fatal. The therapeutic gold standard has not yet been 
fully established, particularly in cases of recurrent disease, neurological 
involvement, and an immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome that may arise 
following the initiation of antibiotic therapy.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2023.12.009
PMID: 38105122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.