---
reference_id: "PMID:27511498"
title: Serological prevalence of human parvovirus B19 in diseases or disordersrelated to different human body systems.
authors:
- Aktaş O
- Aydin H
- Uslu H
journal: Turk J Med Sci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3906/sag-1409-79
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serological prevalence of human parvovirus B19 in diseases or disordersrelated to different human body systems.
**Authors:** Aktaş O, Aydin H, Uslu H
**Journal:** Turk J Med Sci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3906/sag-1409-79](https://doi.org/10.3906/sag-1409-79)

## Content

1. Turk J Med Sci. 2016 Feb 17;46(2):368-73. doi: 10.3906/sag-1409-79.

Serological prevalence of human parvovirus B19 in diseases or disordersrelated 
to different human body systems.

Aktaş O(1), Aydin H(2), Uslu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Atatürk University, 
Erzurum, Turkey.
(2)Department of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Atatürk University, 
Erzurum, Turkey.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Human parvovirus B19 is a pathogen that affects different parts 
of the body. We planned this study because of the lack of data on B19 
seroprevalence based on different body-system diseases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The prevalence of parvovirus B19 antibodies was 
investigated retrospectively in 1239 patients by review of medical records from 
2009-2012, according to their diseases classified under general titles in 
compliance with the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10). 
Parvovirus B19-specific antibodies were detected by quantitative enzyme 
immunoassays.
RESULTS: The positivity rate was 27.8% for only IgG, 8.5% for only IgM, and 2.6% 
for both IgG and IgM. The highest positivity for IgG alone was found in 
musculoskeletal system and connective tissue diseases (55.9%), while the highest 
positivity for IgM was found in neoplasms (16.4%). The highest positivity for 
IgG was seen in rheumatoid arthritis (72.2%) and pregnancy (52.6%), and the 
highest positivity for total IgM was found in upper respiratory tract disease 
(21.0%) and hepatic failure (17.1%).
CONCLUSION: Parvovirus B19 seroprevalence was relatively low in northeastern 
Anatolia compared to most serological studies conducted in other regions. We 
think that this study has provided the first wide-ranging information on the 
seroprevalence of B19 in diseases and disorders of the major human body systems.

DOI: 10.3906/sag-1409-79
PMID: 27511498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]