---
reference_id: "PMID:21396554"
title: Periorbital lesions.
authors:
- Rebora A
journal: Clin Dermatol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2010.09.006
keywords:
- Eye/pathology
- Face/pathology
- Humans
- Metabolic Diseases/complications
- Skin Aging/pathology
- "Skin Diseases/complications, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Periorbital lesions.
**Authors:** Rebora A
**Journal:** Clin Dermatol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clindermatol.2010.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2010.09.006)

## Content

1. Clin Dermatol. 2011 Mar-Apr;29(2):151-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2010.09.006.

Periorbital lesions.

Rebora A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic and Medical Sciences, Section of Dermatology, 
University of Genoa, Viale Benedetto XV, 7, 16122 Genova, Italy. 
rebdermo@unige.it

Periorbital lesions are dermatologic manifestations affecting the area around 
the eyes, excluding the eyelids. They can be classified according to their 
nature and morphology. Although types of skin disorders affect the periorbital 
area, only those with a prevalent or prominent location will be mentioned, and 
clinical descriptions will be confined to the rarer entities. Inflammatory 
lesions include erythematous and erythematous scaling, eczematous and urticarial 
lesions, vesicular and bullous lesions, and granulomatous lesions. Purpuras, 
infections, and infestations may be present as well. Benign and malignant tumors 
are common. Metabolic disorders include some rare entities, such as mucinosis 
and amyloidosis, but also commoner manifestations such as xanthelasma. 
Histiocytosis is rare but does occur in prevalent locations. Hair and pigmentary 
disorders are common, and aging-related damage is most visible in the 
periorbital area.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2010.09.006
PMID: 21396554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]