---
reference_id: "PMID:12915475"
title: CRB1 is essential for external limiting membrane integrity and photoreceptor morphogenesis in the mammalian retina.
authors:
- Mehalow AK
- Kameya S
- Smith RS
- Hawes NL
- Denegre JM
- Young JA
- Bechtold L
- Haider NB
- Tepass U
- Heckenlively JR
- Chang B
- Naggert JK
- Nishina PM
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg232
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing
- Animals
- Basement Membrane/metabolism
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/immunology, metabolism"
- Chromosome Mapping
- Frameshift Mutation
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Morphogenesis
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, immunology, physiology"
- "Nuclear Proteins/immunology, metabolism"
- Peptide Fragments/immunology
- "Photoreceptor Cells, Vertebrate/cytology, metabolism"
- Protein Isoforms
- "Retina/embryology, growth & development"
- "Retinal Degeneration/metabolism, pathology"
- "Schizosaccharomyces pombe Proteins/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CRB1 is essential for external limiting membrane integrity and photoreceptor morphogenesis in the mammalian retina.
**Authors:** Mehalow AK, Kameya S, Smith RS, Hawes NL, Denegre JM, Young JA, Bechtold L, Haider NB, Tepass U, Heckenlively JR, Chang B, Naggert JK, Nishina PM
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddg232](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddg232)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Sep 1;12(17):2179-89. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg232. Epub 2003
Jul  15.

CRB1 is essential for external limiting membrane integrity and photoreceptor
morphogenesis in the mammalian retina.

Mehalow AK(1), Kameya S, Smith RS, Hawes NL, Denegre JM, Young JA, Bechtold L,
Haider NB, Tepass U, Heckenlively JR, Chang B, Naggert JK, Nishina PM.

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

Mutations within the CRB1 gene have been shown to cause human retinal diseases
including retinitis pigmentosa and Leber congenital amaurosis. We have recently
identified a mouse model, retinal degeneration 8 (rd8) with a single base
deletion in the Crb1 gene. This mutation is predicted to cause a frame shift and
premature stop codon which truncates the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domain of
CRB1. Like in Drosophila crumbs (crb) mutants, staining for adherens junction
proteins known to localize to the external limiting membrane, the equivalent of
the zonula adherens in the mammalian retina, is discontinuous and fragmented.
Shortened photoreceptor inner and outer segments are observed as early as 2
weeks after birth, suggesting a developmental defect in these structures rather
than a degenerative process. Photoreceptor degeneration is observed only within
regions of retinal spotting, which is seen predominantly in the inferior nasal
quadrant of the eye, and is caused by retinal folds and pseudorosettes.
Photoreceptor dysplasia and degeneration in Crb1 mutants strongly vary with
genetic background, suggesting that the variability in phenotypes of human
patients that carry mutations in CRB1 may be due to interactions with background
modifiers in addition to allelic variations. The Crb1rd8 mouse model will
facilitate the analysis of Crb1 function in the neural retina and the
identification of interacting factors as candidate retinal disease genes.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg232
PMID: 12915475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
