---
reference_id: "PMID:29794500"
title: Predictors of Locally Advanced Disease at Presentation and Clinical Outcomes Among Cervical Cancer Patients Admitted at a Tertiary Hospital in Botswana.
authors:
- Nassali MN
- Tadele M
- Nkuba RM
- Modimowame J
- Enyeribe I
- Katse E
journal: Int J Gynecol Cancer
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/IGC.0000000000001284
keywords:
- Botswana/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Socioeconomic Factors
- Tertiary Care Centers
- "Uterine Cervical Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of Locally Advanced Disease at Presentation and Clinical Outcomes Among Cervical Cancer Patients Admitted at a Tertiary Hospital in Botswana.
**Authors:** Nassali MN, Tadele M, Nkuba RM, Modimowame J, Enyeribe I, Katse E
**Journal:** Int J Gynecol Cancer (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IGC.0000000000001284](https://doi.org/10.1097/IGC.0000000000001284)

## Content

1. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2018 Jul;28(6):1218-1225. doi: 
10.1097/IGC.0000000000001284.

Predictors of Locally Advanced Disease at Presentation and Clinical Outcomes 
Among Cervical Cancer Patients Admitted at a Tertiary Hospital in Botswana.

Nassali MN(1), Tadele M(1), Nkuba RM(2), Modimowame J(3), Enyeribe I(1), Katse 
E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine.
(2)Department of Environmental Science, Faculty of Science, University of 
Botswana.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Princess Marina Hospital, Gaborone, 
Botswana.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine predictors of locally 
advanced disease at presentation and clinical outcomes among cervical cancer 
patients in Botswana to inform interventional strategies.
METHODS: Retrospective review of 149 medical records of new cervical cancer 
patients was conducted between August 2016 and February 2017 at the Princess 
Marina Hospital. Data collected included sociodemographics, presenting symptoms, 
stage of disease, comorbidities, interventions, and clinical outcomes. STATA 12 
was used for data analysis. Frequencies were used to describe patient 
demographics and clinical variables. Bivariate and multivariate binary logistic 
regression analyses were used to determine association between stage of disease 
at presentation and patient characteristics. P ≤ 0.05 was considered 
significant.
RESULTS: Mean age was 49.5 years. Nine (89.2%) in 10 patients had locally 
advanced cervical cancer (stage IB1-IVB). Two thirds (65.1%) were human 
immunodeficiency virus positive. Previous cervical cancer screening was low at 
38.3%. Common symptoms were abnormal vaginal bleeding, low abdominal pain, and 
malodorous vaginal discharge reported among 75.8%, 66.4%, and 39.6% of cases, 
respectively. Overall, 32 (21.5%) were declared cured, 52 (34.9%) improved, and 
11 (7.4%) opted for home-based care. Hospital deaths were 41 (27.5%). Major 
causes of death were renal failure (48.7%) and severe anemia (39%). Thirteen 
(8.7%) were lost to follow-up. Being unmarried (odds ratio [OR], 3.9), lack of 
cervical cancer screening (OR, 6.68), presentation with vaginal bleeding (OR, 
7.69), and low abdominal pain (OR, 4.69) were associated with advanced disease 
at presentation.
CONCLUSIONS: Lack of cervical cancer screening, vaginal bleeding, low abdominal 
pain, and unmarried status were associated with advanced disease at 
presentation. We recommend scale-up of cervical cancer screening and its 
integration into routine human immunodeficiency virus care. Capacity building in 
gynecologic oncology and palliative care services is currently critical.

DOI: 10.1097/IGC.0000000000001284
PMID: 29794500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]