---
reference_id: "PMID:25029422"
title: Novel genome-wide association study-based candidate loci for differentiated thyroid cancer risk.
authors:
- Figlioli G
- Köhler A
- Chen B
- Elisei R
- Romei C
- Cipollini M
- Cristaudo A
- Bambi F
- Paolicchi E
- Hoffmann P
- Herms S
- Kalemba M
- Kula D
- Pastor S
- Marcos R
- Velázquez A
- Jarząb B
- Landi S
- Hemminki K
- Försti A
- Gemignani F
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1734
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Follicular/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Adenoma, Oxyphilic"
- Adult
- "Carcinoma, Papillary/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Cell Differentiation
- Female
- Genetic Loci/genetics
- "Genetic Predisposition to Disease/epidemiology, genetics"
- Genome-Wide Association Study/methods
- Humans
- Incidence
- Italy/epidemiology
- Male
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel genome-wide association study-based candidate loci for differentiated thyroid cancer risk.
**Authors:** Figlioli G, Köhler A, Chen B, Elisei R, Romei C, Cipollini M, Cristaudo A, Bambi F, Paolicchi E, Hoffmann P, Herms S, Kalemba M, Kula D, Pastor S, Marcos R, Velázquez A, Jarząb B, Landi S, Hemminki K, Försti A, Gemignani F
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2014-1734](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2014-1734)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Oct;99(10):E2084-92. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1734.
Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Novel genome-wide association study-based candidate loci for differentiated
thyroid cancer risk.

Figlioli G(1), Köhler A, Chen B, Elisei R, Romei C, Cipollini M, Cristaudo A,
Bambi F, Paolicchi E, Hoffmann P, Herms S, Kalemba M, Kula D, Pastor S, Marcos
R, Velázquez A, Jarząb B, Landi S, Hemminki K, Försti A, Gemignani F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology (G.F., M.C., E.P., S.L., F.G.), University of Pisa,
56123 Pisa, Italy; Molecular Genetic Epidemiology (A.K., B.C., K.H., A.F.),
German Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism (R.E., C.R., A.C.), University of Pisa, 56124 Pisa,
Italy; Blood Centre (F.B.), Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria A. Meyer, 50139
Firenze, Italy; Department of Genomics (P.H., S.H.), Life and Brain Center and
Institute of Human Genetics (P.H., S.H.), University of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn,
Germany; Division of Medical Genetics (P.H., S.H.), University Hospital Basel
and Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland;
Department of Nuclear Medicine and Endocrine Oncology (M.K., D.K., B.J.), Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice
Branch, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland; Grup de Mutagènesi (S.P., R.M., A.V.),
Departament de Genètica i de Microbiologia, Facultat de Biociències, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vallés, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red y Epidemiologia y Salud Pública (S.P., R.M.,
A.V.), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, Spain; and Center for
Primary Health Care Research (K.H., A.F.), Clinical Research Center, Lund
University, 205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

CONTEXT: Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) on differentiated thyroid
cancer (DTC) have identified robust associations with single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) at 9q22.33 (FOXE1), 14q13.3 (NKX2-1), and 2q35 (DIRC3). Our
recently published GWAS suggested additional susceptibility loci specific for
the high-incidence Italian population.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to identify novel Italian-specific DTC
risk variants based on our GWAS and to test them further in low-incidence
populations.
DESIGN: We investigated 45 SNPs selected from our GWAS first in an Italian
population. SNPs that showed suggestive evidence of association were
investigated in the Polish and Spanish cohorts.
RESULTS: The combined analysis of the GWAS and the Italian replication study
(2260 case patients and 2218 control subjects) provided strong evidence of
association with rs10136427 near BATF (odds ratio [OR] =1.40, P = 4.35 × 10(-7))
and rs7267944 near DHX35 (OR = 1.39, P = 2.13 × 10(-8)). A possible role in DTC
susceptibility in the Italian populations was also found for rs13184587 (ARSB)
(P = 8.54 × 10(-6)) and rs1220597 (SPATA13) (P = 3.25 × 10(-6)). Only the
associations between rs10136427 and rs7267944 and DTC risk were replicated in
the Polish and the Spanish populations with little evidence of population
heterogeneity (GWAS and all replications combined, OR = 1.30, P = 9.30 × 10(-7)
and OR = 1.32, P = 1.34 × 10(-8), respectively). In silico analyses provided new
insights into the possible functional consequences of the SNPs that showed the
strongest association with DTC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide evidence for novel DTC susceptibility
variants. Further studies are warranted to identify the specific genetic
variants responsible for the observed associations and to functionally validate
our in silico predictions.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2014-1734
PMID: 25029422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
