---
reference_id: "PMID:1347149"
title: "An exonic mutation in the HuP2 paired domain gene causes Waardenburg's syndrome."
authors:
- Baldwin CT
- Hoth CF
- Amos JA
- da-Silva EO
- Milunsky A
journal: Nature
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1038/355637a0
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Exons
- "Genes, Homeobox/genetics"
- Humans
- Molecular Conformation
- Molecular Sequence Data
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Restriction Mapping
- Transcription Factors
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An exonic mutation in the HuP2 paired domain gene causes Waardenburg's syndrome.
**Authors:** Baldwin CT, Hoth CF, Amos JA, da-Silva EO, Milunsky A
**Journal:** Nature (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1038/355637a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/355637a0)

## Content

1. Nature. 1992 Feb 13;355(6361):637-8. doi: 10.1038/355637a0.

An exonic mutation in the HuP2 paired domain gene causes Waardenburg's syndrome.

Baldwin CT(1), Hoth CF, Amos JA, da-Silva EO, Milunsky A.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Boston University School of Medicine,
Massachusetts 02118.

Comment in
    Nature. 1992 Feb 13;355(6361):590-1. doi: 10.1038/355590a0.

Here we report the identification and characterization of a gene defect causing
Waardenburg's syndrome with hearing loss in a large Brazilian family. This
demonstrates a mutation causing Waardenburg's syndrome as well as a mutation
causing a form of congenital deafness. The mutation was found in the HuP2 gene,
a member of the paired domain family of proteins that bind DNA and regulate gene
expression. The mutation occurred in 100% of the cases with the disease in this
family and was absent in a random sample of 50 unrelated control subjects.
Identification of the Waardenburg's syndrome gene and future characterization of
its gene product is likely to increase our understanding of the pathogenesis of
this disorder and may allow prevention of deafness of this type.

DOI: 10.1038/355637a0
PMID: 1347149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
