---
reference_id: "PMID:26131859"
title: "Nail involvement in adult patients with plaque-type psoriasis: prevalence and clinical features."
authors:
- Schons KR
- Beber AA
- Beck Mde O
- Monticielo OA
journal: An Bras Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20153736
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Brazil/epidemiology
- Epidemiologic Methods
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nail Diseases/epidemiology, pathology"
- Nails/pathology
- "Psoriasis/epidemiology, pathology"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Sex Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nail involvement in adult patients with plaque-type psoriasis: prevalence and clinical features.
**Authors:** Schons KR, Beber AA, Beck Mde O, Monticielo OA
**Journal:** An Bras Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1590/abd1806-4841.20153736](https://doi.org/10.1590/abd1806-4841.20153736)

## Content

1. An Bras Dermatol. 2015 May-Jun;90(3):314-9. doi:
10.1590/abd1806-4841.20153736.  Epub 2015 Jun 1.

Nail involvement in adult patients with plaque-type psoriasis: prevalence and 
clinical features.

Schons KR(1), Beber AA(2), Beck Mde O(2), Monticielo OA(3).

Author information:
(1)Universidade de Passo Fundo, Passo Fundo, RS, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a disease of worldwide distribution with a prevalence 
of 1 to 3%. Nail psoriasis is estimated in 50% of patients with psoriasis, and 
in the presence of joint involvement, it can reach 80%.
OBJECTIVE: To study the nail changes - and their clinical implications - 
presented by patients with psoriasis vulgaris under surveillance in a university 
hospital from the south of Brazil.
METHODS: his cross-sectional study evaluated 65 adult patients from January 2012 
to March 2013. Cutaneous severity was assessed according to the Psoriasis Area 
and Severity Index (PASI). The Nail Psoriasis Severity Index (NAPSI) was used to 
evaluate patient's nails. The diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis was established 
according to the Classification Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis (CASPAR).
RESULTS: The prevalence of NP was 46.1%. These patients had a median 
[interquartilic range (IQR)] NAPSI of 1 (0-15). A total of 63.3% of patients 
reported aesthetic discomfort or functional impairment related to their nails. 
Onycholysis was the most common feature (80%). When compared with patients 
without nail involvement, patients with NP had lower mean age at psoriasis onset 
[21 (18-41) vs. 43 (30-56) years, p=0,001]; longer disease duration [15.5 
(10-24) vs. 6 (2-12) years, p=0.001]; higher PASI [9.2 (5-17) vs. 3.7 (2-10), 
p=0.044], higher frequency of psoriatic arthritis (43.3 vs. 3.7, p = 0.002) and 
more often reported family history of psoriasis (40% vs. 7.4%, p = 0.011).
CONCLUSION: Onycholysis was the most frequent finding and most patients feel 
uncomfortable with the psoriatic nail changes that they experience.

DOI: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20153736
PMCID: PMC4516108
PMID: 26131859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None.