---
reference_id: "PMID:33577778"
title: Insights From Invasive Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing of Patients With Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.
authors:
- Joseph P
- Arevalo C
- Oliveira RKF
- Faria-Urbina M
- Felsenstein D
- Oaklander AL
- Systrom DM
journal: Chest
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2021.01.082
keywords:
- Biopsy
- Exercise Test/methods
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/physiopathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Small Fiber Neuropathy/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights From Invasive Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing of Patients With Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.
**Authors:** Joseph P, Arevalo C, Oliveira RKF, Faria-Urbina M, Felsenstein D, Oaklander AL, Systrom DM
**Journal:** Chest (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2021.01.082](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2021.01.082)

## Content

1. Chest. 2021 Aug;160(2):642-651. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2021.01.082. Epub 2021
Feb  10.

Insights From Invasive Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing of Patients With Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.

Joseph P(1), Arevalo C(2), Oliveira RKF(3), Faria-Urbina M(4), Felsenstein D(5),
Oaklander AL(6), Systrom DM(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Yale-New Haven Hospital, Yale University, New Haven, CT. Electronic
address: phillip.joseph@yale.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
NY.
(3)Division of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Medicine, Federal University
of Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(5)Infectious Diseases Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA;
Department of Pathology (Neuropathology), Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA.

BACKGROUND: Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) affects
tens of millions worldwide; the causes of exertional intolerance are poorly
understood. The ME/CFS label overlaps with postural orthostatic tachycardia
(POTS) and fibromyalgia, and objective evidence of small fiber neuropathy (SFN)
is reported in approximately 50% of POTS and fibromyalgia patients.
RESEARCH QUESTION: Can invasive cardiopulmonary exercise testing (iCPET) and
PGP9.5-immunolabeled lower-leg skin biopsies inform the pathophysiology of
ME/CFS exertional intolerance and potential relationships with SFN?
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed 1,516 upright invasive iCPETs performed to
investigate exertional intolerance. After excluding patients with intrinsic
heart or lung disease and selecting those with right atrial pressures
(RAP) <6.5 mm Hg, results from 160 patients meeting ME/CFS criteria who had skin
biopsy test results were compared with 36 control subjects. Rest-to-peak changes
in cardiac output (Qc) were compared with oxygen uptake (Qc/VO2 slope) to
identify participants with low, normal, or high pulmonary blood flow by Qc/VO2
tertiles.
RESULTS: During exercise, the 160 ME/CFS patients averaged lower RAP (1.9 ± 2
vs 8.3 ± 1.5; P < .0001) and peak VO2 (80% ± 21% vs 101.4% ± 17%; P < .0001)
than control subjects. The low-flow tertile had lower peak Qc than the normal
and high-flow tertiles (88.4% ± 19% vs 99.5% ± 23.8% vs 99.9% ± 19.5% predicted;
P < .01). In contrast, systemic oxygen extraction was impaired in high-flow
vs low- and normal-flow participants (0.74% ± 0.1% vs 0.88 ± 0.11 vs 0.86 ± 0.1;
P < .0001) in association with peripheral left-to-right shunting. Among the 160
ME/CFS patient biopsies, 31% were consistent with SFN (epidermal
innervation ≤5.0% of predicted; P < .0001). Denervation severity did not
correlate with exertional measures.
INTERPRETATION: These results identify two types of peripheral neurovascular
dysregulation that are biologically plausible contributors to ME/CFS exertional
intolerance-depressed Qc from impaired venous return, and impaired peripheral
oxygen extraction. In patients with small-fiber pathology, neuropathic
dysregulation causing microvascular dilation may limit exertion by shunting
oxygenated blood from capillary beds and reducing cardiac return.

Copyright © 2021 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2021.01.082
PMCID: PMC8727854
PMID: 33577778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
