---
reference_id: "PMID:25015208"
title: Sodium L-ascorbate enhances elastic fibers deposition by fibroblasts from normal and pathologic human skin.
authors:
- Hinek A
- Kim HJ
- Wang Y
- Wang A
- Mitts TF
journal: J Dermatol Sci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.05.011
keywords:
- Adult
- Ascorbic Acid/chemistry
- Biopsy
- Collagen/metabolism
- Elasticity
- Elastin/metabolism
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/metabolism
- "Keloid/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Organ Culture Techniques
- Phosphorylation
- Prolyl-Hydroxylase Inhibitors/chemistry
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- "Receptor, IGF Type 1/metabolism"
- Regeneration
- "Skin/drug effects, pathology"
- Striae Distensae/drug therapy
- Tropoelastin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sodium L-ascorbate enhances elastic fibers deposition by fibroblasts from normal and pathologic human skin.
**Authors:** Hinek A, Kim HJ, Wang Y, Wang A, Mitts TF
**Journal:** J Dermatol Sci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.05.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.05.011)

## Content

1. J Dermatol Sci. 2014 Sep;75(3):173-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.05.011.
Epub  2014 Jun 11.

Sodium L-ascorbate enhances elastic fibers deposition by fibroblasts from normal
and pathologic human skin.

Hinek A(1), Kim HJ(2), Wang Y(2), Wang A(2), Mitts TF(3).

Author information:
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, PGCRL, 686 Bay Street, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4,
Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Canada; Human Matrix Sciences, LLC, Visalia, CA, USA. Electronic
address: alek.hinek@sickkids.ca.
(2)The Hospital for Sick Children, PGCRL, 686 Bay Street, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4,
Canada.
(3)Human Matrix Sciences, LLC, Visalia, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid), a known enhancer of collagen
deposition, has also been identified as an inhibitor of elastogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: Present studies explored whether and how the L-ascorbic acid
derivative (+) sodium L-ascorbate (SA) would affect production of collagen and
elastic fibers in cultures of fibroblasts derived from normal human skin and
dermal fat, as well as in explants of normal human skin, stretch-marked skin and
keloids.
METHODS: Effects of SA on the extracellular matrix production were assessed
quantitatively by PCR analyses, western blots, biochemical assay of insoluble
elastin and by immuno-histochemistry. We also evaluated effects of SA on
production of the reactive oxygen species (ROS) and phosphorylation of IGF-I and
insulin receptors.
RESULTS: SA, applied in 50-200 μM concentrations, stimulates production of both
collagen and elastic fibers in all tested cultures. Moreover, combination of SA
with a proline hydroxylase inhibitor induces a beneficial remodelling in
explants of dermal scars, resulting in the inhibition of collagen deposition and
induction of new elastogenesis. Importantly, we revealed that SA stimulates
elastogenesis only after intracellular influx of non-oxidized ascorbate anions
(facilitated by the sodium-dependent ascorbate transporter), that causes
reduction of intracellular ROS, activation of c-Src tyrosine kinase and the
enhancement of IGF-1-induced phosphorylation of the IGF-1 receptor that
ultimately triggers elastogenic signalling pathway.
CONCLUSION: Our results endorse the use of this potent stimulator of collagen
and elastin production in the treatment of wrinkled and stretch-marked skin.
They also encourage inclusion of SA into therapeutic combinations with
collagenogenesis inhibitors to prevent formation of dermal scars and keloids.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.05.011
PMID: 25015208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
