---
reference_id: "PMID:36396927"
title: Clinical Manifestations of Monkeypox.
authors:
- Abaza H
- Agadi K
- Anand A
- Elsaid M
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/5584_2022_747
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Manifestations of Monkeypox.
**Authors:** Abaza H, Agadi K, Anand A, Elsaid M
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/5584_2022_747](https://doi.org/10.1007/5584_2022_747)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2023;1410:7-11. doi: 10.1007/5584_2022_747.

Clinical Manifestations of Monkeypox.

Abaza H(1)(2), Agadi K(2)(3), Anand A(2)(4), Elsaid M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)King Hussein Cancer Center, Amman, Jordan.
(2)Medical Research Platform (MRP), Giza, Egypt.
(3)The Larkin Community Hospital, South Miami, FL, USA.
(4)B. P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, Dharan, Nepal.
(5)Medical Research Platform (MRP), Giza, Egypt. 
mohamed65295@student.must.edu.eg.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Misr University for Science and Technology, Giza, Egypt. 
mohamed65295@student.must.edu.eg.

Monkeypox is a global health issue caused by the monkeypox virus. It can spread 
from person to person through respiratory secretions, direct exposure to 
dermatological lesions of infected patients, or exposure to contaminated 
objects. It is more common in homosexual men, and most patients are 
asymptomatic. The gold standard for diagnosis is a real-time polymerase chain 
reaction. In the absence of testing facilities, clinicians rely upon detailed 
history to exclude other causes of fever with rashes. Initially, there is a 
prodrome phase of a few days, which is followed by the appearance of rashes. The 
dermatological manifestations are in the form of an exanthematous rash, which 
transforms through a macular, papular, and vesicular phase and disappears after 
crusting in approximately 3 weeks. There can be associated lymphadenopathy in 
these patients. Respiratory manifestations include nasal congestion and 
shortness of breath that may result in secondary bacterial infections. 
Additionally, patients can have neurological involvement in the form of 
encephalitis. Furthermore, ocular involvement can occur in the form of 
conjunctivitis, keratitis, and corneal ulceration. Other symptoms can include 
diarrhea, vomiting, myalgia, and backache. Since most patients do not require 
hospitalization, the approach to treatment is mainly vigilant monitoring, 
antiviral therapy, and management of associated complications.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/5584_2022_747
PMID: 36396927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]