---
reference_id: "PMID:34224366"
title: β-Catenin Attenuation Inhibits Tumor Growth and Promotes Differentiation in a BRAF(V600E)-Driven Thyroid Cancer Animal Model.
authors:
- Zou M
- BinEssa HA
- Al-Malki YH
- Al-Yahya S
- Al-Alwan M
- Al-Jammaz I
- Khabar KSA
- Almohanna F
- Assiri AM
- Meyer BF
- Alzahrani AS
- Al-Mohanna FA
- Shi Y
journal: Mol Cancer Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-21-0037
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
- Indoles/pharmacology
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Sulfonamides/pharmacology
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/etiology, metabolism, pathology, prevention & control"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/etiology, metabolism, pathology, prevention & control"
- Wnt Signaling Pathway/drug effects
- beta Catenin/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# β-Catenin Attenuation Inhibits Tumor Growth and Promotes Differentiation in a BRAF(V600E)-Driven Thyroid Cancer Animal Model.
**Authors:** Zou M, BinEssa HA, Al-Malki YH, Al-Yahya S, Al-Alwan M, Al-Jammaz I, Khabar KSA, Almohanna F, Assiri AM, Meyer BF, Alzahrani AS, Al-Mohanna FA, Shi Y
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-21-0037](https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-21-0037)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2021 Sep;20(9):1603-1613. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-21-0037.
 Epub 2021 Jun 17.

β-Catenin Attenuation Inhibits Tumor Growth and Promotes Differentiation in a
BRAF(V600E)-Driven Thyroid Cancer Animal Model.

Zou M(#)(1), BinEssa HA(#)(1), Al-Malki YH(2), Al-Yahya S(3), Al-Alwan M(4),
Al-Jammaz I(2), Khabar KSA(3), Almohanna F(5), Assiri AM(5), Meyer BF(1),
Alzahrani AS(6), Al-Mohanna FA(7), Shi Y(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Centre for Genomic Medicine, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Cyclotron and Radiopharmaceuticals, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of BioMolecular Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Stem Cell & Tissue Re-engineering, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Comparative Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Cell Biology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Genetics and Centre for Genomic Medicine, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
yufei@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(#)Contributed equally

BRAFV600E mutation is the most frequent genetic alteration in papillary thyroid
cancer (PTC). β-Catenin (Ctnnb1) is a key downstream component of canonical Wnt
signaling pathway and is frequently overexpressed in PTC. BRAF V600E-driven
tumors have been speculated to rely on Wnt/β-catenin signaling to sustain its
growth, although many details remain to be elucidated. In this study, we
investigated the role of β-catenin in BrafV600E -driven thyroid cancer in a
transgenic mouse model. In Braf V600E mice with wild-type (WT) Ctnnb1
(BVE-Ctnnb1WT or BVE), overexpression of β-catenin was observed in thyroid
tumors. In Braf V600E mice with Ctnnb1 knockout (BVE-Ctnnb1null), thyroid tumor
growth was slowed with significant reduction in papillary architecture. This was
associated with increased expression of genes involved in thyroid hormone
synthesis, elevated 124iodine uptake, and serum T4. The survival of
BVE-Ctnnb1null mice was increased by more than 50% during 14-month observation.
Mechanistically, downregulation of MAPK, PI3K/Akt, and TGFβ pathways and loss of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) were demonstrated in the BVE-Ctnnb1null
tumors. Treatment with dual β-catenin/KDM4A inhibitor PKF118-310 dramatically
improved the sensitivity of BVE-Ctnnb1WT tumor cells to BRAFV600E inhibitor
PLX4720, resulting in significant growth arrest and apoptosis in vitro, and
tumor regression and differentiation in vivo These findings indicate that
β-catenin signaling plays an important role in thyroid cancer growth and
resistance to BRAFV600E inhibitors. Simultaneously targeting both Wnt/β-catenin
and MAPK signaling pathways may achieve better therapeutic outcome in BRAFV600E
inhibitor-resistant and/or radioiodine-refractory thyroid cancer.

©2021 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-21-0037
PMID: 34224366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
