---
reference_id: "PMID:10071918"
title: Osteoporosis in adult patients with celiac disease.
authors:
- Kemppainen T
- Kröger H
- Janatuinen E
- Arnala I
- Kosma VM
- Pikkarainen P
- Julkunen R
- Jurvelin J
- Alhava E
- Uusitupa M
journal: Bone
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s8756-3282(98)00178-1
keywords:
- "Absorptiometry, Photon"
- Adult
- Aged
- Atrophy
- Biomarkers/analysis
- Bone Density
- "Celiac Disease/complications, diagnostic imaging, diet therapy, epidemiology, pathology"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Diet, Protein-Restricted"
- Female
- Femur Neck/diagnostic imaging
- Finland/epidemiology
- Glutens
- Humans
- Intestinal Mucosa/pathology
- Lumbar Vertebrae/diagnostic imaging
- Male
- Menopause
- Middle Aged
- "Osteoporosis/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- "Vitamin D/analogs & derivatives, blood"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoporosis in adult patients with celiac disease.
**Authors:** Kemppainen T, Kröger H, Janatuinen E, Arnala I, Kosma VM, Pikkarainen P, Julkunen R, Jurvelin J, Alhava E, Uusitupa M
**Journal:** Bone (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s8756-3282(98)00178-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s8756-3282(98)00178-1)

## Content

1. Bone. 1999 Mar;24(3):249-55. doi: 10.1016/s8756-3282(98)00178-1.

Osteoporosis in adult patients with celiac disease.

Kemppainen T(1), Kröger H, Janatuinen E, Arnala I, Kosma VM, Pikkarainen P, 
Julkunen R, Jurvelin J, Alhava E, Uusitupa M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Nutrition, Kuopio University Hospital and University 
of Kuopio, Finland. tarja.kemppainen@uku.fi

We investigated the bone mineral density (BMD) and prevalence of osteopenia and 
osteoporosis in adult celiac patients with varying disease states. In this 
cross-sectional study the data on the severity of celiac disease and BMD were 
collected from 77 celiac patients (28 newly diagnosed and 49 previously 
diagnosed celiac patients), and BMD results were compared with those of 157 
control subjects matched for age, gender, and menopausal status. The celiac 
patients had significantly lower BMD than the control subjects at the lumbar 
spine (-6%) and femoral neck (-5%). The mean BMD did not differ significantly 
among celiac patients classified by severity of disease. Based on Z scores, 35% 
of the celiac patients and 17% of the control subjects had low BMDs for age at 
the lumbar spine (p = 0.005), whereas 31% of celiac patients and 16% of control 
subjects had Z scores of < or =-1 at the femoral neck (p = 0.01). Altogether, 
26% of all celiac patients, but only 5% of control subjects, were classified as 
having osteoporosis (T score < or =-2.5 SD) at the lumbar spine (p = 0.03), 
whereas osteoporosis was rare at the femoral neck in both groups (3% vs. 1%, p = 
1.00). Prevalence of osteopenia and osteoporosis was highest in newly diagnosed 
celiac patients and in patients with disease not in remission. A low 25-(OH)D 
vitamin concentration was a typical biochemical abnormality in our patients (64% 
of men and 71% of women). The main associated variables of low BMD were age 
(men), low serum vitamin D level, low body weight, and postmenopausal status 
(women). The present study suggests that celiac disease constitutes a risk 
factor for osteoporosis. This finding applies particularly to untreated and 
poorly treated patients.

DOI: 10.1016/s8756-3282(98)00178-1
PMID: 10071918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]