---
reference_id: "PMID:24966934"
title: A case of cervical cancer expressed three mRNA variant of Hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor.
authors:
- Villegas-Ruíz V
- Salcedo M
- Zentella-Dehesa A
- de Oca EV
- Román-Basaure E
- Mantilla-Morales A
- Dávila-Borja VM
- Juárez-Méndez S
journal: Int J Clin Exp Pathol
year: '2014'
keywords:
- Alternative Splicing
- Base Sequence
- Exons
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Genetic Variation
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- "Hyaluronan Receptors/genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Transfection
- "Uterine Cervical Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of cervical cancer expressed three mRNA variant of Hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor.
**Authors:** Villegas-Ruíz V, Salcedo M, Zentella-Dehesa A, de Oca EV, Román-Basaure E, Mantilla-Morales A, Dávila-Borja VM, Juárez-Méndez S
**Journal:** Int J Clin Exp Pathol (2014)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Apr 15;7(5):2256-64. eCollection 2014.

A case of cervical cancer expressed three mRNA variant of Hyaluronan-mediated 
motility receptor.

Villegas-Ruíz V(1), Salcedo M(1), Zentella-Dehesa A(2), de Oca EV(3), 
Román-Basaure E(4), Mantilla-Morales A(5), Dávila-Borja VM(6), Juárez-Méndez 
S(6).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Oncology Laboratory, Medical Research Unit in Oncologic Diseases, 
Oncology Hospital, National Medical Center Siglo XXI, IMSS México, D.F., México.
(2)Department of Medical Genomics and Environmental Toxicology, Biomedical 
Research Institute, UNAM México, D.F., México ; Biochemistry Unit, National 
Institute of Medical Sciences and Nutrition "Salvador Zubirán" México, D.F., 
México.
(3)Biochemistry Unit, National Institute of Medical Sciences and Nutrition 
"Salvador Zubirán" México, D.F., México.
(4)Department of Oncology, General Hospital of México O. D México, D.F., México.
(5)Department of Pathology, National Medical Center Siglo XXI, IMSS México, 
D.F., México.
(6)Experimental Oncology Laboratory, Department of Research, National Institute 
of Pediatrics México, D.F., México.

Cervical cancer is the second malignancy in Mexico, little is known about the 
prognostic factors associated with this disease. Several cellular components are 
important in their transformation and progression. Alternative mRNA splice is an 
important mechanism for generating protein diversity, nevertheless, in cancer 
unknown mRNA diversity is expressed. Hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor 
(HMMR, RHAMM, CD168) is a family member of proteins, hyaluronan acid dependent, 
and has been associated with different malignant processes such as: 
angiogenesis, cell invasiveness, proliferation, metastasis and poor outcome in 
some tumors. In the present study we identified expression of HMMR in cervical 
cancer by means of RT-PCR and sequencing. Our results indicate co-expression of 
two HMMR variants in all samples, and one case expressed three alternative HMMR 
splice transcripts. These results showed the heterogeneity of mRNA transcripts 
of HMMR that could express in cancer and the expression of HMMR could be marker 
of malignancy in CC.

PMCID: PMC4069874
PMID: 24966934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]