---
reference_id: "PMID:9646819"
title: "Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: radiographic findings in six patients."
authors:
- Yoo CC
- Levine MS
- Furth EE
- Salhany KE
- Rubesin SE
- Laufer I
- Herlinger H
journal: Radiology
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1148/radiology.208.1.9646819
keywords:
- Aged
- "Antibiotics, Antineoplastic/therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- "Contrast Media/administration & dosage"
- Dyspepsia/physiopathology
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Gastric Fundus/diagnostic imaging
- "Gastric Mucosa/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Gastritis/microbiology, pathology"
- Gastroscopy
- Helicobacter Infections/pathology
- Helicobacter pylori
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell, Marginal Zone/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, pathology, radiotherapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nausea/physiopathology
- Neoplasm Staging
- Pain/physiopathology
- "Polyps/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Pyloric Antrum/diagnostic imaging
- Radiography
- Remission Induction
- Retrospective Studies
- Stomach/diagnostic imaging
- "Stomach Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, pathology, radiotherapy"
- "Stomach Ulcer/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Vomiting/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: radiographic findings in six patients.
**Authors:** Yoo CC, Levine MS, Furth EE, Salhany KE, Rubesin SE, Laufer I, Herlinger H
**Journal:** Radiology (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1148/radiology.208.1.9646819](https://doi.org/10.1148/radiology.208.1.9646819)

## Content

1. Radiology. 1998 Jul;208(1):239-43. doi: 10.1148/radiology.208.1.9646819.

Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: radiographic findings in six 
patients.

Yoo CC(1), Levine MS, Furth EE, Salhany KE, Rubesin SE, Laufer I, Herlinger H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the radiographic findings of low-grade gastric 
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma on double-contrast upper 
gastrointestinal studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pathology records, double-contrast upper gastrointestinal 
studies, and medical records of six patients with gastric MALT lymphoma were 
retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: The most common clinical findings at presentation included epigastric 
pain (n = 6), dyspepsia (n = 4), and nausea and vomiting (n = 4). 
Double-contrast studies revealed rounded, often confluent nodules of varying 
size in four patients with low-grade MALT lymphoma. Nodularity was located in 
the gastric antrum (n = 2), body (n = 1), or body and fundus (n = 1). A fifth 
patient had a malignant-appearing 1-cm-diameter antral ulcer, and a sixth had a 
10-cm-diameter polypoid, ulcerated mass in the gastric fundus. The latter 
patient was found to have high-grade MALT lymphoma with low-grade MALT lymphoma 
abutting the tumor. Five patients had associated Helicobacter pylori gastritis. 
Five patients had stage I disease, and one had stage IIB disease. At endoscopic 
follow-up (n = 4), marked regression of tumor occurred after treatment with 
antibiotics, chemotherapy, and/or radiation therapy.
CONCLUSION: When low-grade MALT lymphoma is suspected on the basis of barium 
study results, endoscopic biopsy specimens should be obtained for a definitive 
diagnosis so these patients can be treated before the development of high-grade 
gastric lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1148/radiology.208.1.9646819
PMID: 9646819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]