---
reference_id: "PMID:26977832"
title: Diagnosis and Management of Nephrotic Syndrome in Adults.
authors:
- Kodner C
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2016'
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Adult
- Biopsy
- Disease Management
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Management of Nephrotic Syndrome in Adults.
**Authors:** Kodner C
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2016)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2016 Mar 15;93(6):479-85.

Diagnosis and Management of Nephrotic Syndrome in Adults.

Kodner C(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, USA.

Nephrotic syndrome (NS) consists of peripheral edema, heavy proteinuria, and 
hypoalbuminemia, often with hyperlipidemia. Patients typically present with 
edema and fatigue, without evidence of heart failure or severe liver disease. 
The diagnosis of NS is based on typical clinical features with confirmation of 
heavy proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia. The patient history and selected 
diagnostic studies rule out important secondary causes, including diabetes 
mellitus, systemic lupus erythematosus, and medication adverse effects. Most 
cases of NS are considered idiopathic or primary; membranous nephropathy and 
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis are the most common histologic subtypes of 
primary NS in adults. Important complications of NS include venous thrombosis 
and hyperlipidemia; other potential complications include infection and acute 
kidney injury. Spontaneous acute kidney injury from NS is rare but can occur as 
a result of the underlying medical problem. Despite a lack of evidence-based 
guidelines, treatment consisting of sodium restriction, fluid restriction, loop 
diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor 
blocker therapy, and careful assessment for possible disease complications is 
appropriate for most patients. Renal biopsy is often recommended, although it 
may be most useful in patients with suspected underlying systemic lupus 
erythematosus or other renal disorders, in whom biopsy can guide management and 
prognosis. Immunosuppressive treatment, including corticosteroids, is often used 
for NS, although evidence is lacking. Routine prophylactic treatment to prevent 
infection or thrombosis is not recommended. A nephrologist should be consulted 
about use of anticoagulation and immunosuppressants, need for renal biopsy, and 
for other areas of uncertainty.

PMID: 26977832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]