---
reference_id: "PMID:36835142"
title: Clinical and Pathologic Features of Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes Caused by 35 Genes-A Comprehensive Review.
authors:
- Ohno K
- Ohkawara B
- Shen XM
- Selcen D
- Engel AG
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24043730
keywords:
- Humans
- Albuterol
- Amifampridine
- Cholinesterase Inhibitors
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Myasthenic Syndromes, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- NAV1.4 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel/genetics
- Neuromuscular Junction/pathology
- "Receptors, Cholinergic/genetics"
- Symporters/genetics
- Synaptic Transmission
- Myosins
- Organic Anion Transporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Pathologic Features of Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes Caused by 35 Genes-A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Ohno K, Ohkawara B, Shen XM, Selcen D, Engel AG
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24043730](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24043730)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Feb 13;24(4):3730. doi: 10.3390/ijms24043730.

Clinical and Pathologic Features of Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes Caused by 35 
Genes-A Comprehensive Review.

Ohno K(1), Ohkawara B(1), Shen XM(2), Selcen D(2), Engel AG(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurogenetics, Center for Neurological Diseases and Cancer, 
Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neuromuscular Research Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a heterogeneous group of disorders 
characterized by impaired neuromuscular signal transmission due to germline 
pathogenic variants in genes expressed at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). A 
total of 35 genes have been reported in CMS (AGRN, ALG14, ALG2, CHAT, CHD8, 
CHRNA1, CHRNB1, CHRND, CHRNE, CHRNG, COL13A1, COLQ, DOK7, DPAGT1, GFPT1, GMPPB, 
LAMA5, LAMB2, LRP4, MUSK, MYO9A, PLEC, PREPL, PURA, RAPSN, RPH3A, SCN4A, 
SLC18A3, SLC25A1, SLC5A7, SNAP25, SYT2, TOR1AIP1, UNC13A, VAMP1). The 35 genes 
can be classified into 14 groups according to the pathomechanical, clinical, and 
therapeutic features of CMS patients. Measurement of compound muscle action 
potentials elicited by repetitive nerve stimulation is required to diagnose CMS. 
Clinical and electrophysiological features are not sufficient to identify a 
defective molecule, and genetic studies are always required for accurate 
diagnosis. From a pharmacological point of view, cholinesterase inhibitors are 
effective in most groups of CMS, but are contraindicated in some groups of CMS. 
Similarly, ephedrine, salbutamol (albuterol), amifampridine are effective in 
most but not all groups of CMS. This review extensively covers pathomechanical 
and clinical features of CMS by citing 442 relevant articles.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24043730
PMCID: PMC9961056
PMID: 36835142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.