---
reference_id: "PMID:12589953"
title: Eradication of Propionibacterium acnes by its endogenic porphyrins after illumination with high intensity blue light.
authors:
- Ashkenazi H
- Malik Z
- Harth Y
- Nitzan Y
journal: FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2003.tb00644.x
keywords:
- Acne Vulgaris/drug therapy
- Aminolevulinic Acid/pharmacology
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- Coproporphyrins/metabolism
- Culture Media
- Electron Probe Microanalysis/methods
- Humans
- Light
- "Microscopy, Electron, Scanning"
- Photochemotherapy
- Photosensitizing Agents/pharmacology
- Porphyrins/metabolism
- "Propionibacterium acnes/drug effects, metabolism, radiation effects, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eradication of Propionibacterium acnes by its endogenic porphyrins after illumination with high intensity blue light.
**Authors:** Ashkenazi H, Malik Z, Harth Y, Nitzan Y
**Journal:** FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1574-695X.2003.tb00644.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-695X.2003.tb00644.x)

## Content

1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2003 Jan 21;35(1):17-24. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2003.tb00644.x.

Eradication of Propionibacterium acnes by its endogenic porphyrins after 
illumination with high intensity blue light.

Ashkenazi H(1), Malik Z, Harth Y, Nitzan Y.

Author information:
(1)Health Sciences Research Center, Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan 
University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel.

Propionibacterium acnes is a Gram-positive, microaerophilic bacterium that 
causes skin wounds. It is known to naturally produce high amounts of 
intracellular porphyrins. The results of the present study confirm that the 
investigated strain of P. acnes is capable of producing endogenic porphyrins 
with no need for any trigger molecules. Extracts from growing cultures have 
demonstrated emission peaks around 612 nm when excited at 405 nm, which are 
characteristic for porphyrins. Endogenic porphyrins were determined and 
quantified after their extraction from the bacterial cells by fluorescence 
intensity and by elution retention time on high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC). The porphyrins produced by P. acnes are mostly 
coproporphyrin, as shown by the HPLC elution patterns. Addition of 
delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) enhanced intracellular porphyrin synthesis and 
higher amounts of coproporphyrin have been found. Eradication of P. acnes by its 
endogenic porphyrins was examined after illumination with intense blue light at 
407-420 nm. The viability of 24 h cultures grown anaerobically in liquid medium 
was reduced by less than two orders of magnitude when illuminated once with a 
light dose of 75 J cm(-2). Better photodynamic effects were obtained when 
cultures were illuminated twice or three times consecutively with a light dose 
of 75 J cm(-2) and an interval of 24 h between illuminations. The viability of 
the culture under these conditions decreased by four orders of magnitude after 
two illuminations and by five orders of magnitude after three illuminations. 
When ALA-triggered cultures were illuminated with intense blue light at a light 
dose of 75 J cm(-2) the viability of the treated cultures decreased by seven 
orders of magnitude. This decrease in viability can occur even after a single 
exposure of illumination for the indicated light intensity. X-ray microanalysis 
and transmission electron microscopy revealed structural damages to membranes in 
the illuminated P. acnes. Illumination of the endogenous coproporphyrin with 
blue light (407-420 nm) apparently plays a major role in P. acnes 
photoinactivation. A treatment protocol with a series of several illuminations 
or illumination after application of ALA may be suitable for curing acne. 
Treatment by both pathways may overcome the resistance of P. acnes to antibiotic 
treatment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2003.tb00644.x
PMID: 12589953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]