---
reference_id: "PMID:34620975"
title: Monitoring of compound resting membrane potentials of cell cultures with ratiometric genetically encoded voltage indicators.
authors:
- Rühl P
- Langner JM
- Reidel J
- Schönherr R
- Hoshi T
- Heinemann SH
journal: Commun Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02675-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monitoring of compound resting membrane potentials of cell cultures with ratiometric genetically encoded voltage indicators.
**Authors:** Rühl P, Langner JM, Reidel J, Schönherr R, Hoshi T, Heinemann SH
**Journal:** Commun Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s42003-021-02675-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02675-0)

## Content

1. Commun Biol. 2021 Oct 7;4(1):1164. doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02675-0.

Monitoring of compound resting membrane potentials of cell cultures with 
ratiometric genetically encoded voltage indicators.

Rühl P(1), Langner JM(1), Reidel J(1), Schönherr R(1), Hoshi T(2), Heinemann 
SH(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine, Department of Biophysics, Friedrich 
Schiller University Jena and Jena University Hospital, D-07745, Jena, Germany.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Center for Molecular Biomedicine, Department of Biophysics, Friedrich 
Schiller University Jena and Jena University Hospital, D-07745, Jena, Germany. 
Stefan.H.Heinemann@uni-jena.de.

The cellular resting membrane potential (Vm) not only determines electrical 
responsiveness of excitable cells but also plays pivotal roles in non-excitable 
cells, mediating membrane transport, cell-cycle progression, and tumorigenesis. 
Studying these processes requires estimation of Vm, ideally over long periods of 
time. Here, we introduce two ratiometric genetically encoded Vm indicators, rArc 
and rASAP, and imaging and analysis procedures for measuring differences in 
average resting Vm between cell groups. We investigated the influence of ectopic 
expression of K+ channels and their disease-causing mutations involved in 
Andersen-Tawil (Kir2.1) and Temple-Baraitser (KV10.1) syndrome on median resting 
Vm of HEK293T cells. Real-time long-term monitoring of Vm changes allowed to 
estimate a 40-50 min latency from induction of transcription to functional 
Kir2.1 channels in HEK293T cells. The presented methodology is readily 
implemented with standard fluorescence microscopes and offers deeper insights 
into the role of the resting Vm in health and disease.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-021-02675-0
PMCID: PMC8497494
PMID: 34620975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.