---
reference_id: "PMID:32738956"
title: Atopic dermatitis.
authors:
- Langan SM
- Irvine AD
- Weidinger S
journal: Lancet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31286-1
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Asthma/epidemiology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Comorbidity
- "Dermatitis, Atopic/epidemiology, physiopathology, prevention & control, therapy"
- Eczema/pathology
- Food Hypersensitivity/epidemiology
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Global Burden of Disease
- Humans
- Infant
- Inflammation/physiopathology
- Mental Disorders/epidemiology
- Microbiota/physiology
- Molecular Targeted Therapy/methods
- Phototherapy/methods
- Prevalence
- Pruritus/pathology
- Quality of Life
- "Rhinitis, Allergic/epidemiology"
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atopic dermatitis.
**Authors:** Langan SM, Irvine AD, Weidinger S
**Journal:** Lancet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31286-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31286-1)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2020 Aug 1;396(10247):345-360. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31286-1.

Atopic dermatitis.

Langan SM(1), Irvine AD(2), Weidinger S(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK; St John's Institute of Dermatology, Guy's and St 
Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; Health Data Research UK, London, UK. 
Electronic address: sinead.langan@lshtm.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; 
Dermatology, Children's Health Ireland, Crumlin, Ireland; National Children's 
Research Centre, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital 
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2020 Sep 12;396(10253):758. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31825-0.

Atopic dermatitis is a common inflammatory skin disorder characterised by 
recurrent eczematous lesions and intense itch. The disorder affects people of 
all ages and ethnicities, has a substantial psychosocial impact on patients and 
relatives, and is the leading cause of the global burden from skin disease. 
Atopic dermatitis is associated with increased risk of multiple comorbidities, 
including food allergy, asthma, allergic rhinitis, and mental health disorders. 
The pathophysiology is complex and involves a strong genetic predisposition, 
epidermal dysfunction, and T-cell driven inflammation. Although type-2 
mechanisms are dominant, there is increasing evidence that the disorder involves 
multiple immune pathways. Currently, there is no cure, but increasing numbers of 
innovative and targeted therapies hold promise for achieving disease control, 
including in patients with recalcitrant disease. We summarise and discuss 
advances in our understanding of the disease and their implications for 
prevention, management, and future research.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31286-1
PMID: 32738956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]