---
reference_id: "PMID:34751954"
title: "Systematic review: the association between the gut microbiota and medical therapies in inflammatory bowel disease."
authors:
- Radhakrishnan ST
- Alexander JL
- Mullish BH
- Gallagher KI
- Powell N
- Hicks LC
- Hart AL
- Li JV
- Marchesi JR
- Williams HRT
journal: Aliment Pharmacol Ther
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/apt.16656
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic review: the association between the gut microbiota and medical therapies in inflammatory bowel disease.
**Authors:** Radhakrishnan ST, Alexander JL, Mullish BH, Gallagher KI, Powell N, Hicks LC, Hart AL, Li JV, Marchesi JR, Williams HRT
**Journal:** Aliment Pharmacol Ther (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/apt.16656](https://doi.org/10.1111/apt.16656)

## Content

1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2022 Jan;55(1):26-48. doi: 10.1111/apt.16656. Epub
2021  Nov 9.

Systematic review: the association between the gut microbiota and medical 
therapies in inflammatory bowel disease.

Radhakrishnan ST(1)(2), Alexander JL(1)(2), Mullish BH(1)(2), Gallagher KI(2), 
Powell N(1)(2), Hicks LC(1)(2), Hart AL(2)(3), Li JV(2), Marchesi JR(2), 
Williams HRT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, St Mary's Hospital, Imperial 
College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(2)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Metabolism, Digestion and 
Reproduction, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(3)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Unit, St Mark's Hospital, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: The gut microbiota has been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), with Faecalibacterium prausnitizii associated 
with protection, and certain genera (including Shigella and Escherichia) 
associated with adverse features. The variability of patient response to medical 
therapies in IBD is incompletely understood. Given the recognised contribution 
of the microbiota to treatment efficacy in other conditions, there may be 
interplay between the gut microbiota, IBD medical therapy and IBD phenotype.
AIMS: To evaluate the bidirectional relationship between IBD medical therapies 
and the gut microbiota.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic search of MEDLINE and EMBASE. All original 
studies analysing interactions between the gut microbiota and established IBD 
medical therapies were included.
RESULTS: We screened 1296 records; 19 studies were eligible. There was 
heterogeneity in terms of sample analysis, treatment protocols, and outcome 
reporting. Increased baseline α-diversity was observed in responders versus 
non-responders treated with exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN), infliximab, 
ustekinumab or vedolizumab. Higher baseline Faecalibacterium predicted response 
to infliximab and ustekinumab. A post-treatment increase in Faecalibacterium 
prausnitzii was noted in responders to aminosalicylates, anti-TNF medications 
and ustekinumab; conversely, this species decreased in responders to EEN. 
Escherichia was a consistent marker of unfavourable drug response, and its 
presence in the gut mucosa correlated with inflammation in 
aminosalicylate-treated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Both gut microbiota diversity and specific taxonomic features 
(including high abundance of Faecalibacterium) are associated with the efficacy 
of a range of IBD therapies. These findings hold promise for a potential role 
for the gut microbiota in explaining the heterogeneity of patient response to 
IBD treatments.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apt.16656
PMID: 34751954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]