---
reference_id: "PMID:11128183"
title: The treatment of spontaneous carotid and vertebral artery dissections.
authors:
- Schievink WI
journal: Curr Opin Cardiol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1097/00001573-200009000-00002
keywords:
- "Angioplasty, Balloon"
- Anticoagulants/therapeutic use
- "Carotid Artery, Internal, Dissection/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Stroke/etiology, prevention & control"
- Vascular Surgical Procedures
- "Vertebral Artery Dissection/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The treatment of spontaneous carotid and vertebral artery dissections.
**Authors:** Schievink WI
**Journal:** Curr Opin Cardiol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00001573-200009000-00002](https://doi.org/10.1097/00001573-200009000-00002)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2000 Sep;15(5):316-21. doi:
10.1097/00001573-200009000-00002.

The treatment of spontaneous carotid and vertebral artery dissections.

Schievink WI(1).

Author information:
(1)Cedars-Sinai Neurosurgical Institute, Los Angeles, California, USA.
schievinkw@cshs.org

Spontaneous dissections of the carotid and vertebral arteries in the neck are a
common cause of stroke in young and middle-aged people. Moreover, they are
increasingly recognized as the cause of a wide variety of other, more subtle,
neurologic signs and symptoms. The cause of these arterial dissections largely
remains unexplained but probably involves a combination of genetic and
environmental factors. Magnetic resonance imaging has largely surpassed
angiography as the imaging study of choice. The treatment of carotid and
vertebral artery dissections is based on rather incomplete evidence.
Anticoagulation with heparin followed by warfarin remains the treatment of
choice in most major medical centers and is supported by the demonstration of
emboli as the most common cause of stroke in these patients. The burgeoning
interest in endovascular techniques has resulted in many patients being treated
for carotid and vertebral artery dissections with percutaneous angioplasty and
stent deployment. Although the treatment of dissections is generally well
tolerated and the radiographic results are impressive, most dissections heal
spontaneously and the associated aneurysms never rupture and rarely cause
delayed ischemic symptoms. Surgical treatment of dissections, consisting of an
in situ interposition graft or extracranial-intracranial bypass, is indicated
only for those patients with persistent symptoms refractory to maximal medical
therapy who are not candidates for endovascular treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/00001573-200009000-00002
PMID: 11128183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
