---
reference_id: "PMID:28137823"
title: Topical tacrolimus solution in autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1-associated keratitis.
authors:
- Shoughy SS
- Tabbara KF
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2016-309808
keywords:
- "Administration, Topical"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Keratitis/diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Male
- Ophthalmic Solutions
- Photophobia/drug therapy
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/diagnosis, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tacrolimus/administration & dosage"
- Treatment Outcome
- Visual Acuity/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topical tacrolimus solution in autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1-associated keratitis.
**Authors:** Shoughy SS, Tabbara KF
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjophthalmol-2016-309808](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2016-309808)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2017 Sep;101(9):1230-1233. doi: 
10.1136/bjophthalmol-2016-309808. Epub 2017 Jan 30.

Topical tacrolimus solution in autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1-associated 
keratitis.

Shoughy SS(1), Tabbara KF(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)The Eye Center and the Eye Foundation for Research in Ophthalmology, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, King Saud University, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)The Wilmer Ophthalmological Institute of The Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficacy of topical tacrloimus eye drops in the 
treatment of keratitis associated with autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 
(APS)-1.
METHODS: This is a retrospective review of 10 patients with APS-1. The patients 
were treated with topical tacrolimus 0.01% solution at The Eye Center, between 1 
March 2012 and 30 April 2016. The outcome measures included improvement in 
visual acuity, photophobia and keratitis following treatment. Clinical 
assessment was carried out before, during and on the last visit following 
initiation of therapy.
RESULTS: A total of 10 patients were included. There were five male and five 
female patients. The mean age was 11 years with age range of 3-42 years. The 
mean duration of treatment with topical tacrolimus was 26 months (range 
8-46 months). There was improvement of photophobia in 7 out of 10 patients 
following therapy with topical tacrolimus. In three patients, the photophobia 
was persistent. There was no clinically detectable improvement in the severity 
of keratitis in all patients. The mean best corrected visual acuity was 0.1 
before and following therapy.
CONCLUSION: Topical tacrolimus is effective in reducing the photophobia in 
patients with APS-1-associated keratitis, but showed no effects on the severity 
of keratitis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2016-309808
PMID: 28137823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.