---
reference_id: "PMID:14702637"
title: Overexpression of CNP in chondrocytes rescues achondroplasia through a MAPK-dependent pathway.
authors:
- Yasoda A
- Komatsu Y
- Chusho H
- Miyazawa T
- Ozasa A
- Miura M
- Kurihara T
- Rogi T
- Tanaka S
- Suda M
- Tamura N
- Ogawa Y
- Nakao K
journal: Nat Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/nm971
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Division
- Chondrocytes/metabolism
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/metabolism
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Natriuretic Peptide, C-Type/metabolism"
- Organ Culture Techniques
- Phenotype
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- Transgenes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overexpression of CNP in chondrocytes rescues achondroplasia through a MAPK-dependent pathway.
**Authors:** Yasoda A, Komatsu Y, Chusho H, Miyazawa T, Ozasa A, Miura M, Kurihara T, Rogi T, Tanaka S, Suda M, Tamura N, Ogawa Y, Nakao K
**Journal:** Nat Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm971](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm971)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2004 Jan;10(1):80-6. doi: 10.1038/nm971. Epub 2003 Dec 14.

Overexpression of CNP in chondrocytes rescues achondroplasia through a 
MAPK-dependent pathway.

Yasoda A(1), Komatsu Y, Chusho H, Miyazawa T, Ozasa A, Miura M, Kurihara T, Rogi 
T, Tanaka S, Suda M, Tamura N, Ogawa Y, Nakao K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 54 Shogoin Kawahara-cho Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Achondroplasia is the most common genetic form of human dwarfism, for which 
there is presently no effective therapy. C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) is a 
newly identified molecule that regulates endochondral bone growth through GC-B, 
a subtype of particulate guanylyl cyclase. Here we show that targeted 
overexpression of CNP in chondrocytes counteracts dwarfism in a mouse model of 
achondroplasia with activated fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR-3) in 
the cartilage. CNP prevented the shortening of achondroplastic bones by 
correcting the decreased extracellular matrix synthesis in the growth plate 
through inhibition of the MAPK pathway of FGF signaling. CNP had no effect on 
the STAT-1 pathway of FGF signaling that mediates the decreased proliferation 
and the delayed differentiation of achondroplastic chondrocytes. These results 
demonstrate that activation of the CNP-GC-B system in endochondral bone 
formation constitutes a new therapeutic strategy for human achondroplasia.

DOI: 10.1038/nm971
PMID: 14702637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]