---
reference_id: "PMID:37231664"
title: Cerebrovascular glycocalyx damage and microcirculation impairment in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy.
authors:
- van Lanen RH
- Haeren RH
- Staals J
- Dings JT
- Schijns OE
- Hoogland G
- van Kuijk SM
- Kapsokalyvas D
- van Zandvoort MA
- Vink H
- Rijkers K
journal: J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/0271678X231179413
keywords:
- Humans
- "Epilepsy, Temporal Lobe/surgery"
- Glycocalyx
- Microcirculation/physiology
- Blood-Brain Barrier
- Capillaries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrovascular glycocalyx damage and microcirculation impairment in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy.
**Authors:** van Lanen RH, Haeren RH, Staals J, Dings JT, Schijns OE, Hoogland G, van Kuijk SM, Kapsokalyvas D, van Zandvoort MA, Vink H, Rijkers K
**Journal:** J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0271678X231179413](https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X231179413)

## Content

1. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2023 Oct;43(10):1737-1751. doi:
10.1177/0271678X231179413. Epub 2023 May 26.

Cerebrovascular glycocalyx damage and microcirculation impairment in patients
with temporal lobe epilepsy.

van Lanen RH(1)(2), Haeren RH(1)(2), Staals J(3), Dings JT(1)(4), Schijns
OE(1)(2)(4), Hoogland G(1)(2), van Kuijk SM(5), Kapsokalyvas D(6)(7), van
Zandvoort MA(2)(6)(8), Vink H(9), Rijkers K(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht,
The Netherlands.
(2)School for Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNs), Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, CARIM School for Cardiovascular Diseases, Maastricht
University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Academic Centre for Epileptology, Maastricht University Medical Centre and
Kempenhaeghe, Maastricht/Heeze, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Medical Technology Assessment,
Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Genetics & Cell Biology, CARIM School for Cardiovascular
Diseases, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(7)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research (IZKF), University Hospital
RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(8)Institute for Molecular Cardiovascular Research IMCAR, Universitätsklinikum,
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(9)Department of Physiology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is increasingly associated with blood-brain barrier
dysfunction and microvascular alterations, yet the pathophysiological link is
missing. An important barrier function is exerted by the glycocalyx, a gel-like
layer coating the endothelium. To explore such associations, we used
intraoperative videomicroscopy to quantify glycocalyx and microcirculation
properties of the neocortex and hippocampus of 15 patients undergoing resective
brain surgery as treatment for drug-resistant TLE, and 15 non-epileptic
controls. Fluorescent lectin staining of neocortex and hippocampal tissue was
used for blood vessel surface area quantification. Neocortical perfused boundary
region, the thickness of the glycocalyx' impaired layer, was higher in patients
(2.64 ± 0.52 µm) compared to controls (1.31 ± 0.29 µm), P < 0.01, indicative of
reduced glycocalyx integrity in patients. Moreover, erythrocyte flow velocity
analysis revealed an impaired ability of TLE patients to (de-)recruit
capillaries in response to changing metabolic demands (R2 = 0.75, P < 0.01),
indicating failure of neurovascular coupling mechanisms. Blood vessel
quantification comparison between intraoperative measurements and resected
tissue showed strong correlation (R2 = 0.94, P < 0.01). This is the first report
on in vivo assessment of glycocalyx and microcirculation properties in TLE
patients, confirming the pivotal role of cerebrovascular changes. Further
assessment of the cerebral microcirculation in relation to epileptogenesis might
open avenues for new therapeutic targets for drug-resistant epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1177/0271678X231179413
PMCID: PMC10581235
PMID: 37231664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: HV is the Chief
Science Officer at GlycoCheck & Microvascular Health Solutions. The authors
declare that this manuscript has not been or currently is under review by any
other journal.
