---
reference_id: "PMID:32726073"
title: "The Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Polymer Load Correlates With Hepatocyte Senescence, Fibrosis Stage and Liver-Related Mortality."
authors:
- Mela M
- Smeeton W
- Davies SE
- Miranda E
- Scarpini C
- Coleman N
- Alexander GJM
journal: Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.3.2019.0158
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Polymer Load Correlates With Hepatocyte Senescence, Fibrosis Stage and Liver-Related Mortality.
**Authors:** Mela M, Smeeton W, Davies SE, Miranda E, Scarpini C, Coleman N, Alexander GJM
**Journal:** Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.15326/jcopdf.7.3.2019.0158](https://doi.org/10.15326/jcopdf.7.3.2019.0158)

## Content

1. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2020 Jul;7(3):151-162. doi:
10.15326/jcopdf.7.3.2019.0158.

The Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Polymer Load Correlates With Hepatocyte Senescence,
Fibrosis Stage and Liver-Related Mortality.

Mela M(1), Smeeton W(1), Davies SE(2), Miranda E(3), Scarpini C(4), Coleman
N(4), Alexander GJM(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Department of
Medicine, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Histopathology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biology and Biotechnologies, Charles Darwin and Pasteur
Institute Cenci-Bolognetti Foundation, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Pathology, Cambridge University, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)UCL Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, Royal Free Hospital, London,
United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is an important, inherited
cause of chronic liver disease. Marked variation in fibrosis stages in patients
with homozygous deficiency and those factors that determine whether heterozygous
carriers develop liver fibrosis, remain unexplained. Murine studies implicate
polymerized alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) within hepatocytes as pathogenic.
AIMS AND METHODS: The relationship between the quantity of polymerized AAT
within hepatocytes (polymer load), stage of hepatic fibrosis and liver-related
clinical outcomes (death, evolution to hepatocellular carcinoma, or need for
liver transplantation) were investigated using liver tissue from 92 patients at
first presentation with either homozygous or heterozygous AATD. Further
tissue-based studies were undertaken to determine if polymerized AAT was
associated with failure of cell cycle progression, accelerated aging or
hepatocyte senescence by immunohistochemical analysis.
RESULTS: The AAT polymer load correlated closely with hepatic fibrosis stage and
long-term clinical outcome, independent of homozygous or heterozygous status.
AAT polymers within hepatocytes correlated closely with failure of cell cycle
progression assessed using cell cycle phase markers, accelerated aging manifest
as shortened telomeres and other markers consistent with hepatocyte senescence
manifest as the presence of nuclear p21 expression and enlarged nuclei. The
proportion of p21 positive hepatocytes or hepatocytes with enlarged nuclei
correlated with hepatic fibrosis stage and the long-term clinical outcome.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that accumulation of AAT polymers within
hepatocytes drives senescence. Quantitation of both the AAT polymer load or
hepatocyte senescence markers correlated with hepatic fibrosis stage and the
long-term clinical outcome. Either or both could be considered markers of
disease severity and treatment response in clinical trials.

JCOPDF © 2020.

DOI: 10.15326/jcopdf.7.3.2019.0158
PMCID: PMC7857716
PMID: 32726073
