---
reference_id: PMID:21353196
title: Exome sequencing identifies truncating mutations in human SERPINF1 in autosomal-recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Becker J
- Semler O
- Gilissen C
- Li Y
- Bolz HJ
- Giunta C
- Bergmann C
- Rohrbach M
- Koerber F
- Zimmermann K
- de Vries P
- Wirth B
- Schoenau E
- Wollnik B
- Veltman JA
- Hoischen A
- Netzer C
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.01.015
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Base Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons/genetics
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Growth Factors/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Radiography
- Serpins/genetics
- Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing identifies truncating mutations in human SERPINF1 in autosomal-recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Becker J, Semler O, Gilissen C, Li Y, Bolz HJ, Giunta C, Bergmann C, Rohrbach M, Koerber F, Zimmermann K, de Vries P, Wirth B, Schoenau E, Wollnik B, Veltman JA, Hoischen A, Netzer C
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.01.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.01.015)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Mar 11;88(3):362-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.01.015.
Epub  2011 Feb 25.

Exome sequencing identifies truncating mutations in human SERPINF1 in 
autosomal-recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.

Becker J(1), Semler O, Gilissen C, Li Y, Bolz HJ, Giunta C, Bergmann C, Rohrbach 
M, Koerber F, Zimmermann K, de Vries P, Wirth B, Schoenau E, Wollnik B, Veltman 
JA, Hoischen A, Netzer C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous genetic disorder characterized 
by bone fragility and susceptibility to fractures after minimal trauma. After 
mutations in all known OI genes had been excluded by Sanger sequencing, we 
applied next-generation sequencing to analyze the exome of a single individual 
who has a severe form of the disease and whose parents are second cousins. A 
total of 26,922 variations from the human reference genome sequence were 
subjected to several filtering steps. In addition, we extracted the genotypes of 
all dbSNP130-annotated SNPs from the exome sequencing data and used these 
299,494 genotypes as markers for the genome-wide identification of homozygous 
regions. A single homozygous truncating mutation, affecting SERPINF1 on 
chromosome 17p13.3, that was embedded into a homozygous stretch of 2.99 Mb 
remained. The mutation was also homozygous in the affected brother of the index 
patient. Subsequently, we identified homozygosity for two different truncating 
SERPINF1 mutations in two unrelated patients with OI and parental consanguinity. 
All four individuals with SERPINF1 mutations have severe OI. Fractures of long 
bones and severe vertebral compression fractures with resulting deformities were 
observed as early as the first year of life in these individuals. Collagen 
analyses with cultured dermal fibroblasts displayed no evidence for impaired 
collagen folding, posttranslational modification, or secretion. SERPINF1 encodes 
pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), a secreted glycoprotein of the serpin 
superfamily. PEDF is a multifunctional protein and one of the strongest 
inhibitors of angiogenesis currently known in humans. Our data provide genetic 
evidence for PEDF involvement in human bone homeostasis.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.01.015
PMCID: PMC3059418
PMID: 21353196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]