---
reference_id: "PMID:1374906"
title: Characterization of a type II collagen gene (COL2A1) mutation identified in cultured chondrocytes from human hypochondrogenesis.
authors:
- Horton WA
- Machado MA
- Ellard J
- Campbell D
- Bartley J
- Ramirez F
- Vitale E
- Lee B
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.89.10.4583
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of a type II collagen gene (COL2A1) mutation identified in cultured chondrocytes from human hypochondrogenesis.
**Authors:** Horton WA, Machado MA, Ellard J, Campbell D, Bartley J, Ramirez F, Vitale E, Lee B
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.89.10.4583](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.89.10.4583)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 May 15;89(10):4583-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.89.10.4583.

Characterization of a type II collagen gene (COL2A1) mutation identified in 
cultured chondrocytes from human hypochondrogenesis.

Horton WA(1), Machado MA, Ellard J, Campbell D, Bartley J, Ramirez F, Vitale E, 
Lee B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School, Houston 77225.

A subtle mutation in the type II collagen gene COL2A1 was detected in a case of 
human hypochondrogenesis by using a chondrocyte culture system and PCR-cDNA 
scanning analysis. Chondrocytes obtained from cartilage biopsies were 
dedifferentiated and expanded in monolayer culture and then redifferentiated by 
culture over agarose. Single-strand conformation polymorphism and direct 
sequencing analysis identified a G----A transition, resulting in a glycine 
substitution at amino acid 574 of the pro alpha 1(II) collagen triple-helical 
domain. Morphologic assessment of cartilage-like structures produced in culture 
and electrophoretic analysis of collagens synthesized by the cultured 
chondrocytes suggested that the glycine substitution interferes with conversion 
of type II procollagen to collagen, impairs intracellular transport and 
secretion of the molecule, and disrupts collagen fibril assembly. This 
experimental approach has broad implications for the investigation of human 
chondrodysplasias as well as human chondrocyte biology.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.89.10.4583
PMCID: PMC49127
PMID: 1374906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]