---
reference_id: "PMID:25057192"
title: Mutant β-III spectrin causes mGluR1α mislocalization and functional deficits in a mouse model of spinocerebellar ataxia type 5.
authors:
- Armbrust KR
- Wang X
- Hathorn TJ
- Cramer SW
- Chen G
- Zu T
- Kangas T
- Zink AN
- Öz G
- Ebner TJ
- Ranum LP
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0876-14.2014
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cerebellum/chemistry, pathology"
- "Dendritic Spines/chemistry, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Receptors, Metabotropic Glutamate/analysis, genetics, metabolism"
- Spectrin/genetics
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant β-III spectrin causes mGluR1α mislocalization and functional deficits in a mouse model of spinocerebellar ataxia type 5.
**Authors:** Armbrust KR, Wang X, Hathorn TJ, Cramer SW, Chen G, Zu T, Kangas T, Zink AN, Öz G, Ebner TJ, Ranum LP
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0876-14.2014](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0876-14.2014)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2014 Jul 23;34(30):9891-904. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0876-14.2014.

Mutant β-III spectrin causes mGluR1α mislocalization and functional deficits in 
a mouse model of spinocerebellar ataxia type 5.

Armbrust KR(1), Wang X(2), Hathorn TJ(3), Cramer SW(2), Chen G(2), Zu T(3), 
Kangas T(1), Zink AN(1), Öz G(4), Ebner TJ(2), Ranum LP(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development.
(2)Neuroscience, and.
(3)Center for NeuroGenetics, Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, 
Genetics Institute, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
Florida 32610.
(4)Center for Magnetic Resonance Research, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota 55455 and.
(5)Departments of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, Center for 
NeuroGenetics, Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Department of 
Neurology, and Genetics Institute, College of Medicine, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida 32610 ranum@ufl.edu.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 5 (SCA5), a dominant neurodegenerative disease 
characterized by profound Purkinje cell loss, is caused by mutations in SPTBN2, 
a gene that encodes β-III spectrin. SCA5 is the first neurodegenerative disorder 
reported to be caused by mutations in a cytoskeletal spectrin gene. We have 
developed a mouse model to understand the mechanistic basis for this disease and 
show that expression of mutant but not wild-type β-III spectrin causes 
progressive motor deficits and cerebellar degeneration. We show that endogenous 
β-III spectrin interacts with the metabotropic glutamate receptor 1α (mGluR1α) 
and that mice expressing mutant β-III spectrin have cerebellar dysfunction with 
altered mGluR1α localization at Purkinje cell dendritic spines, decreased 
mGluR1-mediated responses, and deficient mGluR1-mediated long-term potentiation. 
These results indicate that mutant β-III spectrin causes mislocalization and 
dysfunction of mGluR1α at dendritic spines and connects SCA5 with other 
disorders involving glutamatergic dysfunction and synaptic plasticity 
abnormalities.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/349891-14$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0876-14.2014
PMCID: PMC4107406
PMID: 25057192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]