---
reference_id: "PMID:38714179"
title: Deep Brain Stimulation of the Globus Pallidus Internus in a Child with Refractory Dystonia due to L2-Hydroxyglutaric Aciduria.
authors:
- Alamri A
- Breitbart S
- Warsi N
- Rayco E
- Ibrahim G
- Fasano A
- Gorodetsky C
journal: Stereotact Funct Neurosurg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1159/000538418
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep Brain Stimulation of the Globus Pallidus Internus in a Child with Refractory Dystonia due to L2-Hydroxyglutaric Aciduria.
**Authors:** Alamri A, Breitbart S, Warsi N, Rayco E, Ibrahim G, Fasano A, Gorodetsky C
**Journal:** Stereotact Funct Neurosurg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000538418](https://doi.org/10.1159/000538418)

## Content

1. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 2024;102(4):209-216. doi: 10.1159/000538418. Epub 
2024 May 7.

Deep Brain Stimulation of the Globus Pallidus Internus in a Child with 
Refractory Dystonia due to L2-Hydroxyglutaric Aciduria.

Alamri A(1)(2)(3), Breitbart S(4), Warsi N(5), Rayco E(2)(3), Ibrahim 
G(4)(5)(6), Fasano A(2)(7)(8)(9)(10), Gorodetsky C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Division of Neurology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Division of Neurosurgery, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(7)Edmond J. Safra Program in Parkinson's Disease, Morton and Gloria Shulman 
Movement Disorders Clinic, Toronto Western Hospital, UHN, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(8)Division of Neurology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Krembil Brain Institute, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(10)Center for Advancing Neurotechnological Innovation to Application (CRANIA), 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L2HGA) is a rare neurometabolic 
disorder marked by progressive and debilitating psychomotor deficits. Here, we 
report the first patient with L2HGA-related refractory dystonia that was managed 
with deep brain stimulation to the bilateral globus pallidus internus (GPi-DBS).
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a 17-year-old female with progressive decline in 
cognitive function, motor skills, and language ability which significantly 
impaired activities of daily living. Neurological exam revealed generalized 
dystonia, significant choreic movements in the upper extremities, slurred 
speech, bilateral dysmetria, and a wide-based gait. Brisk deep tendon reflexes, 
clonus, and bilateral Babinski signs were present. Urine 2-OH-glutaric acid 
level was significantly elevated. Brain MRI showed extensive supratentorial 
subcortical white matter signal abnormalities predominantly involving the U 
fibers and bilateral basal ganglia. Genetic testing identified a homozygous 
pathogenic mutation in the L-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase gene c. 164G&gt;A 
(p. Gly55Asp). Following minimal response to pharmacotherapy, GPi-DBS was 
performed. Significant increases in mobility and decrease in dystonia were 
observed at 3 weeks, 6 months, and 12 months postoperatively.
CONCLUSION: This is the first utilization of DBS as treatment for L2HGA-related 
dystonia. The resulting significant improvements indicate that pallidal 
neuromodulation may be a viable option for pharmaco-resistant cases, and 
possibly in other secondary metabolic dystonias.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000538418
PMCID: PMC11309047
PMID: 38714179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.