---
reference_id: "PMID:38827992"
title: "Connexins in epidermal health and diseases: insights into their mutations, implications, and therapeutic solutions."
authors:
- Yasarbas SS
- Inal E
- Yildirim MA
- Dubrac S
- Lamartine J
- Mese G
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2024.1346971
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Connexins in epidermal health and diseases: insights into their mutations, implications, and therapeutic solutions.
**Authors:** Yasarbas SS, Inal E, Yildirim MA, Dubrac S, Lamartine J, Mese G
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2024.1346971](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2024.1346971)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2024 May 7;15:1346971. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2024.1346971. 
eCollection 2024.

Connexins in epidermal health and diseases: insights into their mutations, 
implications, and therapeutic solutions.

Yasarbas SS(#)(1), Inal E(#)(1), Yildirim MA(#)(1), Dubrac S(2), Lamartine J(3), 
Mese G(1).

Author information:
(1)Izmir Institute of Technology, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular 
Biology and Genetics, Izmir, Turkiye.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Skin Functional Integrity Group, Laboratory for Tissue Biology and 
Therapeutics Engineering (LBTI) CNRS UMR5305, University of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(#)Contributed equally

The epidermis, the outermost layer of the skin, serves as a protective barrier 
against external factors. Epidermal differentiation, a tightly regulated process 
essential for epidermal homeostasis, epidermal barrier formation and skin 
integrity maintenance, is orchestrated by several players, including signaling 
molecules, calcium gradient and junctional complexes such as gap junctions 
(GJs). GJ proteins, known as connexins facilitate cell-to-cell communication 
between adjacent keratinocytes. Connexins can function as either hemichannels or 
GJs, depending on their interaction with other connexons from neighboring 
keratinocytes. These channels enable the transport of metabolites, cAMP, 
microRNAs, and ions, including Ca2+, across cell membranes. At least ten 
distinct connexins are expressed within the epidermis and mutations in at least 
five of them has been linked to various skin disorders. Connexin mutations may 
cause aberrant channel activity by altering their synthesis, their gating 
properties, their intracellular trafficking, and the assembly of hemichannels 
and GJ channels. In addition to mutations, connexin expression is dysregulated 
in other skin conditions including psoriasis, chronic wound and skin cancers, 
indicating the crucial role of connexins in skin homeostasis. Current treatment 
options for conditions with mutant or altered connexins are limited and 
primarily focus on symptom management. Several therapeutics, including 
non-peptide chemicals, antibodies, mimetic peptides and allele-specific small 
interfering RNAs are promising in treating connexin-related skin disorders. 
Since connexins play crucial roles in maintaining epidermal homeostasis as shown 
with linkage to a range of skin disorders and cancer, further investigations are 
warranted to decipher the molecular and cellular alterations within cells due to 
mutations or altered expression, leading to abnormal proliferation and 
differentiation. This would also help characterize the roles of each isoform in 
skin homeostasis, in addition to the development of innovative therapeutic 
interventions. This review highlights the critical functions of connexins in the 
epidermis and the association between connexins and skin disorders, and 
discusses potential therapeutic options.

Copyright © 2024 Yasarbas, Inal, Yildirim, Dubrac, Lamartine and Mese.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2024.1346971
PMCID: PMC11140265
PMID: 38827992

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.