---
reference_id: "PMID:23352252"
title: "Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing 2: structure, function, and diseases."
authors:
- Yao Q
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.12.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing 2: structure, function, and diseases.
**Authors:** Yao Q
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.12.005)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Aug;43(1):125-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.12.005. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing 2: structure, function, and 
diseases.

Yao Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatic and Immunologic Diseases/A50, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. yaoq@ccf.org

OBJECTIVES: To systematically review literature about the structure and function 
of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing 2 (NOD2) and its disease 
association.
METHODS: The English literature was searched using keywords "NOD2" and 
"disease". Relevant original and review articles were reviewed.
RESULTS: NOD2 is an intracellular protein and shares similar molecular structure 
with NOD1, pyrin, and cryopyrin. There are more than 100 NOD2 gene mutations, 
some of which have been linked to diseases such as Crohn disease, Blau syndrome, 
and NOD2-associated autoinflammatory disease (NAID). The NOD2 variants located 
in the leucine-rich repeat (LRR) region are susceptible to Crohn disease, and 
the variants in the nucleotide-binding domain (NBD) and in between the NBD and 
LRR are associated with Blau syndrome and NAID, respectively. No disease 
association with the gene variants has been found in rheumatoid arthritis, 
systemic lupus erythematosus, ankylosing spondylitis, psoriasis/psoriatic 
arthritis, adult sarcoidosis, granulomatous polyangiitis, or multiple sclerosis. 
The potential association of the NOD2 variants with graft-versus-host-disease 
remains controversial. NOD2 functions mainly through RICK or RIP2 to activate 
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases and NF-κB, resulting in inflammatory 
response, and enhanced autophagic activity. Biologic therapy may be beneficial 
for NOD2-associated diseases, and new drug development may be realized based 
upon the signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: NOD2 gene mutations are associated with several diseases, and some 
of the mutations are of diagnostic value in Blau disease and NAID. To understand 
the NOD2 function, disease association, and its pathogenesis is important given 
the ever increasing clinical significance of NOD2.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.12.005
PMID: 23352252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]