---
reference_id: "PMID:37014703"
title: Accumulation of α-synuclein mediates podocyte injury in Fabry nephropathy.
authors:
- Braun F
- Abed A
- Sellung D
- Rogg M
- Woidy M
- Eikrem O
- Wanner N
- Gambardella J
- Laufer SD
- Haas F
- Wong MN
- Dumoulin B
- Rischke P
- Mühlig A
- Sachs W
- von Cossel K
- Schulz K
- Muschol N
- Gersting SW
- Muntau AC
- Kretz O
- Hahn O
- Rinschen MM
- Mauer M
- Bork T
- Grahammer F
- Liang W
- Eierhoff T
- Römer W
- Hansen A
- Meyer-Schwesinger C
- Iaccarino G
- Tøndel C
- Marti HP
- Najafian B
- Puelles VG
- Schell C
- Huber TB
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/JCI157782
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Accumulation of α-synuclein mediates podocyte injury in Fabry nephropathy.
**Authors:** Braun F, Abed A, Sellung D, Rogg M, Woidy M, Eikrem O, Wanner N, Gambardella J, Laufer SD, Haas F, Wong MN, Dumoulin B, Rischke P, Mühlig A, Sachs W, von Cossel K, Schulz K, Muschol N, Gersting SW, Muntau AC, Kretz O, Hahn O, Rinschen MM, Mauer M, Bork T, Grahammer F, Liang W, Eierhoff T, Römer W, Hansen A, Meyer-Schwesinger C, Iaccarino G, Tøndel C, Marti HP, Najafian B, Puelles VG, Schell C, Huber TB
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI157782](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI157782)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2023 Jun 1;133(11):e157782. doi: 10.1172/JCI157782.

Accumulation of α-synuclein mediates podocyte injury in Fabry nephropathy.

Braun F(1)(2), Abed A(3), Sellung D(3), Rogg M(3)(4), Woidy M(5)(6), Eikrem 
O(7)(8), Wanner N(1)(2), Gambardella J(9)(10), Laufer SD(1)(2), Haas F(1)(2), 
Wong MN(1)(2)(11)(12), Dumoulin B(1)(2), Rischke P(1)(2), Mühlig A(1)(2)(5)(6), 
Sachs W(2)(13), von Cossel K(14), Schulz K(1)(2), Muschol N(14), Gersting 
SW(5)(6), Muntau AC(5), Kretz O(1)(2), Hahn O(15)(16), Rinschen 
MM(1)(2)(15)(16), Mauer M(17), Bork T(3), Grahammer F(1)(2), Liang W(3), 
Eierhoff T(18)(19), Römer W(18)(20), Hansen A(21)(22), Meyer-Schwesinger 
C(2)(13), Iaccarino G(9)(10), Tøndel C(7)(23), Marti HP(7)(8), Najafian B(24), 
Puelles VG(1)(2)(11)(12), Schell C(3)(4)(20), Huber TB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)III. Department of Medicine and.
(2)Hamburg Center for Kidney Health, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine IV and.
(4)Institute of Surgical Pathology, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)University Children's Hospital and.
(6)University Children's Research, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(8)Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(9)Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences and.
(10)Interdepartmental Center of Research on Hypertension and Related Conditions, 
Federico II University, Napoli, Italy.
(11)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(12)Department of Pathology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(13)Institute of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Center for Experimental 
Medicine, and.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, International Center for Lysosomal Disorders 
(ICLD), University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(15)Department of Biomedicine and.
(16)Aarhus Institute for Advanced Studies, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(17)Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(18)Faculty of Biology and Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, 
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(19)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, University Hospital of 
Münster, Münster, Germany.
(20)Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(21)Department of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(22)German Center for Heart Research (DZHK), partner site Hamburg/Lübeck/Kiel, 
Germany.
(23)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(24)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2023 Jun;19(6):359. doi: 10.1038/s41581-023-00723-y.

Current therapies for Fabry disease are based on reversing intracellular 
accumulation of globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) by enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) 
or chaperone-mediated stabilization of the defective enzyme, thereby alleviating 
lysosomal dysfunction. However, their effect in the reversal of end-organ 
damage, like kidney injury and chronic kidney disease, remains unclear. In this 
study, ultrastructural analysis of serial human kidney biopsies showed that 
long-term use of ERT reduced Gb3 accumulation in podocytes but did not reverse 
podocyte injury. Then, a CRISPR/Cas9-mediated α-galactosidase knockout podocyte 
cell line confirmed ERT-mediated reversal of Gb3 accumulation without resolution 
of lysosomal dysfunction. Transcriptome-based connectivity mapping and 
SILAC-based quantitative proteomics identified α-synuclein (SNCA) accumulation 
as a key event mediating podocyte injury. Genetic and pharmacological inhibition 
of SNCA improved lysosomal structure and function in Fabry podocytes, exceeding 
the benefits of ERT. Together, this work reconceptualizes Fabry-associated cell 
injury beyond Gb3 accumulation, and introduces SNCA modulation as a potential 
intervention, especially for patients with Fabry nephropathy.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI157782
PMCID: PMC10232004
PMID: 37014703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]