---
reference_id: "PMID:33729549"
title: Viral infections in humans and mice with genetic deficiencies of the type I IFN response pathway.
authors:
- Meyts I
- Casanova JL
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/eji.202048793
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- Humans
- Interferon Type I/metabolism
- "Interferon-Stimulated Gene Factor 3, gamma Subunit/deficiency"
- Interferons/metabolism
- Janus Kinase 1/deficiency
- Job Syndrome/genetics
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Interferon alpha-beta/genetics, metabolism"
- STAT1 Transcription Factor/deficiency
- STAT2 Transcription Factor/deficiency
- Signal Transduction
- "TYK2 Kinase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Virus Diseases/etiology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Viral infections in humans and mice with genetic deficiencies of the type I IFN response pathway.
**Authors:** Meyts I, Casanova JL
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.202048793](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.202048793)

## Content

1. Eur J Immunol. 2021 May;51(5):1039-1061. doi: 10.1002/eji.202048793. Epub 2021
 Apr 4.

Viral infections in humans and mice with genetic deficiencies of the type I IFN 
response pathway.

Meyts I(1)(2), Casanova JL(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Microbiology and Transplantation, Laboratory of 
Inborn Errors of Immunity, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM 
UMR 1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France.
(5)Imagine Institute, University of Paris, Paris, France.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY, USA.

Type I IFNs are so-named because they interfere with viral infection in 
vertebrate cells. The study of cellular responses to type I IFNs led to the 
discovery of the JAK-STAT signaling pathway, which also governs the response to 
other cytokine families. We review here the outcome of viral infections in mice 
and humans with engineered and inborn deficiencies, respectively, of (i) IFNAR1 
or IFNAR2, selectively disrupting responses to type I IFNs, (ii) STAT1, STAT2, 
and IRF9, also impairing cellular responses to type II (for STAT1) and/or III 
(for STAT1, STAT2, IRF9) IFNs, and (iii) JAK1 and TYK2, also impairing cellular 
responses to cytokines other than IFNs. A picture is emerging of greater 
redundancy of human type I IFNs for protective immunity to viruses in natural 
conditions than was initially anticipated. Mouse type I IFNs are essential for 
protection against a broad range of viruses in experimental conditions. These 
findings suggest that various type I IFN-independent mechanisms of human 
cell-intrinsic immunity to viruses have yet to be discovered.

© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.202048793
PMCID: PMC8900014
PMID: 33729549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The Authors 
declare no conflict of interest.