---
reference_id: "PMID:32878610"
title: "Increased incidence of Susac syndrome: a case series study."
authors:
- Wilf-Yarkoni A
- Elkayam O
- Aizenstein O
- Oron Y
- Furer V
- Zur D
- Goldstein M
- Barequet D
- Hallevi H
- Karni A
- Habot-Wilner Z
- Regev K
journal: BMC Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s12883-020-01892-0
keywords:
- Adult
- Brain Diseases/diagnosis
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Humans
- Incidence
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Radiography
- Retrospective Studies
- "Susac Syndrome/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased incidence of Susac syndrome: a case series study.
**Authors:** Wilf-Yarkoni A, Elkayam O, Aizenstein O, Oron Y, Furer V, Zur D, Goldstein M, Barequet D, Hallevi H, Karni A, Habot-Wilner Z, Regev K
**Journal:** BMC Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12883-020-01892-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12883-020-01892-0)

## Content

1. BMC Neurol. 2020 Sep 2;20(1):332. doi: 10.1186/s12883-020-01892-0.

Increased incidence of Susac syndrome: a case series study.

Wilf-Yarkoni A(1), Elkayam O(2)(3), Aizenstein O(4), Oron Y(5), Furer V(2)(3), 
Zur D(3)(6), Goldstein M(3)(6), Barequet D(3)(6), Hallevi H(7), Karni 
A(3)(7)(8), Habot-Wilner Z(3)(6), Regev K(7).

Author information:
(1)Neuro-Immunology Service and Department of Neurology Rabin Medical Center, 
4941492, Petach Tikva, Israel. adi.wilf@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(3)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Neuroradiology unit, Department of Radiology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical 
Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Department of ENT, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Division of Ophthalmology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(7)Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Unit of the Department of Neurology, 
Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(8)Sagol School of Neuroscience Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Susac syndrome (SuS) is a rare condition characterized by a clinical 
triad of sensorineural hearing loss, branch artery occlusion and encephalopathy. 
This study reports an increased incidence of SuS in Israel. We describe the 
clinical characteristics of these patients, diagnostic procedures and the use 
and subsequent outcomes of newly published treatment guidelines.
METHODS: This is a single center retrospective study. Patients who were 
diagnosed with SuS between July 2017 and August 2018 were enrolled in this 
study.
RESULTS: Seven patients were diagnosed with SuS according to the diagnostic 
criteria in a time period of 13 months. The annual incidence was recently 
evaluated in Austria to be 0.024/100000, therefore, our case series represent at 
least a 5.4- fold increase in the annual incidence of SuS expected in Israel and 
a 7-fold increase in the annual incidence expected in our medical center. Mean 
time from the onset of the symptoms to diagnosis was three weeks and follow-up 
time was twenty four months. Recent exposure to cytomegalovirus was 
serologically evident in three patients and one patient had high titer of 
anti-streptolysin antibody. All patients underwent brain MRI, fluorescein 
angiography and audiometry. All patients were treated according to the newly 
recommended guidelines. All patients achieved clinical and radiological 
stability.
CONCLUSIONS: We report of an increased incidence of SuS in Israel. Infectious 
serological findings may imply a post infectious mechanism. The use of the 
recommended diagnostic procedures reduced the time to diagnosis. Newly published 
treatment guidelines led to favorable clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-020-01892-0
PMCID: PMC7465403
PMID: 32878610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interest. None of the authors reports conflicts of interest related to this 
work. Dr. Karni Arnon received research support from Stem Cell Medicine Ltd., 
Medison Pharma Ltd. and from Novartis Pharmaceutical Ltd.