---
reference_id: "PMID:9874851"
title: Neurofibromatosis 1 in childhood.
authors:
- North KN
journal: Semin Pediatr Neurol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s1071-9091(98)80002-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- "Glioma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Neurofibroma, Plexiform/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Optic Nerve Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurofibromatosis 1 in childhood.
**Authors:** North KN
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Neurol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1071-9091(98)80002-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1071-9091(98)80002-8)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 1998 Dec;5(4):231-42. doi:
10.1016/s1071-9091(98)80002-8.

Neurofibromatosis 1 in childhood.

North KN(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Research Unit, Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children, NSW, 
Sydney, Australia.

Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) is an autosomal-dominant disorder with an incidence of 
approximately 1 in 3,000. The cardinal features of the disorder are cafe au lait 
spots, axillary freckling, cutaneous neurofibromas, and iris hamartomas (Lisch 
nodules). Common complications include learning disability, scoliosis, and optic 
gliomas. Other complications (e.g., peripheral nerve malignancy, bony 
deformities, and epilepsy) are individually rare. The mainstay of care for 
patients with NF1 is anticipatory guidance, and the early detection and 
symptomatic treatment of disease complications. Counseling of patients and their 
families should provide a realistic overview of possible disease complications, 
while emphasizing that most individuals with NF1 lead healthy and productive 
lives. The gene for NF1 has been identified, and future cell biology research 
will focus on understanding the pathogenetic mechanisms that underly the diverse 
manifestations of the disorder.

DOI: 10.1016/s1071-9091(98)80002-8
PMID: 9874851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]