---
reference_id: "PMID:23759795"
title: Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis.
authors:
- Björkhem I
journal: Curr Opin Lipidol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e328362df13
keywords:
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/enzymology, genetics"
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Cholestanetriol 26-Monooxygenase/genetics
- Cholestanol/metabolism
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Lipid Metabolism
- Tendons/metabolism
- "Xanthomatosis, Cerebrotendinous/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis.
**Authors:** Björkhem I
**Journal:** Curr Opin Lipidol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOL.0b013e328362df13](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOL.0b013e328362df13)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2013 Aug;24(4):283-7. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e328362df13.

Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis.

Björkhem I(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
ingemar.bjorkhem@karolinska.se

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) is a rare neurological
disease characterized by accumulation of cholesterol and cholestanol in brain
and tendons caused by a mutation in the sterol 27-hydroxylase gene (CYP27A1).
The mechanism behind the accumulation of cholestanol in the brain was recently
clarified and a role of 27-hydroxycholesterol as a regulator of brain
cholesterol homeostasis has been established.
RECENT FINDINGS: There is a significant flux of the bile acid precursor
7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one across the blood-brain barrier in cy27-/- mice with
its subsequent conversion into cholestanol. CTX patients with white matter
lesions and vacuolation are described. CYP27A1 was identified as a candidate
gene for sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
SUMMARY: The mechanism behind accumulation of cholestanol in brain and tendons
of patients with CTX has been clarified but it is not known why this
accumulation is associated with parallel accumulation of cholesterol and
formation of xanthomas. Further studies are needed to understand why some
patients with CTX develop white matter lesions in the brain. In view of the fact
that CTX can present with upper motor neuronal signs it is interesting that
CYP27 has been shown to be a candidate gene for sporadic ALS.

DOI: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e328362df13
PMID: 23759795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
