---
reference_id: "PMID:28424234"
title: "BRAF V600 mutation detection in melanoma: a comparison of two laboratory testing methods."
authors:
- "O'Brien O"
- Lyons T
- Murphy S
- Feeley L
- Power D
- Heffron CCBB
journal: J Clin Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2017-204367
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Ireland
- "Melanoma/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Mutation Rate
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Reproducibility of Results
- "Skin Neoplasms/enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Tissue Array Analysis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF V600 mutation detection in melanoma: a comparison of two laboratory testing methods.
**Authors:** O'Brien O, Lyons T, Murphy S, Feeley L, Power D, Heffron CCBB
**Journal:** J Clin Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jclinpath-2017-204367](https://doi.org/10.1136/jclinpath-2017-204367)

## Content

1. J Clin Pathol. 2017 Nov;70(11):935-940. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2017-204367.
Epub  2017 Apr 19.

BRAF V600 mutation detection in melanoma: a comparison of two laboratory testing
methods.

O'Brien O(1), Lyons T(2), Murphy S(1), Feeley L(1), Power D(2), Heffron CCBB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Cork University Hospital, Cork, Ireland.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Cork University Hospital, Cork, Ireland.

AIMS: The assessment of B-raf proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase (BRAF)
gene status is now standard practice in patients diagnosed with metastatic
melanoma with its presence predicting a clinical response to treatment with BRAF
inhibitors. The gold standard in determining BRAF status is currently by
DNA-based methods. More recently, a BRAF V600E antibody has been developed. We
aim to investigate whether immunohistochemical detection of BRAF mutation is a
suitable alternative to molecular testing by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
METHODS: We assessed the incidence of BRAF mutation in our cohort of 132
patients, as determined by PCR, as well as examining clinical and
histopathological features. We investigated the sensitivity and specificity of
the anti-BRAF V600E VE1 clone antibody in detecting the presence of the BRAF
V600E mutation in 122 cases deemed suitable for testing.
RESULTS: The incidence of BRAF mutation in our cohort was 28.8% (38/132).
Patients with the BRAF mutation were found to be significantly younger at age of
diagnosis. BRAF-mutated melanomas tended to be thinner and more mitotically
active. The antibody showed a sensitivity of 86.1% with a specificity of 96.9%.
The positive predictive value was 96.9%; the negative predictive value was
94.4%. The concordance rate between PCR and immunohistochemical BRAF status was
95.1% (116/122).
CONCLUSIONS: The rate of BRAF mutation in our cohort (28.8%) was lower than
international published rates of 40%-60%. This may reflect ethnic or geographic
differences within population cohorts. The high concordance rate of PCR and
immunohistochemical methods in determining BRAF status suggests that
immunohistochemistry is potentially a viable, cost-effective alternative to PCR
testing and suitable as a screening test for the BRAF mutation.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/jclinpath-2017-204367
PMID: 28424234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
