---
reference_id: "PMID:1555394"
title: Puberty-associated gingivitis.
authors:
- Tiainen L
- Asikainen S
- Saxén L
journal: Community Dent Oral Epidemiol
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0528.1992.tb00683.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Puberty-associated gingivitis.
**Authors:** Tiainen L, Asikainen S, Saxén L
**Journal:** Community Dent Oral Epidemiol (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0528.1992.tb00683.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0528.1992.tb00683.x)

## Content

1. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 1992 Apr;20(2):87-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0528.1992.tb00683.x.

Puberty-associated gingivitis.

Tiainen L(1), Asikainen S, Saxén L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

In a 2-yr follow-up study gingival condition was related to oral hygiene and 
different stages of puberty in 88 14-yr-old Finnish schoolchildren. Visible 
plaque and gingival bleeding after probing were determined from six teeth, at 
four sites each. Bitewing radiographs were taken from the molar areas. These 
examinations were repeated 2 yr later. The pubertal stage of the subjects was 
determined at the age of 14 by the school physician based on the classification 
of Tanner according to breast development (M) in girls and genital development 
(G) in boys. All subjects were in the somatic period of puberty at the time of 
the baseline examination. No radiographically detectable bone loss was found in 
either of the examinations. There was no difference in the gingival bleeding 
tendency at various pubertal stages when all subjects were included or when boys 
and girls were compared separately. Instead, a highly significant correlation 
was found between gingival bleeding and visible plaque, both at the baseline and 
2 yr later. The results indicate that from the age of 14 to 16 the influence of 
oral hygiene on the gingival condition may be more important than that of the 
rising level of steroid hormones.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0528.1992.tb00683.x
PMID: 1555394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]