---
reference_id: "PMID:32918483"
title: Comparison of treatment options in adults with frequently relapsing or steroid-dependent minimal change disease.
authors:
- Heybeli C
- Erickson SB
- Fervenza FC
- Hogan MC
- Zand L
- Leung N
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfaa133
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Mycophenolic Acid/therapeutic use
- "Nephrosis, Lipoid/drug therapy"
- Recurrence
- Rituximab
- Steroids
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of treatment options in adults with frequently relapsing or steroid-dependent minimal change disease.
**Authors:** Heybeli C, Erickson SB, Fervenza FC, Hogan MC, Zand L, Leung N
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfaa133](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfaa133)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2021 Sep 27;36(10):1821-1827. doi:
10.1093/ndt/gfaa133.

Comparison of treatment options in adults with frequently relapsing or 
steroid-dependent minimal change disease.

Heybeli C(1), Erickson SB(2), Fervenza FC(2), Hogan MC(2), Zand L(2), Leung 
N(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Dokuz Eylül University School of Medicine, İzmir, 
Turkey.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Studies comparing all treatment options for 
frequently-relapsing/steroid-dependent (FR/SD) minimal change disease (MCD) in 
adults are lacking.
METHODS: Medical records of 76 adults with FR/SD MCD who were treated with 
corticosteroids as the first-line therapy were reviewed. Treatment options were 
compared for the time to relapse, change of therapy and progression (relapse on 
full-dose treatment).
RESULTS: Second-line treatments included rituximab (RTX; n = 13), mycophenolate 
mofetil (MMF; n = 12), calcineurin inhibitors (CNI; n = 26) and cyclophosphamide 
(CTX; n = 16). During the second-line treatments, 48 (71.6%) patients relapsed 
at median 17 (range 2-100)  months. The majority of relapses occurred during 
dose tapering or off drug. Twenty of 65 (30.8%) changed therapy after the first 
relapse. The median time to relapse after the second line was 66 versus 
28 months in RTX versus non-RTX groups (P = 0.170). The median time to change of 
treatment was 66 and 44 months, respectively (P = 0.060). Last-line treatment 
options included RTX (n = 8), MMF (n = 4), CNI (n = 3) and CTX (n = 2). Seven 
(41.2%) patients had a relapse during the last-line treatment at median 39 
(range 5-112)  months. The median time to relapse was 48 versus 34 months in the 
RTX versus non-RTX groups (P = 0.727). One patient in the RTX group died 
presumably of heart failure. No major adverse event was observed. During the 
median follow-up of 81 (range 9-355)  months, no patients developed end-stage 
renal disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Relapse is frequent in MCD in adults. Patients treated with RTX may 
be less likely to require a change of therapy and more likely to come off 
immunosuppressive drugs.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
ERA-EDTA. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfaa133
PMID: 32918483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]