---
reference_id: "PMID:8855593"
title: Hot tub legionellosis.
authors:
- Tolentino A
- Ahkee S
- Ramirez J
journal: J Ky Med Assoc
year: '1996'
keywords:
- Adult
- Anti-Bacterial Agents
- "Drug Therapy, Combination/therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- Hydrotherapy
- "Legionella pneumophila/isolation & purification"
- "Legionnaires' Disease/diagnosis, drug therapy, transmission"
- Risk Factors
- Water Microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hot tub legionellosis.
**Authors:** Tolentino A, Ahkee S, Ramirez J
**Journal:** J Ky Med Assoc (1996)

## Content

1. J Ky Med Assoc. 1996 Sep;94(9):393-4.

Hot tub legionellosis.

Tolentino A(1), Ahkee S, Ramirez J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Louisville, School of 
Medicine, KY, USA.

Legionella pneumophila is the cause of Legionnaires' disease, and Pontiac fever, 
an influenza-like condition without pneumonia. We present a case of Pontiac 
fever after exposure to a hot tub contaminated with L pneumophila. A 37 y/o wf 
presented to the office with acute onset of sore throat, fever, headache, and 
myalgia. Patient was hospitalized 3 days later because of worsening shortness of 
air. Chest x-ray was normal. Patient was treated with 2 days of IV erythromycin 
and was discharged home on oral erythromycin. Her Legionella IFA was 1:16,384. 
Two days later, she developed chest tightness, pleuritic chest pain, and 
increasing shortness of air but did not have any cough or sputum production. She 
was re-hospitalized with a diagnosis of Pontiac fever and treated with IV 
erythromycin plus oral rifampin. A repeat chest x-ray remained normal. After a 
detailed epidemiologic history was obtained, it was noted that she became ill 
after using a hot tub, which her two children also used and they themselves 
developed a self limited illness. Water from the hot tub was positive for L 
pneumophila by DFA, culture, and PCR. Patient improved gradually with therapy 
and was discharged home. This report emphasizes the importance of a complete 
epidemiologic history in the diagnosis of respiratory infections. It also 
demonstrates that aquatic environment can be contaminated with Legionella and 
serve as a source of infection.

PMID: 8855593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]