---
reference_id: "PMID:27033733"
title: Outcomes of cases with 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (3-MCC) deficiency - Report from the Inborn Errors of Metabolism Information System.
authors:
- Forsyth R
- Vockley CW
- Edick MJ
- Cameron CA
- Hiner SJ
- Berry SA
- Vockley J
- Arnold GL
- Inborn Errors of Metabolism Collaborative
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.02.002
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/epidemiology"
- Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency
- "Databases, Factual"
- Developmental Disabilities/epidemiology
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Neonatal Screening
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes of cases with 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (3-MCC) deficiency - Report from the Inborn Errors of Metabolism Information System.
**Authors:** Forsyth R, Vockley CW, Edick MJ, Cameron CA, Hiner SJ, Berry SA, Vockley J, Arnold GL, Inborn Errors of Metabolism Collaborative
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.02.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.02.002)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2016 May;118(1):15-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.02.002. Epub
 2016 Feb 15.

Outcomes of cases with 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (3-MCC) deficiency -
Report from the Inborn Errors of Metabolism Information System.

Forsyth R(1), Vockley CW(2), Edick MJ(3), Cameron CA(3), Hiner SJ(4), Berry
SA(5), Vockley J(6), Arnold GL(7); Inborn Errors of Metabolism Collaborative.

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(2)Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Department of Pediatrics,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(3)Michigan Public Health Institute, Center for Translational Genetics, Okemos,
MI, United States.
(4)Michigan Public Health Institute, Public Health Services, Okemos, MI, United
States.
(5)University of Minnesota, Department of Pediatrics, Minneapolis, MN, United
States.
(6)University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
Graduate School of Public Health, Department of Human Genetics, Pittsburgh, PA,
United States.
(7)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Electronic address: Glarnold2757@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: 3-Methyl crotonyl CoA carboxylase (3MCC) deficiency is an inborn
error of leucine metabolism whose detection was increased with the advent of
expanded newborn screening. While most NBS-identified infants appear clinically
normal, prior studies suggest a possible increased risk for developmental or
metabolic abnormalities. As yet, no predictive markers are known that can
identify children at risk for biochemical or developmental abnormalities.
METHOD: All available 3-MCC cases diagnosed by newborn screening in the Inborn
Errors of Metabolism Information System (IBEM-IS) were reviewed for markers that
might be predictive of outcome.
RESULTS: A limited number of cases were identified with traditional biochemical
symptoms including acidosis, hyperammonemia or lactic acidosis, and 15% of those
with available developmental information had recorded developmental disabilities
not clearly attributable to other causes. There was no correlation between
newborn screening (NBS) C5OH level and presence of metabolic, newborn,
later-life or developmental abnormalities in these cases.
DISCUSSION: This sample, obtained from the IBEM-IS database, attempts to avoid
some of the ascertainment bias present in retrospective studies. An increase in
developmental abnormalities and in traditionally described metabolic symptoms
remains apparent, although no specific biochemical markers appear predictive of
outcome. The role that prevention of fasting plays in outcome cannot be
ascertained. These data suggest that C5OH level found on newborn screening by
itself is not sufficient for diagnostic or predictive purposes.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.02.002
PMCID: PMC5540133
PMID: 27033733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
