---
reference_id: "PMID:22854024"
title: CTCF is required for neural development and stochastic expression of clustered Pcdh genes in neurons.
authors:
- Hirayama T
- Tarusawa E
- Yoshimura Y
- Galjart N
- Yagi T
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.06.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CTCF is required for neural development and stochastic expression of clustered Pcdh genes in neurons.
**Authors:** Hirayama T, Tarusawa E, Yoshimura Y, Galjart N, Yagi T
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2012.06.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2012.06.014)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2012 Aug 30;2(2):345-57. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.06.014. Epub
2012  Jul 26.

CTCF is required for neural development and stochastic expression of clustered 
Pcdh genes in neurons.

Hirayama T(1), Tarusawa E, Yoshimura Y, Galjart N, Yagi T.

Author information:
(1)KOKORO-Biology Group, Laboratories for Integrated Biology, Graduate School of 
Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

The CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a key molecule for chromatin conformational 
changes that promote cellular diversity, but nothing is known about its role in 
neurons. Here, we produced mice with a conditional knockout (cKO) of CTCF in 
postmitotic projection neurons, mostly in the dorsal telencephalon. The CTCF-cKO 
mice exhibited postnatal growth retardation and abnormal behavior and had 
defects in functional somatosensory mapping in the brain. In terms of gene 
expression, 390 transcripts were expressed at significantly different levels 
between CTCF-deficient and control cortex and hippocampus. In particular, the 
levels of 53 isoforms of the clustered protocadherin (Pcdh) genes, which are 
stochastically expressed in each neuron, declined markedly. Each CTCF-deficient 
neuron showed defects in dendritic arborization and spine density during brain 
development. Their excitatory postsynaptic currents showed normal amplitude but 
occurred with low frequency. Our results indicate that CTCF regulates functional 
neural development and neuronal diversity by controlling clustered Pcdh 
expression.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.06.014
PMID: 22854024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]