---
reference_id: "PMID:22972052"
title: Topical treatments for cutaneous warts.
authors:
- Kwok CS
- Gibbs S
- Bennett C
- Holland R
- Abbott R
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001781.pub3
keywords:
- "Administration, Topical"
- Adult
- "Bleomycin/administration & dosage"
- Child
- Cryotherapy/methods
- Dermatologic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Dinitrochlorobenzene/administration & dosage"
- "Fluorouracil/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- "Interferons/administration & dosage"
- Photochemotherapy/methods
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Salicylates/administration & dosage"
- Surgical Tape
- Warts/therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topical treatments for cutaneous warts.
**Authors:** Kwok CS, Gibbs S, Bennett C, Holland R, Abbott R
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD001781.pub3](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001781.pub3)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Sep 12;2012(9):CD001781. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001781.pub3.

Topical treatments for cutaneous warts.

Kwok CS(1), Gibbs S, Bennett C, Holland R, Abbott R.

Author information:
(1)Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006 Jul 19;(3):CD001781. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD001781.pub2.

BACKGROUND: Viral warts are a common skin condition, which can range in severity 
from a minor nuisance that resolve spontaneously to a troublesome, chronic 
condition. Many different topical treatments are available.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy of local treatments for cutaneous 
non-genital warts in healthy, immunocompetent adults and children.
SEARCH METHODS: We updated our searches of the following databases to May 2011: 
the Cochrane Skin Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL in The Cochrane Library, 
MEDLINE (from 2005), EMBASE (from 2010), AMED (from 1985), LILACS (from 1982), 
and CINAHL (from 1981). We searched reference lists of articles and online 
trials registries for ongoing trials.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of topical treatments 
for cutaneous non-genital warts.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently selected trials and 
extracted data; a third author resolved any disagreements.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 85 trials involving a total of 8815 randomised 
participants (26 new studies were included in this update). There was a wide 
range of different treatments and a variety of trial designs. Many of the 
studies were judged to be at high risk of bias in one or more areas of trial 
design.Trials of salicylic acid (SA) versus placebo showed that the former 
significantly increased the chance of clearance of warts at all sites (RR (risk 
ratio) 1.56, 95% CI (confidence interval) 1.20 to 2.03). Subgroup analysis for 
different sites, hands (RR 2.67, 95% CI 1.43 to 5.01) and feet (RR 1.29, 95% CI 
1.07 to 1.55), suggested it might be more effective for hands than feet.A 
meta-analysis of cryotherapy versus placebo for warts at all sites favoured 
neither intervention nor control (RR 1.45, 95% CI 0.65 to 3.23). Subgroup 
analysis for different sites, hands (RR 2.63, 95% CI 0.43 to 15.94) and feet (RR 
0.90, 95% CI 0.26 to 3.07), again suggested better outcomes for hands than feet. 
One trial showed cryotherapy to be better than both placebo and SA, but only for 
hand warts.There was no significant difference in cure rates between cryotherapy 
at 2-, 3-, and 4-weekly intervals.Aggressive cryotherapy appeared more effective 
than gentle cryotherapy (RR 1.90, 95% CI 1.15 to 3.15), but with increased 
adverse effects.Meta-analysis did not demonstrate a significant difference in 
effectiveness between cryotherapy and SA at all sites (RR 1.23, 95% CI 0.88 to 
1.71) or in subgroup analyses for hands and feet.Two trials with 328 
participants showed that SA and cryotherapy combined appeared more effective 
than SA alone (RR 1.24, 95% CI 1.07 to 1.43).The benefit of intralesional 
bleomycin remains uncertain as the evidence was inconsistent. The most 
informative trial with 31 participants showed no significant difference in cure 
rate between bleomycin and saline injections (RR 1.28, 95% CI 0.92 to 
1.78).Dinitrochlorobenzene was more than twice as effective as placebo in 2 
trials with 80 participants (RR 2.12, 95% CI 1.38 to 3.26).Two trials of clear 
duct tape with 193 participants demonstrated no advantage over placebo (RR 1.43, 
95% CI 0.51 to 4.05).We could not combine data from trials of the following 
treatments: intralesional 5-fluorouracil, topical zinc, silver nitrate (which 
demonstrated possible beneficial effects), topical 5-fluorouracil, pulsed dye 
laser, photodynamic therapy, 80% phenol, 5% imiquimod cream, intralesional 
antigen, and topical alpha-lactalbumin-oleic acid (which showed no advantage 
over placebo).We did not identify any RCTs that evaluated surgery (curettage, 
excision), formaldehyde, podophyllotoxin, cantharidin, diphencyprone, or squaric 
acid dibutylester.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Data from two new trials comparing SA and cryotherapy have 
allowed a better appraisal of their effectiveness. The evidence remains more 
consistent for SA, but only shows a modest therapeutic effect. Overall, trials 
comparing cryotherapy with placebo showed no significant difference in 
effectiveness, but the same was also true for trials comparing cryotherapy with 
SA. Only one trial showed cryotherapy to be better than both SA and placebo, and 
this was only for hand warts. Adverse effects, such as pain, blistering, and 
scarring, were not consistently reported but are probably more common with 
cryotherapy.None of the other reviewed treatments appeared safer or more 
effective than SA and cryotherapy. Two trials of clear duct tape demonstrated no 
advantage over placebo. Dinitrochlorobenzene (and possibly other similar contact 
sensitisers) may be useful for the treatment of refractory warts.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001781.pub3
PMCID: PMC8101088
PMID: 22972052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.