---
reference_id: "PMID:11734544"
title: Mutations in the general transcription factor TFIIH result in beta-thalassaemia in individuals with trichothiodystrophy.
authors:
- Viprakasit V
- Gibbons RJ
- Broughton BC
- Tolmie JL
- Brown D
- Lunt P
- Winter RM
- Marinoni S
- Stefanini M
- Brueton L
- Lehmann AR
- Higgs DR
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.24.2797
keywords:
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA Repair
- "Globins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Hair Diseases/complications, genetics"
- Haplotypes
- Hematology
- Humans
- Mutation
- Reticulocytes
- Transcription Factor TFIIH
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, physiology"
- "Transcription Factors, TFII"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Xeroderma Pigmentosum/genetics
- "beta-Thalassemia/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the general transcription factor TFIIH result in beta-thalassaemia in individuals with trichothiodystrophy.
**Authors:** Viprakasit V, Gibbons RJ, Broughton BC, Tolmie JL, Brown D, Lunt P, Winter RM, Marinoni S, Stefanini M, Brueton L, Lehmann AR, Higgs DR
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/10.24.2797](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/10.24.2797)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Nov 15;10(24):2797-802. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.24.2797.

Mutations in the general transcription factor TFIIH result in beta-thalassaemia 
in individuals with trichothiodystrophy.

Viprakasit V(1), Gibbons RJ, Broughton BC, Tolmie JL, Brown D, Lunt P, Winter 
RM, Marinoni S, Stefanini M, Brueton L, Lehmann AR, Higgs DR.

Author information:
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Institute of Molecular Medicine, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

The transcription factor TFIIH is involved in both basal transcription and DNA 
repair. Mutations in the XPD helicase component of TFIIH can result in the 
diverse clinical features associated with xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and 
trichothiodystrophy (TTD). It is generally believed that the multi-system 
abnormalities associated with TTD are the result of a subtle deficiency in basal 
transcription. However, to date, there has been no clear demonstration of a 
defect in expression of any specific gene in individuals with these syndromes. 
Here we show that the specific mutations in XPD that cause TTD result in reduced 
expression of the beta-globin genes in these individuals. Eleven TTD patients 
with characterized mutations in the XPD gene have the haematological features of 
beta-thalassaemia trait, and reduced levels of beta-globin synthesis and 
beta-globin mRNA. All these parameters were normal in three patients with XP. 
These findings provide the first evidence for reduced expression of a specific 
gene in TTD. They support the hypothesis that many of the clinical features of 
TTD result from inadequate expression of a diverse set of highly expressed 
genes.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.24.2797
PMID: 11734544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]