---
reference_id: "PMID:31815826"
title: "Clinical Profile, Liver Dysfunction and Outcome of Dengue Infection in Children: A Prospective Observational Study."
authors:
- Prasad D
- Bhriguvanshi A
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002519
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Profile, Liver Dysfunction and Outcome of Dengue Infection in Children: A Prospective Observational Study.
**Authors:** Prasad D, Bhriguvanshi A
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1097/INF.0000000000002519](https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0000000000002519)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2020 Feb;39(2):97-101. doi:
10.1097/INF.0000000000002519.

Clinical Profile, Liver Dysfunction and Outcome of Dengue Infection in Children: 
A Prospective Observational Study.

Prasad D(1), Bhriguvanshi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics King George's Medical University Lucknow 226003, 
Uttar Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: Liver involvement in dengue illness is common and can lead to acute 
liver failure (ALF). No single method can effectively identify patients at risk 
for disease progression and bad outcome. We aimed to determine the relationship 
between liver dysfunction, kinetics of liver function tests (LFTs) and severity 
of hepatitis on the outcome in pediatric dengue illness.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective observational study of hospitalized children 
(1-12 years) with dengue infection (July 2014-July 2015). Serial monitoring of 
LFTs was done in confirmed dengue cases. Patients were classified into 
non-severe (NSD) and severe dengue (SD). Severity of hepatitis was graded: mild, 
moderate and severe hepatitis. Events were noted during hospitalization.
RESULTS: One hundred two children (66, boys), median age 72 (48-96) months, were 
analyzed (NSD, n = 41; SD, n = 61). Elevated transaminases (92%) was the most 
common abnormality; aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) 
in 87% and 82%, respectively. Maximum abnormalities in LFTs peaked at day 5 
(AST, ALT) and day 7 (Alkaline Phosphatase [ALP], gamma-glutamyl transferase) of 
illness. Elevated transaminases was found to be higher in SD than NSD (100% vs. 
80%, P = 0.006). Severe hepatitis developed organ dysfunction such as altered 
sensorium (P < 0.001), ALF (P < 0.001), acute kidney injury (P < 0.001) and 
shock (P < 0.001), more commonly than those with mild to moderate hepatitis. 
Fourteen patients died, two-thirds of whom had severe hepatitis (P < 0.001). 
Using binary logistic regression, presence of severe hepatitis and shock at 
presentation was an independent predictor for ALF (odds ratio: 77; 95% 
confidence interval : 13-457, P < 0.001) and mortality (odds ratio: 55; 95% 
confidence interval: 4.6-66, P < 0.001), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Many children with dengue have liver involvement. Severe hepatitis 
in dengue is associated with significant organ dysfunction and poor outcome.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002519
PMID: 31815826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]