---
reference_id: "PMID:25843156"
title: "Motor vehicle driving in high incidence psychiatric disability: comparison of drivers with ADHD, depression, and no known psychopathology."
authors:
- Aduen PA
- Kofler MJ
- Cox DJ
- Sarver DE
- Lunsford E
journal: J Psychiatr Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.03.009
keywords:
- "Accidents, Traffic/statistics & numerical data"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Distribution
- Aged
- Antisocial Personality Disorder/epidemiology
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology
- Automobile Driving/psychology
- Chi-Square Distribution
- Depression/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Psychiatric Status Rating Scales
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- United States
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Motor vehicle driving in high incidence psychiatric disability: comparison of drivers with ADHD, depression, and no known psychopathology.
**Authors:** Aduen PA, Kofler MJ, Cox DJ, Sarver DE, Lunsford E
**Journal:** J Psychiatr Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.03.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.03.009)

## Content

1. J Psychiatr Res. 2015 May;64:59-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.03.009.
Epub  2015 Mar 21.

Motor vehicle driving in high incidence psychiatric disability: comparison of
drivers with ADHD, depression, and no known psychopathology.

Aduen PA(1), Kofler MJ(2), Cox DJ(3), Sarver DE(4), Lunsford E(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Virginia, USA.
(2)Florida State University, USA. Electronic address: kofler@psy.fsu.edu.
(3)University of Virginia Health Systems, USA.
(4)University of Mississippi Medical Center, USA.

Although not often discussed in clinical settings, motor vehicle driving is a
complex multitasking endeavor during which a momentary attention lapse can have
devastating consequences. Previous research suggests that drivers with high
incidence psychiatric disabilities such as ADHD contribute disproportionately to
collision rates, which in turn portend myriad adverse social, financial, health,
mortality, and legal outcomes. However, self-referral bias and the lack of
psychiatric comparison groups constrain the generalizability of these findings.
The current study addressed these limitations and examined the unique
associations among ADHD, Depression, and adverse driving outcomes, independent
of self-selection, driving exposure, and referral bias. The Strategic Highway
Research Program (SHRP-2) Naturalistic Driving Study comprises U.S. drivers from
six sites selected via probability-based sampling. Groups were defined by
Barkley ADHD and psychiatric diagnosis questionnaires, and included ADHD
(n = 275), Depression (n = 251), and Healthy Control (n = 1828). Primary
outcomes included self-reported traffic collisions, moving violations,
collision-related injuries, and collision fault (last 3 years). Accounting for
demographic differences, ADHD but not Depression portended increased risk for
multiple violations (OR = 2.3) and multiple collisions (OR = 2.2). ADHD but not
Depression portended increased risk for collision fault (OR = 2.1). Depression
but not ADHD predicted increased risk for self-reported injury following
collisions (OR = 2.4). ADHD appears uniquely associated with multiple
collisions, multiple violations, and collision fault, whereas Depression is
uniquely associated with self-reported injury following a collision.
Identification of the specific mechanisms underlying this risk will be critical
to designing effective interventions to improve long-term functioning for
drivers with high incidence psychiatric disability.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.03.009
PMID: 25843156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
