---
reference_id: "PMID:36918105"
title: Long-term outcome of cervical artery dissection.
authors:
- Janquli M
- Selvarajah L
- Moloney MA
- Kavanagh E
- "O'Neill DC"
- Medani M
journal: J Vasc Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2023.03.020
keywords:
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Carotid Artery, Internal, Dissection/complications, diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- "Vertebral Artery Dissection/complications, diagnostic imaging, therapy"
- Neck Pain/etiology
- "Constriction, Pathologic"
- Aftercare
- Patient Discharge
- Cerebrovascular Disorders
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography
- Headache
- Arteries/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term outcome of cervical artery dissection.
**Authors:** Janquli M, Selvarajah L, Moloney MA, Kavanagh E, O'Neill DC, Medani M
**Journal:** J Vasc Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jvs.2023.03.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2023.03.020)

## Content

1. J Vasc Surg. 2023 Jul;78(1):158-165. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2023.03.020. Epub 2023
 Mar 12.

Long-term outcome of cervical artery dissection.

Janquli M(1), Selvarajah L(2), Moloney MA(2), Kavanagh E(2), O'Neill DC(2),
Medani M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, University Hospital Limerick, University of
Limerick, Limerick, Ireland; Department of Radiology, University Hospital
Limerick, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland. Electronic address:
mohammedjanquli@rcsi.com.
(2)Department of Vascular Surgery, University Hospital Limerick, University of
Limerick, Limerick, Ireland; Department of Radiology, University Hospital
Limerick, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study is to evaluate the natural history of
extracranial cervical artery dissection (CAD) including comorbidities, symptoms
at presentation, recurrence of symptoms, and long-term outcome following
different treatment approaches.
METHODS: A retrospective review of patients treated for acute CAD was performed
over a 5-year period from January 2017 to April 2022.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients were included in the study, 25 (64.1%) with acute
internal carotid artery dissection and 14 (35.9%) with acute vertebral artery
dissection. Thirty-four patients (87.1%) had spontaneous CAD, and five patients
(12.8%) had traumatic CAD. The mean age of the cohort was 54.2 years. The mean
time from symptom onset to presentation was 4.34 days. The most common symptoms
in internal carotid artery dissection were unilateral weakness (44%), headache
(44%), slurred speech (36%), facial droop (28%), unilateral paraesthesia (24%),
neck pain (12%), visual disturbance (8%), and Horner's syndrome (8%). The most
common symptoms in vertebral artery dissection were headache (35.7%), neck pain
(35.7%), vertigo (28.57%), ataxia (14.28%), and slurred speech (14.28%). The
imaging modalities used for diagnosis included computed tomography angiography
(48.7%), magnetic resonance angiography (41%), and duplex ultrasound (10.2%). In
patients with carotid artery dissection, 57% had severe stenosis, 24% had
moderate stenosis, and 20% had mild stenosis. All patients treated were managed
conservatively with either anticoagulation or antiplatelets. Long-term clinical
follow-up was available for 33 patients (84.6%). Thirty patients (90.9%)
reported complete resolution of symptoms, and three patients (9%) reported
persistent symptoms. Anatomic follow-up with imaging was available for 17
patients (43.58%). Thirteen patients (76.47%) had complete resolution of
dissection, two patients (11.76%) had partial resolution of dissection, and two
patients (11.76%) had persistent dissection. There was one death unrelated to
CAD in a multi-trauma patient. There were four early recurrent symptoms in the
first 3 to 8 weeks post discharge. The mean follow-up time was 308.27 days.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of CADs can be managed conservatively with good
clinical and anatomical outcome and low rates of recurrence.

Copyright © 2023 Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2023.03.020
PMID: 36918105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
