---
reference_id: "PMID:21734245"
title: "Infectious diseases in patients with IRAK-4, MyD88, NEMO, or IκBα deficiency."
authors:
- Picard C
- Casanova JL
- Puel A
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00001-11
keywords:
- "Bacterial Infections/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "I-kappa B Kinase/deficiency, genetics"
- "I-kappa B Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- "Interleukin-1 Receptor-Associated Kinases/deficiency, genetics"
- Mutation
- "Myeloid Differentiation Factor 88/deficiency, genetics"
- NF-KappaB Inhibitor alpha
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infectious diseases in patients with IRAK-4, MyD88, NEMO, or IκBα deficiency.
**Authors:** Picard C, Casanova JL, Puel A
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00001-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00001-11)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2011 Jul;24(3):490-7. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00001-11.

Infectious diseases in patients with IRAK-4, MyD88, NEMO, or IκBα deficiency.

Picard C(1), Casanova JL, Puel A.

Author information:
(1)Study Center of Primary Immunodeficiencies, Assistance Publique Hoˆpitaux de 
Paris, Necker Hospital, France. capucine.picard@inserm.fr

Autosomal recessive IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiencies predispose affected patients 
to recurrent invasive pyogenic bacterial infection. Both defects result in the 
selective impairment of cellular responses to Toll-like receptors (TLRs) other 
than TLR3 and of cellular responses to most interleukin-1 receptors (IL-1Rs), 
including IL-1R, IL-18R, and IL-33R. Hypomorphic mutations in the X-linked NEMO 
gene and hypermorphic mutations in the autosomal IKBA gene cause X-linked 
recessive and autosomal dominant anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with 
immunodeficiency (EDA-ID) syndromes. Both of these defects impair NF-κB-mediated 
cellular responses to multiple receptors, including TLRs, IL-1Rs, and tumor 
necrosis factor receptors (TNF-Rs). They therefore confer a much broader 
predisposition to infections than that for IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiencies. These 
disorders were initially thought to be rare but have now been diagnosed in over 
170 patients worldwide. We review here the infectious diseases affecting 
patients with inborn errors of NF-κB-dependent TLR and IL-1R immunity.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00001-11
PMCID: PMC3131061
PMID: 21734245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]