---
reference_id: "PMID:33972170"
title: "Increases in Frequent Vaping of Cannabis Among High School Seniors in the United States, 2018-2019."
authors:
- Palamar JJ
journal: J Adolesc Health
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.03.034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increases in Frequent Vaping of Cannabis Among High School Seniors in the United States, 2018-2019.
**Authors:** Palamar JJ
**Journal:** J Adolesc Health (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.03.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.03.034)

## Content

1. J Adolesc Health. 2021 Jul;69(1):153-156. doi:
10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.03.034.  Epub 2021 May 7.

Increases in Frequent Vaping of Cannabis Among High School Seniors in the United 
States, 2018-2019.

Palamar JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health, New York University Grossman School of 
Medicine, New York, New York. Electronic address: joseph.palamar@nyulangone.org.

PURPOSE: Studies have examined trends in cannabis vaping, but research is needed 
to examine trends in more frequent use as this may increase risk for adverse 
health outcomes.
METHODS: Data were from 12,561 high school seniors participating in the 
Monitoring the Future national study. Prevalence of self-reported frequent 
vaping of cannabis (defined as using ≥10 times in the past month) was compared 
between 2018 and 2019 cohorts.
RESULTS: Frequent vaping of cannabis significantly increased from 2.1% to 4.9%, 
a 131.4% increase. This increase was larger than the increase for any vaping of 
cannabis (which increased 85.9%). Notable significant increases occurred among 
students aged ≥18 years (a 154.9% increase), female students (a 183.5% 
increase), those who go out 4-7 evenings per week (a 163.0% increase), and those 
reporting past-year nonmedical prescription opioid use (a 184.7% increase).
CONCLUSIONS: Frequent vaping of cannabis is increasing among adolescents in the 
United States, particularly among selected subgroups.

Copyright © 2021 Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.03.034
PMCID: PMC8238831
PMID: 33972170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest: The author declares no 
conflict of interest.