---
reference_id: "PMID:37512487"
title: Low Fasting Concentrations of Glucagon in Patients with Very Long-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Stenlid R
- Manell H
- Seth R
- Cerenius SY
- Chowdhury A
- Roa Cortés C
- Nyqvist I
- Lundqvist T
- Halldin M
- Bergsten P
journal: Metabolites
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/metabo13070780
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low Fasting Concentrations of Glucagon in Patients with Very Long-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Stenlid R, Manell H, Seth R, Cerenius SY, Chowdhury A, Roa Cortés C, Nyqvist I, Lundqvist T, Halldin M, Bergsten P
**Journal:** Metabolites (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/metabo13070780](https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo13070780)

## Content

1. Metabolites. 2023 Jun 22;13(7):780. doi: 10.3390/metabo13070780.

Low Fasting Concentrations of Glucagon in Patients with Very Long-Chain Acyl-CoA 
Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Stenlid R(1), Manell H(2), Seth R(1), Cerenius SY(1), Chowdhury A(1), Roa Cortés 
C(1), Nyqvist I(1), Lundqvist T(3), Halldin M(3), Bergsten P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, SE75123 Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, SE75185 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institute, SE17177 
Stockholm, Sweden.

(1) Background: Deficiencies of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation (FAO) define 
a subgroup of inborn errors of metabolism, with medium-chain acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency (MCAD) and very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency (VLCAD) being two of the most common. Hypoketotic hypoglycemia is a 
feared clinical complication and the treatment focuses on avoiding hypoglycemia. 
In contrast, carnitine uptake deficiency (CUD) is treated as a mild disease 
without significant effects on FAO. Impaired FAO has experimentally been shown 
to impair glucagon secretion. Glucagon is an important glucose-mobilizing 
hormone. If and how glucagon is affected in patients with VLCAD or MCAD remains 
unknown. (2) Methods: A cross-sectional study was performed with plasma hormone 
concentrations quantified after four hours of fasting. Patients with VLCAD (n = 
10), MCAD (n = 7) and CUD (n = 6) were included. (3) Results: The groups were 
similar in age, sex, weight, and height. The glucagon and insulin levels were 
significantly lower in the VLCAD group compared to the CUD group (p < 0.05, 
respectively). The patients with CUD had glucagon concentrations similar to the 
normative data. No significant differences were seen in GLP-1, glicentin, 
glucose, amino acids, or NEFAs. (4) Conclusions: Low fasting concentrations of 
glucagon are present in patients with VLCAD and cannot be explained by altered 
stimuli in plasma.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo13070780
PMCID: PMC10386500
PMID: 37512487

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.