---
reference_id: "PMID:31559771"
title: Diagnostic Value of Low Platelets in Malaria.
authors:
- Varadaraj SLG
- Tripathy GCN
- Nithiya DR
journal: J Assoc Physicians India
year: '2019'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic Value of Low Platelets in Malaria.
**Authors:** Varadaraj SLG, Tripathy GCN, Nithiya DR
**Journal:** J Assoc Physicians India (2019)

## Content

1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2019 Jul;67(7):61-64.

Diagnostic Value of Low Platelets in Malaria.

Varadaraj SLG(1), Tripathy GCN(2), Nithiya DR(3).

Author information:
(1)Graded Specialist, Department of Medicine , Corresponding Author.
(2)Classified Specialist (Aviation Medicine), 15 Air Force Hospital, Jaisalmer, 
Rajasthan.
(3)Assistant Professor, Department of Physiology, Mahatma Gandhi Medical College 
and Research Institute, Puducherry.

OBJECTIVE: To study the incidence of thrombocytopenia in adults with Plasmodium 
vivax infection.
METHOD: An observational study comprising 84 consenting individuals with 
Plasmodium vivax infection was undertaken. All the individuals belong to armed 
forces who are from different parts of the country. Everyone had normal platelet 
count prior to admission to the hospital. After admission, they were subjected 
to routine hematological and biochemical investigations comprising complete 
blood count including platelet counts, urine routine, liver function test, renal 
function test, serum electrolytes and Chest X-ray after ruling out Dengue, 
concomitant sepsis and possibility of recent viral infection. Grading of 
thrombocytopenia was done according to NCI common terminology criteria for 
adverse events Version 3.0. Results were analysed and tabulated.
RESULT: A total of 84 patients were studied. 82 (97.6%) patients had 
thrombocytopenia. Majority (68.3%) of the patients had their lowest platelet 
count on the 5th and 6th day of fever. There was no associated increase in risk 
of complication with the increase in grade of thrombocytopenia. But with 
increase in severity of thrombocytopenia, it took more time for the platelets to 
recover to normal level.
CONCLUSION: Thrombocytopenia is widely present in P. vivax malaria of adults. 
However, the severity of thrombocytopenia does not correlate with the likely 
progression to complication. The chance of progressing to complicated malaria is 
equal among all adults of P.vivax malaria irrespective of the platelet levels. 
Hence, in a resource limited rural Indian set-up where the expertise to diagnose 
and detect malaria microscopically or reliable antigen detection method is not 
available, thrombocytopenia in an acute febrile illness especially on Day 5 to 
Day 6 of fever onset could be considered as P. vivax malarial infection with 
good amount of diagnostic accuracy (sensitivity of 97.6%) and empirical 
anti-malarial therapy could be started as per the existing treatment guidelines.

© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2011.

PMID: 31559771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]