---
reference_id: "PMID:23830563"
title: Virus interactions with endocytic pathways in macrophages and dendritic cells.
authors:
- Mercer J
- Greber UF
journal: Trends Microbiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2013.06.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Virus interactions with endocytic pathways in macrophages and dendritic cells.
**Authors:** Mercer J, Greber UF
**Journal:** Trends Microbiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tim.2013.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2013.06.001)

## Content

1. Trends Microbiol. 2013 Aug;21(8):380-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2013.06.001. Epub 
2013 Jul 3.

Virus interactions with endocytic pathways in macrophages and dendritic cells.

Mercer J(1), Greber UF.

Author information:
(1)Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule (ETH) Zürich, Institute of Biochemistry, 
Schafmattstr. 18, CH-8093, Zürich, Switzerland. jason.mercer@bc.biol.ethz.ch

Macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs) are at the front line of defence against 
fungi, bacteria, and viruses. Together with physical barriers, such as mucus and 
a range of antimicrobial compounds, they constitute a major part of the 
intrinsic and innate immune systems. They have elaborate features, including 
pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and specialized endocytic mechanisms, 
cytokines and chemokines, and the ability to call on reserves. As masters of 
manipulation and counter-attack, viruses shunt intrinsic and innate recognition, 
enter immune cells, and spread from these cells throughout an organism. Here, we 
review mechanisms by which viruses subvert endocytic and pathogen-sensing 
functions of macrophages and DCs, while highlighting possible strategic 
advantages of infecting cells normally tuned into pathogen destruction.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2013.06.001
PMID: 23830563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]