---
reference_id: "PMID:25427950"
title: "Compound heterozygosity for a frame shift mutation and a likely pathogenic sequence variant in the planar cell polarity—ciliogenesis gene WDPCP in a girl with polysyndactyly, coarctation of the aorta, and tongue hamartomas."
authors:
- Saari J
- Lovell MA
- Yu HC
- Bellus GA
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36852
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Aortic Coarctation/diagnosis, genetics"
- Biopsy
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Facies
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Hamartoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- RNA Splice Sites
- Radiography
- "Syndactyly/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Tongue Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Compound heterozygosity for a frame shift mutation and a likely pathogenic sequence variant in the planar cell polarity—ciliogenesis gene WDPCP in a girl with polysyndactyly, coarctation of the aorta, and tongue hamartomas.
**Authors:** Saari J, Lovell MA, Yu HC, Bellus GA
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36852](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36852)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Feb;167A(2):421-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36852. Epub 2014
 Nov 26.

Compound heterozygosity for a frame shift mutation and a likely pathogenic 
sequence variant in the planar cell polarity—ciliogenesis gene WDPCP in a girl 
with polysyndactyly, coarctation of the aorta, and tongue hamartomas.

Saari J(1), Lovell MA, Yu HC, Bellus GA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Colorado, University of 
Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado.

We report on a young girl with polysyndactyly, coarctation of the aorta, and 
tongue hamartomas. These features are similar to those reported in individuals 
with variant forms of orofaciodigital syndrome known as congenital heart 
defects, hamartomas of the tongue and polysyndactly (CHDHTP: OMIM 217085) 
[Örstavik et al., 1992] and orocardiodigital syndrome [Digilio et al., 1996]. 
Whole exome sequencing revealed that she is a compound heterozygote for a frame 
shift mutation and a likely pathogenic sequence variant in WDPCP, a gene that 
regulates planar cell polarity and ciliogenesis. Results of genotyping in her 
parents and unaffected siblings were consistent with autosomal recessive 
inheritance of the mutation and the WDPCP variant. These results suggest that 
disruption of planar cell polarity and ciliogenesis may result in this unusual 
form of orofaciodigital syndrome.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36852
PMID: 25427950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]