---
reference_id: "PMID:25119037"
title: Inappropriate p53 activation during development induces features of CHARGE syndrome.
authors:
- Van Nostrand JL
- Brady CA
- Jung H
- Fuentes DR
- Kozak MM
- Johnson TM
- Lin CY
- Lin CJ
- Swiderski DL
- Vogel H
- Bernstein JA
- Attié-Bitach T
- Chang CP
- Wysocka J
- Martin DM
- Attardi LD
journal: Nature
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/nature13585
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism"
- Alleles
- Animals
- Apoptosis/genetics
- "CHARGE Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Cycle Checkpoints/genetics
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Ear/abnormalities
- "Embryo, Mammalian/abnormalities, metabolism"
- Female
- Fibroblasts
- Gene Deletion
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Mutant Proteins/metabolism
- Phenotype
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- "Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inappropriate p53 activation during development induces features of CHARGE syndrome.
**Authors:** Van Nostrand JL, Brady CA, Jung H, Fuentes DR, Kozak MM, Johnson TM, Lin CY, Lin CJ, Swiderski DL, Vogel H, Bernstein JA, Attié-Bitach T, Chang CP, Wysocka J, Martin DM, Attardi LD
**Journal:** Nature (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature13585](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13585)

## Content

1. Nature. 2014 Oct 9;514(7521):228-32. doi: 10.1038/nature13585. Epub 2014 Aug
3.

Inappropriate p53 activation during development induces features of CHARGE 
syndrome.

Van Nostrand JL(1), Brady CA(2), Jung H(1), Fuentes DR(3), Kozak MM(2), Johnson 
TM(2), Lin CY(4), Lin CJ(5), Swiderski DL(6), Vogel H(4), Bernstein JA(7), 
Attié-Bitach T(8), Chang CP(9), Wysocka J(10), Martin DM(11), Attardi LD(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Division of Radiation and Cancer Biology, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
(2)1] Department of Radiation Oncology, Division of Radiation and Cancer 
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA 
[2] Cardiovascular Research Center and Division of Cardiology, Department of 
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, 
Massachusetts 02129, USA (C.A.B.); Department of Medicine, University of Central 
Florida, Orlando, Florida 32827, USA (M.M.K.); Department of Emergency Medicine, 
Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA (T.M.J.).
(3)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California 94305, USA.
(5)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California 94305, USA.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California 94305, USA.
(8)1] Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, 75015 
Paris, France [2] Unite INSERM U1163, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris 
Cité, Institut Imagine, 75015 Paris, France.
(9)Krannert Institute of Cardiology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.
(10)1] Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA [2] Department of Developmental 
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, 
USA.
(11)1] Department of Pediatrics, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [2] Department of Human Genetics, The University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
(12)1] Department of Radiation Oncology, Division of Radiation and Cancer 
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA 
[2] Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California 94305, USA.

CHARGE syndrome is a multiple anomaly disorder in which patients present with a 
variety of phenotypes, including ocular coloboma, heart defects, choanal 
atresia, retarded growth and development, genitourinary hypoplasia and ear 
abnormalities. Despite 70-90% of CHARGE syndrome cases resulting from mutations 
in the gene CHD7, which encodes an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeller, the 
pathways underlying the diverse phenotypes remain poorly understood. 
Surprisingly, our studies of a knock-in mutant mouse strain that expresses a 
stabilized and transcriptionally dead variant of the tumour-suppressor protein 
p53 (p53(25,26,53,54)), along with a wild-type allele of p53 (also known as 
Trp53), revealed late-gestational embryonic lethality associated with a host of 
phenotypes that are characteristic of CHARGE syndrome, including coloboma, inner 
and outer ear malformations, heart outflow tract defects and craniofacial 
defects. We found that the p53(25,26,53,54) mutant protein stabilized and 
hyperactivated wild-type p53, which then inappropriately induced its target 
genes and triggered cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis during development. 
Importantly, these phenotypes were only observed with a wild-type p53 allele, as 
p53(25,26,53,54)(/-) embryos were fully viable. Furthermore, we found that CHD7 
can bind to the p53 promoter, thereby negatively regulating p53 expression, and 
that CHD7 loss in mouse neural crest cells or samples from patients with CHARGE 
syndrome results in p53 activation. Strikingly, we found that p53 heterozygosity 
partially rescued the phenotypes in Chd7-null mouse embryos, demonstrating that 
p53 contributes to the phenotypes that result from CHD7 loss. Thus, 
inappropriate p53 activation during development can promote CHARGE phenotypes, 
supporting the idea that p53 has a critical role in developmental syndromes and 
providing important insight into the mechanisms underlying CHARGE syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/nature13585
PMCID: PMC4192026
PMID: 25119037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]