---
reference_id: "PMID:29231870"
title: "Improving the Care and Treatment of Monkeypox Patients in Low-Resource Settings: Applying Evidence from Contemporary Biomedical and Smallpox Biodefense Research."
authors:
- Reynolds MG
- McCollum AM
- Nguete B
- Shongo Lushima R
- Petersen BW
journal: Viruses
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3390/v9120380
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Improving the Care and Treatment of Monkeypox Patients in Low-Resource Settings: Applying Evidence from Contemporary Biomedical and Smallpox Biodefense Research.
**Authors:** Reynolds MG, McCollum AM, Nguete B, Shongo Lushima R, Petersen BW
**Journal:** Viruses (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v9120380](https://doi.org/10.3390/v9120380)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2017 Dec 12;9(12):380. doi: 10.3390/v9120380.

Improving the Care and Treatment of Monkeypox Patients in Low-Resource Settings: 
Applying Evidence from Contemporary Biomedical and Smallpox Biodefense Research.

Reynolds MG(1), McCollum AM(2), Nguete B(3), Shongo Lushima R(4), Petersen 
BW(5).

Author information:
(1)US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Poxvirus and Rabies Branch, 
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. nzr6@cdc.gov.
(2)US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Poxvirus and Rabies Branch, 
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. azv4@cdc.gov.
(3)Kinshasa School of Public Health, Kinshasa 11850, Congo. 
beatanguete13@gmail.com.
(4)Ministry of Health, Kinshasa 11842, Congo. robert_shongo@yahoo.fr.
(5)US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Poxvirus and Rabies Branch, 
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. ige3@cdc.gov.

Monkeypox is a smallpox-like illness that can be accompanied by a range of 
significant medical complications. To date there are no standard or optimized 
guidelines for the clinical management of monkeypox (MPX) patients, particularly 
in low-resource settings. Consequently, patients can experience protracted 
illness and poor outcomes. Improving care necessitates developing a better 
understanding of the range of clinical manifestations-including complications 
and sequelae-as well as of features of illness that may be predictive of illness 
severity and poor outcomes. Experimental and natural infection of non-human 
primates with monkeypox virus can inform the approach to improving patient care, 
and may suggest options for pharmaceutical intervention. These studies have 
traditionally been performed to address the threat of smallpox bioterrorism and 
were designed with the intent of using MPX as a disease surrogate for smallpox. 
In many cases this necessitated employing high-dose, inhalational or intravenous 
challenge to recapitulate the severe manifestations of illness seen with 
smallpox. Overall, these data-and data from biomedical research involving burns, 
superficial wounds, herpes, eczema vaccinatum, and so forth-suggest that MPX 
patients could benefit from clinical support to mitigate the consequences of 
compromised skin and mucosa. This should include prevention and treatment of 
secondary bacterial infections (and other complications), ensuring adequate 
hydration and nutrition, and protecting vulnerable anatomical locations such as 
the eyes and genitals. A standard of care that considers these factors should be 
developed and assessed in different settings, using clinical metrics specific 
for MPX alongside consideration of antiviral therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/v9120380
PMCID: PMC5744154
PMID: 29231870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.