---
reference_id: "PMID:36300209"
title: "Hypogonadism in adolescent girls: treatment and long-term effects."
authors:
- Voutsadaki K
- Matalliotakis M
- Ladomenou F
journal: Acta Biomed
year: '2022'
doi: 10.23750/abm.v93i5.13719
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Female
- Humans
- "Puberty, Delayed/drug therapy, etiology"
- Progesterone/therapeutic use
- "Hypogonadism/diagnosis, drug therapy, complications"
- Estrogens
- Estradiol/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypogonadism in adolescent girls: treatment and long-term effects.
**Authors:** Voutsadaki K, Matalliotakis M, Ladomenou F
**Journal:** Acta Biomed (2022)
**DOI:** [10.23750/abm.v93i5.13719](https://doi.org/10.23750/abm.v93i5.13719)

## Content

1. Acta Biomed. 2022 Oct 26;93(5):e2022317. doi: 10.23750/abm.v93i5.13719.

Hypogonadism in adolescent girls: treatment and long-term effects.

Voutsadaki K(1), Matalliotakis M(2), Ladomenou F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Venizeleion General Hospital Heraklion, Crete,
Greece . cliovou@hotmail.gr.
(2)Obstetrics and Gynecology Department of Venizeleion General Hospital
Heraklion, Crete, Greece. mihalismat@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Venizeleion General Hospital Heraklion, Crete,
Greece . fladomenou@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Hypogonadism in adolescent females presents as delayed
puberty or primary amenorrhea. Constitutional delay of growth and puberty,
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism represent the
principal differential diagnosis of delayed puberty. Girls with hypogonadism
require hormone replacement therapy to initiate and sustain puberty. We aimed to
provide a brief review concerning treatment for female adolescents with
hypogonadism and further to focus on current data regarding long-term effects of
therapy.
METHODS: The published studies and articles of the international literature were
used regarding the approach to adolescent girls with hypogonadism.
RESULTS: The aim of therapy is the development of secondary sexual
characteristics and achievement of target height, body composition and bone
mass, to promote psychosexual health and, finally, to maximize the potential for
fertility. Hypogonadal females need long-term HRT, so it is of great importance
to fully define risks and benefits of therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The optimal pubertal induction in women contains both estrogens and
progesterone regimens.  Different therapeutic options have been described over
the years in the literature, but larger randomized trials are required in order
to define the ideal approach. The latest acquisitions in the field seem to
propose that transdermal 17β-estradiol and micronized progesterone present the
most physiological formulations available for this purpose. Further studies and
follow up are needed concerning the long-term effects of HRT in adolescents.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v93i5.13719
PMCID: PMC9686158
PMID: 36300209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Each author declares that he or she has no
commercial associations (e.g., consultancies, stock ownership, equity interest,
patent/licensing arrangement etc.) that might pose a conflict of interest in
connection with the submitted article
