---
reference_id: "PMID:9524360"
title: Procollagen N-proteinase and procollagen C-proteinase. Two unusual metalloproteinases that are essential for procollagen processing probably have important roles in development and cell signaling.
authors:
- Prockop DJ
- Sieron AL
- Li SW
journal: Matrix Biol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0945-053x(98)90013-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Procollagen N-proteinase and procollagen C-proteinase. Two unusual metalloproteinases that are essential for procollagen processing probably have important roles in development and cell signaling.
**Authors:** Prockop DJ, Sieron AL, Li SW
**Journal:** Matrix Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0945-053x(98)90013-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0945-053x(98)90013-0)

## Content

1. Matrix Biol. 1998 Feb;16(7):399-408. doi: 10.1016/s0945-053x(98)90013-0.

Procollagen N-proteinase and procollagen C-proteinase. Two unusual 
metalloproteinases that are essential for procollagen processing probably have 
important roles in development and cell signaling.

Prockop DJ(1), Sieron AL, Li SW.

Author information:
(1)Center for Gene Therapy, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

As soon as procollagen precursors of fibrillar collagens were discovered in the 
early 1970s, it became apparent that connective tissues must contain proteolytic 
activities that cleave the N-propeptides and the C-propeptides from 
procollagens. Isolation and characterization of the enzymic activities, however, 
proved to be unexpectedly difficult. Both proteinases are large and are 
synthesized in several different forms with polypeptide chains ranging in size 
from 70 kDa to about 130 kDa. The N-proteinase has the unusual property of 
cleaving the N-propeptides from type I and type II procollagens if the proteins 
are in a native conformation, but not if the proteins are partially unfolded so 
that the N-telopeptides are no longer in a hair-pin configuration. The 
C-proteinase specifically cleaves native and denatured types I, II and III 
procollagens. It also specifically cleaves a precursor of lysyl oxidase and 
laminin 5. Both enzymes and their variants have structures that place them in a 
large and expanding super-family of over 200 zinc-binding metalloproteinases. 
The larger of two forms of the N-proteinase contains an RGD sequence for binding 
through integrins and properdin repeats similar to those found in 
thrombospondin. The shorter 70 kDa form of the C-proteinase is identical to the 
protein that was previously identified as bone morphogenic protein-1. Both the 
70 kDa C-proteinase and two larger forms are homologous to proteins that are 
expressed early in development in a variety of organisms, including Drosophila, 
sea urchin, and fish. Therefore, the data suggest that both the N- and 
C-proteinases have important biological functions in addition to the roles in 
the processing of procollagens.

DOI: 10.1016/s0945-053x(98)90013-0
PMID: 9524360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]