---
reference_id: "PMID:17259984"
title: Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B deficiency or inhibition delays ErbB2-induced mammary tumorigenesis and protects from lung metastasis.
authors:
- Julien SG
- Dubé N
- Read M
- Penney J
- Paquet M
- Han Y
- Kennedy BP
- Muller WJ
- Tremblay ML
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/ng1963
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B deficiency or inhibition delays ErbB2-induced mammary tumorigenesis and protects from lung metastasis.
**Authors:** Julien SG, Dubé N, Read M, Penney J, Paquet M, Han Y, Kennedy BP, Muller WJ, Tremblay ML
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1963](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1963)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2007 Mar;39(3):338-46. doi: 10.1038/ng1963. Epub 2007 Jan 28.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B deficiency or inhibition delays ErbB2-induced 
mammary tumorigenesis and protects from lung metastasis.

Julien SG(1), Dubé N, Read M, Penney J, Paquet M, Han Y, Kennedy BP, Muller WJ, 
Tremblay ML.

Author information:
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, 3655 Sir William Osler Promenade, 
Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

We investigated the role of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) in mammary 
tumorigenesis using both genetic and pharmacological approaches. It has been 
previously shown that transgenic mice with a deletion mutation in the region of 
Erbb2 encoding its extracellular domain (referred to as NDL2 mice, for 'Neu 
deletion in extracellular domain 2') develop mammary tumors that progress to 
lung metastasis. However, deletion of PTP1B activity in the NDL2 transgenic mice 
either by breeding with Ptpn1-deficient mice or by treatment with a specific 
PTP1B inhibitor results in significant mammary tumor latency and resistance to 
lung metastasis. In contrast, specific overexpression of PTP1B in the mammary 
gland leads to spontaneous breast cancer development. The regulation of 
ErbB2-induced mammary tumorigenesis by PTB1B occurs through the attenuation of 
both the MAP kinase (MAPK) and Akt pathways. This report provides a rationale 
for the development of PTP1B as a new therapeutic target in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1963
PMID: 17259984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]