---
reference_id: "PMID:20540698"
title: "Vitiligo: pathogenetic hypotheses and targets for current therapies."
authors:
- Guerra L
- Dellambra E
- Brescia S
- Raskovic D
journal: Curr Drug Metab
year: '2010'
doi: 10.2174/138920010791526105
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitiligo: pathogenetic hypotheses and targets for current therapies.
**Authors:** Guerra L, Dellambra E, Brescia S, Raskovic D
**Journal:** Curr Drug Metab (2010)
**DOI:** [10.2174/138920010791526105](https://doi.org/10.2174/138920010791526105)

## Content

1. Curr Drug Metab. 2010 Jun 1;11(5):451-67. doi: 10.2174/138920010791526105.

Vitiligo: pathogenetic hypotheses and targets for current therapies.

Guerra L(1), Dellambra E, Brescia S, Raskovic D.

Author information:
(1)Tissue Engineering and Cutaneous Pathophysiology Laboratory, Istituto 
Dermopatico dell'Immacolata, IDI-IRCCS, Via dei Monti di Creta 104, 00167 Rome, 
Italy. l.guerra@idi.it

Vitiligo is a multifactorial disorder characterized by the appearance of white 
maculae that may spread over the entire body skin. Depigmentation arises from 
the loss of functioning melanocytes. Non segmental vitiligo (NSV) is the most 
common form of the disease: it is usually progressive and may be associated with 
familiarity and autoimmunity. Segmental vitiligo (SV) frequently stabilizes few 
years after its onset. Vitiligo etiology involves multiple pathogenetic factors, 
most of them working in concert. Impaired antioxidative defences lead to 
accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which affect melanocytes. 
Mitochondrial membrane lipid peroxidation may participate to ROS overproduction. 
A temporal sequence may connect oxidative stress and autoimmunity. Overall, a 
genetic predisposition renders vitiligo melanocytes more susceptible to 
precipitating factors than normal healthy melanocytes. The definition of 
isolated or superimposed manifestations of polygenic skin disorders has been 
proposed for SV and SV-NSV association. Keratinocytes and melanocytes are both 
affected and apoptosis, ageing or melanocythorragy are the ultimate effects of 
the complex deregulation in vitiligo skin. Pathogenetic therapies mainly act by 
inducing immunosuppression and stimulation of melanocyte proliferation and 
migration. Here the most popular hypotheses for the pathogenesis of vitiligo are 
summarized. Fundamental cellular, biochemical and molecular alterations 
accounting for melanocyte destruction in vitiligo are also described. Last, 
pathogenetic approaches in the treatment of such a complex disease are 
discussed, with particular consideration on the cellular and molecular targets 
of the current therapies.

DOI: 10.2174/138920010791526105
PMID: 20540698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]