---
reference_id: "PMID:29260504"
title: Modeling and Control of a Delayed Hepatitis B Virus Model with Incubation Period and Combination Treatment.
authors:
- Sun D
- Liu F
journal: Interdiscip Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12539-017-0275-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling and Control of a Delayed Hepatitis B Virus Model with Incubation Period and Combination Treatment.
**Authors:** Sun D, Liu F
**Journal:** Interdiscip Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12539-017-0275-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12539-017-0275-y)

## Content

1. Interdiscip Sci. 2018 Jun;10(2):375-389. doi: 10.1007/s12539-017-0275-y. Epub 
2017 Dec 19.

Modeling and Control of a Delayed Hepatitis B Virus Model with Incubation Period 
and Combination Treatment.

Sun D(1), Liu F(2).

Author information:
(1)Control and Simulation Center, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 15008, 
China.
(2)Control and Simulation Center, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 15008, 
China. liufei@hit.edu.cn.

In this paper, a hepatitis B virus (HBV) model with an incubation period and 
delayed state and control variables is firstly proposed. Furthermore, the 
combination treatment is adopted to have a longer-lasting effect than 
mono-therapy. The equilibrium points and basic reproduction number are 
calculated, and then the local stability is analyzed on this model. We then 
present optimal control strategies based on the Pontryagin's minimum principle 
with an objective function not only to reduce the levels of exposed cells, 
infected cells and free viruses nearly to zero at the end of therapy, but also 
to minimize the drug side-effect and the cost of treatment. What's more, we 
develop a numerical simulation algorithm for solving our HBV model based on the 
combination of forward and backward difference approximations. The state 
dynamics of uninfected cells, exposed cells, infected cells, free viruses, CTL 
and ALT are simulated with or without optimal control, which show that HBV is 
reduced nearly to zero based on the time-varying optimal control strategies 
whereas the disease would break out without control. At last, by the 
simulations, we prove that strategy A is the best among the three kinds of 
strategies we adopt and further comparisons have been done between model (1) and 
model (2).

DOI: 10.1007/s12539-017-0275-y
PMID: 29260504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]