---
reference_id: "PMID:445864"
title: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia. A genetic study of 13 Finnish families.
authors:
- von Wendt L
- Hirvasniemi A
- Similä S
journal: Clin Genet
year: '1979'
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.1979.tb01773.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- Finland
- Gene Frequency
- Glycine/blood
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonketotic hyperglycinemia. A genetic study of 13 Finnish families.
**Authors:** von Wendt L, Hirvasniemi A, Similä S
**Journal:** Clin Genet (1979)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1399-0004.1979.tb01773.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0004.1979.tb01773.x)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 1979 May;15(5):411-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.1979.tb01773.x.

Nonketotic hyperglycinemia. A genetic study of 13 Finnish families.

von Wendt L, Hirvasniemi A, Similä S.

In Finland, 19 children, born 1964--1977, from 13 families, have been diagnosed 
as suffering from nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH). This gives an incidence for 
NKH in the Finnish population of 1:55,000 newborns. The majority of these 
children were born in the northern part of the country, where the incidence is 
1:12,000. The geographical distribution of the birth-places of the grandparents 
also seems to point towards an enrichment of the gene in northern Finland. An 
autosomal recessive mode of inheritance for this disease seems probable, since 
the corrected proportion of affected siblings (Apert's a priori method) is 
0.288. Abnormally high plasma glycine concentration and elevated glycine urinary 
excretion in the parents of the NKH-children suggest the existence of a minor 
metabolic defect in heterozygotes of this disease. Some of the healthy siblings 
of the NKH-patients also show similary elevated levels. However, a definite 
diagnosis of the NKH-heterozygote state cannot easily be made on the basis of 
these laboratory findings, as the levels in some individuals are very close to, 
or even overlap corresponding values in a normal material.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.1979.tb01773.x
PMID: 445864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]