---
reference_id: "PMID:9818845"
title: "Treating repetitive seizures with a rectal diazepam formulation: a randomized study. The North American Diastat Study Group."
authors:
- Cereghino JJ
- Mitchell WG
- Murphy J
- Kriel RL
- Rosenfeld WE
- Trevathan E
journal: Neurology
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.51.5.1274
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treating repetitive seizures with a rectal diazepam formulation: a randomized study. The North American Diastat Study Group.
**Authors:** Cereghino JJ, Mitchell WG, Murphy J, Kriel RL, Rosenfeld WE, Trevathan E
**Journal:** Neurology (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.51.5.1274](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.51.5.1274)

## Content

1. Neurology. 1998 Nov;51(5):1274-82. doi: 10.1212/wnl.51.5.1274.

Treating repetitive seizures with a rectal diazepam formulation: a randomized 
study. The North American Diastat Study Group.

Cereghino JJ(1), Mitchell WG, Murphy J, Kriel RL, Rosenfeld WE, Trevathan E.

Author information:
(1)Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland 97201-3098, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effectiveness and safety of a single-dose treatment 
for acute repetitive seizure (ARS) episodes (e.g., clusters) administered in a 
nonmedical setting by caregivers.
BACKGROUND: Patients with epilepsy may experience ARS episodes despite optimal 
anticonvulsant treatment. Such episodes require rapid treatment as medical 
emergencies. Typically, the patient is treated in an emergency medical setting 
with i.v. medication by trained medical personnel.
METHODS: The authors undertook a multicenter, randomized, parallel, double-blind 
study of a single administration of Diastat (diazepam rectal gel) for treating 
episodes of ARS. ARS episodes and treatment criteria were defined for each 
patient at the start of the study. Caregivers were taught to determine ARS 
episode onset, administer a predetermined dose of study medication, monitor 
outcome, count respirations, and record seizures and adverse events.
RESULTS: A total of 29 centers enrolled 158 patients, of whom 114 patients had a 
treated ARS episode (Diastat, n = 56; placebo, n = 58). Diastat treatment 
reduced median seizure frequency (p = 0.029). More Diastat patients were seizure 
free post-treatment (Diastat, 55%; placebo, 34%; p = 0.031). Kaplan-Meier 
analysis of the time to the next seizure favored Diastat treatment (p < 0.007). 
The most common adverse event was somnolence.
CONCLUSION: Administration of a single rectal dose of Diastat was significantly 
more effective than placebo in reducing the number of seizures following an 
episode of ARS. Caregivers could administer treatment safely and effectively in 
a nonmedical setting.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.51.5.1274
PMID: 9818845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]