---
reference_id: "PMID:38021591"
title: "Alport Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review."
authors:
- Adone A
- Anjankar A
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.47129
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alport Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review.
**Authors:** Adone A, Anjankar A
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.47129](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.47129)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Oct 16;15(10):e47129. doi: 10.7759/cureus.47129. eCollection 2023
 Oct.

Alport Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review.

Adone A(1), Anjankar A(2).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of Higher 
Education and Research, Wardha, IND.
(2)Biochemistry, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of 
Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

Alport syndrome is an genetic disorder that distresses the basement membrane of 
the kidneys and can also impact other organs, such as the cochlea of the inner 
ear and eyes. It is characterized by mutation causing abnormalities in the 
collagen within the basement membrane, which has a crucial role in the 
filtration process of the kidneys. These abnormalities lead to progressive 
kidney damage and often result in chronic kidney disease. In some cases of 
Alport syndrome, the abnormal collagen can also affect the cochlea in the inner 
ear, leading to sensorineural hearing loss. Additionally, changes in the ocular 
lens, named anterior lenticonus, can occur, causing vision problems. Alport 
syndrome can manifest differently among individuals, and its severity can vary. 
Some people may experience mild symptoms, while others may develop more severe 
kidney problems, including end-stage renal disease, which may need dialysis or 
kidney transplant. Treatment for Alport syndrome primarily focuses on managing 
its symptoms and complications. Regular monitoring of kidney function and blood 
pressure, along with medications to control hypertension, are crucial aspects of 
the management plan. In cases of severe kidney damage, kidney transplantation 
may be necessary. As with any medical condition, early detection and 
intervention can improve results and quality of life for persons with Alport 
syndrome. Therefore, if there is a family history of the disorder or any 
concerning symptoms, it is essential to seek medical attention promptly. Genetic 
testing can help confirm the diagnosis and identify affected family members, 
allowing for appropriate monitoring and management.

Copyright © 2023, Adone et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.47129
PMCID: PMC10649250
PMID: 38021591

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.