---
reference_id: "PMID:34350853"
title: "Modeling Manifest Huntington's Disease Prevalence Using Diagnosed Incidence and Survival Time."
authors:
- Crowell V
- Houghton R
- Tomar A
- Fernandes T
- Squitieri F
journal: Neuroepidemiology
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000516767
keywords:
- Europe
- Germany
- Humans
- Huntington Disease/epidemiology
- Incidence
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling Manifest Huntington's Disease Prevalence Using Diagnosed Incidence and Survival Time.
**Authors:** Crowell V, Houghton R, Tomar A, Fernandes T, Squitieri F
**Journal:** Neuroepidemiology (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000516767](https://doi.org/10.1159/000516767)

## Content

1. Neuroepidemiology. 2021;55(5):361-368. doi: 10.1159/000516767. Epub 2021 Jul
15.

Modeling Manifest Huntington's Disease Prevalence Using Diagnosed Incidence and 
Survival Time.

Crowell V(1), Houghton R(2), Tomar A(3), Fernandes T(4), Squitieri F(5).

Author information:
(1)Access Insights & Metrics, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Product Development Personalized Healthcare, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., 
Basel, Switzerland.
(3)ZS Associates International Inc., Frankfurt, Germany.
(4)ZS Associates India Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon, India.
(5)Huntington and Rare Diseases Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza Research Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Understanding the epidemiology of Huntington's disease (HD) is key 
to assessing disease burden and the healthcare resources required to meet 
patients' needs. We aimed to develop and validate a model to estimate the 
diagnosed prevalence of manifest HD by the Shoulson-Fahn stage.
METHODS: A literature review identified epidemiological data from Brazil, 
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the UK, and the USA. Data on staging 
distribution at diagnosis, progression, and mortality were derived from 
Enroll-HD. Newly diagnosed patients with manifest HD were simulated by applying 
annual diagnosed incidence rates to the total population in each country, each 
year from 1950 onwards. The number of diagnosed prevalent patients from the 
previous year who remained in each stage was estimated in line with the 
probability of death or progression. Diagnosed prevalence in 2020 was estimated 
as the sum of simulated patients, from all the incident cohorts, still alive.
RESULTS: The model estimates that in 2020, there were 66,787 individuals 
diagnosed with HD in the 8 included countries, of whom 62-63% were in 
Shoulson-Fahn stages 1 and 2 (with less severely limited functional capacity 
than those in stages 3-5). Diagnosed prevalence is estimated to be 8.2-9.0 per 
100,000 in the USA, Canada, and the 5 included European countries and 3.5 per 
100,000 in Brazil.
CONCLUSION: The modeled estimates generally accord with the previously published 
data. This analysis contributes to better understanding of the epidemiology of 
HD and highlights areas of uncertainty.

© 2021 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000516767
PMID: 34350853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]