---
reference_id: "PMID:20301622"
title: Alpha-Thalassemia X-Linked Intellectual Disability Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Stevenson RE
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-Thalassemia X-Linked Intellectual Disability Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Stevenson RE

## Content

1. Alpha-Thalassemia X-Linked Intellectual Disability Syndrome.

Stevenson RE(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Jun 19 [updated 2020 May 28].

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics and Cytogenetics, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, 
South Carolina

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Alpha-thalassemia X-linked intellectual disability 
(ATR-X) syndrome is characterized by distinctive craniofacial features, genital 
anomalies, hypotonia, and mild-to-profound developmental delay / intellectual 
disability (DD/ID). Craniofacial abnormalities include small head circumference, 
telecanthus or widely spaced eyes, short triangular nose, tented upper lip, and 
thick or everted lower lip with coarsening of the facial features over time. 
While all affected individuals have a normal 46,XY karyotype, genital anomalies 
comprise a range from hypospadias and undescended testicles, to severe 
hypospadias and ambiguous genitalia, to normal-appearing female external 
genitalia. Alpha-thalassemia, observed in about 75% of affected individuals, is 
mild and typically does not require treatment. Osteosarcoma has been reported in 
a few males with germline pathogenic variants.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ATR-X syndrome is established in a proband 
with suggestive findings, a 46,XY karyotype, and a hemizygous pathogenic variant 
in ATRX identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: DD/ID, seizures, gastrointestinal 
manifestations and feeding difficulties, excessive drooling, and genital 
anomalies are managed per standard of care. Surveillance: Regular assessment of 
growth and developmental progress in infancy and childhood.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ATR-X syndrome is inherited in an X-linked manner. The 
mother of a proband may be heterozygous (i.e., a carrier) or the affected 
individual may have a de novo pathogenic variant. If the mother of the proband 
has an ATRX pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting it in each pregnancy 
is 50%: sibs with a 46,XY karyotype who inherit the pathogenic variant will be 
affected; sibs with a 46,XX karyotype who inherit the pathogenic variant will be 
heterozygous and will rarely show clinical manifestations. Affected males do not 
reproduce. Once the ATRX pathogenic variant in the family has been identified, 
carrier testing for at-risk females, prenatal testing for pregnancies at 
increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301622