---
reference_id: "PMID:16545696"
title: "Effects of arsenic exposure among semiconductor workers: a cautionary note on urinary 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-deoxyguanosine."
authors:
- Hu CW
- Pan CH
- Huang YL
- Wu MT
- Chang LW
- Wang CJ
- Chao MR
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2005.12.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of arsenic exposure among semiconductor workers: a cautionary note on urinary 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-deoxyguanosine.
**Authors:** Hu CW, Pan CH, Huang YL, Wu MT, Chang LW, Wang CJ, Chao MR
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2005.12.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2005.12.003)

## Content

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Apr 1;40(7):1273-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2005.12.003. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Effects of arsenic exposure among semiconductor workers: a cautionary note on 
urinary 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-deoxyguanosine.

Hu CW(1), Pan CH, Huang YL, Wu MT, Chang LW, Wang CJ, Chao MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Arsenic is a notorious environmental toxicant and was found to cause oxidative 
stress in cultured cells and animals. However, little work has been done in 
human studies, especially for the population occupationally exposed to arsenic. 
In order to investigate the effect of occupational exposure to arsenic in 
oxidative stress, we measured urinary 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-deoxyguanosine 
(8-oxodGuo) from 90 semiconductor workers including 50 exposed and 40 nonexposed 
subjects. A highly sensitive and specific isotope dilution LC-MS/MS method was 
used for quantification of 8-oxodGuo. The levels of inorganic arsenic (iAs3+, 
iAs5+), monomethylarsonic acid (MMA), and dimethylarsinic acid (DMA) in urine 
were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography-flow injection atomic 
absorption spectrometry (HPLC-FIAAS). Results showed that the mean urinary 
concentrations of total arsenic and 8-oxodGuo were significantly higher for 
exposed workers compared with the nonexposed workers. In addition, elevated 
urinary 8-oxodGuo concentrations of exposed workers were correlated with urinary 
levels of MMA (r = 0.44, P < 0.005) and the extent of primary methylation (the 
ratio of MMA to inorganic arsenic) (r = 0.40, P < 0.005). These findings 
suggested that occupational exposure to arsenic could result in the induction of 
oxidative stress. The presence and/or formation of MMA could play an important 
role in arsenic-involved injuries.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2005.12.003
PMID: 16545696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]