---
reference_id: "PMID:19328655"
title: Schizophrenia, "just the facts" 4. Clinical features and conceptualization.
authors:
- Tandon R
- Nasrallah HA
- Keshavan MS
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.03.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Schizophrenia, "just the facts" 4. Clinical features and conceptualization.
**Authors:** Tandon R, Nasrallah HA, Keshavan MS
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2009.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2009.03.005)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2009 May;110(1-3):1-23. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.03.005. Epub
 2009 Mar 27.

Schizophrenia, "just the facts" 4. Clinical features and conceptualization.

Tandon R(1), Nasrallah HA, Keshavan MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Florida College of Medicine, P.O. Box 
100256, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. rtandon@umich.edu

Comment in
    Schizophr Res. 2009 Dec;115(2-3):374. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.09.013.
    Schizophr Res. 2011 May;128(1-3):3-4. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.03.002.

Although dementia praecox or schizophrenia has been considered a unique disease 
entity for the past century, its definitions and boundaries have continued to 
vary over this period. At any given time, the changing concept of schizophrenia 
has been influenced by available diagnostic tools and treatments, related 
conditions from which it most needs to be distinguished, extant knowledge and 
scientific paradigms. There is significant heterogeneity in the etiopathology, 
symptomatology, and course of schizophrenia. It is characterized by an admixture 
of positive, negative, cognitive, mood, and motor symptoms whose severity varies 
across patients and through the course of the illness. Positive symptoms usually 
first begin in adolescence or early adulthood, but are often preceded by varying 
degrees of negative and cognitive symptomatology. Schizophrenia tends to be a 
chronic and relapsing disorder with generally incomplete remissions, variable 
degrees of functional impairment and social disability, frequent comorbid 
substance abuse, and decreased longevity. Although schizophrenia may not 
represent a single disease with a unitary etiology or pathogenetic process, 
alternative approaches have thus far been unsuccessful in better defining this 
syndrome or its component entities. The symptomatologic, course, and 
etio-pathological heterogeneity can usefully be addressed by a dimensional 
approach to psychopathology, a clinical staging approach to illness course, and 
by elucidating endophenotypes and markers of illness progression, respectively. 
This will allow an approach to the deconstruction of schizophrenia into its 
multiple component parts and strategies to reconfigure these components in a 
more meaningful manner. Possible implications for DSM-V and ICD-11 definitions 
of schizophrenia are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.03.005
PMID: 19328655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]