---
reference_id: "PMID:17965227"
title: Age and origin of major Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) mutations in European populations.
authors:
- Witsch-Baumgartner M
- Schwentner I
- Gruber M
- Benlian P
- Bertranpetit J
- Bieth E
- Chevy F
- Clusellas N
- Estivill X
- Gasparini G
- Giros M
- Kelley RI
- Krajewska-Walasek M
- Menzel J
- Miettinen T
- Ogorelkova M
- Rossi M
- Scala I
- Schinzel A
- Schmidt K
- Schönitzer D
- Seemanova E
- Sperling K
- Syrrou M
- Talmud PJ
- Wollnik B
- Krawczak M
- Labuda D
- Utermann G
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.053520
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Europe
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- Founder Effect
- "Genetics, Population"
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Mutation
- Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors/genetics
- Pan troglodytes/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome/enzymology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Age and origin of major Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) mutations in European populations.
**Authors:** Witsch-Baumgartner M, Schwentner I, Gruber M, Benlian P, Bertranpetit J, Bieth E, Chevy F, Clusellas N, Estivill X, Gasparini G, Giros M, Kelley RI, Krajewska-Walasek M, Menzel J, Miettinen T, Ogorelkova M, Rossi M, Scala I, Schinzel A, Schmidt K, Schönitzer D, Seemanova E, Sperling K, Syrrou M, Talmud PJ, Wollnik B, Krawczak M, Labuda D, Utermann G
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2007.053520](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2007.053520)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2008 Apr;45(4):200-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.053520. Epub 2007 Oct
 26.

Age and origin of major Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) mutations in European
populations.

Witsch-Baumgartner M(1), Schwentner I, Gruber M, Benlian P, Bertranpetit J,
Bieth E, Chevy F, Clusellas N, Estivill X, Gasparini G, Giros M, Kelley RI,
Krajewska-Walasek M, Menzel J, Miettinen T, Ogorelkova M, Rossi M, Scala I,
Schinzel A, Schmidt K, Schönitzer D, Seemanova E, Sperling K, Syrrou M, Talmud
PJ, Wollnik B, Krawczak M, Labuda D, Utermann G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical
University Innsbruck, Schoepfstrasse 41, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
Witsch-Baumgartner@i-med.ac.at

BACKGROUND: Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) (MIM 270 400) is an autosomal
recessive multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation syndrome caused by
mutations in the Delta7-sterol reductase (DHCR7, E.C.1.3.1.21) gene. The
prevalence of SLOS has been estimated to range between 1:15000 and 1:60000 in
populations of European origin.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We have analysed the frequency, origin, and age of DHCR7
mutations in European populations. In 263 SLOS patients 10 common alleles
(c.964-1G>C, p.Trp151X, p.Thr93Met, p.Val326Leu, p.Arg352Trp, p.Arg404Cys,
p.Phe302Leu, p.Leu157Pro, p.Gly410Ser, p.Arg445Gln) were found to constitute
approximately 80% of disease-causing mutations. As reported before, the
mutational spectra differed significantly between populations, and frequency
peaks of common mutations were observed in North-West (c.964-1G>C), North-East
(p.Trp151X, p.Val326Leu) and Southern Europe (p.Thr93Met). SLOS was virtually
absent from Finland. The analysis of nearly 8000 alleles from 10 different
European populations confirmed a geographical distribution of DHCR7 mutations as
reported in previous studies. The common Null mutations in Northern Europe
(combined ca. 1:70) occurred at a much higher frequency than expected from the
reported prevalence of SLOS. In contrast the most common mutation in
Mediterranean SLOS patients (p.Thr93Met) had a low population frequency.
Haplotypes were constructed for SLOS chromosomes, and for wild-type chromosomes
of African and European origins using eight cSNPs in the DHCR7 gene. The DHCR7
orthologue was sequenced in eight chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and three
microsatellites were analysed in 50 of the SLOS families in order to estimate
the age of the three major SLOS-causing mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate a time of first appearance of c.964-1G>C and
p.Trp151X some 3000 years ago in North-West and North-East Europe, respectively.
The p.Thr93Met mutations on the J haplotype has probably first arisen
approximately 6000 years ago in the Eastern Mediterranean. Together, it appears
that a combination of founder effects, recurrent mutations, and drift have
shaped the present frequency distribution of DHCR7 mutations in Europe.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2007.053520
PMID: 17965227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
