---
reference_id: "PMID:16543052"
title: Airway smooth muscle as a regulator of immune responses and bronchomotor tone.
authors:
- Lazaar AL
- Panettieri RA Jr
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2005.10.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Airway smooth muscle as a regulator of immune responses and bronchomotor tone.
**Authors:** Lazaar AL, Panettieri RA Jr
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccm.2005.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccm.2005.10.003)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2006 Mar;27(1):53-69, vi. doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2005.10.003.

Airway smooth muscle as a regulator of immune responses and bronchomotor tone.

Lazaar AL(1), Panettieri RA Jr.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Division, University of Pennsylvania 
Medical Center, BRB II/III, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6160, 
USA. Aili.L.Lazaar@gsk.com

The traditional view of airway smooth muscle (ASM) in asthma, as a purely 
contractile tissue, seems to be inadequate. Compelling evidence now suggests 
that ASM plays an important role in regulating bronchomotor tone, in 
perpetuating airway inflammation, and in remodeling of the airways. This article 
reviews three distinct functions of ASM cells: the process of 
excitation-contraction coupling, with a particular focus on the role of 
cytokines in modulating calcium responses; the processes of smooth muscle cell 
proliferation and migration; and the synthetic and immunomodulatory function of 
ASM cells. This article also discusses how altered synthetic function 
contributes to airway remodeling.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccm.2005.10.003
PMID: 16543052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]