---
reference_id: "PMID:11680679"
title: The role of collagen II and cartilage fibril-associated molecules in skeletal development.
authors:
- Aszódi A
- Hunziker EB
- Olsen BR
- Fässler R
journal: Osteoarthritis Cartilage
year: '2001'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of collagen II and cartilage fibril-associated molecules in skeletal development.
**Authors:** Aszódi A, Hunziker EB, Olsen BR, Fässler R
**Journal:** Osteoarthritis Cartilage (2001)

## Content

1. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2001;9 Suppl A:S150-9.

The role of collagen II and cartilage fibril-associated molecules in skeletal 
development.

Aszódi A(1), Hunziker EB, Olsen BR, Fässler R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Lund University, Sweden. 
attila.aszodi@pat.lu.se

OBJECTIVE: The extracellular matrix (ECM) of hyaline cartilage contains an 
elaborated collagen fibrillar network, which is essential for the mechanical 
stability and the proper function of the tissue. Cartilage collagen fibrils 
consist of collagen II, the quantitatively minor collagens IX and XI, and 
several non-collagenous fibril-associated proteins. To understand the role some 
of these molecules in skeletal development, we have generated transgenic mouse 
strains harboring ablated genes for collagens II and IX, and matrilin-1.
DESIGN: Mice lacking collagen II, collagen IX and matrilin-1 have been 
established earlier in our laboratory using standard techniques. To determine 
the consequences of the null mutations we used skeletal staining, histochemical 
and immunohistochemical assays, in situ hybridization and ultrastructural 
analysis.
RESULTS: Transgenic mice deficient in collagen II (Col2a1-/-) die at birth and 
display a severely malformed skeleton characterized by abnormal endochondral 
ossification and impaired intervertebral disc development. Mice lacking collagen 
IX (Col9a1-/-) are viable and develop an osteoarthritis-like phenotype in knee 
joints between 9-12 months of age. To test the possibility that the reduction in 
collagen II content has an influence on the onset of degenerative changes of 
articular cartilage, we have generated mice, which are heterozygous for the 
collagen II null mutation and homozygous for the collagen IX null mutation. 
Col2a1+/- Col9a1-/- mice show no accelerated development of osteoarthritis 
compared with the collagen IX knockout animals. Finally, mice lacking 
matrilin-1, a non-collagenous glycoprotein that binds to both collagen fibrils 
and aggrecan, develop normally without detectable abnormalities in their 
skeleton.
CONCLUSIONS: Our transgenic mouse strains carrying null mutations in genes 
encoding cartilage ECM proteins demonstrate that these proteins have different 
roles during skeletal development. Collagen II is important for cartilage 
formation, collagen IX for cartilage maintenance and matrilin-1 is redundant.

PMID: 11680679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]