---
reference_id: "PMID:16397067"
title: "Clinical, molecular, and genotype-phenotype correlation studies from 25 cases of oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1: a French and Belgian collaborative study."
authors:
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Cossée M
- Cormier-Daire V
- Van Maldergem L
- Toutain A
- Alembik Y
- Bieth E
- Layet V
- Parent P
- David A
- Goldenberg A
- Mortier G
- Héron D
- Sagot P
- Bouvier AM
- Huet F
- Cusin V
- Donzel A
- Devys D
- Teyssier JR
- Faivre L
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2004.027672
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, molecular, and genotype-phenotype correlation studies from 25 cases of oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1: a French and Belgian collaborative study.
**Authors:** Thauvin-Robinet C, Cossée M, Cormier-Daire V, Van Maldergem L, Toutain A, Alembik Y, Bieth E, Layet V, Parent P, David A, Goldenberg A, Mortier G, Héron D, Sagot P, Bouvier AM, Huet F, Cusin V, Donzel A, Devys D, Teyssier JR, Faivre L
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2004.027672](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2004.027672)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2006 Jan;43(1):54-61. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2004.027672.

Clinical, molecular, and genotype-phenotype correlation studies from 25 cases of 
oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1: a French and Belgian collaborative study.

Thauvin-Robinet C, Cossée M, Cormier-Daire V, Van Maldergem L, Toutain A, 
Alembik Y, Bieth E, Layet V, Parent P, David A, Goldenberg A, Mortier G, Héron 
D, Sagot P, Bouvier AM, Huet F, Cusin V, Donzel A, Devys D, Teyssier JR, Faivre 
L.

Oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1 (OFD1) is characterised by an X linked 
dominant mode of inheritance with lethality in males. Clinical features include 
facial dysmorphism with oral, tooth, and distal abnormalities, polycystic kidney 
disease, and central nervous system malformations. Large interfamilial and 
intrafamilial clinical variability has been widely reported, and 18 distinct 
mutations have been previously reported within OFD1. A French and Belgian 
collaborative study collected 25 cases from 16 families. OFD1 was analysed using 
direct sequencing and phenotype-genotype correlation was performed using chi2 
test. X inactivation studies were performed on blood lymphocytes. In 11 
families, 11 novel mutations, including nine frameshift, one nonsense, and one 
missense mutation were identified, which spanned nine different exons. A 
combination of our results with previously reported cases showed that the 
majority of mutations (65.5%) was located in exons 3, 8, 9, 13, and 16. There 
was phenotype-genotype correlation between (a) polycystic kidney disease and 
splice mutations; (b) mental retardation and mutations located in exons 3, 8, 9, 
13, and 16; and (c) tooth abnormalities and mutations located in coiled coil 
domains. Comparing the phenotype of the families with a pathogenic mutation to 
families with absence of OFD1 mutation, polycystic kidneys and short stature 
were significantly more frequent in the group with no OFD1 mutation, whereas 
lingual hamartomas were significantly more frequent in the group with OFD1 
mutation. Finally, an X inactivation study showed non-random X inactivation in a 
third of the samples. Differential X inactivation between mothers and daughters 
in two families with high intrafamilial variability was of particular interest. 
Slight phenotype-genotype correlations were established, and X inactivation 
study showed that skewed X inactivation could be partially involved in the 
pathogenesis of intrafamilial clinical variability.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2004.027672
PMCID: PMC2564504
PMID: 16397067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: none declared