---
reference_id: "PMID:16819396"
title: Defects in bile acid biosynthesis--diagnosis and treatment.
authors:
- Setchell KD
- Heubi JE
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1097/01.mpg.0000226386.79483.7b
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defects in bile acid biosynthesis--diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** Setchell KD, Heubi JE
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.mpg.0000226386.79483.7b](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.mpg.0000226386.79483.7b)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2006 Jul;43 Suppl 1:S17-22. doi: 
10.1097/01.mpg.0000226386.79483.7b.

Defects in bile acid biosynthesis--diagnosis and treatment.

Setchell KD(1), Heubi JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH, USA. 
KSetchell@aol.com

Bile acid synthetic defects represent a specific category of metabolic liver 
disease. This article highlights the history and summarizes our analytical 
approach to the diagnosis and treatment of genetic defects in bile acid 
synthesis. By the application of mass spectrometry as a screening tool, it is 
possible to perform rapid diagnosis of potential inborn errors in bile acid 
synthesis from urinary bile acid analysis. Molecular techniques then afford the 
identification of specific mutations in genes encoding the enzymes responsible 
for bile acid synthesis. Using this approach, 6 of the 7 known genetic defects 
that are causes of progressive cholestatic liver disease, syndromes of 
fat-soluble vitamin malabsorption, or neurological disease, have been 
characterized. Bile-acid therapy using oral cholic acid has proven effective in 
most of these bile acid synthetic defects making early diagnosis crucial to 
optimum clinical prognosis.

DOI: 10.1097/01.mpg.0000226386.79483.7b
PMID: 16819396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]