---
reference_id: "PMID:35587922"
title: "Tetanus seroprotection among children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2013-2014."
authors:
- Cheng A
- Ghanem-Uzqueda A
- Hoff NA
- Ashbaugh H
- Doshi RH
- Mukadi P
- Budd R
- Higgins SG
- Randall C
- Gerber S
- Kabamba M
- Ngoie Mwamba G
- Okitolonda-Wemakoy E
- Muyembe-Tanfum JJ
- Rimoin AW
journal: PLoS One
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0268703
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tetanus seroprotection among children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2013-2014.
**Authors:** Cheng A, Ghanem-Uzqueda A, Hoff NA, Ashbaugh H, Doshi RH, Mukadi P, Budd R, Higgins SG, Randall C, Gerber S, Kabamba M, Ngoie Mwamba G, Okitolonda-Wemakoy E, Muyembe-Tanfum JJ, Rimoin AW
**Journal:** PLoS One (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0268703](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0268703)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2022 May 19;17(5):e0268703. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0268703. 
eCollection 2022.

Tetanus seroprotection among children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
2013-2014.

Cheng A(1), Ghanem-Uzqueda A(1), Hoff NA(1), Ashbaugh H(1), Doshi RH(1), Mukadi 
P(2), Budd R(3), Higgins SG(4), Randall C(3), Gerber S(5), Kabamba M(6), Ngoie 
Mwamba G(7), Okitolonda-Wemakoy E(8), Muyembe-Tanfum JJ(9), Rimoin AW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Fielding School of Public Health, University of 
California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(2)School of Medicine, Kinshasa University, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the 
Congo.
(3)DYNEX Technologies Incorporated, Chantilly, Virginia, United States of 
America.
(4)Lentigen Technology, Incorporated, Gaithersburg, Maryland, United States of 
America.
(5)Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, Washington, United States of 
America.
(6)Expanded Program on Immunization, Ministry of Public Health, Kinshasa, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(7)VillageReach, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(8)Kinshasa School of Public Health, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(9)National Institute for Biomedical Research, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of 
the Congo.

BACKGROUND: Tetanus is a potentially fatal disease that is preventable through 
vaccination. While the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) has continued to 
improve implementing routine vaccination activities throughout the country, they 
have struggled to maintain high childhood vaccine coverage. This study aims to 
examine the seroprevalence of tetanus in children 6 to 59 months to identify 
areas for intervention and improvement of vaccination coverage.
METHODS: In collaboration with the 2013-2014 Demographic and Health Survey, we 
assessed the seroprevalence of tetanus antibodies among children in the DRC. 
Dried blood spot samples collected from children 6-59 months of age were 
processed using a prototype DYNEX Multiplier® chemiluminescent automated 
immunoassay instrument with a multiplex measles, mumps, rubella, varicella and 
tetanus assay. Multivariable logistic regression was used to determine factors 
associated with tetanus vaccination and seroprotection.
RESULTS: Overall, 36.1% of children 6-59 months of age reported receiving at 
least 1 dose of tetanus vaccine while 28.7% reported receiving 3 doses; tetanus 
seroprotection was 40%. Increasing age in children was associated with decreased 
tetanus seroprotection, but increased number tetanus vaccinations received. 
Factors related to increased tetanus seroprotection included number of children 
in the household, wealth index of the family, urban residence compared to rural, 
level of maternal education, and province and geography.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings in this nationally representative sample indicate that 
serology biomarkers may help identify children who are not fully immunized to 
tetanus more accurately than reported vaccination. While children may be 
captured for routine immunization activities, as children age, decreasing 
seroprevalence may indicate additional need to bolster routine vaccination 
activities and documentation of vaccination in school aged children. 
Additionally, the study highlights gaps in rural residential areas and 
vaccination coverage based on maternal education, indicating that policies 
targeting maternal education and awareness could improve the coverage and 
seroprevalence of tetanus antibodies in the DRC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0268703
PMCID: PMC9119496
PMID: 35587922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation employs 
SG. The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. These 
affiliations do not alter our adherence to PLOSONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.