---
reference_id: "PMID:26072379"
title: Rhabdomyosarcoma of Soft Tissues in an Adult Brook Trout (Salvelinus fontinalis).
authors:
- Sirri R
- Bianco C
- Beraldo P
- Mandrioli L
- Pulvirenti I
- Brachelente C
- Galeotti M
- Sarli G
journal: J Comp Pathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2015.05.001
keywords:
- Animals
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Fish Diseases/pathology
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/pathology, veterinary"
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/pathology, veterinary"
- Trout
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rhabdomyosarcoma of Soft Tissues in an Adult Brook Trout (Salvelinus fontinalis).
**Authors:** Sirri R, Bianco C, Beraldo P, Mandrioli L, Pulvirenti I, Brachelente C, Galeotti M, Sarli G
**Journal:** J Comp Pathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcpa.2015.05.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcpa.2015.05.001)

## Content

1. J Comp Pathol. 2015 Aug-Oct;153(2-3):190-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2015.05.001.
Epub 2015 Jun 10.

Rhabdomyosarcoma of Soft Tissues in an Adult Brook Trout (Salvelinus
fontinalis).

Sirri R(1), Bianco C(2), Beraldo P(3), Mandrioli L(2), Pulvirenti I(2),
Brachelente C(4), Galeotti M(3), Sarli G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, University of Bologna, Via Tolara
di Sopra 50, 40064 Ozzano Emilia, Bologna, Italy. Electronic address:
rubina.sirri2@unibo.it.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, University of Bologna, Via Tolara
di Sopra 50, 40064 Ozzano Emilia, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Food Science, Section Veterinary Pathology, University of
Udine, Via Sondrio 2/a, 33100 Udine, Italy.
(4)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Perugia, Via San Costanzo 4,
06126 Perugia, Italy.

This report describes a spontaneously arising rhabdomyosarcoma of soft tissues
in a brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis). The lesion was examined by means of
histology, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and transmission electron microscopy
(TEM). The cross-reactivity of the primary antibodies used in the IHC was
investigated in silico using the Protein Blast system. Microscopically, the
lesion appeared as a 'small round cell' undifferentiated sarcoma with rare
myotube formation. IHC identified expression of sarcomeric actin and vimentin
and these molecules showed the highest protein sequence identity. Lower protein
sequence identity coincided with negative immunolabelling for desmin, MyoD1,
myogenin and CD3. TEM revealed myofibrils, but without a defined sarcomeric
architecture. The diagnosis of solid alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma of soft tissues
was achieved on the basis of histological and ultrastructural findings.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2015.05.001
PMID: 26072379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
