---
reference_id: "PMID:39273359"
title: "Expression of MicroRNAs in Adults with Celiac Disease: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Rigo FF
- Oliveira ECS
- Quaglio AEV
- Moutinho BD
- Di Stasi LC
- Sassaki LY
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25179412
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression of MicroRNAs in Adults with Celiac Disease: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Rigo FF, Oliveira ECS, Quaglio AEV, Moutinho BD, Di Stasi LC, Sassaki LY
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25179412](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25179412)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Aug 30;25(17):9412. doi: 10.3390/ijms25179412.

Expression of MicroRNAs in Adults with Celiac Disease: A Narrative Review.

Rigo FF(1), Oliveira ECS(1), Quaglio AEV(2), Moutinho BD(3), Di Stasi LC(4), 
Sassaki LY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School, S達o Paulo State University 
(UNESP), Botucatu 18618-687, SP, Brazil.
(2)Verum Ingredients, Botucatu Technology Park, Botucatu 18605-525, SP, Brazil.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Division of Clinical Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, University of S達o Paulo School of Medicine (USP), S達o Paulo 
01246-903, SP, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Phytomedicines, Pharmacology and Biotechnology 
(PhytoPharmaTec), Department of Biophysics and Pharmacology, Institute of 
Biosciences, S達o Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu 18618-689, SP, Brazil.

Celiac disease (CD) is an immune-mediated enteropathy triggered by the ingestion 
of proline- and glutamine-rich proteins, widely termed "gluten", in genetically 
susceptible individuals. CD induces an altered immune response that leads to 
chronic inflammation and duodenal mucosal damage. Currently, there are no 
specific tests for the accurate diagnosis of CD, and no drugs are available to 
treat this condition. The only available treatment strategy is lifelong 
adherence to a gluten-free diet. However, some studies have investigated the 
involvement of microRNAs (miRNAs) in CD pathogenesis. miRNAs are small noncoding 
ribonucleic acid molecules that regulate gene expression. Despite the growing 
number of studies on the role of miRNAs in autoimmune disorders, data on miRNAs 
and CD are scarce. Therefore, this study aimed to perform a literature review to 
summarize CD, miRNAs, and the potential interactions between miRNAs and CD in 
adults. This review shows that miRNA expression can suppress or stimulate 
pathways related to CD pathogenesis by regulating cell proliferation and 
differentiation, regulatory T-cell development, innate immune response, 
activation of the inflammatory cascade, focal adhesion, T-cell commitment, 
tissue transglutaminase synthesis, and cell cycle. Thus, identifying miRNAs and 
their related effects on CD could open new possibilities for diagnosis, 
prognosis, and follow-up of biomarkers.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25179412
PMCID: PMC11395070
PMID: 39273359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.