---
reference_id: "PMID:11937757"
title: Genes and proteins in renal development.
authors:
- Davies JA
- Fisher CE
journal: Exp Nephrol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1159/000049905
keywords:
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/genetics
- Drosophila Proteins
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Glial Cell Line-Derived Neurotrophic Factor Receptors
- Humans
- Integrins/genetics
- "Kidney/embryology, physiology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Wnt Proteins
- Zebrafish Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genes and proteins in renal development.
**Authors:** Davies JA, Fisher CE
**Journal:** Exp Nephrol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000049905](https://doi.org/10.1159/000049905)

## Content

1. Exp Nephrol. 2002;10(2):102-13. doi: 10.1159/000049905.

Genes and proteins in renal development.

Davies JA(1), Fisher CE.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Developmental Biology, Edinburgh University Medical School, Teviot 
Place, Edinburgh EH8 9AG, UK. Jamie.Davies@ed.ac.uk

Metanephric kidney development begins with the formation of the metanephrogenic 
mesenchyme; this event depends on the prior action in the intermediate mesoderm 
of transcription factors such as Lim-1, Pax-2, Eya-1, and Foxc-1. Once it has 
formed, the mesenchyme secretes GDNF; this induces the nearby wolffian duct to 
produce a ureteric bud which invades the metanephrogenic mesenchyme and begins 
to arborize. Ureteric bud development and branching depends on the transcription 
factor Emx-2, the GDNF-cRet and probably the HGF/cMet, signalling systems, and 
the intracellular regulatory molecules formin IV and timeless. Proteins of the 
BMP family modulate ureteric bud branching and keep bud development in step with 
that of other tissue types. Proteins and glycosaminoglycans of the matrix, and 
their receptors, and also required. The metanephrogenic mesenchyme has a default 
fate of apoptosis and is dissuaded from suicide by factors secreted from the bud 
such as TGF-alpha, TIMP-2, EGF, and FGF-2. Other factors such as LIF and 
TGFbeta2 cooperate with these to induce clumps of mesenchyme cells to 
differentiate into nephrons, while BMP-7 appears to lead them instead to form 
stroma. As nephrons form, they express critical transcription factors such as 
WT-1, Pax-2, and Hoxa11 and d11, condense, and secrete Wnt-4. Wnt-4 acts in an 
autocrine loop to stimulate its own synthesis and is required for cells to 
differentiate into epithelia; its action is antagonized by sFRP-1, secreted by 
stroma, but this antagonism is itself inhibited by sFRP-2 made by the developing 
nephron. This system probably acts both to limit the spread of Wnt-4's influence 
and also to commit responding cells to their epithelial fate. As nephrons 
mature, regions of them differentiate to perform specific physiological 
functions, a process that requires the proteins WT-1, Lmx-1b, Notch-2, Jagged-1, 
and Hnf-1.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000049905
PMID: 11937757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]