---
reference_id: PMID:17724334
title: Reprogramming of keratin biosynthesis by sulforaphane restores skin integrity in epidermolysis bullosa simplex.
authors:
- Kerns ML
- DePianto D
- Dinkova-Kostova AT
- Talalay P
- Coulombe PA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0706486104
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- "Blister/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Isothiocyanates
- "Keratins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Kruppel-Like Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Sulfoxides
- Thiocyanates/therapeutic use
- Zinc Finger Protein Gli2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reprogramming of keratin biosynthesis by sulforaphane restores skin integrity in epidermolysis bullosa simplex.
**Authors:** Kerns ML, DePianto D, Dinkova-Kostova AT, Talalay P, Coulombe PA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0706486104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0706486104)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 4;104(36):14460-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0706486104. Epub 2007 Aug 27.

Reprogramming of keratin biosynthesis by sulforaphane restores skin integrity in 
epidermolysis bullosa simplex.

Kerns ML(1), DePianto D, Dinkova-Kostova AT, Talalay P, Coulombe PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, 725 North Wolfe Street, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is a rare inherited condition in which the 
epidermis loses its integrity after mechanical trauma. EBS is typified by the 
dysfunction of intermediate filaments in basal keratinocytes of epidermis. Most 
cases of EBS are due to mutations in the keratin 5 or 14 gene (K5 and K14), 
whose products copolymerize to form intermediate filaments in basal 
keratinocytes. Available treatments for this disorder are only palliative. Here 
we exploit functional redundancy within the keratin gene family as the basis for 
therapy. We show that genetic activation of Gli2 or treatment with a 
pharmacological activator of Nrf2, two transcription factors eliciting distinct 
transcriptional programs, alleviates the blistering caused by a K14 deficiency 
in an EBS mouse model, correlating with K17 induction in basal epidermal 
keratinocytes. Nrf2 induction is brought about by treatment with sulforaphane, a 
natural product. Sulforaphane thus represents an attractive option for the 
prevention of skin blistering associated with K14 mutations in EBS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0706486104
PMCID: PMC1964870
PMID: 17724334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.