---
reference_id: "PMID:8831129"
title: Non-immune hydrops fetalis caused by beta-glucuronidase deficiency (mucopolysaccharidosis VII). Study of a family with 3 affected siblings.
authors:
- Van Dorpe J
- Moerman P
- Pecceu A
- Van den Steen P
- Fryns JP
journal: Genet Couns
year: '1996'
keywords:
- "Abortion, Induced"
- Cytoplasm/ultrastructure
- "Edema/diagnosis, embryology, etiology, physiopathology"
- Female
- Glucuronidase/deficiency
- Humans
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis VII/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- "Neck/embryology, physiopathology"
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Trophoblasts/ultrastructure
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-immune hydrops fetalis caused by beta-glucuronidase deficiency (mucopolysaccharidosis VII). Study of a family with 3 affected siblings.
**Authors:** Van Dorpe J, Moerman P, Pecceu A, Van den Steen P, Fryns JP
**Journal:** Genet Couns (1996)

## Content

1. Genet Couns. 1996;7(2):105-12.

Non-immune hydrops fetalis caused by beta-glucuronidase deficiency 
(mucopolysaccharidosis VII). Study of a family with 3 affected siblings.

Van Dorpe J(1), Moerman P, Pecceu A, Van den Steen P, Fryns JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology I, University Hospital St-Rafaël, Leuven, Belgium.

Non-immune hydrops fetalis caused by beta-glucuronidase deficiency 
(mucopolysaccharidosis VII). Study of a family with 3 affected siblings. We 
describe a family case of beta-glucuronidase deficiency with 3 consecutively 
affected siblings. The three fetuses showed hydrops at a very early stage. In 
the first and second pregnancy the hydrops was visible on ultrasound scan in the 
first trimester. In the second pregnancy this was highly suggestive for 
recurrence. The diagnosis of mucopolysaccharidosis type VII was suggested after 
pathologic examination of the first fetus and placenta, and confirmed by 
deficient beta-glucuronidase activity in cultured skin fibroblasts. In the 
second, as well as in the third pregnancy a prenatal biochemical diagnosis was 
possible on cultured chorionic villus cells. The third pregnancy was terminated 
before hydrops was visible on ultrasound scan. Pathologic findings in the 3 
fetuses were similar. Vacuolated macrophages were found in all tissues, but were 
most prominent in placenta, liver, lymph nodes and bone marrow.

PMID: 8831129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]