---
reference_id: "PMID:25988654"
title: Role of crystallins in diabetic complications.
authors:
- Reddy VS
- Reddy GB
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.05.009
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cardiomyopathies/complications, metabolism, prevention & control"
- "Cataract/complications, metabolism, prevention & control"
- "Crystallins/chemistry, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- "Diabetes Complications/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Models, Biological"
- "Molecular Chaperones/chemistry, therapeutic use"
- "Peptides/chemistry, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of crystallins in diabetic complications.
**Authors:** Reddy VS, Reddy GB
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.05.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.05.009)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Jan;1860(1 Pt B):269-77. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.05.009. Epub 2015 May 17.

Role of crystallins in diabetic complications.

Reddy VS(1), Reddy GB(2).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Division, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 500 007, 
India.
(2)Biochemistry Division, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 500 007, 
India. Electronic address: geereddy@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Crystallins are the major structural proteins of vertebrate eye lens 
responsible for maintaining the refractive index of the lens. However, recent 
studies suggest that they also have a functional significance in non-lenticular 
tissues. Prolonged uncontrolled diabetes results in the development of macro and 
microvascular complications that are the leading causes of morbidity and 
mortality in diabetic patients all over the world.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: Recent studies have shown that crystallins play an instrumental 
role in diabetes and its complications. Therefore, this review highlights the 
current data on the impact of chronic hyperglycemia on expression, distribution, 
glycation, phosphorylation, chaperone-like function and, anti-apoptotic activity 
of crystallins. Furthermore, we discussed the insights for developing 
therapeutic strategies for diabetic complications including natural agents, 
peptides, and pharmacological chaperones that modulate or mimic chaperone 
activity of α-crystallins.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Upregulation of crystallins appears to be a common feature of 
chronic diabetes. Further, chronic hyperglycemia induces the glycation and 
phosphorylation of crystallins, mainly α-crystallins and thereby alters their 
properties. The disturbed interaction of αB-crystallin with various apoptotic 
mediators including Bax and caspases is also an important factor for increased 
cell death in diabetes. Numerous dietary agents, peptides, and chemical 
chaperones prevent apoptosis and the loss of chaperone activity in diabetes.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Understanding the role of crystallins will aid in 
developing therapeutic strategies for alleviating pathophysiological conditions 
such as protein aggregation, inflammation, oxidative stress and apoptosis 
associated with chronic complications of diabetes including cataract, 
retinopathy, and cardiomyopathy. This article is part of a Special Issue 
entitled Crystallin Biochemistry in Health and Disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.05.009
PMID: 25988654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]