---
reference_id: "PMID:39926866"
title: "Probing the Clinical, Laboratory, and Sociodemographic Factors Associated with Malaria: A Case-Control Study."
authors:
- Upadhyay R
- Dhumale AJ
- Dehariya C
- Waghmare R
- Rangari A
journal: J Pharm Bioallied Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.4103/jpbs.jpbs_1270_24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Probing the Clinical, Laboratory, and Sociodemographic Factors Associated with Malaria: A Case-Control Study.
**Authors:** Upadhyay R, Dhumale AJ, Dehariya C, Waghmare R, Rangari A
**Journal:** J Pharm Bioallied Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.4103/jpbs.jpbs_1270_24](https://doi.org/10.4103/jpbs.jpbs_1270_24)

## Content

1. J Pharm Bioallied Sci. 2024 Dec;16(Suppl 4):S3793-S3795. doi: 
10.4103/jpbs.jpbs_1270_24. Epub 2024 Dec 10.

Probing the Clinical, Laboratory, and Sociodemographic Factors Associated with 
Malaria: A Case-Control Study.

Upadhyay R(1), Dhumale AJ(2), Dehariya C(3), Waghmare R(4), Rangari A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Medicine, Chhindwara Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of General Medicine, Krishna Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Krishna Vishwa Vidyapith, Karad, Maharashtra, India.
(3)Department of Pathology, Chhindwara Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh, India.
(4)Department of Community Medi1cine, Virendra Kumar Sakhlecha Government 
medical College, Neemuch, Madhya Pradesh, India.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Nandkumar Singh Chouhan Government Medical 
College, Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: The National Malaria Elimination Program (NMEP) has helped reduce 
the mortality from malaria in India, and there are alarmingly high mortality 
rates from anemia in certain geographical regions.
AIM: To assess the clinical, laboratory, and sociodemographic factors associated 
with malaria from P. falciparum and P. vivax.
METHODS: This retrospective record-based clinical study subjects with malaria 
were further divided into P. vivax and P. falciparum cases. In all the cases, 
the clinical, laboratory, and sociodemographic factors were assessed. Data 
gathered were analyzed statistically.
RESULTS: During the study period, 222 cases of malaria were assessed where 
22.52% (n = 50) and 74.48% (n = 172) cases were due to P. falciparum and P. 
vivax, respectively. Hepatomegaly was common in P. falciparum cases and 
splenomegaly in P. vivax cases. Thrombocytopenia was seen in 58.1% (n = 100) and 
72% (n = 36) subjects with P. vivax and P. falciparum cases. No significant 
difference was seen in other laboratory parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical, laboratory, and sociodemographic factors associated with 
malaria from P. falciparum and P. vivax have no statistically significant 
difference.

Copyright: © 2024 Journal of Pharmacy and Bioallied Sciences.

DOI: 10.4103/jpbs.jpbs_1270_24
PMCID: PMC11805264
PMID: 39926866

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.