---
reference_id: "PMID:37919617"
title: "Diazoxide choline extended-release tablet in people with Prader-Willi syndrome: results from long-term open-label study."
authors:
- Miller JL
- Gevers E
- Bridges N
- Yanovski JA
- Salehi P
- Obrynba KS
- Felner EI
- Bird LM
- Shoemaker AH
- Angulo M
- Butler MG
- Stevenson D
- Goldstone AP
- Wilding J
- Lah M
- Shaikh MG
- Littlejohn E
- Abuzzahab MJ
- Fleischman A
- Hirano P
- Yen K
- Cowen NM
- Bhatnagar A
- C601/C602 Investigators
journal: Obesity (Silver Spring)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/oby.23928
keywords:
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/drug therapy, complications"
- "Diazoxide/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Hyperphagia/complications
- Body Composition
- Insulin/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diazoxide choline extended-release tablet in people with Prader-Willi syndrome: results from long-term open-label study.
**Authors:** Miller JL, Gevers E, Bridges N, Yanovski JA, Salehi P, Obrynba KS, Felner EI, Bird LM, Shoemaker AH, Angulo M, Butler MG, Stevenson D, Goldstone AP, Wilding J, Lah M, Shaikh MG, Littlejohn E, Abuzzahab MJ, Fleischman A, Hirano P, Yen K, Cowen NM, Bhatnagar A, C601/C602 Investigators
**Journal:** Obesity (Silver Spring) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/oby.23928](https://doi.org/10.1002/oby.23928)

## Content

1. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2024 Feb;32(2):252-261. doi: 10.1002/oby.23928. Epub 
2023 Nov 2.

Diazoxide choline extended-release tablet in people with Prader-Willi syndrome: 
results from long-term open-label study.

Miller JL(1), Gevers E(2), Bridges N(3), Yanovski JA(4), Salehi P(5), Obrynba 
KS(6), Felner EI(7), Bird LM(8), Shoemaker AH(9), Angulo M(10), Butler MG(11), 
Stevenson D(12), Goldstone AP(13), Wilding J(14), Lah M(15), Shaikh MG(16), 
Littlejohn E(17), Abuzzahab MJ(18), Fleischman A(19), Hirano P(20), Yen K(20), 
Cowen NM(20), Bhatnagar A(20); C601/C602 Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Queen Mary University of London, Barts Health NHS Trust-Royal London 
Children's Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(6)Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(7)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(8)University of California, San Diego/Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, 
California, USA.
(9)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(10)New York University Langone Health, Mineola, New York, USA.
(11)University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.
(12)Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, USA.
(13)Department of Endocrinology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, 
Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
(14)University of Liverpool, Clinical Sciences Centre, Aintree University 
Hospital, Liverpool, UK.
(15)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(16)Royal Hospital for Children, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(17)Sparrow Clinical Research Institute, Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(18)Children's Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(19)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(20)Soleno Therapeutics, Redwood City, California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study assessed the effect of 1-year administration of diazoxide 
choline extended-release tablet (DCCR) on hyperphagia and other complications of 
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS).
METHODS: The authors studied 125 participants with PWS, age ≥ 4 years, who were 
enrolled in the DESTINY PWS Phase 3 study and who received DCCR for up to 
52 weeks in DESTINY PWS and/or its open-label extension. The primary efficacy 
endpoint was Hyperphagia Questionnaire for Clinical Trials (HQ-CT) score. Other 
endpoints included behavioral assessments, body composition, hormonal measures, 
and safety.
RESULTS: DCCR administration resulted in significant improvements in HQ-CT (mean 
[SE] -9.9 [0.77], p < 0.0001) and greater improvements in those with more severe 
baseline hyperphagia (HQ-CT > 22). Improvements were seen in aggression, 
anxiety, and compulsivity (all p < 0.0001). There were reductions in leptin, 
insulin, and insulin resistance, as well as a significant increase in 
adiponectin (all p < 0.004). Lean body mass was increased (p < 0.0001). Disease 
severity was reduced as assessed by clinician and caregiver (both p < 0.0001). 
Common treatment-emergent adverse events included hypertrichosis, peripheral 
edema, and hyperglycemia. Adverse events infrequently resulted in 
discontinuation (7.2%).
CONCLUSIONS: DCCR administration to people with PWS was well tolerated and 
associated with broad-ranging improvements in the syndrome. Sustained 
administration of DCCR has the potential to reduce disease severity and the 
burden of care for families.

© 2023 The Authors. Obesity published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of The 
Obesity Society. This article has been contributed to by U.S. Government 
employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/oby.23928
PMCID: PMC12181816
PMID: 37919617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]