---
reference_id: "PMID:26567278"
title: Echinocandin Resistance in Candida.
authors:
- Perlin DS
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/cid/civ791
keywords:
- Anidulafungin
- "Antifungal Agents/pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Azoles/therapeutic use
- "Candida/drug effects, enzymology, genetics"
- "Candida glabrata/drug effects, genetics"
- "Candidiasis/drug therapy, microbiology"
- Caspofungin
- "Drug Resistance, Multiple, Fungal/genetics"
- "Echinocandins/pharmacokinetics, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Glucosyltransferases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Humans
- "Intraabdominal Infections/drug therapy, microbiology"
- "Lipopeptides/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Micafungin
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Echinocandin Resistance in Candida.
**Authors:** Perlin DS
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/civ791](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ791)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2015 Dec 1;61 Suppl 6(Suppl 6):S612-7. doi:
10.1093/cid/civ791.

Echinocandin Resistance in Candida.

Perlin DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Public Health Research Institute, New Jersey Medical School-Rutgers 
Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark.

Invasive fungal infections are an important infection concern for patients with 
underlying immunosuppression. Antifungal therapy is a critical component of 
patient care, but therapeutic choices are limited due to few drug classes. 
Antifungal resistance, especially among Candida species, aggravates the problem. 
The echinocandin drugs (micafungin, anidulafungin, and caspofungin) are the 
preferred choice to treat a range of candidiasis. They target the 
fungal-specific enzyme glucan synthase, which is responsible for the 
biosynthesis of a major cell wall polymer. Therapeutic failure involves 
acquisition of resistance, although it is a rare event among most Candida 
species. However, in some settings, higher-level resistance has been reported 
among Candida glabrata, which is also frequently resistant to azole drugs, 
resulting in difficult-to-treat multidrug-resistant strains. The mechanism of 
echinocandin resistance involves amino acid changes in "hot spot" regions of 
FKS-encoded subunits of glucan synthase, which decreases the sensitivity of 
enzyme to drug, resulting in higher minimum inhibitory concentration values. The 
cellular processes promoting the formation of resistant FKS strains involve 
complex stress response pathways that yield a variety of adaptive compensatory 
genetic responses. Standardized broth microdilution techniques can be used to 
distinguish FKS mutant strains from wild type, but testing C. glabrata with 
caspofungin should be approached cautiously. Finally, clinical factors that 
promote echinocandin resistance include prophylaxis, host reservoirs including 
biofilms in the gastrointestinal tract, and intra-abdominal infections. An 
understanding of clinical and molecular factors that promote echinocandin 
resistance is critical to develop better diagnostic tools and therapeutic 
strategies to overcome resistance.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/civ791
PMCID: PMC4643482
PMID: 26567278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]