---
reference_id: "PMID:24136893"
title: "Cowden syndrome and the PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome: systematic review and revised diagnostic criteria."
authors:
- Pilarski R
- Burt R
- Kohlman W
- Pho L
- Shannon KM
- Swisher E
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt277
keywords:
- Brain/pathology
- Brain Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Breast/pathology
- Breast Neoplasms/diagnosis
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Evidence-Based Medicine
- Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Gastrointestinal Tract/pathology
- Germ-Line Mutation
- "Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- PTEN Phosphohydrolase/genetics
- Skin/pathology
- Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Thyroid Gland/pathology
- Thyroid Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Urogenital Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Urogenital System/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cowden syndrome and the PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome: systematic review and revised diagnostic criteria.
**Authors:** Pilarski R, Burt R, Kohlman W, Pho L, Shannon KM, Swisher E
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/djt277](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djt277)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Nov 6;105(21):1607-16. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt277. Epub
 2013 Oct 17.

Cowden syndrome and the PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome: systematic review and 
revised diagnostic criteria.

Pilarski R(1), Burt R, Kohlman W, Pho L, Shannon KM, Swisher E.

Author information:
(1)Affiliations of authors: Division of Human Genetics, Department of Internal 
Medicine and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH (RP); Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, UT (RB, WK, LP); University 
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT (RB, WK); Department of 
Dermatology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT (LP); Massachusetts General 
Hospital Cancer Center, Center for Cancer Risk Assessment, Boston, MA (KMS); 
University of Washington Medical Center/Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, 
WA (ES).

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Nov 6;105(21):1595-7. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt290.
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014 Jun 04;106(6):dju130. doi: 10.1093/jnci/dju130.
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014 Jun 04;106(6):dju131. doi: 10.1093/jnci/dju131.

BACKGROUND: PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) refers to a spectrum of 
disorders caused by mutations in the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) gene. 
Diagnostic criteria for Cowden syndrome, the principal PTEN-related disorder, 
were first established in 1996 before the identification of the PTEN gene and 
the ability to molecularly confirm a clinical diagnosis. These consortium 
criteria were based on clinical experience and case reports in the existing 
literature, with their inherent selection biases. Although it was initially 
reported that approximately 80% of patients with Cowden syndrome had an 
identifiable germline PTEN mutation, more recent work has shown these diagnostic 
criteria to be far less specific. In addition, increasing evidence has 
documented the association of a broader spectrum of clinical features with PTEN 
mutations. Our goal was to develop revised, evidence-based diagnostic criteria 
and to include features of the broader spectrum of PTEN-related clinical 
syndromes.
METHODS: We performed a systematic search and review of the medical literature 
related to clinical features reported in individuals with a PTEN mutation and/or 
a related clinical diagnosis.
RESULTS: We found no sufficient evidence to support inclusion of benign breast 
disease, uterine fibroids, or genitourinary malformations as diagnostic 
criteria. There was evidence to include autism spectrum disorders, colon cancer, 
esophageal glycogenic acanthosis, penile macules, renal cell carcinoma, 
testicular lipomatosis, and vascular anomalies.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose revised, evidence-based criteria covering the spectrum 
of PTEN-related clinical disorders. Additional research on clinical features 
associated with PTEN mutations is warranted.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djt277
PMID: 24136893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]