---
reference_id: PMID:31924266
title: "KMT2C/D COMPASS complex-associated diseases [K(CD)COM-ADs]: an emerging class of congenital regulopathies."
authors:
- Lavery WJ
- Barski A
- Wiley S
- Schorry EK
- Lindsley AW
journal: Clin Epigenetics
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13148-019-0802-2
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9/genetics"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Hematologic Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- "Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Vestibular Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# KMT2C/D COMPASS complex-associated diseases [K(CD)COM-ADs]: an emerging class of congenital regulopathies.
**Authors:** Lavery WJ, Barski A, Wiley S, Schorry EK, Lindsley AW
**Journal:** Clin Epigenetics (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13148-019-0802-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13148-019-0802-2)

## Content

1. Clin Epigenetics. 2020 Jan 10;12(1):10. doi: 10.1186/s13148-019-0802-2.

KMT2C/D COMPASS complex-associated diseases [K(CD)COM-ADs]: an emerging class of 
congenital regulopathies.

Lavery WJ(1), Barski A(1)(2), Wiley S(3), Schorry EK(2), Lindsley AW(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center (CCHMC), 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH, 45229-3026, USA.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, CCHMC, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(3)Division of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, CCHMC, Cincinnati, OH, 
USA.
(4)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center (CCHMC), 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH, 45229-3026, USA. 
Andrew.Lindsley@cchmc.org.

The type 2 lysine methyltransferases KMT2C and KMT2D are large, enzymatically 
active scaffold proteins that form the core of nuclear regulatory structures 
known as KMT2C/D COMPASS complexes (complex of proteins associating with Set1). 
These evolutionarily conserved proteins regulate DNA promoter and enhancer 
elements, modulating the activity of diverse cell types critical for embryonic 
morphogenesis, central nervous system development, and post-natal survival. 
KMT2C/D COMPASS complexes and their binding partners enhance active gene 
expression of specific loci via the targeted modification of histone-3 tail 
residues, in general promoting active euchromatic conformations. Over the last 
20 years, mutations in five key COMPASS complex genes have been linked to three 
human congenital syndromes: Kabuki syndrome (type 1 [KMT2D] and 2 [KDM6A]), 
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (type 1 [CBP] and 2 [EP300]), and Kleefstra syndrome 
type 2 (KMT2C). Here, we review the composition and biochemical function of the 
KMT2 complexes. The specific cellular and embryonic roles of the KMT2C/D COMPASS 
complex are highlight with a focus on clinically relevant mechanisms sensitive 
to haploinsufficiency. The phenotypic similarities and differences between the 
members of this new family of disorders are outlined and emerging therapeutic 
strategies are detailed.

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-019-0802-2
PMCID: PMC6954584
PMID: 31924266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.