---
reference_id: "PMID:37925482"
title: "Utilization of carbon-coated ZrO(2)/Mn-Mg-Zn ferrites nanostructures for the adsorption of Cs (I) and Sr (II) from the binary system: kinetic and equilibrium studies."
authors:
- Abdel Maksoud MIA
- Murad GA
- Hassan HS
journal: BMC Chem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13065-023-01069-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Utilization of carbon-coated ZrO(2)/Mn-Mg-Zn ferrites nanostructures for the adsorption of Cs (I) and Sr (II) from the binary system: kinetic and equilibrium studies.
**Authors:** Abdel Maksoud MIA, Murad GA, Hassan HS
**Journal:** BMC Chem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13065-023-01069-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13065-023-01069-z)

## Content

1. BMC Chem. 2023 Nov 4;17(1):149. doi: 10.1186/s13065-023-01069-z.

Utilization of carbon-coated ZrO(2)/Mn-Mg-Zn ferrites nanostructures for the 
adsorption of Cs (I) and Sr (II) from the binary system: kinetic and equilibrium 
studies.

Abdel Maksoud MIA(1), Murad GA(2), Hassan HS(3).

Author information:
(1)Radiation Physics Department, National Center for Radiation Research and 
Technology (NCRRT), Egyptian Atomic Energy Authority (EAEA), Cairo, Egypt. 
muhamadmqsod@gmail.com.
(2)Hot Laboratories and Waste Management Center, Egyptian Atomic Energy 
Authority (EAEA), Inshas, 13759, Egypt. gadaa12389@gmail.com.
(3)Hot Laboratories and Waste Management Center, Egyptian Atomic Energy 
Authority (EAEA), Inshas, 13759, Egypt.

Carbon-coated ZrO2/Mn-Mg-Zn ferrites nanostructures (CZ-FN) have been prepared 
as a new inorganic sorbent to remove Cs (I) and Sr (II) from a waste stream. 
Adsorption of Cs (I) and Sr (II) has been implemented considering different 
noteworthy parameters, for example, shaking time and the optimum time achieved 
high adsorption capacity of both ions [103 and 41 mg/g for Sr (II) and Cs (I)] 
was found 30 min. Also, the impact of pH values was studied; the best pH value 
for the adsorption process is pH 6. The adsorption saturation capacity of CZ-FN 
is 420.22 and 250.45 mg/g for strontium and cesium, respectively. The solubility 
percentage of CZ-FN was calculated utilizing diverse molarities from HNO3, HCl, 
and NaOH as eluents, the obtained data reveals an increase in the solubility 
percentage with more increase in the molarity of the eluents. The elevation in 
the solubility percentage follows the following order; HNO3 < HCl < NaOH. The 
kinetic studies were applied using the nanolinear form of different kinetic 
models; it was found that the adsorption process obeys the nonlinear 
pseudo-second-order. According to equilibrium studies, the Langmuir model has 
been more accurate than the Freundlich model for adsorption in the case of 
binary systems. The values of Di for the strontium and cesium are 10-10 m2/s, 
which displays the chemisorption nature of this process. The greatest values of 
the desorption process for the strontium and cesium are 96.87% and 94.43 by 0.3 
M of HNO3. This indicated that the carbon-coated ZrO2/Mn-Mg-Zn ferrites could be 
regenerated and recycled to remove strontium and cesium ions from waste streams.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13065-023-01069-z
PMCID: PMC10625698
PMID: 37925482

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.