---
reference_id: "PMID:22128806"
title: Isolation of novel multipotent neural crest-derived stem cells from adult human inferior turbinate.
authors:
- Hauser S
- Widera D
- Qunneis F
- Müller J
- Zander C
- Greiner J
- Strauss C
- Lüningschrör P
- Heimann P
- Schwarze H
- Ebmeyer J
- Sudhoff H
- Araúzo-Bravo MJ
- Greber B
- Zaehres H
- Schöler H
- Kaltschmidt C
- Kaltschmidt B
journal: Stem Cells Dev
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0419
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolation of novel multipotent neural crest-derived stem cells from adult human inferior turbinate.
**Authors:** Hauser S, Widera D, Qunneis F, Müller J, Zander C, Greiner J, Strauss C, Lüningschrör P, Heimann P, Schwarze H, Ebmeyer J, Sudhoff H, Araúzo-Bravo MJ, Greber B, Zaehres H, Schöler H, Kaltschmidt C, Kaltschmidt B
**Journal:** Stem Cells Dev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1089/scd.2011.0419](https://doi.org/10.1089/scd.2011.0419)

## Content

1. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Mar 20;21(5):742-56. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0419. Epub
2012  Jan 26.

Isolation of novel multipotent neural crest-derived stem cells from adult human 
inferior turbinate.

Hauser S(1), Widera D, Qunneis F, Müller J, Zander C, Greiner J, Strauss C, 
Lüningschrör P, Heimann P, Schwarze H, Ebmeyer J, Sudhoff H, Araúzo-Bravo MJ, 
Greber B, Zaehres H, Schöler H, Kaltschmidt C, Kaltschmidt B.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurobiology, University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany.

Adult human neural crest-derived stem cells (NCSCs) are of extraordinary high 
plasticity and promising candidates for the use in regenerative medicine. Here 
we describe for the first time a novel neural crest-derived stem cell population 
within the respiratory epithelium of human adult inferior turbinate. In contrast 
to superior and middle turbinates, high amounts of source material could be 
isolated from human inferior turbinates. Using minimally-invasive surgery 
methods isolation is efficient even in older patients. Within their endogenous 
niche, inferior turbinate stem cells (ITSCs) expressed high levels of nestin, 
p75(NTR), and S100. Immunoelectron microscopy using anti-p75 antibodies 
displayed that ITSCs are of glial origin and closely related to nonmyelinating 
Schwann cells. Cultivated ITSCs were positive for nestin and S100 and the neural 
crest markers Slug and SOX10. Whole genome microarray analysis showed pronounced 
differences to human ES cells in respect to pluripotency markers OCT4, SOX2, 
LIN28, and NANOG, whereas expression of WDR5, KLF4, and c-MYC was nearly 
similar. ITSCs were able to differentiate into cells with neuro-ectodermal and 
mesodermal phenotype. Additionally ITSCs are able to survive and perform neural 
crest typical chain migration in vivo when transplanted into chicken embryos. 
However ITSCs do not form teratomas in severe combined immunodeficient mice. 
Finally, we developed a separation strategy based on magnetic cell sorting of 
p75(NTR) positive ITSCs that formed larger neurospheres and proliferated faster 
than p75(NTR) negative ITSCs. Taken together our study describes a novel, 
readily accessible source of multipotent human NCSCs for potential 
cell-replacement therapy.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2011.0419
PMCID: PMC3296122
PMID: 22128806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]