---
reference_id: "PMID:32990485"
title: "Endocrine treatment of transgender individuals: current guidelines and strategies."
authors:
- Prince JCJ
- Safer JD
journal: Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/17446651.2020.1825075
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrine treatment of transgender individuals: current guidelines and strategies.
**Authors:** Prince JCJ, Safer JD
**Journal:** Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17446651.2020.1825075](https://doi.org/10.1080/17446651.2020.1825075)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Nov;15(6):395-403. doi: 
10.1080/17446651.2020.1825075. Epub 2020 Sep 29.

Endocrine treatment of transgender individuals: current guidelines and 
strategies.

Prince JCJ(1), Safer JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Mount Sinai Morningside and Mount 
Sinai West, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Center for Transgender Medicine and Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai , New York, NY, USA.

INTRODUCTION: This review summarizes gender affirming medical and surgical care 
available to transgender individuals, along with proposals to improve medically 
and culturally appropriate care.
AREAS COVERED: Transgender individuals are those whose gender identity differs 
from that recorded at birth (usually based on visualization of external sexual 
anatomy). In order to align the body with the patient's gender identity, 
clinicians can provide hormone therapy (HT) to bring sex hormone levels to the 
range associated with the patient's gender identity. At steady state, monitoring 
for maintenance of levels, as well as for known risks and complications, is 
required. Treating clinicians should have knowledge of trans assessment 
criteria, hormone therapy, surgical options, primary care, and mental health 
needs of transgender patients. A narrative literature review was conducted using 
Pubmed and EMBASE with articles then selected for relevance. The initial search 
terms were: androgen suppression, antiandrogen, breast development, chest 
reconstruction, cisgender, estrogen, fertility preservation, gender-affirming 
surgery, gender identity, gender incongruence, genital reconstruction, hormone 
replacement, hyperlipidemia, orchiectomy, prolactin, prostate atrophy, 
spermatogenesis, spironolactone, testosterone, thrombogenesis, transgender, and 
virilization.
EXPERT OPINION: Although guidelines exist and examples of training are 
available, systematic formal training must be implemented to truly mainstream 
high-quality gender-affirming health care .

DOI: 10.1080/17446651.2020.1825075
PMID: 32990485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]