---
reference_id: "PMID:35587600"
title: Genetic Variants Associated With Mineral Metabolism Traits in Chronic Kidney Disease.
authors:
- Laster ML
- Rowan B
- Chen HC
- Schwantes-An TH
- Sheng X
- Friedman PA
- Ikizler TA
- Sinshiemer JS
- Ix JH
- Susztak K
- de Boer IH
- Kestenbaum B
- Hung A
- Moe SM
- Perwad F
- Robinson-Cohen C
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgac318
keywords:
- Biomarkers
- Calcium
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/genetics
- Humans
- Minerals/metabolism
- Parathyroid Hormone
- Phosphates
- "Receptors, Calcium-Sensing"
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Variants Associated With Mineral Metabolism Traits in Chronic Kidney Disease.
**Authors:** Laster ML, Rowan B, Chen HC, Schwantes-An TH, Sheng X, Friedman PA, Ikizler TA, Sinshiemer JS, Ix JH, Susztak K, de Boer IH, Kestenbaum B, Hung A, Moe SM, Perwad F, Robinson-Cohen C
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgac318](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgac318)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2022 Aug 18;107(9):e3866-e3876. doi:
10.1210/clinem/dgac318.

Genetic Variants Associated With Mineral Metabolism Traits in Chronic Kidney
Disease.

Laster ML(1), Rowan B(2), Chen HC(2), Schwantes-An TH(3), Sheng X(4), Friedman
PA(5), Ikizler TA(6)(7), Sinshiemer JS(8)(9), Ix JH(10), Susztak K(4), de Boer
IH(11), Kestenbaum B(12), Hung A(6), Moe SM(13)(14), Perwad F(15),
Robinson-Cohen C(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California 90095-1752, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.
(3)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine and Genetics, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA.
(7)Vanderbilt O'Brien Center for Kidney Disease, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.
(8)Department of Human Genetics and Computational Medicine, David Geffen School
of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095-1752, USA.
(9)Department of Biostatistics, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los
Angeles, California 90095-1752, USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, San Diego,
California 92161, USA.
(11)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-6420, USA.
(12)Kidney Research Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-6420, USA.
(13)Clinical Translational Sciences Institute, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.
(14)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana 46202, USA.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

CONTEXT: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) causes multiple interrelated disturbances
in mineral metabolism. Genetic studies in the general population have identified
common genetic variants associated with circulating phosphate, calcium,
parathyroid hormone (PTH), and fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23).
OBJECTIVE: In this study we aimed to discover genetic variants associated with
circulating mineral markers in CKD.
METHODS: We conducted candidate single-nucleotide variation (SNV) analysis in
3027 participants in the multiethnic Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort (CRIC)
to determine the associations between SNVs and circulating levels of mineral
markers.
RESULTS: SNVs adjacent to or within genes encoding the regulator of G
protein-coupled signaling 14 (RGS14) and the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR)
were associated with levels of mineral metabolites. The strongest associations
(P < .001) were at rs4074995 (RGS14) for phosphate (0.09 mg/dL lower per minor
allele) and FGF23 (8.6% lower), and at rs1801725 (CASR) for calcium (0.12 mg/dL
higher). In addition, the prevalence of hyperparathyroidism differed by
rs4074995 (RGS14) genotype (chi-square P < .0001). Differential inheritance by
race was noted for the minor allele of RGS14. Expression quantitative loci
(eQTL) analysis showed that rs4074995 was associated with lower RGS14 gene
expression in glomeruli (P = 1.03 × 10-11) and tubules (P = 4.0 × 10-4).
CONCLUSION: We evaluated genetic variants associated with mineral metabolism
markers in a CKD population. Participants with CKD and the minor allele of
rs4074995 (RGS14) had lower phosphorus, lower plasma FGF23, and lower prevalence
of hyperparathyroidism. The minor allele of RGS14 was also associated with lower
gene expression in the kidney. Further studies are needed to elucidate the
effect of rs4074995 on the pathogenesis of disordered mineral metabolism in CKD.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgac318
PMCID: PMC9387704
PMID: 35587600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
