---
reference_id: "PMID:24022366"
title: "To bud or not to bud: the RET perspective in CAKUT."
authors:
- Davis TK
- Hoshi M
- Jain S
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-013-2606-5
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Organogenesis/physiology
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/physiology
- Urinary Tract/abnormalities
- "Urogenital Abnormalities/genetics, metabolism"
- Urologic Diseases/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# To bud or not to bud: the RET perspective in CAKUT.
**Authors:** Davis TK, Hoshi M, Jain S
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-013-2606-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-013-2606-5)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2014 Apr;29(4):597-608. doi: 10.1007/s00467-013-2606-5.

To bud or not to bud: the RET perspective in CAKUT.

Davis TK, Hoshi M, Jain S.

Congenital anomalies of the kidneys or lower urinary tract (CAKUT) encompass a
spectrum of anomalies that result from aberrations in spatio-temporal regulation
of genetic, epigenetic, environmental, and molecular signals at key stages of
urinary tract development. The Rearranged in Transfection (RET) tyrosine kinase
signaling system is a major pathway required for normal development of the
kidneys, ureters, peripheral and enteric nervous systems. In the kidneys, RET is
activated by interaction with the ligand glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF) and coreceptor GFRα1. This activated complex regulates a number of
downstream signaling cascades (PLCγ, MAPK, and PI3K) that control proliferation,
migration, renewal, and apoptosis. Disruption of these events is thought to
underlie diseases arising from aberrant RET signaling. RET mutations are found
in 5-30 % of CAKUT patients and a number of Ret mouse mutants show a spectrum of
kidney and lower urinary tract defects reminiscent of CAKUT in humans. The
remarkable similarities between mouse and human kidney development and in
defects due to RET mutations has led to using RET signaling as a paradigm for
determining the fundamental principles in patterning of the upper and lower
urinary tract and for understanding CAKUT pathogenesis. In this review, we
provide an overview of studies in vivo that delineate expression and the
functional importance of RET signaling complex during different stages of
development of the upper and lower urinary tracts. We discuss how RET signaling
balances activating and inhibitory signals emanating from its docking tyrosines
and its interaction with upstream and downstream regulators to precisely
modulate different aspects of Wolffian duct patterning and branching
morphogenesis. We outline the diversity of cellular mechanisms regulated by RET,
disruption of which causes malformations ranging from renal agenesis to
multicystic dysplastic kidneys in the upper tract and vesicoureteral reflux or
ureteropelvic junction obstruction in the lower tract.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-013-2606-5
PMCID: PMC3952039
PMID: 24022366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
