---
reference_id: "PMID:37729688"
title: Prevalence of oncogenic driver mutations in Hispanics/Latin patients with lung cancer. A systematic review and meta-analysis.
authors:
- Parra-Medina R
- Castañeda-González JP
- Montoya L
- Paula Gómez-Gómez M
- Clavijo Cabezas D
- Plazas Vargas M
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2023.107378
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, epidemiology"
- Mutation
- Hispanic or Latino/genetics
- Prevalence
- Oncogenes
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, epidemiology"
- ErbB Receptors/genetics
- White
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of oncogenic driver mutations in Hispanics/Latin patients with lung cancer. A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Parra-Medina R, Castañeda-González JP, Montoya L, Paula Gómez-Gómez M, Clavijo Cabezas D, Plazas Vargas M
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2023.107378](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2023.107378)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2023 Nov;185:107378. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2023.107378. Epub
2023  Sep 15.

Prevalence of oncogenic driver mutations in Hispanics/Latin patients with lung
cancer. A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Parra-Medina R(1), Castañeda-González JP(2), Montoya L(3), Paula Gómez-Gómez
M(4), Clavijo Cabezas D(4), Plazas Vargas M(5).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute, Fundación Universitaria de Ciencias de la Salud - FUCS,
Bogotá, Colombia; Department of Pathology, Fundación Universitaria de Ciencias
de la Salud - FUCS, Bogotá, Colombia; Department of Pathology, Instituto
Nacional de Cancerología, Bogotá, Colombia. Electronic address:
rafa.parram@gmail.com.
(2)Research Institute, Fundación Universitaria de Ciencias de la Salud - FUCS,
Bogotá, Colombia; Department of Pathology, Fundación Universitaria de Ciencias
de la Salud - FUCS, Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Pontificia Universidad
Javeriana, Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Department of Pathology, Fundación Universitaria de Ciencias de la Salud -
FUCS, Bogotá, Colombia.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Fundación Universitaria de Ciencias de la Salud -
FUCS, Bogotá, Colombia.

INTRODUCTION: The frequency of actionable mutations varies between races, and
Hispanic/Latino (H/L) people are a population with different proportions of
ancestry. Our purpose was to establish prevalence of actionable mutations in the
H/L population with NSCLC.
METHODS: EMBASE, LILACS, MEDLINE, and Virtual Health Library were searched for
studies published up to April 2023 that evaluated the prevalence of ALK, BRAF,
EGFR, HER-2, KRAS, MET, NTRK, RET, ROS1 in H/L patients. Meta-analyses were done
to determine prevalence using a random effects model.
RESULTS: Fifty-five articles were included. EGFR and KRAS were the most
prevalent genes with high heterogeneity across the countries. The overall
mutation frequency for EGFR was 22%. The most frequent mutations in the EGFR
gene were del19 (10%) and L858R (7%). The mean of KRAS mutation was a 14%
prevalence. KRASG12C was the most frequent mutation with a 7% prevalence in an
entire population. The overall frequency of ALK rearrangement was 5%. The mean
frequency of ROS-1 rearrangement was 2%, and the frequencies of HER-2, MET,
BRAF, RET, NTRK molecular alterations were 4%, 3%, 2%, 2%, and 1% respectively.
Almost half of the cases were male, and 65.8% had a history of tobacco exposure.
The most common clinical stage was IV.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of driver mutations such as EGFR and KRAS in LA
populations differs from what is reported in Asians and Europeans. In the
present article, countries with a high proportion of Amerindian ancestry show a
greater prevalence of EGFR in contrast to countries with a high proportion of
Caucasians. Lack of information on some countries or studies with a small sample
size affects the real prevalence data for the region.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2023.107378
PMID: 37729688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests: Rafael Parra-Medina reports writing
assistance was provided by University Foundation of Health Sciences. Rafael
Parra-Medina reports a relationship with University Foundation of Health
Sciences that includes: employment.
