---
reference_id: "PMID:31050625"
title: The importance of considering the neglected intestinal protozoan parasite Dientamoeba fragilis.
authors:
- Intra J
- Sarto C
- Besana S
- Tiberti N
- Brambilla P
journal: J Med Microbiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000983
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The importance of considering the neglected intestinal protozoan parasite Dientamoeba fragilis.
**Authors:** Intra J, Sarto C, Besana S, Tiberti N, Brambilla P
**Journal:** J Med Microbiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1099/jmm.0.000983](https://doi.org/10.1099/jmm.0.000983)

## Content

1. J Med Microbiol. 2019 Jun;68(6):890-892. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000983. Epub 2019 
May 3.

The importance of considering the neglected intestinal protozoan parasite 
Dientamoeba fragilis.

Intra J(1), Sarto C(1), Besana S(1), Tiberti N(2), Brambilla P(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca, Azienda 
Socio Sanitaria Territoriale di Monza ASST-Monza, Desio Hospital, via Mazzini 1, 
20833, Desio (MB), Italy.
(2)2 Department of Infectious - Tropical Diseases and Microbiology, IRCCS Sacro 
Cuore - Don Calabria Hospital, Negrar, Verona, Italy.

Dientamoebiasis is globally distributed and detected in a large number of 
subjects with diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, flatulence, fatigue and loss of 
appetite. The life cycle and transmission of Dientamoeba fragilis are poorly 
understood. Microscopic examination of permanent stained smears is traditionally 
employed to diagnose the infection. However, this approach is time-consuming and 
the success in detecting D. fragilis depends on the microscopist's experience. 
Hence, only a few laboratories routinely carry out tests for D. fragilis. 
Consequently, the prevalence of D. fragilis infection is probably 
underestimated. Although novel, rapid and more sensitive diagnostic tests are 
becoming available for detecting intestinal parasites, they also possess some 
limitations. The aim of this study was to emphasize the importance of performing 
microscopic examination of permanent stained smears from at least one fresh 
stool specimen after sample arrival at the laboratory, as a mandatory practice 
for the diagnosis of dientamoebiasis, particulary where it is not possible to 
perform molecular assays.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.000983
PMID: 31050625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]