---
reference_id: "PMID:19073822"
title: C5a receptor mediates neutrophil activation and ANCA-induced glomerulonephritis.
authors:
- Schreiber A
- Xiao H
- Jennette JC
- Schneider W
- Luft FC
- Kettritz R
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008050497
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic/metabolism"
- Autoantibodies/chemistry
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Complement C3a/chemistry
- Complement C5a/chemistry
- Cytoplasm/metabolism
- "Glomerulonephritis/immunology, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Neutrophil Activation
- Neutrophils/metabolism
- Peroxidase/metabolism
- "Receptor, Anaphylatoxin C5a/chemistry, metabolism"
- Respiratory Burst
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# C5a receptor mediates neutrophil activation and ANCA-induced glomerulonephritis.
**Authors:** Schreiber A, Xiao H, Jennette JC, Schneider W, Luft FC, Kettritz R
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2008050497](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2008050497)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Feb;20(2):289-98. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008050497. Epub
2008  Dec 10.

C5a receptor mediates neutrophil activation and ANCA-induced glomerulonephritis.

Schreiber A(1), Xiao H, Jennette JC, Schneider W, Luft FC, Kettritz R.

Author information:
(1)Medical Faculty of the Charité, Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, 
Franz Volhard Clinic at the Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 
HELIOS-Klinikum-Berlin, Berlin, Germany. adrian.schreiber@gmx.de

Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA)-induced necrotizing crescentic 
glomerulonephritis (NCGN) requires complement participation in its pathogenesis. 
We tested the hypothesis that the anaphylatoxin C5a is pivotal to disease 
induction via the neutrophil C5a receptor (C5aR). Supernatants from 
ANCA-activated neutrophils activated the complement cascade in normal serum, 
producing C5a. This conditioned serum primed neutrophils for ANCA-induced 
respiratory burst; neutrophil C5aR blockade abrogated this priming, but C3aR 
blockade did not. Furthermore, recombinant C5a but not C3a dosage-dependently 
primed neutrophils for ANCA-induced respiratory burst. To test the role of C5aR 
in a model of NCGN, we immunized myeloperoxidase-deficient mice with 
myeloperoxidase, irradiated them, and transplanted bone marrow from wild-type 
mice or C5aR-deficient mice into them. All mice that received wild-type marrow 
(six of six) but only one of eight mice that received C5aR-deficient marrow 
developed NCGN (P < 0.05). Albuminuria and neutrophil influx into glomeruli were 
also significantly attenuated in the mice that received C5aR-deficient marrow (P 
< 0.05). In summary, C5a and the neutrophil C5aR may compose an amplification 
loop for ANCA-mediated neutrophil activation. The C5aR may provide a new 
therapeutic target for ANCA-induced necrotizing crescentic glomerulonephritis.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2008050497
PMCID: PMC2637051
PMID: 19073822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]