---
reference_id: "PMID:34144933"
title: "Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS): State of the science and clinical care from a 2019 National Institutes of Health Expert Consensus Meeting - Part 1."
authors:
- Vernino S
- Bourne KM
- Stiles LE
- Grubb BP
- Fedorowski A
- Stewart JM
- Arnold AC
- Pace LA
- Axelsson J
- Boris JR
- Moak JP
- Goodman BP
- Chémali KR
- Chung TH
- Goldstein DS
- Diedrich A
- Miglis MG
- Cortez MM
- Miller AJ
- Freeman R
- Biaggioni I
- Rowe PC
- Sheldon RS
- Shibao CA
- Systrom DM
- Cook GA
- Doherty TA
- Abdallah HI
- Darbari A
- Raj SR
journal: Auton Neurosci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2021.102828
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS): State of the science and clinical care from a 2019 National Institutes of Health Expert Consensus Meeting - Part 1.
**Authors:** Vernino S, Bourne KM, Stiles LE, Grubb BP, Fedorowski A, Stewart JM, Arnold AC, Pace LA, Axelsson J, Boris JR, Moak JP, Goodman BP, Chémali KR, Chung TH, Goldstein DS, Diedrich A, Miglis MG, Cortez MM, Miller AJ, Freeman R, Biaggioni I, Rowe PC, Sheldon RS, Shibao CA, Systrom DM, Cook GA, Doherty TA, Abdallah HI, Darbari A, Raj SR
**Journal:** Auton Neurosci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autneu.2021.102828](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2021.102828)

## Content

1. Auton Neurosci. 2021 Nov;235:102828. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2021.102828. Epub 
2021 Jun 5.

Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS): State of the science and 
clinical care from a 2019 National Institutes of Health Expert Consensus Meeting 
- Part 1.

Vernino S(1), Bourne KM(2), Stiles LE(3), Grubb BP(4), Fedorowski A(5), Stewart 
JM(6), Arnold AC(7), Pace LA(8), Axelsson J(9), Boris JR(10), Moak JP(11), 
Goodman BP(12), Chémali KR(13), Chung TH(14), Goldstein DS(15), Diedrich A(16), 
Miglis MG(17), Cortez MM(18), Miller AJ(19), Freeman R(20), Biaggioni I(21), 
Rowe PC(22), Sheldon RS(2), Shibao CA(23), Systrom DM(24), Cook GA(25), Doherty 
TA(26), Abdallah HI(27), Darbari A(28), Raj SR(29).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Cardiac Sciences, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, Cumming 
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology, Stony Brook University Renaissance School of 
Medicine, Stony Brook, NY, USA; Dysautonomia International, East Moriches, NY, 
USA.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, The University of Toledo 
Medical Center, USA.
(5)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden; Department 
of Cardiology, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(6)Center for Hypotension, Departments of Pediatrics and Physiology, New York 
Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Pennsylvania State University 
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA; Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of 
Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(8)Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical 
Genetics and Genomics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(9)Department of Clinical Immunology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(10)Jeffrey R Boris MD LLC, Moylan, PA, USA.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, George Washington Univeristy School of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.
(12)Neuromuscular Division, Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, 
AZ, USA.
(13)Department of Neurology, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Division of 
Neurology, Neuromuscular and Autonomic Center, Sentara Healthcare, Norfolk, VA, 
USA.
(14)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(15)Autonomic Medicine Section, Clinical Neurosciences Program, Division of 
Intramural Research, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(16)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department 
of Medicine and Biomedical Engineering, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN, USA.
(17)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(18)Department of Neurology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(19)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Pennsylvania State University 
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA.
(20)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Center for 
Autonomic and Peripheral Nerve Disorders, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(21)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Departments 
of Medicine and Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN, USA.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(23)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Departments 
of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(24)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(25)Department of Neurology, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(26)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, Department of Medicine, 
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(27)Children's Heart Institute, Fredericksburg, VA, USA.
(28)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Children's National Hospital, Department of 
Pediatrics, George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Washington, DC, USA.
(29)Department of Cardiac Sciences, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, Cumming 
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; Autonomic 
Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. Electronic address: 
satish.raj@ucalgary.ca.

Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a chronic and often 
disabling disorder characterized by orthostatic intolerance with excessive heart 
rate increase without hypotension during upright posture. Patients often 
experience a constellation of other typical symptoms including fatigue, exercise 
intolerance and gastrointestinal distress. A typical patient with POTS is a 
female of child-bearing age, who often first displays symptoms in adolescence. 
The onset of POTS may be precipitated by immunological stressors such as a viral 
infection. A variety of pathophysiologies are involved in the abnormal postural 
tachycardia response; however, the pathophysiology of the syndrome is 
incompletely understood and undoubtedly multifaceted. Clinicians and researchers 
focused on POTS convened at the National Institutes of Health in July 2019 to 
discuss the current state of understanding of the pathophysiology of POTS and to 
identify priorities for POTS research. This article, the first of two articles 
summarizing the information discussed at this meeting, summarizes the current 
understanding of this disorder and best practices for clinical care. The 
evaluation of a patient with suspected POTS should seek to establish the 
diagnosis, identify co-morbid conditions, and exclude conditions that could 
cause or mimic the syndrome. Once diagnosed, management typically begins with 
patient education and non-pharmacologic treatment options. Various medications 
are often used to address specific symptoms, but there are currently no 
FDA-approved medications for the treatment of POTS, and evidence for many of the 
medications used to treat POTS is not robust.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autneu.2021.102828
PMCID: PMC8455420
PMID: 34144933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]