---
reference_id: "PMID:25604450"
title: "Joint modelling of repeated measurement and time-to-event data: an introductory tutorial."
authors:
- Asar Ö
- Ritchie J
- Kalra PA
- Diggle PJ
journal: Int J Epidemiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/ije/dyu262
keywords:
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/mortality, therapy"
- Longitudinal Studies
- "Models, Statistical"
- Proportional Hazards Models
- "Renal Replacement Therapy/methods, mortality"
- Research Design
- Survival Analysis
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Joint modelling of repeated measurement and time-to-event data: an introductory tutorial.
**Authors:** Asar Ö, Ritchie J, Kalra PA, Diggle PJ
**Journal:** Int J Epidemiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ije/dyu262](https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyu262)

## Content

1. Int J Epidemiol. 2015 Feb;44(1):334-44. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyu262. Epub 2015 Jan
 19.

Joint modelling of repeated measurement and time-to-event data: an introductory 
tutorial.

Asar Ö(1), Ritchie J(2), Kalra PA(2), Diggle PJ(3).

Author information:
(1)CHICAS, Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK, 
Vascular Research Group, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University 
of Manchester, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, UK and Institute of Infection 
and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK 
o.asar@lancaster.ac.uk.
(2)CHICAS, Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK, 
Vascular Research Group, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University 
of Manchester, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, UK and Institute of Infection 
and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(3)CHICAS, Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK, 
Vascular Research Group, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University 
of Manchester, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, UK and Institute of Infection 
and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK CHICAS, Lancaster 
Medical School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK, Vascular Research Group, 
Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, Salford 
Royal NHS Foundation Trust, UK and Institute of Infection and Global Health, 
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

BACKGOUND: The term 'joint modelling' is used in the statistical literature to 
refer to methods for simultaneously analysing longitudinal measurement outcomes, 
also called repeated measurement data, and time-to-event outcomes, also called 
survival data. A typical example from nephrology is a study in which the data 
from each participant consist of repeated estimated glomerular filtration rate 
(eGFR) measurements and time to initiation of renal replacement therapy (RRT). 
Joint models typically combine linear mixed effects models for repeated 
measurements and Cox models for censored survival outcomes. Our aim in this 
paper is to present an introductory tutorial on joint modelling methods, with a 
case study in nephrology.
METHODS: We describe the development of the joint modelling framework and 
compare the results with those obtained by the more widely used approaches of 
conducting separate analyses of the repeated measurements and survival times 
based on a linear mixed effects model and a Cox model, respectively. Our case 
study concerns a data set from the Chronic Renal Insufficiency Standards 
Implementation Study (CRISIS). We also provide details of our open-source 
software implementation to allow others to replicate and/or modify our analysis.
RESULTS: The results for the conventional linear mixed effects model and the 
longitudinal component of the joint models were found to be similar. However, 
there were considerable differences between the results for the Cox model with 
time-varying covariate and the time-to-event component of the joint model. For 
example, the relationship between kidney function as measured by eGFR and the 
hazard for initiation of RRT was significantly underestimated by the Cox model 
that treats eGFR as a time-varying covariate, because the Cox model does not 
take measurement error in eGFR into account.
CONCLUSIONS: Joint models should be preferred for simultaneous analyses of 
repeated measurement and survival data, especially when the former is measured 
with error and the association between the underlying error-free measurement 
process and the hazard for survival is of scientific interest.

© The Author 2015; all rights reserved. Published by Oxford University Press on 
behalf of the International Epidemiological Association.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/dyu262
PMID: 25604450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]