---
reference_id: "PMID:16713563"
title: Histone H2B monoubiquitination functions cooperatively with FACT to regulate elongation by RNA polymerase II.
authors:
- Pavri R
- Zhu B
- Li G
- Trojer P
- Mandal S
- Shilatifard A
- Reinberg D
journal: Cell
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.04.029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histone H2B monoubiquitination functions cooperatively with FACT to regulate elongation by RNA polymerase II.
**Authors:** Pavri R, Zhu B, Li G, Trojer P, Mandal S, Shilatifard A, Reinberg D
**Journal:** Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2006.04.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.04.029)

## Content

1. Cell. 2006 May 19;125(4):703-17. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.04.029.

Histone H2B monoubiquitination functions cooperatively with FACT to regulate 
elongation by RNA polymerase II.

Pavri R(1), Zhu B, Li G, Trojer P, Mandal S, Shilatifard A, Reinberg D.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Division of 
Nucleic Acids Enzymology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 683 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Over the past years, a large number of histone posttranslational modifications 
have been described, some of which function to attain a repressed chromatin 
structure, while others facilitate activation by allowing access of regulators 
to DNA. Histone H2B monoubiquitination is a mark associated with transcriptional 
activity. Using a highly reconstituted chromatin-transcription system 
incorporating the inducible RARbeta2 promoter, we find that the establishment of 
H2B monoubiquitination by RNF20/40 and UbcH6 is dependent on the transcription 
elongation regulator complex PAF, the histone chaperone FACT, and transcription. 
H2B monoubiquitination facilitates FACT function, thereby stimulating transcript 
elongation and the generation of longer transcripts. These in vitro analyses and 
corroborating in vivo experiments demonstrate that elongation by RNA polymerase 
II through the nucleosomal barrier is minimally dependent upon (1) FACT and (2) 
the recruitment of PAF and the H2B monoubiquitination machinery.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.04.029
PMID: 16713563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]