---
reference_id: "PMID:32067109"
title: Human genetics of meningococcal infections.
authors:
- Hodeib S
- Herberg JA
- Levin M
- Sancho-Shimizu V
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-020-02128-4
keywords:
- Complement Factor H/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Human Genetics
- Humans
- "Meningococcal Infections/genetics, immunology, microbiology"
- Neisseria meningitidis/pathogenicity
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Virulence/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human genetics of meningococcal infections.
**Authors:** Hodeib S, Herberg JA, Levin M, Sancho-Shimizu V
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-020-02128-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-020-02128-4)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2020 Jun;139(6-7):961-980. doi: 10.1007/s00439-020-02128-4. Epub
2020  Feb 17.

Human genetics of meningococcal infections.

Hodeib S(1), Herberg JA(1), Levin M(1), Sancho-Shimizu V(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Infectious Disease, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial 
College London, Norfolk Place, London, W2 1PG, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatric Infectious Disease, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial 
College London, Norfolk Place, London, W2 1PG, UK. 
v.sancho-shimizu@imperial.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, Norfolk 
Place, London, W2 1PG, UK. v.sancho-shimizu@imperial.ac.uk.

Neisseria meningitidis is a leading cause of bacterial septicaemia and 
meningitis worldwide. Meningococcal disease is rare but can be life threatening 
with a tendency to affect children. Many studies have investigated the role of 
human genetics in predisposition to N. meningitidis infection. These have 
identified both rare single-gene mutations as well as more common polymorphisms 
associated with meningococcal disease susceptibility and severity. These 
findings provide clues to the pathogenesis of N. meningitidis, the basis of host 
susceptibility to infection and to the aetiology of severe disease. From the 
multiple discoveries of monogenic complement deficiencies to the associations of 
complement factor H and complement factor H-related three polymorphisms to 
meningococcal disease, the complement pathway is highlighted as being central to 
the genetic control of meningococcal disease. This review aims to summarise the 
current understanding of the host genetic basis of meningococcal disease with 
respect to the different stages of meningococcal infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-020-02128-4
PMCID: PMC7272491
PMID: 32067109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding 
author states that there is no conflict of interest.