---
reference_id: "PMID:25951892"
title: "Molecular genetics of human primary microcephaly: an overview."
authors:
- Faheem M
- Naseer MI
- Rasool M
- Chaudhary AG
- Kumosani TA
- Ilyas AM
- Pushparaj P
- Ahmed F
- Algahtani HA
- Al-Qahtani MH
- Saleh Jamal H
journal: BMC Med Genomics
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-8-S1-S4
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Microcephaly/epidemiology, genetics"
- Mutation
- Saudi Arabia/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular genetics of human primary microcephaly: an overview.
**Authors:** Faheem M, Naseer MI, Rasool M, Chaudhary AG, Kumosani TA, Ilyas AM, Pushparaj P, Ahmed F, Algahtani HA, Al-Qahtani MH, Saleh Jamal H
**Journal:** BMC Med Genomics (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1755-8794-8-S1-S4](https://doi.org/10.1186/1755-8794-8-S1-S4)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genomics. 2015;8 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S4. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-8-S1-S4. 
Epub 2015 Jan 15.

Molecular genetics of human primary microcephaly: an overview.

Faheem M, Naseer MI, Rasool M, Chaudhary AG, Kumosani TA, Ilyas AM, Pushparaj P, 
Ahmed F, Algahtani HA, Al-Qahtani MH, Saleh Jamal H.

Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a neurodevelopmental disorder 
that is characterised by microcephaly present at birth and non-progressive 
mental retardation. Microcephaly is the outcome of a smaller but architecturally 
normal brain; the cerebral cortex exhibits a significant decrease in size. MCPH 
is a neurogenic mitotic disorder, though affected patients demonstrate normal 
neuronal migration, neuronal apoptosis and neural function. Twelve MCPH loci 
(MCPH1-MCPH12) have been mapped to date from various populations around the 
world and contain the following genes: Microcephalin, WDR62, CDK5RAP2, CASC5, 
ASPM, CENPJ, STIL, CEP135, CEP152, ZNF335, PHC1 and CDK6. It is predicted that 
MCPH gene mutations may lead to the disease phenotype due to a disturbed mitotic 
spindle orientation, premature chromosomal condensation, signalling response as 
a result of damaged DNA, microtubule dynamics, transcriptional control or a few 
other hidden centrosomal mechanisms that can regulate the number of neurons 
produced by neuronal precursor cells. Additional findings have further 
elucidated the microcephaly aetiology and pathophysiology, which has informed 
the clinical management of families suffering from MCPH. The provision of 
molecular diagnosis and genetic counselling may help to decrease the frequency 
of this disorder.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8794-8-S1-S4
PMCID: PMC4315316
PMID: 25951892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]