---
reference_id: "PMID:38281070"
title: "Joint involvement in sarcoidosis: systematic review and meta-analysis of prevalence, clinical pattern and outcome."
authors:
- Yeung T
- Grebowicz A
- Nevskaya T
- Zahid S
- Pope JE
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keae048
keywords:
- Humans
- Sarcoidosis/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Arthritis/epidemiology
- "Arthralgia/epidemiology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Joint involvement in sarcoidosis: systematic review and meta-analysis of prevalence, clinical pattern and outcome.
**Authors:** Yeung T, Grebowicz A, Nevskaya T, Zahid S, Pope JE
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keae048](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keae048)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2024 Jul 1;63(7):1803-1814. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keae048.

Joint involvement in sarcoidosis: systematic review and meta-analysis of 
prevalence, clinical pattern and outcome.

Yeung T(1), Grebowicz A(1), Nevskaya T(1), Zahid S(1), Pope JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Schulich School of 
Medicine, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: To characterize joint involvement (JI) in sarcoidosis, a systematic 
search of MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane Library was conducted from inception to 
July 2022 for publications reporting its prevalence, pattern, treatment and 
outcome.
METHODS: The pooled prevalence estimates (PPE) with 95% CI were calculated using 
binomial distribution and random effects. Meta-regression method was used to 
examine factors affecting heterogeneity between studies.
RESULTS: Forty-nine articles were identified comprising a total of 8574 
sarcoidosis patients, where 12% presented with JI (95% CI 10, 14; I2 = 0%). The 
PPE for sarcoid arthritis (SA) was 19% (95% CI 14, 24; I2 = 95%), and 32% (95% 
CI 13, 51; I2 = 99%) for arthralgia. Heterogeneity was due to higher JI 
prevalence reported in Western Asia and the Middle East, in rheumatology clinics 
and via surveys. Sample size of SA varied from 12 to 117 cases. Ankles were most 
frequently affected (PPE 80%) followed by knees and wrists. Monoarthritis was 
uncommon (PPE 1%; 95% CI 0, 2; I2 = 55%). Acute SA prevailed (PPE 79%; 95% CI 
72, 88; I2 = 69%) with an equal proportion of oligo and polyarthritis and was 
frequently accompanied by erythema nodosum (PPE 62%; 95% CI 52, 71; I2 = 16%). 
Chronic SA was predominantly polyarticular with a higher frequency of the upper 
extremity joints affected. Most common non-articular manifestations with SA 
included fever (52%), erythema nodosum (41%), hilar adenopathy (86%) and 
interstitial lung disease (23%) of which one-third required corticosteroids 
and/or immunosuppressants.
CONCLUSION: SA occurred early in the disease with a PPE of 19% and most frequent 
pattern of acute oligo- or polyarthritis predominantly affecting the lower 
extremity large joints.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keae048
PMID: 38281070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]