---
reference_id: PMID:28504349
title: Polysome profiling of mAb producing CHO cell lines links translational control of cell proliferation and recombinant mRNA loading onto ribosomes with global and recombinant protein synthesis.
authors:
- Godfrey CL
- Mead EJ
- Daramola O
- Dunn S
- Hatton D
- Field R
- Pettman G
- Smales CM
journal: Biotechnol J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/biot.201700177
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Batch Cell Culture Techniques
- CHO Cells
- Cell Engineering/methods
- Cell Proliferation/genetics
- Cricetulus
- "Polyribosomes/chemistry, genetics"
- Protein Biosynthesis
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- "Recombinant Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Ribosomes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polysome profiling of mAb producing CHO cell lines links translational control of cell proliferation and recombinant mRNA loading onto ribosomes with global and recombinant protein synthesis.
**Authors:** Godfrey CL, Mead EJ, Daramola O, Dunn S, Hatton D, Field R, Pettman G, Smales CM
**Journal:** Biotechnol J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/biot.201700177](https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201700177)

## Content

1. Biotechnol J. 2017 Aug;12(8). doi: 10.1002/biot.201700177. Epub 2017 Jul 5.

Polysome profiling of mAb producing CHO cell lines links translational control 
of cell proliferation and recombinant mRNA loading onto ribosomes with global 
and recombinant protein synthesis.

Godfrey CL(1), Mead EJ(1), Daramola O(2), Dunn S(2), Hatton D(2), Field R(2), 
Pettman G(2), Smales CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Industrial Biotechnology Centre and School of Biosciences, University of 
Kent, Canterbury, Kent, CT2 7NJ, Great Britain.
(2)MedImmune, Milstein Building, Granta Park, Cambridge, CB21 6GH, Great 
Britain.

mRNA translation is a key process determining growth, proliferation and duration 
of a Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell culture and influences recombinant protein 
synthesis rate. During bioprocessing, CHO cells can experience stresses leading 
to reprogramming of translation and decreased global protein synthesis. Here we 
apply polysome profiling to determine reprogramming and translational 
capabilities in host and recombinant monoclonal antibody-producing (mAb) CHO 
cell lines during batch culture. Recombinant cell lines with the fastest cell 
specific growth rates were those with the highest global translational 
efficiency. However, total ribosomal capacity, determined from polysome 
profiles, did not relate to the fastest growing or highest producing mAb cell 
line, suggesting it is the ability to utilise available machinery that 
determines protein synthetic capacity. Cell lines with higher cell specific 
productivities tended to have elevated recombinant heavy chain transcript copy 
numbers, localised to the translationally active heavy polysomes. The highest 
titre cell line was that which sustained recombinant protein synthesis and 
maintained high recombinant transcript copy numbers in polysomes. Investigation 
of specific endogenous transcripts revealed a number that maintained or 
reprogrammed into heavy polysomes, identifying targets for potential cell 
engineering or those with 5' untranslated regions that might be utilised to 
enhance recombinant transcript translation.

© 2017 The Authors. Biotechnology Journal published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & 
Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/biot.201700177
PMID: 28504349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]