---
reference_id: "PMID:39135718"
title: "Drug repurposing in Rett and Rett-like syndromes: a promising yet underrated opportunity?"
authors:
- Fuchs C
- "'t Hoen PAC"
- Müller AR
- Ehrhart F
- Van Karnebeek CDM
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1425038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug repurposing in Rett and Rett-like syndromes: a promising yet underrated opportunity?
**Authors:** Fuchs C, 't Hoen PAC, Müller AR, Ehrhart F, Van Karnebeek CDM
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2024.1425038](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2024.1425038)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2024 Jul 29;11:1425038. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1425038.
eCollection 2024.

Drug repurposing in Rett and Rett-like syndromes: a promising yet underrated
opportunity?

Fuchs C(1), 't Hoen PAC(2), Müller AR(3)(4)(5), Ehrhart F(6), Van Karnebeek
CDM(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)EURORDIS - RARE Disease Europe, Paris, France.
(2)Center for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam
Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, Amsterdam UMC Location University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Amsterdam UMC, Emma Center for Personalized Medicine, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam Reproduction and Development,
Amsterdam UMC Location University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(6)Department of Bioinformatics - BiGCaT, Research Institute of Nutrition and
Translational Research in Metabolism (NUTRIM), Maastricht University,
Maastricht, Netherlands.

Rett syndrome (RTT) and Rett-like syndromes [i.e., CDKL5 deficiency disorder
(CDD) and FOXG1-syndrome] represent rare yet profoundly impactful
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). The severity and complexity of symptoms
associated with these disorders, including cognitive impairment, motor
dysfunction, seizures and other neurological features significantly affect the
quality of life of patients and families. Despite ongoing research efforts to
identify potential therapeutic targets and develop novel treatments, current
therapeutic options remain limited. Here the potential of drug repurposing (DR)
as a promising avenue for addressing the unmet medical needs of individuals with
RTT and related disorders is explored. Leveraging existing drugs for new
therapeutic purposes, DR presents an attractive strategy, particularly suited
for neurological disorders given the complexities of the central nervous system
(CNS) and the challenges in blood-brain barrier penetration. The current
landscape of DR efforts in these syndromes is thoroughly examined, with
partiuclar focus on shared molecular pathways and potential common drug targets
across these conditions.

Copyright © 2024 Fuchs, ‘t Hoen, Müller, Ehrhart and Van Karnebeek.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2024.1425038
PMCID: PMC11317438
PMID: 39135718

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
