---
reference_id: "PMID:10211873"
title: The American College of Rheumatology nomenclature and case definitions for neuropsychiatric lupus syndromes.
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '1999'
doi: "10.1002/1529-0131(199904)42:4<599::AID-ANR2>3.0.CO;2-F"
keywords:
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, diagnosis, psychology"
- Male
- "Mental Disorders/diagnosis, etiology"
- Rheumatology/standards
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The American College of Rheumatology nomenclature and case definitions for neuropsychiatric lupus syndromes.
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1529-0131(199904)42:4<599::AID-ANR2>3.0.CO;2-F](https://doi.org/10.1002/1529-0131(199904)42:4<599::AID-ANR2>3.0.CO;2-F)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 1999 Apr;42(4):599-608. doi:
10.1002/1529-0131(199904)42:4<599::AID-ANR2>3.0.CO;2-F.

The American College of Rheumatology nomenclature and case definitions for
neuropsychiatric lupus syndromes.

[No authors listed]

OBJECTIVE: To develop a standardized nomenclature system for the
neuropsychiatric syndromes of systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE).
METHODS: An international, multidisciplinary committee representing
rheumatology, neurology, psychiatry, neuropsychology, and hematology developed
case definitions, reporting standards, and diagnostic testing recommendations.
Before and after the meeting, clinician committee members assigned diagnoses to
sets of vignettes randomly generated from a pool of 108 NPSLE patients. To
assess whether the nomenclature system improved diagnostic agreement, a
consensus index was developed and pre- and postmeeting scores were compared by
t-tests.
RESULTS: Case definitions including diagnostic criteria, important exclusions,
and methods of ascertainment were developed for 19 NPSLE syndromes.
Recommendations for standard reporting requirements, minimum laboratory
evaluation, and imaging techniques were formulated. A short neuropsychological
test battery for the diagnosis of cognitive deficits was proposed. In the
postmeeting exercise, a statistically significant improvement in diagnostic
agreement was observed.
CONCLUSION: The American College of Rheumatology (ACR) Nomenclature for NPSLE
provides case definitions for 19 neuropsychiatric syndromes seen in SLE, with
reporting standards and recommendations for laboratory and imaging tests. It is
intended to facilitate and enhance clinical research, particularly multicenter
studies, and reporting. In clinical settings, consultation with other
specialists may be required. It should be useful for didactic purposes but
should not be used uncritically or as a substitute for a clinical diagnosis. The
complete case definitions are available on the ACR World Wide Web site:
http://www.rheumatology .org/ar/ar.html.

DOI: 10.1002/1529-0131(199904)42:4<599::AID-ANR2>3.0.CO;2-F
PMID: 10211873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
