---
reference_id: "PMID:12181401"
title: Efficacy and safety of imatinib mesylate in advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors.
authors:
- Demetri GD
- von Mehren M
- Blanke CD
- Van den Abbeele AD
- Eisenberg B
- Roberts PJ
- Heinrich MC
- Tuveson DA
- Singer S
- Janicek M
- Fletcher JA
- Silverman SG
- Silberman SL
- Capdeville R
- Kiese B
- Peng B
- Dimitrijevic S
- Druker BJ
- Corless C
- Fletcher CD
- Joensuu H
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa020461
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of imatinib mesylate in advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors.
**Authors:** Demetri GD, von Mehren M, Blanke CD, Van den Abbeele AD, Eisenberg B, Roberts PJ, Heinrich MC, Tuveson DA, Singer S, Janicek M, Fletcher JA, Silverman SG, Silberman SL, Capdeville R, Kiese B, Peng B, Dimitrijevic S, Druker BJ, Corless C, Fletcher CD, Joensuu H
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa020461](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa020461)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2002 Aug 15;347(7):472-80. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa020461.

Efficacy and safety of imatinib mesylate in advanced gastrointestinal stromal 
tumors.

Demetri GD(1), von Mehren M, Blanke CD, Van den Abbeele AD, Eisenberg B, Roberts 
PJ, Heinrich MC, Tuveson DA, Singer S, Janicek M, Fletcher JA, Silverman SG, 
Silberman SL, Capdeville R, Kiese B, Peng B, Dimitrijevic S, Druker BJ, Corless 
C, Fletcher CD, Joensuu H.

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Cancer Center, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2002 Aug 15;347(7):462-3. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp020079.
    Gastroenterology. 2003 Apr;124(4):1151-3. doi: 
10.1016/s0016-5085(03)70070-5.

BACKGROUND: Constitutive activation of KIT receptor tyrosine kinase is critical 
in the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Imatinib mesylate, a 
selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has been shown in preclinical models and 
preliminary clinical studies to have activity against such tumors.
METHODS: We conducted an open-label, randomized, multicenter trial to evaluate 
the activity of imatinib in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal 
tumor. We assessed antitumor response and the safety and tolerability of the 
drug. Pharmacokinetics were assessed in a subgroup of patients.
RESULTS: A total of 147 patients were randomly assigned to receive 400 mg or 600 
mg of imatinib daily. Overall, 79 patients (53.7 percent) had a partial 
response, 41 patients (27.9 percent) had stable disease, and for technical 
reasons, response could not be evaluated in 7 patients (4.8 percent). No patient 
had a complete response to the treatment. The median duration of response had 
not been reached after a median follow-up of 24 weeks after the onset of 
response. Early resistance to imatinib was noted in 20 patients (13.6 percent). 
Therapy was well tolerated, although mild-to-moderate edema, diarrhea, and 
fatigue were common. Gastrointestinal or intraabdominal hemorrhage occurred in 
approximately 5 percent of patients. There were no significant differences in 
toxic effects or response between the two doses. Imatinib was well absorbed, 
with pharmacokinetics similar to those reported in patients with chronic myeloid 
leukemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Imatinib induced a sustained objective response in more than half 
of patients with an advanced unresectable or metastatic gastrointestinal stromal 
tumor. Inhibition of the KIT signal-transduction pathway is a promising 
treatment for advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors, which resist 
conventional chemotherapy.

Copyright 2002 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa020461
PMID: 12181401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]