---
reference_id: "PMID:9665974"
title: Kawasaki syndrome.
authors:
- Rowley AH
- Shulman ST
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.11.3.405
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki syndrome.
**Authors:** Rowley AH, Shulman ST
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.11.3.405](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.11.3.405)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1998 Jul;11(3):405-14. doi: 10.1128/CMR.11.3.405.

Kawasaki syndrome.

Rowley AH(1), Shulman ST.

Author information:
(1)Loyola University Stritch School of Medicine, Maywood, Illinois 60153, USA. 
Arowley@wpo.it.luc.edu

Kawasaki syndrome (KS) is an acute, sometimes fatal vasculitis of young 
children. KS has replaced acute rheumatic fever as the most common cause of 
acquired heart disease in children in the United States. The illness is 
manifested by prolonged fever, conjunctival injection, enanthem, exanthem, 
erythema and swelling of the hands and feet, and cervical adenopathy. These 
acute features of illness are self-limiting, but coronary artery abnormalities 
occur in 20% of untreated patients. The etiology of the illness is unknown, but 
its clinical and epidemiologic features are most consistent with an infectious 
cause. Common cardiovascular manifestations of the illness include myocarditis, 
pericardial effusion, and coronary artery aneurysm formation. Treatment with 
intravenous gamma globulin (IVGG) and aspirin within the first 10 days of 
illness reduces the prevalence of coronary artery abnormalities from 20% in 
those treated with aspirin alone to 4%. Patients who develop coronary artery 
aneurysms, particularly those who develop giant coronary artery aneurysms, may 
suffer myocardial infarction secondary to thrombosis or stenosis in the abnormal 
vessel. Additional research to determine the cause of KS is urgently needed to 
allow for improved diagnosis, more specific therapy, and prevention of the 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.11.3.405
PMCID: PMC88887
PMID: 9665974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]