---
reference_id: "PMID:34448220"
title: "Ludwig's angina in a COVID positive patient-An atypical case report."
authors:
- Poorna T A
- J R L
- Ek J
- John B
journal: Spec Care Dentist
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/scd.12643
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ludwig's angina in a COVID positive patient-An atypical case report.
**Authors:** Poorna T A, J R L, Ek J, John B
**Journal:** Spec Care Dentist (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/scd.12643](https://doi.org/10.1111/scd.12643)

## Content

1. Spec Care Dentist. 2022 Jan;42(1):99-102. doi: 10.1111/scd.12643. Epub 2021
Aug  26.

Ludwig's angina in a COVID positive patient-An atypical case report.

Poorna T A(1), J R L(1), Ek J(1), John B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Government Dental College, 
Kottayam, Kerala, India.

The management of odontogenic infections is established and several guidelines 
have been proposed for its effective treatment. Outbreak of COVID-19 has posed 
serious challenge in the management of odontogenic infections, further 
complicated by immunocompromised status of the patient, where adequate 
evaluation and prompt attention is mandatory to avoid untoward consequences. 
Ludwig's angina being a life threatening infection by itself, association or 
simultaneous presentation with COVID-19 infection can add further complexity in 
the management for a maxillofacial surgeon. Here we present a case report of 
Ludwig's angina in a patient who tested positive for Coronavirus infection and 
how we treated her successfully.

© 2021 Special Care Dentistry Association and Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/scd.12643
PMCID: PMC8662242
PMID: 34448220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.