---
reference_id: "PMID:29021619"
title: Pan-cancer analysis of bi-allelic alterations in homologous recombination DNA repair genes.
authors:
- Riaz N
- Blecua P
- Lim RS
- Shen R
- Higginson DS
- Weinhold N
- Norton L
- Weigelt B
- Powell SN
- Reis-Filho JS
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00921-w
keywords:
- "Genes, Neoplasm"
- Humans
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Neoplasms/genetics
- Recombinational DNA Repair/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pan-cancer analysis of bi-allelic alterations in homologous recombination DNA repair genes.
**Authors:** Riaz N, Blecua P, Lim RS, Shen R, Higginson DS, Weinhold N, Norton L, Weigelt B, Powell SN, Reis-Filho JS
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-017-00921-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00921-w)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2017 Oct 11;8(1):857. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00921-w.

Pan-cancer analysis of bi-allelic alterations in homologous recombination DNA
repair genes.

Riaz N(1), Blecua P(1), Lim RS(2)(3), Shen R(4), Higginson DS(1), Weinhold N(1),
Norton L(5), Weigelt B(2), Powell SN(6), Reis-Filho JS(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY, 10065, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY, 10065, USA.
(3)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
10065, USA.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY, 10065, USA. powells@mskcc.org.
(7)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY, 10065, USA. reisfilj@mskcc.org.
(8)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA. reisfilj@mskcc.org.

BRCA1 and BRCA2 are involved in homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair and are
germ-line cancer pre-disposition genes that result in a syndrome of hereditary
breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC). Whether germ-line or somatic alterations in
these genes or other members of the HR pathway and if mono- or bi-allelic
alterations of HR-related genes have a phenotypic impact on other cancers
remains to be fully elucidated. Here, we perform a pan-cancer analysis of The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data set and observe that bi-allelic pathogenic
alterations in homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair-related genes are
prevalent across many malignancies. These bi-allelic alterations often associate
with genomic features of HR deficiency. Further, in ovarian, breast and prostate
cancers, bi-allelic alterations are mutually exclusive of each other. The
combination of these two properties facilitates reclassification of variants of
unknown significance affecting DNA repair genes, and may help personalize HR
directed therapies in the clinic.Germline mutations in homologous recombination
(HR) DNA repair genes are linked to breast and ovarian cancer. Here, the authors
show that mutually exclusive bi-allelic inactivation of HR genes are present in
other cancer types and associated with genomic features of HR deficiency,
expanding the potential use of HR-directed therapies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00921-w
PMCID: PMC5636842
PMID: 29021619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.
