---
reference_id: "PMID:38946839"
title: "Gallbladder cancer: Progress in the Indian subcontinent."
authors:
- Kumar A
- Sarangi Y
- Gupta A
- Sharma A
journal: World J Clin Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5306/wjco.v15.i6.695
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gallbladder cancer: Progress in the Indian subcontinent.
**Authors:** Kumar A, Sarangi Y, Gupta A, Sharma A
**Journal:** World J Clin Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5306/wjco.v15.i6.695](https://doi.org/10.5306/wjco.v15.i6.695)

## Content

1. World J Clin Oncol. 2024 Jun 24;15(6):695-716. doi: 10.5306/wjco.v15.i6.695.

Gallbladder cancer: Progress in the Indian subcontinent.

Kumar A(1), Sarangi Y(2), Gupta A(2), Sharma A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Gastroenterology, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow 226014, Uttar Pradesh, India. 
doc.ashokgupta@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Surgical Gastroenterology, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow 226014, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)Division of Haematology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, AZ 85054, United 
States.

Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is one of the commonest biliary malignancies seen in 
India, Argentina, and Japan. The disease has dismal outcome as it is detected 
quite late due to nonspecific symptoms and signs. Early detection is the only 
way to improve the outcome. There have been several advances in basic as well as 
clinical research in the hepatobiliary and pancreatic diseases in the West and 
other developed countries but not enough has been done in GBC. Therefore, it is 
important and the responsibility of the countries with high burden of GBC to 
find solutions to the many unanswered questions like etiopathogenesis, early 
diagnosis, treatment, and prognostication. As India being one of the largest 
hubs for GBC in the world, it is important to know how the country has 
progressed on GBC. In this review, we will discuss the outcome of the 
publications from India highlighting the work and the developments taken place 
in past several decades both in basic and clinical research.

©The Author(s) 2024. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.5306/wjco.v15.i6.695
PMCID: PMC11212610
PMID: 38946839

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: Dr. Kumar has 
nothing to disclose.