---
reference_id: "PMID:35809948"
title: Recurrent Pleuritic Chest Pain, Lobar Consolidation, and Pleural Effusion in a 50-Year-Old Woman.
authors:
- Zakynthinos GE
- Dimeas IE
- Sinis SI
- Tsolaki V
- Daniil Z
- Gourgoulianis KI
journal: Chest
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2022.02.034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent Pleuritic Chest Pain, Lobar Consolidation, and Pleural Effusion in a 50-Year-Old Woman.
**Authors:** Zakynthinos GE, Dimeas IE, Sinis SI, Tsolaki V, Daniil Z, Gourgoulianis KI
**Journal:** Chest (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chest.2022.02.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2022.02.034)

## Content

1. Chest. 2022 Jul;162(1):e37-e41. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2022.02.034.

Recurrent Pleuritic Chest Pain, Lobar Consolidation, and Pleural Effusion in a 
50-Year-Old Woman.

Zakynthinos GE(1), Dimeas IE(2), Sinis SI(2), Tsolaki V(3), Daniil Z(2), 
Gourgoulianis KI(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Intensive Care, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly, 
Larissa, Greece. Electronic address: gzakynthinos2@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
(3)Department of Intensive Care, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly, 
Larissa, Greece.

A 50-year-old woman with a history of permanent atrial fibrillation (AF) treated 
with radiofrequency catheter ablation (RFCA) 6 months ago was admitted to the 
respiratory department of a tertiary hospital because of recurrent episodes of 
pleuritic chest pain in the preceding 5 months. The patient reported multiple 
visits to a regional hospital, where she was treated with broad-spectrum 
antibiotics after discovery of a left alveolar consolidation on chest radiograph 
(Fig 1), subsequently imaged with CT scan (Fig 2). On treatment failure and 
appearance of a left-sided pleural effusion during outpatient follow-up, the 
patient was re-admitted. Pleural fluid was obtained via thoracocentesis 
characterized by exudative features and lymphocytic predominance. Abdomen CT 
scan, with IV and per os contrast agent, was devoid of findings consistent with 
malignancy, and serum autoantibody levels were below positivity cut off values 
(antinuclear, cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, rheumatoid factor, and 
anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies). The patient underwent flexible 
bronchoscopy without endobronchial pathology on visual inspection. Microbiologic 
studies and cytological examination of samples obtained by bronchial 
washing/aspiration yielded no clinically relevant information. Lung 
perfusion/ventilation scintigraphy was ordered to exclude chronic thromboembolic 
pulmonary hypertension; however, a deficit in vascularization for the left 
inferior lobe was found, prompting further investigation (Fig 3). Progression of 
left inferior lobe consolidation and the presence of a small pericardial 
effusion became evident on reimaging after a 2-month interval. The patient was 
empirically started on corticosteroids. After emergence of left hilar 
lymphadenopathy (< 1 cm), a PET-CT scan was performed. The left lower inferior 
lobe consolidation, whose metabolic activity pattern was consistent with that of 
inflammation (standardized uptake value equal to 4.4) (Fig 4), as well as the 
left sided-pleural effusion were markedly improved compared with previous 
imaging 20 days after corticosteroid initiation (Fig 2). On the grounds of 
recalcitrant pleuritic pain and pleural effusion recurrence during 
corticosteroid tapering, the patient was referred to the respiratory department 
of our university hospital to have her condition diagnosed.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2022.02.034
PMID: 35809948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]