---
reference_id: "PMID:37480203"
title: "Meteorological and environmental factors that impact pollen counts, allergenicity, and thresholds: A scoping review."
authors:
- Brake DR
- Yaman RN
- Camargo AR
- Marks LA
- Maddux JT
- Ochkur SI
- Rank MA
journal: Allergy Asthma Proc
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2500/aap.2023.44.230022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meteorological and environmental factors that impact pollen counts, allergenicity, and thresholds: A scoping review.
**Authors:** Brake DR, Yaman RN, Camargo AR, Marks LA, Maddux JT, Ochkur SI, Rank MA
**Journal:** Allergy Asthma Proc (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2500/aap.2023.44.230022](https://doi.org/10.2500/aap.2023.44.230022)

## Content

1. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2023 Jul 1;44(4):229-236. doi:
10.2500/aap.2023.44.230022.

Meteorological and environmental factors that impact pollen counts, 
allergenicity, and thresholds: A scoping review.

Brake DR(1), Yaman RN(1), Camargo AR(2), Marks LA(3), Maddux JT(1), Ochkur 
SI(1), Rank MA(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, Arizona.
(2)Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(3)Library Services, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.

Background: Pollen is a key source of aeroallergens responsible for allergic 
rhinitis, conjunctivitis, and asthma. Objective: The goal of this scoping review 
was to summarize current available literature on the factors that affect pollen 
counts, allergenicity, and thresholds that induce symptoms in individuals who 
were sensitized. Methods: Several databases showed no published articles with a 
similar scope as of January 2022. A search of these data bases yielded 373 
articles for assessment. These were then reviewed for relevance, and articles 
were selected to demonstrate the breadth of available data on pollen counts, 
allergenicity, and thresholds that induce symptoms in individuals who were 
sensitized. Additional articles were identified through examination of 
bibliographies of search-identified articles. Results: Several environmental 
factors have shown a correlation with pollen counts and allergen load, including 
the distance from the source, wind characteristics, pollen size, terrain, urban 
environments, air composition (particulate matter, CO₂ levels, ozone, NO₂), and 
weather conditions (humidity, thunderstorms, precipitation). Pollen thresholds 
at which symptoms were induced varied by study, pollen type, symptom, disease, 
and location. In addition, there was heterogeneity in study designs, threshold 
definition, and outcome measures. Conclusion: This scoping review demonstrates 
the plethora of variables that influence the relationship between pollen and the 
symptoms of allergic diseases. Analysis of the available data sheds light on the 
complex interaction between environmental and biologic factors that affect 
pollen's role in allergic diseases and provides guidance on multiple areas for 
further investigation.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2023.44.230022
PMID: 37480203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]