---
reference_id: "PMID:31263214"
title: "Liver fibrosis during clinical ascertainment of glycogen storage disease type III: a need for improved and systematic monitoring."
authors:
- Halaby CA
- Young SP
- Austin S
- Stefanescu E
- Bali D
- Clinton LK
- Smith B
- Pendyal S
- Upadia J
- Schooler GR
- Mavis AM
- Kishnani PS
journal: Genet Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0561-7
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Biomarkers
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cholesterol/analysis, metabolism"
- Female
- Glycogen
- Glycogen Storage Disease/pathology
- Glycogen Storage Disease Type I/pathology
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type III/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Liver/pathology
- "Liver Cirrhosis/metabolism, pathology"
- Liver Diseases
- Male
- "Oligosaccharides/analysis, metabolism"
- "Transaminases/analysis, metabolism"
- "Triglycerides/analysis, metabolism"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver fibrosis during clinical ascertainment of glycogen storage disease type III: a need for improved and systematic monitoring.
**Authors:** Halaby CA, Young SP, Austin S, Stefanescu E, Bali D, Clinton LK, Smith B, Pendyal S, Upadia J, Schooler GR, Mavis AM, Kishnani PS
**Journal:** Genet Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-019-0561-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-019-0561-7)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2019 Dec;21(12):2686-2694. doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0561-7. Epub
2019  Jul 2.

Liver fibrosis during clinical ascertainment of glycogen storage disease type
III: a need for improved and systematic monitoring.

Halaby CA(1), Young SP(1), Austin S(1), Stefanescu E(1), Bali D(1), Clinton
LK(2), Smith B(3), Pendyal S(1), Upadia J(1), Schooler GR(4), Mavis AM(5),
Kishnani PS(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Division of Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of
Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(6)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. priya.kishnani@duke.edu.

PURPOSE: In glycogen storage disease type III (GSD III), liver aminotransferases
tend to normalize with age giving an impression that hepatic manifestations
improve with age. However, despite dietary treatment, long-term liver
complications emerge. We present a GSD III liver natural history study in
children to better understand changes in hepatic parameters with age.
METHODS: We reviewed clinical, biochemical, histological, and radiological data
in pediatric patients with GSD III, and performed a literature review of GSD III
hepatic findings.
RESULTS: Twenty-six patients (median age 12.5 years, range 2-22) with GSD IIIa
(n = 23) and IIIb (n = 3) were enrolled in the study. Six of seven pediatric
patients showed severe fibrosis on liver biopsy (median [range] age: 1.25
[0.75-7] years). Markers of liver injury (aminotransferases), dysfunction
(cholesterol, triglycerides), and glycogen storage (glucose tetrasaccharide,
Glc4) were elevated at an early age, and decreased significantly thereafter
(p < 0.001). Creatine phosphokinase was also elevated with no significant
correlation with age (p = 0.4).
CONCLUSION: Liver fibrosis can occur at an early age, and may explain the
decrease in aminotransferases and Glc4 with age. Our data outlines the need for
systematic follow-up and specific biochemical and radiological tools to monitor
the silent course of the liver disease process.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-019-0561-7
PMID: 31263214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
