---
reference_id: "PMID:34311990"
title: "COVID-19 in Children: Where do we Stand?"
authors:
- Nikolopoulou GB
- Maltezou HC
journal: Arch Med Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2021.07.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COVID-19 in Children: Where do we Stand?
**Authors:** Nikolopoulou GB, Maltezou HC
**Journal:** Arch Med Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arcmed.2021.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcmed.2021.07.002)

## Content

1. Arch Med Res. 2022 Jan;53(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2021.07.002. Epub 2021
 Jul 6.

COVID-19 in Children: Where do we Stand?

Nikolopoulou GB(1), Maltezou HC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatitis, National Public Health Organization, Athens, Greece.
(2)Directorate of Research, Studies and Documentation, National Public Health 
Organization, Athens, Greece. Electronic address: 
helen-maltezou@ath.forthnet.gr.

From the beginning of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic it became 
evident that children infected with the severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) remain mostly asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic. We 
reviewed the epidemiologic and clinical features of children with SARS-CoV-2 
infection. The true prevalence of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection is most 
likely underestimated, as asymptomatic children are less frequently tested. 
Serologic surveys indicate that half of children tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 
report no symptoms. Anosmia/ageusia is not frequent in children but it is the 
strongest predictor of a positive SARS-CoV-2 test. In general, children with 
COVID-19 are at lower risk of hospitalization and life-threatening 
complications. Nevertheless, cases of severe disease or a post-infectious 
multisystem hyperinflammatory syndrome named multisystem inflammatory syndrome 
in children (MIS-C) have been described. Rarely children with severe COVID-19 
develop neurologic complications. In addition, studies indicate that school 
closures have a limited impact on SARS-CoV-2 transmission, much less than other 
social distancing measures. The past months new SARS-CoV-2 variants emerged with 
higher transmissibility and an increased impact on morbidity and deaths. The 
role of children in the transmission dynamics of these variants must be 
elucidated. Lastly, preliminary results from COVID-19 vaccine trials indicate 
very good efficacy and tolerability in children. Very recently the United States 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other public health authorities 
recommend vaccination of children 12 years or older to protect them but mostly 
to contribute to the achievement of herd immunity.

Copyright © 2021 Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMSS). Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2021.07.002
PMCID: PMC8257427
PMID: 34311990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interest Theackre is no conflict of 
interest to declare.