---
reference_id: "PMID:31698507"
title: "Review: Danon disease: Review of natural history and recent advances."
authors:
- Cenacchi G
- Papa V
- Pegoraro V
- Marozzo R
- Fanin M
- Angelini C
journal: Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/nan.12587
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type IIb/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review: Danon disease: Review of natural history and recent advances.
**Authors:** Cenacchi G, Papa V, Pegoraro V, Marozzo R, Fanin M, Angelini C
**Journal:** Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nan.12587](https://doi.org/10.1111/nan.12587)

## Content

1. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2020 Jun;46(4):303-322. doi: 10.1111/nan.12587.
Epub  2019 Nov 25.

Review: Danon disease: Review of natural history and recent advances.

Cenacchi G(1), Papa V(1), Pegoraro V(2), Marozzo R(2), Fanin M(3), Angelini
C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, "Alma Mater" University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Neurobiology Laboratory, IRCCS San Camillo Hospital, Venice, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Neuromuscular Department, IRCCS San Camillo Hospital, Venice, Italy.

Danon disease is a severe multisystem disorder clinically characterized by
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy and mental retardation in male
patients, and by a milder phenotype (predominantly involving cardiac muscle) in
female patients. The disease is inherited as an X-linked dominant trait. The
primary deficiency of lysosome-associated membrane protein-2 (LAMP-2) causes
disruption of autophagy, leading to an impaired fusion of lysosomes to
autophagosomes and biogenesis of lysosomes. We surveyed over 500 Danon disease
patients reported in the literature from the first description to the present,
in order to summarize the clinical, pathological and molecular data and
treatment perspectives. An early molecular diagnosis is of crucial importance
for genetic counselling and for therapeutic interventions: in male patients, the
prognosis is poor due to rapid progression towards heart failure, and only heart
transplantation modifies the disease course.

© 2019 British Neuropathological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/nan.12587
PMID: 31698507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
