---
reference_id: "PMID:9972676"
title: Chronic recurrent stress due to panic disorder does not precipitate Graves' disease.
authors:
- Chiovato L
- Marinò M
- Perugi G
- Fiore E
- Montanelli L
- Lapi P
- Cavaliere R
- Ciampi M
- Patronelli A
- Placidi G
- Placidi GF
- Cassano GB
- Pinchera A
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1007/BF03348042
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic recurrent stress due to panic disorder does not precipitate Graves' disease.
**Authors:** Chiovato L, Marinò M, Perugi G, Fiore E, Montanelli L, Lapi P, Cavaliere R, Ciampi M, Patronelli A, Placidi G, Placidi GF, Cassano GB, Pinchera A
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF03348042](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03348042)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 1998 Dec;21(11):758-64. doi: 10.1007/BF03348042.

Chronic recurrent stress due to panic disorder does not precipitate Graves' 
disease.

Chiovato L(1), Marinò M, Perugi G, Fiore E, Montanelli L, Lapi P, Cavaliere R, 
Ciampi M, Patronelli A, Placidi G, Placidi GF, Cassano GB, Pinchera A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University of Pisa, Italy.

A role of psychic stress in precipitating hyperthyroid Graves' disease has been 
suggested, but the evidence in support of this pathogenetic mechanism is 
conflicting. In this study we investigated the possible occurrence of Graves' 
disease in patients with panic disorder, a psychiatric condition characterized 
by recurrent endogenous stress. The study group included 87 consecutive patients 
suffering from panic disorder since 1 to 30 years: 17 males (mean age 31.3, 
range 26-43 years) and 70 females (mean age 37.6, range 15-73 years). Two 
hundred and sixty-two normal subjects with no present or past history of 
psychiatric disorder served as controls. Patients were submitted to a full 
evaluation of the thyroid that included physical examination, assays for free 
thyroid hormones, TSH, thyroglobulin (TgAb), thyroperoxidase (TPOAb) and TSH 
receptor (TRAb) antibodies, and thyroid echography. The prevalence of 
circulating TgAb and/or TPOAb in patients with panic disorder did not differ 
from that in the control group. Twelve patients with panic disorder (13.7%) had 
circulating TgAb and/or TPOAb, but none had TRAb. Three out of 12 patients with 
thyroid antibodies, indicating a genetic susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid 
disease, had a family history of clinical thyroid autoimmunity, and 4 of them 
had a hypoechogenic pattern of the thyroid at ultrasound suggesting autoimmune 
thyroiditis. None of the patients with panic disorder had a previous history of 
hyperthyroidism. On examination, clinical hyperthyroidism or endocrine 
ophthalmopathy were not found in any of them. A small goiter was appreciated by 
palpation in 16 patients (18.3%). Free thyroid hormones and TSH were within the 
normal range in all patients but one: a 55-year old lady with normal serum free 
thyroid hormones and undetectable TSH. During an 18-month follow-up she did not 
develop hyperthyroidism and her TSH spontaneously returned in the normal range. 
Considering the individual duration of panic disorder, evidence for previous or 
present Graves' hyperthyroidism was not found for a total of 478 patient-years 
of exposure to recurrent endogenous stress in the whole study group, and for a 
total of 39 patient-years in patients with a genetic susceptibility to 
autoimmune thyroid disease. In conclusion, we found that recurrent endogenous 
stress did not precipitate Graves' hyperthyroidism in a series of 87 patients 
with panic disorder, encompassing a total of 478 patient-years of exposure to 
stress. Failure to activate the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis by 
endogenous stress due to panic disorder as opposed to exogenous stress due to 
life-events might explain why panic disorder does not precipitate Graves' 
hyperthyroidism.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03348042
PMID: 9972676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]