---
reference_id: "PMID:28419980"
title: Evaluation of GLUT1 variation in non-acquired focal epilepsy.
authors:
- Peeraer A
- Damiano JA
- Bellows ST
- Scheffer IE
- Berkovic SF
- Mullen SA
- Hildebrand MS
journal: Epilepsy Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2017.04.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of GLUT1 variation in non-acquired focal epilepsy.
**Authors:** Peeraer A, Damiano JA, Bellows ST, Scheffer IE, Berkovic SF, Mullen SA, Hildebrand MS
**Journal:** Epilepsy Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2017.04.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2017.04.007)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Res. 2017 Jul;133:54-57. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2017.04.007. Epub 
2017 Apr 10.

Evaluation of GLUT1 variation in non-acquired focal epilepsy.

Peeraer A(1), Damiano JA(1), Bellows ST(1), Scheffer IE(2), Berkovic SF(1), 
Mullen SA(3), Hildebrand MS(4).

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, 
Austin Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, 3084, Australia.
(2)Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, 
Austin Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, 3084, Australia; Florey Institute for 
Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 
3052, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Royal 
Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(3)Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, 
Austin Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, 3084, Australia; Florey Institute for 
Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 
3052, Australia. Electronic address: saul.mullen@unimelb.edu.au.
(4)Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, 
Austin Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, 3084, Australia. Electronic address: 
michael.hildebrand@unimelb.edu.au.

Brain glucose transport is dependent on glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1), encoded 
by the solute carrier family 2 member 1 (SLC2A1) gene. Mutations in SLC2A1 cause 
GLUT1 deficiency which is characterized by a broad spectrum of neurological 
phenotypes including generalized epilepsy, motor disorders, developmental delay 
and microcephaly. Recent case reports suggest SLC2A1 mutations can contribute to 
non-acquired focal epilepsy (NAFE) but interrogation of a large patient cohort 
has not been reported. We studied 200 patients with NAFE (126 with temporal lobe 
epilepsy) comprising 104 females and 96 males with a mean age of onset of 18 
years. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Sanger sequencing was performed to 
detect variants in all 10 coding exons and splice site regions of the SLC2A1 
gene. We did not detect any pathogenic mutations in SLC2A1 in this cohort. Our 
data suggests that the frequency of GLUT1 mutations in NAFE is low. Limitations 
of this study include the mean age of onset and cohort size. Future research 
should focus on subpopulations of focal epilepsy with lower age of seizure onset 
particularly with co-existent movement disorders in which GLUT1 mutations may 
play a more important role.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2017.04.007
PMID: 28419980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]