---
reference_id: "PMID:15800319"
title: Unequivocal delineation of clinicogenetic subgroups and development of a new model for improved outcome prediction in neuroblastoma.
authors:
- Vandesompele J
- Baudis M
- De Preter K
- Van Roy N
- Ambros P
- Bown N
- Brinkschmidt C
- Christiansen H
- Combaret V
- Lastowska M
- Nicholson J
- "O'Meara A"
- Plantaz D
- Stallings R
- Brichard B
- Van den Broecke C
- De Bie S
- De Paepe A
- Laureys G
- Speleman F
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.06.104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unequivocal delineation of clinicogenetic subgroups and development of a new model for improved outcome prediction in neuroblastoma.
**Authors:** Vandesompele J, Baudis M, De Preter K, Van Roy N, Ambros P, Bown N, Brinkschmidt C, Christiansen H, Combaret V, Lastowska M, Nicholson J, O'Meara A, Plantaz D, Stallings R, Brichard B, Van den Broecke C, De Bie S, De Paepe A, Laureys G, Speleman F
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2005.06.104](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2005.06.104)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Apr 1;23(10):2280-99. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.06.104.

Unequivocal delineation of clinicogenetic subgroups and development of a new 
model for improved outcome prediction in neuroblastoma.

Vandesompele J(1), Baudis M, De Preter K, Van Roy N, Ambros P, Bown N, 
Brinkschmidt C, Christiansen H, Combaret V, Lastowska M, Nicholson J, O'Meara A, 
Plantaz D, Stallings R, Brichard B, Van den Broecke C, De Bie S, De Paepe A, 
Laureys G, Speleman F.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent (CMGG), Ghent University Hospital, MRB, De 
Pintelaan 185, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium. Joke.Vandesompele@UGent.be

PURPOSE: Neuroblastoma is a genetically heterogeneous pediatric tumor with a 
remarkably variable clinical behavior ranging from widely disseminated disease 
to spontaneous regression. In this study, we aimed for comprehensive genetic 
subgroup discovery and assessment of independent prognostic markers based on 
genome-wide aberrations detected by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Published CGH data from 231 primary untreated 
neuroblastomas were converted to a digitized format suitable for global data 
mining, subgroup discovery, and multivariate survival analyses.
RESULTS: In contrast to previous reports, which included only a few genetic 
parameters, we present here for the first time a strategy that allows unbiased 
evaluation of all genetic imbalances detected by CGH. The presented approach 
firmly established the existence of three different clinicogenetic subgroups and 
indicated that chromosome 17 status and tumor stage were the only independent 
significant predictors for patient outcome. Important new findings were: (1) a 
normal chromosome 17 status as a delineator of a subgroup of presumed 
favorable-stage tumors with highly increased risk; (2) the recognition of a 
survivor signature conferring 100% 5-year survival for stage 1, 2, and 4S tumors 
presenting with whole chromosome 17 gain; and (3) the identification of 3p 
deletion as a hallmark of older age at diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: We propose a new regression model for improved patient outcome 
prediction, incorporating tumor stage, chromosome 17, and amplification/deletion 
status. These findings may prove highly valuable with respect to more reliable 
risk assessment, evaluation of clinical results, and optimization of current 
treatment protocols.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2005.06.104
PMID: 15800319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]