---
reference_id: "PMID:23720786"
title: "GH treatment to final height produces similar height gains in patients with SHOX deficiency and Turner syndrome: results of a multicenter trial."
authors:
- Blum WF
- Ross JL
- Zimmermann AG
- Quigley CA
- Child CJ
- Kalifa G
- Deal C
- Drop SL
- Rappold G
- Cutler GB Jr
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1222
keywords:
- Age Determination by Skeleton
- Body Height/drug effects
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- "Human Growth Hormone/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- Puberty
- Short Stature Homeobox Protein
- "Turner Syndrome/drug therapy, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GH treatment to final height produces similar height gains in patients with SHOX deficiency and Turner syndrome: results of a multicenter trial.
**Authors:** Blum WF, Ross JL, Zimmermann AG, Quigley CA, Child CJ, Kalifa G, Deal C, Drop SL, Rappold G, Cutler GB Jr
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2013-1222](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2013-1222)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Aug;98(8):E1383-92. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1222. 
Epub 2013 May 29.

GH treatment to final height produces similar height gains in patients with SHOX 
deficiency and Turner syndrome: results of a multicenter trial.

Blum WF(1), Ross JL, Zimmermann AG, Quigley CA, Child CJ, Kalifa G, Deal C, Drop 
SL, Rappold G, Cutler GB Jr.

Author information:
(1)Eli Lilly and Company, Werner-Reimers-Strasse 2-4, D-61352 Bad Homburg, 
Germany. wernblum@gmail.com

Erratum in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Dec;98(12):4992.

CONTEXT: Growth impairment in short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) 
deficiency and Turner syndrome share a similar etiology. Because of the 
established effect of GH treatment on height in patients with Turner syndrome, 
we hypothesized that GH therapy would also stimulate growth in patients with 
SHOX deficiency.
OBJECTIVE: Our objectives were to evaluate long-term efficacy of GH treatment in 
short patients with SHOX deficiency and to compare the effect on final (adult) 
height (FH) in patients with SHOX deficiency and Turner syndrome.
DESIGN AND SETTING: A prospective, multinational, open-label, randomized 3-arm 
study consisting of a 2-year control period and a subsequent extension period to 
FH. The treatment groups were 1) SHOX-D-C/GH (untreated during the control 
period, GH-treated during the extension), 2) SHOX-D-GH/GH, and 3) Turner-GH/GH 
(GH-treated during both study periods).
PATIENTS: Short-statured prepubertal patients with genetically confirmed SHOX 
deficiency (n = 49) or Turner syndrome (n = 24) who participated in the 
extension.
INTERVENTION: Depending on the study arm, patients received a daily sc injection 
of 0.05 mg/kg recombinant human GH from start of the study or start of the 
extension until attainment of FH or study closure.
RESULTS: Height SD score gain from start of GH treatment to FH was similar 
between the combined SHOX-deficient groups (n = 28, 1.34 ± 0.18 [least-squares 
mean ± SE]) and the Turner group (n = 19, 1.32 ± 0.22). In this FH population, 
57% of the patients with SHOX deficiency and 32% of the patients with Turner 
syndrome achieved a FH greater than -2 SD score.
CONCLUSIONS: GH treatment in short children with SHOX deficiency showed similar 
long-term efficacy as seen in girls with Turner syndrome.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2013-1222
PMID: 23720786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]