---
reference_id: PMID:36285443
title: "Lysosomal positioning diseases: beyond substrate storage."
authors:
- Scerra G
- De Pasquale V
- Scarcella M
- Caporaso MG
- Pavone LM
- "D'Agostino M"
journal: Open Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1098/rsob.220155
keywords:
- Humans
- Calcium/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Autophagy/physiology
- Hydrolases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lysosomal positioning diseases: beyond substrate storage.
**Authors:** Scerra G, De Pasquale V, Scarcella M, Caporaso MG, Pavone LM, D'Agostino M
**Journal:** Open Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rsob.220155](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsob.220155)

## Content

1. Open Biol. 2022 Oct;12(10):220155. doi: 10.1098/rsob.220155. Epub 2022 Oct 26.

Lysosomal positioning diseases: beyond substrate storage.

Scerra G(1), De Pasquale V(2), Scarcella M(1), Caporaso MG(1), Pavone LM(1), 
D'Agostino M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University of 
Naples Federico II, Via Sergio Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Productions, University of 
Naples Federico II, Via Federico Delpino 1, 80137 Naples, Italy.

Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) comprise a group of inherited monogenic 
disorders characterized by lysosomal dysfunctions due to undegraded substrate 
accumulation. They are caused by a deficiency in specific lysosomal hydrolases 
involved in cellular catabolism, or non-enzymatic proteins essential for normal 
lysosomal functions. In LSDs, the lack of degradation of the accumulated 
substrate and its lysosomal storage impairs lysosome functions resulting in the 
perturbation of cellular homeostasis and, in turn, the damage of multiple organ 
systems. A substantial number of studies on the pathogenesis of LSDs has 
highlighted how the accumulation of lysosomal substrates is only the first event 
of a cascade of processes including the accumulation of secondary metabolites 
and the impairment of cellular trafficking, cell signalling, autophagic flux, 
mitochondria functionality and calcium homeostasis, that significantly 
contribute to the onset and progression of these diseases. Emerging studies on 
lysosomal biology have described the fundamental roles of these organelles in a 
variety of physiological functions and pathological conditions beyond their 
canonical activity in cellular waste clearance. Here, we discuss recent advances 
in the knowledge of cellular and molecular mechanisms linking lysosomal 
positioning and trafficking to LSDs.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.220155
PMCID: PMC9597170
PMID: 36285443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.