---
reference_id: "PMID:33040085"
title: DNA analysis of benign adult familial myoclonic epilepsy reveals associations between the pathogenic TTTCA repeat insertion in SAMD12 and the nonpathogenic TTTTA repeat expansion in TNRC6A.
authors:
- Terasaki A
- Nakamura M
- Urata Y
- Hiwatashi H
- Yokoyama I
- Yasuda T
- Onuma T
- Wada K
- Kaneko S
- Kan R
- Niwa SI
- Hashimoto O
- Komure O
- Goto YI
- Yamagishi Y
- Nakano M
- Furusawa Y
- Sano A
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-020-00855-0
keywords:
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Autoantigens/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Middle Aged
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA analysis of benign adult familial myoclonic epilepsy reveals associations between the pathogenic TTTCA repeat insertion in SAMD12 and the nonpathogenic TTTTA repeat expansion in TNRC6A.
**Authors:** Terasaki A, Nakamura M, Urata Y, Hiwatashi H, Yokoyama I, Yasuda T, Onuma T, Wada K, Kaneko S, Kan R, Niwa SI, Hashimoto O, Komure O, Goto YI, Yamagishi Y, Nakano M, Furusawa Y, Sano A
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-020-00855-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-020-00855-0)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2021 Apr;66(4):419-429. doi: 10.1038/s10038-020-00855-0. Epub
2020  Oct 10.

DNA analysis of benign adult familial myoclonic epilepsy reveals associations 
between the pathogenic TTTCA repeat insertion in SAMD12 and the nonpathogenic 
TTTTA repeat expansion in TNRC6A.

Terasaki A(1), Nakamura M(2), Urata Y(1), Hiwatashi H(1), Yokoyama I(1), Yasuda 
T(3), Onuma T(4), Wada K(5), Kaneko S(6)(7), Kan R(8), Niwa SI(9), Hashimoto 
O(10), Komure O(11), Goto YI(12)(13), Yamagishi Y(14), Nakano M(15), Furusawa 
Y(16), Sano A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan. nakamu36@m.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Neurology, Kurashiki-kinen Hospital, Kurashiki, Japan.
(4)Musashinokokubunji Clinic, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Comprehensive Rehabilitation Science, Hirosaki University 
Graduate School of Health Sciences, Hirosaki, Japan.
(6)North Tohoku Epilepsy Center, Minato Hospital, Aomori, Japan.
(7)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Hirosaki University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan.
(8)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Fukushima Medical University School of 
Medicine, Fukushima, Japan.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Aizu Medical Center, Fukushima Medical University, 
Fukushima, Japan.
(10)Hashimoto Clinic, Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Department of Neurology, Amagasaki Daimotsu Hospital, Amagasaki, Japan.
(12)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National 
Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(13)Medical Genome Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(14)Department of Neurology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan.
(15)Department of Neurology, Suita Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(16)Department of Neurology, National Center Hospital, National Center of 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Hum Genet. 2021 Apr;66(4):449-450. doi: 10.1038/s10038-020-00867-w.

Benign adult familial myoclonic epilepsy (BAFME) is an autosomal dominant 
disease characterized by adult-onset tremulous hand movement, myoclonus, and 
infrequent epileptic seizures. Recently, intronic expansion of unstable 
TTTCA/TTTTA pentanucleotide repeats in SAMD12, TNRC6A, or RAPGEF2 was identified 
as pathological mutations in Japanese BAFME pedigrees. To confirm these 
mutations, we performed a genetic analysis on 12 Japanese BAFME pedigrees. A 
total of 143 participants, including 43 familial patients, 5 suspected patients, 
3 sporadic nonfamilial patients, 22 unaffected familial members, and 70 
unrelated controls, were screened for expanded abnormal pentanucleotide repeats 
in SAMD12, TNRC6A, RAPGEF2, YEAT2, MARCH6, and STARD7. DNA samples were analyzed 
using Southern blotting, long-range polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 
repeat-primed PCR, and long-range PCR followed by Southern blotting. Of the 51 
individuals with clinically diagnosed or suspected BAFME, 49 carried a SAMD12 
allele with an expanded TTTCA/TTTTA pentanucleotide repeat. Genetic and clinical 
anticipation was observed. As in previous reports, the one patient with 
homozygous mutant alleles showed more severe symptoms than the heterozygous 
carriers. In addition, screening for expanded pentanucleotide repeats in TNRC6A 
revealed that the frequency of expanded TTTTA repeat alleles in the BAFME group 
was significantly higher than in the control group. All patients who were 
clinically diagnosed with BAFME, including those in the original family reported 
by Yasuda, carried abnormally expanded TTTCA/TTTTA repeat alleles of SAMD12. 
Patients with BAFME also frequently carried a TTTTA repeat expansion in TNRC6A, 
suggesting that there may be unknown factors in the ancestry of patients with 
BAFME that make pentanucleotide repeats unstable.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-020-00855-0
PMID: 33040085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]