---
reference_id: "PMID:16996579"
title: "The overlap of Sjögren's syndrome with other systemic autoimmune diseases."
authors:
- Ramos-Casals M
- Brito-Zerón P
- Font J
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.08.007
keywords:
- Age Factors
- "Antibodies, Antiphospholipid/blood"
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Autoimmune Diseases/classification, diagnosis"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Mixed Connective Tissue Disease/diagnosis
- "Peptides, Cyclic/immunology"
- "Sjogren's Syndrome/diagnosis, immunology"
- Skin Diseases/diagnosis
- Vasculitis/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The overlap of Sjögren's syndrome with other systemic autoimmune diseases.
**Authors:** Ramos-Casals M, Brito-Zerón P, Font J
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.08.007)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Feb;36(4):246-55. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.08.007. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

The overlap of Sjögren's syndrome with other systemic autoimmune diseases.

Ramos-Casals M(1), Brito-Zerón P, Font J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Autoimmune Diseases, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions 
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain. mramos@clinic.ub.es

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the main diagnostic problems caused by the overlap between 
Sjögren's syndrome (SS) and other systemic autoimmune diseases (SAD).
METHODS: We performed a MEDLINE search for articles published between January 
1966 and December 2005 that specifically analyzed the overlap between SS and 
other SAD. We identified a list of diagnostic problems in patients with primary 
SS who had features considered typical of other SAD.
RESULTS: Clinically, the main diagnostic problems occur in SS patients 
presenting with arthritis, Raynaud phenomenon, cutaneous features (subacute 
cutaneous lupus erythematosus, purpura, livedo reticularis, erythema nodosum), 
interstitial pulmonary disease, and cytopenias (leukopenia, thrombocytopenia). 
Immunologically, antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) and antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) are the most frequent atypical autoantibodies 
found in primary SS, with a prevalence ranging between 10 and 20%. However, 
coexisting antiphospholipid syndrome or systemic vasculitis is only detected in 
around 10% of SS patients with aPL or ANCA. Anti-DNA and anticentromere 
antibodies have a prevalence of 5 to 10%, but are more closely related to 
clinical and/or laboratory data suggestive of associated systemic lupus 
erythematosus and limited systemic sclerosis, respectively, leading to the 
fulfillment of classification criteria for these diseases in more than 25% of 
cases.
CONCLUSION: The wide variety of clinical and immunological manifestations of 
patients with primary SS often overlap with other SAD, making the 
differentiation between primary SS, SS associated with SAD, and SS-like 
presentations of some other SAD difficult. This overlap suggests that the 
current classification criteria are useful in differentiating between autoimmune 
and non-autoimmune processes but fail to clearly differentiate among SAD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2006.08.007
PMID: 16996579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]