---
reference_id: "PMID:38227868"
title: "Sarcoidosis: Evaluation and Treatment."
authors:
- Partin M
- Clebak KT
- Chen R
- Helm M
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2024'
keywords:
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Humans
- "Sarcoidosis/therapy, drug therapy"
- "Sarcoidosis, Pulmonary/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Dyspnea/diagnosis
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sarcoidosis: Evaluation and Treatment.
**Authors:** Partin M, Clebak KT, Chen R, Helm M
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2024)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2024 Jan;109(1):19-29.

Sarcoidosis: Evaluation and Treatment.

Partin M(1), Clebak KT(1), Chen R(1), Helm M(1).

Author information:
(1)Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, Pennsylvania.

Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous inflammatory disease of unknown 
etiology that can involve any organ. Ongoing dyspnea and dry cough in a young to 
middle-aged adult should increase the suspicion for sarcoidosis. Symptoms can 
present at any age and affect any organ system; however, pulmonary sarcoidosis 
is the most common. Extrapulmonary manifestations often involve cardiac, 
neurologic, ocular, and cutaneous systems. Patients with sarcoidosis can exhibit 
constitutional symptoms such as fever, unintentional weight loss, and fatigue. 
The early recognition and diagnosis of sarcoidosis are challenging because there 
is no diagnostic standard for testing, initial symptoms vary, and patients may 
be asymptomatic. Consensus guidelines recommend a holistic approach when 
diagnosing sarcoidosis that focuses on clinical presentation and radiographic 
findings, biopsy with evidence of noncaseating granulomas, involvement of more 
than one organ system, and elimination of other etiologies of granulomatous 
disease. Corticosteroids are the initial treatment for active disease, with 
refractory cases often requiring immunosuppressive or biologic therapies. 
Transplantation can be considered for advanced and end-stage disease depending 
on organ involvement.

PMID: 38227868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]