---
reference_id: "PMID:38313286"
title: "GM1 Gangliosidosis Type II: Results of a 10-Year Prospective Study."
authors:
- "D'Souza P"
- Farmer C
- Johnston J
- Han ST
- Adams D
- Hartman AL
- Zein W
- Huryn LA
- Solomon B
- King K
- Jordan C
- Myles J
- Nicoli ER
- Rothermel CE
- Algarin YM
- Huang R
- Quimby R
- Zainab M
- Bowden S
- Crowell A
- Buckley A
- Brewer C
- Regier D
- Brooks B
- Baker E
- Vézina G
- Thurm A
- Tifft CJ
journal: medRxiv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1101/2024.01.04.24300778
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GM1 Gangliosidosis Type II: Results of a 10-Year Prospective Study.
**Authors:** D'Souza P, Farmer C, Johnston J, Han ST, Adams D, Hartman AL, Zein W, Huryn LA, Solomon B, King K, Jordan C, Myles J, Nicoli ER, Rothermel CE, Algarin YM, Huang R, Quimby R, Zainab M, Bowden S, Crowell A, Buckley A, Brewer C, Regier D, Brooks B, Baker E, Vézina G, Thurm A, Tifft CJ
**Journal:** medRxiv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2024.01.04.24300778](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.04.24300778)

## Content

1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Jan 4:2024.01.04.24300778. doi: 
10.1101/2024.01.04.24300778.

GM1 Gangliosidosis Type II: Results of a 10-Year Prospective Study.

D'Souza P(1), Farmer C(2), Johnston J(1), Han ST(3), Adams D(1), Hartman AL(4), 
Zein W(5), Huryn LA(5), Solomon B(6), King K(7), Jordan C(8), Myles J(9), Nicoli 
ER(1), Rothermel CE(1), Algarin YM(1), Huang R(1), Quimby R(1), Zainab M(1), 
Bowden S(1), Crowell A(1), Buckley A(10), Brewer C(7), Regier D(11), Brooks 
B(5), Baker E(12), Vézina G(13), Thurm A(2), Tifft CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Office of the Clinical Director and Medical Genetics Branch, National Human 
Genome Research Institute, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda MD USA.
(2)Neurodevelopmental and Behavioral Phenotyping Service, National Institute of 
Mental Health, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda MD USA.
(3)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, 10 Center 
Drive, Bethesda MD USA.
(4)Division of Clinical Research, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, 6001 Executive Blvd, Rockville, MD, USA.
(5)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, 10 
Center Drive, Bethesda MD, USA.
(6)Speech Language Pathology Section, Rehabilitation Medicine Department, Warren 
Grant Magnuson Clinical Research Center, 10 Center Drive Bethesda MD USA.
(7)Neurotology Branch, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute on 
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD USA.
(8)Inova Children's Cardiology, 8260 Willow Oaks Corporate Drive; suite 400; 
Fairfax, VA, 22031.
(9)Nutrition Department, Warren Grant Magnuson Clinical Research Center, 10 
Center Drive Bethesda MD USA.
(10)Sleep and Neurodevelopment Service, National Institute of Mental Health, 10 
Center Drive, Bethesda MD USA.
(11)Genetics and Metabolism, Children's National Hospital, 111 Michigan Avenue 
NW, Washington DC USA.
(12)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Warren Grant Magnuson Clinical 
Research Center, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(13)Program in Neuroradiology, Children's National Hospital, 111 Michigan Avenue 
NW, Washington DC USA; Radiology and Pediatrics, The George Washington 
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 2300 I St NW, Washington DC 
USA.

Update in
    Genet Med. 2024 Jul;26(7):101144. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2024.101144.

PURPOSE: GM1 gangliosidosis (GM1) is an ultra-rare lysosomal storage disease 
caused by pathogenic variants in galactosidase beta 1 (GLB1; NM_000404), 
primarily characterized by neurodegeneration, often in children. There are no 
approved treatments for GM1, but clinical trials using gene therapy 
(NCT03952637, NCT04713475) and small molecule substrate inhibitors (NCT04221451) 
are ongoing. Understanding the natural history of GM1 is essential for timely 
diagnosis, facilitating better supportive care, and contextualizing the results 
of therapeutic trials.
METHODS: Forty-one individuals with type II GM1 (n=17 late infantile and n=24 
juvenile onset) participated in a single-site prospective observational study. 
Here, we describe the results of extensive multisystem assessment batteries, 
including clinical labs, neuroimaging, physiological exams, and behavioral 
assessments.
RESULTS: Classification of 37 distinct variants in this cohort was performed 
according to ACMG criteria and resulted in the upgrade of six and the submission 
of four new variants to pathogenic or likely pathogenic. In contrast to type I 
infantile, children with type II disease exhibited normal or near normal hearing 
and did not have cherry red maculae or significant hepatosplenomegaly. Some 
older children with juvenile onset developed thickened aortic and/or mitral 
valves with regurgitation. Serial MRIs demonstrated progressive brain atrophy 
that were more pronounced in those with late infantile onset. MR spectroscopy 
showed worsening elevation of myo-inositol and deficit of N-acetyl aspartate 
that were strongly correlated with scores on the Vineland Adaptive Behavior 
Scale and progress more rapidly in late infantile than juvenile onset disease.
CONCLUSION: The comprehensive serial phenotyping of type II GM1 patients expands 
the understanding of disease progression and clarifies some common 
misconceptions about type II patients. Findings from this 10-year endeavor are a 
pivotal step toward more timely diagnosis and better supportive care for 
patients. The wealth of data amassed through this effort will serve as a robust 
comparator for ongoing and future therapeutic trials.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.01.04.24300778
PMCID: PMC10836125
PMID: 38313286

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosure ALH receives 
consulting fees from Teladoc. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.