---
reference_id: "PMID:30345862"
title: Profibrotic effects of angiotensin II and transforming growth factor beta on feline kidney epithelial cells.
authors:
- van Beusekom CD
- Zimmering TM
journal: J Feline Med Surg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/1098612X18805862
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Profibrotic effects of angiotensin II and transforming growth factor beta on feline kidney epithelial cells.
**Authors:** van Beusekom CD, Zimmering TM
**Journal:** J Feline Med Surg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1098612X18805862](https://doi.org/10.1177/1098612X18805862)

## Content

1. J Feline Med Surg. 2019 Aug;21(8):780-787. doi: 10.1177/1098612X18805862. Epub
 2018 Oct 22.

Profibrotic effects of angiotensin II and transforming growth factor beta on 
feline kidney epithelial cells.

van Beusekom CD(1), Zimmering TM(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Veterinary Pharmacology, Pharmacotherapy and Toxicology, Institute for Risk 
Assessment Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)2 Boehringer Ingelheim Animal Health GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of angiotensin II 
(AT-II) and its main mediator, transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-β1), in 
the development of feline renal fibrosis.
METHODS: Expression of marker genes indicating epithelial-to-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT), profibrotic mediators and matricellular proteins was measured 
in feline kidney epithelial cells (Crandell Rees feline kidney [CRFK] cells) 
after incubation with AT-II and/or TGF-β1.
RESULTS: Cells incubated with TGF-β1 or the combination of TGF-β1 with AT-II 
showed clear EMT with more stretched fibroblastic cells, whereas the cells 
incubated without TGF-β1 and AT-II (control) showed more epithelial cells. Gene 
expression of collagen type I (COL1), tenascin-C (TNC), trombospondin-1 (TSP-1), 
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) 
increased significantly after incubation of the CRFK cells with TGF-β1 or TGF-β1 
in combination with AT-II for 12 h. As incubation of the CRFK cells with only 
AT-II did not show any significant rise in gene expression of the 
above-mentioned genes, this was further investigated. In contrast to healthy 
feline kidney tissue, CRFK cells showed almost no expression of the AT-II type 1 
(AT1) receptor.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: TGF-β1 significantly induced expression of the EMT 
marker gene α-SMA, profibrotic mediator CTGF, and fibrogenic proteins COL1, TNC 
and TSP-1 in CRFK cells. The effect of TGF-β1 on myofibroblast formation was 
also observed by the stretched appearance of the CRFK cells. As CRFK cells 
expressed almost no AT1 receptors, this cell line proved not suitable for 
testing the efficacy of drugs that interact with the AT1 receptor. As AT-II 
stimulates the effects of TGF-β1 in mammals, the results of this study suggest 
an indirect profibrotic effect of AT-II besides the demonstrated profibrotic 
effect of TGF-β1 and thus the development of feline renal fibrosis. Modulation 
of EMT or proliferation of myofibroblasts could serve as a diagnostic tool and a 
novel therapeutic target to inhibit renal fibrogenesis, and could possibly serve 
in the therapy of feline renal fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1177/1098612X18805862
PMCID: PMC6661713
PMID: 30345862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.