---
reference_id: "PMID:38078000"
title: "Unveiling the pathogenic mechanisms of NPR2 missense variants: insights into the genotype-associated severity in acromesomelic dysplasia and short stature."
authors:
- Badawi S
- Varghese DS
- Raj A
- John A
- Al-Musafir HS
- Al-Ghamari AJ
- Alshamsi AR
- Ouda SH
- Al-Dirbashi G
- Ali BR
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1294748
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unveiling the pathogenic mechanisms of NPR2 missense variants: insights into the genotype-associated severity in acromesomelic dysplasia and short stature.
**Authors:** Badawi S, Varghese DS, Raj A, John A, Al-Musafir HS, Al-Ghamari AJ, Alshamsi AR, Ouda SH, Al-Dirbashi G, Ali BR
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2023.1294748](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2023.1294748)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2023 Nov 23;11:1294748. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1294748. 
eCollection 2023.

Unveiling the pathogenic mechanisms of NPR2 missense variants: insights into the 
genotype-associated severity in acromesomelic dysplasia and short stature.

Badawi S(1), Varghese DS(1), Raj A(1), John A(1), Al-Musafir HS(1), Al-Ghamari 
AJ(1), Alshamsi AR(1), Ouda SH(1), Al-Dirbashi G(1), Ali BR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomics, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(2)ASPIRE Precision Medicine Research Institute Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates 
University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

Introduction: Natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR2 or NPR-B) plays a central 
role in growth development and bone morphogenesis and therefore loss-of-function 
variations in NPR2 gene have been reported to cause Acromesomelic Dysplasia, 
Maroteaux type 1 and short stature. While several hypotheses have been proposed 
to underlie the pathogenic mechanisms responsible for these conditions, the 
exact mechanisms, and functional characteristics of many of those variants and 
their correlations with the clinical manifestations have not been fully 
established. Methods: In this study, we examined eight NPR2 genetic missense 
variants (p.Leu51Pro, p.Gly123Val, p.Leu314Arg, p.Arg318Gly, p.Arg388Gln, 
p.Arg495Cys, p.Arg557His, and p.Arg932Cys) Acromesomelic Dysplasia, Maroteaux 
type 1 and short stature located on diverse domains and broadly classified as 
variants of uncertain significance. The evaluated variants are either reported 
in patients with acromesomelic dysplasia in the homozygous state or short 
stature in the heterozygous state. Our investigation included the evaluation of 
their expression, subcellular trafficking and localization, N-glycosylation 
profiles, and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) production activity. Results 
and Discussion: Our results indicate that variants p.Leu51Pro, p.Gly123Val, 
p.Leu314Arg, p.Arg388Gln have defective cellular trafficking, being sequestered 
within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and consequently impaired cGMP production 
ability. Conversely, variants p.Arg318Gly, p.Arg495Cys, and p.Arg557His seem to 
display a non-statistically significant behavior that is slightly comparable to 
WT-NPR2. On the other hand, p.Arg932Cys which is located within the guanylyl 
cyclase active site displayed normal cellular trafficking profile albeit with 
defective cGMP. Collectively, our data highlights the genotype-phenotype 
relationship that might be responsible for the milder symptoms observed in short 
stature compared to acromesomelic dysplasia. This study enhances our 
understanding of the functional consequences of several NPR2 variants, shedding 
light on their mechanisms and roles in related genetic disorders which might 
also help in their pathogenicity re-classification.

Copyright © 2023 Badawi, Varghese, Raj, John, Al-Musafir, Al-Ghamari, Alshamsi, 
Ouda, Al-Dirbashi and Ali.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1294748
PMCID: PMC10702138
PMID: 38078000

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.