---
reference_id: "PMID:31882532"
title: Hashimoto encephalopathy in the 21st century.
authors:
- Mattozzi S
- Sabater L
- Escudero D
- Ariño H
- Armangue T
- Simabukuro M
- Iizuka T
- Hara M
- Saiz A
- Sotgiu S
- Dalmau J
- Graus F
journal: Neurology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008785
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Encephalitis/complications, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Hashimoto Disease/complications, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Steroids/therapeutic use
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hashimoto encephalopathy in the 21st century.
**Authors:** Mattozzi S, Sabater L, Escudero D, Ariño H, Armangue T, Simabukuro M, Iizuka T, Hara M, Saiz A, Sotgiu S, Dalmau J, Graus F
**Journal:** Neurology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000008785](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000008785)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2020 Jan 14;94(2):e217-e224. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008785.
Epub  2019 Dec 27.

Hashimoto encephalopathy in the 21st century.

Mattozzi S(1), Sabater L(1), Escudero D(1), Ariño H(1), Armangue T(1), 
Simabukuro M(1), Iizuka T(1), Hara M(1), Saiz A(1), Sotgiu S(1), Dalmau J(1), 
Graus F(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Neuroimmunology Program (S.M., L.S., H.A., T.A., A.S., J.D., F.G.), 
Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain; 
Department of Medical, Surgical and Experimental Medicine (S.M., S.S.), 
University of Sassari, Italy; Service of Neurology (D.E., A.S.), Hospital 
Clinic, and Pediatric Neuroimmunology Unit (T.A.), Neurology Department, Sant 
Joan de Déu Children's Hospital, University of Barcelona, Spain; Neurology 
Division (M.S.), Hospital das Clínicas, São Paulo University, Brazil; Department 
of Neurology (T.I.), Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara; 
Division of Neurology (M.H.), Department of Medicine, Nihon University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Neurology (J.D.), University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; and Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis 
Avançats (J.D.), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)From the Neuroimmunology Program (S.M., L.S., H.A., T.A., A.S., J.D., F.G.), 
Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain; 
Department of Medical, Surgical and Experimental Medicine (S.M., S.S.), 
University of Sassari, Italy; Service of Neurology (D.E., A.S.), Hospital 
Clinic, and Pediatric Neuroimmunology Unit (T.A.), Neurology Department, Sant 
Joan de Déu Children's Hospital, University of Barcelona, Spain; Neurology 
Division (M.S.), Hospital das Clínicas, São Paulo University, Brazil; Department 
of Neurology (T.I.), Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara; 
Division of Neurology (M.H.), Department of Medicine, Nihon University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Neurology (J.D.), University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; and Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis 
Avançats (J.D.), Barcelona, Spain. francesc.graus@idibaps.org.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2020 Jan 14;94(2):55-56. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008776.
    Neurology. 2020 Dec 8;95(23):1067-1068. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000011100.
    Neurology. 2020 Dec 8;95(23):1068. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000011101.

OBJECTIVE: To report the presenting syndromes and to determine whether 
pretreatment criteria of Hashimoto encephalopathy (HE) predict response to 
steroids.
METHODS: We assessed symptoms and steroid responsiveness in 24 patients with 
pretreatment criteria of HE, including (1) subacute onset of cognitive 
impairment, psychiatric symptoms, or seizures; (2) euthyroid status or mild 
hypothyroidism; (3) serum thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPOAb) >200 IU/mL; (4) 
absent neuronal antibodies in serum/CSF; and (5) no other etiologies. Additional 
studies included determination of TPOAb (>200 IU/mL) in 74 patients with 
criteria of possible autoimmune encephalitis (AE) without neuronal antibodies 
and 205 patients with different neuroimmunologic diseases, psychosis, or 
new-onset refractory status epilepticus (NORSE). Serum antibodies to the amino 
(ΝΗ2)-terminal of α-enolase (NH2-α-enolaseAb) were examined in the indicated 24 
patients and 13 controls.
RESULTS: The 24 patients (14 women) with suspected HE had a median age of 48 
years (range 8-79 years). Four syndromes were identified: psychiatric (7, 29%), 
encephalopathy (7, 29%), NORSE-like (6, 25%), and limbic encephalitis (4, 17%). 
Only 6 of 19 (31.6%) patients completely responded to steroids. The frequency of 
TPOAb in the 74 patients with possible AE (6 of 74, 8.1%) was similar to that of 
the 205 controls (17 of 205, 8.2%; p = 0.84). NH2-α-enolaseAb were identified in 
1 of 24 suspected HE cases and 1 of 13 controls.
CONCLUSION: Current pretreatment criteria of HE do not predict steroid 
responsiveness. The detection of TPOAb across all control groups reveals their 
poor disease-specificity. NH2-α-enolaseAb did not help in the diagnosis of HE. 
These findings imply a redefinition of HE that requires a systematic exclusion 
of antibody-mediated encephalitis.

© 2019 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008785
PMID: 31882532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]