---
reference_id: "PMID:18959706"
title: "Hirschsprung's disease: a regional experience."
authors:
- Koh CE
- Yong TL
- Fenton EJ
journal: ANZ J Surg
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1445-2197.2008.04724.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschsprung's disease: a regional experience.
**Authors:** Koh CE, Yong TL, Fenton EJ
**Journal:** ANZ J Surg (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1445-2197.2008.04724.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1445-2197.2008.04724.x)

## Content

1. ANZ J Surg. 2008 Nov;78(11):1023-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-2197.2008.04724.x.

Hirschsprung's disease: a regional experience.

Koh CE(1), Yong TL, Fenton EJ.

Author information:
(1)Women's and Children's Services, Royal Hobart Hospital, Hobart, Tasmania, 
Australia. cherry_koh@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Hirschsprung's disease (HD) is widely quoted to have an incidence of 
approximately 1 in 5000 live births. However, it is also known that regional 
variation in incidence can occur. The aim of this paper was to study the 
incidence of Hirschsprung's disease in Tasmania and to document a regional 
experience of HD.
METHODS: A retrospective review of all patients with newly diagnosed HD between 
January 1998 and December 2005 was carried out. Data were extracted from medical 
records and reported. Tasmanian birth statistics from 1998 to 2005 were obtained 
from the Australian Bureau of Statistics website and the incidence was 
calculated.
RESULTS: Over the 8-year study period, 14 new cases of HD were identified in 
Tasmania. The estimated incidence of HD in Tasmania based on this study is 1 in 
3429. This incidence is higher than the widely quoted incidence of 1 in 5000, 
but the difference did not reach statistical significance. Between 2003 and 
2005, there was a surge in the number of cases with 11 of 14 cases being derived 
from these 3 years. No obvious reasons were found to explain this surge in the 
number of cases. Abdominal distension and vomiting were most common modes of 
presentation (100 and 71%, respectively). There was delayed passage of meconium 
in 43%.
CONCLUSION: The incidence of Hirschsprung's disease seems higher in Tasmania. 
The surge in the number of cases is also of interest, although the reasons 
behind this remain unknown. Delayed passage of meconium was also less common 
than previously cited.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1445-2197.2008.04724.x
PMID: 18959706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]