---
reference_id: "PMID:36147799"
title: Detection of a novel SETBP1 variant in a Chinese neonate with Schinzel-Giedion syndrome.
authors:
- Yang H
- Liu Z
- Chen D
- Lin W
- Wang L
- Chen T
- Wang R
- Yan X
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.920741
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of a novel SETBP1 variant in a Chinese neonate with Schinzel-Giedion syndrome.
**Authors:** Yang H, Liu Z, Chen D, Lin W, Wang L, Chen T, Wang R, Yan X
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2022.920741](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.920741)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2022 Sep 6;10:920741. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.920741.
eCollection  2022.

Detection of a novel SETBP1 variant in a Chinese neonate with Schinzel-Giedion 
syndrome.

Yang H(1), Liu Z(1), Chen D(1), Lin W(2), Wang L(3), Chen T(4), Wang R(1), Yan 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's Hospital, 
Quanzhou, China.
(2)Department of Ultrasound, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's Hospital, 
Quanzhou, China.
(3)Xiamen Genokon Medical Technology Co., Ltd., Xiamen, China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Quanzhou Maternity and Children's Hospital, 
Quanzhou, China.

Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (SGS) is a multiple malformation syndrome 
characterized by typical facial features, severe neurodevelopmental delay, and 
multiple congenital abnormalities. SGS is associated with de novo pathogenic 
variants in the SETBP1 gene. In specific, SETBP1 variants in over 50 patients 
with classical or non-classical SGS were clustered within exon 4. A male Chinese 
neonate with dysmorphic facial features, nervous system disorders, and organ 
malformations at birth was examined in this study and long-term followed-up. 
Whole-exome sequencing was performed to identify any underlying pathogenic 
variants in the proband. Additionally, we reviewed the literature that documents 
the main clinical features and underlying variants of all patients genetically 
diagnosed with SGS. The neonate had a characteristic midface retraction, 
abnormal electroencephalogram waveforms, and genital abnormalities. The patient 
did not initially develop hydronephrosis or undergo a comprehensive skeletal 
assessment. Six months after birth, the patient had an epileptic seizure and 
experienced persistent neurodevelopmental delay with auditory and visual 
abnormalities. Color Doppler ultrasonography at 18 months revealed 
hydronephrosis and bilateral widening of the lateral ventricles. The patient 
died suddenly 20.5 months after birth. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a 
heterozygous de novo variant (c.2605A > G:p.S869G) in exon 4 degradation 
sequence in SETBP1. The reported de novo heterozygous variant in SETBP1 (c.2605A 
> G:p.S869G) broadens the knowledge of the scientific community's on the 
possible SGS genetic alterations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the 
first report of SETBP1 variant (c.2605A > G:p.S869G) in SGS. The clinical 
manifestations of neonatal SGS are atypical, and genetic testing is crucial for 
diagnosis. Long-term follow-up should be conducted after diagnosis to optimize 
the therapeutic interventions.

Copyright © 2022 Yang, Liu, Chen, Lin, Wang, Chen, Wang and Yan.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.920741
PMCID: PMC9488805
PMID: 36147799

Conflict of interest statement: LW was employed by Xiamen Genokon Medical 
Technology Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.