---
reference_id: "PMID:33280851"
title: A child presents with perianal symptoms - how often is this Crohn's disease?
authors:
- Goddard GR
- Lim IIP
- Cheng YC
- Velazco CS
- Jenkins T
- Rosen NG
- Kotagal M
- Garrison AP
- Falcone R
- Rymeski B
- Frischer JS
journal: J Pediatr Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2020.11.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A child presents with perianal symptoms - how often is this Crohn's disease?
**Authors:** Goddard GR, Lim IIP, Cheng YC, Velazco CS, Jenkins T, Rosen NG, Kotagal M, Garrison AP, Falcone R, Rymeski B, Frischer JS
**Journal:** J Pediatr Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2020.11.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2020.11.016)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Surg. 2021 Sep;56(9):1618-1622. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2020.11.016.
 Epub 2020 Nov 20.

A child presents with perianal symptoms - how often is this Crohn's disease?

Goddard GR(1), Lim IIP(2), Cheng YC(1), Velazco CS(1), Jenkins T(1), Rosen 
NG(1), Kotagal M(1), Garrison AP(1), Falcone R(1), Rymeski B(1), Frischer JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Colorectal Center, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet 
Ave, Cincinnati, OH 45229, United States.
(2)Colorectal Center, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet 
Ave, Cincinnati, OH 45229, United States. Electronic address: 
Ireneisabel.lim-beutel@cchmc.org.

BACKGROUND: The cumulative incidence and predictors of future diagnosis of 
Crohn's disease (CD) following presentation with perianal symptoms, such as 
anorectal abscess, fistula or fissure, is unknown.
METHODS: A 5-year retrospective review of children presenting with perianal 
symptoms without prior CD diagnosis was performed. Institutional cumulative 
incidence of CD was calculated to determine the risk of CD presenting with 
perianal symptoms.
RESULTS: 1140 children presented for evaluation of an anorectal abscess 
(n = 232), fistula (n = 49), or fissure (n = 859). Thirty-five were later 
diagnosed with CD, resulting in an incidence of 3%. Prognostic indicators of 
future CD diagnosis included increased age per every additional year (RR 1.19, 
95% CI: 1.14-1.25, p < 0.001), male sex (RR 2.12, 95% CI 1.07-4.22, p = 0.024), 
or perianal fistula (RR 4.67, 95% CI 2.26-9.67, p = 0.022). Among those 
diagnosed with CD, 57% experienced and had a documented history of a 
CD-associated symptom prior to perianal symptom onset. Absence of symptoms 
resulted in delayed diagnosis (43 vs 3 days, p < 0.02).
CONCLUSION: Of children presenting with a perianal symptom, three percent will 
eventually be diagnosed with CD. At highest risk (35%) were males aged 10 years 
or older with a perianal fistula; which should prompt expeditious workup.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2020.11.016
PMID: 33280851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]