---
reference_id: "PMID:24606999"
title: "Clinical, paraclinical and serological findings in Susac syndrome: an international multicenter study."
authors:
- Jarius S
- Kleffner I
- Dörr JM
- Sastre-Garriga J
- Illes Z
- Eggenberger E
- Chalk C
- Ringelstein M
- Aktas O
- Montalban X
- Fechner K
- Stöcker W
- Ringelstein EB
- Paul F
- Wildemann B
journal: J Neuroinflammation
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-11-46
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Autoantibodies/blood
- Cognition Disorders/etiology
- Connective Tissue Diseases/blood
- Hearing Disorders/etiology
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/blood
- International Cooperation
- Leukocyte Count
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/blood"
- Middle Aged
- Multiple Sclerosis/blood
- Serologic Tests
- "Susac Syndrome/blood, complications, diagnosis"
- Vision Disorders/etiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, paraclinical and serological findings in Susac syndrome: an international multicenter study.
**Authors:** Jarius S, Kleffner I, Dörr JM, Sastre-Garriga J, Illes Z, Eggenberger E, Chalk C, Ringelstein M, Aktas O, Montalban X, Fechner K, Stöcker W, Ringelstein EB, Paul F, Wildemann B
**Journal:** J Neuroinflammation (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1742-2094-11-46](https://doi.org/10.1186/1742-2094-11-46)

## Content

1. J Neuroinflammation. 2014 Mar 8;11:46. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-11-46.

Clinical, paraclinical and serological findings in Susac syndrome: an 
international multicenter study.

Jarius S(1), Kleffner I, Dörr JM, Sastre-Garriga J, Illes Z, Eggenberger E, 
Chalk C, Ringelstein M, Aktas O, Montalban X, Fechner K, Stöcker W, Ringelstein 
EB, Paul F, Wildemann B.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuroimmunology, Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany. sven.jarius@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: Susac syndrome (SuS) is a rare disorder thought to be caused by 
autoimmune-mediated occlusions of microvessels in the brain, retina and inner 
ear leading to central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction, visual disturbances due 
to branch retinal artery occlusions (BRAO), and hearing deficits. Recently, a 
role for anti-endothelial cell antibodies (AECA) in SuS has been proposed.
OBJECTIVES: To report the clinical and paraclinical findings in the largest 
single series of patients so far and to investigate the frequency, titers, and 
clinical relevance of AECA in SuS.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 107 serum samples from 20 patients with 
definite SuS, 5 with abortive forms of SuS (all with BRAO), and 70 controls were 
tested for AECA by immunohistochemistry employing primate brain tissue sections.
RESULTS: IgG-AECA >1:100 were detected in 25% (5/20) of patients with definite 
SuS and in 4.3% (3/70) of the controls. Median titers were significantly higher 
in SuS (1:3200, range 1:100 to 1:17500) than in controls (1:100, range 1:10 to 
1:320); IgG-AECA titers >1:320 were exclusively present in patients with SuS; 
three controls had very low titers (1:10). Follow-up samples (n = 4) from a 
seropositive SuS patient obtained over a period of 29 months remained positive 
at high titers. In all seropositive cases, AECA belonged to the 
complement-activating IgG1 subclass. All but one of the IgG-AECA-positive 
samples were positive also for IgA-AECA and 45% for IgM-AECA. SuS took a severe 
and relapsing course in most patients and was associated with bilateral visual 
and hearing impairment, a broad panel of neurological and neuropsychological 
symptoms, and brain atrophy in the majority of cases. Seropositive and 
seronegative patients did not differ with regard to any of the clinical or 
paraclinical parameters analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: SuS took a severe and protracted course in the present cohort, 
resulting in significant impairment. Our finding of high-titer IgG1 and IgM AECA 
in some patients suggest that humoral autoimmunity targeting the 
microvasculature may play a role in the pathogenesis of SuS, at least in a 
subset of patients. Further studies are warranted to define the exact target 
structures of AECA in SuS.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-11-46
PMCID: PMC3995917
PMID: 24606999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]