---
reference_id: "PMID:34240629"
title: Ketogenic Diet Therapy for Epilepsy Associated With Aicardi Syndrome.
authors:
- Sanchez MAR
- Cervenka MC
- Bessone SK
- Kossoff EH
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/08830738211023335
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Aicardi Syndrome/complications, diet therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diet, Ketogenic/methods"
- Electroencephalography/methods
- "Epilepsy/complications, diagnosis, diet therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ketogenic Diet Therapy for Epilepsy Associated With Aicardi Syndrome.
**Authors:** Sanchez MAR, Cervenka MC, Bessone SK, Kossoff EH
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/08830738211023335](https://doi.org/10.1177/08830738211023335)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2021 Oct;36(11):1007-1010. doi: 10.1177/08830738211023335.
Epub  2021 Jul 9.

Ketogenic Diet Therapy for Epilepsy Associated With Aicardi Syndrome.

Sanchez MAR(1), Cervenka MC(2), Bessone SK(3), Kossoff EH(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins All Children's Hospital, St. Petersburg, FL, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Aicardi syndrome is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder associated 
with epilepsy in females. Ketogenic diet therapy represents a possible 
nonpharmacologic treatment in Aicardi syndrome patients.
METHODS: All patients with Aicardi syndrome seen at Johns Hopkins Hospital 
(Baltimore, MD) and Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital (St Petersburg, FL) 
treated with ketogenic diet therapy since 1994 were evaluated retrospectively.
RESULTS: Fifteen patients, ages 4 months to 34 years, were identified. Ten (67%) 
patients experienced a ≥50% seizure reduction after 3 months, with 3 (20%) 
having a ≥90% reduction. Only 1 patient was seizure-free for a short period of 
time. The number of drugs tried prior to ketogenic diet therapy initiation was 
correlated with ≥50% seizure reduction at 3 months, 5.8 vs 2.6 in responders 
versus nonresponders (P = .01). In addition, the mean number of drugs actively 
received also correlated, 3.0 vs 1.2, P = .005. Ketogenic diet therapy was 
slightly more successful in those without infantile spasms, 78% vs 50%, P = .33.
CONCLUSION: Ketogenic diet therapy was helpful in Aicardi syndrome, although 
seizure freedom was rare. It was especially helpful for those who were more 
drug-resistant and did not have infantile spasms at ketogenic diet therapy 
onset.

DOI: 10.1177/08830738211023335
PMID: 34240629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]