---
reference_id: "PMID:20301346"
title: Bestrophinopathies.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- MacDonald IM
- Lee T
- Lawrence J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bestrophinopathies.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, MacDonald IM, Lee T, Lawrence J

## Content

1. Bestrophinopathies.

MacDonald IM(1), Lee T(2), Lawrence J(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Sep 30 [updated 2020 Jul 16].

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
(2)Department of Ophthalmology University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
(3)Alberta Health Services, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Bestrophinopathies, the spectrum of ophthalmic 
disorders caused by pathogenic variants in BEST1, are typically characterized by 
retinal degeneration. The four recognized phenotypes are the three autosomal 
dominant disorders: Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD), BEST1 adult-onset 
vitelliform macular dystrophy (AVMD), and autosomal dominant 
vitreoretinochoroidopathy (ADVIRC); and autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy 
(ARB). Onset is usually in the first decade (except AVMD in which onset is age 
30 to 50 years). Slow visual deterioration is the usual course. Choroidal 
neovascularization can occur in rare cases. ADVIRC is also associated with 
panophthalmic involvement including nanophthalmos, microcornea, hyperopia, and 
narrow anterior chamber angle with angle closure glaucoma.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of autosomal dominant bestrophinopathy is 
established in a proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous BEST1 
pathogenic (or likely pathogenic) variant identified by molecular genetic 
testing. The diagnosis of autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy is established in 
a proband with suggestive findings and biallelic BEST1 pathogenic variants.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: For individuals with significant visual 
impairment, referral to a low vision clinic; attention to special education 
needs for children with visual impairment; and occupational counseling. 
Regarding advanced BVMD fundus lesions, no clinical trials have compared 
conservative treatment vs laser photocoagulation for choroidal 
neovascularization (CNV) and hemorrhage. Also, there are no ongoing clinical 
trials regarding the effectiveness of treatment with anti-VEGF (vascular 
endothelial growth factor) agents. Surveillance: Annual ophthalmologic 
examination (including best corrected visual acuity, visual fields, and spectral 
domain optical coherence tomography) to monitor progression of fundus lesions 
and to evaluate for coincidental development of CNV; in childhood, perform 
annual ophthalmologic examinations to help prevent the development of amblyopia. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Cessation of smoking to help prevent 
neovascularization of the retina. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is 
appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and 
younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as 
early as possible those who would benefit from prompt ophthalmologic evaluation 
and routine follow up.
GENETIC COUNSELING: BVMD, AVMD, and ADVIRC are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant (AD) manner. By definition, autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB) 
is inherited in an autosomal recessive (AR) manner. AD bestrophinopathy. Each 
child of an affected individual has a 50% chance of inheriting the BEST1 
pathogenic variant. AR bestrophinopathy. If both parents are known to be 
heterozygous for a BEST1 pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual 
has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an 
asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. 
Once the BEST1 pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family 
member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation 
genetic testing for a bestrophinopathy are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301346