---
reference_id: "PMID:24014605"
title: Increased protein expression of LHCG receptor and 17α-hydroxylase/17-20-lyase in human polycystic ovaries.
authors:
- Comim FV
- Teerds K
- Hardy K
- Franks S
journal: Hum Reprod
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/humrep/det352
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased protein expression of LHCG receptor and 17α-hydroxylase/17-20-lyase in human polycystic ovaries.
**Authors:** Comim FV, Teerds K, Hardy K, Franks S
**Journal:** Hum Reprod (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/humrep/det352](https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/det352)

## Content

1. Hum Reprod. 2013 Nov;28(11):3086-92. doi: 10.1093/humrep/det352. Epub 2013 Sep
 5.

Increased protein expression of LHCG receptor and 17α-hydroxylase/17-20-lyase in 
human polycystic ovaries.

Comim FV(1), Teerds K, Hardy K, Franks S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Imperial College London, 
London, UK.

STUDY QUESTION: Does the expression of LHCG receptor (LHCGR) protein and key 
enzymes in the androgen biosynthetic pathway differ in normal human versus 
polycystic ovarian tissue?
SUMMARY ANSWER: LHCGR and 17α-hydroxylase/17-20-lyase (CYP17A1) protein levels 
are increased in polycystic ovaries (PCOs).
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: The predominant source of excess androgen secretion in 
women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is ovarian theca cells but few 
studies have directly assessed the presence and abundance of protein for key 
molecules involved in androgen production by theca, including LHCGR and the 
rate-limiting enzyme in androgen production, CYP17A1.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: This is a laboratory-based, cross-sectional study 
comparing protein expression of key molecules in the androgen biosynthetic 
pathway in archived ovarian tissue from women with normal ovaries (n = 10) with 
those with PCOs (n = 16).
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: A quantitative morphometric study was 
performed using sections of archived human ovaries (n = 26) previously 
characterized as normal or polycystic. The distribution and abundance of LHCGR, 
CYP17A1, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (3βHSDII) and 17β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 5 (17βHSD5) proteins were evaluated by immunohistochemistry 
and quantified.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: A higher proportion of theca cells from 
anovulatory PCO expressed LHCGR protein when compared with control ovaries (P = 
0.01). A significant increase in the intensity of immunostaining for CYP17A1 was 
identified in antral follicles in sections of PCO compared with ovaries from 
normal women (P = 0.04).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: As the study used formalin-fixed ovarian 
tissue sections, it was not possible to carry out studies 'in vitro' using the 
same ovarian tissues in order to also demonstrate increased functional activity 
of LHCGR and CYP17A1.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The data are in keeping with the results of 
previous studies in isolated theca cells and support the notion of an intrinsic 
abnormality of theca cell androgen production in women with PCOS.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): The research was supported by a Programme 
Grant, G0802782, from the Medical Research Council (MRC) UK and by the National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre based at 
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust and Imperial College London. F.V.C was 
supported by Capes Foundation (Brazilian Ministry of Education). The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/det352
PMID: 24014605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]