---
reference_id: "PMID:29432562"
title: Loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations in PPP3CA cause two distinct disorders.
authors:
- Mizuguchi T
- Nakashima M
- Kato M
- Okamoto N
- Kurahashi H
- Ekhilevitch N
- Shiina M
- Nishimura G
- Shibata T
- Matsuo M
- Ikeda T
- Ogata K
- Tsuchida N
- Mitsuhashi S
- Miyatake S
- Takata A
- Miyake N
- Hata K
- Kaname T
- Matsubara Y
- Saitsu H
- Matsumoto N
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy052
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations in PPP3CA cause two distinct disorders.
**Authors:** Mizuguchi T, Nakashima M, Kato M, Okamoto N, Kurahashi H, Ekhilevitch N, Shiina M, Nishimura G, Shibata T, Matsuo M, Ikeda T, Ogata K, Tsuchida N, Mitsuhashi S, Miyatake S, Takata A, Miyake N, Hata K, Kaname T, Matsubara Y, Saitsu H, Matsumoto N
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy052](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy052)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Apr 15;27(8):1421-1433. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy052.

Loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations in PPP3CA cause two distinct 
disorders.

Mizuguchi T(1), Nakashima M(2), Kato M(3), Okamoto N(4), Kurahashi H(5), 
Ekhilevitch N(6), Shiina M(7), Nishimura G(8), Shibata T(9), Matsuo M(10), Ikeda 
T(11), Ogata K(7), Tsuchida N(1), Mitsuhashi S(1), Miyatake S(1)(12), Takata 
A(1), Miyake N(1), Hata K(13), Kaname T(14), Matsubara Y(15)(16), Saitsu H(2), 
Matsumoto N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo 
142-8666, Japan.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Women's and Children's Hospital, Osaka 
594-1101, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Aichi Medical University, Aichi 480-1195, Japan.
(6)The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa 3109601, Israel.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.
(8)Center for Intractable Diseases, Saitama Medical University Hospital, Saitama 
350-0495, Japan.
(9)Department of Child Neurology, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Saga University Faculty of Medicine, Saga 
849-8501, Japan.
(11)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Osaka Women's and Children's Hospital, 
Osaka 594-1101, Japan.
(12)Clinical Genetics Department, Yokohama City University Hospital, Yokohama 
236-0004, Japan.
(13)Department of Maternal-Fetal Biology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
(14)Department of Genome Medicine, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
(15)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai 
980-8574, Japan.
(16)National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo 
157-8535, Japan.

Calcineurin is a calcium (Ca2+)/calmodulin-regulated protein phosphatase that 
mediates Ca2+-dependent signal transduction. Here, we report six heterozygous 
mutations in a gene encoding the alpha isoform of the calcineurin catalytic 
subunit (PPP3CA). Notably, mutations were observed in different functional 
domains: in addition to three catalytic domain mutations, two missense mutations 
were found in the auto-inhibitory (AI) domain. One additional frameshift 
insertion that caused premature termination was also identified. Detailed 
clinical evaluation of the six individuals revealed clinically unexpected 
consequences of the PPP3CA mutations. First, the catalytic domain mutations and 
frameshift mutation were consistently found in patients with nonsyndromic early 
onset epileptic encephalopathy. In contrast, the AI domain mutations were 
associated with multiple congenital abnormalities including craniofacial 
dysmorphism, arthrogryposis and short stature. In addition, one individual 
showed severe skeletal developmental defects, namely, severe craniosynostosis 
and gracile bones (severe bone slenderness and perinatal fractures). Using a 
yeast model system, we showed that the catalytic and AI domain mutations visibly 
result in decreased and increased calcineurin signaling, respectively. These 
findings indicate that different functional effects of PPP3CA mutations are 
associated with two distinct disorders and suggest that functional approaches 
using a simple cellular system provide a tool for resolving complex 
genotype-phenotype correlations.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy052
PMID: 29432562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]