---
reference_id: "PMID:34790820"
title: "Tetanus Toxoid Vaccination Coverage and Associated Factors among Childbearing Women in Ethiopia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Nigussie J
- Girma B
- Molla A
- Mareg M
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1155/2021/5529315
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tetanus Toxoid Vaccination Coverage and Associated Factors among Childbearing Women in Ethiopia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Nigussie J, Girma B, Molla A, Mareg M
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2021/5529315](https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5529315)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2021 Nov 8;2021:5529315. doi: 10.1155/2021/5529315.
eCollection  2021.

Tetanus Toxoid Vaccination Coverage and Associated Factors among Childbearing 
Women in Ethiopia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Nigussie J(1), Girma B(1), Molla A(2), Mareg M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nursing, College of Health Sciences and Medicine, Dilla 
University, Dilla, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, College of Health Science and Medicine, Dilla 
University, Dilla, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Reproductive Health, School of Public Health, College of Health 
Science and Medicine, Dilla University, Dilla, Ethiopia.

BACKGROUND: Tetanus is a bacterial disease caused by the Clostridium tetani, 
which is a highly fatal, noncommunicable, and toxin-mediated disease. Globally, 
maternal and neonatal tetanus is a public health problem due to low maternal 
tetanus toxoid immunization. Ethiopia has the highest neonatal mortality and 
morbidity related to tetanus due to low tetanus toxoid immunization and the high 
number of home deliveries. The main objective of this systematic review and 
meta-analysis was to estimate the pooled coverage of at least two doses of 
tetanus toxoid immunization, and the pooled effect sizes of associated factors 
in Ethiopia.
METHODS: Primary studies for this review were searched from the PubMed/MEDLINE 
online, ScienceDirect, Hinari, Google, and Google Scholar databases. Primary 
articles published from 2010 up to August 30, 2020, were included in this 
meta-analysis. Data were extracted in Microsoft Excel format and exported to 
STATA Version 14.0. A random-effects meta-analysis model was used to estimate 
the pooled coverage of two or more tetanus toxoid immunizations and its 
associated factors. Heterogeneity was evaluated by the I 2 test. Egger's 
weighted regression test was used to assess publication bias.
RESULTS: We retrieved 212 records; of these, 199 articles were excluded for 
reasons. Finally, 14 studies were included in this meta-analysis. The pooled 
estimate of receiving at least two doses of tetanus toxoid immunization coverage 
in Ethiopia was 52.2% (95% CI: 42.47-61.93, I 2 = 98.4%). Antenatal care (OR = 
7.8 (95% CI: 3.2, 19.2), I 2 = 96.3%), media exposure (OR = 8.3 (95% CI: 2.1, 
33.3), I 2 = 98.1%), distance from the health facility (OR = 2.64 (95% CI: 1.1, 
6.6), I 2 = 94.1%), educational status of women (OR = 4.7 (95% CI: 2.07, 9.56), 
I 2 = 94.2%), and educational status of husbands (OR = 2.995 (95% CI: 1.194, 
7.512), I 2 = 92.5%) were factors significantly associated with receiving at 
least two doses of tetanus toxoid immunization coverage in Ethiopia.
CONCLUSIONS: The coverage of tetanus toxoid immunization among childbearing 
women was low in Ethiopia. Strengthening maternal health service utilization 
(antinatal care and institutional delivery) to the nearest health facility even 
in health posts and empowering education for both women and their husbands is 
recommended to increase tetanus toxoid immunization coverage in Ethiopia.

Copyright © 2021 Jemberu Nigussie et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5529315
PMCID: PMC8592723
PMID: 34790820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.