---
reference_id: "PMID:35422800"
title: B-Cell Epitope Mapping of TprC and TprD Variants of Treponema pallidum Subspecies Informs Vaccine Development for Human Treponematoses.
authors:
- Molini B
- Fernandez MC
- Godornes C
- Vorobieva A
- Lukehart SA
- Giacani L
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.862491
keywords:
- Animals
- Epitope Mapping
- "Epitopes, B-Lymphocyte/genetics"
- Humans
- Immune Sera
- Rabbits
- Recombinant Proteins
- "Syphilis/prevention & control"
- Treponema pallidum/genetics
- Treponemal Infections
- Vaccine Development
- Yaws
content_type: abstract_only
---

# B-Cell Epitope Mapping of TprC and TprD Variants of Treponema pallidum Subspecies Informs Vaccine Development for Human Treponematoses.
**Authors:** Molini B, Fernandez MC, Godornes C, Vorobieva A, Lukehart SA, Giacani L
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.862491](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.862491)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2022 Mar 29;13:862491. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.862491.
eCollection 2022.

B-Cell Epitope Mapping of TprC and TprD Variants of Treponema pallidum
Subspecies Informs Vaccine Development for Human Treponematoses.

Molini B(1), Fernandez MC(1), Godornes C(1), Vorobieva A(2)(3), Lukehart
SA(1)(4), Giacani L(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States.
(2)VIB-VUB Center for Structural Biology, VIB, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Structural Biology Brussels, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States.

Several recent studies have focused on the identification, functional analysis,
and structural characterization of outer membrane proteins (OMPs) of Treponema
pallidum (Tp). The Tp species encompasses the highly related pallidum, pertenue,
and endemicum subspecies of this pathogen, known to be the causative agents of
syphilis, yaws, and bejel, respectively. These studies highlighted the
importance of identifying surface-exposed OMP regions and the identification of
B-cell epitopes that could be protective and used in vaccine development
efforts. We previously reported that the TprC and TprD OMPs of Tp are predicted
to contain external loops scattered throughout the entire length of the
proteins, several of which show a low degree of sequence variability among
strains and subspecies. In this study, these models were corroborated using
AlphaFold2, a state-of-the-art protein structure modeling software. Here, we
identified B-cell epitopes across the full-length TprC and TprD variants using
the Geysan pepscan mapping approach with antisera from rabbits infected with
syphilis, yaws, and bejel strains and from animals immunized with refolded
recombinant TprC proteins from three syphilis strains. Our results show that the
humoral response is primarily directed to sequences predicted to be on
surface-exposed loops of TprC and TprD proteins, and that the magnitude of the
humoral response to individual epitopes differs among animals infected with
various syphilis strains and Tp subspecies. Rather than exhibiting
strain-specificity, antisera showed various degrees of cross-reactivity with
variant sequences from other strains. The data support the further exploration
of TprC and TprD as vaccine candidates.

Copyright © 2022 Molini, Fernandez, Godornes, Vorobieva, Lukehart and Giacani.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.862491
PMCID: PMC9001972
PMID: 35422800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
