---
reference_id: "PMID:17653760"
title: Melanocytic nevi simulant of melanoma with medicolegal relevance.
authors:
- Massi G
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-007-0459-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Melanocytic nevi simulant of melanoma with medicolegal relevance.
**Authors:** Massi G
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-007-0459-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-007-0459-7)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2007 Sep;451(3):623-47. doi: 10.1007/s00428-007-0459-7. Epub
2007  Jul 26.

Melanocytic nevi simulant of melanoma with medicolegal relevance.

Massi G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Catholic University Medical School, Largo F. Vito, 
1, 00168, Rome, Italy. gmassi@rm.unicatt.it

Comment in
    Virchows Arch. 2008 Jan;452(1):113-4. doi: 10.1007/s00428-007-0537-x.

A group of melanocytic benign nevi are prone to be misdiagnosed as nodular or 
superficial spreading melanoma. This review illustrates the most frequent forms 
of these nevi in direct comparison with their malignant morphologic 
counterparts. The nevi are: hyper-cellular form of common nevus to be 
distinguished from nevoid melanoma, Spitz nevus (vs spitzoid melanoma), Reed 
nevus (vs melanoma with features of Reed nevus), cellular atypical blue nevus 
(vs melanoma on blue nevus), acral nevus (vs acral melanoma), Clark dysplastic 
nevus (vs superficial spreading melanoma), desmoplastic nevi (vs desmoplastic 
melanoma), benign proliferative nodules in congenital nevi (vs melanoma on 
congenital nevi), epithelioid blue nevus (vs animal type melanoma) and regressed 
nevus (vs regressed melanoma). For each single 'pair' of morphological 
look-alikes, a specific set of morphological, immunohistochemical and genetic 
criteria is provided.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-007-0459-7
PMID: 17653760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]