---
reference_id: "PMID:24389137"
title: Clinical features and management of BRCA1 and BRCA2-associated prostate cancer.
authors:
- Alanee SR
- Glogowski EA
- Schrader KA
- Eastham JA
- Offit K
journal: Front Biosci (Elite Ed)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.2741/e686
keywords:
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- Carcinogenesis/genetics
- "Genetic Counseling/methods, trends"
- "Genetic Testing/methods, trends"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Neoplasm Metastasis/physiopathology
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics, therapy"
- Referral and Consultation/trends
- Risk Assessment/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and management of BRCA1 and BRCA2-associated prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Alanee SR, Glogowski EA, Schrader KA, Eastham JA, Offit K
**Journal:** Front Biosci (Elite Ed) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.2741/e686](https://doi.org/10.2741/e686)

## Content

1. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2014 Jan 1;6(1):15-30. doi: 10.2741/e686.

Clinical features and management of BRCA1 and BRCA2-associated prostate cancer.

Alanee SR(1), Glogowski EA(2), Schrader KA(2), Eastham JA(1), Offit K(1).

Author information:
(1)Urology Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY.
(2)Clinical Genetics Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY.

It is thought that over forty percent of an individual's risk of developing
prostate cancer (PCa) is related to familial and genetic factors. Although
multiple genes have been implicated in the development of PCa, few confer as
high a risk as mutations in the genes associated with early-onset breast cancer
(BRCA1 and BRCA2). Not only do mutations in BRCA genes increase the risk of PCa,
but they have also been related to adverse disease characteristics and outcomes.
Therefore, a better understanding of the association between BRCA gene mutations
and PCa may provide the backdrop for individualized management of patients with
PCa who are carriers of a gene mutation. Such management may include an
individualized approach to screening and treatment including chemotherapeutic
regimens targeted to the underlying genetic mechanism of disease. In this paper,
we review the evidence relating BRCA gene mutations to the risk of PCa, as well
as outcomes and response to therapy, and suggest an approach to the management
of such patients.

DOI: 10.2741/e686
PMID: 24389137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
