---
reference_id: "PMID:30303258"
title: Elevated levels of interleukin-33 are associated with allergic and eosinophilic asthma.
authors:
- Gasiuniene E
- Janulaityte I
- Zemeckiene Z
- Barkauskiene D
- Sitkauskiene B
journal: Scand J Immunol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/sji.12724
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated levels of interleukin-33 are associated with allergic and eosinophilic asthma.
**Authors:** Gasiuniene E, Janulaityte I, Zemeckiene Z, Barkauskiene D, Sitkauskiene B
**Journal:** Scand J Immunol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/sji.12724](https://doi.org/10.1111/sji.12724)

## Content

1. Scand J Immunol. 2019 May;89(5):e12724. doi: 10.1111/sji.12724. Epub 2019 Mar 
18.

Elevated levels of interleukin-33 are associated with allergic and eosinophilic 
asthma.

Gasiuniene E(1), Janulaityte I(2), Zemeckiene Z(3), Barkauskiene D(4), 
Sitkauskiene B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Allergology, Lithuanian University of Health 
Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Laboratory of Pulmonology, Lithuanian University 
of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, 
Kaunas, Lithuania.
(4)Department of Pulmonology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, 
Lithuania.

IL-33 is a recently discovered cytokine which plays an important role in asthma 
pathogenesis.
AIM: To evaluate serum IL-33 in patients with asthma and healthy controls, and 
to evaluate the association of IL-33 with different asthma phenotypes.
METHODS: Patients with asthma (n = 115) and healthy subjects (n = 85) were 
included in the study. Subjects with asthma were divided into groups according 
to their phenotype: allergic/non-allergic, eosinophilic/non-eosinophilic, 
obese/non-obese and severity according to GINA (mild, moderate and severe). The 
concentration of IL-33 in serum was measured by standardized enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: The level of IL-33 was significantly higher in patients with asthma 
when compared to healthy subjects (672.73 ± 104.47 pg/mL vs 
268.52 ± 27.56 pg/mL, P < 0.05). IL-33 was also higher in the allergic asthma 
group patients when compared to non-allergic asthmatics (844.61 ± 152.08 pg/mL 
vs 369.56 ± 77.94 pg/mL, P < 0.05). There was a significantly higher serum IL-33 
level in the eosinophilic asthma group when compared to the group of 
non-eosinophilic asthma patients (1001.10 ± 199.11 pg/mL vs 
337.49 ± 72.68 pg/mL, P < 0.01). We did not find a significant difference in 
serum IL-33 level between different asthma severity groups, obese and non-obese 
asthmatics.
CONCLUSION: IL-33 is increased in asthma patients, particularly in some 
phenotypes: allergic asthma and eosinophilic asthma.

© 2018 The Foundation for the Scandinavian Journal of Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.12724
PMID: 30303258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]