---
reference_id: "PMID:19279257"
title: In vivo evidence for NMDA receptor-mediated excitotoxicity in a murine genetic model of Huntington disease.
authors:
- Heng MY
- Detloff PJ
- Wang PL
- Tsien JZ
- Albin RL
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5599-08.2009
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein
- "Huntington Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred CBA"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vivo evidence for NMDA receptor-mediated excitotoxicity in a murine genetic model of Huntington disease.
**Authors:** Heng MY, Detloff PJ, Wang PL, Tsien JZ, Albin RL
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5599-08.2009](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5599-08.2009)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2009 Mar 11;29(10):3200-5. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5599-08.2009.

In vivo evidence for NMDA receptor-mediated excitotoxicity in a murine genetic 
model of Huntington disease.

Heng MY(1), Detloff PJ, Wang PL, Tsien JZ, Albin RL.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program and Department of Neurology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR)-mediated excitotoxicity is implicated as a 
proximate cause of neurodegeneration in Huntington Disease (HD). This hypothesis 
has not been tested rigorously in vivo. NMDAR-NR2B subunits are a major NR2 
subunit expressed by striatal medium spiny neurons that degenerate in HD. To 
test the excitotoxic hypothesis, we crossed a well validated murine genetic 
model of HD (Hdh((CAG)150)) with a transgenic line overexpressing NMDAR-NR2B 
subunits. In the resulting double-mutant line, we show exacerbation of selective 
striatal neuron degeneration. This is the first direct in vivo evidence of 
NR2B-NMDAR-mediated excitotoxicity in the context of HD. Our results are 
consistent with previous suggestions that direct and/or indirect interactions of 
mutant huntingtin with NMDARs are a proximate cause of neurodegeneration in HD.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5599-08.2009
PMCID: PMC6666431
PMID: 19279257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]