---
reference_id: "PMID:33754384"
title: "Risk factors for progression of appendiceal neuroendocrine tumours: low-stage tumours <5 mm appear to be overwhelmingly indolent and may merit a separate designation."
authors:
- Noor M
- Huber AR
- Cates JMM
- Gonzalez RS
journal: Histopathology
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/his.14369
keywords:
- Appendectomy
- Appendiceal Neoplasms/pathology
- Appendix/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Intestinal Neoplasms/pathology
- Ki-67 Antigen/analysis
- Lymphatic Metastasis/pathology
- Male
- Neoplasm Staging
- Neuroendocrine Tumors/pathology
- Pancreatic Neoplasms/pathology
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
- Stomach Neoplasms/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk factors for progression of appendiceal neuroendocrine tumours: low-stage tumours <5 mm appear to be overwhelmingly indolent and may merit a separate designation.
**Authors:** Noor M, Huber AR, Cates JMM, Gonzalez RS
**Journal:** Histopathology (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/his.14369](https://doi.org/10.1111/his.14369)

## Content

1. Histopathology. 2021 Sep;79(3):416-426. doi: 10.1111/his.14369. Epub 2021 Jun
4.

Risk factors for progression of appendiceal neuroendocrine tumours: low-stage 
tumours <5 mm appear to be overwhelmingly indolent and may merit a separate 
designation.

Noor M(1), Huber AR(1), Cates JMM(2), Gonzalez RS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, 
NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, 
USA.

AIMS: Appendiceal well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) are usually 
incidental and clinically benign. Several studies have reported different risk 
factors for nodal metastasis. The aim of this study was to investigate our 
appendiceal NETs (App-NETs) to determine the factors associated with malignant 
behaviour.
METHODS AND RESULTS: For 120 App-NETs, we reviewed the clinical presentation and 
follow-up, including serum chromogranin A (CgA) levels, and compiled several 
microscopic variables. Pathological factors were compared with nodal status and 
time to biochemical recurrence (elevated serum CgA level) by the use of Cox 
regression. We also reviewed similar App-NET data in the Surveillance, 
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Programme. Among our 120 cases, seven 
patients had positive lymph nodes, and nine developed subsequent elevation of 
CgA levels; none developed distant metastases or died of disease. Only three 
patients had grade 2 NETs; none had nodal disease, and one developed an elevated 
CgA level. Increasing tumour size was associated with an increased risk of nodal 
disease [odds ratio (OR) 4.99, P = 0.0055). All seven node-positive cases were 
≥13 mm. Factors associated with elevated CgA levels included age (OR 1.04, 
P = 0.041), pT4 disease (OR 10.22, P = 0.033), and nodal disease (OR 24.0, 
P = 0.012), but not size (OR 2.13, P = 0.072). Of the 1492 reported App-NETs in 
the SEER database with data on tumour size, 137 (9%) were pN1; only five of 
these (4%) were coded as being <5 mm.
CONCLUSIONS: Small (<5 mm) App-NETs that do not invade the serosa or 
mesoappendix appear to be overwhelmingly benign and low-grade, requiring neither 
Ki67 staining nor synoptic reporting. Given their indolent behaviour, different 
nomenclature or staging may be more appropriate for these NETs.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.14369
PMID: 33754384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]