---
reference_id: "PMID:10911965"
title: Transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Bornemann KD
- Staufenbiel M
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06653.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Bornemann KD, Staufenbiel M
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06653.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06653.x)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2000 Jun;908:260-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06653.x.

Transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer's disease.

Bornemann KD(1), Staufenbiel M.

Author information:
(1)Novartis Pharma, Inc., Basel, Switzerland.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology is characterized by A beta peptide-containing 
plaques, neurofibrillary tangles consisting of hyperphosphorylated tau, 
extensive neuritic degeneration, and distinct neuron loss. We generated several 
transgenic mouse lines expressing the human amyloid precursor protein (APP751) 
containing the AD-linked KM670/671NL double mutation (Swedish mutation) under 
the control of a neuron-specific Thy-1 promoter fragment. In the best 
APP-expressing line (APP23), compact A beta deposits can be detected at 6 months 
of age. These plaques dramatically increase with age, are mostly Congo Red 
positive, and accumulate typical plaque-associated proteins such as 
heparansulfate proteoglycan and apolipoprotein E. Activated astrocytes and 
microglia indicative of inflammatory processes reminiscent of AD accumulate 
around the deposits. Furthermore, plaques are surrounded by enlarged dystrophic 
neurites as visualized by neurofilament or Holmes-Luxol staining. Strong 
staining for acetylcholinesterase activity is found throughout the plaques and 
is accompanied by local distortion of the cholinergic fiber network. All 
congophilic plaques contain hyperphosphorylated tau reminiscent of early tau 
pathology. Modern stereologic methods demonstrate a significant loss of neurons 
in the hippocampal CA1 region, correlating with an increasing A beta plaque 
load. Interestingly, APP23 mice develop cerebral amyloid angiopathy in addition 
to amyloid plaques even though the APP transgene is only expressed in neurons. 
Crossbreeding of APP23 mice with transgenic mice carrying AD-linked presenilin 
mutations but not wild-type presenilin resulted in enhanced formation of 
pathology. In conclusion, our APP transgenic mice present many pathologic 
features, similar to those observed in AD and therefore offer excellent tools 
for studying the contribution of A beta to AD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06653.x
PMID: 10911965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]