---
reference_id: "PMID:35245581"
title: Bacterial meningitis presenting with a normal cerebrospinal fluid leukocyte count.
authors:
- van Soest TM
- Chekrouni N
- van Sorge NM
- Brouwer MC
- van de Beek D
journal: J Infect
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2022.02.029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial meningitis presenting with a normal cerebrospinal fluid leukocyte count.
**Authors:** van Soest TM, Chekrouni N, van Sorge NM, Brouwer MC, van de Beek D
**Journal:** J Infect (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jinf.2022.02.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2022.02.029)

## Content

1. J Infect. 2022 May;84(5):615-620. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2022.02.029. Epub 2022
Mar  2.

Bacterial meningitis presenting with a normal cerebrospinal fluid leukocyte 
count.

van Soest TM(1), Chekrouni N(1), van Sorge NM(2), Brouwer MC(1), van de Beek 
D(3).

Author information:
(1)Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Meibergdreef, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Department of Medical Microbiology 
and Infection Prevention, Amsterdam Institute for Infection and Immunity, 
Meibergdreef, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Amsterdam UMC, Netherlands Reference 
Laboratory for Bacterial Meningitis, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Meibergdreef, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
d.vandebeek@amsterdamumc.nl.

OBJECTIVES: We describe clinical characteristics and outcome of adults with 
bacterial meningitis presenting with a normal CSF leukocyte count.
METHODS: We studied community-acquired bacterial meningitis with a normal CSF 
leukocyte count (≤ 5 per mm3) in adults from a prospective nationwide cohort 
study.
RESULTS: From 2006 through 2020, 39 of 2,357 (2%) episodes presented with a 
normal CSF leukocyte count. Immunocompromising conditions were present in 19 of 
39 patients (49%), compared to 690 of 2303 (30%) in patients with elevated 
leukocytes (P = 0.02). The triad of fever, neck stiffness, and altered 
consciousness was present in 6 of 34 patients (18%). CSF protein was abnormal in 
25 of 37 patients (68%). We identified 3 clinical subgroups: those with severe 
pneumococcal meningitis (20 patients [51%]), with mainly sepsis (8 [21%]), and a 
miscellaneous group (11 [28%]). All patients with severe pneumococcal meningitis 
presented with high CSF protein levels and 18 of 19 (95%) had bacteria in the 
CSF Gram stain. Outcome was unfavorable in 23 of 39 (59%) patients and 12 (31%) 
died.
CONCLUSION: Patients with bacterial meningitis may present with normal CSF 
leukocyte counts. In these patients, CSF protein levels and Gram staining are 
important diagnostic parameters.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2022.02.029
PMID: 35245581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest N.M. van Sorge 
receives consultancy fees from Pfizer, MSD, and GSK (fees paid to Amsterdam 
UMC); In addition, N.M. van Sorge has a patent WO 2013/020090 A3 (inventors: 
N.M. van Sorge/V. Nizet) outside the submitted work with royalties paid to 
University of California San Diego. Other authors: no conflicts