---
reference_id: "PMID:34553752"
title: MEK-inhibitor-mediated rescue of skeletal myopathy caused by activating Hras mutation in a Costello syndrome mouse model.
authors:
- Tidyman WE
- Goodwin AF
- Maeda Y
- Klein OD
- Rauen KA
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.049166
keywords:
- Animals
- "Costello Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Muscular Diseases
- Mutation/genetics
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/metabolism
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics, metabolism"
- Quality of Life
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MEK-inhibitor-mediated rescue of skeletal myopathy caused by activating Hras mutation in a Costello syndrome mouse model.
**Authors:** Tidyman WE, Goodwin AF, Maeda Y, Klein OD, Rauen KA
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.049166](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.049166)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2022 Feb 1;15(2):dmm049166. doi: 10.1242/dmm.049166. Epub 2021
 Nov 19.

MEK-inhibitor-mediated rescue of skeletal myopathy caused by activating Hras 
mutation in a Costello syndrome mouse model.

Tidyman WE(1)(2), Goodwin AF(3), Maeda Y(1)(2), Klein OD(3)(4), Rauen KA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA 
95817, USA.
(2)UC Davis MIND Institute, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.
(3)Department of Orofacial Sciences and Program in Craniofacial Biology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Institute for Human Genetics, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Costello syndrome (CS) is a congenital disorder caused by heterozygous 
activating germline HRAS mutations in the canonical Ras/mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (Ras/MAPK) pathway. CS is one of the RASopathies, a large group 
of syndromes caused by mutations within various components of the Ras/MAPK 
pathway. An important part of the phenotype that greatly impacts quality of life 
is hypotonia. To gain a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying 
hypotonia in CS, a mouse model with an activating HrasG12V allele was utilized. 
We identified a skeletal myopathy that was due, in part, to inhibition of 
embryonic myogenesis and myofiber formation, resulting in a reduction in 
myofiber size and number that led to reduced muscle mass and strength. In 
addition to hyperactivation of the Ras/MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways, there was a 
significant reduction in p38 signaling, as well as global transcriptional 
alterations consistent with the myopathic phenotype. Inhibition of Ras/MAPK 
pathway signaling using a MEK inhibitor rescued the HrasG12V myopathy phenotype 
both in vitro and in vivo, demonstrating that increased MAPK signaling is the 
main cause of the muscle phenotype in CS.

© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.049166
PMCID: PMC8617311
PMID: 34553752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.