---
reference_id: "PMID:19268275"
title: "Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, dyserythropoeitic anemia, and calvarial hyperostosis are caused by a mutation in the COX4I2 gene."
authors:
- Shteyer E
- Saada A
- Shaag A
- Al-Hijawi FA
- Kidess R
- Revel-Vilk S
- Elpeleg O
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.02.006
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Anemia, Dyserythropoietic, Congenital/genetics"
- Cytochromes c/genetics
- Electron Transport Complex IV
- Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Hyperostosis/genetics
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Skull/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, dyserythropoeitic anemia, and calvarial hyperostosis are caused by a mutation in the COX4I2 gene.
**Authors:** Shteyer E, Saada A, Shaag A, Al-Hijawi FA, Kidess R, Revel-Vilk S, Elpeleg O
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.02.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.02.006)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Mar;84(3):412-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.02.006. Epub
2009  Mar 5.

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, dyserythropoeitic anemia, and calvarial 
hyperostosis are caused by a mutation in the COX4I2 gene.

Shteyer E(1), Saada A, Shaag A, Al-Hijawi FA, Kidess R, Revel-Vilk S, Elpeleg O.

Author information:
(1)The Metabolic Disease Unit, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel.

Steatorrhea and malabsorption of lipid-soluble vitamins due to exocrine 
pancreatic insufficiency are common in patients with cystic fibrosis and are 
predominant in Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond, Pearson, and Johanson-Blizzard 
syndromes. In four patients who suffered from congenital exocrine pancreatic 
insufficiency, dyserythropoeitic anemia, and calvarial hyperostosis, we excluded 
these disorders and identified, by using homozygosity mapping, a mutation in the 
COX4I2 gene. The COX4 protein is an essential structural subunit of cytochrome c 
oxidase complex and has two isoforms, encoded by two different genes. We show 
that the ratio of COX4I2 to COX4I1 mRNA is relatively high in human acinar 
cells. The mutation is associated with marked reduction of COX4I2 expression and 
with striking attenuation of the physiologic COX4I2 response to hypoxia. 
Mutation analysis of COX4I2 is warranted in patients with malabsorption due to 
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and in patients with dyserythropoeitic anemia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.02.006
PMCID: PMC2668012
PMID: 19268275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]