---
reference_id: "PMID:29025426"
title: "The complete European guidelines on phenylketonuria: diagnosis and treatment."
authors:
- van Wegberg AMJ
- MacDonald A
- Ahring K
- Bélanger-Quintana A
- Blau N
- Bosch AM
- Burlina A
- Campistol J
- Feillet F
- Giżewska M
- Huijbregts SC
- Kearney S
- Leuzzi V
- Maillot F
- Muntau AC
- van Rijn M
- Trefz F
- Walter JH
- van Spronsen FJ
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0685-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The complete European guidelines on phenylketonuria: diagnosis and treatment.
**Authors:** van Wegberg AMJ, MacDonald A, Ahring K, Bélanger-Quintana A, Blau N, Bosch AM, Burlina A, Campistol J, Feillet F, Giżewska M, Huijbregts SC, Kearney S, Leuzzi V, Maillot F, Muntau AC, van Rijn M, Trefz F, Walter JH, van Spronsen FJ
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-017-0685-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-017-0685-2)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017 Oct 12;12(1):162. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0685-2.

The complete European guidelines on phenylketonuria: diagnosis and treatment.

van Wegberg AMJ(1), MacDonald A(2), Ahring K(3), Bélanger-Quintana A(4), Blau 
N(5)(6), Bosch AM(7), Burlina A(8), Campistol J(9), Feillet F(10), Giżewska 
M(11), Huijbregts SC(12), Kearney S(13), Leuzzi V(14), Maillot F(15), Muntau 
AC(16), van Rijn M(1), Trefz F(17), Walter JH(18), van Spronsen FJ(19).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University 
Medical Center Groningen, PO BOX 30.001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Dietetic Department, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(3)Department of PKU, Kennedy Centre, Glostrup, Denmark.
(4)Metabolic Diseases Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Hospital Ramon y Cajal 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(5)University Children's Hospital, Dietmar-Hoppe Metabolic Centre, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(6)University Children's Hospital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Metabolic Disorders, Academic Medical 
Centre, University Hospital of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Department of Paediatrics, 
University Hospital of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(9)Neuropaediatrics Department, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Department of Paediatrics, Hôpital d'Enfants Brabois, CHU Nancy, Vandoeuvre 
les Nancy, France.
(11)Department of Paediatrics, Endocrinology, Diabetology, Metabolic Diseases 
and Cardiology of the Developmental Age, Pomeranian Medical University, 
Szczecin, Poland.
(12)Department of Clinical Child and Adolescent Studies-Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders, Faculty of Social Sciences, Leiden University, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(13)Clinical Psychology Department, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham, 
UK.
(14)Department of Paediatrics, Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Via dei Sabelli 108, 00185, Rome, Italy.
(15)CHRU de Tours, Université François Rabelais, INSERM U1069, Tours, France.
(16)University Children's Hospital, University Medical Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
20246, Hamburg, Germany.
(17)Department of Paediatrics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(18)Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Central Manchester 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(19)Division of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University 
Medical Center Groningen, PO BOX 30.001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands. 
f.j.van.spronsen@umcg.nl.

Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive inborn error of phenylalanine 
metabolism caused by deficiency in the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase that 
converts phenylalanine into tyrosine. If left untreated, PKU results in 
increased phenylalanine concentrations in blood and brain, which cause severe 
intellectual disability, epilepsy and behavioural problems. PKU management 
differs widely across Europe and therefore these guidelines have been developed 
aiming to optimize and standardize PKU care. Professionals from 10 different 
European countries developed the guidelines according to the AGREE (Appraisal of 
Guidelines for Research and Evaluation) method. Literature search, critical 
appraisal and evidence grading were conducted according to the SIGN (Scottish 
Intercollegiate Guidelines Network) method. The Delphi-method was used when 
there was no or little evidence available. External consultants reviewed the 
guidelines. Using these methods 70 statements were formulated based on the 
highest quality evidence available. The level of evidence of most 
recommendations is C or D. Although study designs and patient numbers are 
sub-optimal, many statements are convincing, important and relevant. In 
addition, knowledge gaps are identified which require further research in order 
to direct better care for the future.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-017-0685-2
PMCID: PMC5639803
PMID: 29025426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: K. 
Ahring was/is a member of the European Nutrition Expert Panel (Merck Serono 
international, Biomarin). A. Bélanger-Quintana has received honoraria as a 
speaker from Nutricia, Vitaflo International, Merck Serono and Recordati, and is 
a member of the European Nutrition Expert Panel (Merck Serono international, 
Biomarin), the Sapropterin Advisory Board (Merck Serono international, 
Biomarin), and KAMPER Advisory Board (Merck Serono international, Biomarin). N. 
Blau was/is a member of Merck-Serono and Biomarin Scientific Advisory Board for 
PKU and has received grants and honorarium from Merck-Serono and BioMarin. A. 
Bosch was/is a member of Scientific Advisory Boards for Phenylketonuria that are 
supported by Merck-Serono SA, Biomarin and by Nutricia, and has received grants 
and honorarium from Merck-Serono and Nutricia. A. Burlina was/is a member of 
Scientific Advisory Boards for Phenylketonuria that are supported by 
Merck-Serono SA, Biomarin and by Nutricia. J.Campistol has received honoraria as 
a consultant and/or speaker from Merck-Serono SA and Nutricia/Danone. M. 
Giżewska was/is a member of the Scientific Advisory Board for Phenylketonuria 
that was supported by Merck-Serono SA, and Biomarin and received honoraria as a 
consultant and/or speaker for Merck Serono SA and Nutricia. F. Feillet was/is a 
member of Scientific Advisory Boards for Phenylketonuria (Merck-Serono SA, 
Biomarin) and has received honoraria from Merck-Serono, Nutricia/Danone and 
Excemed. S.C. J. Huijbregts has participated in strategic advisory boards and 
received honoraria as a consultant and/or speaker for Merck Serono SA, Biomarin 
and Nutricia. S. Kearney received honoraria from Merck Serono and Biomarin. A. 
MacDonald has received research funding and honoraria from Nutricia, Vitaflo 
International, Merck Serono, chaired/chairs the European Nutrition Expert Panel 
(Merck Serono international and later Biomarin), was/is a member of the 
Sapropterin Advisory Board (Merck Serono international, Biomarin), and is a 
member of the Advisory Board Element (Danone-Nutricia). F. Maillot has received 
honoraria as a consultant and/or speaker from Merck Serono SA, Nutricia and Arla 
Foods. A.C. Muntau was/is a member of Scientific Advisory Boards for 
Phenylketonuria (Merck Serono SA, Arla Foods, Biomarin); has received research 
funding from Nutricia, Vitaflo International, Merck Serono and has received 
honoraria from Merck Serono and Arla Foods. M. van Rijn was a member of the 
European Nutritionist Expert Panel in PKU (until 2015), is a member of the 
ELEMENT (Leading Education in Metabolic Error Nutritional Therapy) Steering 
Committee for Nutricia International, and has received grants and fees for 
educational and research activities from Nutricia International and Orphan 
Europe. F.J. van Spronsen was/is a member of Scientific Advisory Boards for 
Phenylketonuria (Merck-Serono SA, Arla Foods, Biomarin) and chairs the 
Scientific Advisory Board for metabolic diseases of Nutricia, has received 
grants from Nutricia and Merck-Serono SA), and honoraria from Merck-Serono SA, 
Vitaflo International, Nutricia/Danone, and Excemed. F. Trefz received grants 
from Vitaflo and honoraria as a speaker from Merck-Serono SA. A. van Wegberg 
received a grant from the ESPKU. The other authors declare no competing of 
interest. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.