---
reference_id: "PMID:39049864"
title: Neonatal Graves Disease Masquerading as Hemochromatosis.
authors:
- Maggiotto L
- Mittelman SD
- Fallah R
journal: JCEM Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1210/jcemcr/luae132
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal Graves Disease Masquerading as Hemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Maggiotto L, Mittelman SD, Fallah R
**Journal:** JCEM Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcemcr/luae132](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcemcr/luae132)

## Content

1. JCEM Case Rep. 2024 Jul 24;2(7):luae132. doi: 10.1210/jcemcr/luae132. 
eCollection 2024 Jul.

Neonatal Graves Disease Masquerading as Hemochromatosis.

Maggiotto L(1), Mittelman SD(2), Fallah R(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, UCLA David Geffen School 
of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology; Department of Pediatrics, UCLA David 
Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(3)Riley Hospital for Children, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology & 
Diabetology; Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Thyroid autoimmunity is extremely common in the adult population and can affect 
pregnancy outcomes. Signs in the newborn can range from absent to severe, making 
the diagnosis easy to miss. We present an interesting case of neonatal Graves 
disease associated with intrauterine growth restriction, premature delivery, and 
liver failure with severely high ferritin, thought to be secondary to 
hemochromatosis. Treatment of the underlying hyperthyroidism caused a rapid 
resolution of the elevated ferritin and liver failure. This report highlights 
the importance of considering Graves disease in newborns with liver failure of 
unknown etiology.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/jcemcr/luae132
PMCID: PMC11267223
PMID: 39049864