---
reference_id: "PMID:28342444"
title: Acid Ceramidase Deficiency in Mice Results in a Broad Range of Central Nervous System Abnormalities.
authors:
- Sikora J
- Dworski S
- Jones EE
- Kamani MA
- Micsenyi MC
- Sawada T
- Le Faouder P
- Bertrand-Michel J
- Dupuy A
- Dunn CK
- Xuan ICY
- Casas J
- Fabrias G
- Hampson DR
- Levade T
- Drake RR
- Medin JA
- Walkley SU
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.12.005
keywords:
- Acid Ceramidase/metabolism
- Animals
- "Behavior, Animal"
- "Central Nervous System/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Cerebellum/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Cerebrum/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Farber Lipogranulomatosis/complications, pathology"
- Homozygote
- Hydrocephalus/pathology
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Motor Activity
- "Nervous System Malformations/etiology, pathology"
- "Neurons/pathology, ultrastructure"
- Phenotype
- "Spectrometry, Mass, Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization"
- Sphingolipids/metabolism
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acid Ceramidase Deficiency in Mice Results in a Broad Range of Central Nervous System Abnormalities.
**Authors:** Sikora J, Dworski S, Jones EE, Kamani MA, Micsenyi MC, Sawada T, Le Faouder P, Bertrand-Michel J, Dupuy A, Dunn CK, Xuan ICY, Casas J, Fabrias G, Hampson DR, Levade T, Drake RR, Medin JA, Walkley SU
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.12.005)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2017 Apr;187(4):864-883. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.12.005.

Acid Ceramidase Deficiency in Mice Results in a Broad Range of Central Nervous
System Abnormalities.

Sikora J(1), Dworski S(2), Jones EE(3), Kamani MA(4), Micsenyi MC(5), Sawada
T(5), Le Faouder P(6), Bertrand-Michel J(6), Dupuy A(6), Dunn CK(4), Xuan
ICY(7), Casas J(8), Fabrias G(8), Hampson DR(7), Levade T(9), Drake RR(3), Medin
JA(10), Walkley SU(11).

Author information:
(1)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Rose F. Kennedy Intellectual
and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York; Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles
University, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic; Institute of
Pathology, Charles University, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina.
(4)University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Rose F. Kennedy Intellectual
and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York.
(6)MetaToul-Lipidomic Facility-MetaboHUB, INSERM UMR1048, Institute of
Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases, Université Paul Sabatier-Toulouse III,
Toulouse, France.
(7)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(8)Research Unit on Bioactive Molecules, Department of Biomedicinal Chemistry,
Institute for Advanced Chemistry of Catalonia, Spanish National Research
Council, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)INSERM UMR1037, Cancer Research Center of Toulouse, Universite Toulouse III
Paul-Sabatier, Toulouse, France; Metabolic Biochemistry Laboratory, Federative
Institute of Biology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Toulouse, Toulouse,
France.
(10)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada; University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Medical
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Electronic address: jmedin@mcw.edu.
(11)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Rose F. Kennedy Intellectual
and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York. Electronic address: steve.walkley@einstein.yu.edu.

Farber disease is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by acid ceramidase
deficiency that usually presents as early-onset progressive visceral and
neurologic disease. To understand the neurologic abnormality, we investigated
behavioral, biochemical, and cellular abnormalities in the central nervous
system of Asah1P361R/P361R mice, which serve as a model of Farber disease.
Behaviorally, the mutant mice had reduced voluntary locomotion and exploration,
increased thigmotaxis, abnormal spectra of basic behavioral activities, impaired
muscle grip strength, and defects in motor coordination. A few mutant mice
developed hydrocephalus. Mass spectrometry revealed elevations of ceramides,
hydroxy-ceramides, dihydroceramides, sphingosine, dihexosylceramides, and
monosialodihexosylganglioside in the brain. The highest accumulation was in
hydroxy-ceramides. Storage compound distribution was analyzed by mass
spectrometry imaging and morphologic analyses and revealed involvement of a wide
range of central nervous system cell types (eg, neurons, endothelial cells, and
choroid plexus cells), most notably microglia and/or macrophages. Coalescing and
mostly perivascular granuloma-like accumulations of storage-laden CD68+
microglia and/or macrophages were seen as early as 3 weeks of age and located
preferentially in white matter, periventricular zones, and meninges.
Neurodegeneration was also evident in specific cerebral areas in late disease.
Overall, our central nervous system studies in Asah1P361R/P361R mice
substantially extend the understanding of human Farber disease and suggest that
this model can be used to advance therapeutic approaches for this currently
untreatable disorder.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.12.005
PMCID: PMC5397689
PMID: 28342444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
