---
reference_id: "PMID:37781000"
title: "A Stop-gain Variant c.220C>T (p.(Gln74*)) in FLNB Segregates with Spondylocarpotarsal Synostosis Syndrome in a Consanguineous Family."
authors:
- Shahid H
- Shakoor N
- Bibi A
- Qazi AS
- Saeed RF
- Nawaz A
- Malik S
- Mumtaz S
journal: Yale J Biol Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.59249/UTCP9818
keywords:
- Filamins/genetics
- Cleft Palate
- Consanguinity
- Phenotype
- Humans
- "Scoliosis/diagnostic imaging, genetics, congenital"
- Animals
- Dental Enamel Hypoplasia
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Lumbar Vertebrae/abnormalities
- Musculoskeletal Diseases
- Synostosis
- Thoracic Vertebrae/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Stop-gain Variant c.220C>T (p.(Gln74*)) in FLNB Segregates with Spondylocarpotarsal Synostosis Syndrome in a Consanguineous Family.
**Authors:** Shahid H, Shakoor N, Bibi A, Qazi AS, Saeed RF, Nawaz A, Malik S, Mumtaz S
**Journal:** Yale J Biol Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.59249/UTCP9818](https://doi.org/10.59249/UTCP9818)

## Content

1. Yale J Biol Med. 2023 Sep 29;96(3):383-396. doi: 10.59249/UTCP9818.
eCollection  2023 Sep.

A Stop-gain Variant c.220C>T (p.(Gln74*)) in FLNB Segregates with 
Spondylocarpotarsal Synostosis Syndrome in a Consanguineous Family.

Shahid H(1), Shakoor N(2), Bibi A(2), Qazi AS(1), Saeed RF(1), Nawaz A(2), Malik 
S(2), Mumtaz S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Medical Sciences, 
Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(2)Human Genetics Program, Department of Zoology, Faculty of Biological 
Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis (SCT) syndrome is a very rare and severe form of 
skeletal dysplasia. The hallmark features of SCT are disproportionate short 
stature, scoliosis, fusion of carpal and tarsal bones, and clubfoot. Other 
common manifestations are cleft palate, conductive and sensorineural hearing 
loss, joint stiffness, and dental enamel hypoplasia. Homozygous variants in FLNB 
are known to cause SCT. This study was aimed to investigate the phenotypic and 
genetic basis of unique presentation of SCT syndrome segregating in a 
consanguineous Pakistani family. Three of the four affected siblings evaluated 
had severe short stature, short trunk, short neck, kyphoscoliosis, pectus 
carinatum, and winged scapula. The subjects had difficulty in walking and gait 
problems and complained of knee pain and backache. Roentgenographic examination 
of the eldest patient revealed gross anomalies in the axial skeleton including 
thoracolumbar and cervical fusion of ribs, severe kyphoscoliosis, thoracic and 
lumbar lordosis, coxa valga, fusion of certain carpals and tarsals, and 
clinodactyly. The patients had normal faces and lacked other typical features of 
SCT like cleft palate, conductive and sensorineural hearing loss, joint 
stiffness, and dental enamel hypoplasia. Whole exome sequencing (WES) of two 
affected siblings led to the discovery of a rare stop-gain variant c.220C>T 
(p.(Gln74*)) in exon 1 of the FLNB gene. The variant was homozygous and 
segregated with the malformation in this family. This study reports extensive 
phenotypic variability in SCT and expands the mutation spectrum of FLNB.

Copyright ©2023, Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine.

DOI: 10.59249/UTCP9818
PMCID: PMC10524816
PMID: 37781000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]