---
reference_id: "PMID:20538002"
title: Hepatitis C virus infection of neuroepithelioma cell lines.
authors:
- Fletcher NF
- Yang JP
- Farquhar MJ
- Hu K
- Davis C
- He Q
- Dowd K
- Ray SC
- Krieger SE
- Neyts J
- Baumert TF
- Balfe P
- McKeating JA
- Wong-Staal F
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.06.008
keywords:
- "Antigens, CD/physiology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Claudin-1
- Hepacivirus/physiology
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/physiology
- "Neuroectodermal Tumors, Primitive, Peripheral/virology"
- Occludin
- "RNA, Viral/analysis"
- "Scavenger Receptors, Class B/physiology"
- Tetraspanin 28
- Viral Tropism
- Virus Internalization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis C virus infection of neuroepithelioma cell lines.
**Authors:** Fletcher NF, Yang JP, Farquhar MJ, Hu K, Davis C, He Q, Dowd K, Ray SC, Krieger SE, Neyts J, Baumert TF, Balfe P, McKeating JA, Wong-Staal F
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2010.06.008](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2010.06.008)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2010 Oct;139(4):1365-74. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.06.008.
Epub 2010 Jun 9.

Hepatitis C virus infection of neuroepithelioma cell lines.

Fletcher NF(1), Yang JP, Farquhar MJ, Hu K, Davis C, He Q, Dowd K, Ray SC,
Krieger SE, Neyts J, Baumert TF, Balfe P, McKeating JA, Wong-Staal F.

Author information:
(1)Hepatitis C Research Group, Institute for Biomedical Research, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2010 Oct;139(4):1090-3. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.08.014.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) establishes chronic infections in 3%
of the world's population. Infection leads to progressive liver disease;
hepatocytes are the major site of viral replication in vivo. However, chronic
infection is associated with a variety of extrahepatic syndromes, including
central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities. We therefore screened a series of
neural and brain-derived cell lines for their ability to support HCV entry and
replication.
METHODS: We used a panel of neural-derived cell lines, HCV pseudoparticles
(HCVpp), and an infectious, HCV JFH-1 cell-culture system (HCVcc) to assess
viral tropism.
RESULTS: Two independently derived neuroepithelioma cell lines (SK-N-MC and
SK-PN-DW) permitted HCVpp entry. In contrast, several neuroblastoma, glioma, and
astrocytoma cell lines were refractory to HCVpp infection. HCVcc infected the
neuroepithelioma cell lines and established a productive infection. Permissive
neuroepithelioma cells expressed CD81, scavenger receptor BI (SR-BI), and the
tight junction proteins Claudin-1 (CLDN1) and occludin, whereas nonpermissive
neural cell lines lacked CLDN1 and, in some cases, SR-BI. HCVpp infection of the
neuroepithelioma cells was neutralized by antibodies to CD81, SR-BI, CLDN1, and
HCV E2. Furthermore, anti-CD81, interferon, and the anti-NS3 protease inhibitor
VX-950 significantly reduced HCVcc infection of neuroepithelioma and hepatoma
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Neuroepithelioma-derived cell lines express functional receptors
that support HCV entry at levels comparable to those of hepatoma cells. HCV
infection in vitro is not restricted to hepatic-derived cells, so HCV might
infect cells of the CNS in vivo.

Copyright © 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.06.008
PMCID: PMC3298458
PMID: 20538002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: There are no conflict of
interest to disclose for any of the authors.
