---
reference_id: "PMID:21518713"
title: Natural progression of neurological disease in mucopolysaccharidosis type II.
authors:
- Holt JB
- Poe MD
- Escolar ML
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2010-1274
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cognition Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Cohort Studies
- "Developmental Disabilities/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Disease Progression
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mental Disorders
- "Motor Skills Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis II/diagnosis, mortality, physiopathology"
- "Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Psychometrics
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- Severity of Illness Index
- Survival Analysis
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural progression of neurological disease in mucopolysaccharidosis type II.
**Authors:** Holt JB, Poe MD, Escolar ML
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2010-1274](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2010-1274)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2011 May;127(5):e1258-65. doi: 10.1542/peds.2010-1274. Epub 2011
Apr  25.

Natural progression of neurological disease in mucopolysaccharidosis type II.

Holt JB(1), Poe MD, Escolar ML.

Author information:
(1)PO Box 7255, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II) is a lysosomal storage
disorder characterized by insufficiency of the iduronate-2-sulfatase enzyme,
which results in excess heparan and dermatan sulfates within the lysosomes of
various tissues and organs, including the central nervous system. The purpose of
this study was to investigate the natural progression of neurologic disease in a
large cohort of patients evaluated with standardized testing at a single
institution.
METHODS: During the period of December 2002 to October 2010, patients with MPS
II were referred to the Program for Neurodevelopmental Function in Rare
Disorders. A retrospective review of patient data was performed, which included
the use of detailed questionnaires that addressed medical history, notes from
previous health care providers, and the results of a multidisciplinary
evaluation that lasted 4 to 6 hours and was performed by a team of
neurodevelopmental pediatricians, speech pathologists, psychologists,
audiologists, psychometricians, and occupational and physical therapists.
Patients were evaluated annually for management of disease progression.
RESULTS: A total of 50 male patients with MPS II were evaluated over 152
encounters. Two distinct subgroups of children were identified. One subset of
patients had normal cognitive, speech and language, and adaptive functions
whereas the other showed a dramatic decline in these areas. All patients
developed fine and gross motor deficits.
CONCLUSION: The natural progression of MPS II manifests as 2 divergent and
distinct neurologic phenotypes with similar somatic disease. Patients may have
primary neural parenchymal disease with cognitive involvement or may maintain
normal cognitive abilities.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2010-1274
PMID: 21518713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
