---
reference_id: "PMID:39201425"
title: Molecular Basis of Hydatidiform Moles-A Systematic Review.
authors:
- Bahutair SNM
- Dube R
- Kuruba MGB
- Salama RAA
- Patni MAMF
- Kar SS
- Kar R
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25168739
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- "Hydatidiform Mole/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- "Uterine Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Basis of Hydatidiform Moles-A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Bahutair SNM, Dube R, Kuruba MGB, Salama RAA, Patni MAMF, Kar SS, Kar R
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25168739](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25168739)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Aug 10;25(16):8739. doi: 10.3390/ijms25168739.

Molecular Basis of Hydatidiform Moles-A Systematic Review.

Bahutair SNM(1), Dube R(1), Kuruba MGB(2), Salama RAA(3)(4), Patni MAMF(3), Kar 
SS(5), Kar R(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, RAK College of Medical Sciences, RAK 
Medical & Health Sciences University, Ras al Khaimah P.O. Box 11172, United Arab 
Emirates.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, RAK College of Medical Sciences, RAK Medical & 
Health Sciences University, Ras al Khaimah P.O. Box 11172, United Arab Emirates.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, RAK College of Medical Sciences, RAK 
Medical & Health Sciences University, Ras al Khaimah P.O. Box 11172, United Arab 
Emirates.
(4)Department of Public Health and Community Medicine, Kasr El Ainy Faculty of 
Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo 12613, Egypt.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, RAK College of Medical Sciences, RAK Medical & 
Health Sciences University, Ras al Khaimah P.O. Box 11172, United Arab Emirates.
(6)Department of Pathology, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical 
Education & Research, Puducherry 605006, India.

Gestational trophoblastic diseases (GTDs) encompass a spectrum of conditions 
characterized by abnormal trophoblastic cell growth, ranging from benign molar 
pregnancies to malignant trophoblastic neoplasms. This systematic review 
explores the molecular underpinnings of GTDs, focusing on genetic and epigenetic 
factors that influence disease progression and clinical outcomes. Based on 71 
studies identified through systematic search and selection criteria, key 
findings include dysregulations in tumor suppressor genes such as p53, aberrant 
apoptotic pathways involving BCL-2 (B-cell lymphoma), and altered expression of 
growth factor receptors and microRNAs (micro-ribose nucleic acid). These 
molecular alterations not only differentiate molar pregnancies from normal 
placental development but also contribute to their clinical behavior, from 
benign moles to potentially malignant forms. The review synthesizes insights 
from immunohistochemical studies and molecular analyses to provide a 
comprehensive understanding of GTD pathogenesis and implications for 
personalized care strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25168739
PMCID: PMC11354253
PMID: 39201425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.