---
reference_id: "PMID:29390596"
title: "Novel urinary biomarkers and their association with urinary heavy metals in chronic kidney disease of unknown aetiology in Sri Lanka: a pilot study."
authors:
- Wanigasuriya K
- Jayawardene I
- Amarasiriwardena C
- Wickremasinghe R
journal: Ceylon Med J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.4038/cmj.v62i4.8568
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel urinary biomarkers and their association with urinary heavy metals in chronic kidney disease of unknown aetiology in Sri Lanka: a pilot study.
**Authors:** Wanigasuriya K, Jayawardene I, Amarasiriwardena C, Wickremasinghe R
**Journal:** Ceylon Med J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.4038/cmj.v62i4.8568](https://doi.org/10.4038/cmj.v62i4.8568)

## Content

1. Ceylon Med J. 2017 Dec 26;62(4):210-217. doi: 10.4038/cmj.v62i4.8568.

Novel urinary biomarkers and their association with urinary heavy metals in 
chronic kidney disease of unknown aetiology in Sri Lanka: a pilot study.

Wanigasuriya K(1), Jayawardene I, Amarasiriwardena C, Wickremasinghe R.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Sri Lanka. 
kamaniw@usjp.ac.lk

INTRODUCTION: Chronic kidney disease of unknown etiology (CKDu) has emerged as a 
significant public health problem in Sri Lanka. The role of environmental 
exposure to cadmium and arsenic in the aetiology of CKDu is still unclear. 
Identification of a panel of novel urinary biomarkers would be invaluable in the 
study of toxin mediated damage postulated to be the aetiology of CKDu.
OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were to evaluate the profile of novel urinary 
biomarkers in CKDu patients and identify any association with environmental 
exposure to heavy metals.
METHODS: Thirty seven randomly selected CKDu patients attending a renal clinic 
in the North Central Province and two control groups namely a farmer group 
(n=39) and a non-farmer group (n=40) from a non-endemic area were included in 
this comparative cross sectional study. Urine samples were analyzed for heavy 
metals and five urinary biomarkers.
RESULTS: CKDu patients had significantly elevated urinary levels of fibrinogen 
(198.2 ng/mg creatinine p<0.001), clusterin (3479 ng/mg creatinine p<0.001), 
cystatin-C (5124.8 ng/mg creatinine p<0.001) and β2-microglobulin (9913.4 ng/mg 
creatinine p<0.001) compared to the control groups. Fibrinogen and 
β2-microglobulin were the best to discriminate CKDu patients from normal 
individuals with the receiver operator areas under the curve being 0.867 and 
0.853, respectively. Urinary fibrinogen and KIM-1 levels correlated positively 
with urinary arsenic levels. KIM-1 levels correlated positively with urinary 
mercury and lead levels but no correlation was seen with urinary cadmium levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrinogen and β2-microglobulin have the potential of being a 
screening tool for detection of CKDu and may aid the early diagnosis of toxin 
mediated tubular injury in CKDu. Their usefulness need to be further validated 
in a larger epidemiological study of patients with early stages of CKDu.

DOI: 10.4038/cmj.v62i4.8568
PMID: 29390596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]