---
reference_id: "PMID:33528280"
title: Chronic inflammation involves CCL11 and IL-13 to facilitate the development of liver cirrhosis and fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B virus infection.
authors:
- Wong SW
- Ting YW
- Yong YK
- Tan HY
- Barathan M
- Riazalhosseini B
- Bee CJ
- Tee KK
- Larsson M
- Velu V
- Shankar EM
- Mohamed R
journal: Scand J Clin Lab Invest
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/00365513.2021.1876245
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic inflammation involves CCL11 and IL-13 to facilitate the development of liver cirrhosis and fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B virus infection.
**Authors:** Wong SW, Ting YW, Yong YK, Tan HY, Barathan M, Riazalhosseini B, Bee CJ, Tee KK, Larsson M, Velu V, Shankar EM, Mohamed R
**Journal:** Scand J Clin Lab Invest (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00365513.2021.1876245](https://doi.org/10.1080/00365513.2021.1876245)

## Content

1. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2021 Apr;81(2):147-159. doi: 
10.1080/00365513.2021.1876245. Epub 2021 Feb 2.

Chronic inflammation involves CCL11 and IL-13 to facilitate the development of 
liver cirrhosis and fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B virus infection.

Wong SW(1), Ting YW(1), Yong YK(1)(2), Tan HY(1)(3), Barathan M(4), 
Riazalhosseini B(5)(6), Bee CJ(7), Tee KK(4), Larsson M(8), Velu V(9)(10), 
Shankar EM(11), Mohamed R(12).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Laboratory Centre, Xiamen University Malaysia, Sepang, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Xiamen University Malaysia, 
Sepang, Malaysia.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology, University of 
Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, University of Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(6)Department of Microbiology, College of Basic Science, Shahr-e-Qods Branch, 
Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(7)School of Healthcare and Medical Sciences, Sunway University, Selangor, 
Malaysia.
(8)Division of Molecular Medicine and Virology, Department of Biomedicine and 
Clinical Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(9)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes 
National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory Vaccine Center, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(11)Infection Biology, Department of Life Sciences, Central University of Tamil 
Nadu, Thiruvarur, India.
(12)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Malaya Medical 
Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

The pathogenesis involving non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in the 
context of chronic HBV (CHB) virus infection requires to be understood for 
developing improved modalities of diagnosis and treatment. We retrospectively 
investigated the association between NAFLD and CHB virus infection in the 
context of liver fibrosis. Among the 522 consecutive CHB patients who underwent 
transient elastography between years 2013 and 2016, we studied 455 subjects in 
the current investigation. Controlled attenuation parameter (CAP) and liver 
stiffness measurement (LSM) scores were generally higher in patients with 
steatosis and fibrosis or cirrhosis. Antiviral treatment had significantly 
reduced the hepatitis B virus (HBV) viral load. Other liver function markers 
showed a significant positive correlation with both CAP and LSM scores. Plasma 
IL-13 was independently associated with increased CAP score where every increase 
of 1 unit of IL-13 was associated with an increase in CAP score by 0.98 unit. 
CCL11 was independently associated with LSM with every increase of CCL11 by a 
unit that, in turn, was associated with an increase of LSM score. We found that 
there was a high concurrence of NAFLD among patients with CHB virus infection. 
The presence of metabolic syndrome and chronic inflammation in CHB 
virus-infected patients were two independent factors that led to the progression 
of liver cirrhosis, with IL-13 playing the key role in linking the metabolic 
with the inflammatory components.

DOI: 10.1080/00365513.2021.1876245
PMID: 33528280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]