---
reference_id: "PMID:36613052"
title: Music Therapy in Preterm Infants Reduces Maternal Distress.
authors:
- Kobus S
- Diezel M
- Dewan MV
- Huening B
- Dathe AK
- Marschik PB
- Felderhoff-Mueser U
- Bruns N
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph20010731
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Music Therapy in Preterm Infants Reduces Maternal Distress.
**Authors:** Kobus S, Diezel M, Dewan MV, Huening B, Dathe AK, Marschik PB, Felderhoff-Mueser U, Bruns N
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph20010731](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20010731)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Dec 30;20(1):731. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph20010731.

Music Therapy in Preterm Infants Reduces Maternal Distress.

Kobus S(1)(2)(3), Diezel M(1)(2), Dewan MV(1)(2), Huening B(1)(2), Dathe 
AK(1)(2)(4), Marschik PB(5)(6)(7)(8), Felderhoff-Mueser U(1)(2), Bruns N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics I, University Hospital Essen, University of 
Duisburg-Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany.
(2)Centre for Translational Neuro- and Behavioural Sciences (C-TNBS), Faculty of 
Medicine, University Duisburg-Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany.
(3)Center of Artistic Therapy, University Medicine Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany.
(4)Department of Health and Nursing, Occupational Therapy, Ernst-Abbe-University 
of Applied Sciences Jena, 07745 Jena, Germany.
(5)Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center 
Göttingen, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Leibniz ScienceCampus Primate Cognition, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(7)iDN-Interdisciplinary Developmental Neuroscience, Division of Phoniatrics, 
Medical University of Graz, 8036 Graz, Austria.
(8)Center of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (KIND), Center for Psychiatry 
Research, Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, 
11330 Stockholm, Sweden.

Preterm delivery is a stressful event for mothers, posing them at risk for 
post-traumatic stress reactions. This study examined the degree of depressive 
symptoms and post-traumatic stress in mothers of preterm infants born before 32 
gestational weeks depending on whether the infant received music therapy in the 
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) or not. We included 33 mothers of preterm 
infants enrolled in a previously described prospective randomized controlled 
trial, of whom 18 received music therapy (mean mothers' age 34.1 ± 4.6 years) 
and 15 did not (mean mothers' age 29.6 ± 4.2). The degree of depressive 
symptoms, anxiety and acute stress reactions of these mothers were measured by 
using the German version of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression 
Scale (CES-D) and Impact of Events Scale-Revised (IES-R) one week after birth 
(T1) and at infants' hospital discharge (T2). 605 music therapy sessions with a 
mean duration of 24.2 ± 8.6 min (range 10 to 50 min) were conducted two times a 
week from the second week of life (T1) until discharge (T2) to the infants from 
the intervention group. The infants from the control group received standard 
medical care without music therapy. The mean total CES-D score decreased from T1 
(mean 34.7, 95% Confidence Interval (CI) 31.1-38.1) until T2 in all mothers 
(mean 16.3, 95% CI 12.6-20.1). Mothers whose infants received music therapy 
showed stronger declines of depressive and stress symptoms (with music therapy: 
CES-D mean difference of total score 25.7, 95% CI 20.0-31.3, IES-R mean 
difference of total score 1.7, 95% CI 0.9-2.5, IES-R mean difference of 
subcategory hyperarousal 10.2, 95% CI 6.2-14.3; without music therapy: CES-D 
mean difference of total score 9.5, 95% CI 3.8-15.3, IES-R mean difference of 
total score 0.1, 95% CI -1.0-1.2, IES-R mean difference of subcategory 
hyperarousal 1.6, 95% CI -4.7-7.9). Effect sizes were strong for CES-D, IES-R, 
and the hyperarousal subcategory, moderate for intrusion, and low for avoidance. 
These findings show that mothers of preterm infants are highly susceptible to 
supportive non-medical interventions such as music therapy to reduce 
psychological symptoms and distress during their infants' NICU stay.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph20010731
PMCID: PMC9819311
PMID: 36613052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.