---
reference_id: "PMID:38976065"
title: The long-term effect of COVID-19 infection on olfaction and taste; a prospective analysis.
authors:
- Boldes T
- Ritter A
- Soudry E
- Diker D
- Reifen E
- Yosefof E
journal: Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00405-024-08827-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The long-term effect of COVID-19 infection on olfaction and taste; a prospective analysis.
**Authors:** Boldes T, Ritter A, Soudry E, Diker D, Reifen E, Yosefof E
**Journal:** Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00405-024-08827-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-024-08827-2)

## Content

1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2024 Nov;281(11):6001-6007. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-024-08827-2. Epub 2024 Jul 8.

The long-term effect of COVID-19 infection on olfaction and taste; a prospective 
analysis.

Boldes T(1)(2), Ritter A(3)(4), Soudry E(3)(4), Diker D(5)(4), Reifen E(3)(4), 
Yosefof E(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Meir Medical 
Center, 59 Tchernichovsky St., 4428164, Kfar Saba, Israel. 
Tomerboldes@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. 
Tomerboldes@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Rabin Medical 
Center-Beilinson Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Internal Medicine Department, Hasharon Hospital, Rabin Medical Center, Petach 
Tikva, Israel.

PURPOSE: To estimate long-term prognosis of chemosensory dysfunctions among 
patients recovering from COVID-19 disease.
METHODS: Between April 2020 and July 2022, we conducted a prospective, 
observational study enrolling 48 patients who experienced smell and/or taste 
dysfunction during the acute-phase of COVID-19. Patients were evaluated for 
chemosensory function up to 24 months after disease onset.
RESULTS: During the acute-phase of COVID-19, 80% of patients reported anosmia, 
15% hyposmia, 63% ageusia, and 33% hypogeusia. At two years' follow-up, 53% 
still experienced smell impairment, and 42% suffered from taste impairment. 
Moreover, 63% of patients who reported parosmia remained with olfactory 
disturbance. Interestingly, we found a negative correlation between visual 
analogue scale scores for smell and taste impairments during the acute-phase of 
COVID-19 and the likelihood of long-term recovery.
CONCLUSION: Our study sheds light on the natural history and long-term follow-up 
of chemosensory dysfunction in patients recovering from COVID-19 disease. Most 
patients who initially suffered from smell and/or taste disturbance did not 
reach full recovery after 2 years follow-up. The severity of impairment may 
serve as a prognostic indicator for full recovery.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-024-08827-2
PMCID: PMC11512859
PMID: 38976065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declares that there is no conflict 
of interest.