---
reference_id: "PMID:30911977"
title: Childhood Vitiligo.
authors:
- Nicolaidou E
- Mastraftsi S
- Tzanetakou V
- Rigopoulos D
journal: Am J Clin Dermatol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s40257-019-00430-0
keywords:
- "Administration, Topical"
- Age of Onset
- Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/epidemiology
- "Calcineurin Inhibitors/administration & dosage"
- Child
- Child Behavior/psychology
- Comorbidity
- "Dermatologic Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Parents/psychology
- Prevalence
- Quality of Life
- "Stress, Psychological/etiology, psychology"
- Treatment Outcome
- Ultraviolet Therapy/methods
- "Vitiligo/epidemiology, psychology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood Vitiligo.
**Authors:** Nicolaidou E, Mastraftsi S, Tzanetakou V, Rigopoulos D
**Journal:** Am J Clin Dermatol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40257-019-00430-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40257-019-00430-0)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2019 Aug;20(4):515-526. doi: 10.1007/s40257-019-00430-0.

Childhood Vitiligo.

Nicolaidou E(1), Mastraftsi S(2), Tzanetakou V(1), Rigopoulos D(1).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Dermatology and Venereology, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens School of Medicine, "A. Sygros" Hospital for Skin and 
Venereal Diseases, Athens, Greece.
(2)First Department of Dermatology and Venereology, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens School of Medicine, "A. Sygros" Hospital for Skin and 
Venereal Diseases, Athens, Greece. stmastraftsi@yahoo.com.

Vitiligo is a common acquired depigmenting skin disease characterized by a 
progressive loss of functional melanocytes. It may appear from the first years 
of life to late adulthood. Childhood vitiligo (CV), defined as vitiligo that 
begins before the age of 12 years, is common and may differ from post-CV in 
terms of epidemiology, clinical presentation, comorbidities, and treatment 
options. Taking into consideration the potential significant psychosocial impact 
of the disease on both children and their parents, all available therapeutic 
options must be offered to patients who desire treatment. According to the most 
recent guidelines, topical corticosteroids, topical calcineurin inhibitors, and 
narrowband ultraviolet B phototherapy are the most commonly used treatment 
modalities for vitiligo in children. This review presents recent data regarding 
the whole spectrum of CV. Differences between CV and post-CV are also discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-019-00430-0
PMID: 30911977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]