---
reference_id: PMID:32629363
title: "Treatment of MOG-IgG-associated disorder with rituximab: An international study of 121 patients."
authors:
- Whittam DH
- Cobo-Calvo A
- Lopez-Chiriboga AS
- Pardo S
- Gornall M
- Cicconi S
- Brandt A
- Berek K
- Berger T
- Jelcic I
- Gombolay G
- Oliveira LM
- Callegaro D
- Kaneko K
- Misu T
- Capobianco M
- Gibbons E
- Karthikeayan V
- Brochet B
- Audoin B
- Mathey G
- Laplaud D
- Thouvenot E
- Cohen M
- Tourbah A
- Maillart E
- Ciron J
- Deschamps R
- Biotti D
- Rostasy K
- Neuteboom R
- Hemingway C
- Forsyth R
- Matiello M
- Webb S
- Hunt D
- Murray K
- Hacohen Y
- Lim M
- Leite MI
- Palace J
- Solomon T
- Lutterotti A
- Fujihara K
- Nakashima I
- Bennett JL
- Pandit L
- Chitnis T
- Weinshenker BG
- Wildemann B
- Sato DK
- Kim SH
- Huda S
- Kim HJ
- Reindl M
- Levy M
- Jarius S
- Tenembaum S
- Paul F
- Pittock S
- Marignier R
- Jacob A
journal: Mult Scler Relat Disord
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2020.102251
keywords:
- Autoantibodies
- Child
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein
- Neuromyelitis Optica
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Treatment of MOG-IgG-associated disorder with rituximab: An international study of 121 patients.
**Authors:** Whittam DH, Cobo-Calvo A, Lopez-Chiriboga AS, Pardo S, Gornall M, Cicconi S, Brandt A, Berek K, Berger T, Jelcic I, Gombolay G, Oliveira LM, Callegaro D, Kaneko K, Misu T, Capobianco M, Gibbons E, Karthikeayan V, Brochet B, Audoin B, Mathey G, Laplaud D, Thouvenot E, Cohen M, Tourbah A, Maillart E, Ciron J, Deschamps R, Biotti D, Rostasy K, Neuteboom R, Hemingway C, Forsyth R, Matiello M, Webb S, Hunt D, Murray K, Hacohen Y, Lim M, Leite MI, Palace J, Solomon T, Lutterotti A, Fujihara K, Nakashima I, Bennett JL, Pandit L, Chitnis T, Weinshenker BG, Wildemann B, Sato DK, Kim SH, Huda S, Kim HJ, Reindl M, Levy M, Jarius S, Tenembaum S, Paul F, Pittock S, Marignier R, Jacob A
**Journal:** Mult Scler Relat Disord (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.msard.2020.102251](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2020.102251)

## Content

1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2020 Sep;44:102251. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2020.102251.
 Epub 2020 Jun 2.

Treatment of MOG-IgG-associated disorder with rituximab: An international study 
of 121 patients.

Whittam DH(1), Cobo-Calvo A(2), Lopez-Chiriboga AS(3), Pardo S(4), Gornall M(5), 
Cicconi S(5), Brandt A(6), Berek K(7), Berger T(8), Jelcic I(9), Gombolay G(10), 
Oliveira LM(11), Callegaro D(11), Kaneko K(12), Misu T(12), Capobianco M(13), 
Gibbons E(14), Karthikeayan V(15), Brochet B(16), Audoin B(17), Mathey G(18), 
Laplaud D(19), Thouvenot E(20), Cohen M(21), Tourbah A(22), Maillart E(23), 
Ciron J(24), Deschamps R(25), Biotti D(26), Rostasy K(27), Neuteboom R(28), 
Hemingway C(29), Forsyth R(30), Matiello M(4), Webb S(31), Hunt D(32), Murray 
K(32), Hacohen Y(33), Lim M(34), Leite MI(35), Palace J(35), Solomon T(14), 
Lutterotti A(9), Fujihara K(12), Nakashima I(36), Bennett JL(37), Pandit L(38), 
Chitnis T(4), Weinshenker BG(3), Wildemann B(39), Sato DK(40), Kim SH(41), Huda 
S(14), Kim HJ(41), Reindl M(7), Levy M(4), Jarius S(39), Tenembaum S(42), Paul 
F(6), Pittock S(3), Marignier R(2), Jacob A(43).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom; Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
daniel.whittam@nhs.net.
(2)Pathologies de la Myéline et Neuro-inflammation, Hôpital Neurologique Pierre 
Wertheimer Hospices Civils de Lyon, Centre de Référence des Maladies 
Inflammatoires Rares du Cerveau et de la Moelle, INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR 5292, 
Lyon 1 University, Center for Research in Neuroscience of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(3)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States.
(4)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States.
(5)Liverpool Clinical Trials Centre, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Experimental and Clinical Research Center Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular 
Medicine, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(8)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(9)UniversitätsSpital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States; Emory & Children's Pediatric 
Institute, Atlanta, Georgia, United States.
(11)Hospital das Clinicas Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(12)Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(13)Neurology Dept. - Regional MS Centre, S. Luigi University Hospital, 
Orbassano, Italy.
(14)Department of Neurology, The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom; Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(15)Department of Neurology, The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom.
(16)CHU de Bordeaux & INSERM U 1215, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(17)Aix Marseille University, APHM, Hôpital de La Timone, Marseille, France.
(18)Nancy University Hospital and Inserm CIC 1433, Nancy, France.
(19)Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France.
(20)Hôpital Carémeau, Nimes University Hospital, Nimes, France.
(21)Université Côte d'Azur, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nice, Nice, 
France.
(22)Reims University Hospital, University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne, Reims, LPN 
EA 2027, University of Paris VIII, Saint-Denis, France.
(23)Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, APHP, Paris, France.
(24)Poitiers University Hospital, Poitiers, France.
(25)Fondation A. De Rothschild, Paris, France.
(26)University Hospital of Purpan, Toulouse, France.
(27)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Hospital Datteln, University 
Witten/Herdecke, Witten, Germany.
(28)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Erasmus MC-Sophia, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands; Department of Neurology, MS Centre ErasMS, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(29)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children, London, United Kingdom.
(30)Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom.
(31)Department of Neurology, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, 
United Kingdom.
(32)Anne Rowling Regenerative Neurology Clinic, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(33)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children, London, United Kingdom; Department of Neuroinflammation, Queen Square 
MS Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom.
(34)Children's Neuroscience, Evelina London Children's Hospital @ Guy's and St 
Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom; Faculty of Life Sciences 
and Medicine, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(35)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(36)Department of Neurology, Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical University, 
Sendai, Japan.
(37)Departments of Neurology and Ophthalmology, Program in Neuroscience, 
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, United States.
(38)Nitte University, Mangaluru, Karnataka, India.
(39)Molecular Neuroimmunology Group, Department of Neurology, University of 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(40)Hospital das Clinicas Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil; Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; 
Pontificia Universidade Catolica Rio Grande Do Sul, Porto Alegre RS, Brazil.
(41)Research Institute and Hospital of National Cancer Center, Goyang, South 
Korea.
(42)National Pediatric Hospital Dr. Juan P. Garrahan, Ciudad de Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(43)Department of Neurology, The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom; Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom; Department of Neurology, The Cleveland 
Clinic Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Electronic address: 
anu.jacob@thewaltoncentre.nhs.uk.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of anti-CD20 B-cell depletion with rituximab 
(RTX) on relapse rates in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
antibody-associated disorder (MOGAD).
METHODS: Retrospective review of RTX-treated MOGAD patients from 29 centres in 
13 countries. The primary outcome measure was change in relapse rate after 
starting rituximab (Poisson regression model).
RESULTS: Data on 121 patients were analysed, including 30 (24.8%) children. 
Twenty/121 (16.5%) were treated after one attack, of whom 14/20 (70.0%) remained 
relapse-free after median (IQR) 11.2 (6.3-14.1) months. The remainder (101/121, 
83.5%) were treated after two or more attacks, of whom 53/101 (52.5%) remained 
relapse-free after median 12.1 (6.3-24.9) months. In this 'relapsing group', 
relapse rate declined by 37% (95%CI=19-52%, p<0.001) overall, 63% (95%CI=35-79%, 
p = 0.001) when RTX was used first line (n = 47), and 26% (95%CI=2-44%, 
p = 0.038) when used after other steroid-sparing immunotherapies (n = 54). 
Predicted 1-year and 2-year relapse-free survival was 79% and 55% for first-line 
RTX therapy, and 38% and 18% for second-/third-line therapy. Circulating 
CD19+B-cells were suppressed to <1% of total circulating lymphocyte population 
at the time of 45/57 (78.9%) relapses.
CONCLUSION: RTX reduced relapse rates in MOGAD. However, many patients continued 
to relapse despite apparent B-cell depletion. Prospective controlled studies are 
needed to validate these results.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2020.102251
PMCID: PMC7895306
PMID: 32629363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

Autoantibodies targeting human myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG-IgG) have been identified in the sera of children and adults with a CNS inflammatory disease that is distinct from multiple sclerosis (MS) [O’Connor et al., 2007, Mader et al., 2011, Kitley et al., 2012]. 30–80% of patients relapse after an initial attack, [Lopez-Chiriboga et al., 2018, Jurynczyk et al., 2017, Cobo-Calvo et al., 2018, Jarius et al., 2016] and some fulfil diagnostic criteria for aquaporin-4 antibody (AQP4-IgG)-negative neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD) [Jarius et al., 2016, Hamid et al., 2017]. A proportion of patients with MOG-IgG-associated disorder (MOGAD) accrue substantial disability and may benefit from long-term immunomodulatory treatment [Jurynczyk et al., 2017, Cobo-Calvo et al., 2018, Jarius et al., 2016, Hachohen et al., 2018, Ramanathan et al., 2018]. However, natural history and treatment responses in MOGAD are unclear.

Anti-CD20 B-cell depletion with rituximab (RTX) is effective in MS [Bar-Or et al., 2008, Hauser et al., 2008, Hauser et al., 2017, Montalban et al., 2017] and AQP4-IgG-NMOSD [Cree et al., 2005, Jacob et al., 2008, Pellkofer et al., 2011, Mealy et al., 2014, Kim et al., 2011, Kim et al., 2013, Kim et al., 2015, Radaelli et al., 2016, Damato et al., 2016, Cohen et al., 2017]. It is therefore hoped that RTX may be effective in MOGAD. However, its benefit is not yet defined, and several small case series suggest a lower efficacy than expected [Jarius et al., 2016, Hachohen et al., 2018, Ramanathan et al., 2018].

To examine the effectiveness of RTX in a large international cohort of MOGAD patients

Investigators submitted anonymised retrospective data on all patients in their care meeting the inclusion criteria: (1) At least one clinical and MRI-confirmed CNS inflammatory event; (2) MOG-IgG positive by cell-based assay (live or fixed) incorporating full-length human MOG in its conformational form and an IgG-specific secondary antibody; (3) AQP4-IgG negative by live or fixed cell-based assay; (4) treatment with RTX. Acceptable initial RTX dosing regimens were 1000 mg on day 0 and day 15 or a body surface area (BSA)-adjusted dose of 375 mg/m2 weekly for 4 weeks. The interval between subsequent treatment courses was either fixed at 6-months or determined by periodic testing of circulating CD19+B-cell or CD19+/CD27+ memory B-cell levels (maximum testing interval of 2 months). Both approaches have been used successfully in large cohorts of AQP4-IgG-NMOSD patients [Cree et al., 2005, Jacob et al., 2008, Pellkofer et al., 2011, Mealy et al., 2014, Kim et al., 2011, Kim et al., 2013, Kim et al., 2015, Radaelli et al., 2016, Damato et al., 2016, Cohen et al., 2017].

Relapses were defined as a new or worsening symptomatic presentation, with a change in neurological examination, and confirmed by MRI as necessary.

Informed written consent and local ethics committee approval were mandatory for participation. All data were anonymised and were collected between August 2017 and September 2018.

Stata version 15 and SAS version 9.3 were used for data analysis. A Poisson regression model was fitted to the data, with a random effect by patient level, to compare the relapse rate before and after initiating RTX. We compared median annualised relapse rates (ARR) pre- and post-RTX using Wilcoxon signed rank tests. ARR is defined as the total number of attacks divided by the number of years of disease. Relapse-free survival on RTX was estimated with Kaplan-Meier survival curves. Several subgroup analyses were performed.

Data were obtained from 29 centres in 13 countries – Argentina, Austria, Brazil, France, Germany, Netherlands, India, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States of America. The total number of MOGAD patients attending all study centres was 875. RTX was administered to 132/875 (15.1%). We did not have the resources to also obtain and analyse data on the 743 patients who were not treated with RTX. Eleven patients were excluded due to incomplete data (6), inadequate treatment protocol (4) and diagnostic uncertainty (1) (Fig. 1).

Data on 121 patients (71/121, 58.7% female) were analysed (Table 1). Median (interquartile range, IQR) age at onset attack was24.8 (13.1–39.6) years and age at first RTX infusion was 29.7(18.2–44.0) years. Race distribution was 103/121 (85.1%) White, 10/121 (8.3%) Asian, 1/121 (0.8%) Black, and 7/121 (5.8%) mixed race. Paediatric patients (age <18 years at RTX initiation) comprised 30/121 (24.7%).

The most common MOGAD phenotypes in adults were relapsing optic neuritis (ON) (27/91, 29.7%) and relapsing ON with transverse myelitis (TM) (25/91, 27.5%). Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) with relapses (13/30, 43.3%) was the predominant paediatric phenotype.

For all patients, the median (IQR) disease duration prior to RTX initiation was 19.1 (5.9–55.0) months. RTX was started after the index attack in 20/121 (16.5%), and after at least two attacks in 101/121(83.5%). The pre-treatment median (IQR) ARR was 1.82 (0.74–3.40) for the 101 relapsing patients, of whom 54/101 (53.5%) had received one or more prior non-steroid maintenance immunotherapies (Table 1). These included azathioprine (26/101, 25.7%), mycophenolate mofetil (20/101, 19.8%), other immunosuppressive drugs (13/101, 12.8%), intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) (7/101, 6.9%), and MS disease-modifying therapies (MS-DMTs) (11/101, 10.9%, these are listed in the legend for Table 1). There was no standardised ‘wash-out’ period of prior immunotherapies.

RTX was administered 6-monthly to 115/121 (95.0%). Others (6/121, 5.0%) were retreated according to repopulation of circulating CD19+B-cells or CD19+/CD27+ memory B-cells. If only a single treatment course was given, treatment duration was considered as 6 months.

Most patients (79/121, 65.3%) received RTX 1000 mg, administered either once (day 0), or twice (day 0 and day 15) per treatment course. A BSA-adjusted dose of 375 mg/m2 weekly for 4 weeks was given to 28/121 (23.1%) – predominantly paediatric patients. A minority of patients received a combination of both regimens (4/121,3.3%), or exact dosing was not specified (10/121, 8.3%).

RTX was started after the index attack in 20/121 (16.5%) cases from 11/29 centres. Because a proportion of MOGAD patients appear not to relapse irrespective of treatment (i.e. “monophasic disease”), we analysed this group separately from those with an established relapsing phenotype (Fig. 1). After median (IQR) 11.2 (6.3–14.1) months on RTX, 14/20 (70%) remained relapse-free. Eleven relapses occurred in 6/20 (30.0%) patients, with a median (IQR) time to first relapse of 2.6 (1.3–4.5) months. The relapses comprised TM (6/11), ON (4/11) and simultaneous TM/ON (1/11).

RTX was started after two or more attacks in 101/121 (83.5%). The median (IQR) pre-treatment duration was 26.0 (9.8–70.9) months. After median (IQR) 12.1 (6.3–24.9) months on RTX, 53/101 (52.5%) remained relapse-free. 102 relapses occurred in 48/101 (47.5%) patients (Fig. 2) with a median (IQR) time to first relapse of 4.4 (1.8–8.5) months. The relapses comprised ON (73/102, 71.6%), TM (17/102, 16.7%), ADEM/encephalitis (5/102, 4.9%), cerebellitis/rhombencephalitis (5/102, 4.9%) and multifocal/unspecified relapses (2/102, 2.0%). The Poisson regression model showed a 37% (95%CI 19–52%, p<0.001) reduction in relapse rate following treatment with RTX. The Kaplan-Meier estimate of relapse-free survival was 55% (95%CI 44–65%) at 1 year of RTX therapy and 33% (95%CI 20–46%) at 2 years (Fig. 3a).

The effect of RTX on median ARR is shown in Table 2. For all patients (n = 101), median ARR declined after initiation of RTX from 1.82 to 0.00 (p<0.001; Wilcoxon signed rank test). Because calculation of ARR is dependent on pre- and post-treatment observation periods, we repeated the analysis after excluding patients with short observation periods (Table 2). In patients with at least 12 months observation both pre- and post-RTX treatment (34/101, 33.7%), median ARR declined from 1.18 to 0.56 (p = 0.002; Wilcoxon signed rank test).

Some studies of RTX in AQP4-IgG-NMOSD have described a lag time of 3–4 weeks to the onset of relapse-preventing action, despite complete B-cell depletion occurring within days of RTX infusion [Kim et al., 2013, Lindsey et al., 2012]. We therefore re-analysed relapse rates after excluding relapses occurring within 1 month of RTX initiation (5/99,5.1%). With this adjustment, the Poisson regression model showed a 43% (95%CI 26–57%, p<0.001) reduction in relapse rate. Decline in median ARR was unchanged (Table 2). If relapses occurring within 3 months of RTX initiation (26/99, 26.3%) are excluded, relapse rate reduced by 55% (95%CI 40–67%, p<0.001) post-treatment.

A CD19+B-cell count <1% of circulating lymphocytes is a commonly used indicator of effective B-cell depletion by RTX [Kimbrough et al., 2012]. B-cell counts were available at the time of 57/113 (50.4%) relapses. In 12/57 (21.1%) relapses the CD19+B-cell count was ≥1%, indicating that the effect of RTX had waned. However, circulating CD19+B-cells were supressed <1% in 45/57 (78.9%), indicating disease activity despite effective B-cell depletion. In 22/57(38.6%) relapses, B-cells were completely undetectable.

A greater decline in median ARR (p = 0.015, Mann Whitney U test) was observed in treatment naïve patients. Relapse rate declined by 63% (95%CI 35–79%, p = 0.001, Poisson regression) in this group. After 1 and 2 years, 79% (95%CI 62–89%) and 55% of patients treated first-line with RTX are predicted to be relapse-free respectively (Kaplan-Meier analysis, Fig. 3b).

When RTX was given second- or third-line, relapse rate declined by 26% (95%CI 2–44%, p = 0.038, Poisson regression). After 1 and 2 years, 38% (95%CI 25–52%) and 18% (95% CI 7–34%) are predicted to be relapse-free respectively (Kaplan-Meier analysis, Fig. 3b). Repeat analysis after excluding the 11 patients with MS-DMTs exposure obtained similar results, though the 25% (95%CI−3–46%, p = 0.077, Poisson regression) decline in relapse rate was not statistically significant. In the 11 patients exposed to MS-DMTs, median ARR declined from 2.19 pre-treatment (median observation period 49 months) to1.79 after RTX initiation (median observation period 13 months). For the 7 patients with at least 12 months observation pre- and post-RTX, median ARR declined from 1.71 to 0.89.

All 30 children experienced two or more attacks prior to starting RTX. We therefore compared the effect of RTX in 30 children versus 71/91 (78.0%) adults, who had established relapsing disease pre-RTX (Table 2). Median duration on RTX was 12.7 months for adults and 11.8 months for children, in which 31/71 (43.7%) adults and 17/30 (56.7%) children relapsed. Relapse rate declined by 42% (95%CI 20–59%, p = 0.001, Poisson regression) in adults and by 29% (95%CI−7–53%, p = 0.103) in children. Treatment naïve patients comprised 40/71(56.3%) adults versus 7/30 (23.3%) children. CD19+B-cell counts were available for 22/62 (35.5%) relapses in adults and 30/40 (75.0%) relapses in children, and were suppressed <1% in 19/22 (86.4%) and 21/30 (70.0%) respectively.

Maintenance corticosteroid therapy, defined as daily or alternate day dosing of oral prednisolone, was used in 32/121 (26.4%) of patients while receiving RTX, of which 17/121 (14.0%) received continuous treatment, 7/121 (5.8%) were gradually tapered to cessation, and 8/121 (6.6%) restarted maintenance corticosteroids after relapse. Maintenance corticosteroid dosing did not follow a set protocol, so was individualised and variable throughout the observation period. It was therefore not possible to analyse corticosteroid use in greater detail. Maintenance corticosteroids were not used in 78/121 (64.5%). Information about steroid use was not available in 11/121 (9.1%).

Continuation or addition of other immunotherapies with RTX occurred in 20/121 (16.5%) patients: mycophenolate mofetil (8), IVIg (6), azathioprine (3), methotrexate (2), IVIg with azathioprine (1). One patient received low dose IVIg (0.2 mg/kg monthly) for RTX-induced hypogammaglobulinemia, which developed after 35 months of treatment. One patient had recent exposure to alemtuzumab (33 and 21 months pre-RTX).

Exclusion of all patients co-treated with maintenance corticosteroid and steroid-sparing immunotherapies left 61/101 (60.4%) patients (those who started maintenance corticosteroid only after a relapse were included in this analysis, but their follow-up was censored at the point of starting corticosteroid). For this group, the median (IQR) treatment duration was 11.3 (5.3–22.3) months. The Poisson regression model showed a 42% (95%CI 15–60%, p = 0.005) reduction in relapse rate following treatment with RTX. Median ARR declined from 1.54 to 0.00 (p<0.001; Wilcoxon signed rank test).

Twenty-two/121 (18.2%) patients discontinued RTX due to relapses (16/22, 72.7%), de-escalation of immunotherapy (5/22, 22.7%), and infection (1/22, 4.5%). They switched to mycophenolate mofetil (4), tocilizumab (3), azathioprine (3), IVIg (4) or multi-drug regimens.

We compared EDSS at RTX initiation and at last review or on RTX discontinuation. EDSS data were available for 97/121 (80.2%) patients, but scores were not assessed at defined time points with respect to relapses. Median (IQR) EDSS score improved from 3.0 (2.0–3.5) at RTX initiation to 2.0 (1.0–3.0) at follow-up (z = 3.36, p = 0.001; Wilcoxon signed rank test).

We did not systematically acquire data on adverse events. However, the following serious adverse events were reported: anaphylactoid infusion reaction (1), hypogammaglobulinemia (1) and cryptococcal meningoencephalitis (1). The latter occurred a 13-year-old boy on RTX for 2 years, with prior exposure to azathioprine and prednisolone. No patients died during treatment with RTX.

This is the first study examining the effectiveness of RTX in a large MOGAD cohort. RTX led to a 37% decline in relapse rate, and after 2 years, 33% of patients are predicted to remain relapse-free. This is a less beneficial effect than observed with anti-CD20 B-cell depletion in MS and AQP4-IgG-NMOSD [Bar-Or et al., 2008, Hauser et al., 2008, Hauser et al., 2017, Montalban et al., 2017, Cree et al., 2005, Jacob et al., 2008, Pellkofer et al., 2011, Mealy et al., 2014, Kim et al., 2011, Kim et al., 2013, Kim et al., 2015, Radaelli et al., 2016, Damato et al., 2016, Cohen et al., 2017]. Where data were available, 79% of relapses occurred despite apparent robust B-cell depletion. The greatest treatment effect (63% decline in relapse rate) was observed in patients who received RTX as a first-line maintenance immunotherapy (see further discussion below). Patients receiving RTX second- or third-line experienced only a 25% decline in relapses. Separate analyses of adults and children suggested a better response in adult patients (42% versus 29% reduction in relapse rates).

The true benefit of RTX in MOGAD may be even less than that observed in this study, when one considers the potential influence of regression to the mean (the tendency of a group to return to the average, rather than to sustain an above average relapse rate). For example in randomised controlled MS trials, regression to the mean can account for up to 40% of the reduction in relapse rate observed in both treatment and placebo arms [Martínez-Yélamos et al., 2006]. In MOGAD cohorts, estimates of median ARR vary greatly and have been prejudiced by testing bias, variable treatment paradigms and short observation periods. It is therefore difficult to quantify the effect of regression to the mean in this study, but given that the observed treatment effect is relatively small, it is particularly important to consider this phenomenon.

Previous studies of MOGAD treatment responses included smaller numbers of RTX-treated patients. They also observed reduced relapse rates following RTX treatment. Some described frequent early relapses: A German study reported that 6/9 patients relapsed on RTX therapy [Jarius et al., 2016]. An Australasian study included six RTX-treated patients, one of whom relapsed twice despite B-cell depletion [Ramanathan et al., 2018]. Finally, in a European paediatric study, 6/9 RTX-treated children relapsed, including one life-threatening relapse despite confirmed B-cell depletion. Of the three RTX responders, two were additionally receiving maintenance IVIg [Hachohen et al., 2018].

It is not clear why RTX appears less effective for MOGAD than for MS and AQP4-IgG-NMOSD. Phase I and II trials of RTX and phase III trials of ocrelizumab (another anti-CD20 therapy) in relapsing MS, [Bar-Or et al., 2008, Hauser et al., 2008, Hauser et al., 2017] and retrospective studies of RTX in NMOSD, [Cree et al., 2005, Jacob et al., 2008, Pellkofer et al., 2011, Mealy et al., 2014, Kim et al., 2011, Kim et al., 2013, Kim et al., 2015, Radaelli et al., 2016, Damato et al., 2016, Cohen et al., 2017] have consistently reported high efficacy. The largest meta-analysis of 46 NMOSD studies, including 438 predominantly AQP4-IgG positive patients, calculated a 79% reduction in relapse rate [Damato et al., 2016]. RTX has therefore become a dependable maintenance therapy for AQP4-IgG-NMOSD in many countries.

One explanation for apparently poor efficacy is that this study has selected out a subgroup of highly active treatment-refractory MOGAD patients from specialist centres. Only 15.1% of all MOGAD patients at the participating centres were treated with RTX. The pre-treatment median ARR (1.09 for those with >12 months of pre-treatment observation) was relatively high in our study, as compared to unselected incident MOGAD cohorts [Jurynczyk et al., 2017, Cobo-Calvo et al., 2018]. A treatment paradox, in which higher relapse rates and poorer outcomes are seen in those receiving more therapy, reflects the a priori threshold for initiating such treatments and has been observed in other neuroinflammatory disorders [Titulaer et al., 2013, Deiva et al., 2015]. In line with this, we observed a much better response in treatment-naïve patients versus those who had failed an alternative steroid-sparing maintenance therapy (63% reduction in relapses versus 25%). We also saw a paradoxical improvement in RTX effectiveness (42% reduction in relapses versus 37%) when excluding patients co-treated with maintenance corticosteroid and steroid-sparing immunotherapies.

We explored if early relapses may account for poor treatment response, by excluding the 5% of relapses occurring within one month of RTX initiation. The decline in relapse rate increased slightly from 37% to 43%. The validity of this adjustment is uncertain in MOGAD, but stems from experience in AQP4-IgG-NMOSD, where a lag time of 3–4 weeks to achieve relapse-preventing effect has been described, despite complete B-cell depletion within days of RTX infusion [Kim et al., 2013, Lindsey et al., 2012]. Relapse risk may in fact be paradoxically high during this lag period, [Perumal et al., 2015, Nakashima et al., 2011] but most consider this not to reflect truly RTX-refractory disease [Kimbrough et al., 2012]. An even greater delay to therapeutic effect is possible: Decline in relapse rate improved to 55% when relapses within three months of RTX initiation were excluded. However, a more pro-longed median follow-up than 12.1 months would be required to properly discriminate between delayed therapeutic onset and lack of efficacy.

Notwithstanding the above considerations, the obvious explanation may be that anti-CD20 B-cell depletion is indeed not as effective in MOGAD compared to MS and AQP4-IgG-NMOSD. It is notable that most relapses occurred in the context of apparent robust B-cell depletion.

Despite their overlapping phenotypes, many differences have been identified between the immunopathogenic mechanisms underpinning these disorders. Both AQP4-IgG and MOG-IgG are immunoglobulin G1 antibodies, but the evidence that MOG-IgG is directly pathogenic to the CNS is less assured than for AQP4-IgG. It appears that the pathogenicity of human MOG-IgG is dependent on interactions with cognate T-cells [Spadaro et al., 2018]. Additionally, the abundance of circulating MOG-specific B-cells differs greatly between MOGAD patients, and does not correlate with serum titres of MOG-IgG [Winklmeier et al., 2019]. It may therefore be that the predominant source of MOG-IgG production in some patients is by CD20− long-lived plasma cells in the bone marrow (which are not depleted effectively with RTX), rather than by continuous activation and differentiation of CD20+ MOG-specific B-cells in the peripheral circulation. Systematic longitudinal assessment of MOG-IgG titres and B-cell populations were not available in this study but would be informative in future studies of RTX, particularly with respect to treatment failure.

The children in this study experienced only a 29% (p = 0.103) reduction in relapse rates on RTX, compared to the 42% decline observed in adults. Children comprised only a quarter of the cohort, and a much smaller proportion of children (23% versus 56% of adults) were treatment naïve prior to RTX. This may have confounded the comparison between adults and children, given that treatment-naïve patients appeared to respond more favourably to RTX. Finally, of all relapses known to have occurred in the context of inadequate B-cell depletion, 9/12 (75%) occurred in children. This may suggest that children may benefit from closer B-cell monitoring. While possible, it seems unlikely that use of the BSA-adjusted dosing regimen in children accounts for the lesser efficacy observed, as this is a conventional dosing protocol that is proven to cause complete circulating B-cell depletion with established efficacy in numerous autoimmune and haemato-oncological disorders.

Although 45% of the cohort relapsed on RTX, only 18% switched to an alternative immunotherapy. This could be because relapses were mild or responded well to acute therapy. We could not explore this as EDSS data (which did show a trend towards improving disability) were available for only 80% of the cohort and were not calculated at designated time points with respect to relapses. Alternatively, neurologists may continue RTX despite ongoing MOGAD relapses due to limited third-line therapy options. Paediatric studies have suggested possibly superior responses to either IVIg or oral corticosteroid, but this requires further study [Hachohen et al., 2018, Wong et al., 2018]. Tocilizumab (interleukin-6 blockade) has been used effectively in some patients with RTX-refractory MOGAD [Novi et al., 2019, Hayward-Könnecke et al., 2019, Ringelstein et al., 2020].

Important limitations of this study include its retrospective design and the inclusion of many patients with relatively short duration of treatment. The latter will bias analysis of ARR, often utilised in this type of study, which is why we used Poisson regression to provide a more meaningful analysis of treatment effect. Other limitations include the absence of a relapse adjudication committee, and the heterogeneity of the cohort in terms of patient ages, MOGAD phenotypes and prior drug exposure. Furthermore, some patients received concomitant corticosteroid treatment at changing doses, there was no standardised washout from prior steroid-sparing medications and a minority of patients continued these treatments alongside RTX therapy. These limitations are inherent to real-world, retrospective studies of this nature and the inclusion of all cases improves the generalisability of the study and reflects the challenge of managing this rare and unpredictable disorder.

In summary, this is largest study of RTX effectiveness in MOGAD. RTX seems less beneficial than expected for MOGAD, when compared with AQP4-IgG-NMOSD, supporting observations from small case series. Prospective studies in well-defined cohorts of adults and children are needed to confirm or refute our findings and to better understand the role of anti-CD20 therapy in the treatment of MOGAD.