---
reference_id: "PMID:36846556"
title: "Long Covid brain fog: a neuroinflammation phenomenon?"
authors:
- Kavanagh E
journal: Oxf Open Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/oxfimm/iqac007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long Covid brain fog: a neuroinflammation phenomenon?
**Authors:** Kavanagh E
**Journal:** Oxf Open Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfimm/iqac007](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfimm/iqac007)

## Content

1. Oxf Open Immunol. 2022 Sep 27;3(1):iqac007. doi: 10.1093/oxfimm/iqac007. 
eCollection 2022.

Long Covid brain fog: a neuroinflammation phenomenon?

Kavanagh E(1).

Author information:
(1)Independent Researcher.

Neuroinflammation is a process triggered by an attack on the immune system. 
Activation of microglia in response to an immune system challenge can lead to a 
significant impact on cognitive processes, such as learning, memory and 
emotional regulation. Long Covid is an ongoing problem, affecting an estimated 
1.3 million people within the UK alone, and one of its more significant, and as 
yet unexplained, symptoms is brain fog. Here, we discuss the potential role of 
neuroinflammation in Long Covid cognitive difficulties. Inflammatory cytokines 
have been found to play a significant role in reductions in LTP and LTD, a 
reduction in neurogenesis, and in dendritic sprouting. The potential behavioural 
consequences of such impacts are discussed. It is hoped that this article will 
allow for greater examination of the effects of inflammatory factors on brain 
function, most particularly in terms of their role in chronic conditions.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfimm/iqac007
PMCID: PMC9914477
PMID: 36846556