---
reference_id: "PMID:39445629"
title: "Cardiovascular and arrhythmic manifestations of Bartter's and Gitelman's syndromes: do not forget the heart. A narrative literature review."
authors:
- Giordani AS
- Menghi C
- Proietti R
- Stefanelli LF
- Cacciapuoti M
- Calò LA
journal: J Hypertens
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000003910
keywords:
- "Gitelman Syndrome/physiopathology, complications"
- Humans
- "Bartter Syndrome/complications, physiopathology"
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/physiopathology, etiology"
- "Cardiovascular Diseases/physiopathology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular and arrhythmic manifestations of Bartter's and Gitelman's syndromes: do not forget the heart. A narrative literature review.
**Authors:** Giordani AS, Menghi C, Proietti R, Stefanelli LF, Cacciapuoti M, Calò LA
**Journal:** J Hypertens (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/HJH.0000000000003910](https://doi.org/10.1097/HJH.0000000000003910)

## Content

1. J Hypertens. 2025 Feb 1;43(2):191-200. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000003910. Epub
 2024 Oct 23.

Cardiovascular and arrhythmic manifestations of Bartter's and Gitelman's
syndromes: do not forget the heart. A narrative literature review.

Giordani AS(1), Menghi C(1), Proietti R(2), Stefanelli LF(3), Cacciapuoti M(3),
Calò LA(3).

Author information:
(1)Cardiology, Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public
Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(2)Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, UK.
(3)Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Department of Medicine,
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

Bartter's and Gitelman's syndromes (BS/GS) are genetically determined kidney
tubulopathies leading to electrolyte and neurohormonal abnormalities. Although
considered benign entities, major adverse cardiovascular events may complicate
both syndromes, in form of ventricular arrhythmias leading to palpitations,
syncope or sudden cardiac death, microvascular cardiac dysfunction and
exercise-induced myocardial contractile deficit. The mechanisms leading to
cardiovascular complications are not only driven by chronic electrolyte
abnormalities, i.e. chronic hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia, but also by
neurohormonal alterations that can impair vascular tone and myocardial
contractility. In presence of triggering factors, BS/GS patients may experience
a spectrum of cardiac arrhythmias necessitating prompt diagnosis and treatment.
The aim of this review is to explore the pathophysiological mechanisms of BS and
GS, highlighting those responsible for cardiovascular involvement, and to
analyze the spectrum of associated cardiovascular complications. This highlights
the importance of an integrated shared management of GS/BS patients between
Nephrologist and Cardiologist.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000003910
PMID: 39445629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
