---
reference_id: "PMID:38773877"
title: Severe congenital ichthyosiform dermatosis in CHIME syndrome successfully treated with ixekizumab.
authors:
- Flowers LE
- Dyer JA
- Eisenstein KA
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/pde.15648
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe congenital ichthyosiform dermatosis in CHIME syndrome successfully treated with ixekizumab.
**Authors:** Flowers LE, Dyer JA, Eisenstein KA
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.15648](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.15648)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2024 Nov-Dec;41(6):1166-1169. doi: 10.1111/pde.15648. Epub 
2024 May 21.

Severe congenital ichthyosiform dermatosis in CHIME syndrome successfully 
treated with ixekizumab.

Flowers LE(1), Dyer JA(2), Eisenstein KA(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, 
Missouri, USA.

Coloboma, congenital heart disease, ichthyosiform dermatosis, intellectual 
disability, conductive hearing loss, and epilepsy (CHIME) syndrome is a rare 
autosomal recessive neuroectodermal disorder caused by PIGL gene mutations. 
There is emerging literature to support the use of interleukin-17 (IL-17) 
antagonists in the treatment of certain ichthyosiform dermatoses. Here, we 
report a case of severe ichthyosiform dermatosis in a child with CHIME syndrome 
who was recalcitrant to multiple topical medications and dupilumab. This is the 
first reported case of successful treatment of congenital ichthyosiform 
dermatosis in a CHIME syndrome patient with ixekizumab, an IL-17A antagonist.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.15648
PMID: 38773877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]