---
reference_id: "PMID:20301473"
title: Niemann-Pick Disease Type C.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Bremova-Ertl T
- Patterson M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Niemann-Pick Disease Type C.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bremova-Ertl T, Patterson M

## Content

1. Niemann-Pick Disease Type C.

Bremova-Ertl T(1), Patterson M(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Jan 26 [updated 2025 Nov 20].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Bern (Inselspital),, Switzerland
(2)Emeritus Professor, Neurology, Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC) is a slowly 
progressive lysosomal disorder in which the principal manifestations are age 
dependent. Perinatal period and infancy: The initial presentation is 
predominantly visceral with hepatosplenomegaly, cholestatic jaundice, and (in 
some instances) pulmonary infiltrates. Many infants succumb at this stage; 
however, of those who survive, some are hypotonic and have delayed psychomotor 
development, whereas others may have complete resolution of disease 
manifestations, only to present with neurologic disease many years later. Mid- 
to late childhood onset: The initial presentation is dominated by neurologic 
manifestations. The youngest children may present with hypotonia and 
developmental delay, with the subsequent emergence of ataxia, dysarthria, 
dysphagia, and, in some individuals, epileptic seizures, dystonia, and gelastic 
cataplexy. Although cognitive impairment may be subtle at first, it eventually 
becomes apparent as progressive dementia. Death from aspiration pneumonia 
usually occurs in the late second or third decade. Adolescent to adult onset: 
The initial presentation may be neurologic manifestations like those in 
childhood, but with a much slower rate of progression and longer life 
expectancy. In others, the initial presentation can be predominantly early-onset 
dementia or psychiatric manifestations.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of NPC is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in either NPC1 or NPC2 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Treatment for the neurologic manifestations of 
NPC can include miglustat (approved in several countries but not currently FDA 
approved for standalone treatment of NPC), arimoclomol (approved for use in 
combination with miglustat), and levacetylleucine (standalone treatment approved 
by FDA). Supportive care: No curative therapy for NPC exists. Supportive therapy 
is provided by specialists from multiple disciplines including neurology, 
physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, nutrition, feeding, 
psychology, social work, and clinical genetics. Surveillance: Regularly 
scheduled follow up is recommended for multidisciplinary specialists to monitor 
disease progression, emergence of new disease manifestations, and response to 
supportive management including psychosocial support. For those on miglustat 
therapy, regularly scheduled follow up is recommended to monitor adherence, side 
effects, and conditions that would prompt discontinuation of therapy. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Drugs that cause excessive salivation or may 
exacerbate seizures directly by interacting with anti-seizure medication; 
alcohol as well as many drugs that exacerbate ataxia. Evaluation of relatives at 
risk: It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs of an 
affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who might 
benefit from targeted therapy for NPC.
GENETIC COUNSELING: NPC is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both 
parents are known to be heterozygous for an NPC-related pathogenic variant, each 
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, 
a 50% chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of 
the familial pathogenic variants. Heterozygotes may manifest clinical and 
biochemical abnormalities. Once the NPC-causing pathogenic variants have been 
identified in an affected family member, heterozygote testing for at-risk 
relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301473