---
reference_id: "PMID:24055730"
title: "Chromosome 17p13.3 deletion syndrome: aCGH characterization, prenatal findings and diagnosis, and literature review."
authors:
- Chen CP
- Chang TY
- Guo WY
- Wu PC
- Wang LK
- Chern SR
- Wu PS
- Su JW
- Chen YT
- Chen LF
- Wang W
journal: Gene
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.044
keywords:
- Adult
- "Classical Lissencephalies and Subcortical Band Heterotopias/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization/methods
- Female
- "Fetal Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Fetal Growth Retardation/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Polyhydramnios/genetics
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chromosome 17p13.3 deletion syndrome: aCGH characterization, prenatal findings and diagnosis, and literature review.
**Authors:** Chen CP, Chang TY, Guo WY, Wu PC, Wang LK, Chern SR, Wu PS, Su JW, Chen YT, Chen LF, Wang W
**Journal:** Gene (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.044)

## Content

1. Gene. 2013 Dec 10;532(1):152-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.044. Epub 2013 Sep
 19.

Chromosome 17p13.3 deletion syndrome: aCGH characterization, prenatal findings 
and diagnosis, and literature review.

Chen CP(1), Chang TY, Guo WY, Wu PC, Wang LK, Chern SR, Wu PS, Su JW, Chen YT, 
Chen LF, Wang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Department of Medical Research, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan; Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan; School 
of Chinese Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan; Institute of Clinical and Community Health Nursing, National 
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: cpc_mmh@yahoo.com.

We report a molecular cytogenetic characterization of 17p13.3 deletion syndrome 
by array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) in a 
fetus with lissencephaly, corpus callosum dysgenesis, ventriculomegaly, 
microcephaly, intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), polyhydramnios and single 
umbilical artery. aCGH analysis revealed a 3.17-Mb deletion at 17p13.3, or arr 
[hg19] 17p13.3 (0-3,165,530)×1. The qPCR assays revealed a maternal origin of 
the deletion. Metaphase FISH analysis detected the absence of the LIS1 probe 
signal on the aberrant chromosome 17. The karyotype was 46,XX,del(17)(p13.3). We 
review the literature of chromosome 17p13.3 deletion syndrome with prenatal 
findings and diagnosis, and suggest that prenatal ultrasound detection of 
central nervous system anomalies such as lissencephaly, corpus callosum 
dysgenesis/agenesis, ventriculomegaly and microcephaly associated with IUGR, 
polyhydramnios, congenital heart defects, abdominal wall defects and renal 
abnormalities should include a differential diagnosis of chromosome 17p13.3 
deletion syndrome.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.044
PMID: 24055730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]