---
reference_id: "PMID:34663675"
title: "Primary Angiitis of the CNS: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Beuker C
- Strunk D
- Rawal R
- Schmidt-Pogoda A
- Werring N
- Milles L
- Ruck T
- Wiendl H
- Meuth S
- Minnerup H
- Minnerup J
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000001093
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/cerebrospinal fluid, diagnosis, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Angiitis of the CNS: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Beuker C, Strunk D, Rawal R, Schmidt-Pogoda A, Werring N, Milles L, Ruck T, Wiendl H, Meuth S, Minnerup H, Minnerup J
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000001093](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000001093)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2021 Oct 18;8(6):e1093. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000001093. Print 2021 Nov.

Primary Angiitis of the CNS: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Beuker C(1), Strunk D(1), Rawal R(1), Schmidt-Pogoda A(1), Werring N(1), Milles 
L(1), Ruck T(1), Wiendl H(1), Meuth S(1), Minnerup H(2), Minnerup J(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology with Institute of Translational Neurology 
(C.B., D.S., A.S.-P., N.W., H.W., J.M.); Institute of Epidemiology and Social 
Medicine (R.R., H.M.), University of Münster; Department of Neurology (L.M.), 
University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen; and Department of 
Neurology (T.R., S.M.), Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)From the Department of Neurology with Institute of Translational Neurology 
(C.B., D.S., A.S.-P., N.W., H.W., J.M.); Institute of Epidemiology and Social 
Medicine (R.R., H.M.), University of Münster; Department of Neurology (L.M.), 
University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen; and Department of 
Neurology (T.R., S.M.), Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany. 
jens.minnerup@ukmuenster.de.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To facilitate and improve the diagnostic and 
therapeutic process by systematically reviewing studies on patients with primary 
angiitis of the CNS (PACNS).
METHODS: We searched PubMed, looking at the period between 1988 and February 
2020. Studies with adult patients with PACNS were included. We extracted and 
pooled proportions using fixed-effects models. Main outcomes were proportions of 
patients with certain clinical, imaging, and laboratory characteristics and 
neurologic outcomes.
RESULTS: We identified 46 cohort studies including a total of 911 patients (41% 
biopsy confirmed, 43% angiogram confirmed, and 16% without clear assignment to 
the diagnostic procedure). The most frequent onset symptoms were focal 
neurologic signs (63%), headache (51%), and cognitive impairment (41%). Biopsy- 
compared with angiogram-confirmed cases had higher occurrences of cognitive 
impairment (55% vs 39%) and seizures (36% vs 16%), whereas focal neurologic 
signs occurred less often (56% vs 95%). CSF abnormalities were present in 75% vs 
65% and MRI abnormalities in 97% vs 98% of patients. Digital subtraction 
angiography was positive in 33% of biopsy confirmed, and biopsy was positive in 
8% of angiogram-confirmed cases. In 2 large cohorts, mortality was 23% and 8%, 
and the relapse rate was 30% and 34%, during a median follow-up of 19 and 57 
months, respectively. There are no randomized trials on the treatment of PACNS. 
The initial treatment usually includes glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide.
DISCUSSION: PACNS is associated with disabling symptoms, frequent relapses, and 
significant mortality. Differences in symptoms and neuroimaging results and low 
overlap between biopsy and angiogram suggest that biopsy- and 
angiogram-confirmed cases represent different histopathologic types of PACNS. 
The optimal treatment is unknown.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000001093
PMCID: PMC10578363
PMID: 34663675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D. Strunk, C. Beuker, R. Rawal, A. 
Schmidt-Pogoda, T. Ruck, L. Milles, and H. Minnerup declare no conflict of 
interest. S. Meuth has received honoraria for lecturing, travel expenses for 
attending meetings, and financial research support from Almirall, Bayer 
HealthCare, Biogen, Diamed, Genzyme, MedDay Pharmaceuticals, Merck Serono, 
Novartis, Novo Nordisk, ONO Pharma, Roche, Sanofi-Aventis, Chugai Pharma, 
QuintilesIMS, and Teva. H. Wiendl is a member of the following scientific 
advisory boards/steering committees: Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, MedDay 
Pharmaceuticals, Merck Serono, Novartis, and Roche. H. Wiendl has received 
speaker honoraria and travel support from Alexion, Biogen, Cognomed, Evgen, 
Sanofi Genzyme, Impulze, KWHC, Merck Serono, Novartis, PeerVoice, Pennside, and 
PSL Group. H. Wiendl has received compensation as a consultant from AbbVie, 
Actelion, Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, Novartis, and Roche. H. Wiendl has received 
research support from Biogen, Sanofi Genzyme, GlaxoSmithKline, Roche, and Solace 
Pharmaceuticals UK. J. Minnerup has received grants from Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft, Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF), Else 
Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung, EVER Pharma Jena GmbH, and Ferrer International, 
travel grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, and speaking fees from Bayer Vital. Go 
to Neurology.org/NN for full disclosures.