---
reference_id: "PMID:37483632"
title: Muscle fiber necroptosis in pathophysiology of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies and its potential as target of novel treatment strategy.
authors:
- Kamiya M
- Kimura N
- Umezawa N
- Hasegawa H
- Yasuda S
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1191815
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Muscle fiber necroptosis in pathophysiology of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies and its potential as target of novel treatment strategy.
**Authors:** Kamiya M, Kimura N, Umezawa N, Hasegawa H, Yasuda S
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1191815](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1191815)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jul 7;14:1191815. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1191815. 
eCollection 2023.

Muscle fiber necroptosis in pathophysiology of idiopathic inflammatory 
myopathies and its potential as target of novel treatment strategy.

Kamiya M(1), Kimura N(1), Umezawa N(1), Hasegawa H(1), Yasuda S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), Tokyo, Japan.

Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs), which are a group of chronic and 
diverse inflammatory diseases, are primarily characterized by weakness in the 
proximal muscles that progressively leads to persistent disability. Current 
treatments of IIMs depend on nonspecific immunosuppressive agents (including 
glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants). However, these therapies sometimes fail 
to regulate muscle inflammation, and some patients suffer from infectious 
diseases and other adverse effects related to the treatment. Furthermore, even 
after inflammation has subsided, muscle weakness persists in a significant 
proportion of the patients. Therefore, the elucidation of pathophysiology of 
IIMs and development of a better therapeutic strategy that not only alleviates 
muscle inflammation but also improves muscle weakness without increment of 
opportunistic infection is awaited. Muscle fiber death, which has been formerly 
postulated as "necrosis", is a key histological feature of all subtypes of IIMs, 
however, its detailed mechanisms and contribution to the pathophysiology 
remained to be elucidated. Recent studies have revealed that muscle fibers of 
IIMs undergo necroptosis, a newly recognized form of regulated cell death, and 
promote muscle inflammation and dysfunction through releasing inflammatory 
mediators such as damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). The research on 
murine model of polymyositis, a subtype of IIM, revealed that the inhibition of 
necroptosis or HMGB1, one of major DAMPs released from muscle fibers undergoing 
necroptosis, ameliorated muscle inflammation and recovered muscle weakness. 
Furthermore, not only the necroptosis-associated molecules but also PGAM5, a 
mitochondrial protein, and reactive oxygen species have been shown to be 
involved in muscle fiber necroptosis, indicating the multiple target candidates 
for the treatment of IIMs acting through necroptosis regulation. This article 
overviews the research on muscle injury mechanisms in IIMs focusing on the 
contribution of necroptosis in their pathophysiology and discusses the potential 
treatment strategy targeting muscle fiber necroptosis.

Copyright © 2023 Kamiya, Kimura, Umezawa, Hasegawa and Yasuda.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1191815
PMCID: PMC10361824
PMID: 37483632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare that MK received research funding 
from GlaxoSmithKline and speaking fees from Japan Blood Products Organization, 
Ono pharmaceutical, and Pfizer. NK received research funding from Abbvie, Asahi 
Kasei Pharma, AYUMI Pharmaceutical, Nobelpharma, and Taisho Pharmaceutical and 
speaking fees from Abbvie, Asahi Kasei Pharma, Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca, 
Eisai, and Novartis Pharma. NU received consulting fees from Kyowa Kirin Co., 
Ltd. HH received research funding from Daiichi Sankyo Company and speaking fees 
from Abbvie, Asahi Kasei Pharma, Eisai, GlaxoSmithKline, Nihon Pharmaceutical 
Company, and Taisho Pharmaceutical Company. SY received research funding from 
Abbvie, Asahi Kasei Pharma, Chugai Pharmaceutical, CSL Behring, Eisai, 
ImmunoForge, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, and Ono pharmaceutical, consulting fees 
from ImmunoForge, speaking fees from Abbvie, Asahi Kasei Pharma, Chugai 
Pharmaceutical, Eisai, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, Ono 
pharmaceutical, and Pfizer. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be constructed as a potential conflict of interest.