---
reference_id: "PMID:38928321"
title: "Deficiency of Glucocerebrosidase Activity beyond Gaucher Disease: PSAP and LIMP-2 Dysfunctions."
authors:
- Pavan E
- Peruzzo P
- Cattarossi S
- Bergamin N
- Bordugo A
- Sechi A
- Scarpa M
- Biasizzo J
- Colucci F
- Dardis A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25126615
keywords:
- "Glucosylceramidase/genetics, deficiency, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Gaucher Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- "Saposins/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Lysosomal Membrane Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Receptors, Scavenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Mutation
- "Lysosomes/metabolism, enzymology"
- "Hexosaminidases/metabolism, genetics, deficiency"
- Male
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deficiency of Glucocerebrosidase Activity beyond Gaucher Disease: PSAP and LIMP-2 Dysfunctions.
**Authors:** Pavan E, Peruzzo P, Cattarossi S, Bergamin N, Bordugo A, Sechi A, Scarpa M, Biasizzo J, Colucci F, Dardis A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25126615](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25126615)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jun 16;25(12):6615. doi: 10.3390/ijms25126615.

Deficiency of Glucocerebrosidase Activity beyond Gaucher Disease: PSAP and 
LIMP-2 Dysfunctions.

Pavan E(1), Peruzzo P(1), Cattarossi S(1), Bergamin N(1), Bordugo A(1), Sechi 
A(1), Scarpa M(1), Biasizzo J(2), Colucci F(3), Dardis A(1).

Author information:
(1)Regional Coordinator Centre for Rare Diseases, University Hospital of Udine, 
33100 Udine, Italy.
(2)Clinical Pathology Division, Department of Laboratory Medicine, University 
Hospital Friuli Centrale ASUFC, 33100 Udine, Italy.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, University of Ferrara, 44121 
Ferrara, Italy.

Glucocerebrosidase (GCase) is a lysosomal enzyme that catalyzes the breakdown of 
glucosylceramide in the presence of its activator saposin C (SapC). SapC arises 
from the proteolytical cleavage of prosaposin (encoded by PSAP gene), which 
gives rise to four saposins. GCase is targeted to the lysosomes by LIMP-2, 
encoded by SCARB2 gene. GCase deficiency causes Gaucher Disease (GD), which is 
mainly due to biallelic pathogenetic variants in the GCase-encoding gene, GBA1. 
However, impairment of GCase activity can be rarely caused by SapC or LIMP-2 
deficiencies. We report a new case of LIMP-2 deficiency and a new case of SapC 
deficiency (missing all four saposins, PSAP deficiency), and measured common 
biomarkers of GD and GCase activity. Glucosylsphingosine and chitotriosidase 
activity in plasma were increased in GCase deficiencies caused by PSAP and GBA1 
mutations, whereas SCARB2-linked deficiency showed only Glucosylsphingosine 
elevation. GCase activity was reduced in fibroblasts and leukocytes: the 
decrease was sharper in GBA1- and SCARB2-mutant fibroblasts than PSAP-mutant 
ones; LIMP-2-deficient leukocytes displayed higher residual GCase activity than 
GBA1-mutant ones. Finally, we demonstrated that GCase mainly undergoes 
proteasomal degradation in LIMP-2-deficient fibroblasts and lysosomal 
degradation in PSAP-deficient fibroblasts. Thus, we analyzed the differential 
biochemical profile of GCase deficiencies due to the ultra-rare PSAP and SCARB2 
biallelic pathogenic variants in comparison with the profile observed in 
GBA1-linked GCase deficiency.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25126615
PMCID: PMC11204053
PMID: 38928321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E.P. received Sanofi-Genzyme fellowships; A.B. 
received Sanofi-Genzyme fees; M.S. and A.D. received Sanofi-Genzyme and Takeda 
speaker fees, travel grants, and research grants. The funders had no role in the 
design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in 
the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results.