---
reference_id: "PMID:25573747"
title: "Aortic dissection in children and adolescents with Turner syndrome: risk factors and management recommendations."
authors:
- Turtle EJ
- Sule AA
- Webb DJ
- Bath LE
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2014-307080
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aortic dissection in children and adolescents with Turner syndrome: risk factors and management recommendations.
**Authors:** Turtle EJ, Sule AA, Webb DJ, Bath LE
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2014-307080](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2014-307080)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2015 Jul;100(7):662-6. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2014-307080. 
Epub 2015 Jan 8.

Aortic dissection in children and adolescents with Turner syndrome: risk factors 
and management recommendations.

Turtle EJ(1), Sule AA(2), Webb DJ(3), Bath LE(4).

Author information:
(1)Edinburgh Centre for Endocrinology, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Queen's Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh/BHF Centre for 
Cardiovascular Science, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Edinburgh Centre for Endocrinology, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, 
Edinburgh, UK.

Comment in
    Arch Dis Child. 2016 Mar;101(3):294-5. doi: 
10.1136/archdischild-2015-310106.

There is a general lack of awareness of the risk of aortic dissection in Turner 
syndrome (TS) from both patients with TS and their physicians. Patients often 
ignore symptoms for up to 24 h before seeking medical advice, significantly 
increasing their risk of death. A clinical profile of those at risk of 
dissection is emerging and includes the presence of congenital heart defects, 
aortic dilatation and hypertension. MRI has revolutionised the visualisation of 
cardiovascular anatomy in TS but remains underutilised, especially in children 
and adolescents, and there is currently little guidance on blood pressure (BP) 
assessment or hypertension management. Children and adolescents with TS at risk 
of dissection could be easily identified by timely imaging and BP assessment. 
This would allow medical management or surgical intervention to be put in place 
to reduce the risk of this major, and often fatal, complication. Since guidance 
is lacking, we have reviewed the literature on the risk factors for dissection 
in TS during childhood and adolescence, and make recommendations on the 
assessment and management of these patients.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2014-307080
PMID: 25573747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]