---
reference_id: "PMID:27292104"
title: Inotuzumab Ozogamicin versus Standard Therapy for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia.
authors:
- Kantarjian HM
- DeAngelo DJ
- Stelljes M
- Martinelli G
- Liedtke M
- Stock W
- Gökbuget N
- "O'Brien S"
- Wang K
- Wang T
- Paccagnella ML
- Sleight B
- Vandendries E
- Advani AS
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1509277
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Female
- Humans
- Inotuzumab Ozogamicin
- Intention to Treat Analysis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/drug therapy, mortality"
- Remission Induction
- "Sialic Acid Binding Ig-like Lectin 2/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Survival Analysis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inotuzumab Ozogamicin versus Standard Therapy for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia.
**Authors:** Kantarjian HM, DeAngelo DJ, Stelljes M, Martinelli G, Liedtke M, Stock W, Gökbuget N, O'Brien S, Wang K, Wang T, Paccagnella ML, Sleight B, Vandendries E, Advani AS
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1509277](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1509277)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2016 Aug 25;375(8):740-53. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1509277. Epub 2016
 Jun 12.

Inotuzumab Ozogamicin versus Standard Therapy for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia.

Kantarjian HM(1), DeAngelo DJ(1), Stelljes M(1), Martinelli G(1), Liedtke M(1), 
Stock W(1), Gökbuget N(1), O'Brien S(1), Wang K(1), Wang T(1), Paccagnella 
ML(1), Sleight B(1), Vandendries E(1), Advani AS(1).

Author information:
(1)From the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (H.M.K.); the 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston (D.J.D.), and Pfizer, Cambridge (E.V.) - 
both in Massachusetts; Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster (M.S.), and Goethe 
University, Frankfurt (N.G.) - both in Germany; Institute Seràgnoli, DIMES 
(Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine), University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy (G.M.); Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford (M.L.), and 
the University of California, Irvine Medical Center, Orange (S.O.) - both in 
California; the University of Chicago, Chicago (W.S.); Pfizer, Pearl River, NY 
(K.W.); Pfizer, Groton, CT (T.W., M.L.P., B.S.); and Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland 
(A.S.A.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Nov 24;375(21):2100-2101. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1612040.
    N Engl J Med. 2016 Nov 24;375(21):2100. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1612040.
    Cancer Discov. 2017 Oct;7(10):1054-1055. doi: 
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2017-120.

BACKGROUND: The prognosis for adults with relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
is poor. We sought to determine whether inotuzumab ozogamicin, an anti-CD22 
antibody conjugated to calicheamicin, results in better outcomes in patients 
with relapsed or refractory acute lymphoblastic leukemia than does standard 
therapy.
METHODS: In this phase 3 trial, we randomly assigned adults with relapsed or 
refractory acute lymphoblastic leukemia to receive either inotuzumab ozogamicin 
(inotuzumab ozogamicin group) or standard intensive chemotherapy 
(standard-therapy group). The primary end points were complete remission 
(including complete remission with incomplete hematologic recovery) and overall 
survival.
RESULTS: Of the 326 patients who underwent randomization, the first 218 (109 in 
each group) were included in the primary intention-to-treat analysis of complete 
remission. The rate of complete remission was significantly higher in the 
inotuzumab ozogamicin group than in the standard-therapy group (80.7% [95% 
confidence interval {CI}, 72.1 to 87.7] vs. 29.4% [95% CI, 21.0 to 38.8], 
P<0.001). Among the patients who had complete remission, a higher percentage in 
the inotuzumab ozogamicin group had results below the threshold for minimal 
residual disease (0.01% marrow blasts) (78.4% vs. 28.1%, P<0.001); the duration 
of remission was longer in the inotuzumab ozogamicin group (median, 4.6 months 
[95% CI, 3.9 to 5.4] vs. 3.1 months [95% CI, 1.4 to 4.9]; hazard ratio, 0.55 
[95% CI, 0.31 to 0.96]; P=0.03). In the survival analysis, which included all 
326 patients, progression-free survival was significantly longer in the 
inotuzumab ozogamicin group (median, 5.0 months [95% CI, 3.7 to 5.6] vs. 1.8 
months [95% CI, 1.5 to 2.2]; hazard ratio, 0.45 [97.5% CI, 0.34 to 0.61]; 
P<0.001); the median overall survival was 7.7 months (95% CI, 6.0 to 9.2) versus 
6.7 months (95% CI, 4.9 to 8.3), and the hazard ratio was 0.77 (97.5% CI, 0.58 
to 1.03) (P=0.04). In the safety population, the most frequent grade 3 or higher 
nonhematologic adverse events with inotuzumab ozogamicin were liver-related. 
Veno-occlusive liver disease of any grade occurred in 15 patients (11%) who 
received inotuzumab ozogamicin and in 1 patient (1%) who received standard 
therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The rate of complete remission was higher with inotuzumab 
ozogamicin than with standard therapy, and a higher percentage of patients in 
the inotuzumab ozogamicin group had results below the threshold for minimal 
residual disease. Both progression-free and overall survival were longer with 
inotuzumab ozogamicin. Veno-occlusive liver disease was a major adverse event 
associated with inotuzumab ozogamicin. (Funded by Pfizer; INO-VATE ALL 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01564784.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1509277
PMCID: PMC5594743
PMID: 27292104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]