---
reference_id: "PMID:28973544"
title: "Loss of the imprinted, non-coding Snord116 gene cluster in the interval deleted in the Prader Willi syndrome results in murine neuronal and endocrine pancreatic developmental phenotypes."
authors:
- Burnett LC
- Hubner G
- LeDuc CA
- Morabito MV
- Carli JFM
- Leibel RL
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx342
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/growth & development, physiology"
- "Cerebellum/growth & development, metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Islets of Langerhans/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Multigene Family
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- "Prosencephalon/growth & development, metabolism, pathology"
- "RNA, Small Nucleolar/genetics"
- Sequence Deletion
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of the imprinted, non-coding Snord116 gene cluster in the interval deleted in the Prader Willi syndrome results in murine neuronal and endocrine pancreatic developmental phenotypes.
**Authors:** Burnett LC, Hubner G, LeDuc CA, Morabito MV, Carli JFM, Leibel RL
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddx342](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddx342)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Dec 1;26(23):4606-4616. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx342.

Loss of the imprinted, non-coding Snord116 gene cluster in the interval deleted 
in the Prader Willi syndrome results in murine neuronal and endocrine pancreatic 
developmental phenotypes.

Burnett LC(1)(2)(3), Hubner G(4), LeDuc CA(2)(3)(5), Morabito MV(2)(3), Carli 
JFM(2)(3)(6), Leibel RL(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Nutrition.
(2)Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Columbia 
University, New York, NY 10027, USA.
(3)Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center, Russ Berrie Medical Science Pavillion, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.
(4)Packer Collegiate Institute, Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA.
(5)New York Obesity Research Center, Russ Berrie Medical Science Pavillion, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10027, USA.

Global neurodevelopmental delay is a prominent characteristic of individuals 
with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). The neuromolecular bases for these delays are 
unknown. We identified neuroanatomical changes in the brains of mice deficient 
for a gene in the minimal critical deletion region for PWS (Snord116p-/m+). In 
Snord116p-/m+ mice, reduced primary forebrain neuron cell body size is apparent 
in embryonic day 15.5 fetuses, and persists until postnatal day 30 in cerebellar 
Purkinje neurons. Snord116 is a snoRNA gene cluster of unknown function that can 
localize to the nucleolus. In cerebellar Purkinje neurons from postnatal day 30 
Snord116p-/m+ mice the reduction in neuronal cell body size was associated with 
decreased neuronal nucleolar size. We also identified developmental changes in 
the endocrine pancreas of Snord116p-/m+ animals that persist into adulthood. 
Mice lacking Snord116 have smaller pancreatic islets; within the islet the 
percentage of δ-cells is increased, while the percentage of α-cells is reduced. 
The α-cell markers, Sst and Hhex, are upregulated in Snord116p-/m+ isolated 
islets while Ins1, Ins2, Pdx1, Nkx6-1, and Pax6 are downregulated. There is a 
3-fold increase in the percentage of polyhormonal cells in the neonatal 
pancreata of Snord116p-/m+ mice, due primarily to an increase in cells 
co-positive with somatostatin. Snord116 may play a role in islet cell lineage 
specification. The Snord116 gene cluster is important for developmental 
processes in the brain as well as the endocrine pancreas.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddx342
PMCID: PMC5815655
PMID: 28973544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]