---
reference_id: "PMID:32125417"
title: "Persistence of symptoms in dengue patients: a clinical cohort study."
authors:
- Tiga-Loza DC
- Martínez-Vega RA
- Undurraga EA
- Tschampl CA
- Shepard DS
- Ramos-Castañeda J
journal: Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/trstmh/traa007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Persistence of symptoms in dengue patients: a clinical cohort study.
**Authors:** Tiga-Loza DC, Martínez-Vega RA, Undurraga EA, Tschampl CA, Shepard DS, Ramos-Castañeda J
**Journal:** Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/trstmh/traa007](https://doi.org/10.1093/trstmh/traa007)

## Content

1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2020 May 7;114(5):355-364. doi: 
10.1093/trstmh/traa007.

Persistence of symptoms in dengue patients: a clinical cohort study.

Tiga-Loza DC(1)(2), Martínez-Vega RA(3), Undurraga EA(4)(5), Tschampl CA(6), 
Shepard DS(6), Ramos-Castañeda J(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Programa de enfermería, Universidad Manuela Beltrán, Bucaramanga, Santander, 
Colombia.
(2)Centro de investigaciones sobre enfermedades infecciosas, Instituto Nacional 
de Salud Pública, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(3)Escuela de Microbiología, Universidad Industrial de Santander, Bucaramanga, 
Santander, Colombia.
(4)Escuela de Gobierno, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, 
Chile.
(5)Millennium Nucleus for the Study of the Life Course and Vulnerability (MLIV), 
Chile.
(6)Schneider Institutes for Health Policy, Heller School, Brandeis University, 
Waltham, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Universidad Anahuac, Centro de Investigación en Ciencias de la Salud. México.

BACKGROUND: Dengue is commonly considered an acute illness and follows three 
phases: febrile, critical in some cases and recovery. However, a number of 
studies have described a continuation of dengue symptoms for weeks or months, 
extending the recovery phase. Here we evaluate this persistence of dengue 
symptoms during convalescence.
METHODS: Our clinical cohort study included patients who sought medical services 
48 to 144 h from the onset of fever at seven hospitals or ambulatory centers in 
Morelos, Mexico. Seventy-nine laboratory-confirmed dengue patients were followed 
up regularly using clinic and/or home visits and telephone calls for as long as 
symptoms persisted or up to 6 mo.
RESULTS: In total, 55.7% of patients had dengue-related symptoms 1 mo after the 
onset of fever; pain and dermatological manifestations were the most common 
persistent symptoms. Prognostic factors for symptom persistence were: ≥4 d of 
fever (RR 1.72; 95% CI 1.35 to 2.19), platelet count ≤100 000/mm3 (RR 1.20; 95% 
CI 1.20 to 2.20), petechiae/bruises (RR 1.97; 95% CI 1.56 to 2.48) and abdominal 
pain/hepatomegaly (RR 1.79; 95% CI 1.41 to 2.28).
CONCLUSIONS: Persistence of dengue symptoms were common in laboratory-confirmed 
dengue patients. Manifestations related to tissue damage were associated with 
persistence after 30 d; host characteristics, such as age and health status 
before infection, were associated with prolonged persistence (>60 d). The burden 
of dengue may be higher than previously estimated.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal 
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/trstmh/traa007
PMID: 32125417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]