---
reference_id: "PMID:37736852"
title: "Treatment modalities for infantile spasms: current considerations and evolving strategies in clinical practice."
authors:
- Hollenshead PP
- Jackson CN
- Cross JV
- Witten TE
- Anwar AI
- Ahmadzadeh S
- Shekoohi S
- Kaye AD
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-07078-z
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Infant
- "Spasms, Infantile/drug therapy"
- Vigabatrin/therapeutic use
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- Valproic Acid/therapeutic use
- "Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- "Spasm/drug therapy, chemically induced, complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment modalities for infantile spasms: current considerations and evolving strategies in clinical practice.
**Authors:** Hollenshead PP, Jackson CN, Cross JV, Witten TE, Anwar AI, Ahmadzadeh S, Shekoohi S, Kaye AD
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-023-07078-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-023-07078-z)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2024 Feb;45(2):507-514. doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-07078-z. Epub 2023
 Sep 22.

Treatment modalities for infantile spasms: current considerations and evolving
strategies in clinical practice.

Hollenshead PP(1), Jackson CN(1), Cross JV(1), Witten TE(1), Anwar AI(2),
Ahmadzadeh S(3), Shekoohi S(4), Kaye AD(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center at
Shreveport, Shreveport, LA, 71103, USA.
(2)Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, Quinnipiac University, 275 Mount
Carmel Ave, Hamden, CT, 06518, USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center at Shreveport, Shreveport, LA, 71103, USA.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center at Shreveport, Shreveport, LA, 71103, USA. Sahar.Shekoohi@lsuhs.edu.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and
Neurosciences, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center at Shreveport,
Shreveport, LA, 71103, USA.

Infantile spasms, newly classified as infantile epileptic spasm syndrome (IESS),
occur in children under 2 years of age and present as an occur as brief,
symmetrical, contractions of the musculature of the neck, trunk, and
extremities. When infantile spasms occur with a concomitant hypsarrhythmia on
electroencephalogram (EEG) and developmental regression, it is known as West
Syndrome. There is no universally accepted mainstay of treatment for this
condition, but some options include synthetic adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH), repository corticotropin injection (RCI/Acthar Gel), corticosteroids,
valproic acid, vigabatrin, and surgery. Without effective treatment, infantile
spasms can cause an impairment of psychomotor development and/or cognitive and
behavioral functions. The first-line treatment in the USA is ACTH related to
high efficacy for cessation of infantile spasms long-term and low-cost profile.
Acthar Gel is a repository corticotropin intramuscular injection that became
FDA-approved for the treatment of IESS in 2010. Though it is believed that ACTH,
Acthar Gel, and corticosteroids all work via a negative feedback pathway to
decrease corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) release, their safety and
efficacy profiles all vary. Vigabatrin and valproic acid are both anti-seizure
medications that work by increasing GABA concentrations in the CNS and
decreasing excitatory activity. Acthar Gel has been shown to have superior
efficacy and a diminished side effect profile when compared with other treatment
modalities.

© 2023. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-023-07078-z
PMID: 37736852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
