---
reference_id: "PMID:31573162"
title: "Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease: Rapid Evidence Review."
authors:
- Saguil A
- Kane SF
- Lauters R
- Mercado MG
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2019'
keywords:
- Animals
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Exanthema/etiology
- Female
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/diagnosis, physiopathology, prevention & control, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease: Rapid Evidence Review.
**Authors:** Saguil A, Kane SF, Lauters R, Mercado MG
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2019)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2019 Oct 1;100(7):408-414.

Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease: Rapid Evidence Review.

Saguil A(1), Kane SF(2), Lauters R(3), Mercado MG(4).

Author information:
(1)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)96th Medical Group, Eglin Air Force Base, FL, USA.
(4)Naval Hospital Bremerton, Bremerton, WA, USA.

Hand-foot-and-mouth disease is caused by human enteroviruses and 
coxsackieviruses. Outbreaks can occur in the spring to fall and are common in 
North America, and most cases occur in patients younger than 10 years. 
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease is transmitted by fecal-oral, oral-oral, and 
respiratory droplet contact. Patients present with a low-grade fever, a 
maculopapular or papulovesicular rash on the hands and soles of the feet, and 
painful oral ulcerations. Lesions usually resolve in seven to 10 days; however, 
in rare cases, patients may have neurologic or cardiopulmonary complications. 
The differential diagnosis for childhood rashes and oral enanthems is broad and 
includes erythema multiforme, herpes, measles, and varicella. Treatment is 
supportive and directed toward hydration and pain relief as needed with 
acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Oral lidocaine is not recommended, and antiviral 
treatment is not available. The best methods to prevent the spread of 
hand-foot-and-mouth disease are handwashing and disinfecting potentially 
contaminated surfaces and fomites.

PMID: 31573162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]