---
reference_id: "PMID:18923003"
title: FGFR3 promotes synchondrosis closure and fusion of ossification centers through the MAPK pathway.
authors:
- Matsushita T
- Wilcox WR
- Chan YY
- Kawanami A
- Bükülmez H
- Balmes G
- Krejci P
- Mekikian PB
- Otani K
- Yamaura I
- Warman ML
- Givol D
- Murakami S
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn339
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Animals
- Bone Development
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Differentiation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chondrocytes/metabolism
- Chondrogenesis
- Humans
- "MAP Kinase Kinase 1/genetics, metabolism"
- MAP Kinase Signaling System
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Osteoblasts/metabolism
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics, metabolism"
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FGFR3 promotes synchondrosis closure and fusion of ossification centers through the MAPK pathway.
**Authors:** Matsushita T, Wilcox WR, Chan YY, Kawanami A, Bükülmez H, Balmes G, Krejci P, Mekikian PB, Otani K, Yamaura I, Warman ML, Givol D, Murakami S
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddn339](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddn339)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jan 15;18(2):227-40. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn339. Epub 2008
Oct  15.

FGFR3 promotes synchondrosis closure and fusion of ossification centers through 
the MAPK pathway.

Matsushita T(1), Wilcox WR, Chan YY, Kawanami A, Bükülmez H, Balmes G, Krejci P, 
Mekikian PB, Otani K, Yamaura I, Warman ML, Givol D, Murakami S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid 
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Activating mutations in FGFR3 cause achondroplasia and thanatophoric dysplasia, 
the most common human skeletal dysplasias. In these disorders, spinal canal and 
foramen magnum stenosis can cause serious neurologic complications. Here, we 
provide evidence that FGFR3 and MAPK signaling in chondrocytes promote 
synchondrosis closure and fusion of ossification centers. We observed premature 
synchondrosis closure in the spine and cranial base in human cases of homozygous 
achondroplasia and thanatophoric dysplasia as well as in mouse models of 
achondroplasia. In both species, premature synchondrosis closure was associated 
with increased bone formation. Chondrocyte-specific activation of Fgfr3 in mice 
induced premature synchondrosis closure and enhanced osteoblast differentiation 
around synchondroses. FGF signaling in chondrocytes increases Bmp ligand mRNA 
expression and decreases Bmp antagonist mRNA expression in a MAPK-dependent 
manner, suggesting a role for Bmp signaling in the increased bone formation. The 
enhanced bone formation would accelerate the fusion of ossification centers and 
limit the endochondral bone growth. Spinal canal and foramen magnum stenosis in 
heterozygous achondroplasia patients, therefore, may occur through premature 
synchondrosis closure. If this is the case, then any growth-promoting treatment 
for these complications of achondroplasia must precede the timing of the 
synchondrosis closure.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn339
PMCID: PMC2638772
PMID: 18923003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]