---
reference_id: "PMID:31730530"
title: "3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency newborn screening in a population of 536,008: is routine screening necessary?"
authors:
- Wang H
- Liu S
- Wang B
- Yang Y
- Yu B
- Wang L
- Wang T
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2018-0536
keywords:
- "Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- China/epidemiology
- Dried Blood Spot Testing
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- Prognosis
- Risk Assessment
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency newborn screening in a population of 536,008: is routine screening necessary?
**Authors:** Wang H, Liu S, Wang B, Yang Y, Yu B, Wang L, Wang T
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2018-0536](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2018-0536)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2019 Dec 18;32(12):1321-1326. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2018-0536.

3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency newborn screening in a population of
536,008: is routine screening necessary?

Wang H(1), Liu S(2), Wang B(3), Yang Y(1), Yu B(1), Wang L(2), Wang T(3).

Author information:
(1)Changzhou Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing
Medical University, Changzhou, China.
(2)Lianyungang Maternal and Child Health Hospital Affiliated to Yangzhou
University, Lianyungang, China.
(3)The Affiliated Suzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, China.

Objective To evaluate whether 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency
(3-MCCD) should be routinely screened in newborns. Methods Dried blood spots
(DBS) were collected and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (TMS). Blood
samples were collected from infants with positive 3-MCCD results. Targeted
sequencing was performed using the extended panel for inherited metabolic
diseases to detect 306 genes. The sequencing libraries were quantified and used
for massively parallel sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. Results A
total of 536,008 infants underwent newborn screening (NBS) and 14 cases of
3-MCCD were diagnosed. The incidence of 3-MCCD in Jiangsu province was 1:38,286.
During the last 3 years of follow-up, none of the subjects with 3-MCCD exhibited
obvious clinical symptoms. Only two children had mild feeding difficulties and
vomiting. Eleven patients had complex variants of the MCCC1 gene, and three
patients had mutations in MCCC2. In total, 17 types of MCCC1 or MCCC2 variants
were found, and c.639 + 2t > a was the most common mutation. Conclusions As far
as the current results are concerned, 3-MCCD may be benign in Jiangsu province.
However, additional investigations and a longer follow-up period are necessary
to decide whether NBS of 3-MCCD is necessary or not.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2018-0536
PMID: 31730530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
