---
reference_id: "PMID:34955635"
title: "Self-Efficacy Intervention Programs in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Narrative Review."
authors:
- Yi QF
- Yang GL
- Yan J
journal: Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2147/COPD.S338720
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Self-Efficacy Intervention Programs in Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Yi QF, Yang GL, Yan J
**Journal:** Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2147/COPD.S338720](https://doi.org/10.2147/COPD.S338720)

## Content

1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2021 Dec 18;16:3397-3403. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S338720. eCollection 2021.

Self-Efficacy Intervention Programs in Patients with Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease: Narrative Review.

Yi QF(1), Yang GL(2), Yan J(3).

Author information:
(1)Nursing Teaching and Research Department, Third Xiangya Hospital of Central 
South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Respiration, Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South 
University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(3)The Nursing Department, Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, 
Changsha, People's Republic of China.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common chronic disease whose 
development is irreversible, which leads to more than six million deaths each 
year. There is no treatment confirmed effective for the improvement of impaired 
lung function, but the combination of drug therapy with non-drug therapy such as 
pulmonary rehabilitation training has demonstrated a great potential in reducing 
the occurrence of complications and delaying the progression of COPD. 
Self-efficacy is the core of cognitive theory, which is crucial for chronic 
disease management. It has been proposed as an important component of disease 
management to help people develop skills to manage diseases more effectively. 
This study reviewed the development of self-efficacy and its application in 
patients with COPD, with the purpose of providing a better clinical reference 
for the treatments of COPD.

© 2021 Yi et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S338720
PMCID: PMC8694112
PMID: 34955635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.