---
reference_id: "PMID:20301568"
title: Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Shuman C
- Kalish JM
- Weksberg R
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Shuman C, Kalish JM, Weksberg R

## Content

1. Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome.

Shuman C(1), Kalish JM(2), Weksberg R(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2000 Mar 3 [updated 2023 Sep 21].

Author information:
(1)Professor, Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario
(2)Attending Physician, Research Scientist, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia;, Assistant Professor of Pediatrics and Genetics, Perelman School 
of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(3)Geneticist, Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Senior Associate Scientist, 
Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children;, Professor, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a growth disorder 
variably characterized by macroglossia, hemihyperplasia, omphalocele, neonatal 
hypoglycemia, macrosomia, embryonal tumors (e.g., Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, 
neuroblastoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma), visceromegaly, adrenocortical cytomegaly, 
kidney abnormalities (e.g., medullary dysplasia, nephrocalcinosis, and medullary 
sponge kidney), and ear creases / posterior helical ear pits. BWS is considered 
a clinical spectrum, in which affected individuals may have many or only one or 
two of the characteristic clinical features. Although most individuals with BWS 
show rapid growth in late fetal development and early childhood, growth rate 
usually slows by age seven to eight years. Adult heights are typically within 
the normal range. Hemihyperplasia (also known as lateralized overgrowth) is 
often appreciated at birth and may become more or less evident over time. 
Hemihyperplasia may affect segmental regions of the body or selected organs and 
tissues. Hemihyperplasia may be limited to one side of the body (ipsilateral) or 
involve opposite sides of the body (contralateral). Macroglossia is generally 
present at birth and can obstruct breathing or interfere with feeding in 
infants. Neonatal hypoglycemia occurs in approximately 50% of infants with BWS; 
most episodes are mild and transient. However, in some cases, persistent 
hypoglycemia due to hyperinsulinism may require consultation with an 
endocrinologist for therapeutic intervention. With respect to the increased risk 
for embryonal tumor development, the risk for Wilms tumor appears to be 
concentrated in the first seven years of life, whereas the risk for developing 
hepatoblastoma is concentrated in the first three to four years of life. 
Cognitive and neurobehavioral development is usually normal. After childhood, 
prognosis is generally favorable, although some adults experience issues 
requiring medical management (e.g., for renal or skeletal concerns).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of BWS can be established in a proband 
who has two tier 1 characteristic clinical findings OR one tier 1 and one tier 2 
clinical finding. A diagnosis can also be established in a proband with at least 
one tier 1 or tier 2 clinical finding AND either: A constitutional epigenetic or 
genomic alteration leading to an abnormal methylation pattern at 11p15.5 known 
to be associated with BWS; OR. A copy number variant of chromosome 11p15.5 known 
to be associated with BWS; OR. A heterozygous BWS-causing pathogenic variant in 
CDKN1C.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Hypoglycemia is treated with oral 
feeding if it is mild or with glucose supplementation. Hyperinsulinism is 
treated with standard pharmacotherapy per endocrinologist; partial 
pancreatectomy may be considered in those with persistent hypoglycemia who are 
unresponsive to pharmacologic treatment. Feeding and/or respiratory support 
(sometimes requiring intubation at birth or tracheostomy for severe respiratory 
insufficiency) may be needed for those with macroglossia and/or upper airway 
obstruction. Tongue reduction surgery may be considered for this and other 
indications. Standard treatment is recommended for omphalocele per pediatric 
surgeon. A shoe lift may be considered in those with a leg length discrepancy. 
Epiphysiodesis prior to epiphyseal closure in early puberty may be considered in 
instances with leg length discrepancy >2 cm; alternatively, leg lengthening of 
the shorter leg may be considered. For those with hemihyperplasia of the face, 
referral to a craniofacial center for assessment and potential treatments may be 
considered. If present, standard treatment is recommended for speech 
delay/impediment, neoplasia, congenital heart defects, and hypercalciuria / 
kidney anomalies. Surveillance: Tumor surveillance. Perspectives on screening 
for malignant tumors in childhood differ based on local, national, and 
international practices. In North America, proactive tumor screening is 
recommended when the risk of tumor development exceeds 1%. In many European 
countries, proactive tumor screening protocols are typically undertaken when the 
risk of tumor development exceeds 5% and are based on molecular mechanism. For 
most BWS molecular subtypes, tumor screening consists of abdominal ultrasound 
with views of the liver, adrenal glands, and kidneys every three months until 
age four years followed by kidney ultrasound only every three months from age 
four to seven years. Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) levels are performed every 
three months until age four years. Physical exam by a pediatrician, geneticist, 
or pediatric oncologist twice a year is also recommended. Proposed screening for 
neuroblastoma in children with a heterozygous pathogenic variant in CDKN1C 
includes abdominal ultrasound, urine vanillylmandelic acid and homovanillic 
acid, and chest radiograph every three months until age six years, then every 
six months until age ten years. Non-tumor surveillance includes measurement of 
growth parameters, assessment for signs/symptoms of sleep apnea, and monitoring 
of developmental progress / educational needs at each visit; pre-feed serum 
glucose level per endocrinologist recommendations in neonates and infants with a 
history of hypoglycemia/hyperinsulinism or random serum glucose level in 
neonates and infants with signs/symptoms consistent with hypoglycemia; 
consideration of blood pressure measurements and measurement of urinary 
calcium-to-creatinine ratio to screen for occult nephrocalcinosis annually or 
biannually; consideration of kidney ultrasound to identify findings such as 
nephrocalcinosis and medullary sponge kidney annually between age eight years 
and mid-adolescence and periodically in adulthood; assessment of hemihyperplasia 
and leg length discrepancy at each visit at least until skeletal maturity; 
dental evaluation with low threshold for orthodontic evaluation as clinically 
indicated.
GENETIC COUNSELING: BWS is associated with abnormal expression of imprinted 
genes in the BWS critical region. Reliable recurrence risk assessment requires 
identification of the genetic mechanism in the proband that underlies the 
abnormal expression of imprinted genes in the BWS critical region. While the 
majority of families have a recurrence risk of less than 1%, certain underlying 
genetic mechanisms (e.g., CDKN1C pathogenic variants and copy number variants 
involving 11p15) may be associated with a recurrence risk as high as 50% 
depending on the sex of the transmitting parent and the specific alteration. In 
families with recurrence of BWS, maternally inherited CDKN1C pathogenic variants 
account for approximately 40% of genetic alterations and paternally or 
maternally inherited copy number variants account for approximately 9% of 
genetic alterations. Of note, some individuals with BWS have methylation 
alterations in the 11p15 imprinted domain as well as in other imprinted loci. 
For these individuals review of the maternal history should be undertaken for 
unexplained spontaneous abortion, hydatidiform moles, or a sib with BWS or 
another imprinting disorder (e.g., Silver-Russell syndrome); in such cases, a 
homozygous or heterozygous pathogenic variant in maternal effect gene in the 
mother's genome may confer a significant recurrence risk. Prenatal testing and 
preimplantation genetic testing: If a genomic variant involving chromosome 
11p15.5 (i.e., a cytogenetically visible duplication, inversion, or 
translocation), copy number variant of 11p15.5, or a CDKN1C pathogenic variant 
has been identified in the proband, prenatal testing via analysis of fetal DNA 
from samples obtained by chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or amniocentesis is 
possible. Preimplantation genetic testing is possible for a familial CDKN1C 
pathogenic variant and may be possible for some familial genomic variants. For 
evaluation of fetal methylation status, DNA extracted from amniotic fluid is 
currently felt to provide the most reliable tissue source, although false 
negative findings have been reported. Tissue obtained via CVS for prenatal 
testing for methylation status does not yield reliable results. Genetic 
counseling should emphasize the potential limitations of prenatal testing for 
epigenetic alterations.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301568