---
reference_id: "PMID:26818738"
title: "De novo KCNH1 mutations in four patients with syndromic developmental delay, hypotonia and seizures."
authors:
- Fukai R
- Saitsu H
- Tsurusaki Y
- Sakai Y
- Haginoya K
- Takahashi K
- Hubshman MW
- Okamoto N
- Nakashima M
- Tanaka F
- Miyake N
- Matsumoto N
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2016.1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De novo KCNH1 mutations in four patients with syndromic developmental delay, hypotonia and seizures.
**Authors:** Fukai R, Saitsu H, Tsurusaki Y, Sakai Y, Haginoya K, Takahashi K, Hubshman MW, Okamoto N, Nakashima M, Tanaka F, Miyake N, Matsumoto N
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jhg.2016.1](https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2016.1)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2016 May;61(5):381-7. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2016.1. Epub 2016 Jan 28.

De novo KCNH1 mutations in four patients with syndromic developmental delay, 
hypotonia and seizures.

Fukai R(1)(2), Saitsu H(1), Tsurusaki Y(1), Sakai Y(3), Haginoya K(4), Takahashi 
K(5), Hubshman MW(6)(7)(8), Okamoto N(9), Nakashima M(1), Tanaka F(2), Miyake 
N(1), Matsumoto N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology and Stroke Medicine, Yokohama City University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Takuto Rehabilitation Center for Children, 
Sendai, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Ube, Japan.
(6)Pediatric Genetics Unit, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, 
Petach Tikva, Israel.
(7)Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, 
Israel.
(8)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute 
for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi, Japan.

The voltage-gated Kv10.1 potassium channel, also known as ether-a-go-go-related 
gene 1, encoded by KCNH1 (potassium voltage-gated channel, subfamily H (eag 
related), member 1) is predominantly expressed in the central nervous system. 
Recently, de novo missense KCNH1 mutations have been identified in six patients 
with Zimmermann-Laband syndrome and in four patients with Temple-Baraitser 
syndrome. These syndromes were historically considered distinct. Here we report 
three de novo missense KCNH1 mutations in four patients with syndromic 
developmental delay and epilepsy. Two novel KCNH1 mutations (p.R357Q and 
p.R357P), found in three patients, were located at the evolutionally highly 
conserved arginine in the channel voltage-sensor domain (S4). Another mutation 
(p.G496E) was found in the channel pore domain (S6) helix, which acts as a hinge 
in activation gating and mainly conducts non-inactivating outward potassium 
current. A previously reported p.G496R mutation was shown to produce no 
voltage-dependent outward current in CHO cells, suggesting that p.G496E may also 
disrupt the proper function of the Kv channel pore. Our report confirms that 
KCNH1 mutations are associated with syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder, and 
also support the functional importance of the S4 domain.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2016.1
PMID: 26818738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]