---
reference_id: "PMID:27245440"
title: Truncating CHRNG mutations associated with interfamilial variability of the severity of the Escobar variant of multiple pterygium syndrome.
authors:
- Kariminejad A
- Almadani N
- Khoshaeen A
- Olsson B
- Moslemi AR
- Tajsharghi H
journal: BMC Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12863-016-0382-5
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Malignant Hyperthermia/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Pregnancy
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/genetics"
- Skin Abnormalities/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Truncating CHRNG mutations associated with interfamilial variability of the severity of the Escobar variant of multiple pterygium syndrome.
**Authors:** Kariminejad A, Almadani N, Khoshaeen A, Olsson B, Moslemi AR, Tajsharghi H
**Journal:** BMC Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12863-016-0382-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12863-016-0382-5)

## Content

1. BMC Genet. 2016 May 31;17(1):71. doi: 10.1186/s12863-016-0382-5.

Truncating CHRNG mutations associated with interfamilial variability of the 
severity of the Escobar variant of multiple pterygium syndrome.

Kariminejad A(1), Almadani N(1), Khoshaeen A(2), Olsson B(3), Moslemi AR(4), 
Tajsharghi H(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Centre, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Mehrgan Genetics Centre, Sari, Iran.
(3)Systems Biology Research Centre, School of Bioscience, University of Skovde, 
SE-541 28, Skovde, Sweden.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, SE-413 45, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Systems Biology Research Centre, School of Bioscience, University of Skovde, 
SE-541 28, Skovde, Sweden. homa.tajsharghi@his.se.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, SE-413 45, Gothenburg, Sweden. homa.tajsharghi@his.se.

BACKGROUND: In humans, muscle-specific nicotinergic acetylcholine receptor 
(AChR) is a transmembrane protein with five different subunits, coded by CHRNA1, 
CHRNB, CHRND and CHRNG/CHRNE. The gamma subunit of AChR encoded by CHRNG is 
expressed during early foetal development, whereas in the adult, the γ subunit 
is replaced by a ε subunit. Mutations in the CHRNG encoding the embryonal 
acetylcholine receptor may cause the non-lethal Escobar variant (EVMPS) and 
lethal form (LMPS) of multiple pterygium syndrome. The MPS is a condition 
characterised by prenatal growth failure with pterygium and akinesia leading to 
muscle weakness and severe congenital contractures, as well as scoliosis.
RESULTS: Our whole exome sequencing studies have identified one novel and two 
previously reported homozygous mutations in CHRNG in three families affected by 
non-lethal EVMPS. The mutations consist of deletion of two nucleotides, cause a 
frameshift predicted to result in premature termination of the foetally 
expressed gamma subunit of the AChR.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that severity of the phenotype varies 
significantly both within and between families with MPS and that there is no 
apparent correlation between mutation position and clinical phenotype. Although 
individuals with CHRNG mutations can survive, there is an increased frequency of 
abortions and stillbirth in their families. Furthermore, genetic background and 
environmental modifiers might be of significance for decisiveness of the lethal 
spectrum, rather than the state of the mutation per se. Detailed clinical 
examination of our patients further indicates the changing phenotype from 
infancy to childhood.

DOI: 10.1186/s12863-016-0382-5
PMCID: PMC4886457
PMID: 27245440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]