---
reference_id: "PMID:27821860"
title: "Identification of Novel HLA-A*0201-Restricted CTL Epitopes in Chinese Vitiligo Patients."
authors:
- Cui T
- Yi X
- Guo S
- Zhou F
- Liu L
- Li C
- Li K
- Gao T
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/srep36360
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Novel HLA-A*0201-Restricted CTL Epitopes in Chinese Vitiligo Patients.
**Authors:** Cui T, Yi X, Guo S, Zhou F, Liu L, Li C, Li K, Gao T
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/srep36360](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep36360)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 8;6:36360. doi: 10.1038/srep36360.

Identification of Novel HLA-A*0201-Restricted CTL Epitopes in Chinese Vitiligo 
Patients.

Cui T(1), Yi X(1), Guo S(1), Zhou F(1), Liu L(1), Li C(1), Li K(1), Gao T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, 127 Changle West Road, Xi'an, shaanxi, 710032, China.

Generalized vitiligo is an autoimmune disease characterized by melanocyte loss, 
which results in patchy depigmentation of skin and hair. Recent studies 
suggested the key role of CD8+T lymphocytes for mediating immune response in 
vitiligo through melanocyte differentiation antigens, including tyrosinase, 
gp100 and MelanA/Mart-1. However, the specific epitopes of these auto-antigens 
are still unknown. In our study, we predicted the possible HLA-A*0201-restricted 
nonapeptides overlaying the full-length amino acid sequences of these three 
known antigens and investigated the lymphocytes reactivity to these nonapeptides 
by Elispot assay. In addition, we evaluated the abilities of these nonapeptides 
to activate CD8+T cells. We screened out 5 possible epitopes originated from 
tyrosinase and gp100, numbered P28, P41, P112, P118 and P119. Among these 5 
epitopes, notably, P28 and P119 played the dominant role in activating CTLs, 
with a significant increase in proliferation rate and Interferon-γ (IFN-γ) 
production of CD8+T cells. Nevertheless, antigen-specific T cell reactivity was 
not detected in MelanA/Mart-1 peptides. Our studies identified two novel 
epitopes originated from proteins of gp100 and tyrosinase, which may have 
implications for the development of immunotherapies for vitiligo.

DOI: 10.1038/srep36360
PMCID: PMC5099573
PMID: 27821860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]