---
reference_id: "PMID:37940657"
title: Nde1 promotes Lis1-mediated activation of dynein.
authors:
- Zhao Y
- Oten S
- Yildiz A
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-42907-x
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Dyneins/metabolism
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/metabolism
- Dynactin Complex/metabolism
- Microtubules/metabolism
- Cytoskeleton/metabolism
- "1-Alkyl-2-acetylglycerophosphocholine Esterase/genetics, metabolism"
- Mammals/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nde1 promotes Lis1-mediated activation of dynein.
**Authors:** Zhao Y, Oten S, Yildiz A
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-42907-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42907-x)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Nov 9;14(1):7221. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-42907-x.

Nde1 promotes Lis1-mediated activation of dynein.

Zhao Y(1)(2), Oten S(2), Yildiz A(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Physics Department, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94709, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
CA, 94709, USA.
(3)Physics Department, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94709, USA.
yildiz@berkeley.edu.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
CA, 94709, USA. yildiz@berkeley.edu.
(5)Biophysics Graduate Group, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94709,
USA. yildiz@berkeley.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Sep 09:2023.05.26.542537. doi: 10.1101/2023.05.26.542537.

Cytoplasmic dynein drives the motility and force generation functions towards
the microtubule minus end. The assembly of dynein with dynactin and a cargo
adaptor in an active transport complex is facilitated by Lis1 and Nde1/Ndel1.
Recent studies proposed that Lis1 relieves dynein from its autoinhibited
conformation, but the physiological function of Nde1/Ndel1 remains elusive.
Here, we investigate how human Nde1 and Lis1 regulate the assembly and
subsequent motility of mammalian dynein using in vitro reconstitution and single
molecule imaging. We find that Nde1 recruits Lis1 to autoinhibited dynein and
promotes Lis1-mediated assembly of dynein-dynactin adaptor complexes. Nde1 can
compete with the α2 subunit of platelet activator factor acetylhydrolase 1B
(PAF-AH1B) for the binding of Lis1, which suggests that Nde1 may disrupt
PAF-AH1B recruitment of Lis1 as a noncatalytic subunit, thus promoting Lis1
binding to dynein. Before the initiation of motility, the association of
dynactin with dynein triggers the dissociation of Nde1 from dynein by competing
against Nde1 binding to the dynein intermediate chain. Our results provide a
mechanistic explanation for how Nde1 and Lis1 synergistically activate the
dynein transport machinery.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-42907-x
PMCID: PMC10632352
PMID: 37940657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
