---
reference_id: "PMID:30220042"
title: "Chordoma: a systematic review of the epidemiology and clinical prognostic factors predicting progression-free and overall survival."
authors:
- Bakker SH
- Jacobs WCH
- Pondaag W
- Gelderblom H
- Nout RA
- Dijkstra PDS
- Peul WC
- Vleggeert-Lankamp CLA
journal: Eur Spine J
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00586-018-5764-0
keywords:
- Bias
- "Chordoma/epidemiology, therapy"
- Disease Progression
- Disease-Free Survival
- Humans
- Incidence
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
- Sacrococcygeal Region
- "Skull Base Neoplasms/epidemiology, therapy"
- "Spinal Neoplasms/epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chordoma: a systematic review of the epidemiology and clinical prognostic factors predicting progression-free and overall survival.
**Authors:** Bakker SH, Jacobs WCH, Pondaag W, Gelderblom H, Nout RA, Dijkstra PDS, Peul WC, Vleggeert-Lankamp CLA
**Journal:** Eur Spine J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00586-018-5764-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00586-018-5764-0)

## Content

1. Eur Spine J. 2018 Dec;27(12):3043-3058. doi: 10.1007/s00586-018-5764-0. Epub 
2018 Sep 15.

Chordoma: a systematic review of the epidemiology and clinical prognostic 
factors predicting progression-free and overall survival.

Bakker SH(1), Jacobs WCH(2), Pondaag W(2), Gelderblom H(3), Nout RA(4), Dijkstra 
PDS(5), Peul WC(2), Vleggeert-Lankamp CLA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Leiden University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9600, 
2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands. s.h.bakker@lumc.nl.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Leiden University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9600, 
2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Departmant of Radiation Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The aim of this systematic review is to describe the 
epidemiology of chordoma and to provide a clear overview of clinical prognostic 
factors predicting progression-free and overall survival.
METHODS: Four databases of medical literature were searched. Separate searches 
were performed for each of the two objectives. Reference and citation tracking 
was performed. Papers were processed by two independent reviewers according to a 
protocol that included risk of bias analysis. Disagreement was resolved by 
discussion. Pooled analyses were planned if homogeneity of data would allow.
RESULTS: Incidence-incidence rates ranged between 0.18 and 0.84 per million 
persons per year and varied between countries and presumably between races. On 
average patients were diagnosed in their late fifties and gender data indicate 
clear male predominance. Two of the largest studies (n = 400 and n = 544) 
reported different anatomical distributions: one reporting the skull base and 
sacrococcygeal area affected in 32% and 29% of cases, whereas the other 
reporting that they were affected in 26% and 45% of cases, respectively.
PROGNOSTIC FACTORS: Statistically significant adverse prognostic factors 
predicting progression-free and overall survival include female sex, older age, 
bigger tumour size, increasing extent of tumour invasion, non-total resection, 
presence of metastasis, local recurrence, and dedifferentiated histological 
subtype.
CONCLUSIONS: Incidence rate and anatomical distribution vary between countries 
and presumably between races. Most chordomas arise in the skull base and 
sacrococcygeal spine, and the tumour shows clear male predominance. Multiple 
adverse prognostic factors predicting progression-free and overall survival were 
identified in subgroups of patients. These slides can be retrieved under 
Electronic Supplementary Material.

DOI: 10.1007/s00586-018-5764-0
PMID: 30220042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]