---
reference_id: "PMID:30969531"
title: Essential Thrombocytosis.
authors:
- Kaur A
- Gohari P
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Essential Thrombocytosis.
**Authors:** Kaur A, Gohari P

## Content

1. Essential Thrombocytosis.

Kaur A(1), Gohari P.

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2025 Aug 9.

Author information:
(1)Charleston Area Medical Center

Essential thrombocytosis, also known as essential thrombocythemia (ET), was 
first recognized in 1934 and was initially described as hemorrhagic 
thrombocythemia. ET is one of the classic BCR-ABL–negative myeloproliferative 
neoplasms (MPNs). This condition was later classified as a myeloproliferative 
neoplasm in 1951 by Damesheck. Myeloproliferative neoplasms, including 
polycythemia vera, primary myelofibrosis, and essential thrombocytosis, share 
the same mutations. Approximately 55% of patients with essential thrombocytosis 
have the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) mutation. ET is characterized by thrombocytosis 
and megakaryocytic hyperplasia in the bone marrow. Thrombocytosis increases the 
risks of vascular events such as thrombosis, hemorrhage, and sometimes the 
conversion to a blast phase of myelofibrosis. According to the World Health 
Organization, essential thrombocytosis is defined by a platelet count of more 
than 450×10³/µL with the presence of JAK2, calreticulin (CALR), or 
myeloproliferative leukemia virus oncogene (MPL) mutations, and absence of a 
clonal or reactive cause. This activity focuses on this disease's etiology, 
epidemiology, pathophysiology, evaluation, and treatment.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30969531

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Anahat Kaur declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Pouyan Gohari 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.