---
reference_id: "PMID:26089585"
title: Association of PRPS1 Mutations with Disease Phenotypes.
authors:
- Mittal R
- Patel K
- Mittal J
- Chan B
- Yan D
- Grati M
- Liu XZ
journal: Dis Markers
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1155/2015/127013
keywords:
- Ataxia/genetics
- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics
- Deaf-Blind Disorders/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Purines/metabolism
- "Ribose-Phosphate Pyrophosphokinase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of PRPS1 Mutations with Disease Phenotypes.
**Authors:** Mittal R, Patel K, Mittal J, Chan B, Yan D, Grati M, Liu XZ
**Journal:** Dis Markers (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2015/127013](https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/127013)

## Content

1. Dis Markers. 2015;2015:127013. doi: 10.1155/2015/127013. Epub 2015 May 24.

Association of PRPS1 Mutations with Disease Phenotypes.

Mittal R(1), Patel K(1), Mittal J(1), Chan B(1), Yan D(1), Grati M(1), Liu 
XZ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL 33136, USA ; Department of Human Genetics, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA ; Department of Biochemistry, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase 1 (PRPS1) codes for PRS-I enzyme that 
catalyzes the first step of nucleotide synthesis. PRPS1 gene mutations have been 
implicated in a number of human diseases. Recently, new mutations in PRPS1 have 
been identified that have been associated with novel phenotypes like diabetes 
insipidus expanding the spectrum of PRPS1-related diseases. The purpose of this 
review is to evaluate current literature on PRPS1-related syndromes and 
summarize potential therapies. The overexpression of PRPS1 results in PRS-I 
superactivity resulting in purine overproduction. Patients with PRS-I 
superactivity demonstrate uric acid overproduction, hypotonia, ataxia, 
neurodevelopment abnormalities, and postlingual hearing impairment. On the other 
hand, decreased activity leads to X-linked nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness 
(DFNX-2), Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-5 (CMTX5), and Arts syndrome depending on 
the residual activity of PRS-I. Mild PRS-I deficiency (DFNX-2) results in 
non-syndromic progressive hearing loss whereas moderate PRS-I deficiency (CMTX5) 
and severe PRS-I deficiency (Arts syndrome) present with peripheral or optic 
neuropathy, prelingual progressive sensorineural hearing loss, and central 
nervous system impairment. Currently, purine replacement via 
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) supplementation in patients with Arts syndrome 
appears to improve their condition. This suggests that SAM supplementation can 
alleviate symptoms of PRPS1 deficient patients and open new avenues of 
therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/127013
PMCID: PMC4458296
PMID: 26089585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]