---
reference_id: "PMID:22028304"
title: A mouse model for spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita with secondary osteoarthritis due to a Col2a1 mutation.
authors:
- Esapa CT
- Hough TA
- Testori S
- Head RA
- Crane EA
- Chan CP
- Evans H
- Bassett JH
- Tylzanowski P
- McNally EG
- Carr AJ
- Boyde A
- Howell PG
- Clark A
- Williams GR
- Brown MA
- Croucher PI
- Nesbit MA
- Brown SD
- Cox RD
- Cheeseman MT
- Thakker RV
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.547
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Chromosomes, Mammalian/genetics"
- "Collagen Type II/chemistry, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/abnormalities, pathology"
- Genetic Loci/genetics
- "Growth Plate/abnormalities, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutant Proteins/metabolism
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Organ Size
- "Osteoarthritis/complications, genetics"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/complications, congenital, genetics"
- Osteogenesis
- Phenotype
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model for spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita with secondary osteoarthritis due to a Col2a1 mutation.
**Authors:** Esapa CT, Hough TA, Testori S, Head RA, Crane EA, Chan CP, Evans H, Bassett JH, Tylzanowski P, McNally EG, Carr AJ, Boyde A, Howell PG, Clark A, Williams GR, Brown MA, Croucher PI, Nesbit MA, Brown SD, Cox RD, Cheeseman MT, Thakker RV
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.547](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.547)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2012 Feb;27(2):413-28. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.547.

A mouse model for spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita with secondary 
osteoarthritis due to a Col2a1 mutation.

Esapa CT(1), Hough TA, Testori S, Head RA, Crane EA, Chan CP, Evans H, Bassett 
JH, Tylzanowski P, McNally EG, Carr AJ, Boyde A, Howell PG, Clark A, Williams 
GR, Brown MA, Croucher PI, Nesbit MA, Brown SD, Cox RD, Cheeseman MT, Thakker 
RV.

Author information:
(1)Academic Endocrine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford 
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, 
Churchill Hospital, Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Progeny of mice treated with the mutagen N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) revealed a 
mouse, designated Longpockets (Lpk), with short humeri, abnormal vertebrae, and 
disorganized growth plates, features consistent with spondyloepiphyseal 
dysplasia congenita (SEDC). The Lpk phenotype was inherited as an autosomal 
dominant trait. Lpk/+ mice were viable and fertile and Lpk/Lpk mice died 
perinatally. Lpk was mapped to chromosome 15 and mutational analysis of likely 
candidates from the interval revealed a Col2a1 missense Ser1386Pro mutation. 
Transient transfection of wild-type and Ser1386Pro mutant Col2a1 c-Myc 
constructs in COS-7 cells and CH8 chondrocytes demonstrated abnormal processing 
and endoplasmic reticulum retention of the mutant protein. Histology revealed 
growth plate disorganization in 14-day-old Lpk/+ mice and embryonic cartilage 
from Lpk/+ and Lpk/Lpk mice had reduced safranin-O and type-II collagen staining 
in the extracellular matrix. The wild-type and Lpk/+ embryos had vertical 
columns of proliferating chondrocytes, whereas those in Lpk/Lpk mice were 
perpendicular to the direction of bone growth. Electron microscopy of cartilage 
from 18.5 dpc wild-type, Lpk/+, and Lpk/Lpk embryos revealed fewer and less 
elaborate collagen fibrils in the mutants, with enlarged vacuoles in the 
endoplasmic reticulum that contained amorphous inclusions. Micro-computed 
tomography (CT) scans of 12-week-old Lpk/+ mice revealed them to have decreased 
bone mineral density, and total bone volume, with erosions and osteophytes at 
the joints. Thus, an ENU mouse model with a Ser1386Pro mutation of the Col2a1 
C-propeptide domain that results in abnormal collagen processing and phenotypic 
features consistent with SEDC and secondary osteoarthritis has been established.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.547
PMID: 22028304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]