---
reference_id: "PMID:41766659"
title: Deep biochemical phenotyping reveals prognostic value of rare genetic variants in adult kidney stone disease.
authors:
- Münch J
- Petrovska J
- Figueiro-Silva J
- Rubio-Aliaga I
- Cabello EM
- Ivanovski I
- Papik M
- Oneda B
- Fuster DG
- Seeger H
- Ernandez T
- Buchkremer F
- Wuerzner G
- Dhayat NA
- Ritter A
- Segerer S
- Roth B
- Rauch A
- Ferraro PM
- Bonny O
- Wagner CA
- Bachmann-Gagescu R
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1172/JCI196277
keywords:
- Humans
- "Kidney Calculi/genetics, urine, metabolism"
- Female
- Male
- Phenotype
- Adult
- Genetic Variation
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Longitudinal Studies
- Exome Sequencing
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep biochemical phenotyping reveals prognostic value of rare genetic variants in adult kidney stone disease.
**Authors:** Münch J, Petrovska J, Figueiro-Silva J, Rubio-Aliaga I, Cabello EM, Ivanovski I, Papik M, Oneda B, Fuster DG, Seeger H, Ernandez T, Buchkremer F, Wuerzner G, Dhayat NA, Ritter A, Segerer S, Roth B, Rauch A, Ferraro PM, Bonny O, Wagner CA, Bachmann-Gagescu R
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI196277](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI196277)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2026 Mar 2;136(5):e196277. doi: 10.1172/JCI196277. eCollection 
2026 Mar 2.

Deep biochemical phenotyping reveals prognostic value of rare genetic variants 
in adult kidney stone disease.

Münch J(1)(2), Petrovska J(1)(3), Figueiro-Silva J(1), Rubio-Aliaga I(2), 
Cabello EM(1), Ivanovski I(1), Papik M(1), Oneda B(1), Fuster DG(4)(5), Seeger 
H(6), Ernandez T(7), Buchkremer F(8), Wuerzner G(9), Dhayat NA(5), Ritter A(6), 
Segerer S(8), Roth B(10), Rauch A(1), Ferraro PM(11), Bonny O(4)(9)(12), Wagner 
CA(2)(4)(13), Bachmann-Gagescu R(1)(3)(13).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren-Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Physiology, and.
(3)Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(4)National Center of Competence in Research (NCCR) Kidney.CH, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(5)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Inselspital, Bern University 
Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Nephrology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Service of Nephrology, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(8)Division of Nephrology, Cantonal Hospital Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland.
(9)Service of Nephrology and Hypertension, Lausanne University Hospital and 
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Urology, University Hospital of Bern, Inselspital, University 
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(11)Section of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Università degli Studi di 
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(12)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(13)Zurich Kidney Center, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUNDKidney stone disease (KSD) affects approximately 10% of the 
population. While genetic factors are known to play a role in KSD, determining 
the clinical relevance of rare variants in KSD genes identified in adults 
remains challenging.METHODSThe Swiss Kidney Stone Cohort is a multicenter 
longitudinal, observational study consisting of kidney stone formers (KSFs) (n = 
701) and non-kidney stone formers (NKSFs) (n = 200). Blood and urine samples 
were collected at enrollment and over 3 years for deep biochemical phenotyping. 
Results were correlated with rare genetic variants in established KSD genes 
identified through whole-exome sequencing and classified according to American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association of Molecular 
Pathology (ACMG/AMP) criteria.RESULTSCollectively, we found rare (likely) 
pathogenic (LP/P) variants representing strong KSD risk factors in 6.8% of KSFs, 
predominantly in genes involved in renal phosphate handling and cystinuria. 
Detailed biochemical analyses confirmed that KSFs carrying heterozygous LP/P 
SLC34A3 variants exhibited significant hyperphosphaturia. In contrast, 
monoallelic LP/P variants in SLC34A1, SLC9A3R1, or CYP24A1, which were also 
frequent in NKSFs, did not result in the expected biochemical alterations, 
calling into question their causative role as strong KSD risk factors. In 
cystinuria, monoallelic SLC7A9 variants represented intermediate risk factors, 
since they caused biochemical alterations but required additional factors for 
KSD occurrence, based on frequent LP/P variants in NKSFs. The presence of strong 
risk factors was associated with higher kidney stone (KS) recurrence over the 
3-year observation period, supporting a predictive value for genetic 
testing.CONCLUSIONSCorrelation of genetic findings with thorough biochemical 
phenotyping and comparison with NKSFs redefines the clinical relevance of 
variants in KSD genes and has prognostic value.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI196277
PMCID: PMC12948434
PMID: 41766659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]