---
reference_id: "PMID:29274002"
title: A periodic disease transmission model with asymptomatic carriage and latency periods.
authors:
- Al-Darabsah I
- Yuan Y
journal: J Math Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00285-017-1199-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A periodic disease transmission model with asymptomatic carriage and latency periods.
**Authors:** Al-Darabsah I, Yuan Y
**Journal:** J Math Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00285-017-1199-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00285-017-1199-1)

## Content

1. J Math Biol. 2018 Aug;77(2):343-376. doi: 10.1007/s00285-017-1199-1. Epub 2017
 Dec 22.

A periodic disease transmission model with asymptomatic carriage and latency 
periods.

Al-Darabsah I(1), Yuan Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Memorial University of 
Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, A1C 5S7, Canada.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Memorial University of 
Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, A1C 5S7, Canada. yyuan@mun.ca.

In this paper, the global dynamics of a periodic disease transmission model with 
two delays in incubation and asymptomatic carriage periods is investigated. We 
first derive the model system with a general nonlinear incidence rate function 
by stage-structure. Then, we identify the basic reproduction ratio [Formula: see 
text] for the model and present numerical algorithm to calculate it. We obtain 
the global attractivity of the disease-free state when [Formula: see text] and 
discuss the disease persistence when [Formula: see text]. We also explore the 
coexistence of endemic state in the nonautonomous system and prove the 
uniqueness with constants coefficients. Numerical simulations are provided to 
present a case study regarding the meningococcal meningitis disease transmission 
and discuss the influence of carriers on [Formula: see text].

DOI: 10.1007/s00285-017-1199-1
PMID: 29274002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]