---
reference_id: "PMID:39269762"
title: "Airway Clearance Techniques in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Qian L
- Lam B
- Zheng T
- Russo D
- Ma J
- Yao X
journal: P R Health Sci J
year: '2024'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Airway Clearance Techniques in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Qian L, Lam B, Zheng T, Russo D, Ma J, Yao X
**Journal:** P R Health Sci J (2024)

## Content

1. P R Health Sci J. 2024 Sep;43(3):119-124.

Airway Clearance Techniques in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: A Systematic Review.

Qian L(1), Lam B(2), Zheng T(2), Russo D(3), Ma J(2), Yao X(4).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Harvard University & Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(4)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China; McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a respiratory disorder that 
impairs mucociliary clearance, leading to decreased lung function. Conventional 
chest physiotherapy (CCP) is the traditional airway clearance technique (ACT) 
and is considered a standard treatment for PCD patients. This systematic review 
investigated whether device supported ACTs are better alternatives for improving 
lung function and/or quality of life in PCD, compared with CCP.
METHODS: The OVID Medline, PubMed, CINAHL, and Cochrane databases were searched. 
The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 
guidelines were followed, and the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluation approach was used to aggregate the data. This 
systematic review has been registered on the International Prospective Register 
of Systematic Reviews website.
RESULTS: Of the 389 citations that resulted from our literature search, 2 
randomized crossover trials that included a total of 54 patients were analyzed. 
The certainty of the aggregated study evidence was very low. No difference was 
identified between device-supported ACTs and CCP in terms of forced vital 
capacity and forced expiratory volume in 1 second in PCD patients aged 6 to 20 
years.
CONCLUSION: Device-supported ACTs could be considered alternative treatment 
options to replace CCP. High quality research is required to confirm this 
result.

PMID: 39269762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]