---
reference_id: "PMID:26076793"
title: Renal dysplasia in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Ristoska Bojkovska N
- Spahiu L
- Janchevska A
- Gucev ZS
- Tasic V
journal: Pril (Makedon Akad Nauk Umet Odd Med Nauki)
year: '2015'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal dysplasia in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Ristoska Bojkovska N, Spahiu L, Janchevska A, Gucev ZS, Tasic V
**Journal:** Pril (Makedon Akad Nauk Umet Odd Med Nauki) (2015)

## Content

1. Pril (Makedon Akad Nauk Umet Odd Med Nauki). 2015;36(1):211-5.

Renal dysplasia in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Ristoska Bojkovska N(1), Spahiu L(2), Janchevska A(1), Gucev ZS(1), Tasic V(1).

Author information:
(1)University Children's Hospital, Medical School Skopje, R. Macedonia.
(2)Pediatric Clinic, Clinical Center Prishtina, Kosovo.

BACKGROUND: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a multisystem genetic disorder 
characterized with central obesity, pigmentary retinopathy, polydactyly, mental 
retardation, and hypogenitalism. Renal abnormalities have been recognized as a 
cardinal feature of the disease with serious prognostic implication. The aim of 
this study was to analyze the renal status in children with BBS and to implement 
appropriate interventions in those with progressive course Patients and methods: 
The diagnosis of BBS was established on the basis of criteria proposed by Beales 
et al. (J Med Genet 1999). Imaging of the kidneys and urinary tract was 
performed with ultrasound study, Tc99(m)DMSA scan and a cystographic study. 
Twenty four hour urine collections were obtained for estimation of proteinuria 
and creatinine clearance. Blood pressure was monitored at clinical visits or as 
24-hour ambulatory monitoring.
RESULTS: There were 4 children (2 males, 2 females). All four children displayed 
abnormal kidney ultrasound and Tc99(m)DMSA scan resembling dysplastic kidney(s). 
Two of them had overt proteinuria (glomerulo-tubular pattern). Three children 
had normal blood pressure and glomerular filtration rate (GFR): 107, 145 and 95 
ml/min/1.73m(2), and the fourth had hypertension and progressive worsening of 
the GFR at 65 ml/min/1.73m(2).
CONCLUSION: Children with BBS should undergo imaging studies of the kidneys and 
urinary tract at initial work up; in those with renal dysplasia proteinuria, GFR 
and blood pressure should be regularly monitored to slow down progression to 
terminal renal failure.

PMID: 26076793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]