---
reference_id: "PMID:34076545"
title: Characterization of population genetic structure of hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis in Bulgaria.
authors:
- Pavlova Z
- Sarafov S
- Todorov T
- Kirov A
- Chamova T
- Gospodinova M
- Tournev I
- Mitev V
- Todorova A
journal: Amyloid
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/13506129.2021.1935230
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of population genetic structure of hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis in Bulgaria.
**Authors:** Pavlova Z, Sarafov S, Todorov T, Kirov A, Chamova T, Gospodinova M, Tournev I, Mitev V, Todorova A
**Journal:** Amyloid (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13506129.2021.1935230](https://doi.org/10.1080/13506129.2021.1935230)

## Content

1. Amyloid. 2021 Dec;28(4):219-225. doi: 10.1080/13506129.2021.1935230. Epub 2021
 Jun 2.

Characterization of population genetic structure of hereditary transthyretin 
amyloidosis in Bulgaria.

Pavlova Z(1)(2)(3), Sarafov S(4), Todorov T(1)(2), Kirov A(1)(2)(3), Chamova 
T(4), Gospodinova M(5), Tournev I(4)(6), Mitev V(3), Todorova A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Independent Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genome Center "Bulgaria", Sofia, 
Bulgaria.
(2)Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, 
Sofia, Bulgaria.
(4)Clinic of Nervous Diseases, UMBAL Aleksandrovska, Department of Neurology, 
Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(5)University Hospital "St. Ivan Rilski", Sofia, Bulgaria.
(6)Department for Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University, 
Sofia, Bulgaria.

The hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTRv amyloidosis) is an autosomal 
dominant genetic disease characterized by amyloid formation in different tissues 
due to pathogenic variants in the TTR gene. Great heterogeneity in the 
penetrance and manifestation of ATTRv amyloidosis is observed. In Bulgaria, the 
most common TTR pathogenic variant is Glu89Gln. Other TTR pathogenic variants 
are also found - Val30Met, Ser77Phe, Gly47Glu and Ser52Pro. There is a proven 
founder effect for the Glu89Gln variant, thus the aim of the present study is to 
investigate the founder effect for the other TTR pathogenic variants in 
Bulgaria. Haplotype analysis was performed by using microsatellite markers close 
to the TTR gene. DNA samples from ATTRv amyloidosis patients and their healthy 
relatives were analyzed. Theoretical haplotype reconstruction was done with 
Arlequin v.3.01 software. The age of the most recent common ancestor 
(hypothetical founder) for the studied variants was calculated with the DMLE 2.2 
software. In addition, DBS screening among 100 Roma newborns was done for the 
Gly47Glu TTR variant via direct Sanger sequencing. The reconstructed haplotypes 
of the patients were compared to their healthy relatives and to a control group 
of 40 healthy individuals. The results showed a possible founder effect for each 
of the studied variants. The Val30Met haplotype was compared to published 
haplotype data for this variant and no similarity was found. The result from the 
DBS screening showed no pathogenic TTR variants in exon 2 of the gene, so we 
considered the presence of the Gly47Glu variant in our population a sporadic 
event. With this study, we succeeded to gain a more complete picture of the 
population genetics of ATTRv amyloidosis in Bulgaria and made another step 
towards a more detailed understanding of the disease epidemiology.

DOI: 10.1080/13506129.2021.1935230
PMID: 34076545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]