---
reference_id: "PMID:35418250"
title: Mitochondrial Sirtuin-3 (SIRT3) Prevents Doxorubicin-Induced Dilated Cardiomyopathy by Modulating Protein Acetylation and Oxidative Stress.
authors:
- Tomczyk MM
- Cheung KG
- Xiang B
- Tamanna N
- Fonseca Teixeira AL
- Agarwal P
- Kereliuk SM
- Spicer V
- Lin L
- Treberg J
- Tong Q
- Dolinsky VW
journal: Circ Heart Fail
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.121.008547
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial Sirtuin-3 (SIRT3) Prevents Doxorubicin-Induced Dilated Cardiomyopathy by Modulating Protein Acetylation and Oxidative Stress.
**Authors:** Tomczyk MM, Cheung KG, Xiang B, Tamanna N, Fonseca Teixeira AL, Agarwal P, Kereliuk SM, Spicer V, Lin L, Treberg J, Tong Q, Dolinsky VW
**Journal:** Circ Heart Fail (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.121.008547](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.121.008547)

## Content

1. Circ Heart Fail. 2022 May;15(5):e008547. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.121.008547. Epub 2022 Apr 14.

Mitochondrial Sirtuin-3 (SIRT3) Prevents Doxorubicin-Induced Dilated 
Cardiomyopathy by Modulating Protein Acetylation and Oxidative Stress.

Tomczyk MM(1)(2)(3), Cheung KG(1)(2)(3), Xiang B(1)(2)(3), Tamanna N(4), Fonseca 
Teixeira AL(4), Agarwal P(1)(2)(3)(5)(6), Kereliuk SM(1)(2)(3), Spicer 
V(7)(3)(8), Lin L(9)(10), Treberg J(4), Tong Q(9), Dolinsky VW(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Research Envisioned and Accomplished in Manitoba (DREAM) Theme of 
the Children's Hospital Research Institute of Manitoba' Winnipeg' Canada 
(M.M.T., K.G.C., B.X., P.A., S.M.K., V.W.D.).
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics (M.M.T., K.G.C., B.X., P.A., 
S.M.K., V.W.D.), University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(3)Rady Faculty of Health Science, College of Medicine (M.M.T., K.G.C., B.X., 
P.A., S.M.K., V.S., V.W.D.), University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences (N.T., A.L.F.T., J.T.), University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(5)KTH Royal Institute of Technology, School of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science, Stockholm, Sweden (P.A.).
(6)Science for Life Laboratory, Solna, Sweden (P.A.).
(7)Department of Internal Medicine (V.S.), University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Canada.
(8)Manitoba Center for Proteomics and Systems Biology, Winnipeg, Canada (V.S.).
(9)Children's Nutrition Research Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
(L.L., Q.T.).
(10)Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, China (L.L.).

BACKGROUND: High doses of doxorubicin put cancer patients at risk for developing 
dilated cardiomyopathy. Previously, we showed that doxorubicin treatment 
decreases SIRT3 (sirtuin 3), the main mitochondrial deacetylase and increases 
protein acetylation in rat cardiomyocytes. Here, we hypothesize that SIRT3 
expression can attenuate doxorubicin induced dilated cardiomyopathy in vivo by 
preventing the acetylation of mitochondrial proteins.
METHODS: Nontransgenic, M3-SIRT3 (truncated SIRT3; short isoform), and M1-SIRT3 
(full-length SIRT3; mitochondrial localized) transgenic mice were treated with 
doxorubicin for 4 weeks (8 mg/kg body weight per week). Echocardiography was 
performed to assess cardiac structure and function and validated by 
immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence (n=4-10). Mass spectrometry was 
performed on cardiac mitochondrial peptides in saline (n=6) and doxorubicin 
(n=5) treated hearts. Validation was performed in doxorubicin treated primary 
rat and human induced stem cell derived cardiomyocytes transduced with 
adenoviruses for M3-SIRT3 and M1-SIRT3 and deacetylase deficient mutants 
(n=4-10).
RESULTS: Echocardiography revealed that M3-SIRT3 transgenic mice were partially 
resistant to doxorubicin induced changes to cardiac structure and function 
whereas M1-SIRT3 expression prevented cardiac remodeling and dysfunction. In 
doxorubicin hearts, 37 unique acetylation sites on mitochondrial proteins were 
altered. Pathway analysis revealed these proteins are involved in energy 
production, fatty acid metabolism, and oxidative stress resistance. Increased 
M1-SIRT3 expression in primary rat and human cardiomyocytes attenuated 
doxorubicin-induced superoxide formation, whereas deacetylase deficient mutants 
were unable to prevent oxidative stress.
CONCLUSIONS: Doxorubicin reduced SIRT3 expression and markedly affected the 
cardiac mitochondrial acetylome. Increased M1-SIRT3 expression in vivo prevented 
doxorubicin-induced cardiac dysfunction, suggesting that SIRT3 could be a 
potential therapeutic target for mitigating doxorubicin-induced dilated 
cardiomyopathy.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.121.008547
PMCID: PMC9117478
PMID: 35418250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]