---
reference_id: "PMID:33078978"
title: "Carboplatin and Paclitaxel for Advanced Endometrial Cancer: Final Overall Survival and Adverse Event Analysis of a Phase III Trial (NRG Oncology/GOG0209)."
authors:
- Miller DS
- Filiaci VL
- Mannel RS
- Cohn DE
- Matsumoto T
- Tewari KS
- DiSilvestro P
- Pearl ML
- Argenta PA
- Powell MA
- Zweizig SL
- Warshal DP
- Hanjani P
- Carney ME
- Huang H
- Cella D
- Zaino R
- Fleming GF
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.20.01076
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Cisplatin/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Endometrial Neoplasms/drug therapy, mortality"
- Female
- "Filgrastim/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Paclitaxel/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Progression-Free Survival
- Quality of Life
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Carboplatin and Paclitaxel for Advanced Endometrial Cancer: Final Overall Survival and Adverse Event Analysis of a Phase III Trial (NRG Oncology/GOG0209).
**Authors:** Miller DS, Filiaci VL, Mannel RS, Cohn DE, Matsumoto T, Tewari KS, DiSilvestro P, Pearl ML, Argenta PA, Powell MA, Zweizig SL, Warshal DP, Hanjani P, Carney ME, Huang H, Cella D, Zaino R, Fleming GF
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.20.01076](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.20.01076)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2020 Nov 20;38(33):3841-3850. doi: 10.1200/JCO.20.01076. Epub
2020  Sep 29.

Carboplatin and Paclitaxel for Advanced Endometrial Cancer: Final Overall 
Survival and Adverse Event Analysis of a Phase III Trial (NRG Oncology/GOG0209).

Miller DS(1), Filiaci VL(2), Mannel RS(3), Cohn DE(4), Matsumoto T(5), Tewari 
KS(6), DiSilvestro P(7), Pearl ML(8), Argenta PA(9), Powell MA(10), Zweizig 
SL(11), Warshal DP(12), Hanjani P(13), Carney ME(14), Huang H(2), Cella D(15), 
Zaino R(16), Fleming GF(17).

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX.
(2)NRG Oncology, Clinical Trial Development Division, Biostatistics and 
Bioinformatics, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY.
(3)The Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, The University of Oklahoma 
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK.
(4)Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute, Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH.
(5)Ehime University School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan.
(6)Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of California, Irvine 
Medical Center, Orange, CA.
(7)Women and Infants Hospital, Providence, RI.
(8)Stony Brook University Hospital, Stony Brook, NY.
(9)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(10)Gynecologic Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO.
(11)University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center, Worcester, MA.
(12)Cooper Hospital/University Medical Center, Camden, NJ.
(13)Hanjani Institute for Gynecologic Oncology, Abington Memorial Hospital, 
Abington, PA.
(14)John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii Cancer Center, 
Honolulu, HI.
(15)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL.
(16)Penn State University, Hershey, PA.
(17)The University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL.

PURPOSE: Limitations of the paclitaxel-doxorubicin-cisplatin (TAP) regimen in 
the treatment of endometrial cancer include tolerability and cumbersome 
scheduling. The Gynecologic Oncology Group studied carboplatin plus paclitaxel 
(TC) as a noninferior alternative to TAP.
METHODS: GOG0209 was a phase III, randomized, noninferiority, open-label trial. 
Inclusion criteria were stage III, stage IV, and recurrent endometrial cancers; 
performance status 0-2; and adequate renal, hepatic, and marrow function. Prior 
radiotherapy and/or hormonal therapy were permitted, but chemotherapy, including 
radiosensitization, was not. Patients were treated with doxorubicin 45 mg/m2 and 
cisplatin 50 mg/m2 (day 1), followed by paclitaxel 160 mg/m2 (day 2) with 
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin 
area under the curve 6 (day 1) every 21 days for seven cycles. The primary 
endpoint was overall survival (OS; modified intention to treat). 
Progression-free survival (PFS), health-related quality of life (HRQoL), and 
toxicity were secondary endpoints.
RESULTS: From 2003 to 2009, 1,381 women were enrolled. Noninferiority of TC to 
TAP was concluded for OS (median, 37 v 41 months, respectively; hazard ratio 
[HR], 1.002; 90% CI, 0.9 to 1.12), and PFS (median, 13 v 14 months; HR, 1.032; 
90% CI, 0.93 to 1.15). Neutropenic fever was reported in 7% of patients 
receiving TAP and 6% of those receiving TC. Grade > 2 sensory neuropathy was 
recorded in 26% of patients receiving TAP and 20% receiving TC (P = .40). More 
grade ≥ 3 thrombocytopenia (23% v 12%), vomiting (7% v 4%), diarrhea (6% v 2%), 
and metabolic (14% v 8%) toxicities were reported with TAP. Neutropenia (52% v 
80%) was more common with TC. Small HRQoL differences favored TC.
CONCLUSION: With demonstrated noninferiority to TAP, TC is the global first-line 
standard for advanced endometrial cancer.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.20.01076
PMCID: PMC7676887
PMID: 33078978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]