---
reference_id: "PMID:32175297"
title: "Myhre Syndrome Associated With Dunbar Syndrome and Urinary Tract Abnormalities: A Case Report."
authors:
- Varenyiova Z
- Hrckova G
- Ilencikova D
- Podracka L
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2020.00072
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myhre Syndrome Associated With Dunbar Syndrome and Urinary Tract Abnormalities: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Varenyiova Z, Hrckova G, Ilencikova D, Podracka L
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2020.00072](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2020.00072)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2020 Feb 27;8:72. doi: 10.3389/fped.2020.00072. eCollection
2020.

Myhre Syndrome Associated With Dunbar Syndrome and Urinary Tract Abnormalities: 
A Case Report.

Varenyiova Z(1), Hrckova G(1), Ilencikova D(1), Podracka L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Medical School, Comenius University and National 
Institute of Children's Diseases, Bratislava, Slovakia.

Myhre syndrome is a rare condition caused by a mutation in the SMAD4 gene, which 
leads to a defective TGF-β/BMP signaling, resulting in the proliferation of 
abnormal fibrous tissues. Clinically, patients with Myhre syndrome manifest with 
defects of connective tissue (skin, muscles, joints), and cardiovascular and 
neurological impairment. In our report, we present a case of a 16-year-old 
female with skeletal abnormalities, reduced articular mobility, skin, and 
muscular hypertrophy and cardiovascular defects characteristic of Myhre 
syndrome. Long-term pulmonary hypertension and arterial hypertension were 
persistent in spite of antihypertensive treatment. Our patient was also 
diagnosed with chronic kidney disease and Dunbar syndrome, which is an external 
compression of the coeliac trunk or coeliac artery by the surrounding tissues. 
Until now, only a few cases of renal complications in Myhre syndrome have been 
published. We describe for the first time a female patient with genetically 
confirmed Myhre syndrome caused by the p.Ile500Val SMAD4 mutation presenting 
with an unusual occurrence of congenital vesicoureteral reflux, proteinuria with 
a decreased renal function, and a condition recognized as Dunbar syndrome.

Copyright © 2020 Varenyiova, Hrckova, Ilencikova and Podracka.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2020.00072
PMCID: PMC7057230
PMID: 32175297