---
reference_id: "PMID:23508630"
title: "Bone collagen: new clues to its mineralization mechanism from recessive osteogenesis imperfecta."
authors:
- Eyre DR
- Weis MA
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-013-9723-9
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arthrogryposis/genetics, metabolism"
- Bone and Bones/metabolism
- Collagen/chemistry
- Collagen Type I/physiology
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Golgi Apparatus/metabolism
- HSP47 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- HSP70 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Proteoglycans/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone collagen: new clues to its mineralization mechanism from recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Eyre DR, Weis MA
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-013-9723-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-013-9723-9)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2013 Oct;93(4):338-47. doi: 10.1007/s00223-013-9723-9. Epub
 2013 Mar 19.

Bone collagen: new clues to its mineralization mechanism from recessive 
osteogenesis imperfecta.

Eyre DR(1), Weis MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington, 
1959 NE Pacific St, P.O. Box 356500, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA, deyre@uw.edu.

Until 2006 the only mutations known to cause osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) were 
in the two genes coding for type I collagen chains. These dominant mutations 
affecting the expression or primary sequence of collagen α1(I) and α2(I) chains 
account for over 90% of OI cases. Since then a growing list of mutant genes 
causing the 5-10% of recessive cases has rapidly emerged. They include CRTAP, 
LEPRE1, and PPIB, which encode three proteins forming the prolyl 3-hydroxylase 
complex; PLOD2 and FKBP10, which encode, respectively, lysyl hydroxylase 2 and a 
foldase required for its activity in forming mature cross-links in bone 
collagen; SERPINH1, which encodes the collagen chaperone HSP47; SERPINF1, which 
encodes pigment epithelium-derived factor required for osteoid mineralization; 
and BMP1, which encodes the type I procollagen C-propeptidase. All cause fragile 
bone in infancy, which can include overmineralization or undermineralization 
defects as well as abnormal collagen posttranslational modifications. 
Consistently both dominant and recessive variants lead to abnormal cross-linking 
chemistry in bone collagen. These recent discoveries strengthen the potential 
for a common pathogenic mechanism of misassembled collagen fibrils. Of the new 
genes identified, eight encode proteins required for collagen posttranslational 
modification, chaperoning of newly synthesized collagen chains into native 
molecules, or transport through the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi for 
polymerization, cross-linking, and mineralization. In reviewing these findings, 
we conclude that a common theme is emerging in the pathogenesis of brittle bone 
disease of mishandled collagen assembly with important insights on 
posttranslational features of bone collagen that have evolved to optimize it as 
a biomineral template.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-013-9723-9
PMCID: PMC3758449
PMID: 23508630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Financial Conflicts of Interest: 
Neither of the authors has any financial relationship with the organization that 
sponsored the research or with any other organizations whose area of activity 
may be affected or perceived to be influenced by the results of this review. The 
authors have stated that they have no conflict of interest.