---
reference_id: "PMID:36681682"
title: Wdr4 promotes cerebellar development and locomotion through Arhgap17-mediated Rac1 activation.
authors:
- Wu PR
- Chiang SY
- Midence R
- Kao WC
- Lai CL
- Cheng IC
- Chou SJ
- Chen CC
- Huang CY
- Chen RH
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-022-05442-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Neurogenesis/physiology
- Neurons/metabolism
- Purkinje Cells/metabolism
- Microcephaly/genetics
- Locomotion
- Cerebellum
- GTP-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- "rac1 GTP-Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "GTPase-Activating Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wdr4 promotes cerebellar development and locomotion through Arhgap17-mediated Rac1 activation.
**Authors:** Wu PR, Chiang SY, Midence R, Kao WC, Lai CL, Cheng IC, Chou SJ, Chen CC, Huang CY, Chen RH
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-022-05442-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-022-05442-z)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2023 Jan 21;14(1):52. doi: 10.1038/s41419-022-05442-z.

Wdr4 promotes cerebellar development and locomotion through Arhgap17-mediated
Rac1 activation.

Wu PR(1)(2), Chiang SY(3), Midence R(4), Kao WC(3), Lai CL(3), Cheng IC(5), Chou
SJ(5), Chen CC(4), Huang CY(6)(7), Chen RH(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 115, Taiwan.
f93448001@ntu.edu.tw.
(2)Cardiovascular and Mitochondrial Related Disease Research Center, Hualien Tzu
Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Hualien, 970, Taiwan.
f93448001@ntu.edu.tw.
(3)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 115, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 115, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 115,
Taiwan.
(6)Cardiovascular and Mitochondrial Related Disease Research Center, Hualien Tzu
Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Hualien, 970, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China
Medical University, Taichung, 404, Taiwan.
(8)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 115, Taiwan.
rhchen@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

Patients with mutations of WDR4, a substrate adaptor of the CUL4 E3 ligase
complex, develop cerebellar atrophy and gait phenotypes. However, the underlying
mechanisms remain unexplored. Here, we identify a crucial role of Wdr4 in
cerebellar development. Wdr4 deficiency in granule neuron progenitors (GNPs) not
only reduces foliation and the sizes of external and internal granular layers
but also compromises Purkinje neuron organization and the size of the molecular
layer, leading to locomotion defects. Mechanistically, Wdr4 supports the
proliferation of GNPs by preventing their cell cycle exit. This effect is
mediated by Wdr4-induced ubiquitination and degradation of Arhgap17, thereby
activating Rac1 to facilitate cell cycle progression. Disease-associated Wdr4
variants, however, cannot provide GNP cell cycle maintenance. Our study
identifies Wdr4 as a previously unappreciated participant in cerebellar
development and locomotion, providing potential insights into treatment
strategies for diseases with WDR4 mutations, such as primordial dwarfism and
Galloway-Mowat syndrome.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-022-05442-z
PMCID: PMC9867761
PMID: 36681682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
