---
reference_id: "PMID:3930839"
title: Differential diagnosis of tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency.
authors:
- Niederwieser A
- Ponzone A
- Curtius HC
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '1985'
doi: 10.1007/BF01800657
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential diagnosis of tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency.
**Authors:** Niederwieser A, Ponzone A, Curtius HC
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF01800657](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01800657)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 1985;8 Suppl 1:34-8. doi: 10.1007/BF01800657.

Differential diagnosis of tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency.

Niederwieser A, Ponzone A, Curtius HC.

Six hundred and seventy-three children (483 newborns and 190 older selected 
children) were screened for tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficiency by HPLC of 
urine pterins and BH4 load test. One patient with GTP cyclohydrolase I 
deficiency, 36 patients with dihydrobiopterin synthetase (DHBS) deficiency (of 
which six were in the newborn and 30 in the older children) and 14 with 
dihydropteridine reductase deficiency (DHPR) were found. All 37 patients with 
defective BH4 biosynthesis responded to a BH4 load by lowering of the elevated 
serum phenylalanine concentration but four of 14 patients with DHPR deficiency 
did not. Measurement of DHPR activity in blood spots on Guthrie cards is 
recommended. Since subvariants of patients with BH4 deficiency exist, 
homovanillic acid, 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid, pterins, phenylalanine, and 
tyrosine in cerebrospinal fluid should be measured for diagnosis and the control 
of therapy. The activity of the phosphate-eliminating enzyme (a key enzyme in 
BH4 biosynthesis and part of "DHBS") was measured in human liver and activities 
of approx. 1 n U (mg protein)-1 were found. In the liver biopsy of a patient 
with DHBS deficiency no activity (less than 3% of controls) was demonstrated.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01800657
PMID: 3930839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]