---
reference_id: "PMID:40371605"
title: Changes in Protein Expression of Renal Drug Transporters and Drug-Metabolizing Enzymes in Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease Patients.
authors:
- Tillmann AC
- Peters DJM
- Rostami-Hodjegan A
- Wilson P
- Norman J
- Barber J
- Al-Majdoub ZM
journal: Clin Pharmacol Ther
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/cpt.3715
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Changes in Protein Expression of Renal Drug Transporters and Drug-Metabolizing Enzymes in Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease Patients.
**Authors:** Tillmann AC, Peters DJM, Rostami-Hodjegan A, Wilson P, Norman J, Barber J, Al-Majdoub ZM
**Journal:** Clin Pharmacol Ther (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cpt.3715](https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.3715)

## Content

1. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2025 Sep;118(3):682-692. doi: 10.1002/cpt.3715. Epub 2025
 May 15.

Changes in Protein Expression of Renal Drug Transporters and Drug-Metabolizing 
Enzymes in Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease Patients.

Tillmann AC(1), Peters DJM(2), Rostami-Hodjegan A(1)(3), Wilson P(4)(5), Norman 
J(4)(5), Barber J(1), Al-Majdoub ZM(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
Netherlands.
(3)Certara Predictive Technologies (CPT), Sheffield, UK.
(4)UCL Centre for Kidney and Bladder Health, University College London (UCL) 
Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(5)PKD Charity UK, London, UK.

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease is the most prevalent inherited 
kidney disease and leads to bilateral kidney enlargement and progressive loss of 
renal function, often over decades. Comorbidities include hypertension, flank 
pain, and bacterial infections. The condition often necessitates prolonged 
multidrug therapy. Given the kidneys' critical role in drug excretion, the 
progressive functional impairment in the disease can lead to complications such 
as drug overdosing and unexpected levels of drug-drug interactions. Studies of 
drug-metabolizing enzyme and transporter expression in this patient group remain 
scarce. We conducted comprehensive global liquid chromatography-tandem mass 
spectrometry proteomic analyses of microsomal and cytosolic fractions from 
early-stage (chronic kidney disease stage: 13, n = 16) and end-stage autosomal 
dominant polycystic kidney disease patients (chronic kidney disease stage: 5, 
n = 14), comparing them with age-matched healthy controls (n = 11). In the 
early-stage ADPKD samples, most drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters 
did not differ significantly from the healthy controls. Exceptions were EPHX2 
and SULT1C2 in the cytosolic fraction, which showed a more than 2-fold decrease 
in abundance (P < 0.05). In contrast, the end-stage ADPKD kidney samples showed 
a decrease in the abundance of most measured proteins. Several drug-metabolizing 
enzymes, including CYP4F2, UGT1A6, UGT1A9, and UGT2B7, exhibited statistically 
significant reductions (P < 0.05). Among the drug transporters, OAT1, OAT3, and 
OCT2 were below the limit of quantification in most ES-ADPKD samples. MDR1 was 
the only efflux drug transporter consistently measured, with an average 
abundance of 1.24 pmol/mg microsomal protein across all samples.

© 2025 The Author(s). Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.3715
PMCID: PMC12355022
PMID: 40371605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Amin Rostami‐Hodjegan is a part‐time employee of 
Certara Inc, a provider of biosimulation solutions for pharmaceutical companies. 
All other authors declared no competing interests for this work.