---
reference_id: "PMID:24299452"
title: HIBCH mutations can cause Leigh-like disease with combined deficiency of multiple mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes and pyruvate dehydrogenase.
authors:
- Ferdinandusse S
- Waterham HR
- Heales SJ
- Brown GK
- Hargreaves IP
- Taanman JW
- Gunny R
- Abulhoul L
- Wanders RJ
- Clayton PT
- Leonard JV
- Rahman S
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-188
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Ketone Oxidoreductases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Leigh Disease/enzymology, genetics"
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/enzymology, genetics"
- Mutation
- Siblings
- Thiolester Hydrolases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HIBCH mutations can cause Leigh-like disease with combined deficiency of multiple mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes and pyruvate dehydrogenase.
**Authors:** Ferdinandusse S, Waterham HR, Heales SJ, Brown GK, Hargreaves IP, Taanman JW, Gunny R, Abulhoul L, Wanders RJ, Clayton PT, Leonard JV, Rahman S
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-8-188](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-8-188)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Dec 4;8:188. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-188.

HIBCH mutations can cause Leigh-like disease with combined deficiency of 
multiple mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes and pyruvate dehydrogenase.

Ferdinandusse S, Waterham HR, Heales SJ, Brown GK, Hargreaves IP, Taanman JW, 
Gunny R, Abulhoul L, Wanders RJ, Clayton PT, Leonard JV, Rahman S(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Unit, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK. 
shamima.rahman@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Deficiency of 3-hydroxy-isobutyryl-CoA hydrolase (HIBCH) caused by 
HIBCH mutations is a rare cerebral organic aciduria caused by disturbance of 
valine catabolism. Multiple mitochondrial respiratory chain (RC) enzyme 
deficiencies can arise from a number of mechanisms, including defective 
maintenance or expression of mitochondrial DNA. Impaired biosynthesis of 
iron-sulphur clusters and lipoic acid can lead to pyruvate dehydrogenase complex 
(PDHc) deficiency in addition to multiple RC deficiencies, known as the multiple 
mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome.
METHODS: Two brothers born to distantly related Pakistani parents presenting in 
early infancy with a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, associated with 
basal ganglia changes on brain magnetic resonance imaging, were investigated for 
suspected Leigh-like mitochondrial disease. The index case had deficiencies of 
multiple RC enzymes and PDHc in skeletal muscle and fibroblasts respectively, 
but these were normal in his younger brother. The observation of persistently 
elevated hydroxy-C4-carnitine levels in the younger brother led to suspicion of 
HIBCH deficiency, which was investigated by biochemical assay in cultured skin 
fibroblasts and molecular genetic analysis.
RESULTS: Specific spectrophotometric enzyme assay revealed HIBCH activity to be 
below detectable limits in cultured skin fibroblasts from both brothers. Direct 
Sanger sequence analysis demonstrated a novel homozygous pathogenic missense 
mutation c.950G <A; p.Gly317Glu in the HIBCH gene, which segregated with 
infantile-onset neurodegeneration within the family.
CONCLUSIONS: HIBCH deficiency, a disorder of valine catabolism, is a novel cause 
of the multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome, and should be considered in 
the differential diagnosis of patients presenting with multiple RC deficiencies 
and/or pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-188
PMCID: PMC4222069
PMID: 24299452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]