---
reference_id: "PMID:25703706"
title: Arsenic-mediated nephrotoxicity.
authors:
- Robles-Osorio ML
- Sabath-Silva E
- Sabath E
journal: Ren Fail
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2015.1013419
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic-mediated nephrotoxicity.
**Authors:** Robles-Osorio ML, Sabath-Silva E, Sabath E
**Journal:** Ren Fail (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3109/0886022X.2015.1013419](https://doi.org/10.3109/0886022X.2015.1013419)

## Content

1. Ren Fail. 2015 May;37(4):542-7. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2015.1013419. Epub 2015 
Feb 23.

Arsenic-mediated nephrotoxicity.

Robles-Osorio ML(1), Sabath-Silva E, Sabath E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Natural Sciences, Universidad Autónoma de Querétaro , Querétaro 
, Mexico .

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is an important global health problem that affects 
8-15% of the population according to epidemiological studies done in different 
countries. Essential to prevention is the knowledge of the environmental factors 
associated with this disease, and heavy metals such as lead and cadmium are 
clearly associated with kidney injury and CKD progression. Arsenic is one of the 
most abundant contaminants in water and soil, and many epidemiological studies 
have found an association between arsenic and type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension and cancer; however, there is a scarcity of epidemiological studies 
about its association with kidney disease, and the evidence linking urinary 
arsenic excretion with CKD, higher urinary excretion of low molecular proteins, 
albuminuria or other markers of renal in injury is still limited, and more 
studies are necessary to characterize the role of arsenic on renal injury and 
CKD progression. Global efforts to reduce arsenic exposure remain important and 
research is also needed to determine whether specific therapies are beneficial 
in susceptible populations.

DOI: 10.3109/0886022X.2015.1013419
PMID: 25703706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]