---
reference_id: "PMID:20666700"
title: Treatment options for paediatric diabetes.
authors:
- Verrotti A
- Chiuri RM
- Blasetti A
- Mohn A
- Chiarelli F
journal: Expert Opin Pharmacother
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1517/14656566.2010.506479
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment options for paediatric diabetes.
**Authors:** Verrotti A, Chiuri RM, Blasetti A, Mohn A, Chiarelli F
**Journal:** Expert Opin Pharmacother (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1517/14656566.2010.506479](https://doi.org/10.1517/14656566.2010.506479)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010 Oct;11(15):2483-95. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.2010.506479.

Treatment options for paediatric diabetes.

Verrotti A(1), Chiuri RM, Blasetti A, Mohn A, Chiarelli F.

Author information:
(1)University of Chieti, Department of Pediatrics, Italy.

IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: Diabetes mellitus is the most common endocrine disease 
in childhood. The global incidence of diabetes emphasizes the health, social and 
financial magnitude of this disease and the importance of optimizing disease 
management and prevention.
AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: This article reviews the treatments options for 
type 1 and 2 diabetes in children, focusing on insulin regimens and new 
alternative therapies.
WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: The treatment goals for children with diabetes 
mellitus are to achieve normal development with prevention of complications. 
Insulin is the primary medication in the treatment of type 1 diabetes. New 
therapeutic options and prevention strategies (cellular therapies, 
immunomodulation and vaccination) aim to preserve residual beta-cell function. 
There are limited data about the effectiveness and safety of treatment 
strategies for type 2 diabetes. Many oral agents are approved only for use in 
adults and have not been yet studied in children.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE: Therapy regimens should be adapted to the lifestyle of 
individual patients to achieve optimal blood glucose control. The replacement of 
beta-cells, preservation of the residual beta-cell function and investigation of 
additional oral treatment options, present a hope for a cure.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2010.506479
PMID: 20666700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]