---
reference_id: "PMID:33911236"
title: Epithelial-immune cell interplay in primary Sjögren syndrome salivary gland pathogenesis.
authors:
- Verstappen GM
- Pringle S
- Bootsma H
- Kroese FGM
journal: Nat Rev Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41584-021-00605-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epithelial-immune cell interplay in primary Sjögren syndrome salivary gland pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Verstappen GM, Pringle S, Bootsma H, Kroese FGM
**Journal:** Nat Rev Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41584-021-00605-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-021-00605-2)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2021 Jun;17(6):333-348. doi: 10.1038/s41584-021-00605-2.
Epub  2021 Apr 28.

Epithelial-immune cell interplay in primary Sjögren syndrome salivary gland 
pathogenesis.

Verstappen GM(#)(1), Pringle S(#)(1), Bootsma H(2), Kroese FGM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. h.bootsma@umcg.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

In primary Sjögren syndrome (pSS), the function of the salivary glands is often 
considerably reduced. Multiple innate immune pathways are likely dysregulated in 
the salivary gland epithelium in pSS, including the nuclear factor-κB pathway, 
the inflammasome and interferon signalling. The ductal cells of the salivary 
gland in pSS are characteristically surrounded by a CD4+ T cell-rich and B 
cell-rich infiltrate, implying a degree of communication between epithelial 
cells and immune cells. B cell infiltrates within the ducts can initiate the 
development of lymphoepithelial lesions, including basal ductal cell 
hyperplasia. Vice versa, the epithelium provides chronic activation signals to 
the glandular B cell fraction. This continuous stimulation might ultimately 
drive the development of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. This Review 
discusses changes in the cells of the salivary gland epithelium in pSS 
(including acinar, ductal and progenitor cells), and the proposed interplay of 
these cells with environmental stimuli and the immune system. Current 
therapeutic options are insufficient to address both lymphocytic infiltration 
and salivary gland dysfunction. Successful rescue of salivary gland function in 
pSS will probably demand a multimodal therapeutic approach and an appreciation 
of the complicity of the salivary gland epithelium in the development of pSS.

DOI: 10.1038/s41584-021-00605-2
PMCID: PMC8081003
PMID: 33911236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.