---
reference_id: "PMID:30576498"
title: Total loss of GM3 synthase activity by a normally processed enzyme in a novel variant and in all ST3GAL5 variants reported to cause a distinct congenital disorder of glycosylation.
authors:
- Indellicato R
- Parini R
- Domenighini R
- Malagolini N
- Iascone M
- Gasperini S
- Masera N
- "dall'Olio F"
- Trinchera M
journal: Glycobiology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwy112
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Flow Cytometry
- "G(M3) Ganglioside/genetics, metabolism"
- Gangliosides/genetics
- Glycosylation
- HEK293 Cells
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Plasmids
- Sialyltransferases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Total loss of GM3 synthase activity by a normally processed enzyme in a novel variant and in all ST3GAL5 variants reported to cause a distinct congenital disorder of glycosylation.
**Authors:** Indellicato R, Parini R, Domenighini R, Malagolini N, Iascone M, Gasperini S, Masera N, dall'Olio F, Trinchera M
**Journal:** Glycobiology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/glycob/cwy112](https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cwy112)

## Content

1. Glycobiology. 2019 Mar 1;29(3):229-241. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwy112.

Total loss of GM3 synthase activity by a normally processed enzyme in a novel
variant and in all ST3GAL5 variants reported to cause a distinct congenital
disorder of glycosylation.

Indellicato R(1), Parini R(2)(3), Domenighini R(1), Malagolini N(4), Iascone
M(5), Gasperini S(2), Masera N(2), dall'Olio F(4), Trinchera M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, San Paolo Hospital, University of Milan, via
A. di Rudinì 8, Milano, Italy.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University Milano Bicocca, Fondazione MBBM, San
Gerardo Hospital, via Pergolesi 33, Monza, Italy.
(3)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (TIGET), San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, via Olgettina 60, Milano, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine (DIMES),
University of Bologna, via San Giacomo 14, Bologna, Italy.
(5)Laboratory of Genetics, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Piazza OMS 1, Bergamo,
Italy.
(6)Department of Medicine and Surgery (DMC), University of Insubria, via JH
Dunant 5, Varese, Italy.

ST3GAL5-CDG is a rare syndrome which is caused by variant GM3 synthases, the
enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of a-b-c-series gangliosides. Here we report
a novel homozygous ST3GAL5 variant, p.Gly342Ser, in a patient suffering from
failure to thrive, severe hearing, visual, motor, and cognitive impairment, and
respiratory chain dysfunction. A GM3 synthase assay towards the natural acceptor
substrate lactosylceramide was performed upon transfection in HEK-293T cells of
expression plasmids carrying wild type and mutated ST3GAL5 cDNAs. The assay
revealed a complete loss of enzyme activity. Identical results were obtained
with the other four ST3GAL5 variants which have been reported to be pathogenic.
HEK-293T clones permanently expressing HaloTag-ST3GAL5 carrying each of the five
variants were assessed by quantitative PCR, flow cytometry, western blotting and
confocal microscopy. The results indicated that transcription, translation,
stability and intracellular localization of the tagged protein were identical to
those of the wild type construct. Compared with the very mild phenotype of
st3gal5 KO mouse models, the results suggest that unknown mechanisms, in
addition to the lack of a-b-c-series gangliosides, contribute to the syndrome.
Direct enzyme assay upon transfection in model cells appears to be an effective
tool for characterizing variants of glycosyltransferases involved in
glycosphingolipid biosynthesis.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwy112
PMID: 30576498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
