---
reference_id: "PMID:26586601"
title: Treatment recommendations in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
authors:
- Polineni D
- Davis SD
- Dell SD
journal: Paediatr Respir Rev
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2015.10.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment recommendations in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Polineni D, Davis SD, Dell SD
**Journal:** Paediatr Respir Rev (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.prrv.2015.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prrv.2015.10.002)

## Content

1. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2016 Mar;18:39-45. doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2015.10.002. Epub 
2015 Oct 20.

Treatment recommendations in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.

Polineni D(1), Davis SD(2), Dell SD(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, Kansas.
(2)Section of Pediatric Pulmonology, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, Riley Hospital 
for Children at Indiana University Health, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(3)Child Health Evaluative Sciences, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic 
address: sharon.dell@sickkids.ca.

Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare heterogenic disorder leading to 
significant respiratory morbidity. Health-care providers who treat PCD must 
familiarize themselves with recommended treatment strategies. However, most of 
the treatments recommended in PCD have been extrapolated from cystic fibrosis 
(CF) and non-CF bronchiectasis literature. Mainstays of therapy are reviewed in 
detail, and should include at a minimum: regular airway clearance, routine 
microbiological surveillance, antibiotic treatment for pulmonary exacerbation, 
and health vaccinations. This review summarizes both medical and surgical 
pulmonary treatment considerations, as well as recommendations for the 
integration of non-pulmonary subspecialty care in the management of PCD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prrv.2015.10.002
PMID: 26586601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]