---
reference_id: "PMID:39490765"
title: "Bridging clinicopathologic features and genetics in follicular lymphoma: Towards enhanced diagnostic accuracy and subtype differentiation."
authors:
- Bosch-Schips J
- Parisi X
- Climent F
- Vega F
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2024.105676
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bridging clinicopathologic features and genetics in follicular lymphoma: Towards enhanced diagnostic accuracy and subtype differentiation.
**Authors:** Bosch-Schips J, Parisi X, Climent F, Vega F
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2024.105676](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2024.105676)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2025 Feb;156:105676. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2024.105676. Epub 2024
Oct 25.

Bridging clinicopathologic features and genetics in follicular lymphoma: Towards
enhanced diagnostic accuracy and subtype differentiation.

Bosch-Schips J(1), Parisi X(2), Climent F(3), Vega F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, University of
Barcelona, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Hematopathology, Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, University of
Barcelona, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
fcliment@bellvitgehospital.cat.
(4)Hematopathology, Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
Electronic address: fvega@mdanderson.org.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a neoplasm that originates from germinal center B
cells and typically forms at least a partial follicular pattern. Approximately
85% of FL cases harbor the t(14;18)(q32;q21)/IGH::BCL2 which leads to the
overexpression of BCL2. These cases are referred to as classic FL in the current
World Health Organization classification [1]. These neoplasms often exhibit
hallmark epigenetic deregulation due to recurrent mutations in genes such as
KMT2D, CREBBP, and EZH2, with KMT2D and CREBBP considered founding events in FL
lymphomagenesis. In contrast, about 15% of FL cases are negative for the
t(14;18), which could present diagnostic challenges. These cases may lack the
typical genetic markers and require careful pathological and molecular analysis
for accurate diagnosis. This review aims to provide an up-to-date pathology
resource on FL, focusing on the pathological and molecular characteristics of
these neoplasms. We will detail the diagnostic criteria for FL and emphasize the
importance of genetic and mutational analyses in accurately characterizing and
distinguishing FL subtypes. Furthermore, we will propose methodologies and best
practices for the diagnostic work-up of FL to enhance diagnostic accuracy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2024.105676
PMID: 39490765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest FV receives
research funding from Allogene, Caribou and Geron Corporation. No other
conflicts of interest are present.
