---
reference_id: "PMID:35791150"
title: "Retinitis pigmentosa in Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl syndrome in India: Electronic medical records driven big data analytics: Report II."
authors:
- Parameswarappa DC
- Das AV
- Thakur PS
- Takkar B
- Multani PK
- Padhy SK
- Doctor MB
- Agarwal K
- Jalali S
journal: Indian J Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_2268_21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinitis pigmentosa in Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl syndrome in India: Electronic medical records driven big data analytics: Report II.
**Authors:** Parameswarappa DC, Das AV, Thakur PS, Takkar B, Multani PK, Padhy SK, Doctor MB, Agarwal K, Jalali S
**Journal:** Indian J Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4103/ijo.IJO_2268_21](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijo.IJO_2268_21)

## Content

1. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2022 Jul;70(7):2533-2538. doi: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_2268_21.

Retinitis pigmentosa in Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl syndrome in India: Electronic 
medical records driven big data analytics: Report II.

Parameswarappa DC(1), Das AV(2), Thakur PS(3), Takkar B(4), Multani PK(5), Padhy 
SK(6), Doctor MB(7), Agarwal K(1), Jalali S(1).

Author information:
(1)Srimati Kanuri Santhamma Center for Vitreo - Retinal Diseases, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India.
(2)Department of eyeSmart EMR and AEye; Standard Charted Eye Care Education, L V 
Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(3)Srimati Kanuri Santhamma Center for Vitreo - Retinal Diseases; Standard 
Charted Eye Care Education, L V Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana, 
India.
(4)Srimati Kanuri Santhamma Center for Vitreo - Retinal Diseases; Indian Health 
Outcomes, Public Health and Economics Research Center, L V Prasad Eye Institute, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(5)Retina and Uveitis Department, GMR Varalakshmi Campus, L V Prasad Eye 
Institute, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(6)Vitreoretina and Uveitis Services, Mithu Tulasi Chanrai Campus, L V Prasad 
Eye Institute, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.
(7)Department of Standard Charted Eye Care Education, L V Prasad Eye Institute, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

Comment in
    Indian J Ophthalmol. 2022 Jul;70(7):2539. doi: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_398_22.

PURPOSE: To describe the clinical presentation and demographic distribution of 
retinitis pigmentosa (RP) in Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl (LMBB) syndrome 
patients.
METHODS: This is a cross-sectional observational hospital-based study wherein 
244 patients with RP in LMBB syndrome presenting to our hospital network between 
March 2012 and October 2020 were included. An electronic medical record database 
was used for data retrieval.
RESULTS: There were 244 patients in total, with a hospital-based prevalence rate 
of 0.010% or 1000/100,000 population. The mean and median age of patients was 
15.22 ± 7.56 and 14 (IQR: 10-18.5) years, respectively, with the majority being 
in the age group of 11-20 years (133/244 patients; 54.50%). Males were more 
commonly affected (164 patients; 67.21%), and the majority (182 patients; 
74.59%) were students. All 244 patients (100%) complained of defective central 
vision at presentation. More than one-fourth of the patients had severe visual 
impairment to blindness at presentation. Prominent retinal feature at 
presentation was diffuse or widespread retinal pigment epithelial degeneration 
in all patients.
CONCLUSION: Patients with RP in LMBB syndrome present mainly in the first to 
second decade of life with severe visual acuity impairment to blindness early in 
life. It is important to rule out LMBB syndrome in early-onset RP with central 
visual acuity impairment. On the contrary, all patients diagnosed or suspected 
with LMBB syndrome systemic features at physician clinic should also be referred 
for ophthalmic evaluation, low vision assessment, rehabilitation, and vice 
versa.

DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_2268_21
PMCID: PMC9426086
PMID: 35791150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None