---
reference_id: "PMID:38606375"
title: "Malignant atrophic papulosis treated with eculizumab and hirudin: a fatal case report and literature review."
authors:
- Yu L
- Wang Y
- Tang X
- Zhao X
- Song Z
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1347587
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant atrophic papulosis treated with eculizumab and hirudin: a fatal case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Yu L, Wang Y, Tang X, Zhao X, Song Z
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2024.1347587](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2024.1347587)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2024 Mar 28;11:1347587. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1347587. 
eCollection 2024.

Malignant atrophic papulosis treated with eculizumab and hirudin: a fatal case 
report and literature review.

Yu L(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Tang X(1)(2), Zhao X(1)(2), Song Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan 
Province, Kunming, China.
(2)The Affiliated Hospital of Kunming University of Science and Technology, 
Kunming, Yunnan, China.

BACKGROUND: Malignant atrophic papulosis (MAP) is a rare obliterative 
vasculopathy whose etiology and pathophysiological mechanisms remain unknown, 
and the treatment is still empirical. It can involve multiple systems, 
especially the gastrointestinal tract and central nervous system, and has a poor 
prognosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 20-year-old Chinese male appeared to have Widespread 
atrophic papules and plaques, intermittent abdominal pain, recurrent bowel 
perforation, and psoas abscess. The clinical diagnosis of MAP was supported by 
skin biopsy. He was then treated with anticoagulants, antiplatelets, 
glucocorticoids, and immunosuppressants and started on eculizumab and hirudin 
after the first surgical interventions. Despite the aggressive 
immunosuppression, anticoagulant, antiplatelet, humanized monoclonal antibodies, 
and surgery therapy, he died five months after presentation.
CONCLUSIONS: MAP is an extremely rare obliterative vasculopathy manifesting as 
benign cutaneous involvement or potentially malignant systemic involvement. MAP 
patients who exhibit any abdominal symptoms should undergo laparoscopy and 
evaluation in time and start on eculizumab and treprostinil as soon as possible, 
as the combination of them is presently the most effective treatment option for 
gastrointestinal MAP and hopefully reduce mortality.

© 2024 Yu, Wang, Tang, Zhao and Song.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1347587
PMCID: PMC11007069
PMID: 38606375

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.