---
reference_id: "PMID:33993277"
title: "Mortality Risk in Patients With Adrenal Insufficiency Using Prednisolone or Hydrocortisone: A Retrospective Cohort Study."
authors:
- Ngaosuwan K
- Johnston DG
- Godsland IF
- Cox J
- Majeed A
- Quint JK
- Oliver N
- Robinson S
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgab347
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mortality Risk in Patients With Adrenal Insufficiency Using Prednisolone or Hydrocortisone: A Retrospective Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Ngaosuwan K, Johnston DG, Godsland IF, Cox J, Majeed A, Quint JK, Oliver N, Robinson S
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgab347](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgab347)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2021 Jul 13;106(8):2242-2251. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgab347.

Mortality Risk in Patients With Adrenal Insufficiency Using Prednisolone or 
Hydrocortisone: A Retrospective Cohort Study.

Ngaosuwan K(1)(2), Johnston DG(1), Godsland IF(1), Cox J(3), Majeed A(4), Quint 
JK(5), Oliver N(1), Robinson S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, Faculty of Medicine, 
Imperial College, London, UK.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Public Health, HRH Princess Chulabhorn College of 
Medical Science, Chulabhorn Royal Academy, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Metabolic Medicine, St. Mary's Hospital, Imperial College; NHS 
trust, London,UK.
(4)School of Public Health, Imperial College, London, UK.
(5)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, UK.

CONTEXT: Prednisolone has been recommended rather than hydrocortisone for 
glucocorticoid replacement in adrenal insufficiency due its longer duration of 
action and lower cost.
OBJECTIVE: To determine mortality rates with prednisolone versus hydrocortisone.
METHODS: In this observational study, we used data extracted from a UK primary 
care database (Clinical Practice Research Datalink) to measure the relative 
mortality of patients with primary and secondary adrenal insufficiency, who were 
treated with either prednisolone or hydrocortisone, and control individuals who 
were individually matched for age, sex, period, and place of follow-up.
RESULTS: As expected, mortality in adrenal insufficiency irrespective of cause 
was increased, based on 5478 patients (4228 on hydrocortisone; 1250 on 
prednisolone) and 54 314 controls (41 934 and 12 380, respectively). Overall, 
the adjusted hazard ratio (HR) was similar with the 2 treatments (prednisolone, 
1.76 [95% CI, 1.54-2.01] vs hydrocortisone 1.69 [1.57-1.82]; P = 0.65). This was 
also the case for secondary adrenal insufficiency. In primary disease (1405 on 
hydrocortisone vs 137 on prednisolone; 13 965 and 1347 controls, respectively), 
prednisolone users were older, more likely to have another autoimmune disease 
and malignancy, and less likely to have mineralocorticoid replacement. 
Nevertheless, after adjustment, the HR for prednisolone-treated patients 
remained higher than for those taking hydrocortisone (2.92 [2.19-3.91] vs 1.90 
[1.66-2.16]; P = 0.0020).
CONCLUSION: In primary but not in secondary adrenal insufficiency, mortality was 
higher with prednisolone. The study was large, but the number of 
prednisolone-treated patients was small, and they had greater risk factors. 
Nonetheless, the increased mortality associated with prednisolone persisted 
despite statistical adjustment. Further evidence is needed regarding the 
long-term safety of prednisolone as routine replacement.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgab347
PMID: 33993277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]