---
reference_id: "PMID:21332725"
title: Symptomatic parvovirus B19 infection caused by blood component transfusion.
authors:
- Satake M
- Hoshi Y
- Taira R
- Momose SY
- Hino S
- Tadokoro K
journal: Transfusion
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2010.03047.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Symptomatic parvovirus B19 infection caused by blood component transfusion.
**Authors:** Satake M, Hoshi Y, Taira R, Momose SY, Hino S, Tadokoro K
**Journal:** Transfusion (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1537-2995.2010.03047.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1537-2995.2010.03047.x)

## Content

1. Transfusion. 2011 Sep;51(9):1887-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2010.03047.x.
Epub  2011 Feb 18.

Symptomatic parvovirus B19 infection caused by blood component transfusion.

Satake M(1), Hoshi Y, Taira R, Momose SY, Hino S, Tadokoro K.

Author information:
(1)Japanese Red Cross Central Blood Institute, Tokyo, Japan. 
ma-satake@tokyo.bc.jrc.or.jp

Comment in
    Transfusion. 2011 Sep;51(9):1878-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2011.03274.x.

BACKGROUND: Although a risk of transfusion-transmitted human parvovirus B19V 
(TT-B19V) infection has been a concern, there have been very few reports of 
clinically relevant TT-B19V caused by the transfusion of a B19V-containing blood 
component. It has therefore been a matter of debate whether a universal B19V 
screening with an appropriate sensitivity is required.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Through the Japanese Red Cross hemovigilance system, 
clinical reports on possible TT-B19V were collected from 1999 to 2008, during 
which B19V donor screening (sensitivity, 10(10) IU/mL) was conducted and 
repository blood samples from donors were available.
RESULTS: Eight patients with TT-B19V caused by component transfusion have been 
identified. Four patients developed sustained anemia and pure red blood cell 
(RBC) aplasia and one patient developed pancytopenia. The underlying diseases in 
these five patients were either hematologic malignancy or hemolytic diseases. 
The viral loads of the responsible components for these cases ranged from 10(3) 
to 10(8) IU/mL. Two patients who underwent surgical treatment without any 
hematologic disorder exhibited only moderate symptoms. The B19V DNA sequence 
identity between a patient and the linked blood donor was confirmed in five of 
the eight patients. All of the components responsible for the eight cases were 
positive for anti-B19V immunoglobulin (Ig)M.
CONCLUSION: Vulnerability to serious B19V-related hematologic disorders depended 
on the patient's underlying disease state of an enhanced erythropoiesis, not on 
the viral load of the component transfused. To prevent clinically relevant 
TT-B19V, a strategy is suggested in which patients at risk of acquiring RBC 
aplasia or pancytopenia are targeted.

© 2011 American Association of Blood Banks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2010.03047.x
PMID: 21332725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]