---
reference_id: "PMID:36669140"
title: "Randomized Phase III Trial of Ganitumab With Interval-Compressed Chemotherapy for Patients With Newly Diagnosed Metastatic Ewing Sarcoma: A Report From the Children's Oncology Group."
authors:
- DuBois SG
- Krailo MD
- Glade-Bender J
- Buxton A
- Laack N
- Randall RL
- Chen HX
- Seibel NL
- Boron M
- Terezakis S
- Hill-Kayser C
- Hayes A
- Reid JM
- Teot L
- Rakheja D
- Womer R
- Arndt C
- Lessnick SL
- Crompton BD
- Kolb EA
- Daldrup-Link H
- Eutsler E
- Reed DR
- Janeway KA
- Gorlick RG
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01815
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/drug therapy"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy"
- Bone Neoplasms/pathology
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/therapeutic use"
- Cyclophosphamide/adverse effects
- Etoposide/therapeutic use
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Doxorubicin/adverse effects
- Vincristine/adverse effects
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/adverse effects"
- Disease-Free Survival
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized Phase III Trial of Ganitumab With Interval-Compressed Chemotherapy for Patients With Newly Diagnosed Metastatic Ewing Sarcoma: A Report From the Children's Oncology Group.
**Authors:** DuBois SG, Krailo MD, Glade-Bender J, Buxton A, Laack N, Randall RL, Chen HX, Seibel NL, Boron M, Terezakis S, Hill-Kayser C, Hayes A, Reid JM, Teot L, Rakheja D, Womer R, Arndt C, Lessnick SL, Crompton BD, Kolb EA, Daldrup-Link H, Eutsler E, Reed DR, Janeway KA, Gorlick RG
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.22.01815](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.22.01815)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2023 Apr 10;41(11):2098-2107. doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01815. Epub
2023  Jan 20.

Randomized Phase III Trial of Ganitumab With Interval-Compressed Chemotherapy
for Patients With Newly Diagnosed Metastatic Ewing Sarcoma: A Report From the
Children's Oncology Group.

DuBois SG(1), Krailo MD(2), Glade-Bender J(3), Buxton A(4), Laack N(5), Randall
RL(6), Chen HX(7), Seibel NL(7), Boron M(7), Terezakis S(8), Hill-Kayser C(9),
Hayes A(10), Reid JM(11), Teot L(12), Rakheja D(13), Womer R(14), Arndt C(15),
Lessnick SL(16)(17), Crompton BD(1)(18), Kolb EA(19), Daldrup-Link H(19),
Eutsler E(20), Reed DR(21), Janeway KA(1), Gorlick RG(22).

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY.
(4)Children's Oncology Group Statistics and Data Center, Monrovia, CA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(6)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, UC Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, CA.
(7)Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, MN.
(9)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School
of Medicine and Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.
(10)Department of Surgery, Howard University College of Medicine, Washington,
DC.
(11)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(12)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA.
(13)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine and Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.
(15)Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(16)Center for Childhood Cancer and Blood Diseases, Abigail Wexner Research
Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH.
(17)The Division of Pediatric Heme/Onc/BMT, The Ohio State University College of
Medicine, Columbus, OH.
(18)Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA.
(19)Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto,
CA.
(20)Department of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
MO.
(21)Department of Individualized Cancer Management, Moffitt Cancer Center,
Tampa, FL.
(22)Department of Pediatrics, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

Comment in
    Transl Pediatr. 2023 Oct 30;12(10):1916-1919. doi: 10.21037/tp-23-388.

PURPOSE: Monoclonal antibodies directed against insulin-like growth factor-1
receptor (IGF-1R) have shown activity in patients with relapsed Ewing sarcoma.
The primary objective of Children's Oncology Group trial AEWS1221 was to
determine if the addition of the IGF-1R monoclonal antibody ganitumab to
interval-compressed chemotherapy improves event-free survival (EFS) in patients
with newly diagnosed metastatic Ewing sarcoma.
METHODS: Patients were randomly assigned 1:1 at enrollment to standard arm
(interval-compressed vincristine/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide alternating once
every 2 weeks with ifosfamide/etoposide = VDC/IE) or to experimental arm (VDC/IE
with ganitumab at cycle starts and as monotherapy once every 3 weeks for 6
months after conventional therapy). A planned sample size of 300 patients was
projected to provide 81% power to detect an EFS hazard ratio of 0.67 or smaller
for the experimental arm compared with the standard arm with a one-sided α of
.025.
RESULTS: Two hundred ninety-eight eligible patients enrolled (148 in standard
arm; 150 in experimental arm). The 3-year EFS estimates were 37.4% (95% CI, 29.3
to 45.5) for the standard arm and 39.1% (95% CI, 31.3 to 46.7) for the
experimental arm (stratified EFS-event hazard ratio for experimental arm 1.00;
95% CI, 0.76 to 1.33; 1-sided, P = .50). The 3-year overall survival estimates
were 59.5% (95% CI, 50.8 to 67.3) for the standard arm and 56.7% (95% CI, 48.3
to 64.2) for the experimental arm. More cases of pneumonitis after radiation
involving thoracic fields and nominally higher rates of febrile neutropenia and
ALT elevation were reported on the experimental arm.
CONCLUSION: Ganitumab added to interval-compressed chemotherapy did not
significantly reduce the risk of EFS event in patients with newly diagnosed
metastatic Ewing sarcoma, with outcomes similar to prior trials without IGF-1R
inhibition or interval compression. The addition of ganitumab may be associated
with increased toxicity.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.22.01815
PMCID: PMC10082251
PMID: 36669140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or
ascopubs.org/jco/authors/author-center. Open Payments is a public database
containing information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed
physicians (Open Payments). Richard G. Gorlick Research Funding: Eisai (Inst) No
other potential conflicts of interest were reported.
