---
reference_id: "PMID:29305412"
title: "Desmopressin in moderate hemophilia A patients: a treatment worth considering."
authors:
- Loomans JI
- Kruip MJHA
- Carcao M
- Jackson S
- van Velzen AS
- Peters M
- Santagostino E
- Platokouki H
- Beckers E
- Voorberg J
- van der Bom JG
- Fijnvandraat K
- RISE consortium
journal: Haematologica
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2017.180059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Desmopressin in moderate hemophilia A patients: a treatment worth considering.
**Authors:** Loomans JI, Kruip MJHA, Carcao M, Jackson S, van Velzen AS, Peters M, Santagostino E, Platokouki H, Beckers E, Voorberg J, van der Bom JG, Fijnvandraat K, RISE consortium
**Journal:** Haematologica (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2017.180059](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2017.180059)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2018 Mar;103(3):550-557. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2017.180059.
Epub  2018 Jan 5.

Desmopressin in moderate hemophilia A patients: a treatment worth considering.

Loomans JI(1), Kruip MJHA(2), Carcao M(3), Jackson S(4), van Velzen AS(1), 
Peters M(1), Santagostino E(5), Platokouki H(6), Beckers E(7), Voorberg J(8), 
van der Bom JG(9)(10), Fijnvandraat K(11)(8); RISE consortium.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Immunology and Infectious diseases, Emma 
Children's Hospital, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Division of Haematology/Oncology, Department of Paediatrics and Child Health 
Evaluative Sciences, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, St. Paul's Hospital and 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(5)A. Bianchi Bonomi Hemophilia and Thrombosis Center, IRCCS Ca' Granda 
Foundation, Maggiore Hospital Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(6)Aghia Sofia Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(7)Maastricht University Medical Centre, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)Leiden University Hospital, the Netherlands.
(10)Sanquin Research, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Immunology and Infectious diseases, Emma 
Children's Hospital, Amsterdam, the Netherlands c.j.fijnvandraat@amc.uva.nl.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2018 Mar;103(3):379-381. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2018.187567.

Desmopressin increases endogenous factor VIII levels in hemophilia A. Large 
inter-individual variation in the response to desmopressin is observed. Patients 
with a lower baseline factor VIII activity tend to show a reduced response, 
therefore, desmopressin is less frequently used in moderate hemophilia A 
patients (baseline factor VIII activity 1-5 international units/deciliter), even 
though factor VIII levels may rise substantially in some of them. We aim to 
describe the response to desmopressin in moderate hemophilia A patients and to 
identify predictors. We selected data on 169 patients with moderate hemophilia 
from the multicenter Response to DDAVP In non-severe hemophilia A patients: in 
Search for dEterminants (RISE) cohort study. Adequate response to desmopressin 
was defined as a peak factor VIII level ≥ 30, and excellent response as ≥ 50 
international units/deciliter after desmopressin administration. We used 
univariate and multiple linear regression techniques to analyze predictors of 
the peak factor VIII level. Response was considered adequate in 68 patients 
(40%), of whom 25 showed excellent response (15%). Intravenous administration, 
age, pre-desmopressin factor VIII activity and von Willebrand factor antigen, 
peak von Willebrand factor activity and desmopressin-induced rise in von 
Willebrand factor antigen were significant predictors of peak factor VIII level 
and explained 65% of the inter-individual variation. In 40% of moderate 
hemophilia A patients, desmopressin response was adequate, thus it is important 
not to with-hold this group of patients from desmopressin responsiveness. Among 
the six predictors that we identified for desmopressin-induced factor VIII rise, 
factor VIII activity and desmopressin-induced rise in von Willebrand factor 
antigen had the strongest effect.

Copyright© 2018 Ferrata Storti Foundation.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2017.180059
PMCID: PMC5830393
PMID: 29305412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]