---
reference_id: "PMID:40434762"
title: "Uveitis in Adults: A Review."
authors:
- Maghsoudlou P
- Epps SJ
- Guly CM
- Dick AD
journal: JAMA
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2025.4358
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Uveitis/classification, diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Remission Induction/methods
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage"
- Choroid
- Retina
- "Uvea/drug effects, immunology, microbiology, pathology"
- "Mycophenolic Acid/administration & dosage"
- "Ophthalmic Solutions/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Intravitreal Injections
- "Biological Products/administration & dosage"
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uveitis in Adults: A Review.
**Authors:** Maghsoudlou P, Epps SJ, Guly CM, Dick AD
**Journal:** JAMA (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2025.4358](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2025.4358)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2025 Aug 5;334(5):419-434. doi: 10.1001/jama.2025.4358.

Uveitis in Adults: A Review.

Maghsoudlou P(1)(2), Epps SJ(2), Guly CM(2), Dick AD(1)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Ophthalmology, Translational Health Sciences, Bristol 
Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(2)Regional Ocular Inflammatory Service, Bristol Eye Hospital, Bristol, United 
Kingdom.
(3)School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, 
United Kingdom.
(4)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom.
(5)National Institute for Health and Care Research Moorfields Biomedical 
Research Centre, London, United Kingdom.

IMPORTANCE: Uveitis is characterized by inflammation of the uvea-the middle 
portion of the eye composed of the iris, ciliary body, and choroid-causing eye 
redness, pain, photophobia, floaters, and blurred vision. Untreated uveitis may 
cause cataracts, glaucoma, macular edema, retinal detachment, optic nerve 
damage, and vision loss.
OBSERVATIONS: Uveitis predominantly affects individuals aged 20 to 50 years. 
Anterior uveitis affects the iris and ciliary body (41%-60% of cases); 
intermediate uveitis affects the pars plana (attachment point of vitreous humor) 
and peripheral retina (9%-15%); posterior uveitis involves the choroid and/or 
retina (17%-23%); and panuveitis involves all uveal layers (7%-32%). Uveitis is 
classified as noninfectious or infectious, with toxoplasmosis, herpes, 
tuberculosis, and HIV comprising 11% to 21% of infectious cases in high-income 
countries and 50% in low- and middle-income countries. Incidence and prevalence 
of uveitis are influenced by genetic factors (eg, human leukocyte antigen-B27), 
environmental factors (eg, air pollution), and infection rates. In the US and 
Europe, 27% to 51% of uveitis cases are idiopathic, and 37% to 49% are 
associated with systemic disease, such as axial spondyloarthritis. Treatment 
goals are to induce and maintain remission while minimizing corticosteroid use 
to reduce corticosteroid-related adverse effects. Infectious uveitis requires 
systemic antimicrobial treatment. Active inflammatory disorders associated with 
uveitis should be treated by the appropriate specialist (eg, rheumatologist). 
Treatment for uveitis depends on subtype; anterior uveitis is treated with 
topical corticosteroids, and mild intermediate uveitis may be monitored without 
initial treatment. Patients with moderate to severe intermediate uveitis, 
posterior uveitis, and panuveitis are at high risk of sight-threatening 
complications and require systemic and/or intravitreal corticosteroids and 
immunosuppressive agents. For posterior uveitis, first-line therapy with 
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs such as methotrexate achieved remission of 
inflammation in 52.1% (95% CI, 38.6%-67.1%) of patients, and mycophenolate 
mofetil controlled inflammation in 70.9% (95% CI, 57.1%-83.5%). In patients who 
do not improve or worsen with first-line therapy, adalimumab extended time to 
treatment failure to 24 weeks vs 13 weeks with placebo and reduced frequency of 
treatment failure from 78.5% to 54.5% (P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Uveitis is characterized by inflammation of the uvea 
and primarily affects adults aged 20 to 50 years. For noninfectious anterior 
uveitis, corticosteroid eyedrops are first-line treatment. For posterior 
noninfectious uveitis, disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs are first-line 
therapy; biologics such as adalimumab are second-line treatment for patients 
with inflammation refractory to treatment. Uveitis caused by systemic infection 
should be treated with antimicrobials, and local or systemic steroids may be 
used depending on the severity of uveitis and the specific microorganism.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2025.4358
PMID: 40434762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]