---
reference_id: "PMID:37783300"
title: "Prenatal risk factors and postnatal cannabis exposure: Assessing dual models of schizophrenia-like rodents."
authors:
- Martín-Cuevas C
- Ramos-Herrero VD
- Crespo-Facorro B
- Sánchez-Hidalgo AC
journal: Neurosci Biobehav Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105409
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal risk factors and postnatal cannabis exposure: Assessing dual models of schizophrenia-like rodents.
**Authors:** Martín-Cuevas C, Ramos-Herrero VD, Crespo-Facorro B, Sánchez-Hidalgo AC
**Journal:** Neurosci Biobehav Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105409](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105409)

## Content

1. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2023 Nov;154:105409. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105409. Epub 2023 Sep 30.

Prenatal risk factors and postnatal cannabis exposure: Assessing dual models of 
schizophrenia-like rodents.

Martín-Cuevas C(1), Ramos-Herrero VD(2), Crespo-Facorro B(3), Sánchez-Hidalgo 
AC(4).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS)/University Hospital Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/University of Sevilla, Manuel Siurot AV, 41013 Seville, Spain; 
Spanish Network for Research in Mental Health (CIBERSAM, ISCIII), Monforte de 
Lemos AV, 3-5, 28029 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: cmartin21@us.es.
(2)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS)/University Hospital Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/University of Sevilla, Manuel Siurot AV, 41013 Seville, Spain. 
Electronic address: vramos-ibis@us.es.
(3)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS)/University Hospital Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/University of Sevilla, Manuel Siurot AV, 41013 Seville, Spain; 
Spanish Network for Research in Mental Health (CIBERSAM, ISCIII), Monforte de 
Lemos AV, 3-5, 28029 Madrid, Spain; Department of Psychiatry, School of 
Medicine, University of Sevilla, Manuel Siurot AV, 41013 Seville, Spain. 
Electronic address: benedicto.crespo@unican.es.
(4)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS)/University Hospital Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/University of Sevilla, Manuel Siurot AV, 41013 Seville, Spain; 
Spanish Network for Research in Mental Health (CIBERSAM, ISCIII), Monforte de 
Lemos AV, 3-5, 28029 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: asanchez36@us.es.

Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a multifactorial neurodevelopmental disorder caused by 
genetic and environmental alterations, especially during prenatal stages. On the 
other hand, cannabis consumption in adolescence has been also linked to an 
increased risk of developing SCZ. The combination of both hits has been proposed 
as the dual hit hypothesis of SCZ. We systematically reviewed prenatal 
environmental alterations and cannabis consumption during adolescence that are 
associated with an increased risk of SCZ, following the PRISMA model. The 
analysis focused on dual animal models where the first hit is prenatal 
environmental exposure and the second hit consists of postnatal cannabis 
exposure. The articles were evaluated by three independent reviewers based on 
inclusion criteria. We extracted the first author´s name, year, model species, 
sex and analysis. The articles reported on dual murine models and their effects 
on weight, behavior, genetics, electrophysiology and brain structure and 
function. We conclude that the defects caused by the dual hits depend on the sex 
of the model, as well as type of hits.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105409
PMID: 37783300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have influenced the work reported in this article.