---
reference_id: "PMID:32134616"
title: Danon Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Taylor MRG
- Adler ED
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Danon Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Taylor MRG, Adler ED

## Content

1. Danon Disease.

Taylor MRG(1), Adler ED(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2020 Mar 5 [updated 2024 May 23].

Author information:
(1)Adult Medical Genetics Program, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, Colorado
(2)Division of Cardiology, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
California

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Danon disease is a multisystem condition with
predominant involvement of the heart, skeletal muscles, and retina, with
overlying cognitive dysfunction. Males are typically more severely affected than
females. Males usually present with childhood onset concentric hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy that is progressive and often requires heart transplantation.
Rarely, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can evolve to resemble dilated
cardiomyopathy. Most affected males also have cardiac conduction abnormalities.
Skeletal muscle weakness may lead to delayed acquisition of motor milestones.
Learning disability and intellectual disability, most often in the mild range,
are common. Additionally, affected males can develop retinopathy with subsequent
visual impairment. The clinical features in females are broader and more
variable. Females are more likely to have dilated cardiomyopathy, with a smaller
proportion requiring heart transplantation compared to affected males. Cardiac
conduction abnormalities, skeletal muscle weakness, mild cognitive impairment,
and pigmentary retinopathy are variably seen in affected females.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Danon disease is established in a proband
(male or female) with suggestive findings and/or a hemizygous (in males) or a
heterozygous (in females) pathogenic variant in LAMP2 identified by molecular
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: While the age of onset and progression
of disease are typically later and slower in females, the management approach in
males and females is similar. Standard treatment guidelines for hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and heart failure; consideration of ablation therapy in those
with cardiac pre-excitation and arrhythmia; physical therapy for skeletal muscle
weakness; standard treatment for developmental delay / intellectual disability;
use of low vision aids for those with retinopathy. Surveillance:
Electrocardiography at least annually with echocardiography and cardiac MRI at
least every one to two years; ambulatory arrhythmia monitoring as needed based
on symptoms; annual assessment of strength and for neurologic changes;
monitoring of developmental progress, educational needs, and behavior at each
visit with formal developmental assessments every three to five years during
childhood; ophthalmology evaluation at least every three to five years.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Avoidance of dehydration or over-diuresis in
those with heart failure; in the presence of significant cardiac hypertrophy
with obstruction and/or symptomatic arrhythmia, consideration of instituting the
guidelines for physical exertion for individuals with sarcomeric hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify
the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk
relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible
those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and surveillance.
Pregnancy management: Management should be guided by the degree of overt disease
in the pregnant woman and per guidelines for pregnant women with hypertrophic or
dilated cardiomyopathy, depending on their condition.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Danon disease is inherited in an X-linked manner. If the
mother of the proband has a LAMP2 pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting
it in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who have a pathogenic variant in LAMP2 will
transmit the pathogenic variant to all of their daughters and none of their
sons. Males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; females who
inherit the pathogenic variant will be heterozygous and may have features of
Danon disease. Once the causative pathogenic variant has been identified in an
affected family member, prenatal testing and preimplantation genetic testing for
Danon disease for a pregnancy at increased risk are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 32134616
