---
reference_id: "PMID:29953972"
title: "Resistant Paediatric Somatotropinomas due to AIP Mutations: Role of Pegvisomant."
authors:
- Joshi K
- Daly AF
- Beckers A
- Zacharin M
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1159/000488856
keywords:
- "Acromegaly/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Adenoma/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Adolescent
- Child
- Female
- Growth Charts
- "Growth Hormone-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Human Growth Hormone/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resistant Paediatric Somatotropinomas due to AIP Mutations: Role of Pegvisomant.
**Authors:** Joshi K, Daly AF, Beckers A, Zacharin M
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000488856](https://doi.org/10.1159/000488856)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2018;90(3):196-202. doi: 10.1159/000488856. Epub 2018 Jun
28.

Resistant Paediatric Somatotropinomas due to AIP Mutations: Role of Pegvisomant.

Joshi K(1)(2), Daly AF(3), Beckers A(3), Zacharin M(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(2)The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Liège, University of Liège, Liège,
Belgium.
(4)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria,
Australiamargaret.zacharin@rch.org.au.
(5)The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria,
Australiamargaret.zacharin@rch.org.au.

BACKGROUND: Somatotropinomas are rare in childhood and frequently associated
with genetic mutations. AIP mutations are found in 20-25% cases and cause
aggressive somatotropinomas, often resistant to somatostatin analogues.
AIMS: To assess responses to multimodal therapy including pegvisomant in 2
children with sporadic somatotropinomas due to AIP mutations.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We report 2 children, a boy aged 13 and a girl aged 10, with
rapid growth, visual impairment, and growth hormone hypersecretion. Magnetic
resonance imaging confirmed a pituitary macroadenoma with parasellar extension
in both. Despite multiple surgical attempts to debulk tumour mass, residual
tumour persisted. Genetic analysis showed two different AIP mutations (patient
1: c.562delC [p.Arg188Glyfs*8]; patient 2: c.140_ 163del24 [p.Gly47_Arg54del8]).
They were initially treated with a long-acting somatostatin analogue (octreotide
LAR 30 mg/month) and cabergoline as a dopamine agonist, with the later addition
of pegvisomant titrated up to 20 mg/day and with radiotherapy for long-term
control. Somatostatin analogue was ceased due to patient intolerance and lack of
control. Patient 1 had normalization of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)
after 5 months of combined therapy with pegvisomant and cabergoline. For patient
2, normalization of IGF-1 was achieved after 2 months of cabergoline and
pegvisomant.
CONCLUSION: AIP-associated tumours can be resistant to management with
somatostatin analogues. Pegvisomant can safely be used, to normalize IGF-1
levels and help control disease.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000488856
PMID: 29953972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
