---
reference_id: "PMID:35503712"
title: "ILAE classification and definition of epilepsy syndromes with onset in neonates and infants: Position statement by the ILAE Task Force on Nosology and Definitions."
authors:
- Zuberi SM
- Wirrell E
- Yozawitz E
- Wilmshurst JM
- Specchio N
- Riney K
- Pressler R
- Auvin S
- Samia P
- Hirsch E
- Galicchio S
- Triki C
- Snead OC
- Wiebe S
- Cross JH
- Tinuper P
- Scheffer IE
- Perucca E
- Moshé SL
- Nabbout R
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/epi.17239
keywords:
- Electroencephalography
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Epilepsy, Generalized"
- Epileptic Syndromes
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Seizures/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ILAE classification and definition of epilepsy syndromes with onset in neonates and infants: Position statement by the ILAE Task Force on Nosology and Definitions.
**Authors:** Zuberi SM, Wirrell E, Yozawitz E, Wilmshurst JM, Specchio N, Riney K, Pressler R, Auvin S, Samia P, Hirsch E, Galicchio S, Triki C, Snead OC, Wiebe S, Cross JH, Tinuper P, Scheffer IE, Perucca E, Moshé SL, Nabbout R
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.17239](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.17239)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2022 Jun;63(6):1349-1397. doi: 10.1111/epi.17239. Epub 2022 May 3.

ILAE classification and definition of epilepsy syndromes with onset in neonates
and infants: Position statement by the ILAE Task Force on Nosology and
Definitions.

Zuberi SM(1), Wirrell E(2), Yozawitz E(3), Wilmshurst JM(4), Specchio N(5),
Riney K(6)(7), Pressler R(8)(9), Auvin S(10), Samia P(11), Hirsch E(12),
Galicchio S(13), Triki C(14), Snead OC(15), Wiebe S(16), Cross JH(17)(18),
Tinuper P(19)(20), Scheffer IE(21), Perucca E(22)(23), Moshé SL(24)(25)(26),
Nabbout R(27).

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Neurosciences Research Group, Royal Hospital for Children,
Institute of Health & Wellbeing, Collaborating Centre of European Reference
Network EpiCARE, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(2)Divisions of Child and Adolescent Neurology and Epilepsy, Department of
Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Isabelle Rapin Division of Child Neurology, Saul R. Korey Department of
Neurology, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Red Cross War Memorial Children's
Hospital, Neuroscience Institute, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South
Africa.
(5)Rare and Complex Epilepsy Unit, Department of Neuroscience, Bambino Gesu'
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Member of European Reference Network EpiCARE, Rome,
Italy.
(6)Neurosciences Unit, Queensland Children's Hospital, South Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland,
Australia.
(8)Clinical Neuroscience, UCL- Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health,
London, UK.
(9)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children NHS Foundation Trust, Member of European Reference Network EpiCARE,
London, UK.
(10)AP-HP, Hôpital Robert-Debré, INSERM NeuroDiderot, DMU Innov-RDB, Neurologie
Pédiatrique, Member of European Reference Network EpiCARE, Université de Paris,
Paris, France.
(11)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Aga Khan University, Nairobi,
Kenya.
(12)Neurology Epilepsy Unit "Francis Rohmer", INSERM 1258, FMTS, Strasbourg
University, Strasbourg, France.
(13)Child Neurology Department, Victor J Vilela Child Hospital of Rosario, Santa
Fe, Argentina.
(14)Child Neurology Department, LR19ES15 Neuropédiatrie, Sfax Medical School,
University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.
(15)Pediatric Neurology, Hospital for Sick Children, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(16)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Alberta, Canada.
(17)Programme of Developmental Neurosciences, UCL NIHR BRC Great Ormond Street
Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, Member of
European Reference Network EpiCARE, London, UK.
(18)Young Epilepsy, Lingfield, UK.
(19)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy.
(20)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche, Bologna, Italy.
(21)Austin Health and Royal Children's Hospital, Florey Institute, Murdoch
Children's Research Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(22)Department of Neuroscience, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(23)Department of Medicine, Austin Health, University of Melbourne, Heidelberg,
Victoria, Australia.
(24)Isabelle Rapin Division of Child Neurology, Saul R. Korey Department of
Neurology, Bronx, New York, USA.
(25)Departments of Neuroscience and Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(26)Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, New York, USA.
(27)Reference Centre for Rare Epilepsies, Department of Pediatric Neurology,
Necker-Enfants Malades University Hospital, APHP, Member of European Reference
Network EpiCARE, Institut Imagine, INSERM, UMR 1163, Université Paris cité,
Paris, France.

The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) Task Force on Nosology and
Definitions proposes a classification and definition of epilepsy syndromes in
the neonate and infant with seizure onset up to 2 years of age. The incidence of
epilepsy is high in this age group and epilepsy is frequently associated with
significant comorbidities and mortality. The licensing of syndrome specific
antiseizure medications following randomized controlled trials and the
development of precision, gene-related therapies are two of the drivers defining
the electroclinical phenotypes of syndromes with onset in infancy. The principal
aim of this proposal, consistent with the 2017 ILAE Classification of the
Epilepsies, is to support epilepsy diagnosis and emphasize the importance of
classifying epilepsy in an individual both by syndrome and etiology. For each
syndrome, we report epidemiology, clinical course, seizure types,
electroencephalography (EEG), neuroimaging, genetics, and differential
diagnosis. Syndromes are separated into self-limited syndromes, where there is
likely to be spontaneous remission and developmental and epileptic
encephalopathies, diseases where there is developmental impairment related to
both the underlying etiology independent of epileptiform activity and the
epileptic encephalopathy. The emerging class of etiology-specific epilepsy
syndromes, where there is a specific etiology for the epilepsy that is
associated with a clearly defined, relatively uniform, and distinct clinical
phenotype in most affected individuals as well as consistent EEG, neuroimaging,
and/or genetic correlates, is presented. The number of etiology-defined
syndromes will continue to increase, and these newly described syndromes will in
time be incorporated into this classification. The tables summarize mandatory
features, cautionary alerts, and exclusionary features for the common syndromes.
Guidance is given on the criteria for syndrome diagnosis in resource-limited
regions where laboratory confirmation, including EEG, MRI, and genetic testing,
might not be available.

© 2022 The Authors. Epilepsia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of
International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.17239
PMID: 35503712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
