---
reference_id: "PMID:24459095"
title: Amyoplasia involving only the upper limbs or only involving the lower limbs with review of the relevant differential diagnoses.
authors:
- Hall JG
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36397
keywords:
- "Arthrogryposis/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Lower Extremity/pathology
- Pregnancy
- "Pregnancy Complications/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
- Prenatal Diagnosis/methods
- Upper Extremity/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyoplasia involving only the upper limbs or only involving the lower limbs with review of the relevant differential diagnoses.
**Authors:** Hall JG
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36397](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36397)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Apr;164A(4):859-73. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36397. Epub
2014  Jan 23.

Amyoplasia involving only the upper limbs or only involving the lower limbs with 
review of the relevant differential diagnoses.

Hall JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, University of British 
Columbia, BC Children's Hospital Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Of individuals with Amyoplasia, 16.8% (94/560) involve only the upper limbs 
(Upper Limb Amyoplasia-ULA) and 15.2% (85/560) involve only the lower limbs 
(Lower Limb Amyoplasia-LLA). The accompanying paper deals with other forms of 
Amyoplasia [Hall et al., 2013] and discusses etiology. An excess of one of 
monozygotic (MZ) twins is seen in both groups (ULA 4/94 (4.3%), LLA 5/85 
(5.9%)), gastrointestinal (GI) abnormalities thought to be of vascular origin 
(bowel atresia and gastroschisis) (ULA 16/94 (17%), LLA 4/85 (4.7%)), small or 
partial absence of digits (ULA 6/94 (6.2%), LLA 8/85 (9.4%)), and umbilical cord 
wrapping around the limbs at birth (ULA 3/94 (3.2%), LLA 7/85 (8.2%)) (severe 
enough to leave a permanent groove). Pregnancy complications occurred in 42/60 
(70%) of ULA and 36/54 (67%) of LLA. Prenatal diagnosis, after ultrasound usage 
became routine, occurred in only 7/25 (28%) of ULA and 5/12 (12%) of LLA. This 
series may represent an over estimate of the complications and associations 
occurring in ULA and LLA. Differential diagnoses separating LLA from the genetic 
forms of "lower limb only" arthrogryposis and ULA from "upper limb only" genetic 
forms of arthrogryposis and Erb's palsy is provided.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36397
PMID: 24459095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]