---
reference_id: "PMID:36433683"
title: Further expansion and confirmation of phenotype in rare loss of YWHAE gene distinct from Miller-Dieker syndrome.
authors:
- Baker EK
- Brewer CJ
- Ferreira L
- Schapiro M
- Tenney J
- Wied HM
- Kline-Fath BM
- Smolarek TA
- Weaver KN
- Hopkin RJ
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63057
keywords:
- Humans
- Classical Lissencephalies and Subcortical Band Heterotopias/genetics
- Chromosome Deletion
- Lissencephaly/genetics
- Phenotype
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/genetics"
- Brain
- 14-3-3 Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Further expansion and confirmation of phenotype in rare loss of YWHAE gene distinct from Miller-Dieker syndrome.
**Authors:** Baker EK, Brewer CJ, Ferreira L, Schapiro M, Tenney J, Wied HM, Kline-Fath BM, Smolarek TA, Weaver KN, Hopkin RJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63057](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63057)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Feb;191(2):526-539. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63057. Epub
2022  Nov 25.

Further expansion and confirmation of phenotype in rare loss of YWHAE gene 
distinct from Miller-Dieker syndrome.

Baker EK(1)(2), Brewer CJ(1), Ferreira L(1)(2), Schapiro M(2)(3), Tenney 
J(2)(3), Wied HM(2)(3), Kline-Fath BM(4), Smolarek TA(1)(2), Weaver KN(1)(2), 
Hopkin RJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(3)Division of Neurology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medicine, Cincinnati, 
Ohio, USA.
(4)Division of Radiology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Deletion of 17p13.3 has varying degrees of severity on brain development based 
on precise location and size of the deletion. The most severe phenotype is 
Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS) which is characterized by lissencephaly, dysmorphic 
facial features, growth failure, developmental disability, and often early 
death. Haploinsufficiency of PAFAH1B1 is responsible for the characteristic 
lissencephaly in MDS. The precise role of YWHAE haploinsufficiency in MDS is 
unclear. Case reports are beginning to elucidate the phenotypes of individuals 
with 17p13.3 deletions that have deletion of YWHAE but do not include deletion 
of PAFAH1B1. Through our clinical genetics practice, we identified four 
individuals with 17p13.3 deletion that include YWHAE but not PAFAH1B1. These 
patients have a similar phenotype of dysmorphic facial features, developmental 
delay, and leukoencephalopathy. In a review of the literature, we identified 19 
patients with 17p13.3 microdeletion sparing PAFAH1B1 but deleting YWHAE. 
Haploinsufficiency of YWHAE is associated with brain abnormalities including 
cystic changes. These individuals have high frequency of epilepsy, intellectual 
disability, and dysmorphic facial features including prominent forehead, 
epicanthal folds, and broad nasal root. We conclude that deletion of 17p13.3 
excluding PAFAH1B1 but including YWHAE is associated with a consistent phenotype 
and should be considered a distinct condition from MDS.

© 2022 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63057
PMCID: PMC10099970
PMID: 36433683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no relevant conflicts of interest to 
disclose.