---
reference_id: "PMID:37747403"
title: Comprehensive Genetic Analysis Unraveled the Missing Heritability and a Founder Variant of BEST1 in a Chinese Cohort With Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy.
authors:
- Shi J
- Tian L
- Sun T
- Zhang X
- Xu K
- Xie Y
- Peng X
- Tang X
- Jin ZB
- Li Y
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.64.12.37
keywords:
- Humans
- Bestrophins/genetics
- East Asian People/genetics
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/ethnology, genetics"
- HEK293 Cells
- "Leukocytes, Mononuclear"
- "Retinal Diseases/ethnology, genetics"
- Introns/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive Genetic Analysis Unraveled the Missing Heritability and a Founder Variant of BEST1 in a Chinese Cohort With Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy.
**Authors:** Shi J, Tian L, Sun T, Zhang X, Xu K, Xie Y, Peng X, Tang X, Jin ZB, Li Y
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.64.12.37](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.64.12.37)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2023 Sep 1;64(12):37. doi: 10.1167/iovs.64.12.37.

Comprehensive Genetic Analysis Unraveled the Missing Heritability and a Founder
Variant of BEST1 in a Chinese Cohort With Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy.

Shi J(1), Tian L(1), Sun T(1), Zhang X(1), Xu K(1), Xie Y(1), Peng X(1), Tang
X(1), Jin ZB(1), Li Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Institute of Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing
Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing Ophthalmology & Visual
Sciences Key Lab, Beijing, China.

PURPOSE: To describe the genetic landscape of BEST1 for a large Chinese cohort
with autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB), identify the missing
heritability, and report a common Chinese founder variant.
METHODS: We recruited 65 patients from 63 families with a clinical diagnosis of
ARB. All patients underwent ophthalmic examinations and comprehensive genetic
analyses, including Sanger DNA sequencing of BEST1 and whole genome sequencing
(WGS). The effects of deep intronic variants (DIVs) on splicing were assessed
using in vitro splicing assays in HEK293T cells and patient-derived peripheral
blood mononuclear cells. Haplotype mapping was performed for 17 unrelated
patients harboring variant c.867+97G>A.
RESULTS: We identified 54 distinct disease-causing variants of BEST1 in 63
pedigrees, 62 probands with biallelic variants, and one family with monoallelic
variants. Sanger DNA sequencing of BEST1 initially detected 51 variants in 61
pedigrees, including 19 probands with one heterozygous variant. Subsequent WGS,
combined with supplementary Sanger sequencing, revealed three missing DIVs
(c.1101-491A>G, c.867+97G>A, and c.867+97G>T) in 20 families. The novel DIV
c.1101-491A>G caused an abnormal splicing resulting in a 204-nt pseudoexon (PE)
insertion, whereas c.867+97G>A/T relatively strengthened an alternative donor
site, resulting in a 203-nt intron retention (IR). The PE and IR generated a
premature termination codon downstream. Haplotype analysis identified
c.867+97G>A as a common founder variant with an allele frequency of 16%.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results expand the pathogenic variant spectrum of BEST1, and
DIVs can explain almost all of the missing heritability. The c.867+97G>A DIV is
a common founder variant for Chinese patients with ARB.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.64.12.37
PMCID: PMC10528473
PMID: 37747403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: J. Shi, None; L. Tian, None; T. Sun,
None; X. Zhang, None; K. Xu, None; Y. Xie, None; X. Peng, None; X. Tang, None;
Z.-B. Jin, None; Y. Li, None
