---
reference_id: PMID:30076958
title: Pigment epithelium derived factor regulates human Sost/Sclerostin and other osteocyte gene expression via the receptor and induction of Erk/GSK-3beta/beta-catenin signaling.
authors:
- Li F
- Cain JD
- Tombran-Tink J
- Niyibizi C
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.07.034
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Differentiation
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases/metabolism
- Eye Proteins/metabolism
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genetic Markers
- Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 beta/metabolism
- Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Humans
- Nerve Growth Factors/metabolism
- "Osteoblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- "Osteocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- Phosphoproteins/metabolism
- Serpins/metabolism
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Pigment epithelium derived factor regulates human Sost/Sclerostin and other osteocyte gene expression via the receptor and induction of Erk/GSK-3beta/beta-catenin signaling.
**Authors:** Li F, Cain JD, Tombran-Tink J, Niyibizi C
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.07.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.07.034)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2018 Oct;1864(10):3449-3458. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.07.034. Epub 2018 Aug 1.

Pigment epithelium derived factor regulates human Sost/Sclerostin and other 
osteocyte gene expression via the receptor and induction of 
Erk/GSK-3beta/beta-catenin signaling.

Li F(1), Cain JD(1), Tombran-Tink J(2), Niyibizi C(3).

Author information:
(1)Penn State College of Medicine, Department of Orthopaedics and 
Rehabilitation, Hershey, PA, USA.
(2)Penn State College of Medicine, Department of Orthopaedics and 
Rehabilitation, Hershey, PA, USA; Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, 
Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA.
(3)Penn State College of Medicine, Department of Orthopaedics and 
Rehabilitation, Hershey, PA, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, Penn State college of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
cniyibizi@psu.edu.

Mutations in Serpinf1 gene which encodes pigment epithelium derived factor 
(PEDF) lead to osteogenesis imperfecta type VI whose hallmark is defective 
mineralization. We reported that PEDF suppressed expression of Sost/Sclerostin 
and other osteocyte related genes in mineralizing osteoblast cultures and 
suggested that this could be part of the mechanisms by which PEDF regulates 
matrix mineralization (Li et al. J Cellular Phys. 2014). We have used a 
long-term differentiated mineralizing osteoblast culture (LTD) to define 
mechanisms by which PEDF regulates osteocyte gene expression. LTD cultures were 
established by culturing human osteoblasts in an osteogenic medium for 4 months 
followed by analysis of osteocytes related genes and encoded proteins. LTD cells 
synthesized Sclerostin, matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE) and 
dentin matrix protein (DMP-1) and their synthesis was reduced by treatment with 
PEDF. Treatment of the cultures with PEDF induced phosphorylation of Erk and 
glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK-3β), and accumulation of nonphosphorylated 
β-catenin. Inhibition of Erk activation and neutralizing antibodies to the 
pigment epithelium derived receptor (PEDF-R) suppressed GSK-3β phosphorylation 
and accumulation of nonphosphorylated β-catenin in presence of PEDF. Topflash 
assays demonstrated that PEDF activated luciferase reporter activity and this 
activity was inhibited by treatment with Erk inhibitor or neutralizing 
antibodies to PEDF-R. Dickkopf-related protein 1 treatment of the cells in 
presence of PEDF had minimal effect suggesting that GSK-3β phosphorylation and 
accumulation of nonphosphorylayted β-catenin may not involve LRP5/6 in 
osteocytes. Taken together, the data demonstrate that PEDF regulates osteocyte 
gene expression through its receptor and possible involvement of 
Erk/GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.07.034
PMCID: PMC6176723
PMID: 30076958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests

Pigment epithelium derived factor (PEDF) encoded by serpinf1 is synthesized by various cell types including osteoblasts and osteocytes [1–6]. PEDF was originally identified in cultures of fetal pigment epithelial cells but it is now known to be ubiquitously synthesized by a variety of cells in different tissues [1, 2]. PEDF is a multifunctional protein that plays a role in regulating gene expression by cells in various tissues [1]. The protein has been shown to possess antiangiogenic activities and this has led to interest in examining its potential application in treating cancer metastasis and diabetes related conditions [1, 7–10]. Recent developments have identified PEDF as a major player in bone homeostasis, playing a major role in bone matrix mineralization. Patients with a rare recessive form of osteogenesis imperfecta type VI exhibit mutations in serpinf1 leading to the absence PEDF in bone cells resulting in excessive accumulation of osteoid that fails to mineralize [11–13]. Mechanisms, through which PEDF regulates bone matrix mineralization, however, remain undefined. We and others reported that PEDF promoted human mesenchymal stem cell (MSCs) differentiation and increased osteoblast mineralization in vitro [14–16]. We also reported that PEDF suppressed Sost/Sclerostin expression by primary osteocytes harvested from human bone [17]. In addition to Sost/Sclerostin suppression, we showed that PEDF had an effect on the expression of other osteocyte genes, MEPE and DMP-1 and PHEX [18]. PEDF inhibited expression of Sost/Sclerostin, MEPE and to a lesser extent DMP-1 as well as the encoded proteins [17]. PEDF promoted expression of Col1A1 and PHEX a protein that promotes matrix mineralization. The osteocyte derived proteins inhibited by PEDF play a role in matrix mineralization and thus PEDF may play a role in matrix mineralization by regulating genes and proteins involved in bone matrix mineralization [19–22].

There are several reports indicating that PEDF may regulate cellular activities via its receptor and MAPK activation [23–25]. Several receptors for PEDF have been described, Laminin receptor, plexin domain containing 1 and 2 (PLXDC1 and PLXDC2), LRP6 and PEDF-R, a patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing 2 (PNPLA2) family with characteristics of PEDF receptor [26–28]. In the present studies we focused on the PEDF-R.

To begin to understand mechanisms by which PEDF regulates genes involved in matrix mineralization, we examined osteocyte related genes and the encoded proteins Sost/Scl, MEPE and DMP-1. Because of difficulties isolating primary osteocytes, we established a long-term differentiated osteoblast mineralizing culture (LTD) and used it as an osteocyte cell source.This culture system has been previously used by other investigators examining osteocytes activities [19, 29–32]. We examined mechanisms by which PEDF regulates osteocyte genes and encoded proteins by focusing on pigment epithelium derived factor receptor (PEDF-R), Erk and GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling pathways using the LTD culture system.

Because of difficulties associated with isolating and culturing osteocytes, we developed a longterm differentiated osteoblast culture system to generate a stable osteocyte cell source for the studies. This approach avoided repeated isolations and potential variations in primary osteocytes used for the experiments. To generate LTD culture, osteoblasts were isolated from the clinical waste of the foot bones of patients undergoing elective surgery; the bones were obtained under approved IRB protocol by the Penn State College of Medicine IRB review committee (protocol # 432612EM). Osteoblast isolation was performed as we described previously and following established protocols [14, 17, 33]. Briefly, fragments of human bone from 15 patients aged 38–60 were washed five times at 3 min intervals in PBS. Following extensive washing, the fragments from individual donors were incubated in a collagenase solution (0.2% collagenase type II in PBS, Worthington) at 37°C for 40 min; digests were collected by centrifugation at 200g for 5 min. After four rounds of collagenase treatments cell pellets were seeded onto 10 mm petri dishes in α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin; cells that grew out of the bone fragments were expanded in culture with medium changes every 3 days. Aliquots of the isolated osteoblasts were assessed for the level of osteogenic differentiation by determining levels of ALP activity; osteoblasts isolated from 7 patients that showed robust ALP activity were used for establishing LTD osteoblast cultures.

Osteoblasts obtained from 7 donors as described above were individually cultured in 6 well plates in osteogenic medium that was replaced every 3 days. The osteogenic medium consisted of alpha-Minimal essential medium (α-MEM) (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS, 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid, 10 mM beta-glycerol phosphate, 10−7M dexamethasone, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S, v/v). After 2 weeks of culture, medium was removed from one well of each 6 well plate, the cells within the well were treated with 0.5 ml of 0.2% type II collagenase for 45 min followed by treatment with 0.5% Trypsin/EDTA for 10 min at 37oC. The cells were used for analysis of osteocytes genes and encoded proteins by PCR and western blotting. This process was repeated every 2 weeks up to 4 months at which mineralizing osteoblast culture generated cells that stably expressed osteocyte genes encoding Sclerostin, MEPE and DMP-1. The cells that maintained the osteocyte phenotype from different wells were combined and cultured in 10 mm plates in osteogenic medium. These cells were used for all of the experiments below described.

Quantitative PCR was carried out to demonstrate expression of osteocyte genes, Sost, DMP-1 and MEPE by LTD osteoblasts and effect of PEDF. Aliquots of the cells recovered from 10 mm petri dishes described above and following trypsinization were plated onto 6 well collagen coated plates and maintained in a MEM for 24h; thereafter the cells were treated with or without PEDF in alpha MEM at a concentration of 50 or 250 ng/ml. The cells were maintained in a medium supplemented with or without PEDF for 72h. After 72h, mRNA expression level for cell treated or not treated with PEDF was analyzed for osteocyte gene expression (Sost, MEPE and DMP-1) using a StepOnePlusTM RT PCR system (Applied Biosystems, CA). The primers and programs used for amplification of the genes were previously reported [17]. The PEDF used in all the experiments was supplied by Dr. Tombran-Tink who prepared and characterized it as reported previously [34].

Aliquots of the LTD cells were cultured onto 6 well collagen coated plates as described above. After 24h of culture on collagen coated plates, medium was supplemented with or without 50 or 250 ng/ml of PEDF and maintained for 72h in culture. After 72h, cells were lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). The protein concentration was determined with a BCA protein assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 μg of protein from each sample was resolved by SDS-PAGE followed by transfer onto PVDF membranes. Antibodies specific for Scl (Abcam, ab63097) and MEPE (Santa Cruz, SC-377035) and DMP-1 (Santa Cruz, SC-73633) were used to detect expression of osteocyte proteins of interest. Antibodies to MEPE and DMP-1 purchased from Santa Cruz were used in studies we reported previously [17]. The present data are consistent with the data we published previously using antibodies from same source [17]. Because these antibodies worked well previously for us there was no need to get them from different sources.

For immunofluorescence, aliquots of the LTD cells were cultured in chamber slides for 24h followed by fixation in 4% paraformaldehyde, washed three times in PBS and incubated in 10% goat or rabbit serum for 2 hours at room temperature. Cells were incubated in respective primary antibodies for Scl (1:50), DMP-1(1:40) and MEPE (1:50) overnight at 4°C. Cells were then washed in PBS three times and incubated in PBS containing rhodamine-conjugated secondary mouse anti-rabbit or cy3- anti-goat antibody (1:100, Santa Cruz). After 45 min of incubation at 25 °C, cells were visualized under a fluorescent microscope.

To determine mechanisms by which PEDF regulated Sost and other osteocyte related genes, we examined involvement of PEDF-R, Erk and GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling pathways. Binding of PEDF to LRP5/6 was evaluated by determining effect of Dkk-1 on osteocyte gene expression. LTD cells described above were used to examine mechanisms by which PEDF-regulated Sost/Scl and other osteocyte genes. Aliquots of LTD cells established at 4 months time point as described above were seeded onto collagen coated 6-well plates at 1×104/ cm2 and pretreated with 10 mM Erk docking domain inhibitor (294675–79-9, Sigma-Aldrich, CA),or 4 ug/ml of PEDF-receptor antibody (Santa Cruz, SC-365278), or 20 ng/ml Dkk-1 (R and D, or control solution (DMSO) for 4h. β-catenin signaling was determined by using antibodies against total β-catenin and non-phosphorylated β-catenin; non-phosphorylated and phosphorylated GSK-3β antibodies (Cell signaling catalog numbers 9315 and 9336 respectively), and non-phosphorylated and phosphorylated Erk1/2 antibodies purchased from Cell Signaling. All antibodies were used at a concentration of 1:1000. All secondary horse radish peroxidase (HRP) conjugated antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz Ltd. Western blotting was used to analyze the data and the bands were visualized using Super-Signal substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Fremont, CA, USA), images were captured on X-ray films. LTD cells were incubated in a medium supplemented with or without 250 ng/ml of PEDF or BSA as a control, for 0, 15 min, 1 h, 4 h, 24h and or 48 h. Cells at each time point were lysed in RIPA buffer and the cell lysates were collected into chilled 0.5 ml Eppendorf tubes on ice and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 minutes. The supernatants were used for Western blotting to determine proteins of interest using antibodies described above. Cells were also assessed for mRNA and protein expression of osteocyte genes at 48h or 72h to determine signaling pathways that regulated their expression.

To determine involvement of β-catenin signaling, TOPFLASH assays were employed. LTD cells (5000 cells/ cm2) were seeded into 12-well plates and cultured in alpha-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS and maintained at 37oC for 24h. After 24h, cells were co-transfected with pTOPFLASH luciferase reporter plasmid (6 ng/well) and phRL-CMV Renilla luciferase control vector (2 ng/well) for 24h, this was followed by incubation of the cells in a medium supplemented with or without 250 ng/ml of PEDF for 24 h. Cells were then directly lysed onto the plates by addition of 1× cell culture lysis reagent (Promega, Madison, WI). Lysates were collected into chilled 0.5 ml Eppendorf tubes on ice and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 5 minutes. The supernatants were transferred into new tubes and directly assayed as described below. Twenty microliter lysates were added either to 100 μl of luciferase assay buffer (20 mM Tricine pH 7.8, 1.1 mM MgCO3, 4 mM MgSO4, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.27 mM coenzyme A, 0.67 mM luciferin, 33 mM DTT and 0.6 mM ATP) or to 100 μl Renilla luciferase assay substrate (E2810, Promega, Madison, WI) and the luciferase activities were measured by use of a luminometer (Berthold Lumat LB 9507). Samples were assayed in triplicate and the firefly luciferase (M50, TOPFLASH) activities were normalized by the Renilla luciferase (CMV-Renilla).

For all experiments, data were compiled from at least three independent replicate experiments performed on separate cultures on separate occasions. Results were expressed as the mean ±SD. Comparative studies of means were performed using one-way ANOVA followed by a post-hoc test (projected least significant difference, Fisher) with significance value of P< 0.05. Expression level was analyzed in a StepOnePlusTM RT PCR system (Applied Biosystems, CA).

Because of the difficulties associated with isolating and culturing primary osteocytes, we established a long-term differentiated osteoblast culture (LTD) using the modification of the methods reported previously [19, 29–32]. Although these previous methods are not identical to the LTD culture we established here, they demonstrate difficulties associated with isolating and working with primary osteocytes. To determine whether LTD osteoblast culture contained osteocytes that responded to PEDF, immunofluorescence staining for osteocyte proteins was used. We focused on Scl, MEPE and DMP-1. Aliquots of the LTD cells plated on collagen coated chamber slides were treated with PEDF to determine its effect on the expression of selected osteocyte genes and synthesis of the encoded proteins. By immunofluorescence staining, the data showed that LTD cultures contained osteocytes that synthesized Scl, MEPE and DMP-1 (Fig. 1A,B, C). Building on our previous findings, we determined whether these osteocytes responded to pigment epithelium factor (PEDF) to downregulate expression of Sost/Scl, MEPE and DMP-1. By immunofluorescence staining, LTD osteoblast cultures treated with PEDF showed reduced staining for Scl, MEPE and DMP-1 (Fig. 1A,B,C). Control cells were not treated with primary antibodies specific to the osteocyte proteins being assessed, thus the cells stained negatively for Rhodamine and were not visible as shown in figure 1A, B, C. DAPI staining revealed presence of the cells by blue staining of the cell nuclei, DAPI staining was merged with Rhodamine staining as indicated in figure 1A,B, C. Because Rhodamine staining was negative, only DAPI staining was visible upon merging the two images. In BSA panel of figure 1, cells in the chamber slides were treated with BSA as a negative control for PEDF followed by treatment with primary and secondary antibodies conjugated to Rhodamine for osteocyte proteins being assessed. As shown, cells with osteocyte morphology are evident revealed by staining of the respective antibodies to the specific osteocyte proteins (Sclerostin, MEPE, DMP-1).. The rhodamine stained image was merged with same slide image stained with DAPI as indicated in the figure 1. In PEDF panel, cells in chamber slides were treated with PEDF followed by immunofluorescence staining for specific antibodies to osteocyte proteins being assessed. As indicated in the figure reduction in staining is evident for each of the osteocyte protein being examined upon PEDF treatment (Fig. 1A, B, C,). Although no quantitation was performed, the data indicated that PEDF had an effect on osteocyte gene expression by regulating synthesis of the respective osteocyte related proteins. These data also showed that LTD osteoblast culture contained osteocytes that responded to PEDF to down regulate expression and synthesis of osteocyte related proteins.

To further examine effect of PEDF on LTD cells on reducing the expression and synthesis of Sost/Scl, MEPE and DMP-1, RT-PCR and western blotting were employed. The data showed that Scl, MEPE and DMP-1 synthesis was reduced by PEDF treatment of LTD cells as shown by western blotting (Fig 2A-C). Reduction in the synthesis of the osteocyte proteins was dose dependent for Scl, 250 ng/ml of PEDF was more effective than 50 ng/ml while for MEPE and DMP-1 both PEDF doses were equally effective (Figs. 2A, B, C; below each blot). Control osteocytes were cultured in a medium supplemented with BSA at 250ng/ml. Following protein analysis, we examined effect of PEDF on the genes that encode Scl, MEPE and DMP-1. RTPCR analysis showed that treatment of osteocytes in LTD osteoblast cultures with PEDF reduced expression of Sost, MEPE and DMP-1 mRNA (Figs. 2D, E, F). For mRNA reduction, 50 ng/ml of PEDF appeared to be equally efficient as 250 ng/ml except for MEPE for which 250 ng/ml of PEDF was more effective (Fig. 2E).

We examined mechanisms by which PEDF regulates osteocyte gene expression (Sost, MEPE and DMP-1) with a focus on PEDF-R, Erk and GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling pathways. LTD osteoblast cultures were used to examine regulation of Sost and other osteocyte related genes by PEDF. LTD osteoblast cultures treated with PEDF induced Erk and GSK-3β phosphorylation at ser9 and accumulation of non-phosphorylated β-catenin (Fig. 3A). Inhibition of PEDF-induced Erk phosphorylation by Erk inhibitor, suppressed GSK-3β phosphorylation as well as suppression of non-phosphorylated beta-catenin accumulation (Fig 3B). Analysis of effect of PEDF-receptor using neutralizing antibodies on PEDF-regulated Erk activation, GSK-3β phosphorylation and β-catenin accumulation produced similar results as inhibiting Erk activation (Fig 3C). Treatment of the cells with Dkk-1 did not have any effect on GSK-3β phosphorylation as well as Erk activation in presence of PEDF (Fig. 3D). These data indicate that PEDF-R is critical for Erk activation, phosphorylation of GSK-3β and accumulation of nonphosphorylated β-catenin.

To demonstrate that PEDF-Erk activation and GSK-3β phosphorylation had an effect on β-catenin stabilization, Topflash assays were used. Data showed that PEDF activated TopFlash activity in LTD osteoblast cultures and this activity was reduced in presence of Erk inhibitor or neutralizing antibodies to PEDF-R; Dkk-1 displayed minimal effect (Fig. 3E, F, G). Taken together, the data demonstrate that PEDF acts through its receptor to induce Erk activation and phosphorylation of GSK-3β as well as stabilization and accumulation of β- catenin. The stabilized β-catenin enters the nucleus and regulates gene expression. Our assumption is that osteocyte genes are regulated by PEDF through this signaling pathway. Because Dkk-1 had minimal or no effect in this process, the data suggest that GSK-3β phosphorylation and stabilization of β-catenin does not involve LRP5 /6. Thus in summary, the data suggest that PEDF binds to its receptor (PEDF-R) to activate Erk which in turn initiates phosphorylation of GSK-3β and targets it for destruction thus stabilizing β-catenin and subsequent migration into the nucleus to regulate target genes.

To determine whether PEDF-activated Erk/GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling played a role in the regulation of the osteocyte genes, we examined whether inhibition of Erk/GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling affected expression of Sost, MEPE and DMP-1 mRNA levels. Treatment of LTD osteoblast cultures with PEDF suppressed expression of Sost, DMP-1 and MEPE genes as expected, however, inhibition of Erk activation by PEDF attenuated PEDF inhibitory activity of Sost, MEPE and DMP-1 expression (Fig. 4A). Blocking PEDF-R with neutralizing antibodies also attenuated PEDF inhibitory activity of Sost, MEPE and DMP-1 ((Fig. 4B). Treatment of the cells with Dkk-1 had minimal effect on PEDF inhibitory activity of osteocyte genes suggesting that PEDF action may not involve LRP5 /6, however binding of PEDF to LRP5/6 cannot be ruled out. These data go along with the data presented in figure 3. The data support the concept that PEDF regulates osteocyte genes via binding to its receptor to induce Erk/GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling to regulate osteocyte gene expression.

Following analysis of PEDF regulated osteocyte gene expression via PEDF-R and Erk/GSK3β/β-catenin signaling; we asked if this was translated into the encoded osteocyte proteins (Scl, MEPE and DMP-1) synthesis. As indicated above for gene expression, we examined whether blocking PEDF-R activity with neutralizing antibodies and hence inhibition of Erk/GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling affected synthesis of Scl, MEPE and DMP-1 by osteocytes. Treatment of LTD osteoblasts cultures with PEDF reduced synthesis of Scl, DMP-1 and MEPE as expected, however, inhibition of Erk activation by PEDF reduced PEDF inhibitory activity (Fig. 5A, B). Blocking PEDF-R activity with neutralizing antibodies also attenuated PEDF inhibitory activity of Scl, MEPE and DMP-1 synthesis (Fig. 5C, D). Treatment of the cells with Dkk-1 had no effect on PEDF inhibitory activity of osteocyte protein synthesis (Fig. 5E, F) suggesting that PEDF action does not involve LRP5 /6 and supporting data shown in figure 4. These data indicate that PEDF regulates osteocyte gene expression and encoded proteins via PEDF-R and induction of Erk/GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling to regulate osteocyte gene expression.

Figure 6 shows a schematic diagram to illustrate how PEDF may regulate osteocyte genes. This pathway has been observed in other cell types involving growth factors such as IGF-1, TGF-β to inactivate GSK-3β [35–39].

In this report, using LTD osteoblast culture we generated osteocytes that stably expressed osteoblast phenotype characterized by the expression of Sost/Scl, MEPE and DMP-1 genes and the encoded proteins. These cells were used to examine effect of PEDF on osteocyte activity and also to examine mechanisms by which PEDF regulates osteocyte gene expression. We demonstrated that LTD culture contained cells that expressed osteocyte specific genes and synthesized osteocyte related proteins (Scl, MEPE and DMP-1). These findings indicated that the culture system we established here contained osteocytes and it was the appropriate model for use in investigating mechanisms by which PEDF regulates Sost and other osteocyte related genes and synthesis of the encoded proteins. PEDF is a multifunctional protein, mutations in serpinf1 that encodes the protein lead to the development of OI type VI whose hallmark is defective mineralization [11–13]. Mechanisms by which PEDF regulates matrix mineralization remain undefined. We and others reported that PEDF enhanced osteoblast differentiation and matrix mineralization by enhancing expression of osteoblast related genes [14–17]. We also reported that PEDF suppressed expression of osteocyte related genes including Sost[17]. We speculated that suppression of osteocyte related genes that play a role in regulating matrix mineralization may be part of the mechanisms by which PEDF regulates matrix mineralization. Sclerostin and other osteocyte related proteins play a role in regulating bone mineralization [19, 40–43], the findings here that PEDF regulates their expression suggest that PEDF may play a role in this process to enhance matrix mineralization. Future studies will examine whether patients with type VI OI have higher levels of Scl than normal individuals and levels of osteocyte proteins that play a role in matrix mineralization. These aforementioned concepts are beyond the studies reported in this report because samples from patients with type VI OI are not easily available. In the present report, we focused on understanding mechanisms by which PEDF regulates osteocyte gene expression. We have shown that in addition to reducing Scl expression, PEDF also reduced expression of MEPE and to a lesser extent DMP-1, these osteocyte proteins have been shown to play a negative role in bone mineralization [19–22]. Thus, absence of PEDF would lead to defective matrix mineralization as seen in patients with type VI OI.

There are several reports indicating that PEDF is an inhibitor of Wnt signaling and that this inhibition is the result of PEDF binding to LRP5/6 [44–46]. Because PEDF is synthesized by osteoblasts and osteocytes, its affinity for LRP5/6 would be expected to have a negative effect on bone formation due to its interference with Wnt signaling. Wnt1 mutations cause bone fragility [47, 48], thus PEDF binding to LRP5/6 would be expected to have a negative effect on bone formation. Present findings at least in osteocytes based on DKK-1 experiments showed that PEDF may not interact with LRP5/6 to regulate osteocyte gene expression, however since PEDF has been reported to be an inhibitor of Wnt signaling by binding to LRP5/6, use of DKK-1 does not rule out binding of PEDF to LRP5/6. PEDF is necessary for bone homeostasis but its actions in bone may be dependent on different stages of cell differentiation [16]. Because our focus was on osteocytes, the terminally differentiated osteoblast, mechanisms of PEDF regulation on osteoblast precursors remains to be clearly elucidated. In the present report, PEDF activated Erk signaling pathway in osteocytes via its receptor to regulate expression of osteocyte genes; PEDF has been shown to activate Erk in other cell systems to regulate cellular activities [23–25]. The data presented in the present report showed that canonical Wnt signaling may not be involved in PEDF-regulated osteocyte gene expression, stabilization and increased β-catenin. Inactivation of GSK-3β by PEDF-activated Erk signaling induced phosphorylation of GSK-3β targeting it for its destruction thus leading to the stabilization of β-catenin. Prevention of PEDF binding to its receptor inhibited Erk and β-catenin stabilization thus indicating that PEDF-R plays important role in PEDF-regulated osteocyte gene expression. Studies on PTH regulated Sost expression were reported to involve PTH receptor (PTH-R) [49–52], thus the present findings that PEDF regulated osteocyte genes via PEDF-R are analogous to these previous reports. The PEDF-R belongs to a family of patatin-like phospholipase domain-2 (PNLA2) with a characteristic of PEDF-R [53]. Topflash assays confirmed that β-catenin signaling was induced via PEDF-R and Erk activation.

The PEDF-R we focused on was described as a lipase linked cell membrane receptor for PEDFR [54]. The PEDF-R was shown to possess a specific and high binding affinity for PEDF and to exhibit a phospholipase A2 activity. It was demonstrated to be associated with eukaryotic cell membranes [54], thus the receptor of focus in this report was not associated with lipid droplets. In addition, there are several other reports in which association of PEDF and ATGL was found to play a role in regulating cellular activities [55, 56]. The present findings indicating that PEDF associates with PEDF-R to regulate osteocyte gene expression are consistent with these previous reports [55, 56].

We used neutralizing antibodies to block PEDF-R in our studies, this approach worked well and we did not attempt to use SiRNA. Using neutralizing antibodies to block cellular activities is an established procedure that has been applied in other cell systems [57].

Taken together, PEDF regulated osteocyte gene expression through its receptor and Erk/GSK3β/β-catenin signaling pathway. This pathway was reported in several cell systems that include fibroblasts, endothelial cells and epithelial cells [35–39]. The schematic diagram shown in figure 6 depicts mechanisms by which PEDF may regulate osteocyte genes via Erk/GSk-3β/β-catenin pathway and this may be part of the mechanisms by which PEDF regulates matrix mineralization.