---
reference_id: "PMID:41625718"
title: "Don't Miss the Sword in the Lung: Unveiling a Previously Undiagnosed Congenital Syndrome in a Suspected Myocardial Infarction with Nonobstructive Coronary Arteries Patient."
authors:
- Laurito M
- Napolitano M
- Turina MC
- Grimaldi T
- Mantovani F
- Navazio A
journal: J Cardiovasc Echogr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4103/jcecho.jcecho_64_25
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Don't Miss the Sword in the Lung: Unveiling a Previously Undiagnosed Congenital Syndrome in a Suspected Myocardial Infarction with Nonobstructive Coronary Arteries Patient.
**Authors:** Laurito M, Napolitano M, Turina MC, Grimaldi T, Mantovani F, Navazio A
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Echogr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4103/jcecho.jcecho_64_25](https://doi.org/10.4103/jcecho.jcecho_64_25)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Echogr. 2025 Dec 31;35(4):413-415. doi: 
10.4103/jcecho.jcecho_64_25. eCollection 2025 Oct-Dec.

Don't Miss the Sword in the Lung: Unveiling a Previously Undiagnosed Congenital 
Syndrome in a Suspected Myocardial Infarction with Nonobstructive Coronary 
Arteries Patient.

Laurito M(1), Napolitano M(1), Turina MC(1), Grimaldi T(1), Mantovani F(1), 
Navazio A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, S. Maria Hospital, Reggio Emilia, Italy.

Myocardial infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries (MINOCA) is a 
working diagnosis encompassing a wide spectrum of ischemic and non-ischemic 
conditions. We report the case of a 57-year-old male admitted for exertional 
chest pain and elevated troponin levels, initially managed as suspected MINOCA. 
Coronary angiography excluded obstructive coronary artery disease, while 
subsequent multimodality imaging unexpectedly revealed Scimitar syndrome, a rare 
congenital heart disease. This case underscores the diagnostic complexity of 
MINOCA and the crucial role of advanced imaging in uncovering alternative, 
non-ischemic etiologies.

Copyright: © 2025 Journal of Cardiovascular Echography.

DOI: 10.4103/jcecho.jcecho_64_25
PMCID: PMC12857796
PMID: 41625718

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.