---
reference_id: "PMID:27153185"
title: Glucose transporter type 10-lacking in arterial tortuosity syndrome-facilitates dehydroascorbic acid transport.
authors:
- Németh CE
- Marcolongo P
- Gamberucci A
- Fulceri R
- Benedetti A
- Zoppi N
- Ritelli M
- Chiarelli N
- Colombi M
- Willaert A
- Callewaert BL
- Coucke PJ
- Gróf P
- Nagy SK
- Mészáros T
- Bánhegyi G
- Margittai É
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12204
keywords:
- Arteries/abnormalities
- Ascorbic Acid/metabolism
- "Biological Transport/drug effects, genetics"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Dehydroascorbic Acid/metabolism
- "Fibroblasts/drug effects, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- "Glucose Transport Proteins, Facilitative/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Humans
- "Intracellular Membranes/drug effects, metabolism"
- Joint Instability/genetics
- RNA Interference
- "RNA, Small Interfering/pharmacology"
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/genetics"
- Vascular Malformations/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose transporter type 10-lacking in arterial tortuosity syndrome-facilitates dehydroascorbic acid transport.
**Authors:** Németh CE, Marcolongo P, Gamberucci A, Fulceri R, Benedetti A, Zoppi N, Ritelli M, Chiarelli N, Colombi M, Willaert A, Callewaert BL, Coucke PJ, Gróf P, Nagy SK, Mészáros T, Bánhegyi G, Margittai É
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1873-3468.12204](https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.12204)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2016 Jun;590(11):1630-40. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12204. Epub 2016
May  27.

Glucose transporter type 10-lacking in arterial tortuosity syndrome-facilitates
dehydroascorbic acid transport.

Németh CE(1), Marcolongo P(2), Gamberucci A(2), Fulceri R(2), Benedetti A(2),
Zoppi N(3), Ritelli M(3), Chiarelli N(3), Colombi M(3), Willaert A(4),
Callewaert BL(4), Coucke PJ(4), Gróf P(5), Nagy SK(1), Mészáros T(1), Bánhegyi
G(1), Margittai É(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena,
Italy.
(3)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine, Medical Faculty, University of Brescia, Italy.
(4)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Belgium.
(5)Department of Biophysics and Radiation Biology, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary.
(6)Institute of Clinical Experimental Research, Semmelweis University, Budapest,
Hungary.

Loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding GLUT10 are responsible for
arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS), a rare connective tissue disorder. In this
study GLUT10-mediated dehydroascorbic acid (DAA) transport was investigated,
supposing its involvement in the pathomechanism. GLUT10 protein produced by in
vitro translation and incorporated into liposomes efficiently transported DAA.
Silencing of GLUT10 decreased DAA transport in immortalized human fibroblasts
whose plasma membrane was selectively permeabilized. Similarly, the transport of
DAA through endomembranes was markedly reduced in fibroblasts from ATS patients.
Re-expression of GLUT10 in patients' fibroblasts restored DAA transport
activity. The present results demonstrate that GLUT10 is a DAA transporter and
DAA transport is diminished in the endomembranes of fibroblasts from ATS
patients.

© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.12204
PMID: 27153185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
