---
reference_id: "PMID:39046601"
title: Endoscopic indicators in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis undergoing duodenal resections - a nationwide Danish cohort study with long-term follow-up.
authors:
- Karstensen JG
- Wewer MD
- Bülow S
- Hansen T
- Højen H
- Jelsig AM
- Kuhlmann TP
- Burisch J
- Pommergaard HC
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10689-024-00415-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endoscopic indicators in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis undergoing duodenal resections - a nationwide Danish cohort study with long-term follow-up.
**Authors:** Karstensen JG, Wewer MD, Bülow S, Hansen T, Højen H, Jelsig AM, Kuhlmann TP, Burisch J, Pommergaard HC
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10689-024-00415-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10689-024-00415-x)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2024 Nov;23(4):607-615. doi: 10.1007/s10689-024-00415-x. Epub 2024
 Jul 24.

Endoscopic indicators in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis undergoing 
duodenal resections - a nationwide Danish cohort study with long-term follow-up.

Karstensen JG(1)(2), Wewer MD(3)(4), Bülow S(3), Hansen T(5)(6), Højen H(3), 
Jelsig AM(6), Kuhlmann TP(5)(7), Burisch J(3)(5)(4), Pommergaard HC(5)(8).

Author information:
(1)Danish Polyposis Register, Gastro Unit, Copenhagen University Hospital - 
Amager and Hvidovre, Kettegaard Allé 30, DK-2650, Hvidovre, Denmark. 
john.gasdal.karstensen@regionh.dk.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. john.gasdal.karstensen@regionh.dk.
(3)Danish Polyposis Register, Gastro Unit, Copenhagen University Hospital - 
Amager and Hvidovre, Kettegaard Allé 30, DK-2650, Hvidovre, Denmark.
(4)Gastrounit, medical division, Copenhagen University Hospital - Amager and 
Hvidovre, Hvidovre, Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital - 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Pathology, Copenhagen University Hospital - Herlev and 
Gentofte, Herlev, Denmark.
(8)Hepatic Malignancy Surgical Research Unit (HEPSURU), Department of Surgery 
and Transplantation, Copenhagen University Hospital - Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) predisposes individuals to 
duodenal adenomas. This study describes the histopathological features of 
endoscopic and surgical specimens from the duodenum, as well as 
genotype-phenotype associations.
METHODS: All known FAP patients were included from the Danish Polyposis 
Register. FAP patients were defined as having more than 100 cumulative 
colorectal adenomas and/or having a known germline pathogenic variant in the APC 
gene. Endoscopic procedures, histopathology, and genetics were evaluated.
RESULTS: Of 500 FAP patients, 70.6% underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) 
at least once. Of these, 59.2% presented with detectable duodenal adenomas. The 
most severe morphology was tubular in 62.7% patients, tubulovillous in 25.4%, 
and villous in 12.0%, while the most severe dysplasia was low-grade in 67.5% 
patients, high-grade in 25.4%, and 6.7% had adenocarcinoma. In 6.2% of FAP 
patients, duodenal resection was recommended, including 29% with duodenal 
adenocarcinoma. The risk of duodenal surgery was 1.31 per 1,000 person-years 
(median age: 53 years). The predominant reason for surgery was extensive 
polyposis (67.7%). Of the patients who underwent duodenal resection, a median of 
six (IQR: 4-8) EGDs were performed within five years prior to surgery, but 67.6% 
and 83.9% never underwent a duodenal polypectomy or endoscopic mucosa resection, 
respectively. Of note, seventeen of 500 patients (3.4%) developed duodenal 
adenocarcinoma, of which 47% were advanced at diagnosis. Genetic evaluations 
revealed various pathogenic variants in the APC gene, with no strong 
genotype-phenotype association.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of duodenal adenomas and cancer in FAP warrants 
vigilant endoscopic surveillance. Nevertheless, the need for duodenal surgery 
persists and should together with endoscopic practice be monitored in national 
registers.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-024-00415-x
PMCID: PMC11512927
PMID: 39046601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JGK is a consultant for SNIPR BIOME. The other 
authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.