---
reference_id: "PMID:34197690"
title: "Hemophilic arthropathy: Current knowledge and future perspectives."
authors:
- Gualtierotti R
- Solimeno LP
- Peyvandi F
journal: J Thromb Haemost
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jth.15444
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemophilic arthropathy: Current knowledge and future perspectives.
**Authors:** Gualtierotti R, Solimeno LP, Peyvandi F
**Journal:** J Thromb Haemost (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jth.15444](https://doi.org/10.1111/jth.15444)

## Content

1. J Thromb Haemost. 2021 Sep;19(9):2112-2121. doi: 10.1111/jth.15444. Epub 2021 
Jul 27.

Hemophilic arthropathy: Current knowledge and future perspectives.

Gualtierotti R(1)(2), Solimeno LP(3), Peyvandi F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Angelo Bianchi Bonomi Hemophilia and Thrombosis Center, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' 
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(3)Traumatology and Orthopedic Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Hemophilia A and B are rare X-linked inherited bleeding disorders caused by 
complete or partial deficiency in or the absence of coagulation factors VIII and 
IX. Recurrent joint bleeding (hemarthrosis) is the most frequent clinical 
manifestation of severe hemophilia. Unless appropriately managed, even 
subclinical hemarthrosis can lead to the development of hemophilic arthropathy, 
a disabling condition characterized by joint remodelling, chronic pain, and a 
reduced quality of life, and eventually requires joint replacement. Given the 
lack of specific treatments to reduce blood-induced synovitis, the prevention of 
bleeding is pivotal to the maintenance of joint health. Prophylactic coagulation 
factor replacement therapy using extended half-life recombinant drugs has 
significantly improved patients' quality of life by reducing the burden of 
intravenous injections, and the more recent introduction of nonreplacement 
therapies such as subcutaneous emicizumab injections has improved treatment 
adherence and led to the greater protection of patients with hemophilia A. 
However, despite these advances, chronic arthropathy is still a significant 
problem. The introduction of point-of-care ultrasound imaging has improved the 
diagnosis of acute hemarthrosis and early hemophilic arthropathy, and allowed 
the better monitoring of progressive joint damage, but further research into the 
underlying mechanisms of the disease is required to allow the development of 
more targeted treatment. In the meantime, patient management should be based on 
the risk factors for the onset and progression of arthropathy of each individual 
patient, and all patients should be collaboratively cared for by 
multidisciplinary teams of hematologists, rheumatologists, orthopedic surgeons, 
and physiotherapists at comprehensive hemophilia treatment centers.

© 2021 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.15444
PMCID: PMC8456897
PMID: 34197690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Gualtierotti is a member of advisory boards 
of Biomarin, Pfizer, Bayer, and Takeda, and participates in educational seminars 
sponsored by Pfizer, Sobi, and Roche. Dr. Peyvandi is a member of advisory 
boards of Bioverativ, Grifols, Roche, Sanofi, Sobi, Spark, and Takeda. Dr. 
Solimeno has no disclosure to make.