---
reference_id: "PMID:39830824"
title: "Real-World Use of Tapinarof Cream 1% Once Daily in Patients with Seborrheic Dermatitis: A Case Series."
authors:
- Issa NT
- Pomaville L
journal: J Clin Aesthet Dermatol
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-World Use of Tapinarof Cream 1% Once Daily in Patients with Seborrheic Dermatitis: A Case Series.
**Authors:** Issa NT, Pomaville L
**Journal:** J Clin Aesthet Dermatol (2025)

## Content

1. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2025 Jan;18(1):24-28.

Real-World Use of Tapinarof Cream 1% Once Daily in Patients with Seborrheic 
Dermatitis: A Case Series.

Issa NT(1), Pomaville L(2).

Author information:
(1)Dr. Issa is with Forefront Dermatology in Vienna, Virginia; Issa Research and 
Consulting, LLC in Springfield, Virginia; the University of Miami Leonard M. 
Miller School of Medicine in Miami, Florida; and the George Washington 
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences in Washington, District of 
Columbia.
(2)Ms. Pomaville is with Forefront Dermatology in Berwyn, Illinois; the 
Marquette University College of Health Sciences, PA Studies Program in 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin; and the University of Dubuque, MSPAS Program, in Dubuque, 
Iowa.

Seborrheic dermatitis (SD) is an inflammatory skin disease with multifactorial 
etiology, involving genetic and environmental factors. Many conventional 
therapies for SD (ie, topical antifungals, topical corticosteroids) are 
associated with incomplete efficacy, frequent and sometimes rapid disease 
recurrence, and restrictions on duration of therapy and anatomic sites of 
application. This may be because they cannot target multiple disease processes 
and/or are limited by safety considerations. Topical roflumilast foam was 
approved for the treatment of SD in 2023, but additional options are needed. The 
pathophysiology of atopic dermatitis (AD) and psoriasis have similarities with 
SD, supporting the hypothesis that tapinarof cream 1% once daily (QD) may be 
beneficial and well tolerated for patients with SD. Tapinarof is a 
non-steroidal, topical aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonist approved for the 
treatment of plaque psoriasis in adults. Tapinarof downregulates 
pro-inflammatory cytokines implicated in AD and plaque psoriasis, restores the 
skin barrier through upregulation of skin barrier components, and reduces 
oxidative stress. Here, we report that tapinarof cream 1% QD used for the 
treatment of four adults with mild-to-severe SD affecting the face, neck, back, 
and chest, demonstrated a rapid onset of efficacy and noticeable improvements in 
disease activity. Efficacy was maintained after treatment discontinuation, 
indicating a possible remittive effect as previously described in plaque 
psoriasis. The efficacy and potential remittive effect may be attributed to the 
unique mechanism of action and clinical profile of tapinarof cream. Tapinarof is 
a novel topical therapy that may be beneficial for patients with SD.

Copyright © 2025. Matrix Medical Communications. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC11741169
PMID: 39830824

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES: Dr. Issa has served as an advisor, 
consultant, speaker, or investigator for Dermavant Sciences, Inc.; Dr. Pomaville 
reports no relevant conflicts of interest.