---
reference_id: "PMID:37261967"
title: Clinical trajectory of hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome/hypermobility spectrum disorders in older adults.
authors:
- Anderson LK
- Lane KR
journal: J Am Assoc Nurse Pract
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/JXX.0000000000000900
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical trajectory of hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome/hypermobility spectrum disorders in older adults.
**Authors:** Anderson LK, Lane KR
**Journal:** J Am Assoc Nurse Pract (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/JXX.0000000000000900](https://doi.org/10.1097/JXX.0000000000000900)

## Content

1. J Am Assoc Nurse Pract. 2023 Oct 1;35(10):605-612. doi: 
10.1097/JXX.0000000000000900.

Clinical trajectory of hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome/hypermobility spectrum 
disorders in older adults.

Anderson LK(1), Lane KR.

Author information:
(1)University of Missouri, Sinclair School of Nursing, Columbia, Missouri.

BACKGROUND: Research on hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and hypermobility 
spectrum disorder (hEDS/HSD) has described its natural history and clinical 
course in children, adolescents, and young to middle-aged adults. However, more 
research is needed on the clinical trajectory of hEDS/HSD into older age. 
Therefore, clinicians, including nurse practitioners, know little about 
identifying older adults with undiagnosed hEDS/HSD.
OBJECTIVE: This review sought to identify studies regarding aging in hEDS/HSD.
DATA SOURCES: This scoping review included PubMed, Cumulative Index to Nursing 
and Allied Health Literature, and Scopus and found 15 studies that mentioned age 
or aging on the symptoms and health-related quality of life.
CONCLUSIONS: No study had a stated aim regarding aging in hEDS/HSD, but all 
studies corroborated earlier natural history studies describing the age-related 
trajectory of manifestations in younger people. Studies found that symptom 
progression was heterogeneous, multisystemic, and unpredictable. Studies also 
noted prolonged diagnosis delays and long symptom duration, but the impact of 
these factors on outcomes was unclear. The high variability in patient outcomes 
precludes the prediction of outcomes based on the included studies. The clinical 
impact of aging on hEDS/HSD remains mostly speculative.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Nurse practitioners, especially those in primary 
care, should consider that older adults presenting with multimorbidity may have 
undiagnosed hEDS/HSD. More research is needed to identify symptom patterns and 
clinical history that may suggest an underlying connective tissue disorder.

Copyright © 2023 American Association of Nurse Practitioners.

DOI: 10.1097/JXX.0000000000000900
PMID: 37261967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors report no 
conflicts of interest.