---
reference_id: "PMID:12832747"
title: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) and renal AA amyloidosis--phenotype-genotype correlation, treatment and prognosis.
authors:
- Ben-Chetrit E
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) and renal AA amyloidosis--phenotype-genotype correlation, treatment and prognosis.
**Authors:** Ben-Chetrit E
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2003)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2003 May-Jun;16(3):431-4.

Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) and renal AA amyloidosis--phenotype-genotype 
correlation, treatment and prognosis.

Ben-Chetrit E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, FMF Clinic, Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, 
Israel. eldad@hadasah.org.il

Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disease, which 
primarily affects the population surrounding the Mediterranean basin. It is 
characterized by recurrent attacks of fever and peritonitis, pleuritis, 
arthritis or erysipelas-like erythema. Amyloidosis, causing renal failure, is 
one of the most severe complications of the disease. The gene associated with 
FMF (MEFV) has been recently isolated. Phenotype-genotype correlation studies 
revealed that amyloidosis was more common in FMF patients originating from 
North-Africa who were homozygous for the M694V mutation. Such a correlation was 
not found in Turkish patients. The risk of amyloidosis is increased in male FMF 
patients and in patients bearing polymorphism a/a in the SAA1 gene. Colchicine 
is the chosen drug for the treatment of FMF and can prevent amyloidosis.

PMID: 12832747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]