---
reference_id: "PMID:26497532"
title: Fc receptors in antibody-dependent enhancement of viral infections.
authors:
- Taylor A
- Foo SS
- Bruzzone R
- Dinh LV
- King NJ
- Mahalingam S
journal: Immunol Rev
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/imr.12367
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fc receptors in antibody-dependent enhancement of viral infections.
**Authors:** Taylor A, Foo SS, Bruzzone R, Dinh LV, King NJ, Mahalingam S
**Journal:** Immunol Rev (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imr.12367](https://doi.org/10.1111/imr.12367)

## Content

1. Immunol Rev. 2015 Nov;268(1):340-64. doi: 10.1111/imr.12367.

Fc receptors in antibody-dependent enhancement of viral infections.

Taylor A(1), Foo SS(1), Bruzzone R(2)(3), Dinh LV(4), King NJ(4), Mahalingam 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Emerging Viruses and Inflammation Research Group, Institute for Glycomics, 
Griffith University, Gold Coast, Qld, Australia.
(2)HKU-Pasteur Research Pole, School of Public Health, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Infection, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(4)Discipline of Pathology, Bosch Institute, School of Medical Sciences, Sydney 
Medical School, Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.

Sensitization of the humoral immune response to invading viruses and production 
of antiviral antibodies forms part of the host antiviral repertoire. 
Paradoxically, for a number of viral pathogens, under certain conditions, 
antibodies provide an attractive means of enhanced virus entry and replication 
in a number of cell types. Known as antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of 
infection, the phenomenon occurs when virus-antibody immunocomplexes interact 
with cells bearing complement or Fc receptors, promoting internalization of the 
virus and increasing infection. Frequently associated with exacerbation of viral 
disease, ADE of infection presents a major obstacle to the prevention of viral 
disease by vaccination and is thought to be partly responsible for the adverse 
effects of novel antiviral therapeutics such as intravenous immunoglobulins. 
There is a growing body of work examining the intracellular signaling pathways 
and epitopes responsible for mediating ADE, with a view to aiding rational 
design of antiviral strategies. With in vitro studies also confirming ADE as a 
feature of infection for a growing number of viruses, challenges remain in 
understanding the multilayered molecular mechanisms of ADE and its effect on 
viral pathogenesis.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.12367
PMCID: PMC7165974
PMID: 26497532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]