---
reference_id: "PMID:36658219"
title: ETV6 dependency in Ewing sarcoma by antagonism of EWS-FLI1-mediated enhancer activation.
authors:
- Gao Y
- He XY
- Wu XS
- Huang YH
- Toneyan S
- Ha T
- Ipsaro JJ
- Koo PK
- Joshua-Tor L
- Bailey KM
- Egeblad M
- Vakoc CR
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41556-022-01060-1
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "RNA-Binding Protein EWS/genetics, metabolism"
- "Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ETV6 dependency in Ewing sarcoma by antagonism of EWS-FLI1-mediated enhancer activation.
**Authors:** Gao Y, He XY, Wu XS, Huang YH, Toneyan S, Ha T, Ipsaro JJ, Koo PK, Joshua-Tor L, Bailey KM, Egeblad M, Vakoc CR
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41556-022-01060-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-01060-1)

## Content

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2023 Feb;25(2):298-308. doi: 10.1038/s41556-022-01060-1. Epub
2023 Jan 19.

ETV6 dependency in Ewing sarcoma by antagonism of EWS-FLI1-mediated enhancer
activation.

Gao Y(1), He XY(1), Wu XS(1)(2), Huang YH(1), Toneyan S(1)(3), Ha T(1), Ipsaro
JJ(4), Koo PK(1), Joshua-Tor L(4), Bailey KM(5), Egeblad M(1), Vakoc CR(6).

Author information:
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA.
(2)Genetics Program, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY, USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, W.M. Keck Structural Biology Laboratory,
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(6)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA. vakoc@cshl.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2023 Feb;25(2):214-216. doi: 10.1038/s41556-022-01067-8.

The EWS-FLI1 fusion oncoprotein deregulates transcription to initiate the
paediatric cancer Ewing sarcoma. Here we used a domain-focused CRISPR screen to
implicate the transcriptional repressor ETV6 as a unique dependency in this
tumour. Using biochemical assays and epigenomics, we show that ETV6 competes
with EWS-FLI1 for binding to select DNA elements enriched for short GGAA repeat
sequences. Upon inactivating ETV6, EWS-FLI1 overtakes and hyper-activates these
cis-elements to promote mesenchymal differentiation, with SOX11 being a key
downstream target. We show that squelching of ETV6 with a dominant-interfering
peptide phenocopies these effects and suppresses Ewing sarcoma growth in vivo.
These findings reveal targeting of ETV6 as a strategy for neutralizing the
EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein by reprogramming of genomic occupancy.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41556-022-01060-1
PMCID: PMC10101761
PMID: 36658219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
