---
reference_id: "PMID:37182593"
title: The protective effect of inhaled corticosteroid on lung inflammation and breathing pattern complexity in a rat model of asthma.
authors:
- Enayati P
- Dehdar K
- Javan M
- Raoufy MR
journal: Respir Physiol Neurobiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2023.104072
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The protective effect of inhaled corticosteroid on lung inflammation and breathing pattern complexity in a rat model of asthma.
**Authors:** Enayati P, Dehdar K, Javan M, Raoufy MR
**Journal:** Respir Physiol Neurobiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.resp.2023.104072](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resp.2023.104072)

## Content

1. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2023 Aug;314:104072. doi:
10.1016/j.resp.2023.104072.  Epub 2023 May 12.

The protective effect of inhaled corticosteroid on lung inflammation and 
breathing pattern complexity in a rat model of asthma.

Enayati P(1), Dehdar K(1), Javan M(1), Raoufy MR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: raoufy@modares.ac.ir.

Asthma is a heterogeneous disease in which the complexity of the breathing 
pattern reduces as the severity of the disease increases. Since the 
pathophysiological basis of reduced breathing pattern complexity in asthma is 
unclear, in this study, we investigated the effect of reducing inflammation 
using an inhaled corticosteroid (fluticasone propionate) on the breathing 
pattern of a rat model of asthma. Detrended fluctuation analysis, sample 
entropy, and cross-sample entropy analysis of both inter-breath interval and 
respiratory volume time series showed that early treatment with inhaled 
corticosteroids not only diminishes lung inflammation and airway 
hyper-responsiveness, but also has a protective effect against the reduction of 
breathing pattern complexity due to asthma. However, late treatment had a 
partial effect on asthma-induced respiratory pattern changes. Since inflammation 
is a key factor in shifting breathing dynamics away from normal fluctuations, 
these findings further emphasize the importance of early treatment of asthma 
with corticosteroids.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2023.104072
PMID: 37182593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.