---
reference_id: "PMID:26354523"
title: Endometrial cancer.
authors:
- Morice P
- Leary A
- Creutzberg C
- Abu-Rustum N
- Darai E
journal: Lancet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00130-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endometrial cancer.
**Authors:** Morice P, Leary A, Creutzberg C, Abu-Rustum N, Darai E
**Journal:** Lancet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00130-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00130-0)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2016 Mar 12;387(10023):1094-1108. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00130-0. 
Epub 2015 Sep 6.

Endometrial cancer.

Morice P(1), Leary A(2), Creutzberg C(3), Abu-Rustum N(4), Darai E(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecologic Surgery, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; Unit 
INSERM U 1030, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; Université Paris-Sud (Paris 
XI), Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France. Electronic address: 
philippe.morice@gustaveroussy.fr.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; 
Translational Research Lab U981, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
Netherlands.
(4)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France; 
INSERM UMRS 938, Paris, France; Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris VI), 
Paris, France.

Endometrial cancer is the most common gynaecological tumour in developed 
countries, and its incidence is increasing. The most frequently occurring 
histological subtype is endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Patients are often 
diagnosed when the disease is still confined to the uterus. Standard treatment 
consists of primary hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, often 
using minimally invasive approaches (laparoscopic or robotic). Lymph node 
surgical strategy is contingent on histological factors (subtype, tumour grade, 
involvement of lymphovascular space), disease stage (including myometrial 
invasion), patients' characteristics (age and comorbidities), and national and 
international guidelines. Adjuvant treatment is tailored according to histology 
and stage. Various classifications are used to assess the risks of recurrence 
and to determine optimum postoperative management. 5 year overall survival 
ranges from 74% to 91% in patients without metastatic disease. Trials are 
ongoing in patients at high risk of recurrence (including chemotherapy, 
chemoradiation therapy, and molecular targeted therapies) to assess the 
modalities that best balance optimisation of survival with the lowest adverse 
effects on quality of life.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00130-0
PMID: 26354523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]