---
reference_id: "PMID:40164036"
title: Exercise antagonizes cadmium-caused liver and intestinal injury in mice via Nrf2 and TLR2/NF-κB signalling pathway.
authors:
- Zhang D
- Liu J
- Liu J
- Fatima M
- Yang L
- Qin Y
- Li W
- Sun Z
- Yang B
journal: Ecotoxicol Environ Saf
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2025.118100
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exercise antagonizes cadmium-caused liver and intestinal injury in mice via Nrf2 and TLR2/NF-κB signalling pathway.
**Authors:** Zhang D, Liu J, Liu J, Fatima M, Yang L, Qin Y, Li W, Sun Z, Yang B
**Journal:** Ecotoxicol Environ Saf (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ecoenv.2025.118100](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2025.118100)

## Content

1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2025 Apr 1;294:118100. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2025.118100. Epub 2025 Mar 30.

Exercise antagonizes cadmium-caused liver and intestinal injury in mice via Nrf2 
and TLR2/NF-κB signalling pathway.

Zhang D(1), Liu J(2), Liu J(2), Fatima M(2), Yang L(2), Qin Y(3), Li W(2), Sun 
Z(2), Yang B(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural University, Taigu 030801, 
PR China. Electronic address: zdlucky2014@sina.com.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural University, Taigu 030801, 
PR China.
(3)Second hospital of Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan 030001, PR China.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural University, Taigu 030801, 
PR China. Electronic address: bo_yang@sxau.edu.cn.

Cadmium (Cd) causes a health risk to humans and animals. Exercise can prevent 
and treat a variety of diseases, but the effect and mechanism of exercise on 
cadmium poisoning are still unclear. The present research aims to investigate 
the antagonistic impacts of exercise on enterotoxicity and hepatotoxicity caused 
by Cd. The results indicated that exercise, both before and during Cd exposure, 
can reduce Cd caused pathological damages in the liver and duodenum of mice, 
suppressing the expression levels of the IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α genes. In mice 
exposed to Cd, exercise significantly decreased blood ALT and AST levels, 
alleviating oxidative stress in the liver by reducing MDA synthesis and 
enhancing SOD and GSH-PX activities. Exercise inhibited nuclear damage and 
hepatocyte apoptosis caused by Cd by increasing Bcl-2 protein expression and 
preventing the release of pro-apoptotic proteins such as caspase-3, Cytc, Bax, 
caspase-8and cleaved-caspase-3. Exercise before or during Cd exposure can 
increase the protein and gene expression of HO-1, NQO-1 and Nrf2 in the liver of 
mice exposed to Cd. These findings suggested that the Nrf2 signaling pathway may 
have contributed to the exercise-induced partial attenuation of Cd-induced 
hepatic injury. Exercise also promoted the expression of the occludin gene in 
the duodenum of Cd-exposed mice, decreasing the structural damage and 
inflammatory cell infiltration induced by Cd. NF-κB and TLR2 protein expression 
levels were elevated in mice exposed to Cd. However, exercise mitigated the 
increase in NF-κB and TLR2 expression in the duodenum of Cd-intoxicated mice, 
suggesting that the protective effects of exercise on the intestinal tract in 
Cd-exposed mice may be mediated through modulation of the NF-κB/TLR2 signaling 
pathway. In conclusion, this study elucidated the protective effects of exercise 
against Cd-induced hepatotoxicity and intestinal injury in mice. The protective 
mechanisms of exercise on Cd-exposed liver and intestinal tract were partially 
realized through the regulation of Nrf2 and NF-κB/TLR2 signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2025.118100
PMID: 40164036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.