---
reference_id: "PMID:34327816"
title: "Disease expression caused by different variants in the BEST1 gene: genotype and phenotype findings in bestrophinopathies."
authors:
- Nowomiejska K
- Nasser F
- Stingl K
- Schimpf-Linzenbold S
- Biskup S
- Brzozowska A
- Rejdak R
- Kohl S
- Zrenner E
journal: Acta Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/aos.14958
keywords:
- Bestrophins/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Retinal Diseases/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease expression caused by different variants in the BEST1 gene: genotype and phenotype findings in bestrophinopathies.
**Authors:** Nowomiejska K, Nasser F, Stingl K, Schimpf-Linzenbold S, Biskup S, Brzozowska A, Rejdak R, Kohl S, Zrenner E
**Journal:** Acta Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aos.14958](https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.14958)

## Content

1. Acta Ophthalmol. 2022 May;100(3):e847-e858. doi: 10.1111/aos.14958. Epub 2021
Jul 29.

Disease expression caused by different variants in the BEST1 gene: genotype and
phenotype findings in bestrophinopathies.

Nowomiejska K(1)(2), Nasser F(2), Stingl K(3)(4), Schimpf-Linzenbold S(5),
Biskup S(5), Brzozowska A(6), Rejdak R(1), Kohl S(2), Zrenner E(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Chair and Department of General and Pediatric Ophthalmology, Medical
University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(2)Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Center for Ophthalmology, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)University Eye Hospital, Center for Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Center for Rare Eye Diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Praxis für Humangenetik Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Mathematics and Medical Biostatistics, Medical University of
Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(7)Werner Reichardt Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.

PURPOSE: To analyse the spectrum of clinical features and molecular genetic data
in a series of patients carrying likely disease-associated variants in the BEST1
gene.
METHODS: Retrospective observational analysis of clinical data extracted from
the medical records of visual function, multimodal imaging and electrophysiology
of 62 eyes of 31 patients. Molecular genetic analysis was performed by means of
panel-based NGS or Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: The spectrum of variants in the BEST1 gene comprised 19 different
variants and three of which are novel. Fundus photographs and OCT images allowed
categorization of 52 eyes as Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) with
stages 1 to 5 and 10 eyes with autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB), with
more severe phenotype. One patient was shown to be heterozygous for a variant,
which has so far been described only in ARB, but this patient had the BVMD
phenotype. There was no significant progression of the visual acuity during the
follow-up period of 5 years both in BVMD and ARB. The most prevalent pattern of
fundus autofluorescence (FAF) in BVMD was 'patchy'. There were diverse visual
field defects in static automated perimetry (SAP) depending on the stage. The
Arden ratio was significantly lower in ARB patients and in eyes with stage 5 of
BVMD.
CONCLUSIONS: The genotype does not always predict the phenotype in patients with
BVMD and ARB; however, having two mutations in the BEST1 gene causes a more
severe phenotype. FAF helped to distinguish ARB from BVMD. Most of the observed
eyes did not progress functionally during the follow-up. ARB and the atrophic
stage of BVMD as the disease end-stage had the worst visual functions and EOG
results.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Acta Ophthalmologica published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation.

DOI: 10.1111/aos.14958
PMCID: PMC9328113
PMID: 34327816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
