---
reference_id: "PMID:28535799"
title: "The spleen in liver cirrhosis: revisiting an old enemy with novel targets."
authors:
- Li L
- Duan M
- Chen W
- Jiang A
- Li X
- Yang J
- Li Z
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-017-1214-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The spleen in liver cirrhosis: revisiting an old enemy with novel targets.
**Authors:** Li L, Duan M, Chen W, Jiang A, Li X, Yang J, Li Z
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-017-1214-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-017-1214-8)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2017 May 23;15(1):111. doi: 10.1186/s12967-017-1214-8.

The spleen in liver cirrhosis: revisiting an old enemy with novel targets.

Li L(1)(2), Duan M(3), Chen W(1)(3), Jiang A(1)(2)(4), Li X(1), Yang J(5)(6)(7), 
Li Z(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Biodiagnosis and 
Biotherapy, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, No.157, 
Xiwu Road, Xi'an, 710004, Shaanxi, China.
(2)Liver and Spleen Diseases Research Center, Shaanxi Province, No.157, Xiwu 
Road, Xi'an, 710004, Shaanxi, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular 
Science (LIMS), La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC, Australia.
(4)Department of General Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, No.157, Xiwu Road, Xi'an, 710004, Shaanxi, China.
(5)National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Biodiagnosis and 
Biotherapy, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, No.157, 
Xiwu Road, Xi'an, 710004, Shaanxi, China. yangjundr@163.com.
(6)Liver and Spleen Diseases Research Center, Shaanxi Province, No.157, Xiwu 
Road, Xi'an, 710004, Shaanxi, China. yangjundr@163.com.
(7)Department of Pathology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, No.157, Xiwu Road, Xi'an, 710004, Shaanxi, China. yangjundr@163.com.
(8)National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Biodiagnosis and 
Biotherapy, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, No.157, 
Xiwu Road, Xi'an, 710004, Shaanxi, China. lzf2568@gmail.com.
(9)Liver and Spleen Diseases Research Center, Shaanxi Province, No.157, Xiwu 
Road, Xi'an, 710004, Shaanxi, China. lzf2568@gmail.com.

The spleen is a secondary lymphoid organ which can influence the progression of 
multiple diseases, notably liver cirrhosis. In chronic liver diseases, 
splenomegaly and hypersplenism can manifest following the development of portal 
hypertension. These splenic abnormalities correlate with and have been 
postulated to facilitate the progression of liver fibrosis to cirrhosis, 
although precise mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this review, we 
summarize the literature to highlight the mechanistic contributions of 
splenomegaly and hypersplenism to the development of liver cirrhosis, focusing 
on three key aspects: hepatic fibrogenesis, hepatic immune microenvironment 
dysregulation and liver regeneration. We conclude with a discussion of the 
possible therapeutic strategies for modulating splenic abnormalities, including 
the novel potential usage of nanomedicine in non-surgically targetting splenic 
disorders for the treatment of liver cirrhosis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-017-1214-8
PMCID: PMC5442653
PMID: 28535799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]