---
reference_id: "PMID:33602475"
title: "Cardiac Involvement in Fabry Disease: JACC Review Topic of the Week."
authors:
- Pieroni M
- Moon JC
- Arbustini E
- Barriales-Villa R
- Camporeale A
- Vujkovac AC
- Elliott PM
- Hagege A
- Kuusisto J
- Linhart A
- Nordbeck P
- Olivotto I
- Pietilä-Effati P
- Namdar M
journal: J Am Coll Cardiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2020.12.024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac Involvement in Fabry Disease: JACC Review Topic of the Week.
**Authors:** Pieroni M, Moon JC, Arbustini E, Barriales-Villa R, Camporeale A, Vujkovac AC, Elliott PM, Hagege A, Kuusisto J, Linhart A, Nordbeck P, Olivotto I, Pietilä-Effati P, Namdar M
**Journal:** J Am Coll Cardiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacc.2020.12.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.12.024)

## Content

1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021 Feb 23;77(7):922-936. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2020.12.024.

Cardiac Involvement in Fabry Disease: JACC Review Topic of the Week.

Pieroni M(1), Moon JC(2), Arbustini E(3), Barriales-Villa R(4), Camporeale A(5), 
Vujkovac AC(6), Elliott PM(2), Hagege A(7), Kuusisto J(8), Linhart A(9), 
Nordbeck P(10), Olivotto I(11), Pietilä-Effati P(12), Namdar M(13).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Department, San Donato Hospital, Arezzo, Italy. Electronic 
address: mauriziopieroni@yahoo.com.
(2)Barts Heart Centre, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico 
San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Unidad de Cardiopatías Familiares, INIBIC, Complejo Hospitalario 
Universitario de A Coruña, CIBERCV, A Coruña, Spain.
(5)Multimodality Cardiac Imaging Section, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San 
Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, General Hospital Slovenj Gradec, Slovenj 
Gradec, Slovenia.
(7)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Cardiology Department, Hôpital 
Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France.
(8)Centre for Medicine and Clinical Research, Kuopio University Hospital and 
University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(9)2(nd) Department of Internal Cardiovascular Medicine, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(10)University Hospital of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(11)Cardiomyopathy Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(12)Cardiac Unit, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland.
(13)Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Genève, Switzerland.

Fabry disease (FD) is a rare X-linked inherited lysosomal storage disorder 
caused by deficient α-galactosidase A activity that leads to an accumulation of 
globotriasylceramide (Gb3) in affected tissues, including the heart. 
Cardiovascular involvement usually manifests as left ventricular hypertrophy, 
myocardial fibrosis, heart failure, and arrhythmias, which limit quality of life 
and represent the most common causes of death. Following the introduction of 
enzyme replacement therapy, early diagnosis and treatment have become essential 
to slow disease progression and prevent major cardiac complications. Recent 
advances in the understanding of FD pathophysiology suggest that in addition to 
Gb3 accumulation, other mechanisms contribute to the development of Fabry 
cardiomyopathy. Progress in imaging techniques have improved diagnosis and 
staging of FD-related cardiac disease, suggesting a central role for myocardial 
inflammation and setting the stage for further research. In addition, with the 
recent approval of oral chaperone therapy and new treatment developments, the 
FD-specific treatment landscape is rapidly evolving.

Copyright © 2021 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2020.12.024
PMID: 33602475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Funding Support and Author Disclosures Dr. 
Pieroni has received advisory board honoraria from Amicus Therapeutics and 
Sanofi Genzyme; and has received speaker honoraria from Amicus Therapeutics, 
Sanofi Genzyme, and Shire. Dr. Moon has received advisory board honoraria and 
speaker honoraria from Sanofi Genzyme and Shire; and has received an 
investigator-led research grant from Sanofi Genzyme. Dr. Arbustini has received 
travel support from Sanofi Genzyme, Shire, and Amicus Therapeutics. Dr. 
Barriales-Villa has received an unrestricted educational grant from Sanofi 
Genzyme; and has received advisory board/speaker’s fees from Amicus 
Therapeutics, Sanofi Genzyme, and Pfizer. Dr. Camporeale has received honoraria 
for presentations and board meetings from Amicus Therapeutics, Sanofi Genzyme, 
and Shire; and has received a research grant from Amicus Therapeutics. Dr. 
Vujkovac has received speaker honoraria and travel support from Sanofi Genzyme 
and Takeda. Dr. Elliott has received an unrestricted educational grant from 
Pfizer; and has received advisory board and/or speaker’s fees from Myokardia, 
Cytokinetics, Sanofi Genzyme, Shire, Alnylam, and Pfizer. Dr. Hagege has 
received support from Amicus, Gilead, Myokardia, Novartis, and Sanofi Genzyme. 
Dr. Kuusisto has received advisory board attendance fees from Sanofi Genzyme; 
and has received speaker honoraria and travel support from Sanofi Genzyme, 
Shire, and Amicus. Dr. Linhart has been a consultant for Amicus Therapeutics, 
Sanofi Genzyme, and Takeda; and has received speaker honoraria and travel 
support from Sanofi Genzyme and Takeda. Dr. Nordbeck has received honoraria for 
lecturing and advisory board participation from Amicus Therapeutics, 
Genzyme/Sanofi, Greenovation, Idorsia, and Shire/Takeda. Dr. Olivotto has 
received grants from Myokardia, Sanofi Genzyme, Shire, Bayer, Amicus, and 
Menarini International; and has received board and/or speaker’s fees from 
Myokardia, Cytokinetics, Sanofi Genzyme, and Shire. Dr. Pietila-Effati has 
received advisory board attendance and speaker honoraria, and travel support 
from Sanofi Genzyme; and has been a consultant for Shire. Dr. Namdar has 
received research support, advisory board attendance, and speaker honoraria, and 
travel support from Sanofi Genzyme; and has received research support from Shire 
HGT.