---
reference_id: "PMID:8736618"
title: Practical guidelines for the treatment of cholera.
authors:
- Seas C
- DuPont HL
- Valdez LM
- Gotuzzo E
journal: Drugs
year: '1996'
doi: 10.2165/00003495-199651060-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practical guidelines for the treatment of cholera.
**Authors:** Seas C, DuPont HL, Valdez LM, Gotuzzo E
**Journal:** Drugs (1996)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00003495-199651060-00005](https://doi.org/10.2165/00003495-199651060-00005)

## Content

1. Drugs. 1996 Jun;51(6):966-73. doi: 10.2165/00003495-199651060-00005.

Practical guidelines for the treatment of cholera.

Seas C(1), DuPont HL, Valdez LM, Gotuzzo E.

Author information:
(1)Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru.

Cholera is a dramatic clinical illness that requires rapid diagnosis and 
aggressive therapy. Clinical signs and symptoms of mild, moderate and severe 
dehydration must be determined, before beginning fluid therapy. Fluid therapy 
has 2 phases: rehydration (first 3 to 4 hours to correct deficits) and 
maintenance (to match continuing losses). The route and speed of fluid 
administration will depend on the degree of dehydration. Patients with severe 
dehydration should be treated intravenously, as should those patients who do not 
tolerate oral rehydration solution (ORS). Ringer's lactate is the preferred 
intravenous solution, although normal saline may be used along with ORS. For 
most patients with cholera, an ORS using one of the higher sodium-containing 
solutions and plain water optimally provide the fluid and salt needed. Close 
monitoring of intake, outputs and hydration status should be performed for all 
patients. Antimicrobial therapy should be given to moderately and severely ill 
patients in order to decrease the volume of fluids lost and to shorten the 
period of excretion of vibrios.

DOI: 10.2165/00003495-199651060-00005
PMID: 8736618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]