---
reference_id: "PMID:29359884"
title: Benign and malignant tumors in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.
authors:
- Boot MV
- van Belzen MJ
- Overbeek LI
- Hijmering N
- Mendeville M
- Waisfisz Q
- Wesseling P
- Hennekam RC
- de Jong D
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38603
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- E1A-Associated p300 Protein/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Grading
- "Neoplasms/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- Registries
- "Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Benign and malignant tumors in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.
**Authors:** Boot MV, van Belzen MJ, Overbeek LI, Hijmering N, Mendeville M, Waisfisz Q, Wesseling P, Hennekam RC, de Jong D
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38603](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38603)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Mar;176(3):597-608. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38603. Epub
2018  Jan 23.

Benign and malignant tumors in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

Boot MV(1), van Belzen MJ(2), Overbeek LI(3), Hijmering N(1), Mendeville M(1), 
Waisfisz Q(4), Wesseling P(1)(5), Hennekam RC(6), de Jong D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Dutch Pathology Registry, Houten, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pathology, Princess Máxima Centre for Pediatric Oncology, 
Utrecht and University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Amsterdam University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a multiple congenital anomalies syndrome 
associated with mutations in CREBBP (70%) and EP300 (5-10%). Previous reports 
have suggested an increased incidence of specific benign and possibly also 
malignant tumors. We identified all known individuals diagnosed with RSTS in the 
Netherlands until 2015 (n = 87) and studied the incidence and character of 
neoplastic tumors in relation to their CREBBP/EP300 alterations. The 
population-based Dutch RSTS data are compared to similar data of the Dutch 
general population and to an overview of case reports and series of all RSTS 
individuals with tumors reported in the literature to date. Using the Nationwide 
Network and Registry of Histopathology and Cytopathology in the Netherlands 
(PALGA Foundation), 35 benign and malignant tumors were observed in 26/87 
individuals. Meningiomas and pilomatricomas were the most frequent benign tumors 
and their incidence was significantly elevated in comparison to the general 
Dutch population. Five malignant tumors were observed in four persons with RSTS 
(medulloblastoma; diffuse large-cell B-cell lymphoma; breast cancer; non-small 
cell lung carcinoma; colon carcinoma). No clear genotype-phenotype correlation 
became evident. The Dutch population-based data and reported case studies 
underscore the increased incidence of meningiomas and pilomatricomas in 
individuals with RSTS. There is no supporting evidence for an increased risk for 
malignant tumors in individuals with RSTS, however, due to the small numbers 
this risk may not be fully dismissed.

© 2018 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A Published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38603
PMCID: PMC5838508
PMID: 29359884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]