---
reference_id: "PMID:18337720"
title: Impaired T(H)17 cell differentiation in subjects with autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome.
authors:
- Milner JD
- Brenchley JM
- Laurence A
- Freeman AF
- Hill BJ
- Elias KM
- Kanno Y
- Spalding C
- Elloumi HZ
- Paulson ML
- Davis J
- Hsu A
- Asher AI
- "O'Shea J"
- Holland SM
- Paul WE
- Douek DC
journal: Nature
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/nature06764
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Candida albicans/immunology
- Cell Differentiation
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Enterotoxins/immunology
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Humans
- "Interferon-gamma/biosynthesis, immunology"
- Interleukin-17/biosynthesis
- "Interleukin-2/biosynthesis, immunology"
- "Job Syndrome/genetics, immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Streptokinase/metabolism
- "T-Lymphocytes, Helper-Inducer/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/biosynthesis, immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired T(H)17 cell differentiation in subjects with autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome.
**Authors:** Milner JD, Brenchley JM, Laurence A, Freeman AF, Hill BJ, Elias KM, Kanno Y, Spalding C, Elloumi HZ, Paulson ML, Davis J, Hsu A, Asher AI, O'Shea J, Holland SM, Paul WE, Douek DC
**Journal:** Nature (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature06764](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06764)

## Content

1. Nature. 2008 Apr 10;452(7188):773-6. doi: 10.1038/nature06764. Epub 2008 Mar
12.

Impaired T(H)17 cell differentiation in subjects with autosomal dominant 
hyper-IgE syndrome.

Milner JD(1), Brenchley JM, Laurence A, Freeman AF, Hill BJ, Elias KM, Kanno Y, 
Spalding C, Elloumi HZ, Paulson ML, Davis J, Hsu A, Asher AI, O'Shea J, Holland 
SM, Paul WE, Douek DC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA.

The autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome (HIES, 'Job's syndrome') is 
characterized by recurrent and often severe pulmonary infections, pneumatoceles, 
eczema, staphylococcal abscesses, mucocutaneous candidiasis, and abnormalities 
of bone and connective tissue. Mutations presumed to underlie HIES have recently 
been identified in stat3, the gene encoding STAT3 (signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 3) (refs 3, 4). Although impaired production of 
interferon-gamma and tumour-necrosis factor by T cells, diminished memory T-cell 
populations, decreased delayed-type-hypersensitivity responses and decreased in 
vitro lymphoproliferation in response to specific antigens have variably been 
described, specific immunological abnormalities that can explain the unique 
susceptibility to particular infections seen in HIES have not yet been defined. 
Here we show that interleukin (IL)-17 production by T cells is absent in HIES 
individuals. We observed that ex vivo T cells from subjects with HIES failed to 
produce IL-17, but not IL-2, tumour-necrosis factor or interferon-gamma, on 
mitogenic stimulation with staphylococcal enterotoxin B or on antigenic 
stimulation with Candida albicans or streptokinase. Purified naive T cells were 
unable to differentiate into IL-17-producing (T(H)17) T helper cells in vitro 
and had lower expression of retinoid-related orphan receptor (ROR)-gammat, which 
is consistent with a crucial role for STAT3 signalling in the generation of 
T(H)17 cells. T(H)17 cells have emerged as an important subset of helper T cells 
that are believed to be critical in the clearance of fungal and extracellular 
bacterial infections. Thus, our data suggest that the inability to produce 
T(H)17 cells is a mechanism underlying the susceptibility to the recurrent 
infections commonly seen in HIES.

DOI: 10.1038/nature06764
PMCID: PMC2864108
PMID: 18337720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]