---
reference_id: "PMID:28339994"
title: "A longitudinal cohort study of the anti-synthetase syndrome: increased severity of interstitial lung disease in black patients and patients with anti-PL7 and anti-PL12 autoantibodies."
authors:
- Pinal-Fernandez I
- Casal-Dominguez M
- Huapaya JA
- Albayda J
- Paik JJ
- Johnson C
- Silhan L
- Christopher-Stine L
- Mammen AL
- Danoff SK
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kex021
keywords:
- Black or African American/ethnology
- Autoantibodies/metabolism
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/ethnology, immunology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Muscular Diseases/immunology
- Myositis/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A longitudinal cohort study of the anti-synthetase syndrome: increased severity of interstitial lung disease in black patients and patients with anti-PL7 and anti-PL12 autoantibodies.
**Authors:** Pinal-Fernandez I, Casal-Dominguez M, Huapaya JA, Albayda J, Paik JJ, Johnson C, Silhan L, Christopher-Stine L, Mammen AL, Danoff SK
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kex021](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kex021)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2017 Jun 1;56(6):999-1007. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/kex021.

A longitudinal cohort study of the anti-synthetase syndrome: increased severity 
of interstitial lung disease in black patients and patients with anti-PL7 and 
anti-PL12 autoantibodies.

Pinal-Fernandez I(1), Casal-Dominguez M(2), Huapaya JA(2), Albayda J(2), Paik 
JJ(2), Johnson C(2), Silhan L(2), Christopher-Stine L(2), Mammen AL(1), Danoff 
SK(2).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda.
(2)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to study the prevalence, rate of appearance and severity 
of clinical features in patients with different anti-synthetase syndrome (ASyS) 
autoantibodies.
METHODS: All Johns Hopkins Myositis Longitudinal Cohort subjects positive for 
any ASyS autoantibodies were included. Clinical information, including symptoms, 
signs, strength, creatine kinase concentrations and pulmonary function tests, 
were prospectively collected. The standardized mortality and cancer rates and 
the rate of appearance and intensity of the different organ manifestations were 
assessed using univariate and multivariate analysis and compared between ASyS 
autoantibodies.
RESULTS: One hundred and twenty-four (73.4%) patients were positive for 
anti-Jo1, 23 (13.6%) for anti-PL12, 16 for anti-PL7 (9.5%) and 3 (1.8%) for 
anti-EJ or anti-OJ, respectively. The mean length of follow-up was 4.1 years. 
Anti-PL12 was more frequent in black subjects. Anti-PL12 and anti-PL7 were 
associated with more prevalent and severe lung involvement, often without muscle 
involvement. Anti-Jo1 displayed more severe muscle involvement compared with 
anti-PL12 patients. Concurrent anti-Ro52 was more prevalent in anti-Jo1 patients 
and was associated with earlier development of mechanic's hands, DM-specific 
skin findings and arthritis. Independent of ASyS antibody status, black patients 
demonstrated more severe lung involvement than white patients. There was no 
significant increase in mortality or cancer risk in ASyS patients compared with 
the general US population.
CONCLUSION: Different ASyS autoantibodies are associated with phenotypically 
distinct subgroups within the ASyS spectrum. Anti-PL7 and anti-PL12 are 
characterized by more severe lung involvement, whereas anti-Jo1 is associated 
with more severe muscle involvement. Black race is a major prognostic factor 
associated with lung disease severity.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kex021
PMCID: PMC5850781
PMID: 28339994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]