---
reference_id: "PMID:12796778"
title: "14-3-3epsilon is important for neuronal migration by binding to NUDEL: a molecular explanation for Miller-Dieker syndrome."
authors:
- Toyo-oka K
- Shionoya A
- Gambello MJ
- Cardoso C
- Leventer R
- Ward HL
- Ayala R
- Tsai LH
- Dobyns W
- Ledbetter D
- Hirotsune S
- Wynshaw-Boris A
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1038/ng1169
keywords:
- 1-Alkyl-2-acetylglycerophosphocholine Esterase
- 14-3-3 Proteins
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Brain/abnormalities
- "Brain Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Cycle Proteins/metabolism
- Cell Movement
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Coatomer Protein/metabolism
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 5
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinases/metabolism
- Dyneins/metabolism
- Enzyme Inhibitors/metabolism
- Female
- Green Fluorescent Proteins
- Humans
- Immunoenzyme Techniques
- Luminescent Proteins/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/metabolism
- Neurons/cytology
- Phosphoprotein Phosphatases/metabolism
- "Protein Kinase C/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Syndrome
- "Tyrosine 3-Monooxygenase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 14-3-3epsilon is important for neuronal migration by binding to NUDEL: a molecular explanation for Miller-Dieker syndrome.
**Authors:** Toyo-oka K, Shionoya A, Gambello MJ, Cardoso C, Leventer R, Ward HL, Ayala R, Tsai LH, Dobyns W, Ledbetter D, Hirotsune S, Wynshaw-Boris A
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1169](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1169)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2003 Jul;34(3):274-85. doi: 10.1038/ng1169.

14-3-3epsilon is important for neuronal migration by binding to NUDEL: a 
molecular explanation for Miller-Dieker syndrome.

Toyo-oka K(1), Shionoya A, Gambello MJ, Cardoso C, Leventer R, Ward HL, Ayala R, 
Tsai LH, Dobyns W, Ledbetter D, Hirotsune S, Wynshaw-Boris A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UCSD Cancer Center, University of California, San 
Diego School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, Mailstop 0627, La Jolla, California 
92093-0627, USA.

Heterozygous deletions of 17p13.3 result in the human neuronal migration 
disorders isolated lissencephaly sequence (ILS) and the more severe 
Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS). Mutations in PAFAH1B1 (the gene encoding LIS1) are 
responsible for ILS and contribute to MDS, but the genetic causes of the greater 
severity of MDS are unknown. Here, we show that the gene encoding 14-3-3epsilon 
(YWHAE), one of a family of ubiquitous phosphoserine/threonine-binding proteins, 
is always deleted in individuals with MDS. Mice deficient in Ywhae have defects 
in brain development and neuronal migration, similar to defects observed in mice 
heterozygous with respect to Pafah1b1. Mice heterozygous with respect to both 
genes have more severe migration defects than single heterozygotes. 
14-3-3epsilon binds to CDK5/p35-phosphorylated NUDEL and this binding maintains 
NUDEL phosphorylation. Similar to LIS1, deficiency of 14-3-3epsilon results in 
mislocalization of NUDEL and LIS1, consistent with reduction of cytoplasmic 
dynein function. These results establish a crucial role for 14-3-3epsilon in 
neuronal development by sustaining the effects of CDK5 phosphorylation and 
provide a molecular explanation for the differences in severity of human 
neuronal migration defects with 17p13.3 deletions.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1169
PMID: 12796778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]