---
reference_id: "PMID:10599728"
title: "Skeletal features and growth patterns in 14 patients with haploinsufficiency of SHOX: implications for the development of Turner syndrome."
authors:
- Kosho T
- Muroya K
- Nagai T
- Fujimoto M
- Yokoya S
- Sakamoto H
- Hirano T
- Terasaki H
- Ohashi H
- Nishimura G
- Sato S
- Matsuo N
- Ogata T
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1210/jcem.84.12.6289
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Body Height
- Bone and Bones/abnormalities
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Growth
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Metacarpus/abnormalities
- Monosomy
- Puberty
- Sex Characteristics
- Short Stature Homeobox Protein
- "Turner Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Weight Gain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skeletal features and growth patterns in 14 patients with haploinsufficiency of SHOX: implications for the development of Turner syndrome.
**Authors:** Kosho T, Muroya K, Nagai T, Fujimoto M, Yokoya S, Sakamoto H, Hirano T, Terasaki H, Ohashi H, Nishimura G, Sato S, Matsuo N, Ogata T
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.84.12.6289](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.84.12.6289)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Dec;84(12):4613-21. doi:
10.1210/jcem.84.12.6289.

Skeletal features and growth patterns in 14 patients with haploinsufficiency of 
SHOX: implications for the development of Turner syndrome.

Kosho T(1), Muroya K, Nagai T, Fujimoto M, Yokoya S, Sakamoto H, Hirano T, 
Terasaki H, Ohashi H, Nishimura G, Sato S, Matsuo N, Ogata T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

We report on clinical features in 14 Japanese patients (4 males and 10 females) 
with partial monosomy of the short arm pseudoautosomal region involving SHOX (n 
= 11) or total monosomy of the pseudoautosomal region with no involvement of 
disease genes on the sex-differential regions (n = 3). Skeletal assessment 
showed that three patients had no discernible skeletal abnormalities, one 
patient exhibited short 4th metacarpals and borderline cubitus valgus, and the 
remaining 10 patients had Madelung deformity and/or mesomelia characteristic of 
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), together with short 4th metacarpals and/or 
cubitus valgus. Skeletal lesions were more severe in females and became obvious 
with age. Growth evaluation revealed that patients without LWD grew along by the 
-2 SD growth curve before puberty and showed a normal or exaggerated pubertal 
growth spurt, whereas those with LWD grew along by the standard growth curves 
before puberty but exhibited an attenuated pubertal growth spurt and resultant 
short stature. Maturational assessment indicated a tendency of relatively early 
maturation in patients with LWD. There was no correlation between the clinical 
phenotype and the deletion size. These findings suggest that haploinsufficiency 
of SHOX causes not only short stature but also Turner skeletal anomalies (such 
as short 4th metacarpals, cubitus valgus, and LWD) and that growth pattern is 
primarily dependent on the presence or absence of LWD. Because skeletal lesions 
have occurred in a female-dominant and age-influenced fashion, it is inferred 
that estrogens exert a maturational effect on skeletal tissues that are 
susceptible to premature fusion of growth plates because of haploinsufficiency 
of SHOX, facilitating the development of skeletal lesions.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.84.12.6289
PMID: 10599728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]