---
reference_id: "PMID:23476150"
title: The battle between infection and host immune responses of dengue virus and its implication in dengue disease pathogenesis.
authors:
- Sun P
- Kochel TJ
journal: ScientificWorldJournal
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1155/2013/843469
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The battle between infection and host immune responses of dengue virus and its implication in dengue disease pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Sun P, Kochel TJ
**Journal:** ScientificWorldJournal (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2013/843469](https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/843469)

## Content

1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2013;2013:843469. doi: 10.1155/2013/843469. Epub 2013 
Feb 10.

The battle between infection and host immune responses of dengue virus and its 
implication in dengue disease pathogenesis.

Sun P(1), Kochel TJ.

Author information:
(1)Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, 
Bethesda, MD 20817, USA. peifang.sun@med.navy.mil

Dengue virus (DENV) is a mosquito-transmitted single stranded RNA virus 
belonging to genus Flavivirus. The virus is endemic in the tropical and 
subtropical countries of the world, causing diseases classified according to 
symptoms and severity (from mild to severe) as dengue fever, dengue hemorrhagic 
fever, and dengue shock syndrome. Among a variety of human cell types targeted 
by DENV, monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells are members of innate 
immunity, capable of mounting rapid inflammatory responses. These cells are also 
major antigen presenting cells, responsible for activating the adaptive immunity 
for long-term memory. This paper is an overview of the current understanding of 
the following mutually affected aspects: DENV structure, viral infectivity, 
cellular receptors, innate immune response, and adaptive immunity.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/843469
PMCID: PMC3582169
PMID: 23476150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]