---
reference_id: "PMID:31021394"
title: Optimal timing of hepatitis B virus DNA quantification and clinical predictors for higher viral load during pregnancy.
authors:
- Cheung KW
- Seto MTY
- So PL
- Wong D
- Mak ASL
- Lau WL
- Wang W
- Kan ASY
- Lee CP
- Ng EHY
journal: Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/aogs.13631
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optimal timing of hepatitis B virus DNA quantification and clinical predictors for higher viral load during pregnancy.
**Authors:** Cheung KW, Seto MTY, So PL, Wong D, Mak ASL, Lau WL, Wang W, Kan ASY, Lee CP, Ng EHY
**Journal:** Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aogs.13631](https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.13631)

## Content

1. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2019 Oct;98(10):1301-1306. doi: 10.1111/aogs.13631.
 Epub 2019 Jun 4.

Optimal timing of hepatitis B virus DNA quantification and clinical predictors 
for higher viral load during pregnancy.

Cheung KW(1), Seto MTY(1), So PL(2), Wong D(3), Mak ASL(4), Lau WL(5), Wang 
W(1), Kan ASY(1), Lee CP(1), Ng EHY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Queen Mary Hospital, the University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Tuen Mun Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, 
China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Pamela Youde Nethersole Eastern 
Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong 
SAR, China.
(5)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Kwong Wah Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, 
China.

Comment in
    Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2020 Jan;99(1):137. doi: 10.1111/aogs.13711.
    Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2020 Jan;99(1):138. doi: 10.1111/aogs.13721.

INTRODUCTION: Authorities publish recommendations on the hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
viral load threshold to initiate antiviral treatment but the timing of 
quantification during pregnancy is not well defined. HBV DNA levels in pregnancy 
women at 28-30 weeks predict the risk of immunoprophylaxis failure. This study 
compared and evaluated the correlation between HBV DNA levels before 22 and 
28-30 weeks' gestation. Clinical predictive factors for HBV DNA >6, 7 and 
8 log10  IU/mL were studied.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A retrospective analysis of HBV DNA levels of women <22 
and 28-30 weeks of gestation was carried out in 352 pregnant HBV carriers. HBV 
DNA was examined using the COBAS TaqMan HBV Monitor Test coupled with the COBAS 
Ampliprep extraction system (Both Roche Diagnostics, Branchburg, NJ, USA).
RESULTS: A strong positive correlation was found between the viral loads of 
women <22 weeks (mean 16.7 weeks) and 28-30 weeks of gestation, which was 
independent of the viral load level and gestational age of quantification (r = 
0.942, P < 0.001). Univariate analysis showed that positive hepatitis B e 
antigen (HBeAg), maternal age <35 years old and body mass index ≤21 kg/m2 were 
associated with a higher mean viral load at 28-30 weeks of gestation (P < 0.05). 
These factors were also associated with a higher chance of viral load >6, 7 and 
8 log10  IU/mL at 28-30 weeks (P < 0.05). In multiple regression analysis, only 
the viral load of <22 weeks and positive HBeAg remained predictive of a higher 
mean viral load at 28-30 weeks of gestation (P < 0.05). The receiver operating 
characteristic curve showed that the HBV DNA of <22 weeks was an excellent 
predictor for different viral load cut-offs at 28-30 weeks. The area under curve 
was 0.986, 0.998 and 0.994 for viral load 6, 7 and 8 log10  IU/mL, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: HBV DNA quantification should be performed before 22 weeks of 
gestation. Viral load cut-offs similar to those at 28 weeks can be used to 
determine immunoprophylaxis failure at earlier gestation. Maternal positive 
HBeAg status was associated with a higher chance of viral load >6, 7 or 8 log10 
 IU/mL.

© 2019 Nordic Federation of Societies of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

DOI: 10.1111/aogs.13631
PMID: 31021394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]