---
reference_id: "PMID:28231269"
title: A mouse model of paralytic myelitis caused by enterovirus D68.
authors:
- Hixon AM
- Yu G
- Leser JS
- Yagi S
- Clarke P
- Chiu CY
- Tyler KL
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006199
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Enterovirus D, Human"
- "Enterovirus Infections/complications, pathology"
- Female
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- "Myelitis/pathology, virology"
- Paralysis/virology
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Spinal Cord/pathology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model of paralytic myelitis caused by enterovirus D68.
**Authors:** Hixon AM, Yu G, Leser JS, Yagi S, Clarke P, Chiu CY, Tyler KL
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1006199](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1006199)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Feb 23;13(2):e1006199. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006199.
eCollection 2017 Feb.

A mouse model of paralytic myelitis caused by enterovirus D68.

Hixon AM(1)(2), Yu G(3)(4), Leser JS(5), Yagi S(6), Clarke P(5), Chiu CY(3)(4),
Tyler KL(5)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States of America.
(2)Neuroscience Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO,
United States of America.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Medicine, Division of Infectious
Diseases, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United
States of America.
(4)UCSF-Abbott Viral Diagnostics and Discovery Center, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States of America.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
CO, United States of America.
(6)California Department of Public Health, Richmond, CA, United States of
America.
(7)Denver VA Medical Center, Denver, CO, United States of America.
(8)Departments of Immunology and Microbiology, and Medicine, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States of America.

In 2014, the United States experienced an epidemic of acute flaccid myelitis
(AFM) cases in children coincident with a nationwide outbreak of enterovirus D68
(EV-D68) respiratory disease. Up to half of the 2014 AFM patients had EV-D68 RNA
detected by RT-PCR in their respiratory secretions, although EV-D68 was only
detected in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from one 2014 AFM patient. Given
previously described molecular and epidemiologic associations between EV-D68 and
AFM, we sought to develop an animal model by screening seven EV-D68 strains for
the ability to induce neurological disease in neonatal mice. We found that four
EV-D68 strains from the 2014 outbreak (out of five tested) produced a paralytic
disease in mice resembling human AFM. The remaining 2014 strain, as well as 1962
prototype EV-D68 strains Fermon and Rhyne, did not produce, or rarely produced,
paralysis in mice. In-depth examination of the paralysis caused by a
representative 2014 strain, MO/14-18947, revealed infectious virus, virion
particles, and viral genome in the spinal cords of paralyzed mice. Paralysis was
elicited in mice following intramuscular, intracerebral, intraperitoneal, and
intranasal infection, in descending frequency, and was associated with infection
and loss of motor neurons in the anterior horns of spinal cord segments
corresponding to paralyzed limbs. Virus isolated from spinal cords of infected
mice transmitted disease when injected into naïve mice, fulfilling Koch's
postulates in this model. Finally, we found that EV-D68 immune sera, but not
normal mouse sera, protected mice from development of paralysis and death when
administered prior to viral challenge. These studies establish an experimental
model to study EV-D68-induced myelitis and to better understand disease
pathogenesis and develop potential therapies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006199
PMCID: PMC5322875
PMID: 28231269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: CYC is the director
of the UCSF-Abbott Viral Diagnostics and Discovery Center and receives research
support from Abbott Laboratories, Inc. AMH, GY, SY, JSL, PC, and KLT declare no
conflicts of interest.
