---
reference_id: "PMID:23794213"
title: Complications of varicella zoster virus reactivation.
authors:
- Nagel MA
- Gilden D
journal: Curr Treat Options Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s11940-013-0246-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complications of varicella zoster virus reactivation.
**Authors:** Nagel MA, Gilden D
**Journal:** Curr Treat Options Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11940-013-0246-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11940-013-0246-5)

## Content

1. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2013 Aug;15(4):439-53. doi: 
10.1007/s11940-013-0246-5.

Complications of varicella zoster virus reactivation.

Nagel MA(1), Gilden D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
CO, USA, maria.nagel@ucdenver.edu.

Varicella zoster virus (VZV) is an exclusively human neurotropic 
alphaherpesvirus. Primary infection causes varicella (chickenpox), after which 
virus becomes latent in ganglionic neurons along the entire neuraxis. With 
advancing age or immunosuppression, cell-mediated immunity to VZV declines and 
virus reactivates to cause zoster (shingles), which can occur anywhere on the 
body. Skin lesions resolve within 1-2 weeks, while complete cessation of pain 
usually takes 4-6 weeks. Zoster can be followed by chronic pain (postherpetic 
neuralgia), cranial nerve palsies, zoster paresis, meningoencephalitis, 
cerebellitis, myelopathy, multiple ocular disorders and vasculopathy that can 
mimic giant cell arteritis. All of the neurological and ocular disorders listed 
above may also develop without rash. Diagnosis of VZV-induced neurological 
disease may require examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), serum and/ or 
ocular fluids. In the absence of rash in a patient with neurological disease 
potentially due to VZV, CSF should be examined for VZV DNA by PCR and for 
anti-VZV IgG and IgM. Detection of VZV IgG antibody in CSF is superior to 
detection of VZV DNA in CSF to diagnose vasculopathy, recurrent myelopathy, and 
brainstem encephalitis. Oral antiviral drugs speed healing of rash and shorten 
acute pain. Immunocompromised patients require intravenous acyclovir. First-line 
treatments for post-herpetic neuralgia include tricyclic antidepressants, 
gabapentin, pregabalin, and topical lidocaine patches. VZV vasculopathy, 
meningoencephalitis, and myelitis are all treated with intravenous acyclovir.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-013-0246-5
PMCID: PMC3752706
PMID: 23794213

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Maria A. Nagel and Don 
Gilden declare that they have no conflict of interest.