---
reference_id: "PMID:18813229"
title: Neurological manifestations of Waldenström macroglobulinemia.
authors:
- Baehring JM
- Hochberg EP
- Raje N
- Ulrickson M
- Hochberg FH
journal: Nat Clin Pract Neurol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/ncpneuro0917
keywords:
- Humans
- "Nervous System Diseases/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia/complications, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological manifestations of Waldenström macroglobulinemia.
**Authors:** Baehring JM, Hochberg EP, Raje N, Ulrickson M, Hochberg FH
**Journal:** Nat Clin Pract Neurol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncpneuro0917](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncpneuro0917)

## Content

1. Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2008 Oct;4(10):547-56. doi: 10.1038/ncpneuro0917. Epub
2008 Sep 23.

Neurological manifestations of Waldenström macroglobulinemia.

Baehring JM(1), Hochberg EP, Raje N, Ulrickson M, Hochberg FH.

Author information:
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Yale Brain Tumor Center, New Haven, CT,
USA.

Waldenström macroglobulinemia, a condition that most commonly occurs in
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, typically manifests with diffuse lymphadenopathies,
cytopenias, and a markedly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Peripheral
neuropathy occurs in nearly half of patients with this condition, and
hyperviscosity-related nervous system disorders are encountered in up to a
third. Other neurological complications, such as encephalopathy or myelopathy
caused by direct tumor infiltration, paraprotein deposition or autoimmune
phenomena, are rare. Diagnosis of Waldenström macroglobulinemia requires
identification of monoclonal IgM protein in the serum, bone marrow biopsy, and
appropriate neurological testing (e.g. imaging studies of affected areas of the
central neuraxis, electrophysiological studies). Treatment options, which should
address both the paraprotein burden and the lymphoplasmacytic clone, include
plasmapheresis and chemotherapy with alkylating agents, nucleoside analogs, and
rituximab. As the disease is incurable and its course indolent, these treatments
are only provided to symptomatic patients.

DOI: 10.1038/ncpneuro0917
PMID: 18813229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
