---
reference_id: "PMID:31821175"
title: CD8+ T cells target cerebrovasculature in children with cerebral malaria.
authors:
- Riggle BA
- Manglani M
- Maric D
- Johnson KR
- Lee MH
- Neto OLA
- Taylor TE
- Seydel KB
- Nath A
- Miller LH
- McGavern DB
- Pierce SK
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1172/JCI133474
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD8+ T cells target cerebrovasculature in children with cerebral malaria.
**Authors:** Riggle BA, Manglani M, Maric D, Johnson KR, Lee MH, Neto OLA, Taylor TE, Seydel KB, Nath A, Miller LH, McGavern DB, Pierce SK
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI133474](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI133474)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2020 Mar 2;130(3):1128-1138. doi: 10.1172/JCI133474.

CD8+ T cells target cerebrovasculature in children with cerebral malaria.

Riggle BA(1), Manglani M(2)(3), Maric D(4), Johnson KR(5), Lee MH(6), Neto 
OLA(7), Taylor TE(8)(9), Seydel KB(8)(9), Nath A(6), Miller LH(10), McGavern 
DB(2), Pierce SK(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases (NIAID), NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(2)Viral Immunology and Intravital Imaging Section, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Medical Scientist Training Program, Pennsylvania State College of Medicine, 
Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Flow and Imaging Cytometry Core Facility.
(5)Information Technology Program, Division of Intramural Research, and.
(6)Section of Infections of the Nervous System, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and.
(7)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(8)Department of Osteopathic Medical Specialties, College of Osteopathic 
Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(9)Blantyre Malaria Project, University of Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre, 
Malawi, Africa.
(10)Laboratory of Malaria Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2020 Mar 2;130(3):1109-1111. doi: 10.1172/JCI135510.

BACKGROUNDCerebral malaria (CM) accounts for nearly 400,000 deaths annually in 
African children. Current dogma suggests that CM results from infected RBC 
(iRBC) sequestration in the brain microvasculature and resulting sequelae. 
Therapies targeting these events have been unsuccessful; findings in 
experimental models suggest that CD8+ T cells drive disease pathogenesis. 
However, these data have largely been ignored because corroborating evidence in 
humans is lacking. This work fills a critical gap in our understanding of CM 
pathogenesis that is impeding development of therapeutics.METHODSUsing multiplex 
immunohistochemistry, we characterized cerebrovascular immune cells in brain 
sections from 34 children who died from CM or other causes. Children were 
grouped by clinical diagnosis (CM+ or CM-), iRBC sequestration (Seqhi, Seqlo, 
Seq0) and HIV status (HIV+ or HIV-).RESULTSWe identified effector CD3+CD8+ T 
cells engaged on the cerebrovasculature in 69% of CM+ HIV- children. The number 
of intravascular CD3+CD8+ T cells was influenced by CM status (CM+ > CM-, P = 
0.004) and sequestration level (Seqhi > Seqlo, P = 0.010). HIV coinfection 
significantly increased T cell numbers (P = 0.017) and shifted cells from an 
intravascular (P = 0.004) to perivascular (P < 0.0001) 
distribution.CONCLUSIONWithin the studied cohort, CM is associated with 
cerebrovascular engagement of CD3+CD8+ T cells, which is exacerbated by HIV 
coinfection. Thus, CD3+CD8+ T cells are highly promising targets for CM 
adjunctive therapy, opening new avenues for the treatment of this deadly 
disease.FUNDINGThis research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of 
the National Institutes of Health.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI133474
PMCID: PMC7269583
PMID: 31821175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.