---
reference_id: "PMID:41126776"
title: Impact of microgravity on the fibrillization kinetics and structure of amyloid beta peptide.
authors:
- Mallikarjuna HN
- Manohar A
- Sekar N
- Sudhakar S
journal: Chem Commun (Camb)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1039/d5cc05096k
keywords:
- "Amyloid beta-Peptides/chemistry, metabolism"
- Kinetics
- "Peptide Fragments/chemistry, metabolism"
- Weightlessness
- Humans
- Protein Aggregates
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of microgravity on the fibrillization kinetics and structure of amyloid beta peptide.
**Authors:** Mallikarjuna HN, Manohar A, Sekar N, Sudhakar S
**Journal:** Chem Commun (Camb) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1039/d5cc05096k](https://doi.org/10.1039/d5cc05096k)

## Content

1. Chem Commun (Camb). 2025 Nov 13;61(92):18144-18147. doi: 10.1039/d5cc05096k.

Impact of microgravity on the fibrillization kinetics and structure of amyloid 
beta peptide.

Mallikarjuna HN(1), Manohar A(1), Sekar N(1), Sudhakar S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Mechanics and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute 
of Technology Madras, Chennai, India. swathi.s@iitm.ac.in.

Amyloid beta (Aβ) is a 38-42 residue peptide that is implicated in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). The undesirable conversion of the soluble Aβ monomers into 
oligomers and fibrils leads to loss of neuronal cell functions and disruption of 
cellular transport and signaling. Studying the behavior of Aβ in microgravity 
conditions is essential to assess the risk of protein misfolding and the 
subsequent risk of neurodegenerative disease occurrence during long-term manned 
space missions. In this study, we demonstrate that microgravity fundamentally 
alters the aggregation process of Aβ(1-40), delaying the fibrillization kinetics 
and yielding more linear, less polymorphic fibrils with reduced parallel β-sheet 
content. These findings highlight the potential of microgravity as a tool for 
investigating the fundamental mechanisms of amyloid fibril formation and its 
implications for disease processes.

DOI: 10.1039/d5cc05096k
PMID: 41126776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]