---
reference_id: "PMID:38222776"
title: "Cutaneous larva migrans in a child: a case report and review of literature."
authors:
- Shrestha A
- K C K
- Baral A
- Shrestha R
- Shrestha R
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000001512
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous larva migrans in a child: a case report and review of literature.
**Authors:** Shrestha A, K C K, Baral A, Shrestha R, Shrestha R
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MS9.0000000000001512](https://doi.org/10.1097/MS9.0000000000001512)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2023 Nov 16;86(1):530-534. doi: 
10.1097/MS9.0000000000001512. eCollection 2024 Jan.

Cutaneous larva migrans in a child: a case report and review of literature.

Shrestha A(1), K C K(2), Baral A(3), Shrestha R(4), Shrestha R(5).

Author information:
(1)Koshi Hospital, Biratnagar, Koshi Province.
(2)Department of Health Services, Epidemiology and Disease Control Division.
(3)Ministry of Health and Population.
(4)Bir Hospital, Kathmandu.
(5)Dhulikhel Hospital, Kathmandu University, Kavrepalanchowk, Bagmati Province, 
Nepal.

INTRODUCTION: Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is a dermatitis caused by the 
invasion and migration of parasitic larvae of hookworms, primarily affecting 
tropical and subtropical regions. This report presents a case of CLM in a Nepali 
child and provides an overview of the literature on this condition.
CASE REPORT: A 4-year-old boy from a rural area in Nepal presented with a 
pruritic skin lesion on his left foot, initially misdiagnosed as fungal 
infection. The lesion gradually expanded, forming a serpiginous erythema, and 
became intensely pruritic. The patient's family had poor socioeconomic 
conditions, and the child frequently walked barefoot in an area with many 
domestic and stray dogs. Diagnosis was confirmed clinically, and treatment with 
oral albendazole and antihistamines resulted in complete resolution of symptoms.
DISCUSSION: CLM is a neglected zoonotic disease, with an underestimated burden 
in developing countries due to underreporting and misdiagnosis. The larvae of 
Ancylostoma spp. are common culprits, causing a localized inflammatory reaction 
as they migrate through the skin. Diagnosis is mainly clinical and routine 
investigations usually reveal no abnormality. Complications may include 
secondary bacterial infections, allergies, and rare migration to internal 
organs. Treatment options include albendazole or ivermectin, with preventive 
measures emphasizing hygiene, footwear use, and pet deworming.
CONCLUSION: CLM is a neglected disease that primarily affects marginalized 
communities in tropical regions. Raising awareness among healthcare providers, 
conducting observational studies, and developing treatment guidelines, 
especially for children, are essential steps to address this public health 
concern. Preventive efforts, such as promoting hygiene and footwear use, should 
be encouraged to reduce CLM incidence.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MS9.0000000000001512
PMCID: PMC10783223
PMID: 38222776

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.Sponsorships 
or competing interests that may be relevant to content are disclosed at the end 
of this article.