---
reference_id: "PMID:39122650"
title: "Protocol and rationale for a randomized controlled SGLT2 inhibitor trial in paediatric and young adult populations with chronic kidney disease: DOUBLE PRO-TECT Alport."
authors:
- Gross O
- Boeckhaus J
- Weber LT
- Heerspink HJL
- Simon JF
- Ahmed R
- Gerst C
- Duerr U
- Walker F
- Tostmann R
- Helm J
- Asendorf T
- Friede T
- study group of the German Society of Pediatric Nephrology
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfae180
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Young Adult
- "Albuminuria/drug therapy, etiology"
- Benzhydryl Compounds/therapeutic use
- Double-Blind Method
- Follow-Up Studies
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Glucosides/therapeutic use
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/drug therapy, complications"
- Prognosis
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/drug therapy, pathology"
- Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2 Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Multicenter Studies as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protocol and rationale for a randomized controlled SGLT2 inhibitor trial in paediatric and young adult populations with chronic kidney disease: DOUBLE PRO-TECT Alport.
**Authors:** Gross O, Boeckhaus J, Weber LT, Heerspink HJL, Simon JF, Ahmed R, Gerst C, Duerr U, Walker F, Tostmann R, Helm J, Asendorf T, Friede T, study group of the German Society of Pediatric Nephrology
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfae180](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfae180)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2025 Apr 1;40(4):679-687. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfae180.

Protocol and rationale for a randomized controlled SGLT2 inhibitor trial in
paediatric and young adult populations with chronic kidney disease: DOUBLE
PRO-TECT Alport.

Gross O(1), Boeckhaus J(1), Weber LT(2), Heerspink HJL(3), Simon JF(4), Ahmed
R(5), Gerst C(5), Duerr U(1)(6), Walker F(6), Tostmann R(6), Helm J(6), Asendorf
T(7), Friede T(7); study group of the German Society of Pediatric Nephrology.

Collaborators: Boeckhaus J, Weber LT, Heerspink HJL, Simon JF, Ahmed R, Gerst C,
Duerr U, Walker F, Tostmann R, Helm J, Asendorf T, Friede T.

Author information:
(1)Nephrology and Rheumatology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany.
(2)Pediatric Nephrology, Children's and Adolescents' Hospital, University
Hospital of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Kidney Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Legal Department, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Clinical Trials Unit, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany.
(7)Department of Medical Statistics, University Medical Center Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Clinical trials have demonstrated positive cardiovascular and kidney
outcomes of sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors in adult patients
with diabetic and other chronic kidney diseases (CKDs). Whether benefits extend
to children, teenagers and young adults with early-stage CKD is unknown. For
this reason, the DOUBLE PRO-TECT Alport trial (NCT05944016) will study the
progression of albuminuria in young patients with Alport syndrome (AS), the most
common hereditary CKD, to assess the safety and efficacy of the SGLT2 inhibitor
dapagliflozin. Patients living with AS and chronically elevated albuminuria have
a high risk of kidney failure before the age of 50 years.
METHODS: DOUBLE PRO-TECT Alport is a multicentre, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Participants (ages 10-39 years) must have a diagnosis
of AS by genetic testing or kidney biopsy, be on a stable (>3 months) maximum
tolerated dose of a renin-angiotensin system inhibitor and have a urinary
albumin:creatinine ratio (UACR) of >300 mg/g (paediatric) or >500 mg/g
(adult).Eligible participants will be randomly assigned at a 2:1 ratio to
48 weeks of treatment with dapaglifozin 10 mg/day or matched placebo. Most
participants are expected to be children with a normal estimated glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR). In addition to safety, the primary (change in UACR from
baseline to week 48) and key secondary (eGFR change from baseline to week 52)
efficacy outcomes will be analysed with a mixed model repeated measures
approach. Efficacy analyses will be performed primarily in the full analysis set
according to the intention-to-treat principle. A sensitivity analysis will be
performed using reference-based multiple imputation.
CONCLUSION: DOUBLE PRO-TECT Alport will assess whether SGLT2 inhibitors can
safely reduce the UACR change from baseline as a marker for progression of CKD
in young patients living with AS.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfae180
PMCID: PMC11960741
PMID: 39122650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: O.G. received advisory fees from AstraZeneca and
his employer received advisory fees from Boehringer Ingelheim. Employees of
Boehringer Ingelheim and O.G. are co-inventors for the patent application
EP3826642 (Empagliflozin for use in treating Alport syndrome). H.J.L.H. received
advisory fees from AstraZeneca. The remaining authors report no conflicts of
interest related to this publication.
