---
reference_id: "PMID:24726473"
title: "Mutations in PIEZO2 cause Gordon syndrome, Marden-Walker syndrome, and distal arthrogryposis type 5."
authors:
- McMillin MJ
- Beck AE
- Chong JX
- Shively KM
- Buckingham KJ
- Gildersleeve HI
- Aracena MI
- Aylsworth AS
- Bitoun P
- Carey JC
- Clericuzio CL
- Crow YJ
- Curry CJ
- Devriendt K
- Everman DB
- Fryer A
- Gibson K
- Giovannucci Uzielli ML
- Graham JM Jr
- Hall JG
- Hecht JT
- Heidenreich RA
- Hurst JA
- Irani S
- Krapels IP
- Leroy JG
- Mowat D
- Plant GT
- Robertson SP
- Schorry EK
- Scott RH
- Seaver LH
- Sherr E
- Splitt M
- Stewart H
- Stumpel C
- Temel SG
- Weaver DD
- Whiteford M
- Williams MS
- Tabor HK
- Smith JD
- Shendure J
- Nickerson DA
- University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics
- Bamshad MJ
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.015
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- "Arachnodactyly/genetics, pathology"
- "Arthrogryposis/genetics, pathology"
- "Blepharophimosis/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cleft Palate/genetics, pathology"
- "Clubfoot/genetics, pathology"
- "Connective Tissue Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Contracture/genetics, pathology"
- Exome/genetics
- Female
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Ion Channels/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- "Ophthalmoplegia/genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
- "Retinal Diseases/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in PIEZO2 cause Gordon syndrome, Marden-Walker syndrome, and distal arthrogryposis type 5.
**Authors:** McMillin MJ, Beck AE, Chong JX, Shively KM, Buckingham KJ, Gildersleeve HI, Aracena MI, Aylsworth AS, Bitoun P, Carey JC, Clericuzio CL, Crow YJ, Curry CJ, Devriendt K, Everman DB, Fryer A, Gibson K, Giovannucci Uzielli ML, Graham JM Jr, Hall JG, Hecht JT, Heidenreich RA, Hurst JA, Irani S, Krapels IP, Leroy JG, Mowat D, Plant GT, Robertson SP, Schorry EK, Scott RH, Seaver LH, Sherr E, Splitt M, Stewart H, Stumpel C, Temel SG, Weaver DD, Whiteford M, Williams MS, Tabor HK, Smith JD, Shendure J, Nickerson DA, University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics, Bamshad MJ
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.015)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 May 1;94(5):734-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.015. Epub
 2014 Apr 10.

Mutations in PIEZO2 cause Gordon syndrome, Marden-Walker syndrome, and distal 
arthrogryposis type 5.

McMillin MJ(1), Beck AE(2), Chong JX(1), Shively KM(1), Buckingham KJ(1), 
Gildersleeve HI(1), Aracena MI(3), Aylsworth AS(4), Bitoun P(5), Carey JC(6), 
Clericuzio CL(7), Crow YJ(8), Curry CJ(9), Devriendt K(10), Everman DB(11), 
Fryer A(12), Gibson K(13), Giovannucci Uzielli ML(14), Graham JM Jr(15), Hall 
JG(16), Hecht JT(17), Heidenreich RA(7), Hurst JA(18), Irani S(19), Krapels 
IP(20), Leroy JG(21), Mowat D(22), Plant GT(23), Robertson SP(24), Schorry 
EK(25), Scott RH(18), Seaver LH(26), Sherr E(27), Splitt M(28), Stewart H(29), 
Stumpel C(20), Temel SG(30), Weaver DD(31), Whiteford M(32), Williams MS(33), 
Tabor HK(34), Smith JD(35), Shendure J(35), Nickerson DA(35); University of 
Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics; Bamshad MJ(36).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Division of Genetic Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA 98105, 
USA.
(3)Genetic Unit, Hospital Dr. Luis Calvo Mackenna, Santiago 7500539, Chile; 
Division of Pediatrics, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago 
8330074, Chile.
(4)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(5)Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Bondy 93143, France.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, 
USA.
(8)Manchester Academic Health Science Centre and University of Manchester, 
Manchester M13 9NT, UK.
(9)Genetic Medicine Central California, University of California, San Francisco, 
Fresno, CA 93701, USA.
(10)Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium.
(11)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC 29646, USA.
(12)Department of Clinical Genetics, Alder Hey Children's Hospital, Liverpool 
L12 2AP, UK.
(13)Genetic Health Service New Zealand, Christchurch Hospital, Christchurch 
8140, New Zealand.
(14)Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Dipartimento di Scieze della Salute, 
University of Florence, Florence 50132, Italy.
(15)Division of Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
(16)Departments of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, University of British 
Columbia and BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC V6H 3N1, Canada.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.
(18)North East Thames Regional Genetic Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital, 
London WC1N 3BH, UK.
(19)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(20)Department of Clinical Genetics, School for Oncology and Developmental 
Biology, Maastricht UMC+, Maastricht 6229 GR, the Netherlands.
(21)Princess Elisabeth Children's Hospital, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 
Ghent, Belgium.
(22)Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children's Hospital, Sydney, NSW 
2031, Australia; School of Women's and Children's Health, UNSW Medicine, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.
(23)National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London WC1N 
3BG, UK.
(24)Department of Women's and Children's Health, University of Otago, Dunedin 
9054, New Zealand.
(25)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
(26)Department of Pediatrics, University of Hawai'i John A. Burns School of 
Medicine, Honolulu, HI 96826, USA.
(27)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(28)Northern Genetics Service, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon 
Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.
(29)Department of Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.
(30)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Uludag University, 
Bursa 16059, Turkey; Department of Histology & Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Uludag University, Bursa 16059, Turkey; Department of Histology & Embryology, 
Faculty of Medicine, Near East University, TRNC Mersin 10, Turkey.
(31)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(32)Department of Clinical Genetics, Southern General Hospital, Glasgow G51 4TF, 
UK.
(33)Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA 17822, 
USA.
(34)Division of Genetic Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA 
98105, USA; Treuman Katz Center for Pediatric Bioethics, Seattle Children's 
Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.
(35)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA.
(36)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Division of Genetic Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA 98105, 
USA; Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA. Electronic address: mbamshad@uw.edu.

Gordon syndrome (GS), or distal arthrogryposis type 3, is a rare, 
autosomal-dominant disorder characterized by cleft palate and congenital 
contractures of the hands and feet. Exome sequencing of five GS-affected 
families identified mutations in piezo-type mechanosensitive ion channel 
component 2 (PIEZO2) in each family. Sanger sequencing revealed PIEZO2 mutations 
in five of seven additional families studied (for a total of 10/12 [83%] 
individuals), and nine families had an identical c.8057G>A (p.Arg2686His) 
mutation. The phenotype of GS overlaps with distal arthrogryposis type 5 (DA5) 
and Marden-Walker syndrome (MWS). Using molecular inversion probes for targeted 
sequencing to screen PIEZO2, we found mutations in 24/29 (82%) DA5-affected 
families and one of two MWS-affected families. The presence of cleft palate was 
significantly associated with c.8057G>A (Fisher's exact test, adjusted p value < 
0.0001). Collectively, although GS, DA5, and MWS have traditionally been 
considered separate disorders, our findings indicate that they are etiologically 
related and perhaps represent variable expressivity of the same condition.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.03.015
PMCID: PMC4067551
PMID: 24726473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]