---
reference_id: "PMID:29431403"
title: "Mildly Elevated Liver Transaminase Levels: Causes and Evaluation."
authors:
- Oh RC
- Hustead TR
- Ali SM
- Pantsari MW
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2017'
keywords:
- Alanine Transaminase/blood
- Aspartate Aminotransferases/blood
- "Celiac Disease/blood, diagnosis"
- "Chemical and Drug Induced Liver Injury/blood, diagnosis"
- "Hemochromatosis/blood, diagnosis"
- "Hepatitis B/blood, diagnosis"
- Hepatitis B Surface Antigens/blood
- "Hepatitis C/blood, diagnosis"
- Hepatitis C Antibodies/blood
- "Hepatitis, Autoimmune/blood, diagnosis"
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/blood, diagnosis"
- Humans
- Insulin Resistance
- Life Style
- "Liver Diseases, Alcoholic/blood, diagnosis"
- "Metabolic Syndrome/blood, diagnosis"
- "Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease/blood, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Thyroid Diseases/blood, diagnosis"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/blood, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mildly Elevated Liver Transaminase Levels: Causes and Evaluation.
**Authors:** Oh RC, Hustead TR, Ali SM, Pantsari MW
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2017)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2017 Dec 1;96(11):709-715.

Mildly Elevated Liver Transaminase Levels: Causes and Evaluation.

Oh RC(1), Hustead TR(2), Ali SM(3), Pantsari MW(4).

Author information:
(1)Martin Army Community Hospital, Fort Benning, GA, USA.
(2)Hardin Memorial Health, Elizabethtown, KY, USA.
(3)Fort Belvoir Community Hospital, Fort Belvoir, VA, USA.
(4)Gastroenterology Consultants of Augusta, Augusta, GA, USA.

Mild, asymptomatic elevations (less than five times the upper limit of normal) 
of alanine transaminase and aspartate transaminase levels are common in primary 
care. It is estimated that approximately 10% of the U.S. population has elevated 
transaminase levels. An approach based on the prevalence of diseases that cause 
asymptomatic transaminase elevations can help clinicians efficiently identify 
common and serious liver disease. The most common causes of elevated 
transaminase levels are nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and alcoholic liver 
disease. Uncommon causes include drug-induced liver injury, hepatitis B and C, 
and hereditary hemochromatosis. Rare causes include alpha1-antitrypsin 
deficiency, autoimmune hepatitis, and Wilson disease. Extrahepatic sources, such 
as thyroid disorders, celiac sprue, hemolysis, and muscle disorders, are also 
associated with mildly elevated transaminase levels. The initial evaluation 
should include an assessment for metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance 
(i.e., waist circumference, blood pressure, fasting lipid level, and fasting 
glucose or A1C level); a complete blood count with platelets; measurement of 
serum albumin, iron, total iron-binding capacity, and ferritin; and hepatitis C 
antibody and hepatitis B surface antigen testing. The nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease fibrosis score and the alcoholic liver disease/nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease index can be helpful in the evaluation of mildly elevated transaminase 
levels. If testing for common causes is consistent with nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease and is otherwise unremarkable, a trial of lifestyle modification is 
appropriate. If the elevation persists, hepatic ultrasonography and further 
testing for uncommon causes should be considered.

PMID: 29431403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]