---
reference_id: "PMID:37743370"
title: "Magnitude of tuberculosis lymphadenitis, risk factors, and rifampicin resistance at Adama city, Ethiopia: a cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Kumbi H
- Reda DY
- Solomon M
- Teklehaimanot A
- Ormago MD
- Ali MM
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-43206-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Magnitude of tuberculosis lymphadenitis, risk factors, and rifampicin resistance at Adama city, Ethiopia: a cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Kumbi H, Reda DY, Solomon M, Teklehaimanot A, Ormago MD, Ali MM
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-023-43206-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-43206-7)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Sep 24;13(1):15955. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-43206-7.

Magnitude of tuberculosis lymphadenitis, risk factors, and rifampicin resistance 
at Adama city, Ethiopia: a cross-sectional study.

Kumbi H(1), Reda DY(2), Solomon M(3), Teklehaimanot A(4), Ormago MD(2), Ali 
MM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory, Adama Hospital Medical College, Adama, Ethiopia.
(2)School of Medical Laboratory Science, Hawassa University College of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Hawassa, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Pathology, Adama Comprehensive Specialized Hospital Medical 
College, Adama, Ethiopia.
(4)Department of Pathology, Hawassa University College of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Hawassa, Ethiopia.
(5)School of Medical Laboratory Science, Hawassa University College of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Hawassa, Ethiopia. ysnmss@yahoo.com.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex has an impact on public health and is 
responsible for over one million deaths per year. Substantial numbers of people 
infected with M. tuberculosis can develop tuberculosis lymphadenitis; however, 
there is a limited study in Adama, Ethiopia. The aim of this study was to 
determine the magnitude of Tuberculosis lymphadenitis, its predictors, and 
rifampicin-resistance gene-positive M. tuberculosis. A total of 291 patients 
with enlarged lymph nodes were recruited from May 2022 to August 30 at Adama 
Comprehensive Specialized Hospital Medical College (ACSHMC). GeneXpert, 
Ziehl-Neelsen staining, and cytology were used for the diagnosis of TB 
lymphadenitis from the Fine Needle Aspirate (FNA) specimen. Rifampicin-resistant 
gene was detected using GeneXpert. For data entry and analysis, Epi Data version 
3.0 and SPSS version 25 were used respectively. A binary logistic regression 
model was used to identify predictors of TB lymphadenitis. A p < 0.05 with a 95% 
confidence interval (CI) was taken as a cut point to determine the significant 
association between dependent and independent variables. The prevalence of TB 
lymphadenitis using GeneXpert, Ziehl-Neelsen staining, and cytology were 138 
(47.4%) (95% CI 41.70-53.10), 100 (34.4%) (95% CI 28.94-39.85), and 123 (42.3%) 
(95% CI 36.63-47.00) respectively. Nine (3.1%) participants were infected with 
rifampicin-resistant gene-positive M. tuberculosis. Out of the total M. 
tuberculosis detected by GeneXpert (n = 138), 9 (6.5%) were positive for 
rifampicin resistance-gene. Participants with a chronic cough had 2 times odds 
of developing TB lymphadenitis (AOR: 2.001, 95% CI 1.142-3.508). Close to half 
of patients with enlarged lymph nodes were positive for M. tuberculosis by the 
GeneXpert method in the study area. Chronic cough was significantly associated 
with TB lymphadenitis. Rifampicin-resistant gene-positive M. tuberculosis was 
relatively prevalent among patients with enlarged lymph node in the study area.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-43206-7
PMCID: PMC10518321
PMID: 37743370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.