---
reference_id: "PMID:23807779"
title: "Expression of MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B, and MUC6 mucins in colorectal cancers and their association with the CpG island methylator phenotype."
authors:
- Walsh MD
- Clendenning M
- Williamson E
- Pearson SA
- Walters RJ
- Nagler B
- Packenas D
- Win AK
- Hopper JL
- Jenkins MA
- Haydon AM
- Rosty C
- English DR
- Giles GG
- McGuckin MA
- Young JP
- Buchanan DD
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.101
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- CDX2 Transcription Factor
- "Carcinoma/genetics, metabolism"
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism"
- CpG Islands/genetics
- DNA Methylation/genetics
- Female
- Gene Silencing
- Homeodomain Proteins/biosynthesis
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Microsatellite Instability
- Middle Aged
- "Mucin 5AC/analysis, biosynthesis"
- "Mucin-2/analysis, biosynthesis"
- "Mucin-5B/analysis, biosynthesis"
- "Mucin-6/analysis, biosynthesis"
- "Mucins/analysis, biosynthesis"
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression of MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B, and MUC6 mucins in colorectal cancers and their association with the CpG island methylator phenotype.
**Authors:** Walsh MD, Clendenning M, Williamson E, Pearson SA, Walters RJ, Nagler B, Packenas D, Win AK, Hopper JL, Jenkins MA, Haydon AM, Rosty C, English DR, Giles GG, McGuckin MA, Young JP, Buchanan DD
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/modpathol.2013.101](https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.2013.101)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2013 Dec;26(12):1642-56. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.101. Epub
2013  Jun 28.

Expression of MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B, and MUC6 mucins in colorectal cancers and
their association with the CpG island methylator phenotype.

Walsh MD(1), Clendenning M, Williamson E, Pearson SA, Walters RJ, Nagler B,
Packenas D, Win AK, Hopper JL, Jenkins MA, Haydon AM, Rosty C, English DR, Giles
GG, McGuckin MA, Young JP, Buchanan DD.

Author information:
(1)1] Cancer and Population Studies Group, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, Herston, QLD, Australia [2] Department of Histopathology, Sullivan
Nicolaides Pathology, Taringa, QLD, Australia.

Mucinous differentiation is associated with both CpG island methylator phenotype
and microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer. The mucinous phenotype
derives from abundant expression of the colonic goblet cell mucin, MUC2, and de
novo expression of gastric foveolar mucin, MUC5AC. We, therefore, investigated
the protein expression levels of MUC2 and MUC5AC, as well as MUC5B and MUC6, in
molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer. Seven-hundred and twenty-two incident
colorectal carcinomas occurring in 702 participants of the Melbourne
Collaborative Cohort Study were characterized for methylator status, MLH1
methylation, somatic BRAF and KRAS mutations, microsatellite-instability status,
MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 mismatch repair, and p53 protein expression, and
their histopathology was reviewed. Protein expression levels of MUC2, MUC5AC,
MUC5B, MUC6, and the putative mucin regulator CDX2 were compared with molecular
and clinicopathological features of colorectal cancers using odds ratios and
corresponding 95% confidence intervals. MUC2 overexpression (>25% positive tumor
cells) was observed in 33% colorectal cancers, MUC5B expression in 53%, and de
novo MUC5AC and MUC6 expression in 50% and 39%, respectively. Co-expression of
two or more of the mucins was commonly observed. Expression of MUC2, MUC5AC and
MUC6 was strongly associated with features associated with tumorigenesis via the
serrated neoplasia pathway, including methylator positivity, somatic BRAF
p.V600E mutation, and mismatch repair deficiency, as well as proximal location,
poor differentiation, lymphocytic response, and increased T stage (all P<0.001).
Overexpression was observed in tumors with and without mucinous differentiation.
There were inverse associations between expression of all four mucins and p53
overexpression. CDX2 expression was inversely associated with MUC2, MUC5AC and
MUC6 expression. Our results suggest that, in methylator-positive tumors, mucin
genes on chromosome 11p15.5 region undergo increased expression via mechanisms
other than direct regulation by CDX2.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.101
PMID: 23807779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
