---
reference_id: "PMID:38398359"
title: "Cardiomyopathy in Celiac Disease: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Milutinovic S
- Jancic P
- Adam A
- Radovanovic M
- Nordstrom CW
- Ward M
- Petrovic M
- Jevtic D
- Delibasic M
- Kotseva M
- Nikolajevic M
- Dumic I
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13041045
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiomyopathy in Celiac Disease: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Milutinovic S, Jancic P, Adam A, Radovanovic M, Nordstrom CW, Ward M, Petrovic M, Jevtic D, Delibasic M, Kotseva M, Nikolajevic M, Dumic I
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13041045](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13041045)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Feb 12;13(4):1045. doi: 10.3390/jcm13041045.

Cardiomyopathy in Celiac Disease: A Systematic Review.

Milutinovic S(1), Jancic P(2), Adam A(3), Radovanovic M(4)(5)(6), Nordstrom 
CW(5)(6), Ward M(4), Petrovic M(7), Jevtic D(8), Delibasic M(1), Kotseva M(9), 
Nikolajevic M(2), Dumic I(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Residency Program at Lee Health, Florida State University 
College of Medicine, Tallahassee, FL 32301, USA.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Cardiology Fellowship Program, Cook County, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
(4)Section of Hospital Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH 
03766, USA.
(5)Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(6)Department of Hospital Medicine, Mayo Clinic Health System, Eau Claire, WI 
54703, USA.
(7)Cardiology Fellowship Program, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY 10029, USA.
(8)Elmhurst Hospital, New York, NY 11373, USA.
(9)Francisian Health, Olympia Fields, IL 60461, USA.

(1) Background: Cardiomyopathy in celiac disease or celiac cardiomyopathy (CCM) 
is a serious and potentially life-threatening disease that can occur in both 
adults and children. However, data supporting the causal relationship between 
celiac disease (CD) and cardiomyopathy (CMP) are still inconsistent. The aim of 
this study was to review and synthesize data from the literature on this topic 
and potentially reveal a more evidence-based causal relationship. (2) Methods: 
The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) 
guidelines were used to search Medline, Embase, and Scopus databases from 
database inception until September 2023. A total of 1187 original articles were 
identified. (3) Results: We identified 28 CCM patients (19 adult and 9 
pediatric) with a mean age of 27.4 ± 18.01 years. Adult patients with CCM were 
predominantly male (84.2%) while pediatric patients were predominantly female 
(75%). The most common comorbidities associated with CCM were anemia (75%) and 
pulmonary hemosiderosis (20%). In 35% of patients, CCM occurred before the 
diagnosis of CD, while in 48% of patients, CCM and CD were diagnosed at the same 
time. Diagnosis of CD preceded diagnosis of CCM in only 18% of patients. 
Diagnosis of CCM is often delayed with an average, from the onset of symptoms to 
diagnosis, of 16 months. All patients were treated with a gluten-free diet in 
addition to guideline-directed medical therapy. At 11-month follow-up, 
cardiovascular improvement was seen in 60.7% of patients. Pediatric mortality 
was 33.3%, while adult mortality was 5.3%. (4) Conclusions: Clinicians should be 
aware of the possible association between CD and CMP, and we recommend CD 
work-up in all patients with CMP who have concomitant anemia. While we 
identified only 28 cases in the literature, many cases might go unreported due 
to a lack of awareness regarding CCM. A high degree of clinical suspicion and a 
prompt diagnosis of CCM are essential to minimizing the risks of morbidity and 
mortality, as the combination of a gluten-free diet and guideline-directed 
medical therapy can improve clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13041045
PMCID: PMC10889265
PMID: 38398359

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.