---
reference_id: "PMID:38275869"
title: The Immune Landscape and Immunotherapeutic Strategies in Platinum-Refractory Testicular Germ Cell Tumors.
authors:
- Evmorfopoulos K
- Marsitopoulos K
- Karachalios R
- Karathanasis A
- Dimitropoulos K
- Tzortzis V
- Zachos I
- Vlachostergios PJ
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16020428
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Immune Landscape and Immunotherapeutic Strategies in Platinum-Refractory Testicular Germ Cell Tumors.
**Authors:** Evmorfopoulos K, Marsitopoulos K, Karachalios R, Karathanasis A, Dimitropoulos K, Tzortzis V, Zachos I, Vlachostergios PJ
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16020428](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16020428)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Jan 19;16(2):428. doi: 10.3390/cancers16020428.

The Immune Landscape and Immunotherapeutic Strategies in Platinum-Refractory 
Testicular Germ Cell Tumors.

Evmorfopoulos K(1), Marsitopoulos K(1), Karachalios R(1), Karathanasis A(1), 
Dimitropoulos K(2), Tzortzis V(1), Zachos I(1), Vlachostergios PJ(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Thessaly, 41110 Larissa, Greece.
(2)Department of Urology, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen AB25 2ZN, UK.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, IASO Thessalias Hospital, 41500 Larissa, 
Greece.
(4)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill 
Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) are cancers with very good prognosis, even 
in the metastatic setting, with high curative potential mainly attributed to the 
introduction of cisplatin-based chemotherapy. However, approximately 15% of the 
patients develop platinum-refractory disease and suffer multiple relapses. 
Therefore, there is an unmet need for novel therapeutic agents with improved 
efficacy and minimal long-term side effects. Recent advances in the development 
of immunotherapeutic agents, particularly immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), 
have offered an opportunity to test their activity in various tumor types, 
including GCTs. This review aims to analyze the immune microenvironment of these 
tumors and present the most recently available data from studies that have 
tested immunotherapeutic agents against GCTs. The majority of the available 
knowledge derives from case reports or small cohort studies, particularly those 
involving ICIs of the PD-1/PD-L1 axis alone or in combination with anti-CTLA-4 
monoclonal antibodies. Other immunotherapeutic targeted approaches, including 
antibody-drug conjugates, antibody prodrugs, vaccines, tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors, chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy, have biological 
rationales and have shown preliminary activity or are currently being tested. 
Growing evidence on these and other approaches will assist in broadening the 
currently limited treatment armamentarium against platinum-refractory TGCTs.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16020428
PMCID: PMC10814346
PMID: 38275869

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.