---
reference_id: "PMID:32940644"
title: Lewis Blood-group Antigens Are Associated With Altered Susceptibility to Shigellosis.
authors:
- Leslie JL
- Weddle E
- Yum LK
- Lin Y
- Jenior ML
- Lee B
- Ma JZ
- Kirkpatrick BD
- Nayak U
- Platts-Mills JA
- Agaisse HF
- Haque R
- Petri WA
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1409
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lewis Blood-group Antigens Are Associated With Altered Susceptibility to Shigellosis.
**Authors:** Leslie JL, Weddle E, Yum LK, Lin Y, Jenior ML, Lee B, Ma JZ, Kirkpatrick BD, Nayak U, Platts-Mills JA, Agaisse HF, Haque R, Petri WA
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciaa1409](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa1409)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2021 Jun 1;72(11):e868-e871. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1409.

Lewis Blood-group Antigens Are Associated With Altered Susceptibility to 
Shigellosis.

Leslie JL(1), Weddle E(2), Yum LK(2), Lin Y(3), Jenior ML(4), Lee B(5), Ma 
JZ(6), Kirkpatrick BD(7), Nayak U(8), Platts-Mills JA(1), Agaisse HF(2), Haque 
R(9), Petri WA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of International Health and Infectious 
Diseases, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, 
USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, University of 
Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(3)Department of Statistics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, 
USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia School of 
Medicine and School of Engineering, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(5)Vaccine Testing Center and Department of Pediatrics, The University of 
Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington, Vermont, USA.
(6)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia School of 
Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine and Vaccine Testing Center, The University of Vermont 
College of Medicine, Burlington, Vermont, USA.
(8)Center for Public Health Genomics and Department of Public Health Sciences, 
University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(9)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

In a cohort of infants, we found that lack of the Lewis histo-blood group 
antigen was associated with increased susceptibility to shigellosis. Broadly 
inhibiting fucosylation in epithelial cells in vitro decreased invasion by 
Shigella flexneri. These results support a role for fucosylated glycans in 
susceptibility to shigellosis.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa1409
PMCID: PMC8315233
PMID: 32940644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]