---
reference_id: "PMID:33512438"
title: Analysis of disease model iPSCs derived from patients with a novel Fanconi anemia-like IBMFS ADH5/ALDH2 deficiency.
authors:
- Mu A
- Hira A
- Niwa A
- Osawa M
- Yoshida K
- Mori M
- Okamoto Y
- Inoue K
- Kondo K
- Kanemaki MT
- Matsuda T
- Ito E
- Kojima S
- Nakahata T
- Ogawa S
- Tanaka K
- Matsuo K
- Saito MK
- Takata M
journal: Blood
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2020009111
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of disease model iPSCs derived from patients with a novel Fanconi anemia-like IBMFS ADH5/ALDH2 deficiency.
**Authors:** Mu A, Hira A, Niwa A, Osawa M, Yoshida K, Mori M, Okamoto Y, Inoue K, Kondo K, Kanemaki MT, Matsuda T, Ito E, Kojima S, Nakahata T, Ogawa S, Tanaka K, Matsuo K, Saito MK, Takata M
**Journal:** Blood (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2020009111](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020009111)

## Content

1. Blood. 2021 Apr 15;137(15):2021-2032. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020009111.

Analysis of disease model iPSCs derived from patients with a novel Fanconi 
anemia-like IBMFS ADH5/ALDH2 deficiency.

Mu A(1)(2)(3), Hira A(1)(2), Niwa A(3), Osawa M(3), Yoshida K(4), Mori 
M(1)(2)(5), Okamoto Y(1)(2)(5), Inoue K(6), Kondo K(6), Kanemaki MT(7)(8), 
Matsuda T(9), Ito E(10), Kojima S(11), Nakahata T(3), Ogawa S(4)(12)(13), Tanaka 
K(6)(14), Matsuo K(15)(16), Saito MK(3), Takata M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of DNA Damage Signaling, Department of Late Effects Studies, 
Radiation Biology Center.
(2)Department of Genome Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies.
(3)Department of Clinical Application, Center for iPS Cell Research and 
Application.
(4)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, and.
(5)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Eisai Co Ltd, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(7)Department of Chromosome Science, National Institute of Genetics, Research 
Organization of Information and Systems, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.
(8)Department of Genetics, SOKENDAI (Graduate University for Advanced Studies), 
Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.
(9)Research Center for Environmental Quality Management, Kyoto University, Otsu, 
Shiga, Japan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Hirosaki, Japan.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya, Japan.
(12)Department of Medicine, Center for Hematology and Regenerative Medicine, 
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(13)Institute for the Advanced Study of Human Biology, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(14)Alchemedicine Inc, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(15)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention, Aichi Cancer Center Research 
Institute, Nagoya, Japan; and.
(16)Division of Analytical Cancer Epidemiology, Nagoya University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Comment in
    Blood. 2021 Apr 15;137(15):1988-1990. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020010541.

We have recently discovered Japanese children with a novel Fanconi anemia-like 
inherited bone marrow failure syndrome (IBMFS). This disorder is likely caused 
by the loss of a catabolic system directed toward endogenous formaldehyde due to 
biallelic variants in ADH5 combined with a heterozygous ALDH2*2 
dominant-negative allele (rs671), which is associated with alcohol-induced Asian 
flushing. Phytohemagglutinin-stimulated lymphocytes from these patients 
displayed highly increased numbers of spontaneous sister chromatid exchanges 
(SCEs), reflecting homologous recombination repair of formaldehyde damage. Here, 
we report that, in contrast, patient-derived fibroblasts showed normal levels of 
SCEs, suggesting that different cell types or conditions generate various 
amounts of formaldehyde. To obtain insights about endogenous formaldehyde 
production and how defects in ADH5/ALDH2 affect human hematopoiesis, we 
constructed disease model cell lines, including induced pluripotent stem cells 
(iPSCs). We found that ADH5 is the primary defense against formaldehyde, and 
ALDH2 provides a backup. DNA repair capacity in the ADH5/ALDH2-deficient cell 
lines can be overwhelmed by exogenous low-dose formaldehyde, as indicated by 
higher levels of DNA damage than in FANCD2-deficient cells. Although 
ADH5/ALDH2-deficient cell lines were healthy and showed stable growth, disease 
model iPSCs displayed drastically defective cell expansion when stimulated into 
hematopoietic differentiation in vitro, displaying increased levels of DNA 
damage. The expansion defect was partially reversed by treatment with a new 
small molecule termed C1, which is an agonist of ALDH2, thus identifying a 
potential therapeutic strategy for the patients. We propose that hematopoiesis 
or lymphocyte blastogenesis may entail formaldehyde generation that necessitates 
elimination by ADH5/ALDH2 enzymes.

© 2021 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020009111
PMID: 33512438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]