---
reference_id: "PMID:38115814"
title: "Retrograde cricopharyngeus dysfunction: How does the inability to burp affect daily life?"
authors:
- Chen JN
- Evans J
- Fakhreddine AB
- Stroever S
- Islam E
- Islam S
journal: Neurogastroenterol Motil
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/nmo.14721
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retrograde cricopharyngeus dysfunction: How does the inability to burp affect daily life?
**Authors:** Chen JN, Evans J, Fakhreddine AB, Stroever S, Islam E, Islam S
**Journal:** Neurogastroenterol Motil (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nmo.14721](https://doi.org/10.1111/nmo.14721)

## Content

1. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2024 Feb;36(2):e14721. doi: 10.1111/nmo.14721. Epub 
2023 Dec 20.

Retrograde cricopharyngeus dysfunction: How does the inability to burp affect 
daily life?

Chen JN(1), Evans J(1), Fakhreddine AB(2), Stroever S(2), Islam E(3), Islam 
S(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, 
Texas, USA.
(2)Clinical Research Institute, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 
Lubbock, Texas, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas, USA.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech 
University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: Retrograde cricopharyngeus dysfunction (R-CPD), a condition first 
detailed in 1987 and termed in 2019, refers to the cricopharyngeal muscle's 
inability to relax to allow the retrograde passage of gas. Limited research 
exists on the fundamental characteristics of this condition, including its 
impact on one's life. The purpose of this study is to characterize R-CPD and how 
the inability to burp affects the social lives of people who suffer from it.
METHODS: A Qualtrics survey was distributed on the subreddit "r/noburp," a 
community of 26,000 individuals sharing information about R-CPD. Adults aged 
18-89 experiencing R-CPD symptoms were invited to participate. Participants 
reported on their experiences with R-CPD and its effects on social life on a 
4-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree to 4 = strongly agree). Data was 
analyzed using descriptive statistics.
KEY RESULTS: Among the 199 respondents, the mean age was 30.9, and gender 
identity was 74%/25% female/male. 99% reported inability to burp, 98% reported 
abdominal bloating, 93% reported socially awkward gurgling noises, 89% reported 
excessive flatulence, and 55% reported difficulty vomiting. Only half discussed 
their symptoms with their primary care provider (PCP), and 90% disagreed with 
receiving adequate help. Average Likert scores indicated embarrassment (3.4), 
anxiety/depression (3.1), negative impact on relationships (2.6), and work 
disruption (2.7) due to R-CPD.
CONCLUSIONS & INFERENCES: R-CPD is unfamiliar to many healthcare providers, 
leaving patients underserved. It not only affects daily life but also personal 
and professional relationships. Raising awareness by understanding disease basic 
features may increase diagnosis and treatment rates, improving quality of life.

© 2023 The Authors. Neurogastroenterology & Motility published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/nmo.14721
PMID: 38115814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]