---
reference_id: "PMID:40523612"
title: "Oral and maxillofacial manifestations of Pycnodysostosis: a summary of clinical, radiological and cephalometric diagnostic criteria. A systematic review."
authors:
- Bovis M
- Brotons A
- Antunes D
- Colard T
- Philip-Alliez C
- Ferri J
journal: J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jormas.2025.102430
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pycnodysostosis/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, complications"
- Cephalometry
- Male
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral and maxillofacial manifestations of Pycnodysostosis: a summary of clinical, radiological and cephalometric diagnostic criteria. A systematic review.
**Authors:** Bovis M, Brotons A, Antunes D, Colard T, Philip-Alliez C, Ferri J
**Journal:** J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jormas.2025.102430](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jormas.2025.102430)

## Content

1. J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2025 Oct;126(5S):102430. doi: 
10.1016/j.jormas.2025.102430. Epub 2025 Jun 14.

Oral and maxillofacial manifestations of Pycnodysostosis: a summary of clinical, 
radiological and cephalometric diagnostic criteria. A systematic review.

Bovis M(1), Brotons A(2), Antunes D(3), Colard T(4), Philip-Alliez C(2), Ferri 
J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery and Stomatology, Lille University Medical 
School, France. Electronic address: marine.bovis@hotmail.fr.
(2)Department of Dentofacial Orthopaedics, Marseille School of Dentistry, 
France.
(3)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery and Stomatology, Lille University Medical 
School, France.
(4)Université de Lille, CHU Lille, Oral Radiology Department, F-59000 Lille, 
France; Université de Bordeaux, CNRS, MC, PACEA, UMR 5199, F-33600 Pessac, 
France.

Pycnodysostosis (PYCD) is a rare osteosclerotic disorder with distinct 
craniofacial features. Diagnosis remains challenging due to overlap with other 
skeletal dysplasias. The aim of this systematic review was to identify clinical, 
radiological, and cephalometric maxillofacial features in PYCD and to evaluate 
their diagnostic relevance. Following PRISMA and AMSTAR guidelines, a search was 
conducted in Pubmed, Web of Science and Cochrane Library databases. Studies were 
included if they reported characteristics of the cranial vault, face, or oral 
cavity. Of the 345 publications identified, 46 studies comprising a total of 69 
patients were included. The cohort consisted of 58 % female and 42 % male 
patients, with a mean age of 20 years and a consanguinity rate of 38 %. Key 
diagnostic features included frontal bossing (92 %), unclosed cranial sutures 
(97 %), sclerotic ossification (90 %), midfacial hypoplasia (100 %), exorbitis 
(83 %), maxillary sinus hypoplasia (97 %), micrognathia (92 %), severely obtuse 
gonial angle (100 %), narrow and grooved palate (100-73 %) and severe dental 
crowding (91 %). The cephalometric analysis, available for 17 patients, revealed 
maxillary and mandibular retrognathia (p = 9.17e-06 and 7.646e-05), with no 
predominance skeletal class, facial hyperdivergence (p = 0.047), and cranial 
base morphology contributing to these dysmorphies (p = 9,31e-04).

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jormas.2025.102430
PMID: 40523612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.