---
reference_id: "PMID:25990962"
title: "Parvovirus B19V infection in Israel: prevalence and occurrence of acute infection between 2008 and 2013."
authors:
- Mor O
- Ofir I
- Pavel R
- Bassal R
- Kra-Oz Z
- Cohen D
- Shohat T
- Mendelson E
journal: Epidemiol Infect
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1017/S0950268815000230
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parvovirus B19V infection in Israel: prevalence and occurrence of acute infection between 2008 and 2013.
**Authors:** Mor O, Ofir I, Pavel R, Bassal R, Kra-Oz Z, Cohen D, Shohat T, Mendelson E
**Journal:** Epidemiol Infect (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0950268815000230](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268815000230)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Infect. 2016 Jan;144(1):207-14. doi: 10.1017/S0950268815000230. Epub
 2015 May 20.

Parvovirus B19V infection in Israel: prevalence and occurrence of acute 
infection between 2008 and 2013.

Mor O(1), Ofir I(1), Pavel R(1), Bassal R(2), Kra-Oz Z(3), Cohen D(4), Shohat 
T(4), Mendelson E(1).

Author information:
(1)Central Virology Laboratory,Ministry of Health,Chaim Sheba Medical 
Center,Tel-Hashomer,Israel.
(2)Israel Center of Disease Control,Ministry of Health,Chaim Sheba Medical 
Center,Tel-Hashomer,Israel.
(3)Virology Laboratory,Rambam Medical Center,Haifa,Israel.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine,School of Public 
Health,Sackler Faculty of Medicine,Tel-Aviv University,Tel-Aviv,Israel.

Differences in the seroprevalence and unique pattern of parvovirus B19 (B19V) 
acute infections have been documented around the world. This study was conducted 
to estimate the seroprevalence of anti-parvovirus B19V IgG antibodies in the 
Israeli population and to assess the pattern of acute infection based on data 
from two laboratories in Israel. The overall IgG prevalence in the 1008 
representative sera samples was 61路4% and the age-adjusted prevalence rate was 
58路2%. Seropositivity was significantly associated with age, ranging from 25路7% 
in children aged 20 years. While no significant differences in seropositivity 
were detected between sexes and population groups, significantly lower 
seroprevalence was observed in older Jews born in Africa or Asia. Acute 
infection rates of 4路1% (234 cases) were found based on the positive IgM results 
identified in samples from 5663 individuals collected between 2008 and 2013. 
Annual peaks of infection were observed in 2008 and 2011-2012 and major seasonal 
peak of B19V IgM positivity was identified in June each year. The number of 
requests for B19V serology was significantly higher for women aged 20-39 years 
while the majority IgM-positive cases were identified in young children. With 
more than 30% of the adult population being susceptible to B19V infection, 
monitoring B19V status should be considered in specific risk groups such as 
pregnant women.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268815000230
PMCID: PMC9507271
PMID: 25990962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.