---
reference_id: "PMID:31435879"
title: Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutics for Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 2.
authors:
- Egorova PA
- Bezprozvanny IB
journal: Neurotherapeutics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s13311-019-00777-6
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ataxin-2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Genetic Therapy/methods, trends"
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, transplantation"
- Mutation/physiology
- "Nerve Net/metabolism, pathology"
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/administration & dosage, genetics, metabolism"
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- "Peptides/genetics, metabolism"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- Stem Cell Transplantation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutics for Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 2.
**Authors:** Egorova PA, Bezprozvanny IB
**Journal:** Neurotherapeutics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13311-019-00777-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-019-00777-6)

## Content

1. Neurotherapeutics. 2019 Oct;16(4):1050-1073. doi: 10.1007/s13311-019-00777-6.

Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutics for Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 2.

Egorova PA(1), Bezprozvanny IB(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurodegeneration, Peter the Great St.Petersburg 
Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, 195251, Russia.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Neurodegeneration, Peter the Great St.Petersburg 
Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, 195251, Russia. 
Ilya.Bezprozvanny@UTSouthwestern.edu.
(3)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, ND12.200, Dallas, Texas, 75390, USA. 
Ilya.Bezprozvanny@UTSouthwestern.edu.

The effective therapeutic treatment and the disease-modifying therapy for 
spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) (a progressive hereditary disease caused by 
an expansion of polyglutamine in the ataxin-2 protein) is not available yet. At 
present, only symptomatic treatment and methods of palliative care are 
prescribed to the patients. Many attempts were made to study the physiological, 
molecular, and biochemical changes in SCA2 patients and in a variety of the 
model systems to find new therapeutic targets for SCA2 treatment. A better 
understanding of the uncovered molecular mechanisms of the disease allowed the 
scientific community to develop strategies of potential therapy and helped to 
create some promising therapeutic approaches for SCA2 treatment. Recent progress 
in this field will be discussed in this review article.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-019-00777-6
PMCID: PMC6985344
PMID: 31435879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]