---
reference_id: "PMID:18458920"
title: "Aristaless-related homeobox gene disruption leads to abnormal distribution of GABAergic interneurons in human neocortex: evidence based on a case of X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG)."
authors:
- Okazaki S
- Ohsawa M
- Kuki I
- Kawawaki H
- Koriyama T
- Ri S
- Ichiba H
- Hai E
- Inoue T
- Nakamura H
- Goto Y
- Tomiwa K
- Yamano T
- Kitamura K
- Itoh M
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-008-0382-2
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Calbindin 2
- Cell Movement
- Cholecystokinin/metabolism
- "Classical Lissencephalies and Subcortical Band Heterotopias/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Doublecortin Protein
- Female
- "Genitalia, Male/abnormalities"
- Glutamate Decarboxylase/metabolism
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Interneurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neocortex/metabolism, pathology"
- Neuropeptide Y/metabolism
- Pedigree
- S100 Calcium Binding Protein G/metabolism
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- gamma-Aminobutyric Acid/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aristaless-related homeobox gene disruption leads to abnormal distribution of GABAergic interneurons in human neocortex: evidence based on a case of X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG).
**Authors:** Okazaki S, Ohsawa M, Kuki I, Kawawaki H, Koriyama T, Ri S, Ichiba H, Hai E, Inoue T, Nakamura H, Goto Y, Tomiwa K, Yamano T, Kitamura K, Itoh M
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-008-0382-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-008-0382-2)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2008 Oct;116(4):453-62. doi: 10.1007/s00401-008-0382-2. Epub
 2008 May 6.

Aristaless-related homeobox gene disruption leads to abnormal distribution of
GABAergic interneurons in human neocortex: evidence based on a case of X-linked
lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG).

Okazaki S(1), Ohsawa M, Kuki I, Kawawaki H, Koriyama T, Ri S, Ichiba H, Hai E,
Inoue T, Nakamura H, Goto Y, Tomiwa K, Yamano T, Kitamura K, Itoh M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Osaka City General Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG) is a rare disorder caused
by mutations in the aristaless-related homeobox (ARX) gene, located on Xp22.13.
Arx-null mice show loss of tangential migration of GABAergic interneurons,
presumably being related to caudal ganglionic eminence tangential migration. In
the present study, we investigated a subpopulation of GABAergic interneurons in
the brain of an infant with XLAG, who had a novel nonsense mutation of the ARX
gene, compared with those of age-matched normal controls and Miller-Dieker
syndrome. We performed immunocytochemistry for interneuron and migration
markers. We found that glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)- and calretinin
(CR)-containing cells were significantly reduced in the neocortex and located in
the white matter and neocortical subventricular zone, while neuropeptide Y- or
cholecystokinin-containing cells were normally distributed. Moreover, in the
neocortical subventricular region, the GAD- and CR-containing cells expressed
the radial migration marker Mash-1 as well as nestin. Our findings suggest that
ARX protein controls not only the tangential migration of GABAergic interneurons
from the ganglionic eminence, but also may serve to induce radial migration from
the neocortical subventricular zone.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-008-0382-2
PMID: 18458920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
